THPNOIKOS.

THE House of Mourning:

FURNISHED With DIRECTIONS for PREPARATIONS to MEDITATIONS of CONSOLATIONS at
the Hour of Death.

DELIVERED IN LIII. SERMONS, Preached at the FUNERALS of diverse faithful
SERVANTS of CHRIST.

By Daniel Featly, Martin Day, John Preston, Doctors in Divinity.
Ri. Houldsworth, Richard Sibbs, Thomas Tailor.
Thomas Fuller. And other Reverend Divines.


ECCLES. 7.4. The heart of the wise, is in the house of Mourning: but the heart
of fools, is in the house of mirth.

Ambr. de obit. frat. Non amitti sed praemitti videntur quos sed non absumptura
mors, sed aeternitatas receptura est.

Seneca Ep. 77. Iter imperfectum est, si in media part aut citra petitum locum
steterit: vita non est imperfecta si honesta, ubicunqque desieris, si been
desieres, tota est.

Newly Corrected and Amended with several ADDITIONS.

LONDON, Printed by G. Dawson, and are to be sold by John Williams, at the Sign
of the Crown in St. Pauls-Chruch-Yard, 1660.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
THere is no man that can plead Ignorance to the universal Decree of God
concerning the necessity of Man's Mortality: It is appointed for all men once to
die: and every man can say as that wise Woman of Tekoaeh, we are all as water
spilt upon the ground. There is no Age, Estate, Condition, or rank of Men, but
have been foiled with that invincible Champion Death; who riding up and down
the World upon his pale Horse above these five thousand years, has with an
impartial stroke laid all flat before him; some in there Infancy have proved
what it is to die before they knew what it was to live; others in the strength
of Youth; some in their old Age: rich and poor, high and low, of all sorts;
young men may die, old men must die; even those that are styled Gods (and that
by no fawning Sycophant, but by God himself) their Mortality proves them to be
men to themselves, though they be as Gods to others: and as Epictetus once told
the Emperor, That to be born, and to die, was common both to Prince and
Beggar. The sicknesses and miseries of this World have made the proudest
Painims to confess with St. Peter to Cornelius, Even I my self also am a mortal
man: So that experience (as well as Scripture) concludes, what man is he that
lives and shall not see death?

There are no ingredients in the shop of Nature that are sufficiently cordial
to fortify the heart against this King of terrors or his harbingers: the
velvet slipper cannot sense the foot from the gout, nor the gold ring the
finger from a fellon; the richest Diadem cannot quit the headache, nor the
purple Robe prevent a Fever: Beauty, strength, riches, honor, friends, nor
any, nor all can repeal that sentence, Dust thou art, and to dust thou shall
return. Every fit of an Ague, and every distemper of this frail constitution
being as a light skirmish before the main battle of Death, wherein weak man
being vanquished, is led captive to his long home: and when once the lines of
Mortality are drawn upon the face of the fairest mortal, he becomes a ghastly
spectacle (how lovely soever before) and the conclusion is, Bury my dead out of
my sight. This inevitable necessity, however it be confessed and acknowledged
of all; yet lamentable experience teaches, that in the Christian world most
men so live as though they should never die, and at length they so die as
though they should never live again, and when the time of their dissolution
comes, their souls are rather chased out by violence, then yielded to God in
obedience.

Indeed to a wicked man, Death is the beginning of sorrows, it is a trap-door
to let him down to the everlasting dungeon of Hell; but the children of God
(though they cannot escape the stroke, yet) they are freed from the sting of
death, they can play upon the hole of this Aspe without danger, and welcome the
grimmest approach of this Giant with a smile, being freed from the hurt of him,
by Him that is the Captain of the Lords Host, who has abolished death, and
brought life and immortality to light; so that the sting of it being plucked
out, and the suffering sanctified by Christ, death is become to every Believer
but a dark entry to the glorious Palace of Heaven.

Now as it is Gods tender mercy to his Children, that their conflict and misery
should be temporary, but their perfect happiness eternal; so it should be their
care in this little space of time allotted them, (whereupon their everlasting
condition depends) so to provide that they may live happily where they shall
live eternally: and since we cannot escape death, to prepare for it, that we
may get the sight of this Basilisk before it approach, and so avoid the danger
of it. Wretched is the estate of that man, who when these spiritual Philistims
(the terrors of death) make war upon him, shall have just cause to say, The
Lord is departed from me: the death of such a one will be like the sleep of a
frantic man, who when the malignant humor is concocted, awakes in a greater
rage than he lay down; whereas to him that is wise to consider his latter end,
death is no way dreadful; death may kill him, but it cannot hurt him; it does
free him from temporary misery, but cannot hinder him from eternal felicity:
and as that noble Captain of Thebes, who having gotten the victory over his
enemies, but withal, received his mortal wound, he made this his grand enquiry,
whether his weapons were safe or not? whether his buckler was not in his
enemies hands? and when it was replied all was safe, he died with a great deal
of cheerfulness and fortitude. So when a Christian is to grapple with death,
his main care is, that his Buckler of Faith, and the Helmet of his Salvation,
his Hope, that they be safe to guard his Soul, and then he passes not much
what becomes of his outward man, he dies in peace and confidence.

Now that we may be fitted to encounter with this last enemy, (besides the
manifold helps which God has reached to us in his Word, in the passages of his
providence, in the frequent examples of mortality before us continually, and in
our own sensible approaches to the gates of death; I say, besides these and
infinite more,) this ensuing Volumn (with so much care and pains compiled) by
Gods blessing, and our endeavors, may prove no small furtherance in our
Pilgrimage; Each Sermon therein being as a several Legasie bequeathed by those,
upon the occasion of whose deaths they were Preached, as by so many Testators,
who themselves have made a real experiment of Mortality, and left these for
our instruction that survive them. It is true, the daily examples of Mortality
are so many real Lectures, that by a kind of dumb Oratory persuade us to expect
our end, but as they are transient, so our thoughts of them vanish; therefore
it can be no small advantage to have in continual readiness that which may
furnish us abundantly with meditations in this kind.

It was a custom in former times for men to make their Sepulchers in their
Gardens, to mind them of death in the midst of the pleasures of this life. This
present Work may not unfitly be termed a Garden, wherein whosoever takes a
daily walk, may gather in the several beds thereof those wholesome flowers and
herbs, which being distilled by serious meditation, will prove water of life
to a fainting spirit: in some he shall find instruction, in some incitation, in
others consolalion, in all profit. Here thou shall find that Lethall Gourd
sprung up by Adam his trausgression, that makes all his posterity cry out,
There is Death in the Pot.

There thou may gather Herbs of Grace, as a counterpoyson against the
malignity of death: in a third there is the spiritual Heliotropium opening with
joy to the Son of Righteousness, the hope of a blessed Resurrection. Do the
glittering shows of outward things make thee begin to over-fancy them? here
thou shall find how little they will avail in death: the consideration whereof
will make them like that precious stone which being put into the mouth of a
dead man loses its virtue: art thou over-burthened with afflictions? here thou
art supported in the expectation of a far more exceeding weight of glory: art
thou ready to faint under thy labors? here thou shall find a time of rest, and
of reaping: does the time seem overlong, that thy patience begins to flag?
here thou have a promise of thy Saviors speedy coming: In a word, be thy
estate and condition what it will be; here thou may have both directions to
guide thee, and comforts to support thee in thy journey on earth, till thou
arrive at thy Country in Heaven.

Certainly, there is no man can slight and undervalue so deserving a Work, but
he shall discover himself either to be ignorant, or idle, or ill affected;
especially when so judicious and learned men have thought it a fit concomitant
for their several Labors, which they have added for the accomplishment of it:
Therefore take it in good worth, improve it for the good of thy Soul; that
being armed and prepared for death when it shall approach; thou may have no
more to do but to die, and may end thy days in a steadfast assurance, That
thy sins shall be blotted out, when the time of Refreshing shall come from the
presence of the LORD.

Thine in Him who is the Resurrection and the Life. H. W.

THE TABLE.
THE Stewards Summons. Page 1. TEXT. LUKE 16.2. Give an Account of thy
Stewardship, for thou may be no longer Steward.

The Praise of Mourning. Page 17. ECCLESIASTES 7.2. It is better to go to the
House of Mourning, then to the House of Feasting: for that is the end of all
men, and the living will lay it to his heart.

Deliverance from the King of Fears. Page 33. HEBREWS 2.14, 15. 14. For as much
then as the Children are partakers of flesh and blood, he also himself likewise
took part of the same, that through death he might destroy him that had the
power of death, that is the Devil.

15. And deliver them who (through the fear of death) were all their life time
subject to bondage.

The Perfection of Patience. Page 47. JAMES 1.4. But let patience have her
perfect work, that you may be perfect and entire, wanting nothing.

A Restraint of exorbitant Passion. Page 61. 2 SAMUEL 12.22, 23. 22. And he said,
while the Child was yet alive, I fasted and wept, for I said, who can tell
whether God will be gracious to me that the Child may live?

23. But now he is dead, wherefore should I fast? Can I bring him back again? I
shall go to him, but he shall not return to me.

The Sting of Death, etc. Page 73. 1 COR. 15.56. The sting of Death is Sin, and
the strength of Sin is the Law.

The Destruction of the Destroyer, etc. Page 81. 1 COR. 15.16. The last Enemy
that shall be destroyed is Death.

The Worlds Loss, and the Righteous Man's Gain. Page 91. ISAIAH 57.1. And
merciful men are taken away, none considering that the righteous is taken away
from the evil to come.

The Good-Mans Epitaph, etc. Page 107. REVEL. 14.13. I heard a voice from
Heaven saying unto me, Write, Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord, from
henceforth, yea, says the Spirit, that they may rest from their labors, and
their Works do follow them.

The Christians Center, etc. Page 117. ROMANS 14.7, 8. 7. For none of us lives
to himself, and no man dies to himself.

8. For whether we live, we live to the Lord; and whether we die, we die unto
the Lord; whether we live therefore or die, we are the Lords.

The Improvement of Time, etc. Page 129. 1 COR. 7.29, 30, 31. 29. But this I
say Brethren, the time is short, it remains that both they that have wives,
be as though they had none.

30. And they that weep as though they wept not; and they that rejoice as if
they rejoiced not, and they that buy, as though they possessed not.

31. And they that use this world, as not abusing it; for the fashion of this
world passes away.

Security Surprised, etc. Page 143. 1 THESSAL. 5.3. For when they shall say
peace and safety: then sudden destruction comes upon them as travail upon a
woman with child, and they shall not escape.

A Christians Victory, or Conquest over Deaths Enmity. Page 159. 1 COR. 15.26.
The last Enemy that shall be destroyed is Death.

The great Tribunal; or Gods Scrutiny of Man's Secrets. Page 171. ECCLES. 12.14.
For God will bring every work into Jungement, with every secret thing, whether
it be good, or whether it be evil.

A Trial of Sincerity, etc. Page 181. ISAIAH 26.8, 9. 8. Yea, in the way of
thy judgments (O Lord) have we waited for thee: the desire of our soul is to
thy name, and to the remembrance of thee.

9. With my soul have I desired thee in the night, yea, with my spirit within
me will I seek thee early; for when thy judgments are in the earth, the
Inhabitants of the world will learn righteousness.

The Expectation of Christ's Coming, etc. Page 195. PHIL. 3.20, 21. 20. For our
conversation is in Heaven, from whence we look for the Savior, the Lord Jesus
Christ.

21. Who shall change our vile body, that it may be fashioned like unto his
glorious body, according to the working, whereby he is able to subdue all
things unto himself.

Christ's Precept and Promise, or Security against Death. Page 211. JOHN 8.51.
Verily verily I say unto you, if a man keep my saying, he shall never see Death.

The Young-mans Liberty and Limits, etc. Page 223. ECCLESIAST. 11.9. Rejoice O
young man in thy youth, and let thy heart cheer thee in the days of thy youth,
and walk in the ways of thine heart, and in the sight of thine eyes: but know
thou that for all these things God will bring thee into Judgment.

Abraham's Purchase, etc. Page 233. GENESIS 23.4. I am a stranger and a sojourner
among you, give me a possession of a burying place with you, that I may bury my
dead out of my sight.

Gods Esteem of the Death of his Saints. Page 243. PSALM. 116.15. Precious in
the sight of the Lord is the death of his Saints.

The desire of the Saints after immortal Glory. Page 251. 2 COR. 5.2. For in
this we groan earnestly, desiring to be clothed upon, with our house which is
from heaven.

The Careless Merchant, etc. Page 265. MAT. 16.26. What is man profited, if he
shall gain the whole world, and lose his soul.

Christ's second Advent, etc. Page 273. REVEL. 22.12. Behold I come shortly, and
my reward is with me, to give every man according to his works.

The Saints longing for the great Epiphany. Page 263. TITUS 2.13. Looking for
that blessed hope, and the glorious appearing of the great God, and our Savior
Jesus Christ.

Life's Apparition, and Man's Dissolution. Page 291. JAMES 4.14. For what is your
life? it is even a vapor that appears for a little while, and then vanishes
away.

Saint Paul's Trumpet, etc. Page 303. ROMANS 13.11. And that knowing the time,
that now it is high time to awake out of sleep.

The Righteous Man's resting place, etc. Page 313. GENESIS 15.1. After these things
the word of the Lord came to Abraham, saying, Fear not Abraham, I am thy
shield, and thy exceeding great reward.

The righteous Judge, etc. Page 323. JAM. 2.12. So speak ye, and so do, as they
that shall be judged by the law of liberty.

Sins Stipend, and Gods Munificence. Page 335. ROMANS 6.23. For the wages of sin
is death, but the gift of God is eternal life, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

The Profit of Afflictions, etc. Page 343. HEB. 12.10. For they verily for a
few days chastened us after their own pleasure; but he for our profit, that we
might be partakers of his holiness.

Spiritual Hearts-ease, etc. Page 355. JOHN 14.1, 2, 3. 1. Let not your hearts
be troubled, believe in God, believe also in me.

2. In my Fathers house are many mansions, if it were not so, I would have told
you, I go to prepare a place for you.

3. And if I go to prepare a place for you, I will come again and receive you
unto my self, that where I am, there you may be also.

Faiths Triumph over the greatest Trials. Page 367. HEB. 11.17. By Faith
Abraham when he was tried, offered up his Son Isaac, and he that had received
the promise offered up his only begotten Son.

The Privilege of the Faithful, etc. Page 377. IPET. 3.7. As Heirs together of
the grace of life.

Peace in Death, etc. Page 387. LUKE 2.29. Lord now let thou thy servant
depart in peace according to thy word.

The Vital Fountain, etc. Page 399. JOHN 11.25, 26. 25. Jesus said unto her, I
am the resurrection and the life; he that believes in me, though he were dead
yet shall he live.

26. And whosoever lives and believes in me, shall never die.

Death in Birth, etc. Page 411. GENESIS 35.19. And Rachel died.

The Death of Sin, and life of Grace. Page 419. ROMANS 6.11. Likewise reckon ye
also your selves to be dead unto sin, but alive unto God through Jesus Christ
our Lord.

Hopes Anchor-Hold, etc. Page 433. 1 COR. 15.19. If in this life only we have
hope in Christ, we are of all men most miserable.

The Platform of Charity, etc. Page 445. GAL. 6.10. As we have therefore
opportunity, let us do good to all, especially to them that are of the household
of faith.

Death prevented, etc. Page 463. JOB 14.14. All the days of my appointed time
will I wait till my change shall come.

Iter Novissimum; or Man his last Progress. Page 473. ECCLESIAST. 12.5. Man
goes to his long home, and the mourners go about the streets.

Tempus putationis; or the ripe Almond gathered. Page 485. GENESIS 15.15. And thou
shall go to thy Fathers in peace, thou shall be buried in a good old age.

Io Paean, or Christ's Triumph over Death. Page 493. 1 COR. 15.55. O Death where
is thy sting? O Grave where is thy victory?

Fato Fatum; The King of Fears frighed, etc. Page 501. HOS. 13.14. O Death I
will be thy plagues.

Vox Coeli, The Deads Herald. Page 509. APOC. 14.13. And I heard a voice from
Heaven, saying unto me, Write, blessed are the dead which die in the Lord, from
henceforth, etc.

Victoris Brabaeum, or The Conquerours Prize. Page 517. APOC. 14.13. So says
the Spirit, that they may rest from their labors, and their works follow them.

Faith's Echo, or The Souls AMEN. Page 527. REVEL. 22.19. AMEN, Even so come
Lord Jesus.

Deaths Prerogative. Page 539. GENESIS 3.19. For dust thou art, and unto dust thou
shall return.

The Patriarchal Funeral. Page 549. GENESIS 50.10. And he made a mourning for his
Father seven days.

The true Accountant. Page 559. PSALM. 90.12. So teach us to number our days,
that we may apply our hearts to wisdom.

The Just-Mans Funeral. Page 575. ECCLES. 7.15. All things have I seen in the
days of my vanity; there is a just man that perishes in his righteousness;
and there is a wicked man, that prolongeth his life in his wickedness.

The Righteous Man's Service to his Generation. Page 587. ACTS 13.36. For David
after he had served his own Generation after the will of God, fell asleep, etc.

The Crown of Righteousness, etc. Page 597. 2 TIMOTHY 4.7, 8. I have fought a good
fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith; henceforth there is
laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous Judge,
shall give me at that day; and not to me only, but unto them also who love his
appearing.


THE STEVVARDS SUMMONS
SERMON I.
LUKE 16.2. Give an account of thy Stewardship for thou may be no longer
Steward.


IN the Chapter going before, The coherence.
our blessed Lord and Savior had preached the Doctrine of the Free Grace of
God in the Remission of Sin, and receiving of Repenting and Returning Sinners,
in the Parable of an indulgent Fathers receiving of a prodigal Son. The
Pharisees were a People that hardened their own hearts, and scoffed at every
thing that Christ delivered: therefore now in this Chapter, he comes to summon
and warn them to appear before God, the great Master of the world, to give an
account of their stewardship; that by the consideration of Gods proceeding in
the day of Judgment, they might know the better how to prize the Remission of
Sins in the day of Grace; This he does, by presenting to them a Parable, of a
certain rich man, that had a steward who was accused unto him, that he had
wasted his goods, calls him to an account: and to the end that the Pharisees
might not think that it was a matter to be jested withal, and that such
considerations as these were to be slighted; he tells them, how the unjust
steward having received this summons and warning from his Master, that he must
come to a reckoning, he forthwith for his own temporal good, casts about that
he may the better be fitted to give up his account: thereby teaching them, and
in them all the world, that if this steward here, (for his own temporal
benefit) was thus careful to prepare himself, how much more should they, and
every one be careful to prepare themselves for that great day of Account,
wherein God will come to judge the World, and bring to light all things that
are hid in darkness.

In these words ye have two things considerable. A Narration, and Devision of
the words.
An Application
of the Parable.

The Narration is twofold.

Of the Persons. Of the Proceedings.
Of the Persons: in the first verse. A rich man, and his Steward.

Of the Proceeding; in the second verse: the Rich Man, upon the information
made against his Steward that he had wasted his goods, calls him to an
account. Give an account of thy Stewardship, for thou may be no longer
Steward. The Steward (in the third and fourth verses) upon his summons falls
first to consult, and after to resolve, as we shall see afterward.

In this verse then that I have read, you see here is first the Summons or
warning. Give an account:

Secondly, the reason of that Sammons, for thou may be no longer Steward,
The day is ended, now give an account of thy work thou must go out of thy
office; now give an account how thou have behaved thy self in thy office: thou
must be no longer steward; therefore give an account of thy stewardship.

In the first, the Summons and calling of this Steward to an Account, ye have
clearly offered to ye these two Propositions, Considerations, of Conclusions.

First, Prospos. Every man in the world is Gods Steward.
That every man in the World is Gods Steward. Secondly, That every one of Gods
Stewards must be brought to a reckoning.
First, (I say) Every man in the World is Gods Steward. If ye ask me who it is
that is called a Steward: The text tells ye, that it is he that must give an
account to his Master.

If you ask me who is the Master? It is God. If then God be the Master, and if
every man must give an account and reckoning to God, then every man is the
Steward here intended in this Text. That every man must give a reckoning to
God, it appears 2 Cor. 5.10. We must all appear before the Judgment seat of
Christ, to give an account of the things me have done in this life, whether
they be good or evil. All men: That which is here expressed by the Apostle in
plain terms, All men. Is more parrabollically and obscurely expressed by Christ
in this word Steward. Give an account of thy Stewardship. So that the
Conclusion remains clear, and is directly gathered from the Text. That every
man in the World is Gods Steward. Proved.
There is no man or woman in the world, but in some respect or other, is the
Steward here, that must be called to an account.

That every man is a Steward, will appear if we consider two things.

First, what every man receives from God.

Secondly, what God expects from every man.

Man receives from God, that which a Steward does from his Lord.

God expects from every man, that which a Lord expects from his Steward.

First (I say) man receives from God that which a Steward does from his
Master: 1. By what every one receives from God.
That is, such goods, such abilities, as whereby he may be of use for such a
place, as the Master shall set him in the family. All the World is but Gods
great Family, all the fittings and endowments of men, are the talents, the
gifts, that God has entrusted men with: some have the gifts of the world,
riches, and places of authority, these are gifts committed to those kind of
Stewards: Others have the gifts of the body, as health and strength, their
senses, and lives, and the like: these are gifts committed to these kind of
Stewards: others have the gifts of the mind, understanding, and wisdom, and
policy: and to all these some have spiritual graces. According as men are
furnished with these gifts, and according to their several qualifications with
these endowments, they all receive them from God as Stewards.

Secondly, 2. By what God expects from every one
if we consider what God expects from men: he expects that which a Lord does
from his Steward.

First, that they acknowledge him to be the chief, to acknowledge that they
hold all from him, that they have it not from themselves or for themselves,
this is that which every Master expects from him to whom he commits his
treasure: And this would God have all men do. God speaks that truly that
Benhadad spoke proudly, and falsely to the King of Israel: thy silver is mine,
and thy gold is mine, Psalm: 24: 1.
and thy daughters and wives are mine, and thy vineyards and thy orchards are
mine. So may God say truly, All are his, the earth (says David) is the Lords
and the fullness thereof. He is the great possessor of all things.

God (as he possesses all things) so he lets out parcels of his possessions
to the sons of men. To some a larger portion of the earth than to others, yet
they are but Tenants at will; and Tenants upon certain conditions and
reservations, wherein this great Lord binds those that hold any thing of him.

And the first Condition, Men do not waste his goods
or Reservation that he ties all his Stewards unto, is this, that they waste
not his goods, that they scatter them not abroad vainly or unprofitably. Now a
man that has riches, if he relieveth not the poor: a man that has authority,
and helps not the oppressed: a man that has wisdom, and instructs not the
ignorant. In a word, A man that has any abilities, if he be not of use unto
others with it, this man scatters his Masters goods, and is like that
unprofitable servant, that hid his Talent in a napkin, and therefore was bound
hand and foot, and cast into utter darkness. This was the accusation that was
brought against this Steward here, that he had wasted the goods of his Lord;
that is, that he had spent them vainly, he was no honor to his Master, there
came no profit to the household by it. That Is the first.

The second thing that this great Lord expects of all his Stewards, 2. That
they do not abuse them to ill ends.
is, that as they do not scatter his goods, nor vainly waste them, so that they
should not abuse them to ill ends. There are a generation of men in the world
that fight against God with his own weapons, and that use all their strength,
and wisdom, and power, to maintain a faction of rebellion against him: that
side with the wicked of the world against his Laws and Ordinances: and this is
the greatest unthankfulness that can be. If a King should raise a servant to
honor, and bestow offices and dignities upon him, and yet if he should raise
an Army against him, and set himself against all his Laws, What greater
unthankfulness? What greater enmity? Luke 19: 27.
Therefore it was the speech of that parrabolical King in Luke 19. (which is
Christ the King of the Church) these mine enemies that would not that I should
reign over them, bring them hither, and stay them before me. Such is the state
of all those men that have wealth and abuse it, James 4: 3.
consume it upon their lusts, (as Saint James speaks) upon their pride, in
excess in apparel, meats; etc. that have wit, and spend it like Turtullus to
cry down the ways of God, to harden themselves and others in the course of
sin: that have greatness and authority, and misimploy it to the crushing of
good persons, and good causes: these and the like are Stewards that abuse their
Masters goods, mis-imploy them to his dishonor, these Christ counts his
enemies, and he will not bear it.

There is a third thing that God expects of all his Stewards, 3: To do him
Homage.
and that is this, that they should do him Homage, that they should appear at
his Court days. Gods Sabbaths are Gods Court days, wherein he calls and
assembleth his servants together. He will have every one to wait there upon
him, that they may know his will: as Cornelius brings his family together,
and says he, We are all present to hear what is commanded thee of God. Acts
10: 33.
So God (I say) will have his servants present at his Court days: and not only
so, not only to be present there, to here his will, and to understand his mind,
but to submit to his orders, to yield obedience to his Laws, to be governed by
his rules. God has certain rules to which he will have every man subject,
there be rules for Magistrates, for Ministers, for Masters, for Parents, for
Servants, for Children, for all: and he is a rebel, and carries not himself as
Gods Steward, that does not keep the rules that God has set up in his own
house.

4: To return him fruit.
Again fourthly; God expects this from all his Stewards, that whenever he
sends his Bailiffs for rent, that they return him the fruit of his own
ground. Every soul is Gods ground, from which God expects some fruit or other,
and he sends his Bailiffs, his Servants, continually to gather these fruits
from men. When he sends a poor man to the rich, there is a Bailiff sent to him,
to gather some fruit of his wealth. When he sends an oppressed man to those
that are in authority, there is a Bailiff sent to him, to gather the fruit of
his power and greatness. When he sends an ignorant man to those that have
wisdom and knowledge, there is a Bailiff sent to him, to gather the fruit of his
Knowledge. And so we may say of all things whatsoever: whatsoever endowments of
body, or mind, or estate, any man has, if another need it, that other is Gods
Bailiff, sent to him to call for his rent, to call for the fruit of his ground,
and thou must return it by such a one, for thou art but a Steward: and you know
how fearful the proceedings of the great King was in Matt. 21. Matt. 21.33.
He sent his servants to the Husbandmen, to those to whom he had let out his
ground, to receive the fruits of it, and there was none; what was the issue of
it? He was full of wrath: and comes upon the Husbandmen and slew them. So when
God shall send the poor to thee for relief, and thou helpest him not: shall
send the ignorant to thee for instrustion, and thou informest him not: shall
send any one to thee that may have use of thy gifts and abilities, and thou
do not employ them that way, thou deniest the great Lord the fruit of his
own ground, and art of the number of those Husbandmen that must expect this at
his hands to be slain in his wrath.

Ye see the Point opened, That all men are Gods Stewards, both in respect of
what God has bestowed on them, and what God does expect from them.

I come briefly now to make some use of this.

Are all men Gods Stewards? Use.
Then certainly there is some work required of every man in the world by virtue
of this title put upon him, that he is Gods Steward. It concerns therefore,
Every one to look to his place.

There are two things required of every Steward. Two things required of a
Steward.


First, a dispensation.

Secondly, a right ordering of his dispensations.

First a Dispensation. 1. Dispensation
For a Steward ye know is appointed for laying out, he is made for others, not
for himself, for the good of the Family in which he is set, not for his own
benefit. God has made every creature to be for the use of others, and not for
it self: those heavenly bodies, the Sun, and Moon, and Stars, their motion and
influences are for us, for the service of the world: the Earth with the fruits
of it; the Beasts, and all are for the service of man. So every man in his
several place, has some work to do for others, some abilities given him for
the service of others. Rom: 13: 4.
Hence it is, that the Magistrate is said to be the Minister of God for the
peoples good. Hence it is, that Ministers are said to be the servants of the
Churches. I am a debtour (says Paul) to the Jew, and to the Gentiles, Rom: 1:
14.1 Tim: 5: 8.
to the Greeks, and to the Barbarians. Hence it is, that a Master of a Family
is said to be worse than an Infidel, if he provide not for those of his own
house. And every other Christian (though he stand not in these relations to
others) he has some gifts or other, that are to be laid forth for the use and
advantage of others, and every private person in the world, he may be of some
use or other in the place in which he is set. Hence it is, that the name of
Brother is common to all Christians, and ye know Joseph acknowledged that he
was preferred to those honors, and that authority and place, for the good of
his Brethren, for his Fathers house: so should all Gods' people acknowledge
other Christians their Brethren, and that whatsoever parts they have, they have
them for the good of the Family. Hence it is, that Christians are called
Members one of another; Every Member is of use to the whole body, so must every
Christian be of use to another, to some by the riches of the body, to some by
the riches of the mind, to some by the abilities of their estates, every one
according to the treasure he is entrusted with, and the Talent that is
committed to him.

This is the first thing, that men must make conscience to do, to be dispencers
of their goodness, of any thing they have, to be communicative, to defuse and
extend themselves to others, as occasion shall be offered. And indeed where
there is any goodness in a man, he will express it this way, by doing all the
good to others he can.

Secondly, 2. Right ordering of his dispensations.
it is required of a Steward, that he consider of the manner, and right
ordering of his dispensations.

There be two Rules for that.

That he dispense Faithfully. Wisely.


Who (says the Lord in that 12 Luke 42.) is a faithful and wise Steward, Luke
12.42.
whom his Lord shall make ruler over his household, etc. Gods Stewards ye see
must in their dispensations be faithful and wise.

First, they must be faithful.

Fidelity appears in this, 1. Faithfully.
when they have a right End, and a right Rule to walk by.

What is the End and Rule of a faithful Steward in all his dispensations in the
house of his Master?

His Masters credit, and his Masters will; His Masters honor, and his Masters
command.

So it must be in the house of God. If we would be faithful in our places, let
Gods glory be our end, and his Word our rule. That is, let a man consider, what
God in his Word commands him in such a place, in such a qualification, having
such endowments, such parts, such abilities, and let him dispense these by that
Rule, according to that Command, to the glory of God that gave them him. Thus
was Moses a faithful Steward, faithful as a servant in all the house of God, so
the Apostle says of him, Heb. 3.5.
Heb. 3.5. His Masters glory was his end, and therefore when once he saw his
Master dishonored by Idolatry, he could not then contain himself, Exodus 32.19.
but his Anger waxed hot, though he was the meekest man upon earth. And his
Masters Will was his Rule, therefore he came down from the Mountain with the
Tables in his hand, that it might appear what he made his guide, and direction
in all his carriage amongst the people: and we shall find that in all the
doubts of the people, either in matter of Command or punishment, he always
sought direction from God. He is no faithful Servant that does not do this.

Secondly, 2. VVisely.
As he must be a faithful Steward in dispensing, so he must be wise in his
dispensing too.

What is the wisdom of Gods Stewards?

Not the wisdom drawn from the writings of Machivile, or the wisdom of the
World, Romans 3.7.
or of the flesh, for that is enmity against God, not drawn from the rules that
politicians walk by: But that wisdom that is drawn out of the Scriptures, the
Word of God: 1 Timothy 3.17.
The Word of God (says the Apostle) is able to make the man of God wise to
salvation: this is the wisdom that Gods servants must express, and manifest in
dispensing of their gifts, they must be made wise by the Word, they must seek
wisdom from the Word the rule of Wisdom, from the Examples in the Word, of
those that were guided by the Spirit of Wisdom, if they would be wise Stewards.

They must compare the precepts of the Word, Gen: 18.19
and the practice of the Saints together: see what God commands in such a
place, in such a condition, see what Gods servants that are gone before have
done in such a condition. Mark how Abraham and Job, and others of Gods Saints
have employed their wealth and authority, it was for the relieving of the poor,
for the furtherance of Gods glory, for the ease of those that were oppressed:
Mark how Nehemiah bestirred himself for the sanctifying of the Sabbath, for the
furtherance of Gods worship: Mark again how St. Paul, as a Minister watched
against the Wolves, and how he spends himself to the uttermost for the Church
of God. Mark how Abraham as a Master of a Family, governed his Family teaching
and commanding his children and his household to walk in the way of the Lord:
Mark how other of Gods servants have employed their gifts; As Sampson, all his
strength for the Church: and so Solomon, all his wisdom, and whatsoever gift
any of them had, they acknowledged that the Talents that were committed to
them, were for God, and for the service of his Church, for the furtherance of
his glory in the particular places that he had set them in. I say if men would
be wise Stewards they must do thus. But I cannot stand upon this, lest I be
prevented in that which I most intend in that that follows.

Ye have heard who is the Steward: It is every one that has received any
ability from God to do him service; God expects that he should employ that
ability in his service.

We come now in the second place to consider the reckoning which every Man must
make, the account that every man must give of his Stewardship. And that (as ye
have heard) in the second point of Doctrine that offers it self to us out of
the first part of the Text, Propos. 2.
viz. That all Gods Stewards must give a reckoning one time or other unto God.

As every Man in the world is Gods Steward, All Gods stewards must give an
account.
so every Steward must give an account.

In opening of this I will show ye two things.

First, I will show ye what time of Reckoning God has with his Stewards.

Secondly, I will show ye why God judiciously proceeds in this manner, called
a Reckoning, or an Account.

For the first. Two days of reckoning.
There are two times of Reckoning that God will have with his Stewards.

The first in this Life.

The second after death.

First, 1. In this life.
he calls them to account in this life, while they live on the Earth, and
that two ways;

By his Word. By his Rodd.
First, by his Word, hastening every man to an Account by the Gospel, and the
Doctrine of Repentance. By the Word.
This course God himself took with Adam, called him to account for his carriage
in the Garden: Adam (says he) where art thou? who told thee that thou were
naked? Gen: 3.11.
have thou eaten of the tree whereof I commanded thee that thou should not
eat? Afterward when God sent his Prophets into the World, they took the same
course, so Elijah when he came to Ahab, have thou killed, 1 King: 19.
and also taken possession? as if he should have said, know that God has found
out thy sin, and now calls thee to a reckoning. So John Baptist, when he came
to the Pharisees, and those hard-hearted sinners, he calls them to a
reckoning, Matt: 3.
Oh Generation of vipers, who has warned ye to flee from the wrath to come? So
Peter called those three thousand souls in Acts 2. to a Reckoning for
crucifying of Christ; him (says he) who is the Lord of life, ye have taken,
and with wicked hands have crucified and slain.

Acts 2.
And because there are many, By the rod.
that like the Adder, stop their ears at the voice of the Charmer; and if God
speak but in his Word, they pass it by, as Elihu in job says, Job 33.14.
God speaks once, yea twice, yet man perceives it not, therefore when the Word
does not prevail, God calls them to a reckoning by his Rodd, Mic. 6.9. Mic:
6.9.
Hear the rodd, and him that appoints it, that is: God has appointed
scourges and afflictions for men, to awake them to hearken to the voice that
calls them to a Reckoning.

Now afflictions are outward or inward, corporal or spiritual. God sometimes
calls men to an account by corporal afflictions: He smites man (as he says)
with pains upon his bed, Job 33.19.
and the multitude of his bones with strong pains. What Is the reason of this,
but that man may come to this conclusion with himself, that he may bring his
own heart to a reckoning for his former carriage? This is that the Apostle
faith, 1 Cor 11.30.
for this cause many are weak and sickly among you, and many sleep: some were
taken with sickness, upon others there was a consuming weakness, and others
were stricken with death, what is the end that God propounds in all this? For
this reason, that we should judge our sevles, for if we judge our selves, we
shall not be judged of the Lord, but when we are judged we are chastned of the
Lord, that we should not be condemned of the world. As if he should say; God
now calls you to a reckoning in this life, to the end you may prevent that
heavy and grievous one that comes after this life.

Again, when outward afflictions prevail not, God has spiritual afflictions
to awaken men. Thus David, when he was in a deep sleep of security, God
awakned him with a spiritual judgment: see his speech in the 32 Psalm. When I
kept close my sins my boues were consumed, Psalm. 31.5.
and I roared for the disquietnesse of my soul; what followed? God by this
means brought him to confession, I will confess my transgressions to the Lord,
and thou forgavest the iniquity of my sin.

Thus God in this life calls men to a reckoning, sometimes by the preaching
of the Word, sometimes by judgments upon the outward man, or by terrors upon
the soul.

But, if all this prevail not to make a man reckon with himself in this life,
then God has another reckoning after this life, 2 After this life.
where every man must give an account, and cannot avoid it, and there he must
abide the sentence of the Judge, that would not prevent it before.

That there is such a Judgment to come it appears;

By the Equity of it A necessity of a day of judgment.
By the Necessity of it
In respect of God. In respect of the Saints. In respect of the wicked.
First (I say) in respect of God, 1. In respect of God his decree Acts. 17.31.
Isa. 46.10.
there is a necessity of it. That his Decree may be fulfilled and executed.
He has appointed a day wherein he will judge the world in righteousness. And
his counsel shall stand, and he will do all his pleasure.

Secondly, His honor.
it is necessary, that Gods honor may be vindicated. Now things seem to go in
some confusion and disorder in the world; good men, the children of God are not
always best in the place of judgment, Eccles. 3.16.
I have seen (says Solomon) an evil under the Sun, that in the place of
judgment wickedness was there, and in the place of righteousness, that
iniquity was there; this observation Solomon makes, therefore I said, God will
bring to judgment every thing, both good and evil, for there is a time for
every work, and every purpose. God has a time to do that great work that he
has now purposed: What is that work? that is to bring every work to judgment,
whether it be good or evil. I say if we consider this, it is necessary that
there should come a judgment, that shall set all right again.

It is necessary likewise in respect of the Saints.

The very tribulations of the Saints, 2. In respect of the Saints. 2 These. 1.5.
in 2 These. 1.5. are called Indigma, an evident demonstration, or a manifest
token of the righteous judgment of God.

There is a necessity of it in respect of them, For the manifestation of their
innocence
in two regards. First, that there innocence that is traduced here may be
manifest. They undergo many disgraces, and hard censures amongst men: the
world accounts them proud, hypocrites, singular, foolish, vainglorious, and I
know not what: now says Job, my witness is in heaven; and says Saint Paul, I
care not to be judged of you, or of man's judgment; he that judges me is the
Lord. The Word in the Greek is, man's day; as if he should say, Men have their
day here, but God has a greater day after, the Lord will judge in another
manner, and upon other grounds than men do.

Secondly, For the reward of their works.
it is necessary also, That their works may be rewarded. When we speak of
reward, we mean not the reward of merit, we mean the reward of grace,
called a reward, because God is tied to it by his promise. The servants of God,
though they serve him with all care, they have not the fatt of the earth as
sometimes the Ishmaels of the world have, they do not abound with outward
things as many others do: nay, sometimes they are in the worst condition, and
that makes Gods ways the more despised, as if God were not able to maintain
his servants in the world in his ways and work. God therefore has a time
when his servants shall have full measure heaped up, pressed down, shaken
together, and running over. Mal. 3.17.18
When God shall make up his jewels (as he says in Malac. 3.) then shall ye
discern between the righteous and the wicked, between him that serves God,
and him that serves him not. Mark, ye shall discern, God will make it
appear to the whole world, in the day when he makes up his jewels, that not
withstanding his servants are despised and lie here under diverse pressures, yet
that they are a people whom he delights in, and accounts as his treasures.

Thirdly, 3. In respect of the wicked.
it is necessary in respect of the wicked too: that is, First, that Gods
righteousness may fully be manifested. Secondly, that their unrighteousness
may fully be punished. For the manifestation of Gods righteous proceeding
against them. Romans 2.5.
First I say, that Gods righteousness may fully be manifested, therefore the
day of Judgment in Romans 2.5. is called a day of wrath and revelation of the
righteous Judgment of God: As if he should say: As God will manifest his wrath
against the vessels of wrath, so he will make it appear to the world, that he
proceeds in a right manner, and by a right rule in judging.

For we must know, that howsoever God cannot be unjust, and how soever that
the ungodly men in this life contend with their own consciences, such is the
hardness of their hearts, and abundance of corruption that they would feign
justify themselves amongst men: and again, howsoever it be true that the
soul when it is departed out of the body is under Gods particular judgment by
an intelectuall elevation of it, that it may receive the sentence of the Judge,
by an illumination, and by such a spiritual, and contemplative discourse, and
observation, and understanding of Gods actions, as that by reflection upon it
self, it may know it self to be accursed, or acpuitted, and accordingly is
entered into the possession either of happiness or misery. Yet all this is
secret in the world, till the day of Gods tribunal come, wherein secret things
shall be made manifest, and things that have been done in darkness, shall
appear before men and Angels. For the perfecting of their punishment.
Secondly, Gods justice must be cleared, and fully manifested, so the wicked
and unrighteous must be fully punished; They are not fully punished, when they
are under the sense of Gods wrath in this life, or when the soul is judged at
death, there must be yet a further degree for all this. And there be these two
reasons for it.

The first is, because the wicked not only sin in soul, but in body too, the
body has been the instrument of the soul in sinning, and therefore it cannot
serve the turn, that the soul is punished, and the body lie in the grave; no,
but those that have joined in sin, must also join in Punishment.

Secondly, howsoever the sinful actions of the wicked are transcient, and seem
to die with them, yet in respect of the contagion and evil effects, these
actions work upon others, and upon posterity bp the ill example of their
predecessors; the actions, I say of those wicked men continue to the day of
Judgment. Thus we shall see the Jews, in Ierem. 44. revived the sins of
their fathers. Our fathers (say they) made cakes to the Queen of heaven, and
so will we. So the succeeding Kings of Israel, that went on in the steps of
Jeroboam, who made Israel to sin, they continued the sin of Jeroboam. As long
as men go on in the steps, and sins of their forefathers, the sins of their
forefathers live. So that some men's sins by a continued imitation, are
perpetuated to the day of Judgment, therefore their must be a judgment then,
that may fill up a measure proportionable to their sin. This was that that
Dives feared in Hell, and that made him cry out as he did, that one might go
and tell his brethren upon earth, that they might not come into that place;
Why would he have them tell his brethren? was there such love to the kingdom
of Christ in hell, that Dives would have his brethren converted? no such
matter. Was it love to the souls of his brethren, that he would not have them
damned? no such matter neither. What then? Certainly it was nothing else, but a
sense of his own guilt, he knew what evil example he had given, and what a
counselor he had been to his brethren, and if they should go on in his steps,
and their children follow the same steps, all this would but add to his
punishment, and torment in the great day, when soul and body shall be joined
together, to make up the full measure of their torment. For this reason, I say,
it is therefore necessary that their should be a judgment after this life, at
the end of the world.

The second thing remains, Why God is said to call all men to an account.
and that is, why the holy Ghost expresses Gods proceedings, by way of
reckoning, or calling to an account? What need the Lord reckon with men, he may
proceed by way of a Judge, but he says, come give an account of thy
Stewardship?

I answer; There are four things implied in this, all showing the manner of
Gods proceedings, at the day of Judgment with his Stewards, that it shall be
like the proeedings of a Master with his servants in an account and reckoning.

The first is this, 1. Because he will proceed in particular.
that it shall be a proceeding in particulars. God shall then proceed not by
gross sums, and in the total; ye have done evil in the general: none will deal
thus with an Accountant, but he will run over the particulars, and Account for
pounds, for pence, for every thing. Thus God will deal with all his Stewards,
when he brings them to a reckoning, he will reckon on particulars, for all
things that he has enabled them with for his service.

Those that are rich men; Job 27.18.
first, how they have gotten their estates, whether they have built their
houses as a moth, as Job speaks, that is, raised their estates, to the hurt of
others, as men do that raise themselves by usury, and oppression, and fraud,
and bribery, and such like courses.

Secondly, how they have kept their wealth, whether with the injury of others
withholding the goods from the owners thereof, from the poor, for I call them
in case of want the owners of their goods, because God has given them to his
Stewards for their sakes: Jam. 5.1.2:
therefore mark how Saint James expresses it; Go to now ye rich men, weep
and houle, why so? your riches are corrupted, and your garments moth eaten,
your gold and silver is cankered, etc. As if he should say, you have been
hoarding up your treasures, you had rather be laying of it up, then laying of
it out, and therefore because you have not laid out your estates for the
service of your master, rust is come upon your gola, and the moth has eaten
into your garments, ye have heaped treasure together for the last day.

Thirdly, how they have spent what they have had, whether on their lusts or no;
Ye ask and have not (faith S. James) because ye ask amiss, James 4.3.
to spend it on your lusts; so ye lay out amiss, ye spend it on your lusts.
When men for pride in apparel, for excess at their tables, for vain buildings,
for sinful upholding of wickedness, for unnecessary, and injurious
proceedings in law suits, or in what soever indirect course men lay out their
estates, it is a mis-spending of their Masters goods. And as he that has got
his wealth unjustly, and he that keeps it unjustly, shall give an account, so
he that lays it out in a confused, sinful, profuse way, shall be called to
give a reckoning for that.

And not only for matter of a estate, but besides, for matter of place and
authority. Moses knew this well enough, and therefore when he was to go out of
the world, he first cleares all reckonings with the people of Israel: I have
been a Ruler thus long, let any man come and stand up and say, I have done him
wrong: let every man come and clear me this day before the Lord, that I have
walked all my lifetime unblameably, inoffensively, promoting the glory of God,
and suppressing all the evil that I could with my might: this was the account
that Moses made with the people of Israel before he died, that he might lift up
his head with comfort in the day of the Lord. Thus it must be with you, ye must
give an account of your places.

And so for the state of your bodies. The health thou have had: how have thou
spent thy strength and thy health? Mark the speech of the Wise man to the young
man, Rejoice (faith he) in the days of thy youth; as if he should say: Do if
thou will; do if thou dare, but know that for all these things thou must come
to judgment. Now thou have a great deal of health, a great deal of strength,
but have thou been the better for Gods service? have thou employed it fot Gods
glory or no?

And so for the members of thy body, thou must give an account for thy
employment of those instruments. Thy tongue: every idle word (faith Christ)
that men shall speak, they shall give an account of, at the day of judgment.
Mat. 16.
If for every idle word, what then for thy swearing and cursing, and lying?
what for the abundance of filthy obscene, and rotten communication that comes
out of thy mouth. Thou must give an account for thy tongue. And so for every
member and for every sense, I cannot stand upon particulars.

Thou must give an account likewise for the gifts of thy mind, how thou have
employed thy wisdom and learning, and experience, etc.

For all thy passions: Mat. 5 22.
he that is angry with his brother unadvisedly, is in danger of judgment.

For all the disposition, Mat. 15.19.
and inclinations of thy heart, for out of the heart comes thefts and
murders, and adulteries.

In a word, whatsoever ability thou have, whereby thou might have been
benificial, and serviceable to the Church and Commonwealth, thou must give an
account of it in particular unto God, he will call thee to a reckoning of every
parcel by it self. The Master (in the Gospel) that gave the talents to his
servants, he called them to an account for every talent he gave them: so there
must be a particular enumeration to God of all those several abilities
wherewith he has fitted thee for his service, how thou have behaved thy self
in matter of health, strength, and time; in thy senses, in the members of thy
body, how with thy mind, how with the dispositions of thy soul, how in all the
gifts and endowments he has entrusted thee with, for the service of the Church
and Commonwealth.

Secondly, 2. Because he will proceed by me hod and order.
it is called a reckoning, because in this reckoning, God will go by a method,
keep an order, such an order as men do in reckoning with their accountants,
every thing has his due place: God will proceed to give every one in the day
of judgment his due place; and ye shall find then, many sins that ye have
accounted the lightest of all, will be the most heaviest, and grievous at that
day. Psalm. 50.
I will set thy sins in order before thee, says God in Psalm. 50. He had
reckoned them up confusedly here, these things thou have done, but, I will set
them in order before thee. God will observe such an order, as every thing shall
have its due place, its due head.

In the first place shall be that Apostacy, whereof all Adams posterity are
guilty. This David saw, and therefore when he judged himself, he judged
himself as one born in sin. Psalm. 51.
I was borne in sin, and in sin has my mother conceived me.

In the next place shall be that concupiscence, that depravation of nature,
from whence all actual sins proceed. Romans 7.
This Saint Paul knew, and therefore he bewaileth it as the original, and root
of all other actual sins, Romans 7. God will begin first with the sins of the
heart, because thence comes all the outward actions of the whole man.

Then all the outward actions. He will begin first with those against the
first Table, Atheism, Infidelity, Profaneness, contempt of God, and his
service, neglect of his glory, and the opportunites he has given us.

And when the Law and the Gospel come together, he will proceed more severely,
for the sins against the Gospel, then the Law. That is the reason that our
Savior tells us, that it shall be easier for Sodom and Gomorah, then
Capernaum at the day of Judgment. Why so? Sodom and Gomorah had the Law, but
Capernaum had the Law and the Gospel too: And (faith the Apostle Heb. 10.) If
they that obeyed not Moses law died, of how much s^rer judgment shall they be
guilty of, that disobey the Gospel of Christ, the Law of faith? Thus God will
proceed.

And therefore, when ye would exercise repentance, follow Gods order, mourn
more for impenitency, A direction in the exercise of repentance.
and infidelity, then for other things. Be more humbled for sins against the
first Table; for prophannesse, for Atheism, and neglect of God, then for
sins against the second, though these must be lamented; and repented of too.
Again, be more in lamenting the inward sinful disposition of thy heart, then
thy outward sinful actions: and forget not the original root of all, which we
brought with us into the world. I say, mark Gods method, and his order: that
which he takes most notice of at the day of judgment, lay that to thy thoughts,
and take greatest notice of it now.

It is a grievous thing for a man to be borne in sin, but to add actual
sins to that, it is more grievous. For a man to sin in thought, and in
heart is grievous, but to add actual sins to those, it is more grievous. It
is a grievous thing for a man to sin against righteousness, to deal unjustly
with men, but to deal unrighteously with God in point of his worship, is more
grievous. It is a grievous sin for a man to disobey the law of God, but to
disobey the law of faith, to delay repentance, to defer turning unto God, is
far more grievous. Thus we should mark Gods order, 3. Because he will proceed
by books. Dan. 10. Rev. 20.
that he will observe, when he brings us to a reckoning.

Thirdly, It is called a reckoning, because God will proceed with men at that
day (as Masters with their servants) by writings, by books. In the tenth of
Daniel, the book was opened, and in the 20. Revel. there is mention made of
books that should be opened. God will proceed with all his Stewards, upon
books that shall be opened. The books are either the book of the law, that
shows what we should have done: John 12.48.
The words that I speak (faith Chirst) the same shall judge you at the last
day. And there is one that judges you, even Moses that is read daily. And then
secondly, there is the book of conscience, that shows what we have done here:
God will put the memories of men to the task, as Abraham did Dives, Son
remember that thou in thy lifetime hadest thy pleasure. So remember that thou
in thy life time had riches, but how did thou employ them? remember that
thou hadest Authority, and office, and place in the Church of the
Commonwealth, but what service did thou do to God? remember that thou
had wisdom, and learning, and knowledge, but what good had the Church or
Commonwealth by it? God I say, will put every man's memory to the task, what
opportunities are lost carelessly; nay, what opportunities he avoided wilfully,
when he might have done God better service, yet lest he should be disadvantaged
in his by-respects in the world he bauked them: remember this.

The sins of Judah (says God) are written with a pen of Iron, and with the
point of a Diamond, they are graven upon the table of their hearts. God has
the Jer. 17.1.
sins of men graven on the table of their hearts. Little do thou that art an
old man, think of a thousand things, that God will bring against thee, that
were done in thy youth. Job little thought till the day of his affliction, when
God made him possess the sins of his youth, that there was such abundance of
guilt against him as there was. God will remember that, that thou have forgot.

God will proceed by books, and this will clear Gods justice in his
proceedings, and make every thing appear righteous in the sight of men and
Angels, because every man's conscience shall testify against himself, and
therefore the mouth of all ungodly men shall be stopped at the day of the Lord,
they shall have nothing to say for themselves, why justice should not proceed
against them. Here (will god say (I find so much given to usury; so much gotten
by usury; so much spent in vain; so much kept injuriously from the furtherance
of Gods worship, and planting the Gospel where it was wanting; so much kept
from benefiting the Church and Commonwealth, in public, in private; so much
from helping the poor: here I find it, how comes it here? was it not written
with thy own hand? was it not thy self that made this impression upon thy
conscience by thy own guilt? What will thou say for thy self? has any one
accused thee wrongfully? has any one wrote it by mistake? No, all is done with
thy own hand, and you cannot deny your own hand writing, when it is brought to
your face. Has any one had the keeping of this book of thy conscience? have
thou not always had it in thy own Possession? what can thou allege for thy
self?.

I know (beloved) and it is true, that there are many other ways whereby
ungodly men shall be accused at the last day: God himself shall accuse thee,
and be a swift witness against thee, the Saints shall accuse thee, wicked men
shall accuse thee, the Devils shall accuse thee: but the main proceeding, and
that that shall clear Gods justice, and stop the mouths of all ungodly men,
is this, that the accusation is by their own handwriting, their own book
shall accuse them, that they have wasted their Lords goods and misspent them.

The fourth and last thing wherein this proceeding at the last day, 4. Because
God will exact of every one according to what he has been trusted with.
shall be like a reckoning is this: That there shall an account be made in
measure, and proportion to the trust committed to men. The Master when he
reckons with his servant, he calls him to account, not for some lesser
sums, or for some one or two things, but for all that he has entrusted him
with, and if one servant have more then another, his account shall be greater
then another, according to the greatness of that that is committed to him, so
shall the largnesse of his reckoning be; to whom much is given, Luke 12.48.
of them much is expected, and to whom little, little is expected; but of every
one something is expected, because every one is a Steward. The reckoning, I
say, it shall be according to the difference of gifts and endowments, wherewith
we are entrusted. When the Master in the Gospel, called his servants to an
account for the Talents, we see he that had ten Talents, made account for ten,
and he that had five, for five, and he that had one, was called to an account
but for one, every one for so much as he had received. He that has received
bodily abilities of health, and strength shall account for that: He that has
had wealth and an estate in the world, shall make an account further for that.
He that has had all these, and authority and place, wherein he had power to
do right, and to glorify God amongst men, he must make an account for so much
the more.

Alas beloved, if men consider, that the more wealth, they heap up, and the
more places of authority, and preferments, they have in the world, their
accounts shall be greater at the day of the Lord, certalnly it would make them
more sober, and walk more humbly, and watchfully, it would make them so much
the more industrious, to improve their talents, to the best advantage of their
Lord that entrusted them with them.

So much for the opeining of the point. I will conclude briefly with a few uses
of it.

Ye see (Beloved) not only that all are Gods Stewards, Use 1. For confutation.
but that all Gods Stewards shall be brought to a reckoning, brought to it in
this life, and in a another. Ye see why it is called a reckoning, why God will
proceed with men in this manner.

The first Use then shall be for confutation of those Atheists, that put far
from them the fear of the day of Judgment.

Is it possible that there should be a generation of the world, Atheists in the
Church.
that should doubt of the Judgment to come? Nay, shall we go further and come
nearer, not only in the world but in the Church, that there should be such as
doubt of the time and day? By that that is done daily, it appears that there be
many at this day in the Church, that doubt of a Judgment day.

First, do but try men's courses. What sins do they most fear, and most avoid?
by that ye shall know what Judgment they fear and what they fear not. They fear
only such sins as in the course of justice, men and their laws take hold of:
such as are only a breach of the second Table. Men will not be injurious to
men, lest men proceed in man's justice against them. But how comes it to pass
that there is so little regard of God? of reverence of his name? of setting up
his worship in their houses, and in their hearts? Certainly you do not think
that God will be as exact in his judgment, in matters that concern his own
honor immediately, as any man will be in cases that are brought before him.
Again, do not men fear those outward actions which expose them to the censure
of men on earth, and unto punishment here? But in the mean time they fear not
evil affections, and the motions of sin in their own hearts. A man would not
be took with open these, yet nevertheless he uses fraud, when men cannot
discern it. A man would not be took with murder, yet nevertheless he is
full of malice and envy, and repining, Why is this, but because men acknowledge
not a judgment to come? They fear not the judgment of God, wherein he will
bring the breaches of the first Table to an account, as well as those of the
second, and the secret thoughts, and sins of the heart, to a reckoning, as
well as outward actions.

Such mockers there were in the time of Saint Peter, 2 Pet. 3.
against whom he speaks in his second Egistle, and third chapter. We will a
little observe the method of the Apostle, that we may see how he discovers
them. ^ay the mockers, there shall be no Judgment. There shall, says the
Apostle. How can that be? ^ve not all things continued as they were, since the
beginning of the Creation for so many thousand years? And why should we think
that there should come any alteration after, more then before? Ye are deceived
(says he) all things have not continued alike, the world was drowned by water.
But if they do continue, it is by the word of God, and that Word that gave a
being to them, that Word will put an end to them, God can as easily by his
Word destroy all things, as by his Word he made all things. But some will say,
by what instrument will he destroy the world? By sire. How can that be, for
that is one of the main parts, the main matter whereof things were made, and
shall that be the destruction of that whereof it is made? Yes (says the
Apostle,) All things were made by water too, and yet they were destroyed by
water, and why not then by fire? But God deserreth the promise of his coming?
What of that? He puts it not quite off, though he defer, yet it is not
long with God, for there is no time long to him that is eternal. and in that he
deserreth, it is that some men may be brought to salvation, and others made
inexcusable. Thus the Apostle takes off all objections of the Atheists of the
world, and shows that there shall be a day of Judgment.

Secondly, Use 2. For instruction.
it serves for instruction. If there shall be such a Judgment to come, if God
will have such a time of rekconing with all his Stewards in the world, Then it
teaches us first, not to busy our selves in judging one another, why? because
there shall a time come of Gods Judgment. 2. Not to judge others. Romans 14.10.
Who art thou (says the Apostle) that judge thy brother? we shall all stand
before the Judgment seat of Christ. As if he should say; What a bold part?
what a presumptuous part is this, that thou should judge thy brother? Do
thou not know that there is one that shall judge him and thee? is it fit that
he that is a prisoner at the Bar should come and leap up into the place of
the Judge, and sit in his seat? Ye are all fellow prisoners together, and ye
must all stand before the Judgment fear of Christ. So in another place the same
Apostle, 1 Cor. 4.5.
when he would take men off from judging, says he, Judge nothing before the
time: Why? for the Lord will come, who both will bring to light, the hidden
things of darkness, and will make manifest the counsels of the hearts, and
then shall every man have praise of God. As if he should say; Thou art not able
to judge aright, it may be that man that thou dispraisest, at that day may find
praise with God.

Secondly, 2. To judge our selves here.
Turn the Judgment on thy own heart, be more in Judging of thy self, that thou
may not be Judged of the Lord. Will God call thee to a reckoning? then begin
to call thy self to a reckoning first.

How shall that be done?

There is a double reckoning that every man must undergo, A two sold reckoning
to be made here.
that will avoid this reckoning with God.

First, he must reckon with his own heart.

Secondly with others.

First with his own heart. 1. Reckon with out selves
Every man must take all the advantages, opportunities that God has given, to
reckon with himself. Does God awaken thy conscience by the preaching of his
word: Descend into thy own heart? It is that that the Lord looks for, Jer. 8.6.
that a man should say, What have I done? Does God smite thee with some
afflictions, if with losses? reckon with thy self how thou have gained thy
wealth: If with disgraces, reckon with thy self about thy pride, and ambition,
and vanity of thy heart. If God smite thy body with sickness: reckon with thy
self about the employment of thy health, and the well usage of the times and
seasons of grace. Every evening call thy self to an account; What have I done
this day? where have I been? In what company? how have I carried my self there?
what good have Idone? what good have I received? In the matters of thy calling,
reckon with thy self, with what heart thou have followed it, with what care to
conform thy self to Gods word, the rule of righteousness. If thou have been
in pleasures, whether they were lawful, and if they were, whether they were
lawfully used. Thus must every man reckon with his own heart; as the Church in
Lament. Lam. 3.39.
3.39. Wherefore is the living man sorrowful? Man suffers for his sin^ let us
search our ways? and turn again to the Lord. There are many that (...) to
outface God, and men, in their sins: but know this who-ever thou art, that if
thou forbear to reckon with thy own heart, God will assuredly reckon with thee,
thou must reckon here, or hereafter with thy self, or with God: therefore says
David Psalm.4. Psalm. 4.
Commune with your own hearts upon your beds; that is, be sure to take time
from your sleep, rather then to neglect this business of reckoning with your
own hearts.

Secondly, 2. Reckon with others.
Reckon with others too. Let that man that is in authority, a Magistrate, so
carry himself in his employments, that he may reckon with the people, and give
an account to them if need be, as Samuel did, Whose ox have I taken? or whose
ass have I taken? 2. Sam. 12.3.
or whom have I defrauded? whom have I oppressed? or of whose hand have I
received any bribe to blind mine eyes therewith? The Lord (says he) is a
witness that ye have not found any thing in my hand. And not only so, but that
they may be able to witness, that they have been great instruments of Gods
glory, and of the good of others.

Let Ministers reckon with the people committed to their charge, as Paul did,
when he took his leave of the Ephesians, and was to go up to Jerusalem; I take
you to record this day (says he) that I am pure from the blood of all men,
Acts 20.26.
for I have not shunned to declare to you the whole counsel of God, and I have
kept back nothing that was profitable unto you, but have showed you, and tought
you publicly, and from house to house. And because I know that after my
departure, there will somewhat remain to be done for Grievous wolves will enter
in, not sparing the flock; therefore I will be careful that there be a
succession of faithful Ministers afther me, and therefore I give carge to the
rest that follow, that they take heed to themselves and to the stook over which
the holy Ghost has made them overseers, to feed the Church of God, which he
has purchased with his own blood.

Let Masters, reckon with their Familes, their servants and children, whether
they have done their duty as faithful Masters, not only in furthering the
service of God, but also in furthering of them by instruction, and example to
all good.

Let those that are in a way of traffic, learn to reckon with those that they
deal withal. If thou have wronged any by unjust gain, thou must reckon with him
by restitution: there is nothing that thou have gotten unjustly, for which thou
do not reckon now, James. 5.3.
but (as Saint James says) at that day shall eat they flesh as it were fire.
Therefore Zacheus, when salvation was brought to his house, If I have done
uujustly, and wronged any, I restore it. Doubtless there are many men that
cloth themselves in Satin and Velvet, and abound in all variety and bravery,
that would now be houseless, and moneyless, and apparelless, it may be, if they
should make restitution of their unjust gain. Well, do it, as ye love your own
souls: you shall reckon as you are Gods Stewards with him, how you have come by
every penny that you have in the world, and therefore go about it now.

Reckon with others also for works of mercy, what thou have been wanting in to
thy brethren: thou have lived thus long in a plentiful estate, what have thou
done which thy estate? Josephus reckons up three several tenths that were
expected and exacted of the Jews. Would thou be less liberal now in the time
of the Gospel, then they were under the law? Is God less merciful? or has he
less interest in thy estate? Thou have so many thousands, What have thou done
out of this to releeve the poor? or to set up those in a course of traffic,
and trade, that want a stock. Beloved you cannot (if you look about you) want
objects of mercy, and means to further your reckoning at the day of the Lord.
And if you would be faithful stewards to God, say thus: I have been thus much
behind-hand in paying the due I owe to the poor, to the Church, etc. I will pay
it while I live, and if that be not enough, when I die I will pay it. But I
hasten. That is the second thing, Let every man reckon thus with his own heart.

The third thing is, 3. To Exercise daily repentance, Acts 17.31.
the daily exercise of repentance upon the sight of your former evils: God now
(says the Apostle) calls all men every where to repentance, because he has
appointed a day, in which he will judge the world in righteousness. Let this
then stir us up to repentance. God expects that men should judge themselves now.

Fourthly, 4. To get an interest in Christ. Rom 8.1. Exodus 25.21.
If you would stand at that great day of Judgment, when there shall be such an
exact reckoning. Interest now your selves in Christ. There is no way to escape
the Judgment to come, but by making peace with the Judge now. There is no
condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus. This was prefigured in the
Mercyseate, that was to be compassed about with the wings of the Cherubins, all
covering the two tables of the Testament, one Cherubin to look toward another:
showing us thus much, that there is no covering of our transgressions committed
against the commandments of God, the tables of the Testimony, but by the great
Mercy-seat the Lord Jesus Christ, upon whom the Fathers of the times before
Christ, and Believers since look, expecting the covering of the guilt of their
sins from the wrath of God by no other means, but by this propitiator or
Mercy-seat, that covers the Arc of the Testimony.

Lastly, 5. To lead a holy conversation.
it serves also for instruction in another point, that is, To teach us to lead
a holy conversation. This use the Apostle Peter made of the Doctrine of the day
of Judgment, Seeing (says he) that we lock for these things, what manner of
persons ought we to be in all holy conversation and godlidesse? 1 Pet. 3.11,
Alas (beloved) little do you know whether this be the last Sermon that many of
you may hear, whether this be the last day wherein God will ever call upon you
to repent, and amend your lives. There shall be a fearful dissolution, and
destruction of all things that you see. There shall be a naked appearance made
before the Judge at that day of reckoning: let every man therefore say within
himself, How shall I stand at that time, at that Judgment? 2 Cor. 5.9.
All our care should be that of the Apostle Paul's, Whether we be absent from
the body, or present in the body, we labor that we may be accepted of the
Lord: Whether we live a day longer, or die this day before the morrow, that we
may be found acceptable before the Lord. And for this cause (says he in
another place) because there shall be a resurrection from the dead, both of the
just and unjust, Acts 26.15: 16.
I exercise my self to have always a conscience void of offense toward God,
and toward men. Look to it in your places, and in your hearts, that you may
have a good conscience, void of offense toward God and men: for the time shall
come, that nothing in the world shall stand you in stead, but a good
conscience: and if then when the books are opened, it be found that your
reckonings are even, and the accounts clear, between you and your Master, by
obedience and repentance, by works and by faith, happy shall that servant be
whom his Master at that day shall find so doing.

The last Use, Use 3. For Comfort.
is a use of comfort to all the servants of God. Let them quietly, and
cheerfully, suffer that portion of misery, and affliction that the Lord
deals out unto them. Let them not grudge at the prosperity of ungodly men, or
at the variety of changes, that themselves are exposed unto; because there is a
day of reckoning, and account, when all things shall be made even. The Apostle
Saint James exhorts Christians to patience upon this very ground, James 5.
because the day of the Lord draws nigh. If therefore you see wicked men
prosper, and bring their enterprises to pass, be not troubled at the matter. A
man does not much envy an enemy that is now in prison, though he have some good
cheer there, though he have some friends, that come and see him there, because
he knows he is but a Prisoner, and he shall be brought out at the Assizes, and
then he shall be righted. The world is the common Jayle, whereinto Adam was
cast after he had sinned, and we are all prisoners in this prisonhouse: the
enemies of Gods glory, and of his Church and people, they cannot escape out of
this prison, here they are tied, Gods chains are upon them, and he will bring
them to an account before his Judgment seat, and that before all men and
Angels. With these things let us comfort and support our selves.

A word concerning the present occasion.
Ye have heard that all men are Gods Stewards: ye have heard that God has a
time, wherein he will call all his Stewards to an account: the forerunners of
this great account, shall be in this life, and after death, when God strikes
men down by death, Heb. 9.27.
it is that they may be brought into his presence, and there receive the
sentence, either of absolution or condemnation, as I showed you before
concerning the soul o man, in that intelectual manner receiving the sentence.
It is appointed to all men once to die, and after that the Judgment.

You have now a spectacle of mortality before you: one of Gods stewards took
away, and called by death to give up his account. Concerning whom, it cannot be
expected that I should say much, or any thing at all, specially by those that
know both the condition of his living, and of his dying.

For his living. It was not in the City, but for the most part, it was from us
in the Country.

For his dying. He was here but a day or two before he was taken hence. He
came to the City in the extremity of his weakness, and it took him with some
violence, as the nature of that disease, the stone, is. There was much
expression expected from him: but it pleased God to make a sudden change more
then we looked for, for (as I said) his disease seized on him with such
violence, and extremity, that he had no space for any thing but to pray us, to
pray with him, and for him

That which we may learn from such examples as these, is this; That we
therefore be good Stewards in the time of our life. We know not what violent
sickness may seize upon us, and how it may dis-inable us, to express our
selves to men, or to set our reckonings even with God. Be serious therefore in
the point, while you have health and strength. All of you are now called to a
reckoning by the preaching of the Word and Gospel, if this will not prevail,
expect another calling by sickness, by terrors of conscience, by death. You
are not sure but that the next calling may be by death, as it was with this our
brother; let me put this therefore as a remembrance to every one of you, that
you behave your selves as dying daily; Remember thou art a Steward, and must
give an account of thy Stewardship. Alexander had his Remembrancer. Saint
Jerome had another Remembrancer, Whether I eat or drink (says he) or
whatsoever I do, me thinks I hear the voice of the last trumpet, and of the
Archangel; Arise you dead, and come to Judgment. Let me now be thy
Remembrancer. Remember thou art a Steward, and that thou must be called to an
account of thy Stewardship. When thou art in holy duties, remember thou must
give an account with what strength thou servest God. When thou art in business,
in thy family, remember thou must give an account how thou have walked toward
thy servants, toward thychildren, toward them that God has given the. Thou
that have an estate, remember that thou must give an account to the great Lord,
of the gitting, and of the spending of that estate. Thou that art in places of
authority over others; remember thou must give an account how thou come to
them, how thou have behaved thy self in them. Let every one remember, that he
must give an account of what service he has done to his Master; of what use he
has been unto God, and what to others: The more God has been glorified, and
others benefited, the more shall our souls be comforted at that great day of
appearance, when the lea^^ smile of GODS countenance, will be worth a thousand
worlds, and the testimony o^ a good conscience, will be preferred before all
the treasures of the Eearth.

THE PRAISE OF MOURNING OR, MOURNING Preferred before MIRTH.
SERMON II.
ECCLESIASTES, 7.2. It is better to go to the House of Mourning, than to the
House of Feasting: for that is the end of all men, and the living will lay it
to his heart.


IN the former Chapter, The Coherence.
the Wise Man had been showing the vanity, and insufficiency of all earthly
things to make a man happy, and how much the World is mistaken, in seeking
happiness in any thing here below. In this Chapter, and those that follow, he
comes to direct men in the right way to find it, and shows them where they
should seek it, and where they should find it: First he tells them of a good
name, in the first verse. A good name is better than precious ointment. The
second means is, a good death; the day of death is better than the day of ones
birth. The third is a right mourning; it is better to go to the house of
mourning, than to the house of feasting. Afterward he proceeds to other
particulars. But this he brings in upon the former, to prevent an objection
that some might make: for having said that the day of death, is better then the
day of ones birth; some might object: What goodness can there be in death? as
for those that are dead, they cease to be, and they that are alive reap no
benefit by it, but mourning, and there is little good, little happiness in
this, to exercise a man's thoughts about mournful objects; Yes (says he) it is
better to go to the house of mourning, then to the house of feasting, for the
living will lay it to his heart. And upon this he spends some time, because
naturally we are exceeding backward, to believe that it is good for a man to be
mourning upon earth.

Others make the dependence of the words thus; That Solomon having before
showed the vanity of riches, he does in the six former verses of this Chapter,
prefer even death it self, before wealth and abundance. And he shows wherein
it is better.

First in the Adjuncts. The Adjunct of death is mourning: the Adjunct of wealth
and abundance is feasting: yet mourning is better then feasting. And because it
seems a Parradox to every natural man, he comes to confirm and prove it.

By the Effects. In the third verse; Sorrow is better then laughter, for by the
sadness of the countenance, the heart is made better. Sorrow can do that for
us that wealth cannot, it makes the heart better.

By the different subjects in which they are. That same worldly mirth is in the
heart of fools. In the fourth verse: the heart of fools, is in the house of
mirth: but this mourning it is in the heart of the wise: the heart of the wise
is in the house of mourning.

By the Efficient cause. One cause of mourning is the rebukes of the wise. In
the fifth verse; It is better to hear the rebukes of the wise, then for a man
to hear the song of fools.

And then in the sixth verse by a Prolepsis, he prevents an objection that some
might make. For whereas he had said that mourning was better then joy, some
might say. It seems otherwise, there is delight in joy, there is none in
mourning. He tells them that that delight, it is but a very short delight,
but as the cracking of thorns under a pot, it is but vanity. As the cracking of
thorns under a pot, so is the laughter of a fool, this also is vanity.

We will not stand much about the matter. So many several men as handle this
book, do severally connect and join the words together, according to their own
conceits and opinions of them.

It is evident, The meaning of the words.
that in this verse that I have now read to you, the Wise man speaks of such a
mourning, as is occasioned by the death of friends. And he says of that
mourning, that it is better then to be in the house of feasting.

That he speaks of such a mourning, appears by that which follows: first he
says, that that is the end of all men, he speaks therefore of such a mourning,
as is upon the end of men, upon the departure of men out of this world: and
secondly he says, the living will lay it to his heart: he speaks of such an
end of men, as is opposite to the life of men.

In a word. By the house of mourning, he means a house wherein some one is
dead, which gives occasion to the parties that dwell there, of sorrow and
mourning for their departed friend. It is better to go to such a house.

By the house of feasting, he means not only such a house wherein there is
feasting, but also all manner of abundance: as commonly men show their wealth
in feasting.

By the end of all men, he means that which the Schools calls the end of
termination. Now there is a twofold end of termination (as they speak) either
Positive, or Privative. A Positive end, as a point is the end of a line, and an
instant is the end of time: because the line resolves it self into a point at
last, and all time resolves it self at last into an instant. A Privative end,
and that is that that causes a cessation of being, that is the end of action,
wherein all the work, and invention, and enterprises of a man cease. Of such an
end here he speaks, such an end of a man as that he cease to be as he was
upon earth, and cease to do as he did upon earth.

By laying to heart, he means more then a bare konwing, or a bare observing,
and taking notice of things. There is to be understood here, a serious
pondering an often considering of it, as it is said of Marie, She laid those
sayings to heart; and so Jacob, he laid the sayings of Joseph to heart. It is
such a serious considering, and pondering, and discussing of every thing, as
they may bring it to some use, may draw some fruit, and benefit out of it to
themselves.

So that the sum and substance of the words is thus much; It is a better
thing for a man to be conversant about the thoughts of death, and to take hold
of all occasions that may bring the serious consideration thereof into his
heart, then to delight himself in those worldly pleasures, and sensual
delights, wherein for the most part men spend their lives. The reason is,
because their is some benefit that arises thereby to the inward man, some
advantage gained to the soul: whereas by the other, there is none at all,
there is much hinderance and hurt, but no furtherance and benefit.

The words then you see consist of a Proposition; The devision of the words.
And a proof or confirmation of that Proposition.

The Proposition. It is better to go to the house of mourning, then to go to
the house of feasting.

The confirmation or proof of it, is double; first, because this is the end of
all men: secondly, because the living will lay it to his heart. This latter
part is that which I purpose most to insist upon.

In the former. He calls the house wherein any one dies, the house of
mourning. It is better to go to the house of mourning.

Where you see; Observat. 1. The death of others, is a just occasion of
Mourning.
That the Death of men, with whom we live, is a just occasion of mourning to
some.

The holy Ghost would not have described the house wherein a man dies in this
manner, if their were not some equity, and justice in mourning, upon such an
occasion. For he speaks not here (as I conceive) only with reference, and
respect to the common custom of natural and worldly men; but with respect to
the natural disposition, and affection, that is in the heart of man, and the
equity of the thing. There should be mourning, and there is in it a just
occasion, when men are taken away by death.

When Sarah died, Genesis 23.2.
the text says that Abraham came to mourn for Sarah, and to weep for her. And
Esau, when he speaks of the death of his father Isaac, he calls the time of
his death, Genesis 27.41.
the time of mourning, the days of mourning for my father are at hand. Genesis
50.10 2. Sam. 25.1.
So Joseph when his father was dead, it is said that he mourned for his father
seven days. When Samuel was dead, all the Israelites were gathered together
and lamented him. When Josiah was dead, there was such a great lamentation for
him, Zach. 12.10.
that it became a pattern of excessive mourning; In that day there shall be a
great mourning in Jerusalem, as the mourning of Hadadrimmon in the valley of
Megiddon. Our Savior Christ, when he looked upon Lazarus, he wept, because he
was dead. John. 11.
And those Ephesians, this was it that broke their hearts, they sorrowed most
of all for the words which S. Paul spoke, Act. 20.38.
that they should see his face no more.

I need not stand upon the proof of the point. Reas. 1.
There is great reason for it, first if we respect men in their usefulness to
others. There is no man but is of some use: and so far as a man is useful to
another, there is just ground of mourning, for the loss of such a one.
Therefore David, he mourned for the death of Saul, though he was a wicked man,
because he was useful in his time by way of government. And as there is more
usefulness, so there is more cause of mourning, as we see in the death of
Samuel, and Josiah, and others.

Secondly, Reas. 2.
because when those that are useful, are taken away, a man sees some effects
partly of his own guilt, and partly of Gods displeasure. Of his own guilt If
those die that are evil, that he did not do them that good that he might, while
they lived, he did not converse so profitably, as he might have done, to
further their spiritual good. If they be good and gracious, that he received
not benefit by them, that he did not manage the opportunities, as he might
have done, to have made that use of their society and conference, of their
prayers, and spiritual helps, of all those gifts and endowments that they had.
And as in the defect, so likewise in the excess there is guilt. When a man
idoliseth the creature too much, and trusts too much to the arm of flesh:
when he sets too great a price upon men, he may apprehend the displeasure of
God, taking away his brother, that was (as it were) a curtain that stood
between God and him, taking away those that hid God from his eyes.

Upon these occasions and grounds the servants of God have reflected upon
themselves, seeing the death of others, that are near, and dear unto them, and
have drawn from thence, matter and cause of mourning.

Nay, Ier. 5.3.
it is a thing that the Lord looks for: Thou have smitten them, and they have
not grieved. When God takes away any that are useful to us, there is a
smiting, and a correction in it, even to those that live, to those that were
intimate and inward with him, and God expects that men should mourn, and
grieve for it.

I briefly note this (for I intend not to stand upon it) against that Stoicall
Apethy, Use.
that stupidity, I cannot say whether it have seized on the spirits of men, or
whether men affect it in themselves: but they account this a matter of praise,
a virtue praiseworthy, to see nothing doleful, nothing worthy of mourning in
the death of any one. We see it is quite contrary to the very course of the
Scripture.

But it will be objected. Object.
We are bid to mortify our earthly affections; and if we must mortify our
affections, we must mortify all our affections, that of sorrow, as well as
anger, and the like.

I answer briefly. Answ.
The Scripture indeed bids us mortify our affections, but it does not bid
us take away our affections: it bids us only mortify, and purge out the
corruption of our affections. A twofold distempe In men's affections. 1.2.
Now there is a twofold corruption, and distemper in the affections of men. The
first is, when they are misplaced, and setupon wrong objects: so we mourn for
that we should rejoice in, or we rejoice in that we should mourn for. Secondly,
when they are either excessive or defective: either we over-do, or we do not,
either not at all, or not in that proportion, and measure that we should. Thus,
when we over-grieve for worldly crosses, and too little for sin; too much for
the loss of earthly friends and too little for the loss of Gods favor, and
spiritual wants: this is a distemper of the affections in the defect, the heart
grows earthly, and fixed upon the creature, and is drawn away, and estranged
from God. Then there is the excess: that the Apostle speaks of, when he
exhorts them, 1 These. 4.13.
not to mourn as men without hope: whether he spoke there of the Gentiles, as
some think; that cut their heads, and made themselves bald, in the day of their
mourning, an affected kind of outward show they had to mourn, which the Lord
forbad the people of Israel to do: Deuteronomy. 14.
or whether (as indeed it is) because they did not restrain inwardly, and
bridle the exorbitant excess of their affection, we should not mourn as the
Gentiles, but as men of hope: mourn as men that can see the changes that God
makes in the earth, and in your Families, and can see how near God comes to
you, and what use God would have you make of every particular trial and
affliction: mourn so far as you see your own guilt, in not making use of the
opportunities you have had in enjoying your friends, and so far as you see any
evidence of displeasure from God: so far we should mourn, but not as men
without hope.

But I briefly pass this, intending not to insist upon it, only by occasion,
because Solomom makes the place where any die, the house of morning.

We come now to the proof of the point, why going to the house of morning,
taking these occasions to affect our hearts, is better then to go to the house
of feasting, then to take occasions of delighting our selves in outward things.
What Is the reason? It is double.

First, This is the end of all men.

What is the end of all men? The house of mourning. That which he means by
the house of mourning here, is that which he calls the end of all men, that
which puts an end to all men, and to their actions upon earth, and that is
Death.

So that the main point, that in this place the wise man intends, is but thus
much, I will deliver it in the very words of the Text, we need not vary from
them at all. Death is the end of all men.

Observat. 2.
Death is that which every man must expect, Death the end of all men.
to be the end of his life, and of his actions. It is the common, the last
condition of all men upon earth.

I will give you but two places of Scripture, that include all men in Death.
One in Job the third, Job 3.14.
from the fourteenth verse, to the 20. Verse of that Chapter, Job shows there
how Death is the End of all men he begins with the Kings and Counselors of
the Earth, with Princes and great Warriors, and descends afterward to
prisoners and mean persons, to laborers, to servants, to small and great, all
(says he) lie down in the dust, and go to the place of silence.

The other place is in Zachar. 1.5. Your fathers where are they? Zach. 1.5.
and the Prophets, do they live for ever? That is, look to all your
forefathers, that have been in all times before you, whether they be those
Fathers that you glory in, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and the rest, or those
Fathers that disobeyed the word of Prophecy (which indeed is the principal
thing here intended) all these Ancient persons they are dead; or as S. Peter
speaks, of those that were disobedient in the days of Noah, they are in
prison, they are in the grave: yea, and the Prophets too, that preached to you,
they are dead: the generations before you, both of Prophets and people, are all
dead.

You see then, that Death is the common condition of all men. Kings and
Subjects, Prophets and people, this is the last thing that shall be said of
them all, they are dead.

And it must be so; Reas. 1. In regard of Gods decree.
First in regard of Gods decree. It is that that God has appointed, and
determined, concerning all men, that they must die: there is a statute for it
in heaven, that can never be reverst. It is appointed to all men once to die,
Heb. 9.17.

Secondly, Reas. 2. In regard of the matter whereof men are made. Job 13 12.
in regard of that matter whereof all men are made, of earth: Dust thou art,
and to dust thou shall return, Your remembrances (says Job) are like unto
ashes, and your bodies, to bodies of clay. How easy is it for the wind to blow
away ashes? for a potter to break in pieces a vessel of clay? so easy it is to
put an end to the memories and bodies of men, they are but ashes and clay.

Thirdly, Reas. 3. In regard every man in him, has the cause of death.
in regard that every man has in him, that that is the cause of Death: sin. It
is that that is as poison in the spirits, and as rottenness in the bones. Sin
brought in Death, and Death seizes upon all men; it consumes all men from the
very beginning by degrees. Show me a man without sin: without it either in the
committing of it, or without it in the guilt of it, you may then show a man
that shall not die: while all men are under sin, they are under Death. Even our
blessed Savior Jesus Christ himself, though he did not sin actually, yet
because he stood guilty of our sins, Death seized upon him.

So then. Look to Gods decree, that is, All men shall die. Look to the matter
whereof every man is made; that is, a decaying dying substance. And look to the
cause of death in all men, that is sin; If any man can either escape Gods
decree, or bring a man that is not made of such a mouldring matter, or produce,
and show a man that has no sin in him: then you may show a man that shall not
die: but till then this conclusion remains, that the wise man sets down,
this is the end of all men, that they shall die.

But here it will be objected; Object. Heb 11.5.
We find some men that did not die. It is said of Enoch, that he was
translated, that he should not see death, Heb, 11.5. And of Elijah, 2 King.
2.11.
that he went up by a whirlwind into heaven in a chariot of fire, 2 Kings
2.11. These men did not die.

To this, Answ.
I answer briefly. Particular and extraordinary examples, do not frustrate
general rules: God may sometimes dispense with some particular men, and yet the
rule remain firm; I say it may be so.

But secondly we answer. They had that that was in stead of Death to them, some
change, though they did not die after the manner of other men. So at the end of
the world, it is said, that those that are alive shall be caught up and
changed, in the twinkling of an eye? there shall be a sudden, and almost
undiscernable, unperceivable change, which shall be to them instead of death.

But it will be objected further. Object.
There is a promise made in Joh. 11. That those that believe shall never die.

To this I answer with that common distinction; Answer.
There is a twofold death, which the Scripture calls, the first and the
second death: The first death, is the death of the body, that arises from a
dis-junction, and separation of the body from the soul; And there ie a second
death, that arises from the dis-junction, and separation of the soul from
God. The first death, is no death properly, the second death is that which is
truly Death: and so they shall not die. A man may have a body separated from
the soul, and yet not his soul separated from God, nor himself from Christ.
Romans 8.28.
Who shall separate us from the love of God in Christ? neither life nor death,
nor principalities nor powers, etc. Death you see shall not be able to separate
us from God: it cannot separate the soul: Nay, it does not separate the body
from Christ: the body remains a member of Christ, as well while it is still
in the grave, as before: God is not the God of the dead, but of the living,
says Christ, Matt. 22.
Mat. 22. And therefore he proves, that even Abraham was not dead in that
sense, that they then took it, but he remains yet alive, in as much as God
was his God. Abraham (whole Abraham) was Gods by virtue of Covenant, so are all
his posterity, the children of Abraham by faith, in a spiritual sense they
remain with Christ, and they are united to him, as members to the head, even
when their bodies are in the grave. So that (I say) they die not in that sense,
so as to have their soul separated from God; though they die in the first
sense, that is, to have their bodies separated from the soul. But our Savior
in that place of John, speaks of the second; of that death, which is an
everlasting separation of the soul from God. As we say of wicked men, that
while they are alive, they are dead; so the Apostle speaks of the widow that
lived in pleasures, while she lived she was dead? and the Church of Sardis, had
a name to live, but she was dead. This is true death indeed, when that the soul
of a man is separated, and dis-joyned from God, and from Christ: And it is the
state of every man by nature, of every man under sin, though they walk up and
down, and do the actions of the living, yet they are but dead men. And as
truly, as they are said to be dead while they live, so truly it may be said of
the children of God, that while they are dead, they live as it said of Abraham,
so it may be said of all Gods servants, they die not properly, but remain still
in union with God, and with Christ: with God through Christ, they are Christ's,
and therefore Gods in him, and therefore they die not. Look what the soul is
to the body, that is God to the soul: the soul is the life of the body, and God
is the life of the soul; they are still living men, that have God; the soul is
alive, even when the body lies down in the grave. This shall serve for the
opening of that, they are not dead, but alive: they do die in the first sense,
and in the common acceptance, in respect of the separation of the body from
the soul; but they do not die in the second sense, in respect of the separation
of the soul from God; they do not die eternally, they do not die properly.

Now briefly to make some use of this, and to hasten to that I most intend to
stand upon.

Is it so then, Use 1. Make account of it for our selves.
that Death is the end of all men. Let us make account of it for our selves.
This seems but a plain point, and so indeed it is: but I know there is
nothing more useful, and I know there is nothing less regarded, and less
considered of seriously then this, that we must die. It is true, we all
acknowledge it in the general, and every man, the very worst, the most
ignorant, and most profane in the world will yield to this in the general,
that all men must die, and let a man come and tell them, that they themselves
must die, they will grant it too, but this is that that undoes us all, we rest
in generals, and do not seriously insist upon a serious application of it, to a
man's own particular case, and bring it home to a man's self; to conclude thus I
must die, I may die soon, this may be the last day of my life upon earth, this
may be the last time I may breath, this may be the last word that I shall
speak, the last action that I shall do; I know I must die, and it may be I may
die now. This is that we should principally intend, and labor most after, that
when we read the stories of the Scripture, and see that Death is the end of all
men, that all must die, and their houses must be houses of mourning, to
conclude the same for our selves. All those worthies spoken of in Heb. 11. it
is said, they all died in faith; I read such a man was a King, but he died;
such a man was a Prophet, but he died; such a man was Noble, but he died; such
a one died in his youth, such a one in his strength, these died, and I must
die; the same thing must be said of me, that is said of them. I say, let us not
only say it, but resolve, and conclude upon it; conclude for our selves, that
the same thing must be said of us, that is said of all men; The benefit of the
particular application of death to a man's self.
All men must die, we must die.

The benefit that flows from it will be this;

First, when a man brings it to his own particular case, it will make sin
more odious to him. What is it that brought Death into the world? what brings
death upon us? Sin. By one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin,
and so death passed upon all men, 1. Sin will be made more odious. Romans 5.11.
for that all have finned. This I say is it, that will make sin odious to a
man, it will make a man look upon sin as a deadly evil. A man will avoid an
infections disease, that is mortal and deadly, and pestilential, and the like;
Why? because it is deadly, it is as much as his life is worth. The same is sin,
it is that that brought death upon all mankind, and will bring it upon thee.
When does the creature forfeit his being to the Creator, but when he does not
use it in the service, and for the glory of the Creator. God has given the
creature a being for himself, I have forfeited my being, when I glorify not
God with it; that man forfeiteth his wit, his memory, his strength, his time,
his life, and all that he is or has, when he does not employ them in Gods
service, to Gods glory. Now sin is that that makes us deny the service and
glory we owe to God; sin is that that makes a forfeiture of our lives, and all
unto him. Here is the first thing, God has given the creature a being for
himself, he preserves the creature in being for himself, when the creature
therefore sins it forfeiteth its life and being to the Creator. This makes
sin odious.

Secondly, 2. The truth and justice of God will be the more acknowledged.
this is it, that declares the wonderful justice, and truth of God. He said to
Adam in the beginning, as soon as ever he had fallen, he should die: and we find
it true on him, and all his posterity: for Adam stood and represented the
person of all men before God, that one man was all men: in him all men were
under the sentence of death. And we see it is true to this day. We find God
true in this, let this make us believe his word in every thing else. He has
been as good as his word, he has declared his justice, and his truth in the
death of all mankind upon the sin of Adam: he will declare it in every thing
else, in every promise, in every threatening, in every passage of his word: let
us give him the glory of his truth, as we find it in this.

Thirdly, 3. Death will be the b(...) prepared for Job 14.14.5
it is advantageous very much for our selves, as a means to prepare us for
death the better. When a man seriously concludes, Death is the end of all men;
then if I reckon and account my self amongst men, it will be my end too, and it
may be my end now. And we shall see what use Job makes of this: All the days
of my appointed time, I will wait till my change shall come. I make account a
great change shall come, such as has been upon all my fathers before me, so it
will come upon me, I will make account of it, and therefore I will wait all my
days: So should we, make account every day, that this may be the day of my
change; in every thing you do, make account that your change may begin then in
that very action, and this will be a means to make you wait for your change,
make you prepare for death. It is that that Drusius notes of Rabbi Eleazer,
that he gave his counsel and advice, that, a man should be sure to repent one
day before he died. He meant not that a man should defer his repentance till it
did evidently, that Death had seized upon him, But because a man may conclude,
if it be possible I may live to day, it is probable I may die to morrow,
therefore I will repent to day. Do it now, and do not delay it till to morrow.

This is that we are to do, Three things wherein here is o^ a particular
application of ^h to a man.
to account of every day, as that which may be the day of our change, and so to
carry our selves in all our actions and occasions, as if we should have no more
time to do our work. And this is especially to be observed in three things.

First, in matter of sinning, be careful to amend sin every day, labor to
mortify sin this day, as if thou should have no more days to mortify it
in, take heed of sinning now as if thou should die now. 1. In matter of
sinning. Acts 5.
Some we see have been taken away in the very act of sin: Ananias and Saphirah
were taken away in the very act of sinning, when they were telling a lie to the
Apostle they died: Zimri and Cosbie were slain in the very act of uncleanness:
Corah and his company, they died in the act of murmuring, and resisting of God,
and his ordinances, and ministers. Let a man now reason with himself, these
were taken away in their sins, it may be my case as well as theirs, if I be
found in sin. That is the first.

Secondly, 2. In redeeming of the time of life:
bring it home to this particular also, in another case, and that is, in
redeeming of the opportunities of the time of our life. Besides, the general
time of life, there be certain opportunities, certain advantages of time, that
the Scripture calls seasons: be careful to redeem them: though you may enjoy
your lives, yet you may have none of these; such as are seasons of glorifying
God, seasons of doing good, seasons of gaining good to a man's self, be careful
therefore (I say) to manage those opportunities, and advantages of time, so
that you may glorify God: Whether you eat or drink, 1 Cor. 10.35
or what soever you do, do all to the glory of God. Which way soever you may
most advance Gods glory, and pormote his worship, which way soever ye may
promote the cause of God; drawing men to God, and encouraging them in the ways
of God; which way soever you may be useful, employ your self at that time, the
present time, because you must die, and you may die now, you may have no more
opportunities to do it in. And so likewise in all advantages, Heb. 3 13. Gal.
6.10.
wherein men may do good to men, Exhort one another while it is called to day,
and while you have time do good unto all: Do all the spiritual good, and all
the outward good that you can, while you have seasons to do good. Happy is that
servant, that his master shall find so doing, when he comes, leading a
fruitful and profitable life. So, do good to your own souls while you have
time: pray, while you have time to pray, hear the Word while you have time to
hear it: exercise repentance, while you have time to repent: perfect the work
of mortification, while you have time to mortify your corruptions: do your
souls all the good you can, by the advantages of all the ordinances, of all the
opportunities that God has given you. This is the end of all men? it has been
the end of good and bad before; and it shall be the end of good and bad now;
men must die, their houses will be houses of mourning, therefore manage the
time in doing all the good you can, that God may be glorified, men may be
benefited, and your own souls furthered; that is the second thing.

Lastly, 3. In the manner of our conversation.
in the manner of your conversation, consider the time that you have to do
every thing in. Will a man be found idleing in the marketplace, when he should
be working in the Vineyard? Would you be feasting, when God would have you
mourning? you shall see some that have been taken away, when they little
thought of it: Belshazzer, he was in his feasts, and then comes the sentence
of death against him, and other the like examples you may see in the Scripture.
Consider therefore the particular actions that you do, whether they be such as
hold agreement with the state of a dying man. So for the manner of doing holy
duties Would you be found praying pefunctorily, and carelessly? Would you be
found coming to the Sacrament unprepared? What though you do holy actions, that
are good for the matter, would you be found doing of them, with unfit and
unprepared hearts? You see what the Apostle says, 1. Cor. 11. For this cause
many are sick, and weak, and many sleep: they slept, they were dead for this,
even because they came unworthily to receive the Sacrament of the Lords Supper.
Would you therefore be found doing of holy duties, and not in a right manner?
The serious consideration of this, that Death is the end of all men, with the
particular application of it to a man's self, that as it is the state of all
men, so it is mine in particular, I must die, and I may die now; it has an
influence into all the actions of a man's life.

To conclude. Use 1: In respect of the death of others.
In the last place; This point is of use to us, also in the death of others.

First, to moderate the mourning of Christians for the death of others. Why? It
is the end of all men, it is that that is the common condition of all men, it
should not be too grievous, 1. To moderate our mourning for the death of others.
not too doleful to any man. We would not have our friends to be in another
condition in their birth then others, we would not have them have more fingers,
or more members then a man, and would we have them have more days? Let this
serve as a brief touch upon that.

Secondly, 2. To improve he life of others.
it teaches us to make good use of our fellowship while we are together. Not
only we may die, but those that are useful to us may die also: let us make good
use of one another, while we live therefore. This will make the death of others
bitter, and will be worse than the death, and loss of our friends, the guilt
upon a man's conscience, that he has not made that use of them while they were
alive, that he might have done: let us therefore make the death of our friends
easy, by making good use of them while they live. It did smite the heart of
those Ephesians, that they should see the face of Paul no more; specially above
the rest it grieved them, that they should see him no more, how would it have
grieved them think you, if they had always hardened themselves against his
ministry before? Think with your selves seriously, here is such a Minister,
such a Christian friend, that husband and wife, that parent and child, a time
of parting will come; let us make it easy now, by making good use of one
another while we live, that when friends are took away, we may have cause to
thank God, that we have had communion, and confort of their fellowship and
society, the benefit of their graces, the fruit of their lives: and not sorrow
for the want of them by death. So much for that.

I come now to the second, and principal reason, why it is better to go to the
house of mourning, then to the house of feasting, it is this, because the
living shall lay it to his heart, What shall he lay to his heart? That that is
the end of all men; he shall lay the death of all men to heart.

The point I observe from hence is thus much. It is the duty of those that
live, Observat. 3. It is the duty of the living. to lay to heart the death of
others.
to lay to heart the death of others.

That is, seriously to consider, and make use for themselves of the death of
others. You see the Text is clear for the point.

And there is good reason why it should be so.

First, Reas. 1.1. God is glorified hy it.
in respect of the glory that comes to God.

Secondly, in respect of the good that comes to our selves by it. First, God
is glorified by this, when we lay to heart the death of others: there is a
dishonor to God to slight any of his actions: this is one of Gods works in the
world, the death of men: this is a thing wherein Gods hand is seen: he says to
the sons of Adam, Return. The spirit returns to God that gave it. It is he
that has the power of life and death. If a sparrow fall not to the ground,
without the providence of God; much less the servants of God, the precious
ones upon the earth, the excellent ones, as David calls them. I say, God is
seen much in these works, and it is a great dishonor to God, when men do not
consider the works of his hands: David by the spirit of prophecy in Psalm.
28.5. Psalm. 28.5.
wishes a curse upon ungodly men, and for this reason among the rest, because
they consider not the operation of his hands: this is that that puts men into a
cursed estate, and exposes them to the wrath of God, when they regard not the
works of the Lord. The actions of Princes, and great men upon earth, every man
considers of them, and weighs them: It is that, wherein we give God the
glory of his wisdom, and of his truth, of his power, of his justice, of his
mercy, of his sovereignty and dominion, and Lordship over the whole earth, when
we labor to draw to a particular use to our selves, the works of God in the
world, specially the death of men, of all men good and bad, for we must give it
the same latitude, and extent, and scope that the Text does here: he speaks
here of the death of men in general, and he says of all men, that their death
shall be laid to heart by the living.

Secondly, Reas. 2. Our selves are benefited by it.
as their is reason that we should take to heart the death of others, in
respect of the glory that comes to God thereby: so in respect of our selves
also, much benefit comes to our selves, by laying to heart the death of other
men. There be three special things considerable in the death of any one, that
is matter of profit, and benefit to those that live, and survive after them.

Therein we see the Certainty, of Death. Therein we see the Nature, of Death.
Therein we see the Cause and End of Death.
First, 1. Thereby we come to see the certainty of death.
therein we see the certainty of death: For now we have not only the word of
God that tells us that we shall die, but the works of God taking others before
us: that as the Sacraments are called visible instructions, because they teach
by the eye, and the outward senses: so the death of others are visible
instructions to the living, it teaches by the eye: a man is guided by the eye,
to see his own condition, and as it were in a glass, there is represented to
him his own state: what we are, they were once: the time was that they converst
with men as we do, that they spoke for Gods glory upon earth as we do; and what
they are now we shall be, there will come a time when our works shall cease as
theirs do, when we shall be in the place of silence, as they are. I say, it
confirms to us the former certainty, and assurance of our death, when we see
others fall before us. And there is great profit and benefit that arises out
of this. This is necessary to awaken men's drowsinesse, and to quicken up men's
dullness to a serious consideration of that that is so useful to themselves. A
man would wonder, that in the Wilderness, where so many thousands died, (for
the hand of God was out against them for their murmuring and rebellion, and
they were destroyed by the destroyer, as the Apostle speaks 2 Cor. 10.) that
there Moses should pray, Lord teach us to number our days, that we may apply
our hearts to wisdom: though they had a sight of so many dying before them,
and that continually, yet they needed to be stirred up to pray, that God would
teach them to make use of it. So it is with us. We have seen not only one or
two die before us, but there was a time not long since (and you cannot forget
it) wherein the destroying Angel did walk at liberty about the City, and kill
thousands in our streets, yet when so many died, what security was there even
among those that lived? in so much that after awhile the sickness grew common,
and usual, and so, unregarded. Have we not need then as much as ever Moses had
in the Wilderness, to cry to God, to teach us to number our days, that we
may apply our hearts to wisdom? Nay, much more now, when there is scarce one,
or none, in comparison of those multitudes that were swept away in that
visitation, we have need of such helps as these are, and to join our prayers
with them too, that we may be stirred up to a serious application of it to our
selves. That Is the first thing; it is necessary for living men to take to heart
the death of those that are departed, that they may see, and be brought
seriously to think of the certainty of their own death.

Secondly, 2. Thereby we come to see the nature of death. The proper work of
death.
therein also we see the nature of death, what the proper work of it in the
world is; It is of singular use too. The nature of death, the proper work of
it, is to dis-unite, to separate, to dis-joyn things: here you have the soul
separated from the body: the estate separated from the man; the man separated
from his friends, and all by Death. First (I say) ye have the body separated
from the soul: and this is a useful consideration. The soul and the body, while
they keep together in a man, 1. To separate the body from the soul.
they may be helpful, and useful one to another; the time will come when they
must be separated. Alas! the not considering of this, is the cause of those
great errors, that are in the lives of men: that they bestow so much time upon
their bodies, that they so much mind the present things of this life and their
outward welfare, as if they had no souls at all to regard; as if there never
should be a separation of body and soul one from another. What is the reason
that there is all that care took, for food for the body? for apparel for the
body? for health for the body? and such an utter neglect of the soul? but
because that men do not dream, do not thing of a time of separation, of a time
of dis-junction, of a time of parting these two. All the work of a man's life,
should now be to make a good use of the faculties of his soul, that the body
may be happy by it: the soul will draw the body after it to its own estate. Now
they are together, if they join now in sin: after there separation, there
shall come a time, when they shall be joined in punishment: if they join now in
the service of God; after they have been separated a while by death, there will
come a time, when they shall be again joined in glory and happiness. That is
the first; There will be a separation of soul and body: therefore make good use
of them, while they are together: let the body be serviceable to the soul, by
all its senses and members: let the soul rule, and order the body, by its
understanding and affections, etc. that both body and soul may be made blessed
in an eternal conjunction together after death, and in an everlasting union in
the sight of God.

Secondly, 2. To separate a man from his estate.
Death makes a separation between a man, and all his outward estate in the
world. The rich man in Saint Luke 12. thought not upon this: Soul, thou have
much goods laid up for many years; he thought his soul, and his goods, should
never have parted, therefore take now thine ease, says he. See what the end of
it was; Thou fool (says the Lord) this night they shall fetch away thy soul,
and then whose shall these things be? The time is coming, that these things
shall be none of thine, they shall be another man's, they shall be some bodies
else, they shall be taken from thee. How necessary is this consideration, to
take off men's affections from the world, and to stir them up to use their
wealth, and their estates, while they have them, so as may make for the glory
of God? A time shall come, that they shall not have it to use, that nothing
shall be left them, but a bare account to be given up, Give an account of thy
Stewardship, Luke 16. The main business is now to be done, while a man and his
wealth are together, while a man and his estate continues together, to use it
to Gods glory, otherwise it will be a woeful, and heavy parting, when death
shall come to make a separation. The young man went away sorrowful, when Christ
would have his wealth from him, because he had great possessions. How sorrowful
will a man go out of the world, when he has a great deal of wealth, but he
has not prepared his account: he cannot give up a reckoning of his getting of
it, of his using and employing of it? it is necessary therefore (I say) that
men take to heart the death of those that die before them, that when they see
the bodies, and souls of men parted, men and their estates parted, they may
learn how to use their bodies and souls, themselves and their estates, while
they are yet joined together.

Thirdly, 3. To separate a man from his friends.
Death does not only part a man's body and soul, a man's self and his wealth, but
it parts a man from his friends, from all his worldly accquaintance, from all
those that he took delight in upon earth: Death makes a separation between
husband and wife: see it in Abraham and Sarah, though Abraham loved Sarah
dearly, Genesis 23.
yet Death parted them, Let me have a place to bury my dead out of my sight. It
parts father and child, how unwilling soever they be: see it in David and
Absalom, Oh Absalom, my son, would God I had died for thee: and Rachel mourned
for her children, and would not be comforted, because they were not. It parts
the Minister and the people: see it in the case of the people of Israel
lamenting the death of Samuel; and in the case of the Ephesians, at the parting
of S. Paul, sorrowing especially when they heard they should see his face no
more. It parts those friends who were so united together in love, as if they
had but one soul in two bodies; see it in the separation that was made by
death, between David and Jonathan, 2 Samuel 1.^.
that were so knit together in their love, that he bewaileth him, Woe is me for
my brother Jonathan.

This is a necessary consideration for us that live, that we may learn to know
how to carry ourselves toward our wordly friends, and how to moderate our
selves in our enjoyment of these worldly comforts. Look upon every worldly
thing as a mortal, as a dying comfort. Look upon children and friends, as dying
comforts. Look upon your estates, as that that has wings, and will be gone.
Look upon your bodies, that now you make so much of, as a thing that must be
parted from the soul by death, and that ere long.

See what advice the Apostle gives, 1 Cor. 7.19.
1 Cor. 7.19. the time is short (says he) therefore let those that marry, be
as if they married not: and they that rejoice, as though they rejoiced not: and
they that buy, as though they possessed not: and they that use this world as
not abusing it. A man abuses the world, when he uses it beyond the
consideration of the shortness of enjoying these things: when he looks upon
these things, as things that he shall enjoy always. But if we would use it
aright, look upon things, as things that we shall enjoy, but for a short time.
This body that seems now to have some beauty in it, yet it must die, and be
laid in the dust: these friends that seem now to have some pleasure, and
delight in them, yet I must die, and be took from them: this estate and wealth,
that now I set so much price upon, I must die, and death will part me and it.
So I say, look upon every thing as separable from us.

Moderate your affections likewise to them. Use them only as comforts in the
way, as a traveller does the pleasures of his Inn, he stands not to build
himself houses against every pleasant walk he looks upon, he stands not to
purchase lands, and to lay them to every Inn he comes to lie at; No, he knows
that he is now but in his passage, in his way, he knows that he is not at home,
that is the place he is going to, and after a time he shall come thither. So
make account that you are not now at home, it is death that must help you to
your home. Let this therefore take you off from all these things that are in
the way.

It is a strange thing, to see how Satan besotteth, and befooleth men. They
strive, and labor to compass many worldly things, as if their happiness
stood in the enjoyment of them, as if they should have their wealth, and their
comforts for ever. What care is there amongst men to get wealth, and many times
lose their souls in getting the world? Alas! Death will part soul and body,
them and their wealth and all. Do we not see this daily in the death of others
before us: such a one is dead, where is his body now? in the dust. Where are
his friends, and his companions now? Where is his wealth and his estate, for
which many flattered him and fawned upon him? are they not all separated from
him? they have nothing now to do with him: he cannot dispose of one penny of
his estate now, it is left he knows not to whom, others now have the mannaging
of it. As now you can say this of others, so there will a time come, that other
men will say the like of you, I had such a friend, but death has parted him
from me, he had such an estate, but death has parted him and his estate. Let
us therefore make this use of the death of others, to conclude with our selves,
that there will be a parting of all those outward things, that now we are so
apt to dote upon.

The third special thing considerable in the death of others, 3. Thereby we
come tosee the end, and cause of death.
that will be matter of profit, and benefit to those that live, and survive
after them is, the end and cause for which God sends Death abroad into the
world with such a large commission, that it goes on with such liberty to every
family, to every place, that it seizes upon every person. What Is the reason of
it?

You shall see in the several deaths of men, several causes. There is judgment
and mercy; sometime a mixture of both, and sometime but of one of these.

Sometimes, we see an apparent judgment of God in the death of some.

A judgment of God upon themselves. Thus the young Prophet that disobeyed the
word of the Lord, a Lion met him in the way and slew him. So those Corinths,
that did eat and drink unworthily in the Lords Supper, though they were such as
were saved after, yet nevertheless for this very cause (says the Apostle)
some of them were sick and weak, and some slept; they died, they were judged of
the Lord, that they might not be condemned with the world. When you see death
seizing upon men, as an act of divine judgment, of divine displeasure, let it
make you more fearful of sinning against God, lest you provoke against your
selves the same warth, in the very act of sin.

Sometimes again, it is a judgment of God upon others. Thus God takes away
diverse of his servants, because the world is not worthy of them.

And as this is an act of judgment upon the world, so it is an act of mercy to
them; God in mercy taking of them away from the evil to come, and from the evil
present. A judgment of God to others that are udworthy of them: A mercy to
themselves, that they are took away, from their own evil, from sin, from
temptations, from all the effects and fruits of sin; and taken away from the
evil that is to come upon others.

An act (I say) of mercy to them. So it was to the child of Jeroboam, he should
die, and should not see the judgment that was to come upon his fathers house,
1 Kings 14.13
because there was found some good thing in him toward the Lord. So it was to
Josiah, 2 Chro. 34.18.
He should be gathered to his fathers in peace, and his eyes should not see all
that evil which the Lord would bring upon Jerusalem, and upon the inhabitants
thereof.

An act of judgment to others. Isa. 57.1.
Righteous and merciful men are taken away, and no man lays it to heart: they
consider not the causes wherefore God takes away those good men. A Land, a
Kingdom, a State, a People, a place is much weakened, when those that are
righteous, and merciful men; when those that stand in the gap, and use their
endeavors to prevent judgments, are taken away. The house will certainly fall,
when the Pillars are removed. They are the people of God only, that hold up a
state; that hold up the world. As Soon as Noah is put into the Ark, presently
comes the deluge upon the World. As Soon as ever Lot was got up to Zoar, Ezekiel.
9.4, 5.
presently the Lord rained down fire and brimstone upon Sodom and Gomorrah.
As Soon as ever the mourners are marked, presently comes the destroying Angel
upon the rest.

Beloved, when we see those that are mourners for the evils of the times, and
places where they live look away, we should lay it to heart, and consider it as
a sign of Gods displeasure, as a sign that he is a going, and departing, when
he takes away his jewels, as a sign that he is a coming to judge the world,
when he begins to separate, to take to himself his own. Certainly, as soon
as ever that number of the elect shall be accomplished, when the company of
those that God has determined to eternal life shall be fulfilled, when the
sheep of Christ, that are yet to be brought into his fold, are gathered
together, when the fullness of the Gentiles is come in, and the nation of the
Jews added, then the world shall he burnt with fire, and the day of Judgment
shall come, nothing shall hinder that general destruction, that shall be the
end of all things here below. As it is with the general Judgment of the world,
so with particular Judgments upon Nations, when God takes away his people,
when the Saints go out of Jerusalem to Pila, then comes the sword of the
enemy upon Jerusalem: when God draws out his own people, presently comes
judgment upon the rest. It is good to observe Gods method and order, that he
takes in governing of the world at this day, that in the death of the servants
of God, we may consider our own time, that we may prepare for those evils that
are a coming, and for those greater judgments that are hastening.

Thus you see what use may be made of laying to heart the death of others; God
is much glorified thereby. For all his attributes are seen in all his works,
and the glorifying of God, is a declaring of God to be as glorious, as he has
revealed himself to be in his attributes, which is, by showing of them forth in
his works. When men can see the wisdom, the justice, the power, the mercy,
the truth, the sovereignty of God, and all in the death of others, then they
glorify God in taking to heart the death of others.

You see likewise what good comes to a man's self by laying to heart the death
of others. He sees thereby the certainty of his own death. He sees the nature
of death, and what the proper work of it is, viz. to separate between him and
all those outward comforts, all those props and stays whereupon his heart
rested too much on earth, in the days of his vanity. And lastly, he sees the
end, and cause, why God sends Death into the world: sometime in judgment,
that men should take heed of sin: sometimes in mercy; in mercy to the men
themselves, and in mercy also to those that live, that they seeing the servants
of God lodged up before the tempest, may learn to fear, and to hide and secure
themselves under Gods special providence, who can either hide them amongst the
living, or the dead, in the worst times.

Now let us conclude with some application to our selves. Use 1: For reproof.
of the general neglect of this duty.
In the first place, it serves for the just reproof of that great neglect that
is in the world at this day, that men lay not to heart the death of others. I
wish that this were only the sin of worldly men. I know to a worldly man it is
of all things the most unpleasant thought that can be to think of death: he
cannot endure to hear this, they shall fetch thy soul from thee. It is as
unpleasant to him, as it is to a Bankrupt to hear of a Sergeant coming to
arrest him: as unpleasant as it is to a Malefactor to hear of being brought
before the Judge. And that is the reason why men in the time of feasting,
cannot endure such discourses at their Tables, as might put sad thoughts of
death into them; oh! these are too melancholy thoughts. Yea, but in the mean
time it is thy folly, thy want of wisdom. He that was guided by the spirit of
wisdom, and had now bought some wisdom at a dear rate, by woeful experience
of his former follies; he now sees that it was far better to go to the house
of mourning, that is, seriously to consider of that, which men account the most
ordinary cause of mourning, that is, the death of others, and of themselves:
then to go to the house of feasting, that is, to sport a man's self in the
pleasures of the world, and to give liberty to a man's self to all manner of
delights.

But (I say) I wish that this were their fault only, and that it may die with
them. But it is too much the fault of Gods own people. Moses is fain to pray
for Israel in the Wilderness, where they saw so many die before them, that God
would give them wisdom to number their days. And Ministers have still the same
cause to pray for the people, and Christians to pray one for another, that God
would give them wisdom to lay to heart the death of other men.

Have you well considered of Death, when you can only discourse, that such a
one that was profitable in his instruction, is dead: such a one by whom we have
had good in conversing with, is dead: such a one that was young, and likely to
live many years longer, is dead? What of all this? this is but idle, and empty
discourse. What use make thou of this to thy self? do thou gather from
thence the certainty of thy own death? Do thou consider what death will do to
thee when it comes? how that it will separate between thee and all things in
the world, as it has done them. Do thou consider for what cause God sends
Death abroad into the world? Do thou consider this with thy self, as thou
ought to do? This is an act of wisdom, This is that we call due
consideration, when the soul reflects upon it self; it is their case now, and
it will be mine, and mine in the same manner, therefore it is good for me, to
set my accounts strait with God. When thou accompaniest another to the grave,
do thou conclude thus with thy self, the very next time that any death is
spoken of, it may be mine, or as Saint Peter speaks to Saphirah after the death
of Annanias, the feet of those that have buried thy husband are at the door,
and shall carry thee out also?

This is reason of all that worldly-mindednesse, of all that earnestness, and
invention, to gain the favor of men by indirect means, this is the reason of
all that immoderate care about our business with the neglect of our souls,
this is the reason of all that carnal security, of all that forgetfulness of
God, and the account that shall be made at the day of Judgment, this is the
reason of the unfruitfulnesse of our lives, of our unprofitable spending of our
times, or of whatsoever else it be, this is even the very reason of all,
because even those that profess themselves to be the people of God, and to
give God the glory of his attributes in all his works, yet they lay not to
heart the death of those that are before them. Men durst not, they could not,
pass away their time in such unprofitablenesse, and unfruitfulnesse as they
do, if they did seriously consider, and lay to heart, the death of others
before them.

Again secondly; Use 2. For reproof.
As it condemns the general neglect that is amongst men of this duty, so it
serves to reprove, that sinful laying to heart of the death of others that is
too frequent and common in the world,

That is, 1. Of the excess of sorrow for dead friends.
first, when men with too much fondness, and with too great excess and
distemper of affection, look upon their dead friends, as if God could never
repair the loss, nor make amends for that he has done in taking of them away.
Rachel mourns, and will not be comforted. David mourns, and will scarce be
comforted. Oh Absalom, my son, my son, would God I had died for thee. What is
all this, but to look on friends, rather as Gods then men, as if all
sufficiency were included in them only? Men look on their friends, as Micah did
upon his Idol, when they had bereaved him of it, they took away all his comfort
and quiet, You have taken away my Gods (says he) and what have I more? Judge.
8.24.
or as Laban, that when his Idols were stolen away, his heart was dead, he could
not stay in his house, Gen 31.30.
he could not enjoy himself, wherefore have you stolen away my Gods? says
he. So, I say, men look on their dead friends as they should look upon the
Creator, and not as upon the creature; they take their death to heart, but not
in a right manner.

This is the very reason why God many times makes your Christian friends so
unprofitable to you when they live, because you idolize them, you advance them
above God.

This is the reason also, why you are so unable to bear the loss of them when
they die, God beating you now with your own rod, and making you feel the fruit
and effect of your own folly. This now is an ill taking to heart the death of
friends, to mourn as men without hope.

Secondly, 2. Of the rash censuring of the manner of others death.
there is a taking to heart, and considering of the death of men, but it is an
unrighteous considering, an unrighteous judging of the death of others. If men
see one die, it may be a violent death, then they conclude, certainly there is
some apparent token of Gods judgment on such a one. If they see another die,
with some extremity of torment, and vehement pains, certainly there is some
apparent evidence of Gods wrath upon this man. If they see another in some
great and violent tentation, struggling against many tentations, they conclude
presently, certainly such are in a worser case then others. I may say to all
these, as Christ said once to those that told him of the eighteen men upon whom
the Tower in Siloe fell think you that they were sinners above all men that
dwelt in Jerusalem? Luke 13.4. Eccles. 9.2.
Or rather as Solomon says, All things come alike unto all, there is one event
to the righteous, and to the wicked; to the clean, and to the unclean; to him
that sacrifices, and to him that sacrifices not; as is the good, so is the
sinner; and he that swears, as he that fears an oath. Learn to judge
righteous judgment, to judge wisely of the death of others, take heed of
condemning the generation of the just.

But rather, Use 3. For Instruction,
in the last place. Make this use of the death of every one. Does such a man
die by an ordinary sickness, having his understanding, and memory continued to
the end? Does such a man die in inward peace and comfort, with clear and
evident apprehensions of Gods love, Luke 2.29.
so that he can with Simeon say, Lord now let thou thy servant depart in
peace? What use should thou that live make of this now? Certainly, let the
sweetness of their death, make thee in love with the goodness of their lives.
That is the only way to a happy death, to a comfortable end indeed, the leading
of a fruitful and profitable life.

Again, do thou see the Children of God full of temptations, full of fears
and disquietnesse of spirit in their death? Sometimes so overcome with the
violence of the disease, as that (it may be) they speak impertinently and
idely, it may be sinfully? What use should thou make of this now? Certainly
let the terribleness of the example of such a man's death, let it be a terror
to thee, and a means to stir thee up to more carfulness of making good use of
thy time in this life. Nabal dies, and his heart is in him as a stone. If ever
God quicken thee, if ever God breath upon thy soul, or enliven thee by the
inward motions of his Spirit, embrace those opportunities, and seasons of
grace, lest God smite thee with an everlasting deadness. Again, has God
caused the light of his countenance to shine upon thy heart? Does he offer a
gracious message of peace to thy soul? Does he speak peace at any time by the
ministry of his Word? Embrace those offers, yield to those conditions of
peace, lest thou be deprived of peace at the end. Again, has GOD given thee
any strength over temptations? Have thou prevailed over the assaults of Satan,
and other of thy enemies? Has he made thee a conqueror? take heed how thou
insnarest thy self again, how thou inthrallest thy self in yielding to
Satan's yoke, lest he buffet thee by him in a worse manner at thy end.

Thus (I say) thou can see nothing befall any of Gods servants in their death,
or in the manner of their death, whether in be more pleasing, or more
sorrowful, more calm and quiet, or more tempestuous, and full of trouble;
whether it be more comfortable, or more lamentable, but it may be useful unto
thee. If it be good, it may be it shall be so with thee, if it be bad, it may
be it shall be so with thee too. The main business that a man has to do, is
to make sure of himself in this life. It was the question that Saint Austin
made to those that told him of a violent death that seized upon one. But how
did he live? (says he) He made no matter how he went out, but how he carried
himself in the world. And truly this is the great Question, that every man
should put to his soul. I must out of the world, how have I lived when I was
in the world? had GOD any glory by me? had men any good by me? have I furthered
my account against the day of reckoning, that I may give it up with joy? it
makes no matter how I go out of the world, I am sure if my life have been
serviceable to God, and beneficial to men, my departure shall be for gain and
advantage, it is for a better world.

Thus much shall serve briefly for the opening of these words, and for that
that is appliable from them.

For the present occasion a word.

Funeral Sermons are not intended for the praise of the dead, but for the
comfort of the living. Therefore I have chosen such an argument to handle at
this time, as might be of use, and profit to you that live. Besides that, I am
in particular, and by particular order, debarred of speaking any thing
concerning our deceased Sister, though I might have spoken much, and that very
useful to you. The best use that you can make will be this, to consider the
life that she led amongst you. She was a pattern, and example of holiness, of
a wise and upright carrirge in her ways: follow her in that: Mark the Godly
and upright man, the end of that man is peace. There was none that knew her,
but upon good assurance are persuaded of her happiness now. Would you then
have the same happiness after? take the same course that she did, be much in
prayer, and dependence upon the ordinances, and in fellowship with the servants
of God; be profitable in doing good, profitable in receiving good: manage the
opportunities and times well that God gives you, as she did, gaining much in
little: she did much work in a short space: let that be your care, and then
this will be your comfort in the end. Thus if you make this use of the death of
others before you, you shall prepare for your own death, and that shall be only
a passage for you to Eternal life.

DELIVERANCE FROM THE KING of FEARS OR, FREEDOM FROM THE FEAR OF DEATH.
SERMON III.
HEBR. 2.15. For as much then as the children are partakers of flesh and blood,
he also himself likewise took part of the same, that through death he might
destroy him that had the power of death, that is the Devil: and deliver them,
who through the fear of death, were all their lifetime subject to bondage.


IN these words that I have read, (to let pass other parts of the Chapter) the
Apostle sets down the humiliation of Christ with the fruit of it; His
humiliation in his Incarnation and death. The fruit of it in subduing him that
had the power of death, and delivering those that were kept under the fear of
death in bondage all their life. At this time we will speak only of the last
part, the fruit of Christ's death, in delivering those that were kept under the
fear of death.

The persons that are kept under this fear, are said to be the children; Gods
own children, those for whom Christ died, yet they were kept under the fear of
death, and that not at some particular time, when tentation had got some
special advantage over them, but it was a trouble, and a burden to them all
their life long, and that not a small burden, or an easy trouble, but such as
kept them as in bondage.

The words (you see) are easy; There are two points that arise from them.

First, that Gods children, those for whom Christ died, are many times hold
strongly under the fear of death.

Secondly, that Christ by his death freeth them from those fears.

I shall only insist at this time principally on the first; Observat. Gods
children are subject to the fear of death.
That Gods own children, the Children that were partakers of flesh and blood
(it is taken either for the humane nature, or the infirmities of that nature)
even these children were held under the fear of death.

I will show the grounds of it.

The fear of death in the children of God, arises either from some causes
without, or from somewhat within them.

From without them, The outward causes of the fear of death.
and so the fear arises from God, an act of his providence upon his children.

Or from Satan, a work of his malice. These are the causes from without.

For the first, 1. God.
God in his providence, and that in his special and fatherly providence,
whereby he does order all things for the good of his children, for the present
increase of their grace, and the fitting them for glory hereafter; He (I say)
in his providence orders it thus, that they shall be kept (many of them) a
great while under the fear of death, and this he does for special good ends.

The first is, To humble his children.
to humble them.

Adam as soon as he had sinned against God, as his fall was by pride (he would
have had a higher condition then he was in) so when God would bring him back
again, he begins first to humble him: and how does he that? Dust thou art
(says he) and to dust thou shall return: he shows him, that he was a dead
man by sin, and so would have the meditation of death to humble Adam, and in
him all his posterity after him.

So David, when he desired that some means might work upon his enemies for
their good, Psalm. 9.20.
he prays, Put them in fear, that they may know that they are but men: He
does not only pray that mortality might be presented to them, but so
presented, that it might leave an impression of fear upon their affections,
that they might know what they are, that they have not their being, or the
power of subsisting in themselves, but that they must look for it above
themselves, to him that has the issues of life and death in his own hand.

And this is necessary, that all the servants of God should be kept humble by
some means or other. The Apostle Paul (you see) he had attained a great measure
of grace, 2. Cor 12.
yet he stands in need of something to humble him, therefore the messenger of
Satan was sent to buffet him, that he should not be exalted above measure,
that he might be kept humble.

God intends to raise up his children to a glorious estate, therefore as men
lay a low foundation, when they intend to erect a high building; so God lays
the foundation, of all grace and comfort in his servants, in humiliation:
therefore he will not only have them mortal, but he will have them apprehend
their mortality, and dying condition with fear, that they may be humbled by
this fear. That is the first thing.

Secondly, To strengthen their. faith.
God aymeth at the strengthening of faith in his servants. While a man looks to
sense, and is upheld by sensible comforts, there is not that exercise of faith:
now every grace is strengthened by exercise, that God therefore may have faith
exercised, and so strengthened in his servants, he will expose them to the fear
of death.

The Apostle Paul found this: 2 Cor. 1.9, 10.
we received (says he) the sentence of death, that we might not turst in our
selves, but in him that raises us up from the dead. He does not only say
thus, we acknowledge this to be a truth, that we must die; but we received the
sentence of death, received it as a man receives a sentence of death from a
Judge, received it so, as it made some impression upon our hearts, received it
with some inward sense, with some inward fear: which was a violent work, such
a work as knocks us off of all holds, and takes us off from all sensible, and
visible props, and humane supports, and makes us to see nothing in the creature
to do us that good we look for, to make us eternal happy: therefore we were
taught (says he) not to trust in our selves; if a man trust any, he might
trust himself first; yea, but we are dying, and cannot enjoy our selves long,
therefore we trust in him that raises us up from the dead.

Thirdly, To increase their watchfulness.
another end that God aymeth at, in holding his servants, many times under the
fear of death, is, that he may make them more watchful, and holy in the course
of their lives.

This our Savior expresses under two parables, Mat. 25.
the one of the Virgins that were to watch for the coming of the Bridegroom,
they knew that he would come, but they knew not when, therefore they were
always to keep their watch, with oil in their lamps. And the other of a
Master, that left Talents with his servants, he told them that he would come,
but he told them not when, that they might be sure to employ them to the best
advantage.

And the Apostle Peter raises an exhortation to this purpose, on this very
ground: 2 Pet. 3.1 1.
Since (says he) that all these things must be dissolved, what manner of
persons ought we to be in all holy conversation and godliness, looking for,
and hastening to the appearance of our Lord Jesus Christ? We know that the Lord
Jesus Christ will come, but he has concealed the particular time of his
coming, that we might always keep our watch, and be prepared for him,
whenever he comes.

Now, this is necessary for all the servants of God, for they are apt to be
secure, and to be carried away with worldly business, and delights, and to
neglect that which concerns their eternal good; and therefore God will affect
them with the fear of death, that they may be stirred up to more watchfulness
and holiness, in a godly course of life.

Fourthly, To prepare them for death.
God does it, that by the fear of Death they may be better prepared for death,
that it may not come upon them as a stranger, that they never thought on
before, that it may not come as an armed man upon them: therefore is it that
God will have thim, not only to have thoughts of it, but fear of it; fear (you
know) is an affection, that quickneth a man to action, keeps him to a constant
observing of God. 2 Chro. 20.3.
Jehosaphat, when God did not only bring a multitude of enemies upon him, but
also sent the report of them to him, and that in such a manner, as he might be
affected with fear; What did all this work in him? The text says; Jehosaphat
did seek the Lord with all his heart, and proclaimed a fast in Judah, and
provided such other defense, as was necessary; he saw nothing but fear and
danger in the creature; We know not what to do with this great company, that
comes against us, this set him awork to seek the Lord with all his heart, and
to make other provision against them. So the Lord will have his servants
apprehend death as an Armed enemy coming upon them, that they may be better
prepared to receive it, that they may get evidences of comfort, and assurance
of heaven, and so may be fitted upon good grounds to entertain death with joy
when it comes.

And this the servants of God have need of, because if there be not somewhat to
quicken to this, there are other things enough to pervert them from it: and
then when men are most weak, and full of pain and weariness, the devil takes
advantage to cast them off from all comfort, so that at the least we shall die
uncomfortably; if not miserably, if they be not prepared beforehand to receive
Death, and have gotten assurance, and evidence of a better condition afterward.

Thus you have the first thing, that is, Gods act, and for what reasons he
keeps his servants in this bondage of the fear of death.

Again secondly, 2. Satan.
another cause from without, is from the malice of Satan. His main aim is, to
keep men from a Christian course altogether: if that cannot be done; his next
work is to make men go on as uncomfortably in it, as he can possible; therefore
he will present them with as many fears, as may be: and because that this is
that that nature most abhors, (for it is the most natural desire of man to
preserve his being) I say, because nature most abhors this; this
dissolution and destruction of it self, therefore the striveth to affect them
with the fear of death, especially and above all other. I say, this is Satan's
malice. Saint Paul when he came to Macedonia, that he might do the work of the
Lord, with less diligence and comfort, 2 Cor. 7.5.
says he, We had fears on every side, horrors within, and terrors without: It
was Satan's devise, that the Apostle might do the work of the Lord with less
strength and comfort, to afflict them with as many fears and horrors as he
could. And he has the same malice still, and still gets much advantage of
men, making men to go on with less comfort in a godly life, adorning their
profession of religion less, with unchearful walking, because they have been
held under the fear of death.

These are the causes that are from without.

Secondly, The inward causes of the fear of death. 1. Natural.
there are some causes from within, from the servants of God themselves. And
these causes whence the fear of death arises, are either natural or sinful.

First, the natural causes of it are; The apprehension of Death, as a thing
contrary to nature: and according to the strength of men's apprehension, so is
there fear.

Now Death in this natural respect, is fearful to every man, whether we
consider the object, or the subject, the thing or the person in whom it is, we
shall find a natural cause of this, even in the servants of God.

First for the object, In respect of the object it self: death.
look upon Death it self, it has all that in it, which makes it a fit object
of fear. There be three things which makes a thing the object of fear, which
makes a thing affect the heart with fear.

First, when it is considered as an ill.

Secondly, when it is considered as an ill, difficult, and hard to be avoided.

Thirdly, when it is considered as an ill to come.

For if it be not conceived a thing that is ill, but good; it is not feared,
but rather desired.

And then again, if it be but a slight ill, such as has but a weak strength in
it, which a man may easily master, it is not fearful, but disdained.

And then thirdly, if it be an ill that has strength in it, and can hardly be
resisted and overcome, if it be present, it is not feared, but grieved for.

It must be evil apprehended as future, appreheneed as difficult, and
apprehended as ill, if it be a thing that is to be feared.

Now all these things are in Death, in the apprehension of Gods servants while
they live. The apprehension of death as an Ill.
First, I say, they apprehend it as Ill.

Ill is twofold, either that which is contrary to man's will, and so it is
called Malum tristitivum; or else contrary to man's nature, and so it is Malum
corruptivum.

Now Death is contrary to man in both these senses, both to his nature, and to
his will. It is a thing he would not have, because it is contrary to his
nature: and that is contrary to his nature, that seeks the destruction of
nature. Now, when a man apprehends Death, as a thing that would destroy
nature, that would overthrow, and dissolve, and break in pieces, that goodly
Fabrique, (as he conceives it) and make that something to become nothing, it
is a thing that nature cannot bear, it abhors. So the servants of God, as
they have nature in them, they have this natural affection to preserve their
being: and this in it self is not simply sinful, but so far as it exceeds
the rule.

Therefore you see that because men apprehend Death, as an Ill contrary to
nature, they prefer other things that are Ill, in a less regard, in a less
degree before that: A man would rather part with his wealth, then part with his
life, as we see in Psalm. 49. A man would give God a ransom for his soul if he
could, he would give all his goods to ransom his life. He would rather be poor
then not at all: Nay, a man will part with his ease, with his health, rather
then with his life: he will be in pain, rather then he will not be: Skin for
skin, and all that a man has, will be give for his life: Nay, Eccles. 9.4.
a man will part with his credit and estimation, rather then with his life, he
will rather be disgraced, then not be: A living dog, is better then a dead
lion; this is the speech of a man natural: he prefers a dog that has life
in him, before a Lion that is dead; he would rather be a mean living man, then
a dead Prince.

That is ths first thing, men naturally conceive Death, as a thing contrary to
nature. So it is a natural Ill.

Secondly, The apprehension of death as an ill unavoidable.
as a man conceives Death an Ill contrary to nature, so he apprehends it an
Ill not easily overcome. When Goliath looked on David, on the meannesse of his
stature, and the slenderness of his prepartation to fight, he considered him
as an enemy, but as a weak one, and therefore instead of fearing, he disdained
him; Do thou come to me as a dog? I will give thy flesh to the fowls of the
heaven, and to the beasts of the earth, he scorned him: But when the Host of
Israel looked on Goliath, as a mighty enemy, that they could not easily resist,
much less overcome; the Text says they were full of fear, because of Goliath:
the strength of the adversary was that that filled them with fear. So when a
man looks upon Death, and sees it come as a mighty armed man, provided with
all weapons of war, sees it come in to the most populous Cities (as in the
pestilence) and slays ten thousand before it, sees it come on the most
strong and valiant men, and breaks their bones, and destroys them; Who can
stand before this Goliath, he that defieth the Host of God, the host of Israel?
not only the wicked, but the servants of God are overcome by this enemy: I say,
thus nature discourses, and thus a natural man apprehends Death, and
therefore he conceives Death to be a fearful Ill, because it is a thing that
he cannot easily overcome; That is the second.

Thirdly, The apprehension of Death as an ill future.
he conceives it as a thing Future, as an Ill to come. I am yet living and in
health, but how soon this health may turn to sickness, and this life to Death,
(...) know not; this is that that holds down the spirit under fear. As David
said, I shall sall one day by the hand of Saul: one day; so says a man that
lives now in the multitude of his business, in abundance of strength, and
ability every way, I shall one day fall into the Grave, I shall one day fall
into the hands of Death. Peter we know how he affected Saphira, with telling
her of the death of her husband, and says he, the feet of those that carried
out thy husband, shall carry thee out; this affected her with fear so that she
fell down dead upon the apprehension of it.

Thus, I say, if we look upon the object, Death considered as an Ill, that is,
a thing contrary to nature. Death considered again, as a strong and mighty
Giant that none can overcome, but it overcomes them. And then considered again
as a thing coming upon men now in the approach, and we know not how soon he
will grasp a man in his hands, and seize upon him: this is that, I say, that
causes that natural fear, that is in the children of God.

Then again consider the Subject, In respect of the subject; men.
the person in whom the apprehension of such an object is, and so likewise we
shall see somewhat in the dispositions of men, or in their state and condition
here, that may affect them with a natural fear of Death.

The first is, some men by constitution are more melancholy, and are naturally
of a more fearful temper, indeed distemper. The brain is distempered, the heart
is distempered. The brain apprehends things, and looks upon them through a
false glass, through a deluded fancy, and so makes a false report to the
heart, presents things more terrible then they are: so sometimes the heart is
ill affected, by the misreport that is brought to it by the understanding:
sometimes both are distempered, as that humor prevails more strongly in the
body. So also there are sometimes raised up turbulent, and disquieting, and
voilent passions that make some full of fear, as we see in Belshazzar, whose
knees did smite together, and all through the apprehension of death; and so
Felix when he heard of death and judgment to come, he trembled. Though the
fear of these men did not rise from melancholy, but from inward guilt of
conscience, yet the effect shows, that when men are affected with the
apprehension of Death in the worst sight and opprehension of it, it causes
fear and terror.

Secondly, it comes in others, and generally in all from weakness of nature,
which in some is more then others, according to their different constitutions
and educations; so the rich many times are more fearful of death then the poor,
because they have more to lose; so likewise voluptuous persons, are more
fearful of Death, then those that are more temperate, because by voluptuousness
they have dis-joynted, and weakened their spirits. So young men many times are
more fearful of Death, Judge 8.20.
then those that are old, as we see in the story, Judge. 8.20. Jether the son
of Gideon, when he should have killed Zeba, and Zalmunna, the Text says, He
was afraid because he was a young man; but Gideon, that was elder did it
willingly, as a man better accustomed, and experienced with observations of
changes, and varieties of accidents amongst men.

We shall see the servants of God themselves have discovered this weakness of
spirit, specially upon sudden apprehensions of things. Abraham upon the sudden
and violent apprehension of Death, Genesis 201
was put to a sinful shift: I thought (says he) the fear of God is not in this
place, and they will slay me for my wives sake, therefore I said this is my
sister. So Samuel, when God sent him to anoint David, 1. Sam 16.
he discovered this weakness, If Saul should know what I am a doing, he will
slay me; therefore he desired to have some other message, under the color
whereof he might put Saul off. So Peter out of a sudden apprehension of death,
and fear of it, he denied his Master: This weakness of spirit is in man
naturally.

Further, there is another thing that causes this natural fear, and that is,
the unacquaintedness men have with Death, there is somewhat in this matter,
that is strange to men; notwithstanding they hear, and see many die before them
daily, they hear things spoken of by the Minister, and they read the Scripture,
and many excellent comforts, but who has seen these? what becomes of these
men? they see Death the strict Porter of the world, let men out of the earth,
but he locks the door of the Grave upon them, and none comes back again to
tell what is done in that place of silence, to tell what is become of men, when
they are in the Grave, how they speed in that world of souls; there is no man
returns from the dead to report these things to them. Now this affects the
natural man, nay all men naturally are affected with the fearful apprehension
of death, because they know not what will come after, as the natural man speaks
in Ecclesiastes. When Joram set out a watchman to see what was abroad, and
spied an army coming, he sent a servant, but Jehu bids him go behind him, he
sends another, and he goes behind him still: says he, I see the men go but
they come not back: the Text says, he was afraid. Make ready the Chariot,
says Joram; If this be the issue that men go, but never come back again, it is
high time to look about us. Certainly (beloved) such are the apprehensions of
death: We see men (says the natural man) go down to the Grave, and not come
back again, we see that a man cease to be, and to do those actions that we
do, when we are upon the earth, therefore let us consider the matter more
seriously. When the Captain of the fifty, that came to the Mount to Elijah, saw
the two former Captains, and their companies consumed, saw that they were all
dead, that they ceased to be, but he saw not what became of them afterward,
therefore he comes with fear to the Prophet, and entreats him that his life
might be precious in his sight.

All strange things we know affect men, and every thing, as it is more strange;
so it more affects man naturally: Let there but come a beast out of the
Wilderness, as soon as ever he comes unto a man and sees him, he flies from
him, because he is not used to the sight of man, it is strange to him; but now
take a beast that is brought up in the pasture, in the field, he will come to a
man without fear, because he is used to the sight of him. So it is here: Death
is apprehended as a strange thing, as a thing that a man never knew by
experience; Men have seen thus much, that people have died, but they never
heard of any that came back again to tell them how it fared with them after
death. This (I say) that men should go to the place of silence and have all
matters hushed, all things kept secret down there, there comes no report
thence, this affects men with fear.

These are the natural causes.

Secondly, 2. Inward causes sinful.
there are other causes within, that affect men with the fear of death, and
those are sinful causes.

First, 1. The want of the fear of God.
the want of the fear of God, and as this is less, so the fear of death is
more; Therefore we shall find that wicked men that cast off the fear of God in
their lives, they are slavishly held under the fear of death, this you shall
see in those examples of Belshazzar, a man that set himself with a high hand
against God, went on in a contemptuous course against God, and profaned the
holy vessels, when there was a hand writing upon the wall, some terrible thing
presented to him, his knees smote together, he could not hold his joints still:
And so Felix, a man that lived without the fear of God, when he heard of
judgment, and other things; the text says, he trembled; and so likewise Cain,
and diverse others, I need not stand on it.

It was one of the Judgments threatened in part, Deuteronomy. 28.65, 66, etc.
Deuteronomy. 28. Because thou do not fear the the Lord thy God, therefore
wheresoever thou go, thou shall find no ease, neither shall the sole of thy
foot have any rest, but the Lord shall give thee a trembling heart, and thy
life shall hang in doubt before thee, (that is, thou shall be in continual fear
of death) and thou shall fear day and night, and shall have none assurance of
thy life; in the Morning thou shall say, would God it were Even, and at even
thou shall say, would God it were morning, because of the fear of thine heart
wherewith thou shall fear; and for the sight of thine eyes which thou shall
see. This is the first thing.

Secondly, 2. In ordinate love of the world.
another thing is this, when men's hearts are too much glued to the world, and
mark it, according as there is worldly affections, and worldly-mindedness in
the the hearts of Gods servants, so the fear of Death is more in them:
according to the strength of the one, is the fear of the other. What is it that
disquieteth men ordinarily, and makes them that they cannot think of Death with
comfort, but this? now they must lose their company, part with all their
friends when they die once. Isa. 38.11.
Hezekiah complained of that, I shall see man no more (says he) with the
inhabitants of the world. This I say, is that that affects the heart
exceedingly, that they must lose all their friends, specially when husband and
wife must part, parents and children must part, and familiar and dear
acquaintance must part, this causes the fear of death, because the heart is
too much set upon the creature. So likewise worldly business, when a man loves
much employment, much business, he cannot abide to think of death, Why so?
because all work, all enterprises cease in the grave, (as Job says) A man has
neither the works of his hands, nor the enterprises of his head in the grave,
all actions cease, both of the mind and body there. So when a man's heart is set
upon pleasures below, there is neither love nor hatred in the grave (says
Solomon) That is, Eccles 9.
those things that affected the heart that men love, they cease there, all his
pleasures and comforts are gone. So if a man love honor, and applause amongst
men, it cease in the grave, all honor there is laid in the dust, contempt is
cast upon Princes: this is that that affects men exceedingly, that they shall
lose their honors and pleasures, and acquaintance, and business, and all when
they come to the grave, and that because men's hearts are set too much upon
these things. That is the second reason.

There is a third thing, 3. Want of the assurance of Gods favor.
which is a sinful cause of this fear of Death, and that is the want of
Assurance. There be two things that a man not being assured of, makes him fear
Death; and these may be in the children of God, and as they are more in any
one, so the fear of death is more in them.

The first is, when they are not assured of reconciliation with God, that God
is at peace with them, pleased with them in Christ. The want of this assurance
makes death fearful, for now they look upon Death, as a Sergeant, as a Jailer;
either it is a Sergeant to take them off their present comforrs, or as a Jailer
to hold them under those bonds and fetters, that they would fain escape: Now
when a man looks upon Death either way, it is terrible. As a Sergeant; so the
rich man in the Gospel, This night they shall fetch thy soul from thee: Luke.
16.
they shall come to thee as a Sergeant to a Debtour, to require a debt, they
shall require thy soul of thee; Now, we all know, that a man that is in debt,
and either has not to pay, or is unwilling to part with that he has, such a
man cannot endure the sight of a Sergeant above all men, because he comes to
fetch that from him, that he would not part with. Or if he look upon Death as a
Jailer, Mat. 6.
so Christ says; Agree with thy adversary quickly, lest he deliver thee to the
Judge, and he give thee to the Jailer, and then he holds thee in prison from
whence thou shall not go out, till thou have paid the utmost farthing. Now when
a man looks on Death as a Jailer, that holds all in the grave, till the great
Judge of heaven and earth calls for them, at the general day of Assizes, that
great day of appearance, when all the world shall be gathered together, and
every prison shall give up their prisoners, The sea and the grave shall give up
their dead. I say, when a man stands thus as unreconciled to God, or at
least, as one that does not apprehend this reconciliation, is not persuaded of
this, that God is reconciled to him, it is no marvel if Death be terrible to
him. Therefore in the sixth of the Revelation; Rev 6.
The Kings and Captains, and the great and mighty men, they cried to the
mountains to fall upon them, and to hide them, from the presence of the Lamb;
Isa. 33.14.
because the great day of wrath was come, and who could stand. So we see in 33.
Isa. 14. there is crying out concerning the coming of God, the sinners in Sion,
the hypocrites are afraid, what is their fear! who shall dwell with everlasting
burnings? and who shall remain with cousuming fire? when they shall see nothing
but terror and wrath in God, fire and consumption, when they see nothing but
such terrible things, then fear comes upon them. Now mark, hypocrites stand
all together unreconciled, and therefore it is no marvel if they be afraid: and
the Saints of God, so far as they are defective in the assurance of Gods
love, so far they conceive themselves in the state of Hypocrites, and
therefore they are so full of fears.

Again, a second thing that they stand unresolved of, is concerning the future
estates of their souls and bodies after death, they are not sure of this, that
there is a better condition afterward: this is that great question, Whither go
we? I go now out of the body, and whither then? I go out of the world, and
whither then? I am going out of the company of men, and whither then? shall I
go to Angels and Saints, or to devils? shall I go to Heaven or to Hell? shall I
have a being or not, in misery or in happiness? They know not what shall
become of them, they are unresolved of this point, of their own state to come,
whether they shall be in happiness or horror after death, and therefore Death
is terrible. You have the point opened; I will answer an objection or two, and
then come to the use.

It may be objected: Object.
It seems the servants of God are not kept under the fear of death: all those
that are in the state of grace, have faith; faith, that spends these fears,
and therefore since they are in the state of believers, how can they be held
under the fear of death?

To this I answer briefly; Answer.
there is faith in all the children of God that are effectually called, but we
must know that Faith is considerable two ways, first as it is in conflict, and
secondly as it is out of conflict. Now the Faith of Gods servants in conflict,
so sometime it is in conflict with fear, and sadness of spirit; Why art thou
cast down oh my soul? Psalm. 42.
why art thou disquieted within me? etc. Sometime it is in conflict with reason
and sense; thus the people of Israel, when they came into the Wilderness; Exodus
14 11.
they looked for nothing but dying, and destruction of nature (for sense
presented it to them,) therefore says Moses (which is the voice of faith)
Stand still, and see the salvation of God, etc. Now in this conflict the
success is doubtful, sometime (as it was between Amalek and Israel fighting
together) Amalek prevailed, and Israel had the worst: sometime Israel
prevailed, and Amalek had the worst, so sometime, Faith prevails against
sense, and those fears that arise from sense, and sometime again carnal fears,
and Sense prevails against Faith; now accordingly are those effects in the
hearts of Gods children.

But secondly, sometime Faith is out of conflict, it now triumphs in
assurance, it is come now to full assurance of Faith, as it is called in the
Scripture, and then there is nothing so comfortable, Psalm. 23.
and desirable as death it self to the servants of God. So we see David in the
23. Psalm. Though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death I will fear
none ill, for thou Lord art with me: And so the Apostle Saint Paul, triumphs
over all things, Nothing shall separate us from the love of God in Christ,
neither principalities nor powers, nor life, nor death, nor things to come;
nothing shall do it, the Apostles faith now was out of conflict, it had got the
field, the day of Sense, and now he looks on Death with comfort. So that I say
in that measure that Faith works, in that measure, fear of death cease.

Secondly, Object. 2.
it may be objected. But we see the servants of God are said to love the
appearance of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the Apostle Paul is said to desire to
be dissolved, and to be with Christ; How can these stand with the fear of
death, under which Gods servants are held?

To this I answer briefly. Answer.
Gods servants must be considered in their desires two ways. First, in their
general desires; Secondly, in a particular state wherein they are. In their
general course, their desire is most for the appearing of Christ, they most
desire to be with him as best for them: but take them in some particular state
wherein they are less provided, and less fitted and prepared, then, they may be
at a stand in their desires, they may have the fear of death in them. As a
wife, her general desire is for nothing so much as for the presence of her
husband, yet she may be under some particular unfitness, there may be something
or other in the way, that she would not have him come in at that instant,
though her desire be for nothing so much as for his company. So it may be the
case of the servants of God, they may say sometimes, Lord spare me a little
before I go hence, to strengthen my faith, to perfect my repentance and
holiness, to do some particular work, and the like. David considered this, that
there was something that he might do that he had not done, and that he would
feign do before he went: and so Hezekiah, and the rest of the servants of God.
The point is clear. I come to the Application.

It shall be a word of exhortation (to cut of other uses) and that is this.
Use. For exortation.


To stir up the servants of God, that if they be disposed to distempers under
which they are held, that they are afraid to die, that therefore they labor by
all good means, to shake off the fear of death. Why? Consider and note well
those two things that are in the Text.

The first is this, To be under the fear of death an uncomfortable estate.
that it is an uncomfortable state to be held under the fear of Death, you see
it is called a Bondage here, and that is enough to show the uncomfortableness
of it, he says, by the fear of death, they were held in bondage all their
life long.

Now the fear of Death is a bondage principally in these two respects, The fear
of death a bondage in two respects.
first, because it is with them, as it is with a Bond-slave. A Bond-slave is
afraid to look on him that has the command of him, he apprehends him as no
friend, therefore he does not love to look on him: so it is in this case, when
a man looks upon Death as a thing that is no friend to him, he cannot abide to
look on him, every thought of Death, is a presenting of death to him, and it is
a miserable bondage, when a man cannot present Death to himself without fear.

Secondly, 2.
there is this in it that makes it a bondage, it holds down the spirit of a
man. A bond-slave (you know) is bound with fetters and chains in his
captivity, so that he has neither freedom of spirit, nor freedom of action:
So it is with a man that is held under the fear of death, he cannot do what he
would, he cannot rejoice in God; he cannot delight in the apprehension of glory
to come, he cannot entertain a thought of parting with things present, with
that security, and comfort of heart, that he should do, and all because this
fear, (as the setters) binds his hands and his feet, and keeps him in
bondage. This is the first thing, the fear of death, to be held under it, it is
an uncomfortable state.

Secondly, It is possible to be freed from the fear of death.
as it is uncomfortable, so it is possible that the servants of God, may be
free from these fears under which they are held. We see the text shows it,
Christ came for this end, that having destroyed him that has the power of
death, that is the devil, he might deliver those, that for fear of death were
held under bondage. Did Christ come for this end? then it is possible to be
had, for certainly Christ would not lose his end he came for: this was his end,
not only to deliver them from eternal death but also from the fear of temporal
death; It is possible therefore; The servants of God have found it, and
therefore you shall see them brought in insulting, and triumphing, and glorying
over Death; Oh death, where is thy sting? Oh Grave, where is thy victory,
thanks be to God that has given us victory, through Christ our Lord: When they
looked upon Death through Christ, they looked on it without this fear, the
sting and power is took out, the very nature of it is changed, and it is made
now every way beneficial. I say it is possible, for we are regenerate, and
begotten again to a lively hope, to an inheritance immortal and undefiled, and
in what measure the hope of heaven is in the heart of man, in that measure the
fear of death falls in that heart, now it is possible that we may attain this
fullness of hope, and therefore it is possible that we may be freed quite from
the fear of Death.

This may suffice by way of motive. A word or two by way of direction. If this
be possible to be had, how shall the servants of God get it? you see some of
Gods servants are held under the fear of death, and that all their life long;
how shall we be freed from this fear?

I should now orderly take up the particulars laid down as causes, Means to be
freed from the fear of death.
and show that by these it is cured: as for instance. Does God do this for this
end, that he may humble a man? then the more humble thou art, the less thou
shall be in the fear of Death, for God lays these fears upon men to humble
them, therefore labor for perfect humiliation, 1. Humility.
and thou shall perfectly rid these fears out of thy heart: as we see plainly,
the servants of God, the more humble they have grown, the less careful they
have been of life, and the less fearful of Death: And so those servants of God
that have been brought to deny themselves, and to renounce all their worldly
expectation and advancements, they have always been ready to die. Saint Paul
was grown humble, and the Lord had prevailed upon him, kept down his spirit
from being exalted above measure, and now (faith he) my life is not dear to me,
he was content to lay down his life and all when he was humbled. Beloved, pride
in some outward excellencies or other, sets a man above his place, therefore
when a man is took off from all that puffs up the spirit of a man, he will be
content, to lay down any of those things, even life it self if need be.

Again secondly; 2. Faith.
Does God do it to strengthen faith in a man? then the more thou strengthenest
faith, the more thou shall be freed from these fears; you know faith looks upon
Christ as the proper object of it, and the more a man interesteth himself in
Christ, the more by Christ, he is freed from the fear of Death, Christ has
redeemed us from the Grave and from Death, and therefore when by faith he looks
upon Christ, and through him upon Death; he looks upon that, as a thing made,
instead of poison a medicine; instead of a destroyer, a Savior and deliverer,
as a means to free him from the bondage of sin and misery and afflictions, etc.

Thirdly; 3. watchfulness.
Does God do this, that he may make men more holy and watchful in their course?
then certainly the more thou can purge out thy sin in the course of thy life,
the less thou shall fear death. The sting of Death is sin, then if thou will
have Death comfortable, let thy life be conformable to Gods rule and word, or
else every sin will present it self in death before thee, specially those
sins, thou allowest thy self in, will make Death as bitter as Hell.

Fourthly; 4. Preparation.
Does God do it for this end, that he may make thee better prepared for death?
Then the more thou art prepared for Death beforehand, the less thou shall fear
it, when it comes upon thee, it will not come as a stranger, but thou will be
ready to receive it, as one with whom thou art acquainted already.

It is a great matter if men could learn this wisdom to die daily; that is, be
every day employed, as dying daily: I mean for the manner of your carriage, not
for the matter, for the substance of the duty. If a man were sure to die this
day he would lay aside all business, and set himself to be prepared for
judgment, and would lay aside the use of any other comforts and delights. But
this is not the meaning, but this, that we carry our selves in business every
day, as if death should seize upon us in that business, that we might be found
well-doing; that is, when a man follows his earthly business with a heavenly
mind, when he keeps to the rule of righteousness, and truth in his ordinary
calling, when he is doing, or receiving good in his company, when he uses his
pleasures and recreations, as the whet-stone to the Sith, to make him fitter
for God; I say, when thus we do things to a right end, and in a right manner;
if Death now should seize upon us in such an action, it should find us
well-doing: And this is that we persuade you to, if you would have death
comfortable, and not tertible, be so employed, as that your actions may be
good, both for matter and form, that you are now about, because Death may
stricke you in such an action. But I cannot stand on these particulars.

Again, 5. Right apprehension of Death.
for the causes in our selves; If you would be freed from the terrors of
Death, then rectify your apprehensions and opinions of Death, think of it as
it is, as it is I say to believers, to those that are in Christ.

It is not the destruction of nature, and so a natural Ill, as you account it;
It is rather a cure of nature; for as soon as ever we live, we are dying, and
all our life, it is but a living death, a continual decaying and dying. Now
when death comes, it puts an end to all the decays of nature, and sets
all right again. It is but a sleep, and sleep it is not a destruction, but a
help of the body, and that which inableth to vigor and strength, and fitness
to action.

Again, it is not the destruction of any part of a man, the body it self is not
destroyed: indeed it is in the Grave, but it is in the grave, as in a bed of
peace, They shall come and rest in their beds (says the Prophet;) The grave is
but as a bed wherein the body lies asleep, and no man (you know) is troubled
with fear that he goes to bed. The grave is but as Gods chest to keep in all
his Treasure, whereof the bodies of his servants are a part, precious to him,
even in the grave, in death, Precious in the sight of the Lord, is the death of
his Saints; and God will open this Cabinet, and the Chest of the Grave, in the
great day of the Resurrection, and bring the body out again, and then it shall
be as good as ever it was; nay, I say not only as good, but much better too,
for our vile bodies shall be made like the glorious body of Christ. Phil 3.
Phil. 3.
No man when he goes to bed, thinks much to have his old clothes taken off,
that they may be mended, and made better against morning. When we sleep in the
Grave, it is no more but this, the garment of the soul, the body, the old
apparel, that is taken off, that it may be made better, and a more glorious
body, this is all, we lose nothing by it, but our estates, even our bodily
estate is bettered by it.

And for the Soul, Death does not destroy that neither, for know this, the soul
lives for ever, the body indeed returns to the Earth as it was, but the
soul returns to God that gave it; The soul I say lives, that is the thing
that Christ himself proves in 22. Mat. Abraham is alive, why so? for God is
not the God of the dead, but of the living; for God said, I am the God of
Abraham, etc. How can this be, that God is the God of Abraham, and yet he is
dead? Indeed he is dead, if we look to the separation of the soul and body, in
the cessation of bodily actions; but if we look to the better part of Abraham,
his soul, that continues, the everliving God has made an everlasting Covenant
with him, and therefore he dies not.

Again it is not only, not the destruction of nature, but not of your actions
neither, Death does not destroy them neither; Indeed there is a cessation of
bodily actions, but it is, that the body may have better strength, and be the
fitter instrument of holiness after: But for those actions of the soul, that
depend not upon the body; they are as perfectly done, when we are dead, as when
we are alive, and better too, When a man lives upon the earth (you see,) his
soul is much hindered by the body; A distempered sick crazie body, or a full
well-fed body, is a hinderance to the soul, because of that tie that is between
the body, and the soul, and the spirit: so there is a simpathy, the soul is
affected somewhat in this sense. But it is not so then, the soul shall be
loosed from the body, and so freer for spiritual actions then now it is. The
souls under the Altar, they cry, How long Lord, holy and just, will thou not
revenge our blood upon them that are upon the earth? The souls of Gods servants
you see then are glorified, when they are out of the body, and therefore shall
glorify God more prefectly, and enjoy God more freely and fully, then now
while their souls are in these mortal bodies. And at that very instant, when
the soul of Cods servant is carried out of the body to heaven, it more
perfectly injoyeth Christ, and is more sensible, and more fit to answer the
love of Christ to him, then ever when it was in the body. So then here is a
cessation of baser actions and employments, to give place to more noble, and
heavenly, and excellent actions, wherein the soul shall be employed in heaven.
There is then no loss of actions neither.

Again, there is no loss of company. This is a thing that troubles men,
husband and wife to part, friends to part. But we lose no company by death,
howsoever we lose the company of men, that we cannot assure ourselves friends
indeed: for of all the friends we speak of in the main point, when they come to
be tried, there are few to be found to be friends: But then, we go to them
whose love is perfect, than you may be sure of, and have the truth of their
love. Again, how little comfort, nay how little have you company with those
friends you desire? Is not much part of our life spent without any sight of our
friends? Is not half of it spent in sleep in the night? and the other half in
business and pleasure? Alas! how little time have we to enjoy our friends we
rest on? But then, we shall perfectly enjoy them, when there shall be no need
of sleep, when there shall be perfection of love, and freedom from distraction
and employment, when the servants of God shall fully, and freely, and sweetly,
and comfortably enjoy one the other. Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, and the
meanest of the Saints, shall meet in the expression of love, in such a
perfection as we cannot speak of. And this is certain, you shall go to many.
Who can tell the dvst of Jacob? Now you have some one, or two, or three, or a
few men or women that you account friends, and dote much upon, but then you
shall have ennumerable company, a world of friends of men and women,
multitudes, they cannot be numbered, they are as the stars of heaven for number.
I say there is no loss of company by this means.

Again, you shall lose no pleasures by death, it may be you shall lose some few
sensual brutish pleasures, a few mixed, corrupt pleasures, pleasures that have
the mixture of sorrow and fear in them, that imbitters them to the soul of a
man, but it shall not be so then: you shall be freed from imperfect pleasures,
and have perfect ones at Gods right hand for evermore, pure pleasures.

Again, you lose no necessary convenience neither, the rich man loses no
riches by death; he loses his money, does he lose his riches therefore? No;
The Angels are rich, but they have no money; the Saints are rich, they want
nothing, but they have no money. It may be thou losest a child, thou shall find
a Father; it may be thou losest a weak friend; that loves not long, or it may
be not so truly as thou think he does; and thou find friends that are
many and perfect, and pure in their love, that love with a perfect heart; And
what then are all those losses, when you enjoy that which shall make the soul
happy for ever?

Thus I say you shall rectify your opinions concerning Death, look upon it
aright, have true apprehensions of it.

Get an intrest in Christ, Assurance of Gods favor.
and look on death through him, get faith, and then all these things that I
have spoken shall be your advantage, so the Apostle concludes, Christ is to us
in life and in death advantage; If we live he is gain to us in life, and if we
die, he is advantage to us in death. And death is reckoned amongst the special
favors and privileges Christ has given to his Church; 1 Cor. 3.23
All are yours, what all? life and death, things present, and things to come;
all are yours, and you are Christ's, and Christ is Gods. So we see that Death is
amongst the privileges that Christ has given his Church, therefore rectify
your opinions concerning Death, make good that I spoke before, and you shall
find this good that I now speak.

And for the last, the unacquaintance with Death: let not that trouble you,
none come from the dead to tell you what is done there, but look on the
servants of God before, and when they die, and you shall find enough how they
apprehended Death, when they have looked on it in the glass of the Gospel.

Look upon them before death, Jacob being to close up his days with blessing
of his children; Lord (says he) I have maited for thy salvation. He looked
upon Death through Christ, the Savior of the world? that he should be saved by
him: and though it be true that there is a further meaning for the Tribes in
those words of Jacob, yet this was proper to Jacob himself, he looked upon
Death now approaching, as that that he was delivered from, and set into that
freedom purchased by Christ. So old Simeon, Lord, now let thou thy servant
depart in peace according to thy word, for mine eyes have seen thy salvation;
Jacoh accounted it his salvation; old Simeon, a departure from a worse place to
a better, from worse company and comforts to a better; A change for the better
still, and a departing in peace.

Again secondly, look on the servants of God in death, see what they have said
too: Josiah, a man that was upright in heart, he went to the grave in peace, he
was gathered to his fathers in peace, that he should not see the evil that
should come upon his people: here is all: it was but a peaceable taking of him
away from a more troubelous condition if he had lived longer^ Beloved, he died
in war, yet it is said he was gathered in peace; he had inward peace with God,
though he failed in that particular action. 2 Cor. 5.4.
And the Apostle in the 2 Cor. 5.4. This is our desire that we may be clothed
upon, not that we would be unclothed, but clothed upon, that mortality may be
swallowed up of life. A strange speech, he counts death life to him, he
counts the death of this life, to be the death of mortality, by laying aside
this earthly tabernacle (as he said in the first verse) mortality is swallowed
up of life: And therefore you give wrong names to things, for while you live,
you die, because your life it is a dying condition, and while you die, you
live, because then the cessation of life it is as the river Jordan to the
people of Israel, no more but a passage to Canaan, not a flood to drown them;
so it is with the servants of God, death is but a passage to heaven, it is not
destructive to them.

So that if men did but rectify their opinions of Death (as I told you before)
when their hearts are right set, when they are humbled, and not lifted up with
worldly things, when their faith is strengthened, and settled in them, when they
are made watchful in a holy course, looking for Death, when they are
established with the assurance of Gods favor, then I say they may find that
all these natural fears of death were upon mistake, they did not rightly
apprehend the thing. Other things I should have added, but I am loath to hold
you too long.

A word for the occasion; and so I will conclude: the departure of our Sister
here was the occasion, as of this meeting here, so of this Text in particular.
She gave good evidence to those that knew her more inwardly, that she was in
Christ, that the was delivered not only from eternal death, but from fear of
tempor all death too. It pleased God to exercise her a great while under the
fear of death, the apprehension of it was of some terror to her, but
nevertheless when God called her to it indeed, then the fear of death was hid
from her, and Christ then applied the fruit of his death, in freeing her from
those fears. She was not freed from them out of a Stoycal Appethy, or want of
natural affection and passion, but out of a spiritual and faithful application
of Christ to her self upon good grounds. She looked upon God as her Father,
and much delighted to express her apprehension of him under that notion, and
she very often manifested her rejoicing in that interest she had in God, as his
child: no marvel then if the fear of death were taken away: we see here in the
text, that they are children that are delivered from the fear of death. When we
are in the state of Gods children by adoption and grace, then there is rather a
desire, then a fear of death: It is but as our Fathers white Horse, so it is
called in the Revelation. A child at school, when he sees one riding post
through the streets, as if he would run over him, or tread upon him, he cries
out: But if he sees that it is his fathers man sent to bring him from school to
his Fathers house, all his fear is past, and he laugheth and rejoices. So when
we are the sons and daughters of God by adoption, we apprehend Death as our
Fathers pale Horse, sent by him to bring us, from a place of prison on earth;
home to our Fathers house, a place of liberty in heaven; So it was with her.

She looked upon Christ as her Husband, and though she left a husband upon
earth, yet (it was her own expression) she was to go to her Husband in heaven,
which was far better for her. And therefore (I say) having these
apprehensions of God as her Father, and that she was adopted to the estate of a
child by grace, and looking upon Christ as her husband, no marvel she was freed
from the fear of Death. And that these were upon good grounds, those that knew
her course best, knew that she expressed it by her abundant care to please God,
by her desire to serve God, by her endeavor to mortify and subdue ill in her
self, by her growth in grace in her latter times, these good evidences did
show that it was not a rash and groundless persuasion, but a true and real
apprehension of God and Christ that freed her from this Fear of death.

Beloved, many times the life of Gods servants is uncomfortable to them,
because (for some of those reasons I have spoken of before) they are afraid of
Death, and they apprehend it not with comfort, and this they do, because they
see not the interest they have in better comforts then Death can take from
them; I have the rather therefore spoke this of her, that you may take notice
of it, and apply it to your selves.

And to conclude, make this use of all, to grow more humble, and watchful, and
holy, to strengthen faith more, and by dying daily to prepare more for Death:
For faith is the rectified apprehension of things: Death it is not so fearful
as you think it is, you lose not so much as you think you lose. Nay again,
because this trouble, and this fear dishonors God, therefore when God
calls us to Death, he hides these fears from us, as he did from this servant
of Christ at this time before us; though she were fearful before, yet she was
exceeding comfortable all the time, when the apprehension of Death approached
upon her. So it shall be with thee, if thou be careful to use the means to
prepare for Death: mind thou the duty that God enjoyneth thee in thy life, and
leave the event and issue to him; either he will glorify himself by thy fears,
or else he will glorify himself by delivering thee from thy fears.

THE PERFECTION OF PATIENCE OR THE COMPLETE CHRISTIAN.
SERMON IV.
JAMES 1.4. But let Patience have her perfect work, that you may be perfect and
entire, wanting nothing.


IN the second verse of this Chapter, Coherence.
the Apostle persuades the distressed servants of God to bear their afflictions
cheerfully, My Brethren (says he) count it all joy, when you fall into diverse
tentations: This Exhortation he presses in the third verse, by showing the
gracious effects of tentations, when God sanctifies them; Knowing this, that
the trial of your faith works patience. Yea, but if this be all the fruit of
our afflictions and tentations, that we shall be made patient, what great
matter is that? what great advantage comes by patience? It is but a dull
grace, it is merely passive? He tells them, that it is such a grace, as is
necessary to the being, and perfection of a Christian, in the words that I
have now read to you, Let patience have her perfect work, that you may be
perfect, and entire, wanting nothing.

I shall speak something for the explication of the terms and phrases used
here, and then come to elect such points as shall offer themselves to us from
them.

First I will show, what is meant by patience.

Secondly, what is meant by Patience having her parfect work.

Thirdly, what is meant by this, that doing of this, they shall be perfect and
entire wanting nothing.

Patience (in a word) it is a grace or fruit of Gods spirit, Definition of
Patience
whereby the heart of a believer willingly submiteth it self to the will of God
in all afflictions, and changes in this life.

I say, it is a work or fruit of Gods spirit. In respect of this work, the
efficient is called, Romans 15.5. Gal. 5.22.
The God of Patience and long suffering (which is the same with Patience) is
made a fruit of the Spirit, Gal. 5.22.

The subject of this, is the heart.

The act of this Patience, is to submit a man's self willingly to God in
afflictions: I say willingly, for there is a submission which is by force; when
God subjects a man to himself, not by a gracious and sweet inclining of the
will, but by a powerful subduing of the person.

Now, when I say there is such a willing submission to God in afflictions; the
meaning is thus; That there may be in a believer, in a child of God, a
Velietie, an inclination of the will, a natural desire to be freed from
Afflictions, yet nevertheless there is in him that willingness that is here the
Patience of a Christian. There may be a willingness, and an unwllingness in one
and the same person arising from diverse principles. In every renewed soul,
there is is a principle of nature, and a principle of grate, (I speak not now
of corrupt nature, but of pure nature, for we may so speak.) There is a desire
that arises from nature, and that tends to the conservation of a man's
being, and to the conservation of a man in all the comforts, and contentments
of his being: This is and may be in a child of God. But then it is overswayed
by grace, which makes a man now resign up this will of his to Gods hand, to be
content (against his own natural desires,) to be disposed of according to Gods
will. This we may see in our Lord and Savior: Father (faith he) if it be
possible, let this cup pass from me. Hear is a desire to keep, Mat. 25
not only in his natural being, but to keep in the comfort of nature and
life: And this is lawful and a good desire; for these affections, are the works
of God upon the soul of man. The will of man moves naturally by these
affections, these desires they are the fruits of nature, and so the works of
God in nature, and therefore not simply to be blamed. But now that which
keeps them within compass, is an overruling work of grace, whereby the
creature is made to acknowledge his distance from the Creator, and that
subjection he owes to God, as the sovereign Lord of nature, and of all
creatures. And in this sense our Savior Christ does check his natural desires;
if it be possible let this cup pass from me, nevertheless, not as I will, but
as thou will, faith he. So here is a work of grace, ordering and overruling
nature, that it might not exceed that proportion of the creature, and those
desires that should be in nature.

So then you see what kind of willingness we mean, such a kind of willingness,
as in the issue and close rests in Gods will.

The object of this Patience is Afflictions, and the changes of this life.
Affliction is properly any thing that is grievous to a man's sense, any thing
that crosses a man's will. There are some things that indeed are Afflictions,
but not to this or that person, because he is not sensible of them, or because
he is not carried with any desires against them: But when a man is crossed in his
will, that is an affliction to him; but specially when this is set on him with
a change, when God brings, as Job speaks, changes upon him, when a man is in
another turning and course of life, this is an affliction indeed. A man that
has tasted the sweetness of prosperity now to be left in affliction, this was
Jobs case, and this is specially the object of Patience. You have heard of the
Patience of Job.

But how did Jobs Patience appear in the Afflictions, in the changes of his
life? That notwithstanding he had felt the sweeness of a prosperous estate, and
the comfort of friends, yea, and the comfort of Gods favor shining upon his
heart, and many other particular mercies, yet when God turned his hand, and
took away the comforts of his life, the comfort and society of his friends, the
comfortable expressions of his own love to his soul, and threatened the taking
away even of life it self; Job could now in this case resolve to rest in the
determination, and appointment and will of God. Here is Patience now.

Thus briefly you have heard what the duty is, to which the Apostle exhorts;
It is Patience, that is, a willing resigning of our selves to Gods appointment
in the changes of our life.

But now that is not enough, What I is to let patience have her perfect work.
Rom 15.13. Collos. 1.11.
the Apostle contents not himself, to say; Have Patience, but let Patience have
her perfect work; He would have them grow in Patience, to grow from one degree
to another, to abound in Patience (as the Apostle speaks of Hope and Joy in
Romans 15.13.) that they might not only have patience, but have it brought to
perfection, which in Coll. 1. 11. is called all long suffering, that there
might not be the least defect, that they might have a measure of patience
proportionable to the measure of Trials: that look as God increased the measure
of their trials upon them, so they might have patience to answer those trials,
somewhat to support the heart, when the greatest weight should be laid upon the
soul to press it down: so the word Hipomene, that is translated patience
signifies, to bear up a man, to support him under a burden, that he be not
pressed down by it. So he would have them have such a measure of Patience, as
might bear up the soul in the greatest pressures, that though they were
afflicted, they might not be broken in their afflictions. Thus you have the
duty opened; Let Patience have her perfect work.

The reason is, that you may be perfect and entire wanting nothing.

That you may be entire. What is meant by entire and wanting nothing
Some understand it thus, that you may be entire in respect of every grace, in
respect of all gracious habits, that you may have one grace as well as another,
that as you have knowledge and faith, so you may have Patience too, that which
is so necessary a grace for a Christian, as well as any other.

Others by intireness here, and wanting nothing, think that the Apostle meant
this, that they might have that which might supply comfort to their souls in
all their wants, A man is then said to want nothing, when he is content and
satisfied with that estate wherein he is, 1. Sam. 30.6.
as if he had all things: So David, when Ziglag was burnt, his Wives carried
away captive, his soldiers began to mutiny, and threaten him, yet nevertheless
he seemed to want nothing, when he could comfort himself in the Lord his God.
Godliness is great gain; (but how?) with contentment; that is, there is such a
sufficiency with contentment of heart, as if a man had the things he wants. So
then hear is the thing, that you may be entire, in respect of all gracious
habits, necessary to the being of a Christian, that you may have that inward
store and supply of comfort, that may support your hearts in all outward wants.
Thus you have the meaning of the words.

The parts are two. The parts the text.


An exhortation to duty.

An argument to enforce that exhortation.

The duty whereto they are exhorted is, 1. A duty exhorted to.
that they should be perfect in Patience; let Patience have her perfect work.

The Argument whereby they are persuaded to this duty, 2. An Argument to
Enforce it.
is that they may be entire, and wanting nothing, that they may have all that
is necessary to a Christian.

We will observe two Conclusions hence, which we shall follow at this time. The
first is this;

That Patience is necessary to the perfection of a Christian. Conclus. 1.
Or, A Christian is not perfect without patience.

The second is this;

That every Christian should strive for a perfection of degrees of Patience.
Conclus. 2.
Or, that a Christian must labor to attain the highest degree and perfection
in Patience.

These two Conclusions we will handle apart in the Explication and proof; and
join them together in the application and use.

For the first then, Conclus. 1. A Christian not perfect without patience. Mat.
5.48.
that A Christian is not perfect without patience. Our Savior exhorting his
Disciples to patience (in the fifth of Matthew.) because they should meet with
many enemies, and injuries in the world, he concludes, be perfect (faith he)
as your heavenly father is perfect. What perfection speaks he of here? Such a
perfection, such a work of Grace, as might enable them to carry themselves, as
became them in the midst of those many enemies and opposites they should meet
withal.

I will not stand upon this, Reas. 1
I will endeavor to make it appear to you. First it may appear thus.

There is a twofold perfection of a Christian; A twofold perfection of a
Christian.
There is a perfection of parts, and a perfection of degrees. A child is a
perfect man in respect of parts, but not in respect of degrees, because it is
not come to that measure of strength (for that age is not capable of it) which
a man has.

Now there is a necessity that there should be a perfection of parts.

First, Perfection of parts what it is.
perfection of parts in a Christian, is but the making up of all those graces
which are necessary to a Christian, and without which he cannot obey God, nor
walk according to the rule: All these are necessary: Now Patience is one of
those parts, one of those habits of grace with which every renewed soul is
endowed, and without which a man is not truly sanctified, without which a man
expresses himself not to be regenerate. 2 Pet. 1.5,6.
And for this observe what the Apostle Peter says, Ad moreover to your faith,
virtue, to virtue knowledge, to knowledge temperance, to temperance patience, to
patience godliness, to godliness brotherly kindness, to brotherly kindness
love; What is the reason of it? If these things be in you and abound, you shall
neither be idle, nor unfruitful in the work of the Lord. As if he should say,
you will be idle and unfruitful professors, unless that these graces be in
you, and abound in you. Now what are the Graces? you shall see the necessity of
every one of them; The Apostle exhorts believers there, to the giving all
diligence to the making their calling and election sare, to make it certain to
themselves that they are effectually called. But might some say, there are many
graces necessary to a Christian, but there is one principal, which we call the
radical and main grace of all, Faith? I but says the Apostle, there are many
others necessary besides that, as you must have faith toward God, so you must
also carry your selves so, as may adorn your profession among men, therefore
add virtue to faith. But they might say, virtue, that is that that guides a
man in all Morrals, in all the course of his life and conversation? You shall
have many provocations to sin, therefore add to virtue temperance. But we have
many discouragements to good? therefore add to temperance Patience. But what
though you should have both temperance and Patience, these are but moral
virtues? Therefore add to Patience godliness, that you may in all things you
do, aim at God, and approve your selves to him. But when we have carried our
selves in a holy manner, according to the rule and word of God, yet
nevertheless there are many Christians that require offices of love from us,
and what shall we do to these? Therefore add to godliness brotherly
kindness. But then again beside that conversation we have with believers,
there are many men in the world that expect certain duties from us? Therefore
add to that, Love, that extends to all men according to their necessities.
So you see how the Apostle takes all graces, as it were into several parcels,
and shows how they cannot be without one parcel of grace, they cannot go
through the course of Christianity, except they heve every thing; they cannot
carry themselves toward God without faith: they cannot adorn their profession
without virtue; they cannot escape temptations without temperance; neither can
they be encouraged against discouragements without patience; Therefore he
brings patience in amongst the rest, as a necessary part and duty of a
Christian without which he cannot go through the work of Christiantie and
religion.

Again in the second place, Reas. 2.
as it appears by the parts of a Christian and Christianity, that a man
cannot be perfect without Patience, so it appears by another argument, and
that is this; A Christian cannot be perfect without that, without which he
cannot keep that grace he has. Look what ever grace is in the soul, Luke 21.19.
a man cannot keep it without Patience. By Patience possess your souls. The
soul which is the seat and subject of Grace, cannot it self be kept without
Patience, therefore neither can any grace be kept in the soul without Patience:
because as the riches and treasures in a Castle cannot be kept, when the walls
are beaten down, so those treasures of grace in the heart of man cannot be
kept, when once patience, which is as the wall of the soul, that keeps it from
the battery of tentations, from the enemy that would steal them away while
men sleep; I say, unless these walls, these supporting graces, specially this
of Patience be in the soul, it cannot stand entire.

For indeed let impatience once into the soul, and you let in all sin with it;
impatience is a destroying of all grace, a pulling down of the wall. Nay, what
is sin indeed, but impatience in a sense? What is pride, but the impatience of
humility? What is uncleanness, but the impatience of chastity? What is
drunkenness, but the impatience of sobriety? Every sin begins in
impatience, when a man cannot bear with that abstinence, and forbearance as
formerly, cannot keep that strict course in his ways, but grows impatient
against the rule of God, he runs into a course of sin presently. So you see
that for the very preserving the soul, the subject of grace, and grace the
treasure of the soul, it is necessary that we should have patience.

And then again thirdly; Reas. 3,
It will appear thus to you, that a Christian cannot be perfect without
patience; because he cannot do his work without Patience; he cannot do the
works of Religion, the task that God lays upon him without Patience. Look in
what measure Patience is defective, in that measure he halteth in his duty, in
the very actions of Religion he goes about.

Take any one duty of Religion that you can name, No duty can be rightly
performed without patience. Not Prayer Matthew. 15.
see whether a man can do that without Patience. Suppose it be Prayer; How can
a man go on in the duty of prayer without Patience? Sometimes God delayeth the
grant of a man's petition: A man will now sink, and give over in discouragement,
if he have not Patience to support the soul. The Canaanitish woman, when she
came to Christ, and spoke once to him, and he did not answer a word; she had so
much Patience as to make her speak the second time to him, then he answered
her, but churlishly; but yet her Patience held her to the third trial, at last
she received her desire: had she not been Patient to go on with her request,
she had lost her petition. The Apostle Paul in 2 Cor. 12. for this thing (faith
he) I besought the Lordthrice, 2 Cor. 11.
He would have given over at the first seeking of the Lord, if he had not had
Patience to uphold him to the second, and third petition, to the renewing of
his suit twice, nay thrice.

Come from praying to hearing the Word preached; Not hearing.
how can a man hear the word profitably without Patience? therefore the good
ground is said to hear the Word, Luke 8.15. Rev. 3.10.
and to bring forth fruit with Patience: and it is the commendation of the
Church of Philadelphia, Thou have kept the word of my Patience. There is a
necessity of Patience, if a man will profit by the Word.

For first, if a man will obey the Word, he shall be sure to have many set
against him in the world, he had need of Patience then, or else he will leave
the rule of the Word, because of the reproaches of the world.

Again, there are many secret corruptions in his own heart that will be met
with in the preaching of the Word, which a man cannot abide to hear of, but he
will be vexing and fretting, and discontented at it (as we see in Ahab and
diverse others) unless he have Patience to keep him from raging against the
Preacher, and preaching of the Word. Heb. 10.36.
You have need of Patience then (as the Apostle faith) that you may bear
thereproofs, and exhortations of the Word. Therefore faith the Apostle James,
James, 1.21.
Receive with Patience the ingrafted Word, or receive with meekness, the
ingrafted Word, that is able to save your souls. There is no ingrafting the
Word in the heart, except those forms of impatience, those hindrances of the
growth of the Word be taken away

But further, Reas. 4.
there is yet a further end: the whole life of a Christian is a continual
exercise of Patience, there is a necessity of it, for he cannot persevere
without Patience, it is impossible for a man to begin in the spirit, but he
shall end in the flesh, Heb. 10.36.
if he have not Patience to persevere in well doing. Therefore faith the
Apostle, You have need of Patience, that after you have obeyed, you might
receive the promise. You have need of Patience, for between the time of the
making of the Promise, and the time of the accomplishment of the Promise to the
soul, there is a great distance many times, therefore ye have need of Patience,
to wait, that after you have obeyed the Word, Heb. 12.1.
you might receive the promise. Let us run with Patience the race that is set
before us, looking to Jesus the Author, and finisher of our faith. Our Lord
Jesus himself had not perfected the work of our redemption, if he had wanted
Patience: neither can we finish our course of Christianity (wherein we must
follow Christ) and run the race that is set before us, except we have Patience
added to other graces.

You see then a Christian cannot be perfect without Patience; First, because he
cannot have all the parts of Christianity, that is one thing. Secondly, because
he cannot keep and preserve the graces he has, that is another thing. Thirdly,
because he cannot act and work according to the rule, that is the third.
Lastly, because he cannot perservere in the course he is in, except he have
Patience. There is a necessity of Patience to the prefection of a Christian.

Secondly, Conclus. 2. Christian must labor for perfection in Patience. Coll.
1.11.
the second point was, That it is the duty of a Christian to strive to bring
Patience to the uttermost perfection, to be as perfect in the degrees of
Patience as he can attain to, to make this the strife of his life, that
Patience may have her perfect work, that there may be no defect in it. The
Apostle prays for the Collossians, that they may be strengthened in the inward
man to all long suffering. And when our Savior sets God as a pattern before
men, Mat. 5, 48.
Be you perfect, as your heavenly Father is perfect; What aymeth he at in that
place but this? that we should strive to the uttermost extent, and highest
degrees of Patience, for our Savior intends of Patience in that place. This
then is the duty of a Christian.

Why so?

First, Reas. 1.
because a Christian is to follow the best pattern: the best patterns are
propounded in the Scripture. And God does not propound examples and Patterns to
men in vain: but as he gives them rules to tell them what they should do, so
he gives them examples and patterns to lead them to that degree, and direct
them in the manner of doing. Therefore ye have God himself set as a pattern of
Patience: Follow God as dear children; Ephesians 5:
wherein? In all those examples wherein you have a rule. For all the examples
of God, and Christ, and the Saints, bind no further, then there is a rule in
the Word. There are many things wherein we cannot follow God and Christ, and we
need not follow every one of the Saints; but those things that are enjoined by
the rule, these examples are set to direct us in obedience to that rule.
Amongst other things, the Patience of God is set forth as a pattern for us to
follow. Exodus 34.7. Romans 11.
In that glorious proclamation made of him, in Exodus 34.7, 8. Among other of
his attributes, he is set out to be a God long suffering and Patient. You see 1
Pet. 3.2 Pt. 2:
how patient God is (faith the Apostle) And God that he might show his
long-suffering and Patience, bore with the world, faith Saint Peter; With what
world? with the world of ungodly men. God has born with the world many Ages of
years, many thousand years already, and yet bears still with the world. The
most holy God that perfectly hates wickedness, yet to show his Patience, he
bears with ungodly ones: Yea, and he bears with men too: the mighty God,
that is able to destroy all the world, with the very breath of his mouth, that
as with a word he made the world, so with a blast he is able to bring it to
nothing, yet this mighty God bears with men, this holy God, with ungodly men;
yea, and this God that might suddenly destroy the earth, as he did the old
World with water, he bears so many thousand years with the world of ungodly
men, that his Patience and longsuffering may appear. You have God for an
example then.

And Christ for an example too: Romans 8.29.
and you are predestined for this very end, to be like the Image of the Son,
to be made conformable unto Christ; Wherein? In all imitable and necessary
graces. I say, in all those graces that are necessary, by virtue of a rule, and
that are imitable, wherein we may or can follow him. Amongst the rest this is
one, his Patience. See the Patience of Christ. In his carriage toward his
Father, how he bore the displeasure of his Father: In his carriage toward men,
when he might have commanded fire from heaven, yet you see how he bore with
them, Luke. 9.
and rebuked his Disciples, You know not of what spirit you are. He was lead as
a lamb, dumb before the shearers; and he opened not his mouth.

Again, James 5.10.
you have the examples of the servants of God. Take my brethren (faith Saint
James) the Prophets who have spoken in the name of the Lord, for an ensample of
suffering affliction, and of Patience. The Prophets suffered long, and endured
the frowns of the world, and the rage of Princes, they endured a thousand
miseries, verse 11.
and all to discharge their duty. But amongst all the servants of God, You have
heard of the Patience of Job, and what end the Lord made with him. Every man
can speak of the patience of Job, Romans 15.4.
but this was written for our ensample, to teach us to be patient as he was:
Whatsoever things were written afore-time, were written for our learnings, that
we through Patience, and comfort of the Scriptures, might have hope.

Again secondly, Reas. 2.
as it is necessary for a Christian to strive for the perfection of Patience in
the degrees of it, because of the conformity that should be between him, and
those examples of God, of Christ, and of the Saints, between God the Father,
and believers his children; between Christ the head, and believers his members;
between the Saints of God, children of the same Father, and servants of the
same Master, that should honor him in the same grace of Patience. So There is
a necessity likewise of it, in respect of the trials whereunto a Christian may
be put: you had need to strive that you may be perfect in Patience, because you
know not what trials ye shall be put to, what times ye are reserved to. Every
man must expect troubles and afflictions, they are called Tribulations, and you
know what Tribulum was, the Iron ball that was full of pikes round about, so
that wheresoever it was cast it did stick; and Engine used in war: Tribulations
are unavoydable they will fall and stick, ye cannot escape them on any side, by
any turning to the right hand, or to the left. Acts 14.22.2. Tim. 3.12.
It is the will of God, that through many tribulations we should enter into the
kingdom of heaven: and whosoever will live Godly in Christ Jesus must suffer
persecution.

Now (beloved) is this so, that this is a Statute in heaven, decreed, and
ordained by God, and will not be reversed, like the laws of the Medes and
Persians, that every man must pass to heaven through tribulation, and
affliction upon earth; then it concerns every one to be armed, to get such a
measure of patience as may support him in such afflictions. Ye know not what
afflictions ye may have, what particular trials God may put ye to: In what a
miserable case then is a man, if he be to seek of his armor; when he is in the
midst of the pikes; if he be then to get patience, when he is in the midst
of trials, when he is disturbed and distracted with vexation of spirit? What
foolish disorderly speeches proceed from men in the time of affliction? We may
see it in David, so foolish was I and ignorant, Psalm. 73.27.
and in this point a beast before thee. What foolish, sensual, beastly
speeches, unreasonable absurd passages proceed from men in those times of
trouble, if they have not got to themselves before hand this grace, and are not
fitted to a Christian carriage in time by patience.

Thus ye see the necessity of patience to the perfection of a Christian, and
the necessity of the perfection of patience to the ornament of a Christian.

Now we come to make use of both these together. Use 1. For reproof
First, it serves for the just reproof of Christians that are careful for
other parts, and acts of religion, and are not so seriously mindful of this
duty of patieuce as they should be, but are so far from striving for
patience, that they seem rather to strive for impatience, that make their
crosses more heavy, and their afflictions more bitter then they would be.
Indeed we make Gods Cup (that of it self is grievous enough to nature and to
sense (by putting into it our own ingredients, that are inbred in our own
passions, and pride and self-will, and our own earthly minds, far more bitter
then else it would be.

But how does a man make afflictions worse?

There are diverse ways that men take, VVayes how men increase Impatience in
themselves.
wherein they are so far from perfecting Patience in themselves, that they
wholly destroy Patience.

The first is, by their agravating of their afflictions, by all the several
circumstances that possible they can invent. 1. By aggravating their
afflictions.
All their eloquence is used in expressing the grievousness of that cross and
affliction that is upon them. They that in the times of mercy could scarce ever
drop a word in thankfulness, and acknowledgement of Gods goodness to them, now
they can pour out floods of sentences in expression of Gods bitter, and heavy
dealing with them in such afflictions, and crosses, and distresses that befall
them. As the Church speaks in the Lamentations; Consider all that pass by, Lam.
1.12.
is there any affliction like my affliction, wherewith the Lord has afflicted
me? The like speech you have ordinarily in the mouths of persons; Is there any
affliction like mine? there is no body so wronged in their name as I; nor has
such pain in their body, nor never went with such an heavy heart as I; never
any man suffered so many injuries by friends and enemies, and all sorts of
people, as I have done: at if all the afflictions in the world, the floods and
waves of trials, were all met upon one person. This is the language of men,
whereby they aggravate their afflictions, and increase impatience in themselves.

Again, 2. By giving liberry to their passions.
another way whereby they do is, is this; By giving vent and free course to
their passions, Passions are like a wild horse, if they have not reins put
upon them, if they be not pulled in, they will fly out to all excess. If once
we give our Passions vent, there is no stoping of them. David, we see checks
himself, he had a curb to bridle his passions; Why art thou cast down, oh my
soul? But otherwise when men give the reins to their passion, and do not
stop their course, but think they have reason for it, they break out into all
exhorbitancie. Jonah, when the Lord challenged him for his anger, Do thou
well to be angry? I (says he) I do well to be angry even to the death. So
David, Oh Absalom, my son, would God I had died for thee; Oh Absalom, my
son my son. What hurt was done to David? what wrong had the man to take on
thus? his son was took from him, but it was Absalom: Absalom died, but it
was Absalom that would have killed his father: and yet he takes on, as if the
father could not live, because the son that sought his death, was took from
him. Such unreasonable Passions, such causeless distempers oft-times are in
the souls of men, that they mistake Gods ways, and that very way that he
intends them good in, they complain of, as if it were their utter undoing,

Again thirdly, 3. By resusing comfort.
another way whereby men increase their impatience and distemper is, when they
will not give way to comfort: they will not only be exceeding vehement and
intent upon their Passions, but besides, stop all passages and in-lets, against
comfort; Genesis 37.34.
It was Jacobs fault concerning the death of Joseph: When he heard that Joseph
was dead, not only his heart sunck within him, but he rends his garments, and
covers himself with sackcloth, he takes on so, that when his sons and
children rose up to comfort him, he would not be comforted: Why? Because Joseph
was not, and I will go to the grave to Joseph: nothing would comfort Jacob but
he would go down to the grave to Joseph by all means. What a great matter was
this? He only heard that Joseph was dead, he was alive, he knew not so much but
he heard a present sound of fear, and he was carried away with that. So it is
with us, the very apprehension of our fears are as bad to us, as the things
themselves could possible be. Nay we multiply upon our selves, our fears, and
we will not hear counsel and comfort, as Rachel, that mourned for her children,
and would not be comforted, because they were not.

Again, 4. By looking only on afflictions present not on mercies
a fourth thing whereby men increase impatience in themselves, and aggravate
their sorrows, is this, when men look only upon the present afflictions, and
not upon the mercies they have: as if they had but one eye to behold all
objects with, as if they could look but upon one thing at once: there should be
a looking upon the affliction, and there should be a looking upon the mercy
too. This was Hamans case: when he was vexed that Mordecay did not do him
reverence, all his wealth and his honors could do him no good: he had much
wealth, and the glory of his house was increased, he had the favor of the
King, and was inclining to have the honor of the Queen put upon him; Est. ^.
13:
yet all this avails me nothing (says he) so long as I see Mordecay the Jew
sitting in the Kings gate. He looks only on this particular that vexed and
grieved him, and not upon the rest. So it is with us, if there be but one
particular affliction upon us, we fix our eyes upon that: Like a Fly, that
flies about the glass, and can stick no where till she come to some crack: or
as a Gnat that comes about the body of a beast, that will be sure to stick on
the galled part, or some sore or other. So it is with these disquieted thoughts
of men, that are of no other use, but to further Satan's ends, to weaken their
faith, and discourage their own hearts; men stick on the gall, on the sore of
any affliction, there they will rest. It is true, God has given us such and
such favors and mercies, has offered us such and such opportunities, but what
is this? this and that particular affliction is upon me. This is that, that
increases impatience, when a man will not look on the mercies he receives,
but only looks on that that he wants.

Again, 5. By looking on the instrument and not on God.
a fifth course that men take to aggravate their sorrows, and increase
impatience in themselves is this. They look upon the instrument of their
sorrows and afflictions, but never look up to God that rules, and over-ruleth
these things; Men look upon such a person, such a man and no more. Ye see how
David was disquieted at this: Psalm. 55.12.13.
If it had been an enemy that reproached him, then he could have born it; but
it was thou my friend, my equal, my guide, my acquaintance, that sat at my
table, we took sweet counsel together, and walked unto the house of God in
company; This troubled him; and see how he multiplied his sorrows, when he
looked upon the instrument, Plal. 39.9.
till he looked upon God, and then I was dumb, I opened not my mouth, because
thou did it. There is no quiet in the heart, when a man looks upon man, till
he looks upon God that orders all things by his wisdom and counsel.

Lastly, 6. By looking on the smart and not on the benefit of affliction.
men aggravate their sorrows, and increase their impatience, by another course
they take, that is, when they look on their sorrows and afflictions only, and
not upon the benefit of affliction: they look only upon that that flesh would
avoid, but not that which if they were spiritual and wise they would desire. No
affliction (faith the Apostle) is joyous for the time, Heb. 12.11.
that is, to flesh and nature, but grievous, nevertheless, afterward it
yields the peaceable fruit of righteousness to them which are exercised
thereby. Now men look upon that only which is grievous in affliction, upon the
smart of it, but not upon the profit of affliction, the quiet fruit of
righteousness that comes by it. As a man when he has a Corroding plaster put
to a sore, he cries and complains of the smart it puts him to, but takes
no notice of the healing that comes by it, and the cure that follows. Thus
it is with men, they complain of God, as if he envied them the comfort of their
lives, as if he intended to rob them of all conveniences, and to make them
utterly miserable, to begin a Hell with them on earth, when they never look how
God by this means fitteth them for heaven, by this means purging out
corruption, and strengthening grace in them: 1. Cor. 11.32
We are afflicted of the Lord, that we may not be condemned of the world: Men
look upon the affliction, not upon their freedom from condemnation.

So much for that. I come now to a second use.

You see here the way whereby men aggravate affliction, and get causes of
impatience in themselves, and if we seriously consider it, we shall find one of
these, the ordinary causes of all distempers, and impatience in losses, in
sicknesses, in distress of mind, in crosses upon a man's name, or whatsoever
befalls him amiss in the world, that which makes him fly out, that which
makes him, that he cannot submit unto God, it is some of these particulars here
spoken of.

Let it therefore in the second place, Use 2. For exhortarion.
stir us up evety one in the presence of God to set our selves upon this task
of Christianity, to labor for Patience, that we may be perfect Christians, and
to be perfect in Patience, Let Patience have her perfect work.

But all the question is, how a man may get it.

As there are two sorts of afflictions in a man's life, so Patience has two
offices. One affliction is those present evils that a man undergoeth and
suffers, Patience is to support him in those present miseries and calamities.

Another sort of trial is, when the good that a man expects is delayed, and is
not presently granted, and here patience is necessary in this case also. I will
show ye how a man may set patience a work in both these, and so conclude.

First, How to exercise patience In present crosses.
for the present calamities of a man's life, (For crosses of any kind, in name,
state, friends, or families, or in whatsoever a man has, or goes about, they
may all be reduced to this one head) when a man comes from a state of health
to a state of sickness; from a state of comfort to a state of sorrow; from
acquaintance, and society, to be as a Pelican in the wilderness, (as David
speaks) destitute of all friends and helps; from inward rejoicing in his heart,
in the assurance of Gods love, to spiritual disertions, wherein he seems to
be as in a cloud, under the frowns of God. When a man is in this case, how
shall he exercise Patience? how shall he come to it?

Briesly, the way for a man to get patience in such cases as these, is this.

First to consider, 1. Consider God the orderer of all conditions.
that there is no change in my life, there is no condition whatsoever that I am
cast into, but it is ordered by God. Set thy soul awork now, to give God his
glory in that change of thy life. First give God the glory of his absolute
Sovereignty and Dominion. Secondly, give him the glory of his wisdom. Thirdly,
give him the glory of his mercy in those changes of thy life that seem most
grievous to thee.

First, Therefore give him the glory of his sovereignty
I say, give him the glory of his absolute sovereignty. Acknowledge him an
absolute in-dependant Lord, that does what he will among the creatures. His
will is the rule of all his actions upon the creatures here below, and
uncontrolled, unquestionable. It is high arrogance, and presumption, and pride
of spirit, for the creature to contest with his Creator, concerning his actions
on earth. Let every man reason thus; I must give God the glory of his
Sovereignty, and acknowledge that he has power and right, to rule all the
families of the earth; and why not mine as well as another? Why not my person
as well as another? Why not to order all the changes of my life, 1 King, 20 3.
as well as another man's? That which Benhadad spoke proudly to Ahab, thy silver
and thy gold, thy wives and thy children, and thy house, and thy City are
mine; That may God speak truly, and by right; All that thon have, and all that
thou art, is mine, therefore give him that glory that Job did in the change of
his life; Job 1.21.
The Lord has given, the Lord has taken away, blessed be the name of the
Lord. The Lord that gave has right to take what he will. There is nothing that
will keep the creature in his due place, but the consideration of Gods absolute
sovereignty. This consideration was that that meekned the spirit of Eli, when
that heavy message was brought to him, that there should come such misery upon
his house, that whosoever heard it, both his ears should tingle, well, says
he, It is the Lord, let him do what seems him good: It is the Lord, 2 Samuel, 15
25
and it becomes not servants to stand and contend with their Lord. So David,
when the Priests offered him their service to go along with him to the field
from Absalom; If (says he) I shall find favor in the eyes of the Lord, he
will bring me back to Jerusalem, and his tabernacle, but if he thus say, I have
no delight in thee, behold here am I, let him do to me as seems good unto
him. Here was that that humbled the spirit of David, when he considered that he
was under the hands of an absolute Lord, let the Lord do with me what seems
him good.

Secondly, O his w^sedome.
as thou must give him the glory of his sovereignty, so of his wisdom. Know
that God orders all his ways with wisdom and counsel; he knows what is
good for his children. Ye are content when ye are sick, that the Physician
should diet ye, because ye account him wise, and one that has skill in that
course. If God diet thee for the purging out of some corruption, and for the
curing of some spiritual disease in thy soul, submit to God in this case, be
willing to resign thy self up to be ordered by him. A man that has a
Gangreen, or such a dangerous disease in his body, submits to the Surgeon in
his course, though it be to the cutting and sawing off a limb, though it be
never so painful, and the loss be never so great, yet he is (for the saving of
his life) willing to have that taken away. God is a wise God, that knows what
estate is best for thee; not only when trials are better than comforts, but
what one kind of trial is better then another: it may be it is better to
exercise one with poverty, another with disgrace, another with spiritual
trouble, another with restraint of liberty, which particular trial is
necessary to cure that disease, and which this, that is in my soul: the
heavenly Physician will bring that upon thee as a spiritual prescription, and
a heavenly course that he takes in insinite wisdom to cure thee.

Lastly, Of h^s mercy.
give him in all this the glory of his mercy. What have thou lost, but thou
may have lost a great deal more? What do thou suffer, but thou may have
suffered a great deal more? As Alcibiades when he was told that one had stolen
half his plate, I have cause (faith he) rather to be thankeful that he took no
more, then to be troubled that he took so much; I am sure it is true of God in
this case: what has God took from thee? some part of thy estate, some friend,
some comfort of thy life, some one or other particular comfort: could he not
have done more? He afflicts thee in thy body, he might have afflicted thee in
thy soul, and a wounded spirit who can bear? He has afflicted thee in some one
member of thy body, he could have cast body and soul into Hell. There is not a
trial upon thee, but God could have made it heavier: let that make thee
therefore to submit with a more meek heart, and willing spirit to God, as a
merciful God: as the Church in the Lamentations; Lam. 2.
It is the Lords mercy that we are not consumed: the Church was in great
affliction, when the Babilonians came upon them, and they were driven from the
house of God, and their own houses, but yet it was Gods mercy that they were
not consumed. So the Prophet Jeremy tells Baruch in the captivity, Seek
thou great things for thy self? Ier. 45.5.
thou shall have thy life for a prey: Baruch was wondrously disquieted, he
complained that the Lord had added grief to his sorrow; What grief was that?
that He must go to Egypt, and after to Babylon; Well says the Prophet, thy
case is not so heavy, as thou seem to make it, thou shall have thy life for
a prey, in all places wheresoever thou go. God might have taken away life
and all, but thy life thou shall have for a prey; Therefore be content with so
much. So I say to thee, when great afflictions comes upon thee, they might have
been greater, therefore consider that, that thou may give God the glory of
his mercy. And so much for the first direction; that is, to acknowledge God in
all the changes of life that befalls thee.

Secondly, 2. Consider the desert of siu.
look to sin, as that deserving cause that draws on all the afflictions of
this life. Consider, thou have fallen by thy sin into Gods displeasure,
therefore whatsoever affliction befalls thee, thy sin has deserved that at
the hands of God. The Lord now dealt with the as a just God; though not in the
extermity of rigor, yet nevertheless there is a righteous proceeding in it,
Dan. 9. E^ ^. 9.
as the Church confesses; Righteousness belongs to thee, O Lord, though
they were in great affliction, yet God was righteous in it. It is profitable to
consider this, nay and not only that thou suffer righteously, (as the Theif
on the Cross said, We suffer according to our deserts) but thou suffer not
so much as thy sins deserve, thy sins deserve greater things at the hands of
God, then yet he has infflicted on thee. We see, that a commutation, and
change of punishment, a less for a greater, has the place of a mercy upon a
malefactor that deserves greater, when he deserves to be executed and to die,
he is not only content to be burnt in the hand, but the confesses it to be a
mercy of the Prince. So it is with us, whatsoever affliction God has laid on
thee, thou may conclude, Lam. 3.
I have deserved greater. Therefore, says the Church, Why is the living man
sorrowful? Man suffers for his sin, let us search and try our ways, and
turn again to the Lord. So let this be the main business of thy life in this
case, rather bethink thy self how to get the favor of God, then to be eased of
such a trouble. Let a man look to sin in all this.

Lastly, (...) of (...) born (...) Patience.
consider the gracious and comfortable fruit of Affliction that is born with
patience: For first patience lesseneth the judgment, impatience increases it
on a man. The struggling child has more stripes; A man in a Fever, the more he
strugle^h and striveth, the more he increases his pain. The more patiently a
man yields himself to the hands of God, the more (by the mercy of God) he
finds ease, and mitigation of the affliction. Rev. 3.10.
And this God promises, Because thou have kept the word of my patience, I will
deliver thee in the time of trouble. God will take off the affliction, when
once he has perfected Patience by affliction: for you must know this, that all
that God aymeth at in all afflictions that he lays on men, is to perfect
patience in them: therefore the issue will be good. There will for the presene
be more ease to the heart, and afterward a gracious issue and deliverance from
trouble, when thou art exercised by patience.

Secondly, How to exercise patience in Gods delaying of mercies.
there are other afflictions of our life, and that is not only in those cases
wherein some positive evil, as we account it naturally, some affliction
grievous to nature and sense are upon a man: but mercies are delayed, and hope
deferred makes the heart faint. It is an affliction to a man, to be kept and
delayed in the expectation of that good he has not: if he seem to catch at it,
it is drawn from him further and further. There are many men that have sent
many a prayer to God, yet the thing they ask is not granted to this day: Many a
man has waited long, and sought the Lord, yet he has not that his soul
desires. How shall a man come to exercise patience in such a case as this?

In such a case when God delayeth, 1. Consider that delays are not denyals
know first that Gods delays are not danyals; though God delay the thing, he
may and will in time certainly grant it, yea though he delay it a great while:
As we see in other servants of God, we may see it in David, in Job, in Paul, in
the Canaanitish woman, and in others; The Vision is for an appointed time
(says Habakkuk) wait for it, it will come, and it will not tarry, it will not
lie. God will be known a God of truth, what he has promised he will perform
in due time: only what does he expect of thee? to wait for the present. Now
this is an act of faith; He that believes will not make have. Glorify God by
believing, put to thy seal that he is true: Whatsoever God has promised in the
Word, and thou have a warrant to believe, wait for it.

Secondly, 2. That delays increase mercies.
Gods delays are not only not denials, but improvements of Gods favor; God
increases and commends the excellencies of his mercies by delays, he
recompenceth our expectation, and waiting for them, with putting in greater
sweetness into those favors when they come: I say, God increases the comfort
answerable to the delay, Isa 61.7.
as in the 61. Isa. 7. God to comfort the distressed Church in the time of
calamity, for their affliction (faith he) they shall have double; Double what?
2. Cor. 4.
Double comforts for their trials; Our light afflictions (faith the Apostle)
that are but for a moment, cause us a far more excellent and sxrpassing weight
of glory. A weight of glory for light Afflictions, an eternal weight of glory
for momentary afflictions. 2. Cor 1.
Here is the issue; As our afflictions have abonnded, so our consolations
abound much more. This is the course of God.

Thirdly, 3. That delays are but short, compared to eternity.
know that Gods delays are never long; at the longest they are but for a short
time: what if he delay a year? what if twenty, thirty, forty, years? what if
the the life of a man? this is no great delay. Compare this time of thy waiting
for mercy, with the time to come of thy enjoying of mercy. A small time of
waiting on earth, to an eternity of recompense in heaven. Compare eternity with
the time of thy suffering. Alas how little, what a small or no agreement is
between them? A moment to eternity. If the life of a man should extend to a
hundred years, to a thousand years (to which age never man yet lived) yet that
is but a point, a moment, to eternity. A thousand years past and to come, they
are but as yester-day to God. Take the eternity past, in God himself that is
without all beginning, and the eternity to come, that shall be without all end,
and put the life of man in the midst of these two, and we will conclude, it
is as a point in the midst of a circumference, it is but a moment; nay, not
so much as a moment of time. Stretch out the duty of Patience then; have thou
waited a week? wait a month, a year, seven years, seventy years, nay seventy
Ages, all the ages of the world if it were possible; All these are but a moment
to eternity.

And where is there a man that has waited so long, but God, that his servants
may not faint in their expectation, either supports them with other comforts,
lest they should faint in their desire, or else gives them that which they
desire before their hearts faint. Know therefore, that it is no such great
matter for a man to wait upon God, it is but a short time: and resolve in the
time of thy waiting upon this, that when thou art fittest for mercy, it shall
come, and when it comes, it shall come with an abundant weight and sweetness,
such as shall countervail all thy expectation and waiting.

Thus I have told you how men should exercise patience by exercising their
faith: and how they should strengthen patience by hope: and how they should
perfect patience by selfe-denyal.

The reason why I took this Text for the present occasion is, that there might
be a concurrence between the rule and the example. Here is the rule, Let
patience have her perfect work, that you may be perfect, and entire wanting
nothing. One reason among others was this, because we know not what changes and
trials, God has reserved any of us to, therefore we had need of patience. Our
Sister here is the example; a pattern to others of those trials of life,
whereto a Christan may be exposed even to extremity. Howsoever it pleased God
to give many other mercies to her, yet nevertheless she had a continual
exercise of patience, in extreme anguish of body, in a vexing tormenting pain,
that a long time, for many years together held her under such extremity of
torture, that a man on the rack, or in any other extremity, could hardly have
greater torments then she sometime felt, in the time of that extremity upon
her. God laid this affliction upon her to perfect her patience, and that she
might be a pattern of patience to you, that you might study and pray for
Patience, and endeavor after it, that when afflictions fall upon any of you,
you may not be found wanting, and destitute of patience. So much for this time.

A RESTRAINT OF EXORBITANT PASSION: OR, GROUNDS AGAINST Unseasonable Mourning.
SERMON V.
2 SAMUEL 12.22, 23. And he said, while the child was yet alive, I fasted and
wept: for I said who can tell, whether God will be gracious to me, that the
child may live? But now he is dead, wherefore should I fast? can I bring him
back again? I shall go to him, but he shall not return to me.


THese Words contain David's answer to a question that was put to Coherence.
him (in the Verse going before the Text) by some of his servants. The question
was grounded upon their observation of his diverse carriage, when the child was
sick, and when the child was dead. When the child was sick, he fasted and wept,
and lay upon the ground, and prayed; When the child was dead, he forbeareth,
weeping, washes himself, calls for bread, etc. And now they ask him the
reason, for they thought rather that he would have expressed a greater sorrow,
then he had done before, as it may be discerned in the consultation among
themselves: every man was loath to tell David of the great loss that was
be^llen him, that his child was dead. When he heard of it, and alters his
carriage, and shows himself more cheerful, contrary to their expectation;
they plainly put the question to him, What should be the reason of this?

The words I have read to ye, (...) an Answer to that question. He tells them
the reason, both of his fasting and weeping in the time of the sickness of the
child, and of his calling for meat, and forbearing to weep now at the death of
the child.

The reason of his former carriage, he gives in the 22. verse; While the child
was yet alive, I fasted and wept, for I said, who knows, whether the Lord may
be gracious to me, that the child may live?

The reason of the alteration of his carriage, why he expressed himself in
another manner, upon the death of the child, he gives in the 23. verse. But
now, he is dead, wherefore should I fast? (...) shall return to him, he shall
not return to me.

In the former part (the reason of his sad and mournful carriage, Division.
during the time of the sickness of the child, then (says he) I did fast.)

Yea have first the declaration of his action, and behavior, and carriage at
that time; While the child was yet alive, I fasted and wept. And the reason of
this action and carriage, for I said, Who^ a^ tell whether the Lord will be
gracious to me that the child may live?

I shall be brief in speaking of this part only.

First for his carriage, 1. David's carriage durl^g his child's sickness. Meaning
of the words. 1. Cor. 3.8. Romans 14.17.
I fasted and wept. These are ^ut external actions: fasting, of it self is not
a worship of God but as it helps and furthe^ another (...), as it help^th a
man in prayer, as it fu^eret^ the work of humination, and declares that; For
neither if we eat are we the better, nor if we eat not, are we the worse, as
the Apostle speaks; And the kingdom of God consists not in meat and drink.

There is a fast enforced by necessity, that which either is by sickness or
want, and is merely civil and outward, without any respect to God. And there is
a fast too, which has a pretense of respect to God, which is not acceptable,
as that of the Pharisees, that rested only in the external action. There is a
fast that is religious, David's Fast a religious fast.
and accepted of God, and that is that which is both a testimony of the inward
humiliation of the soul, as also a help and furtherance of it. Such a fast was
this that David speaks of here. A fast that did arise from a sense of his
unworthiness of the creature, and did express the sorrow of his heart for
sin; A Fast which he did set upon only for this end, that he might be more
free, and more fit for prayer.

And so likewise for the mourning, David's te^rs proceeded nor from a natural,
but from a spiritual principle.
and weeping, he speaks of. It was not such a weeping as arises merely from
the temper of the body, as in some that are more apt for tears, are; such as
the tears of Esau to his father, he lift up his voice and wept, have thou not
one blessing more? bless me, even me also, oh my father. But they were tears
that did arise from a holy affection, from a gracious disposition of heart,
from inward contrition and sorrow; like the tears that Peter shed, when he went
out and wept bitterly. They were tears that discovered the inward vehemence of
his spirit in prayer: Genesis 32. Hso. 12.
like those tears of Jacob, when he wrestled with the Angel, the Prophet Hosea
tells how he wrestled, he prayed and wept. Such tears were these; as did
express the fervency of his spirit in prayer, the earnestness of his desire,
in putting up this request he had now to God: Isa. 38.
like those of Hezekiah; I have heard thy prayers, and seen thy tears, says
God: such tears as God puts i^to his bottle: such tears as he takes special
notice of. There are no tears that are shed for sin, our of an inward sorrow of
heart, that are shed in prayer, to exprese a holy desire, that proceed from an
inward inflamed affection and fervency of spirit, but they are very precious
with God: as far (I say) as they declare the inward truth of the heart, and the
inward sense of our wants, and the weight of the petition^ we put up to God.
Such were these tears here: I fasted and wept. I will not stand upon this.

The reason of this action, 2. The reason of David's carriage.
why he fasted and wept. I did it for this end, for (says he) I said, who
knows whether the Lord will be gracious to me, that the child may live? A man
may wonder if he read the former part of the chapter, whence this persuasion
and hope should come into the heart of David, that there should be a
possibility of having the life of this child by his prayer, whereas the Lord
had said before by Nathan to him, that the child should die. Nathan had told
him in express terms that the child should die, yet he puts up his prayer
for it, and said, Who knows whether the Lord will be gracious to me, that the
child may live.

We must know therefore that God sometime, Gods absolute sentence implies
condition.
even in those sentences that seem absolute, implies, and intends a condition.
David had respect to such a course as God ordinarily took: he knew well that
God at other times had threatened things, yet nevertheless upon the repentance,
and prayers, and tears, upon the humiliation, and contrition of the hearts of
his servants, he has been pleased to alter the sentence, to suspend, nay (it
may be) wholly to take away and change the Execution. Thus it has been; It was
so in the case of Hezekiah: The Lord sent as express a message by Isaiah the
Prophet to Hezekiah, Isa. 38.
as he did by Nathan to David: Set thy house in order, for thou shall die and
not live. Yet nevertheless Hezekiah turns his face to the wall, he wept, and
laid open his request before the Lord: Remember now, oh Lord, I beseech the,
how I have walked before thee, in truth, and with a perfect heart, etc. Ye see,
the Lord presently sends the Prophet to tell him, that he had added fifteen
years to his life: and yet the message was carried in express words, and in as
peremptory terms, as a man would have thought it had been absolute, and no
condition intended.

The like in the case of Niniveh. Jonah. 3.4.
Jonah comes to Niniveh, and began to enter the City, a days journey, and he
cried, and said, Yet forty days, and Nineveh shall be destroyed. Here was the
time limited, the judgment declared, and no condition expressed: yet the King of
Nineveh humbles himself, and the people, they fast and pray, and go in
sackcloth, etc. and the Lord was pleased to alter this sentence.

But some will say, these Examples were after David's time, What were these to
him? upon what ground did he take this course? had he any promise or example
before time of any such thing as this, that did give him encouragement to fast
and pray, in hope that though God had said the child should die, yet it should
live?

Certainly David had examples before time of the like nature, when God had
threatened judgments, and they did not know, whether the issue would prove or
no as they desired, yet they sought God. As in the case of Saul. When the Lord
sent an express message by Samuel, 1 Samuel 15.
that the kingdom should be taken from him and given to another, because he had
not dealt faithfully in the execution of Gods command concerning Amaleck, Verse
35:
yet says the text, Samuel mourned for Saul still. Insomuch as the Lord
questioneth him; How long will thou mourn for Saul, Chap. 16.1.
seeing I have rejected him from reigning over Israel: Yet Samuel continued in
seeking God: as if he should say, Who knows what the Lord will do?

But more expressly David had examples before his time, not only of seeking the
Lord, but of a gracious success, and answer that those had that sought him. As
in the case of the Israelites, when there was a discontent among the people,
because of the ill report that the Spies put upon the good land, the people
began now to murmur against God: Number. 14.
Well (says the Lord to Moses,) let me alone, and I will destroy this people
at once. Moses sets himself to seek the Lord, and prays, and presses the
Lord with many arguments, for his own glory, for his peoples sake, for his
Covenant sake, and many other ways to spare them. What was the issue of it? He
was heard, the Lord told him that he had heard his prayer, and granted his
request, though he would fill the earth with his glory, and all the world
should know what a jealous God he was, another way; yet in this particular he
had granted his request, they should not be cut off at this time.

So that David had good experience, that though judgment has been threatened
before, yet nevertheless courses have been taken that the sentence has been
altered, with a change of Gods purpose at all. For God ever intended it to be
understood with a condition, if they returned not to him he would go on, if
they returned to him, he would not go on. So the purpose of God remains
unchangeable. yet the sentence according to the external expression seems
altered to us: so the change is in us, and not in God.

Hence let us note something (briefly) for our selves, Use 1. For instruction.
and that is this; First, how to understand all these threatenings in Scripture,
that seem peremptory and absolute, by this rule. A judgment is threatened,
against a nation, against a person, or family, etc. Yea, and it is absolutely
threatened in diverse places; because thou have done such and such evils,
therefore such and such things shall come upon thee. All such as these, are to
be understood conditionally, though they seem to be expressed absolutely. Jer.
18 7.
And the rule, God himself gives. At what instant I shall speak concerning a
nation, and concerning a kingdom, to pluck up, and to pull down, and to destroy
it. If that nation against whom I have pronounced, turn from their evil, I will
repent of the evil that I thought to do unto them. Whatsoever I threatened in
my Word, if they turn to me by true repentance, I will turn all that evil from
them, that I have threatened against them, and would certainly have brought upon
them, if they have not returned.

I say, Use. 2. For inconragement,
thus we are to understand all these: and upon this ground we may build some
further uses, that I will but touch. First, to take off those discouragments,
that lie upon the hearts of many; When they find themselves guilty of a sin
against God, when they see, that, sin threatened with severe punishment, and
judgment in the word of God: now they conclude their case to be disperate, it
is in vain to seek further, to use the means, the Lord will proceed in
judgment, and there is no stopping of him. This is an addition to a man's other
sins to conclude thus. Mark how the Lord expresses himself in Ezekiel. 33. The
people were much troubled about such things there, Ezekiel. 33.10, 11.
say they; Our transgressions, and our sins be upon us, and we pine away in
them, how shall we then live? The Prophet had encouraged them notwithstanding
their great sins to return by true repentance, and they should not perish;
nevertheless they are muttering, discouraged with fear, breaking their spirits,
withdrawing themselves from God: the judgments of God are begun upon us, the
hand of wrath is gone out against us, we are pining away in them, though we are
not wasted yet, yet we are like a man in a consumption, that wastes by
degrees, how shall we live? certainly we shall die. Says the Lord, say not
thus among your selves, but know if ye turn, ye shall live; As I live, says
the Lord, I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked, but that the wicked
turn from his way and live: turn ye, turn ye from your evil ways, for why will
ye die, oh house of Israel?

Beware of discouragment therefore, it is Satan's device, that when once he
has drawn men from God by a path of sin to hold them under discouragement,
that so he may ever after keep them from turning to God again. It was his
device whereby he would have kept Adam from turning to God, after he had
committed that great sin in eating of the forbidden tree; He thought of nothing
but hiding himself from God, Genesis 3.
and so he did hide himself amongst the bushes of the Garden: I heard thy
voice, and was afraid, and I hid my self: Mark, here was a fear of
discouragement in Adam, that whereas he should have come and fell down before
the Lord, and have begged mercy, and said as David here, Who knows whether
the Lord will be gracious, to me? He run clean away from God. There is a fear
of reverence that keeps a man with God, and there is a fear, that draws a
man to God: but this fear of discouragement drives a man from God: and that is
the temptation of Satan, to keep a man from God, when once he has turned
aside from him. Therefore (that is the first thing) take heed of such inward
discouragements as may drive you quite off.

Secondly; Take encouragement then to seek the face of God in his own means and
way. He has threatened judgments against others for the same sins that ye find
your selves guilty of, when they have returned to him, they have found mercy.
Return ye to him in truth, and seek his face aright, and ye shall find the same
mercy. In the prophecy of Joel, Joel 2.12, 13.
ye shall see there, that though God had threatened judgments; nay, though he
had begun judgment (for that was the case of those times, judgment was begun
upon them) yet nevertheless the Prophet calls them to fasting and weeping,
and tells them, that the Lord is gracious and merciful, and ready to forgive;
and who knows if he will return, and repent, and leave a blessing behind him?
Therefore let us do our parts, and seek God in truth, amend our lives, and then
no question of this, but that God will return.

It is an old device of Satan, to draw men, instead of Gods revealed will, to
look to Gods secret will: whether I be absolutely rejected or cast off or not.
But this is not the thought wherein a Christian should exercise himself: his
main business is this, to make his calling and election sure, by all the
evidences of it; hy a holy life: walk obediently to Gods revealed will, and be
certain thou shall not be rejected by Gods secret will. He never rejects
those by his secret will, and purpose, and decree, to whom he gives a heart to
walk obediently to his revealed will. So much for that.

Who knows that the Lord will be gracious to me, that the child may live?

The encouragement is this: That the child may live. But mark his expression,
Whether the Lord will be gracious to [ me] that the child may live. If he had
said no more but this, Who knows whether the child may live? A man would have
thought this would fully enough have expressed his mind, but there is more in
it that could not be expressed without this addition, Who knows whether the
Lord will be gracious to me, that the child may live?

The life of a child is a mercy to the father, David expresses herein both his
Pity, and his Piety.

His pity; Observe first David's piety
He accounts all the good or ill that befalls his child, as his own if
death befalls it, he accounts it as a misery that befalls himself: if
sickness befalls his child, he accounts it as an affliction upon himself.
This is his natural pity, that some natural affection of a father to his
Child. See such an expression of the woman of Canaan; Mat 15 22.
have mercy on me, thou son of David, my daughter is miserably vexed of a
devil. The Daughter was miserably vexed, and the mother cries out, Have mercy
on me, There is such a simpathy arises hence from the natural and free course
that love has in descending from the Father to the Child. There are not only
moral persuasions that may invite and draw on love, but besides that, there is
a course of affection, that flows naturally, and kindly, from the Father to
the child: as it is with those rivers that fall downward, they fall more
vehenently then those that are carried upward: so the more natural the
affection is, the more vehement it expresses it self in the motion to such
objects. Now when the Father expresses his affection to his child, this is
more vehement, because it is more natural, there is more strength of nature in
it.

I cannot stand upon this, only a word by way of inference, and application to
our selves.

First; Comfort to Gods children.
are natural parents thus to their children? Then here is a ground of faith for
the children of God, that he is pleased to style himself by the name of Father,
and to receive them into the adoption of sons and daughters. This was David's
expression of God. As a father has compassion of his children, so has the
Lord on those that fear him. Psalm. 103.
And the Prophet Isaiah expresses it fully: In all their affliction, Isa. 63.9.
he was afflicted, and the Angel of his presense saved them; in his love and
pity he redeemed them, and he bare them all the days of old, he bore them
upon his wings. This gives confidence, and boldness to Gods children, in
making their requests known to him. This was it that encouraged the Prodigal; I
will arise and go to my father, and say, Father, I have sinned against heaven
and bofore thee, etc. God (says S. Barnard) always grants those petitions
that are sweetened with the name of father, and the affection of a child. I
should hence speak somewhat to children, to stir them up to answer the love of
their Parents; but other things that follow forbids me any long discourse of
this.

Secondly, 2. Observe David's piety.
here is David's piety expressed in this, Who knows whether the Lord will be
gracious to me? He expressed not only the Pity and affection of a natural father
to a child, but piety also, arising from the sense of his guilt. He was guilty
of sin, and by sin he had brought this sorrow upon himself, and therefore who
knows whether the Lord will be gracious to me, in sealing to me the pardon of
my sin this way, in adding this mercy as a further assurance of his love, in
granting me the forgiveness of my sin. God had told him by Nathan, that his sin
was pardoned, though he told him the Child should die: it may be by the same
mercy he will release me from this sentence of death upon my Child, whereby he
released me from the guilt of my sin before. Here (I say) is the sense of his
own sin.

The point I note hence is; Parents in their childrens miseries should remember
their own sins. 1. King. 17.
That Parents in the miseries that befall their children, should call their own
sin to remembrance. All the sorrows, and sicknesses, and pains, and miseries
that befall children, should present to Parents the remembrance of their own
sin. It was the expression of the Widow of Sar epta to the Prophet Eliah; Art
thou come to call my sins to remembrance, and to slay my child? She saw her sin
in the death of her Child; So I say in all the afflictions and crosses that
befall children, the Parents should call to remembrance their own sin.

But some men will here say; Object. 1. Deuteronomy. 24.16.
There seems to be no need of such a course, for God has said plainly, That
the child shall not die for the sin of the Parent. And after God clears his
own ways from inequality and injustice by that argument, The son shall not
bear the iniquity of the father. Ezekiel. 18.20.
Therefore what reason is there that Parents should call their sins to
remembrance, in the miseries that befall there children?

I answer; Answ.
Though he say, the child shall not die for the Parents sin, yet we must
understand it aright, for what does he mean by the sins of the Parent? And what
does he mean by death?

By sins of the Parent, he means those sins that are so the Parents, as that
the children are not at all guilty of those sins: then the children shall not
die.

By Death, he means (as the word signifies) the destruction of nature.

So death shall not befall the child for that sin that himself is not guilty of.

But how then come little children to die before they have committed any sin
actually? Object. 2.
was this for their own sin, or for the sin of their Parents?

I answer, Answ.
for their own sin they die, for the soul that sins it shall die, and all
children have sinned: they brought sin into the world, and sin brought death
(as the Apostle speaks) therefore death reigns over all, even over those that
have not sinned according to the similitude of Adams transgression; that is,
that have not sinned actually as Adam had done, yet nevertheless they die
because they have sin upon them, they have the corruption of nature: In sin
they were born, and in iniquity their mother conceived them, and the wages of
sin is death: therefore they die for their own sin.

But what if temporal judgments and afflictions befall them, Quest.
is this for their own sin, or for the sin of their Parents?

I answer for both; Answ.
both for their own, and for the sin of their Parents: for as death, so all the
miseries of this life are fruits of original sin, which is an inheritance in
the person of every child by nature, as soon as it is born: but yet if the sin
of the Parents be added to it, that may bring temporal judgments. There are
many instances and examples of this, how God has visited upon the posterity of
wicked persons, the sins of their Fathers, according to that threatening in the
second Commandment. And this you shall see, either in godly children of wicked
parents, or in ungodly children of godly Parents. Suppose a man leave a great
deal of wealth to his children, and have one that fears God amongst them: it
may please God to lay some loss or cross upon him, to the undoing of him, he
may utterly be impoverished, and beggered, and deprived of all that means that
his father left him by unrighteousness; He gets an heir, and in his hand is
nothing (says Solomon) that is, God deprived him of all that estate his father
left him by unrighteousness.

Now I say, here is a judgment upon the father, and yet a mercy upon the child.
A judgment upon the father, that all that he has labored for, that which he
lost his soul for, should be vain, should come to nothing, and not benefit his
posterity as he thought. Yet it is a mercy to the child, to the child of God;
He by this means is humbled, it draws him from the world; Nay, when God
emptieth him of these things that were unrighteously gotten, he gives him (it
may be) an estate another way, wherein he shall see God his Father provide for
him without any indirect and unlawful courses.

So sometimes the very shame and reproach that falls upon wicked children
here, it is a judgment to the parents, and to the children too. Upon the
parent, as far as he is guilty of the neglect of his duty, and of evil example,
and the like, so he is punished in the shame that befalls his posterity. As
it is a blessing upon a man that he is not ashamed to sit in the Gates (as
Solomon speaks) no man can upbraid him with his children; Pro. 31.
So it is a correction to Gods children, even when their children prove
ungodly, so far as they have been negligent, and careless of their duty. This
was the case of old Eli, a good man, yet nevertheless the hand of God was gone
out against his house and family, and what was the reason of it? Because thou
honor thy sons above me, they made themselves vile, 1. Sam 2 29 chap.
3.12.13
and thou restrainest them not, therefore will I bring a judgment upon thy
house, at which both the ears of every one that hears it shall tingle. I say
it may come to pass (and that by reason of that natural affection that is in
Parents) that that misery that befalls their children, may be an exceeding
cross and an affliction to them. God lays sharp corrections on them, when he
makes those children which they accounted as comforts, and the hope of their
life, to be the very cross, and vexation of their life.

There is then ye see, such a course of Gods dealing with men, to visit the
sins of the Fathers upon the children: that is, if the children walk in their
fathers steps if the child and the father agree in a course of sin: if the
father by omission or commission make himself guilty of the sin of the child,
etc. and so if the child, either by imintation, or allowance go on in his
fathers way, he draws a greater judgment upon himself, by adding to his
fathers sin: and as they are alike in sin, so they shall be alike in judgment.

You see likewise for temporal judgments, that God may, and oftentimes does
lay many sicknesses, and crosses upon the children, for the sin of their
parents, that they may be smitten by the judgment that is upon their children,
and yet nevertheless the children may be free from sin, for who ever was
afflicted being innocent?

Is this so? Use 1. To parents. The sins that bring judgments upon men's
posterity.
then in the first place it should teach Parents to take heed of making
themselves miserable in their posterity by sinning against God.

There are specially three sorts of sins in Scripture, for which God continues
his judgments upon men's posterities and families.

The first are, sins against the first Table, against the worship of God,
Idolatry, and such like; for these God smites men's posterities, as we may see
in Jeroboam and others; And so the neglect of duty, profaneness and negligence
in Gods worship: Let thy wrath come upon the heathen, and on the families that
call not upon thy name. A family I know, in a large sense, signifies a Nation,
but in a strict sense a family, or posterity; in that place it signifies both.
A Family or people, that lay aside the worship of God, and the sanctifying of
his Name, those that lie under this charge of not calling upon the name of God:
let thy wrath come upon them.

A second sort of sins, are those against the second Table, unrighteousness,
injustice, uncleanness, and the like: for those sins God visits men's
posterities, punishes them in their children: sometime by taking them away,
sometimes by smiting them with such sicknesses, and temporal afflictions, and
chastisements, as Parents have continual matter of sorrow, and humiliation, and
calling their sins to mind; The Scripture is full of instances of this kind.

Thirdly, for the neglect of duty to their children, when Parents are too fond
and remiss in their education, and careless in their duty: therefore Job was
fearful of this, lest his sons should sin against God, and he was continually
in prayer, that God would keep them in his fear. Parents, if they would have a
blessing continued on their posterity, they should be careful of sanctifying
their Families, by the worship of God, and by their walking with an upright
heart in the midst of their house, by dealing righteously with men in all their
business, not to strive to rear their posterity by wealth, but by grace, to
leave them heirs of the b^essing, rather then of much money. That is the way to
have comfort in children and posterity.

Ye see how few of those that in this City, or other places that have got such
wealth, thrive in many generations, nay, it may be not in the next generation,
but come some to notorious beggary in the sight of others, that others may be
warned how they get estates by unjustice and unrighteousness, to leave to their
families. There is the judgment of God going along with unrighteous gain, and a
sinful life, and falls upon posterity, as far as they approve of, or walk in
their fathers ways.

In the second place it should teach children to take heed of the sinful
courses of their Parents, Use. 2. To children.
if they will not join with them in their punishment; nay, if they will not
have the increase of their punishment, take heed, I say take heed of going on
in their sins. Remember the charge that the Lord gave concerning Babylon, Come
out of her if you will not partake of her Plagues: if we will not partake of
their plagues, take heed of partaking in the sins of your Parents.

Here was David's piety, he calls his sins to remembrence. So ought Parents in
all crosses that befall their families or posterity, if any child be sick or
weak, or if their be any cross in their estates, or trade, or success in their
business, whereby they should maintain their Families, to call their own sins
to remembrance, to look over the several commands of God, to see what sins they
are guilty of, that they have not yet repented of.

Now we come to David's carriage, 2. Davdis carriage when his child was dead.
when the child was dead. But now he is dead, wherefore should I fast: Can I
bring him back again? I shall go to him, but he shall not return to me.

Here ye have David's carriage, The reasons of it.
and the reasons why he did not fast. First, because it was against reason,
wherefore should I fast? in this expression, he implies that he saw no reason
for it, and that made him forbear it. Secondly, it is altogether bootless and
needless; Can I bring him back again? Thirdly, I shall go to him: I have
somewhat else to do, then to spend my time in unprofitable forrow, there is a
matter that concerns me more nearly to think upon, that is, concerning my own
death, to prepare for that. And Lastly, the last reason is, He shall not
return to me. These are the reasons of the alteration of his carriage upon the
death of the child.

Concerning sorrow for the dead, ye must understand it of excessive sorrow.
Here is not forbidden a due measure of sorrow, that is allowed; but he speaks
of sorrow in the excess. Why should I do this?

The reasons he gives against excessive sorrow, are first (I can but give you
the heads of things) because it is a thing against reason. Hence I will note
this to you; That one way to moderate our sorrows, Observation from the first
reason.
and to regulate them aright, is to bring them to the examination of reason and
judgment.

When passions sway, when they do not look to the commands of reason, to be
subject and ordered according to that, but usurp a rule in the soul above
reason, then there is nothing but confusion, and distemper, and disorder, in a
man's afections and actions, and in his whole course. A man should therefore
consider, what reason there is for every thing. If he sorrow for a thing, what
reason have I for it? If he rejoice in any thing, what reason have I for it? Is
it worth this sorrow, or this joy? I say his is the way to rectify and
moderate our passions, and to order them aright, if we try them all by sound
reason.

David took this course at other times, Why art thou cast down, oh my soul, why
art thon disquicted within me? Psalm. 44.
Is there any good reason for it? Reason I say, is a curb and bridle, to stop
passion when it is running on its free course.

If David had done thus, would he have run out to that excessive expression for
his son? Oh Absalom, my son, my sow, etc. What great reason had he for this?
that Absalom a rebellious son was took away that sought the death of his
Father; that God glorified himself in the punishment of a disobedient, proud,
insolent child in the sight of all the world? Was this a matter for David so
much to grieve, and to be troubled at?

If Jonah had done thus, if he had considered what reason he had to be angry;
(as GOD puts the question to him; do thou well to be angry?) Would he not
have stopped that Passion?

If Cain had done thus; if he had put the question to himself as GOD did, Why
art thou wrath? why is thy conntenance fallen? Or as that great King said to
Nehemiah, Why is thy countenance sad? So if men would put the question to
themselves concerning their affections: as, concerning love, why do I set my
heart upon such and such things? and so likewise concerning their sorrow and
anger, and every thing, Why is it thus? As Rebecca said when the children did
strive in her womb, so when there is a conflict of passion in the soul against
reason, since it is so, why am I thus? Who art thou that fear mortal man?
says Isaiah to the Church. If men I say did thus, they would not break out
into such exorbitancy of passions, as commonly they do.

The way then to order any affection aright, The way to order our affections is
to reduce them to the principles of rectified reason.
is to reduce it to the principles of sanctified, and rectified reason and
judgment. Let reason be guided by the Word of GOD, and let the affections be
ordered by that reason so rectified. Thus it was with man in the state of
innocence; and experience tells us, that in the state of corruption, all
disorder comes from the want of this subordination of the affections, to
reason in their several actions and motions. When a man goes hood-winked up and
down, he is in danger of stumbling, and falling into one hole or other: this is
for a man to walk in darkness: then a man-walketh in darkness, when he is not
guided in all his actions and affections, by the light of truth shining in his
understanding. A man should therefore strive to check himself, and to suffer
others to check him, Why is it thus? If a man cannot give a cause and a reason,
it is a passion to be rejected, a distemper o be repented of. This is the first
thing; He saw no reason, therefore he would not do it.

The second is this. It was altogether bootlesse, Why should I fast? I cannot
bring him back again. He means, bring him back again to live on the earth. So
Job means, Job 14.14.
when he speaks in the same manner, If a man die, shall he live again? he
cannot be brought again to live, and converse among men.

The point I note hence is this. That all the actions, Observation from the
second reason.
and opportunities of this life cease in death.

There is no calling of them back again. No bringing of a man back to take new
opportunities, to enjoy the comforts he has lost, and to make use of the means
he has neglected, and to redeem the time he has slackly let pass. When the
request was put to Abraham by Dives, that some might come from the dead to tell
his brethren upon earth where he was: No, faith he, that request shall never be
granted, that a man should come from the dead, to give warning to the living,
much less that a man himself should return from thence, to begin upon a new
score, a new reckoning, to have a new time appointed, when that time is past
over: They have Moses, and the Prophets, let them hear them. God has
appointed the means, and a time to use the means; Now they have Moses and the
Prophets; After this life, they shall have none of these means, no time of
using them; The child shall not come back again, nor the man shall not come
back again. Death is a strict doorkeeper, all that pass out that way, the
door is shut on them, they shall never return back. We read of many several
Ages that have gone to the place of silence, we never read of any that came
thence, to tell what is done there: we never heard of any yet, that came back
again to reform his course. A friend with all his prayers and tears, cannot
bring back a friend that is dead.

It teaches us a point of wisdom to make good use of our time, Use.
the time of grace we have. We draw nearer death every day then other, and when
once we are dead, we shall never be brought back again upon the earth; If a man
had all the world, and would give it to obtain an hours time upon earth, to do
what he neglected before, he cannot have it: therefore while it is called to
day, harden not your hearts: yet a little while and you shall have the light
(says Christ) while ye have the light, walk in the light; Make use of the
means of grace: the time may come, when ye may wish (as Dives is described to
wish) that some body, much more that you your selves might come from the dead.

Certainly, if those in Hell were to come from the dead again, though it were
to live a hundred years on earth, a holy, strict, and concionable life, to
watch over all their ways, to keep a good conscience toward God and men, they
would not omit a duty, nor slight a duty, they would not omit an opportunity, a
minute, but spend their whole life in working out their salvations with fear
and trembling, they would sleep and awake with fear, lest they should sin, they
would be careful that they had no sinful thought, they would be patterns of the
strangest expressions of conformity to the rule that can be imagined, if it
were possible to be granted. You may easily be persuaded of this, do you that
now which they wish for, and wish in vain: make use of the time of grace now,
there is no coming back again afterward.

Thirdly. A third reason is this; I shall go to him. As if he should have said,
I have another business in hand, now the child is dead, it is not for me to
stand blubbering, and spending my time for a dead Child; I am going to him. The
word here is, I shall return to him. Return signifies, to go back to a place
where one was before; So David shall return to his Child: for he was there
before; there, in respect of his body, Encles. 1 2.
the principles of that is in the earth where the Child is, and in heaven in
respect of his soul where the Child is: The Body returns to dust whence it
was taken, and the soul to God that gave it. The body is of the dust, and
returns to dust, the soul comes from God, and returns to God again.
Therefore he says here, I shall return to him, because I came from him. When
things are reduced to their principles, the body to the earth, and the soul to
God, they are said to return. Ye see the phrase then.

The point (briefly) is this; That the greatest care of a man's life,
Observation from the third reason.
the greatest business he has to do on earth, is to prepare for death.

His business is not to care for his children that are dead, and to spend
unprofitable sorrow for them: the main business of my life is, how I shall make
my peace with God, and be fitted for death, for I am going thither. We should
observe the death of others, to stir us up to a serious preparation for our own
death: the Father should be stirred up by seeing his Child dead before him, the
elder by seeing the younger die before them: we see how death has shot his
arrows beyond, and short, and above, and below us, in those that are elder,
and younger, and richer and poorer, all forts, he will strike us at last: this
thing (I say) should stir us up to prepare for our own dissolution.

A man would think that there were no need of such a thing; the very bare sight
of a Corse, or a Hearse, the bare sight of a deed corpse, the bare ringing of a
bell, or a Funeral Sermon, should be warning enough to the living to tell him
of death. When a man sees a company carrying a dead body to the grave; he
should say to himself; It may be the feet of these may carry me next. But how
comes it to pass hat it is not thus?

Certainly, there is not power in all examples to work this: it is the work of
Gods spirit. Though a man observe the death of never so many before him, yet
his cannot work in him a serious care, to make preparation for his own death,
except God add a further work to it. We may see this in the expression of
Moses, when so many died in the Wilderness: Lord teach us to number our days,
that we may apply our hearts to wisdom. As if he should have said, Though so
many thousands died in the Wilderness, and that by so many several kinds of
death, yet we shall never apply our hearts to wisdom by those examples, except
God teach us that wisdom. Therefore we should pray to God to teach us by his
Spirit, to make use of Examples. Men must give account for examples as well as
for rules; men must give account for examples of mortality, as well as for
Sermons of mortality: therefore let the example of others mortality stir you up
to prepare for your own, and that you may do so, be much in calling upon God.

Lastly; Observation from the fouth reason.
He shall not return to me: that is in this sense, to converse on earth, as he
had done before; I shall return to him, but he shall not return to me. He does
but reitterate, and repeat what he had said before in effect.

This is the thing then that Parents must make account of, both for themselves
and their children.

For their children. It should make them moderate therefore in their sorrow for
them. God now has showed his purpose, and declared his will, therefore we
should rest in that will of God. This is the thing that David aimed at. Gods
will was not only to take away his child, but so to take him away, as never to
return to him again in that manner; Now God had declared his will, and
therefore, Why should I fast (says he,) as if he should say, I will now rest
in the will of God.

In all the things which we account crosses, and losses, in children and
friends, etc. The main business of a christian, is not to express sorrow, but
submission and subjection to God, to exercise and inure his heart to patience,
and to rest in Gods good pleasure and will. As Eli, though he failed in his
carriage to his sons, yet he showed a dutiful respect to God his heavenly
father. When Samuel told him the judgment of God that should come upon his
house. It is the Lord (says he) let him do what seems him good in his own
eyes: though it were a heavy judgment, such as whosoever should hear of it,
both his ears should tingle, yet it is the Lord, let him do what seems him
goad. As if he should say; I have nothing to do in this business, but to
subject my self with patient submission, and contentedness to his will, it is
the Lord, it becomes not me to contend with him, and to reason with God
concerning his work, I confess he is righteous, let him do what see meth him
good in his own eyes. And so Aaron. There was a heavy judgment befallen him,
his sons were consumed with fire; yet, the text says, Aaron held his peace.
When God manifested so great wrath to his house, in wasting, and consuming, and
burning his sons, for offering of strange fire, yet Aaron held his peace; that
is, he did only mind how to glorify God by a contented submission to his will.
So Job, he heard not only of the loss of his children, but that he lost them
in such a manner by a violent death, by a house falling on their heads, yet the
Lord has given, and the Lord has taken away, blessed be the name of the Lord.
Whereas a carnal worldly man would have fallen to struggling, and contending,
and quarrelling against God, and so trouble and perplex his own spirit. We do
exceedingly imbitter Gods cup, by mingling with it ingredients of our own
passions, and so make the affliction more heavy and grievous then God intends
it. Here is the reason: we possess not our souls with Patience.

When we are sensible of the loss of friends and children, etc. let us learn
to make it our business, to think, I have a greater work to do, to prepare for
my own death. God in the death of this man speaks to me to prepare for my own;
And then to glorify God by submission to his will, make it appear that thou
acknowledgest a power in God to dispose of thy house, to do every thing, by
patiently resting in his will.

And yet this comfort is added, though children be took away that they shall
not return in an earthly manner, yet they shall in a better manner. Parents are
contented to part with their children for a time for their preferment. Children
(though they are very young) that are commended by the prayers of the godly
Parents into the hands of God; these whose hearts God has enlarged, and
quickened fervently and faithfully to pray in the besalf of their children, they
may rest in this assured, that they shall meet at the Resurrection in a better
manner, their children shall be better preferred then if they were on earth,
and shall be raised up to perfection.

Here you see there is not a tooth bred in a child without a great deal of
pain, and every tooth cost some pain, but this mortal body shall put on
immortality, and this corruption shall put on incorruption; This weak body
shall be made strong, weak children strong without pain. Death ends these
things, and the Resurrection shall present him in a perfect measure of strength
in a glorified estate.

So much for this text, and for this time.
THE STING OF DEATH OR, THE STRENGTH OF SIN.
SERMON VI.
1 COR. 15.56. The Sting of Death is Sin, and the Strength of Sin is the Law.


SOlomon tells thus, Eccles. 3.2.
that there is a season for every thing, there is a time to be born, and a time
to die: These two are the two great seasons of all men, we are as sure to die,
as we are sure we have lived, and every degree of our life, is but a step to
our death. Every man of us has but a part to act here in the world, when we
have done that that God has appointed us, we are drawn off from the Stage by
Death.

You will say, this is a hard condition for so Noble a creature as Man is to be
folded up in the grave, for so fair a beauty as the life of man is, to be
closed up in eternal darkness, that man should turn to the acquaintance of dust
and worms, and make his habitation with rottenness and loathsomeness, that
Death should have the victory of so excellent a Creature, it is a hard
condition.

The Apostle thinks not so, Coherence.
he thinks otherwise, Death (faith he, ver. 54.) is swallowed up in victory; As
if he should say, It need not trouble you to think so of Death, the condition
of it is not so strange and hard as men take it to be; It is swallowed up in
victory. If a man have a strong enemy to deal with, it might trouble him, but
it is no great matter to deal with a conquered enemy: Christ has overcome
Death, has conquered that strong enemy, Death is swallowed up in victory.
Therefore Saint Paul in the precedent, and subsequent verses of this Chapter,
seems to insult and triumph over Death, Oh Death (faith he) where is thy
sting? Oh grave where is thy victory? As if he should say, before Christ came
and conquered thee, Death thou were victorious; so it was. there was a sting in
it: before Christ sweetened the grave, there was something that was terrible in
the Grave, but now because Christ is come, and has gotten the victory over the
one, and sweetened the other, therefore Saint Paul breaks forth thus into an
insultation and triumph.

But, how can this be? Why does the Apostle thus triumph?

The reason is insinuated in the verse I have read to you, the sting of death
is sin, and the strength of sin is the Law.

But this is the occasion of trouble to Christians?

No, it is not, thanks be to God, that has given us victory through Jesus
Christ our Lord: As if he should say, I will show you the reason, of my
triumphing over Death, there was a sting in Sin, and Sin is the sting of Death,
and the Law is the strength of sin, but Christ has took away sin, and has
satisfied the Law, sin being taken away, Death cannot hurt me, the Law being
satisfied, Sin cannot prejudiceme. This was the cause of the Apostle, and in
him of every Christians insultation over Death.

The words I have read contain two parts; Division.


First the sting of Death.

Secondly, the strength of Sin.

First, the sting of death, is sin.

Secondly, the strength of sin, is the Law.

If there were no law, there would be no sin, and if there were no sin, there
would be no death: Sin is the transgression of the Law, and sin is the sting of
death.

I shall only at this time insist upon the first of these, from whence I shall
deliver that, which if it please God to accompany with his Spirit, may be
useful to you.

The proposition shall be the very words of the Text. Sin is the sting of death.

This Proposition I would not have you understaud in this sense only, P^pos.
Sin is the sting of death.
that death came in by sin merely in a habit, though that be true too. But
understand it in this sense, That all the horror and terribleness of Death,
all the power and rage it has, whatsoever makes it fearful to a man, it
receives it all from sin. It is sin that armeth Death against a man, if Death
have any weapons against a man, Sin puts those weapons into the hands of Death;
if Death have any poison against a Christian, the sin of that person puts
that poison in it.

Death may be considered two ways, A double consideration of death.
either as Christ has made it, or as we make it.

Death as Christ has made it, is a medicine to a Christian, a passage and
entrance to happiness, it is a day of redemption and refreshing, and so we need
not be afraid of it.

Death as we by sin have made it, is the Pale horse Saint John speaks of in the
Revelation, it is as a fearful arrest to the debtor, it has a sting in it: and
so it is fearful.

But that I may open this point more profitably, we will inquire into these
particulars.

First what death the Apostle speaks of here.

Secondly, of what sin he speaks of.

Thirdly, in what respect sin is called the sting of death. And then we will
make the use and application of all this.

First, What death is here meant.
of what death does the Apostle here speak of, that sin is the sting of?

For answer hereunto, there is a double death, corporal and spiritual.

Corporal death, is the privation of the soul: when the soul is severed from
the body.

Spiritual death, when God and grace are severed from the soul.

The Text speaks of the corporal death. Corporal death. Principally.
Sin is not the sting of the spiritual death, for the spiritual death is sin it
self. And hear I will not contend with any man, if he be full of enquiry, but I
will distinguish two parts of spiritual death, and I grant in one of them is
this sting.

In spiritual death therefore, Two parts of spiritual death.
there are two parts, or two degrees; The first is called, the first death;
That I take to be the death of the soul in sin.

The second part is when soul and body are for ever closed up in Hell. And in
this part, sin is the sting; And remember this by the way, Sin is not only a
sting now, but it will be a sting to men in Hell: the sting, the deadliness,
the exreamity of punishment that is in Hell, it is received all from sin: for
the damned in Hell, when they come there, as they cease not to sin, so the
sting of sin cease not to be with them: and it may be delivered by
conjecture, I think Hell were no Hell, if there were not the sting of sin there.

So then you see what death the Apostle speaks of: principally of corporal
death, but it may be extended to the second part of spiritual death, for their
sin continues and so the sting remains.

The next question is, what sin the Apostle speaks of, when he faith, the sting
of death is sin?

This is not a time to stir controversies, therefore those ancient
controversies, and such as are lately stirred up about original sin, how far it
is the sting of death, I let them go.

In a word, What sin is the sting of Death Sin two ways considered.
to let you see what sin is the sting of death, remember this. Sin may be
considered two ways, either as it is entire, untouched, uncrushed. Let that
sin be what it will be, whether it be original only, or whether it be any
actual sin, streaming from original, whether it be a sin of ignorance or
knowledge, whether it be of pleasure or of profit; A sin immediately that
respects God, or immadiately respects our neighbor, whatsoever the sin be,
if it be not touched, if it be not crushed, if it escape uncontrouled, if it be
in its native power, and keeps in his kingdom, if it rule in a man; that sin
will certainly be the sting of Death. Every sin vertually is the sting of
death, Sin unmortified proves the sting of death.
there is an aptitude in every Sin, but in the event that sin proves the sting
of death, that is untouched, uncontrouled. Not every sin in the event proves
the sting of death; but that sin that lives in us, or rather that sin that we
live in, that rules in us, that we affect, and love, this is the Sin that
puts a sting into death. That very sin that thou love, and likest so much,
and pleadest for, that sin will make death terrible.

Secondly; Sin may be considered as it is galled, and vexed, and mortified in
the Soul; When a man sets upon the root of Sin, and the way of Sin, and
falls a crucifying the body of Sin, and the members of it, I say, howsoever
there be diverse motions and stirrings of Sin in the soul; yet if these be
disavowed, disaffected, and mortified, if there be a crucifying virtue, pass
over them, if they come not within the judgment to approve them, or within the
affections to embrace and like them; if they come not to be a man's trade, and
way, and walk, but fall within the improbation of the judgment to disavow them,
and the misliking of the affections to sorrow for them: These shall not be the
sting of death, whatsoever the motions are; But these untouched, unmortified
sins, these are the sting of death.

Now these are the sting of death, in a double respect; First, in respect of
the guilt; Secondly, in respect of the corruption.

First, 1. In respect of the guilt.
they are a sting in respect of guilt. Every Sin remaining unsatisfied for,
remains with his guilt, and when Sin is not satisfied for, there is the sting
of death. When the sinner has nothing to oppose to the justice of God, for the
sin he has committed, if the Sin be in the book of God uncrossed, be a debt
there not blotted out by the blood of Christ; if Christ have not satisfied for
it, if the sinner have not part in him (as we shall hear anon) then Sin is the
sting of death.

And then secondly, 2. In respect of the filth.
they are a sting in respect of the corruption, and filthiness of Sins
unmortified. Those filthy sinful motions, those depraving qualities in thy soul
that thou likest, and practifest in thy conversation, they give thee up into
the hand of Death, to execute his Sting upon thee; And therefore you that
applaud your selves in sin, and will go on in Sin, do so; But know this, when
thou come to the full strength of thy Sin, let it be what it will, when Death
comes, it finds the strongest weapon it has in thy sin: the very power of
thy sin armeth Death against thy soul. No man is more obnoxious, and open to
the sharpest dart of Death, then that man that will go on in Sin.

So you see what Sin is spoken of, that is the sting of death, that Sin is the
sting of Death, that a man loves and doteth on.

The third Question is, How sin is said to be the sting of Death.
in what respect Sin is the sting of Death?

First by way of Eminency, because that then the sting of Sin begins most
sensibly to work in a man. Not but that Sin has a sting before Death, but then
the deluded sinner feels his sin; there be diverse times that Sin can sting a
person before that, but then (howsoever the sinner has deluded himself, and
the word of God, and the world) he can delude them no more, Death then (most
ordinarily) sixeth his sting in the soul, and makes the sinner feel the smart
of his sin.

There be three times wherein Sin can sting a man; Before death. At death.
After death.


Before Death. Sin stings before death.
God sometimes lets loose the conscience of a man, even of the most resolved
sinner, of him that bears himself up alost in his own eyes in scrone, and
contempt of the ministry of the Word: sometime (I say) God singleth out such a
person, and rippeth up all his heart, strikes his Arrows into his very soul,
and stings his conscience so irresistably, that he knows not which way to
turn form the wrath that boyleth in his soul. And it is one thing to deal with
the Minister, and another to deal with God; When God strikes his Arrows of
vengeance into the soul of a sinner, then such a one is stung indeed, this God
does sometimes before death.

Nay sometimes God stingeth the consciences of his own children for sin. David
cries out, he roared for the disquietness of his spirit, his bones were broken,
he was sore vexed, Lord how long? faith he. If there be such deep disquiet, by
reason of this sting in the consciences of good persons; tell me then, what is
the disquiet that springs from sin, in a Cain, a Judas, when it meets with a
dispairing disposition? Thus you see Sin has this time to sting, and therefore
think not that Sin will never sting till death, sometimes Sin stingeth a man
before death.

Another time is at death. A: death.
When Death comes and arresteth a sinner in an Action from God, seizes on a
person that is under the power of Sin, on one that is in his sins unrouched,
howsoever he behaved himself in his lifetime, yet then the very name of Death
breaks his heart, it apaleth him, and then it stings such a Person. It is
appointed (beloved) for all of us once to die; Death will one day arrest every
man, but when Death appears before a man, that has not a part in Christ,
that is under the power of his sins, when it comes to a Belshazar, it makes
his very joints to smite one against another, it is a sting to him amidst all
those sweet morsels his sins, which he so much affected, and so earnestly
pursued, it is a very poison to him; nothing is a poison now to us but sin
only; but then at the time of death sin is a poison indeed.

Lastly, After death
Sin can sting not only before, and at, but after death. Bothat the day of
Judgment, and after.

At the day of judgment. At the day of Judgment.
Is not the concience of a sinner (think you) stinged, and his spirit deeply
affected, by reason of the great wrath of God that is to be poured out, when he
shall cry to the mountains to cover him, when he shall call to those insensible
creatures, that are not able to lend him that courtesy to crush him to
nothing? Make this our one cause, think of it, it will be our case, as It is
appointed for us all to die, After the Judgment.
so we must all come to judgment.

And after the Judgment, when the sentence, go you cursed, is past, the sting
of Sin cease not, no, the worm for ever gnaweth in Hell. It were a happiness
for a sinner, if he might only hear the sentence, if this worm might not still
gnaw his conscience, but then, this is his burden, Sin shall sting him for
ever.

This is the first respect in which sin is called the sting of death, because
then Sin stingeth more eminently and sensibly.

Secondly, it is called the sting of death, in respect of the metaphor the
Apostle aludeth unto, it is taken from the sting of a Serpent, and so Sin is a
sting in a double respect; First in respect of the fearfulness, and then in
respect of the hurtfulness of it.

First, Sin makes death fearful.
in respect of the fearfulness; It is Sin that makes Death fearful to a man.
Indeed I confess, that in the best Christian (though Christ have pulled out the
sting of death yet) there are natural grudgings, and shruglings. As to a
Serpent, though the sting be pulled away, yet there are some abhorrings, and
dislikes in a man. But then how terrible is Death when it comes in a complete
Armor, as it does against a person in whom Sin remains in its full power? it
must needs then be terrible.

See the differences between two persons, the one is afraid of every one he
meets, the other is not, what is the reason? the one is greatly indebted and
engaged, the other is free. So it is with a Christian, and another man, the one
cannot hear of Death but his heart breaks, he is full of fear and horror; the
other hears of Death, and is only somewhat affected in the hearing of it, but
not possessed with that fear as is the other; what is the reason? the sting of
death remains in one, and not in another. Sin therefore is a sting in that
respect.

Secondly, it is a sting in respect of hurtfulness. The sting of the Serpent is
a hurtful thing, Sin makes death hurtful.
it poysoneth the vital parts, it takes away life it self. All the evil that
comes to us by death, comes by sin. Man need not complain of the ilness of
the prison so much, as of his own folly, that he engaged himself in debt,
whereby he is cast into prison. Why complainest thou of the misery in Hell?
rather labor to break off thy sins that are the cause of all that misery: all
the hurtful quality, and miserable condition that befalls a person in Death
and Hell, is for Sin: the eternal separation of the soul from God, and all
punishment that follows after in Hell, are the fruit of man's sin. Hell had not
been Hell without Sin: it is Sin that causes it to become hurtful.

Thus I have explained these inquiries.

Now I come to make Use and application, and so conclude the Point.

The first Use of this point shall be this; Use.
If Sin be the sting of death, let it be our wisdom to get this sting pulled
out in the time of our life. Oh that this people were wise (faith God) then
would they consider their latter end. If you were wise that hear me this day,
you would consider that Death will come, and (if it be not taken away
beforehand) with a sting upon the soul.

My brethren, we have many enemies to deal with, even now at this very instant,
but there is yet an enemy, as the Apostle faith, The last enemy to be subdued
is Death, he his behind: and here is the difference betwixt Death our last
enemy, and some other of our enemies: some other of our enemies cannot be
subdued, but by their presence, but (let me tell you) this Death is such an
enemy, as is never subdued, but by his absence, thou can never overcome Death
in death, thou must not reserve this combat till thou come to the field, but
thou must overcome this enemy before he comes, thou must overcome him in thy
life.

How is that? Pull out the sting of him now, then Death is conquered. How will
you disarm the tongues of malicious slanderous persons, and deprive them of
their viperous speech? by an innocent life. So, how will you take away the
sting of death? watch against Sin, take away sin, and you take away the power
from Death, set upon Sin, and Death is overcome, so much sin as is now dead, so
much is Death conquered.

I beseech you seriously consider these particulars.

First, that it will not be long, ere Death knock at these doors of ours, these
houses of clay must shortly be ruinated, we must certainly be resolved into
dust. What is this life of ours, B^cles. 11.
but as a ship that is driven by a gale of breath? When the breath of man
cease, the ship lies in a dead calm. Man goes to his long home, (says
Solomon) and the mourners follow in the streets. Death is our long home, we all
are the mourners, we follow in the streets. This dead carcass is an example
that leads us to our home, and a sermon to tell us that we must follow: we
follow now in a charitable expression, but we shall follow one day, in paying
of the same debt. Look over all the times of the world, and the dispositions of
persons, look over learning and folly, greatness or poorness, find me a man
that escaped Death. Die we must; and we have need to have this much pressed
upon us, for it is a hard matter to believe that we must die, that I must be
the man that must die: common notice of Death are granted, but that I must die,
and lie in the dust, and stand before God, it is a hard matter to believe this.

And consider this secondly, that Death will be terrible to thee, if he knock
and find a sting in thee. Thou that now wilt not be reclaimed from swearing;
Alas what will become of that blaspheming soul of thine, when death shall come
and find a sting of blasphemy in thee? How dare thou think of giving up that
swearing soul of thine to the Judge of heaven and earth? Thou unrighteous
person that wilt not sanctify the Lords day, how dare thou give up that
unholy soul of thine to the holy God? Do thou think to have an eternal rest
in heaven, and wilt not give God a rest here? So I might say for all kind of
sinners. Think of this, take heed lest Death find a sting in thee, for all the
sting that Death has, it finds in thy self, look to it, thy, condition will
be fearful, if Death come and find Sin unmortified, unrepented of in thee. God
will certainly bring thee to judgment, for every thought, and word, and action.

Thirdly consider this, that naturally we are so tempered, that if Death come,
he shall find his weapons, How a man shall know whether Death shall come with a
sting to him.
and strength in us, in every man of us, I mean considered naturally.

But how shall I know whether Death when he comes, shall find a sting in me or
no?

I will only give you two trials, you shall know it thus. First, if thy
conscience now sting thee for some approved sin, if thou repent not, Death will
assuredly meet thee with a sting; that approved sin of thine will be the ^ting
of death.

Conscience will sting a man either for the act done, or for the approbation of
the act, if conscience sting a man, for his approbation of a sinful quality, or
for a sinful course, if a man continue in that course, surely that will be the
sting of death to his soul: therefore look to thy self, perhaps thou art
convicted of such a sin, perhaps thy conscience has so wrought on thee, that
it has stung thee for such a sin, thou yet approvest thy self in it, and thou will go on in thy pride still, in such and such sins still, thou will do so: do,
but know this, that stand thou never so much upon thy resolution, Death will
certainly come, and if he find thee in such a sin against thy conscience,
Eccles. 11.9
thou have reserved in thy self a sting for Death. Secondly, a man shall know
if Death come with a sting by this trial that Solomon gives us in Ec. 11.9.
Rejoice oh young man in thy youth, and let thy heart cheer thee in the days of
thy youth, and walk in the ways of thy heart, and sight of thine eyes, but
know that for all these things God will bring thee to judgment. If thou live a
voluptuous life, Death will certainly come with a sting. Dives he lived a
voluptuous life, had he not a sting for it? So others in Scripture, did not
their plentiful tables, and voluptuous courses bring a sting on them? A
voluptuous life makes a sting for Death. When a poor wretch is a dying, and
shall begin to reflect back on his life, what have I done? how have I lived? so
much time I have spent, or misspent in apparel, in vanity, in eating, in
drinking, in swaggering; What comfort is this to his soul? how can he answer
this before God? this is the very thing that will sting him at such a day, when
he can read nothing in his life, but barrenness, and unfruitfulness, nothing
that has honored God in all his life. Certainly, my brethren, if there be an
Epicurious, voluptuous life, this life will provide a sting for Death.

Alas you will say, Is it so, then we may fear that Death will seize on us
thus, for we confess, we have gone on in a voluptuous life, gone on in sin,
that our conscience has condemned us for, how shall we do to pull out this
sting?

I would to God you were thus affected, that you were convicted, what a fearful
thing it will will be, if sin remain. But would thou have the sting of death
pulled out before death come?

I. How to get the sting of Death p^lied out.
How shall I disarme it, that I may look death in the face with comfort?

I. shall give you some ways and means, remember them, and practice them.

First, get but a part in Christ, and the sting of death is gone: thanks be to
God (says the Apostle here) that has given us victory, 1. Get a part in
Christ.
through our Lord Jesus Christ. It is he that in the Revelation is said to have
the keys of Hell, and of death: they are under his command and subjection,
Rev.1.18.
he is victorious over them, he has vanquished them, so that if a man have
Christ, he has victory and power over Hell and Death. I told you in the
beginning, that that which gives a sting to Death, is the guilt of sin: It is
so, and it is a fearful sting: Now that which takes away the guilt of sin, is
Christ. If Christ be mine, I have enough to answer the guilt of sin, Therefore
the Apostle says, Romans 8.
Death cannot separate from the love of God in Christ; What shall then? Indeed
nothing, it is not the guilt of his sins, Christ has satisfied from them. So
that if thou will have the sting of death out, get faith in Christ: if thou be
not hidden in the clefts of that Rock, in the blood of Christ, if Christ be not
thy Justification, and thy righteousness, what have thou to answer the Justice
of God? you must die, and stand before God, and how can you stand before God in
your sins? you cannot without Christ, why do you not then study more for
Christ? Why do you not labor for faith in him? It will be your wisdom to
labor earnestly to make sure of him, if you have him, the sting of death is
gone. Death cannot hurt a person that has Chri^. Get faith in Christ
therefore, that is the first.

Secondly, 2. Get sincerity of heart
(...) would not have Death terrible, and fearful to you: labor for sincerity.
(...) ^^ethren, it is a mavelous thing, and yet the truth, uprightness, and
sincerity (...) is an enabling grace. All the particular things that we account
particula^ ^^^^^wise they have not an inabling virtue in them. Some persons
have a great d^^^ of learning and wit, and many friends, much riches, and the
like; yet there comes an occasion sometimes that puzzleth all these, there
comes an occasion sometimes, that a man's learning is of no use, and natural
parts and wit cannot help, and riches cannot enable him. What time is that? The
time of death, the heart of a man is put to it at such a time, and now these
shrink, nothing can enable a man agai^^ fear so much, Isa. 38.
as sincerity and uprightness. When the Prophet Isaiah, told (...) from God,
that he must die, he flies to this, Lord remember how I have (...) fore thee
with an upright heart, and done that which was good in thy sight. When Death
comes to a wicked voluptuous person, and tells him, I am here come for thee,
thou must appear before God, what can this man say? Lord I have lived before
thee, a voluptuous, proud, wretched life, I was a scorner of thy Word, a
conten^er and persecutor of thy people, a swearer, etc. What though perhaps he
can say, Lord I have heard so many Sermons, I have been so much in conference,
and the like, will this enable a man against the fear of Death? No, nothing but
this, that he has a sincere heart, that his heart is unmixed, that sin is not
affected in his soul, that there is no sin that he would live in, no duty that
he wonld not do, Lord remember I have walked before thee uprightly; I say,
nothing will enable a man more against fear then sincerity, and nothing
disgraceth, perplexeth the soul in an exigent, more then (...). It is sincerity
that takes away the sting of Death. The Apostle in R^m. 14. says he; No man
lives to himself, but if he live, he lives to the Lord; and if he die, he
dies to the Lord, whether we live or die, we are the Lords. Here is the
comfort, we are the Lords, says he. How proves he that? We live unto him:
That is the work of a sincere heart; A true Christian lives not to himself,
but to Christ; Now if thy conscience give thee this testimony, I have lived
unto Christ, then whether I live or die, I am the Lords; the Apostle concludes
it. So right is that of Solomon, Riches avails not in the day of wrath, but
righteousness delivers from death. Thy righteousness and sincerity delivers
thee, not from dying, but from death; It takes away the sting and power of
Death, Death shall not be death to thee, it is only a passage to thee.
Therefore remember as to get a part in Christ, so to get a perfect, and sincere
heart, and then the sting of death is gone. But a hypocritical divided heart, a
heart and a heart, that will sting a man. 3. Practice Mortification.
That is the second.

Thirdly, would thou have the sting of death pulled out now; Then mortisie
thy sins now, do it presently. Remember what Saint Paul says (but I think he
speaks it in respect of afflictions) 1 Cor. 15.
I profess by our rejoicing in Christ Jesus, I die daily. If it be meant of
afflictions, yet it should be verified of us in respect of sin, die daily to
sin, and then the sting of death is gone. Oh beloved, our condition will be
sad, and discomfortable, when at once we must enter into the field with Death
and Sin; he that dies daily to Sin, he has nothing to do with Death when it
comes; Death may come to such a party, but cannot hurt him, he may rest
quietly when it comes. And observe it, so much sin as thou now sparest, so
much sting thou reservest for Death, and is it not folly in a man to spare sin
that gives a sting to Death?

But now, as a man is to crucify evey sin, (let me put in this caution, and
remember this advise) As the sting of every sin is to be pulled out, so pull
out especially the sting of that Sin, that now stingeth thy conscience, that
now lies upon thy conscience; for if it work now, it will work fearfully at
death: Death does not lessen the work of sin, but inrageth it; God will then
present and set thy sins in order before thee: perhaps God has brought thee
here to day to hear this Word; get thee home, and set thy soul in order.

The love of Sin, and the fear of Death, seldom part, and where Sin is much
loved, Death will there be much feared; Death is never more terrible, then
where sin is most delighted in. Therefore crucify sin, if thou will have the
sting of death taken away. It may be thou think it is a troublesome work:
but remember, that those sins which thou now so much delightest in, and love
and live in, will then prove the sting of death to thee; If a man would spend
his time in the mortisication of sin, when death comes, he should have nothing
to do, but to let his soul loose to God, and to give it up to him, as into the
hands of his most faithful Creator and Redeemer. And is it not an excellent
thing for a man to have nothing to do with Death when it comes?

Lastly, Use 2.
here is a use of comfort. If it has pleased God to give any of us the grace
to pull out the sting of death, it is a great comfort.

But Death is approaching, you will say.

Oh but Death is disarmed, the sting of it is taken away, what a singular
comfort is it then to you that Death is coming? Indeed all the comfort that the
soul is capable of is this, that the sting of death is took away? Now when
Death comes upon such a man, it does but free him from all that state of
misery he is in here, from all that extremity of condition that he is put into,
from all those diversities of occasions, pressing occasions, of tumbling about
in the world, Death does but put an end to all.

And (which is an excellent comfort to a Christian) Sin is ended with Death:
what afflicts the soul of a Christian, but that he carries about him a body
of sin, and of death? This was a trouble to Saint Paul, and is to every true
Christian. Now, when Death comes, there is an end of this Body of sin, thou
shall never sin more, thou shall never grieve the Spirit of God more, thou
shall never be clogged with such imperfections, and infirmities in duty: that
death, that comes to thee, shall pass thee, to the fruition of eternal glory,
and what can thou desire more, then to be happy in eternal glory with God?

THE DESTRUCTION OF THE DESTROYER: OR, THE OVER THROW OF THE LAST ENEMY.
SERMON VII.
1 COR. 15.26. The last Enemy that shall be destroyed, is Death.


DEATH is a Subject that a Christian should have in his thoughts often, and
neither the hearing, nor thinking, nor speaking of it can be unseasonable for
any place or person. We have heard that the life of Philosophers, is nothing
but a meditation of Death: and certainly the life of a Christian much more
should abound in such meditations. No man can live well, till be can die well.
He that is prepared for Derth, is certainly freed from the danger of death:
neither is there any so fit a way to be ready for it, as to be osten minded of
it. Therefore I have made choice at this time to speak of this verse, wherein
(ye see) the Apostle declares, Division of the text.
and leads us to treat of four things.

First, that there is a Death.

Secondly, that this Death is an Enemy.

Thirdly, that this Enemy is the last Enemy.

Lastly, that this last Enemy shall be destroyed.

A word or two of each of these parts.

First; 1. Death is.
Death is. Ye know that well enough, your eyes show it you daily: our senses
declare it so plainly, that no man is so senseless that knows it not: It is
agreed upon by all. Only for your better furtherance to make use of this point,
let us acquaint you with that which nature will teach ye concerning Death.
Secondly, with that which Scripture will teach you, above, and better then
Nature.

Nature shows ye concerning Death, Nature teaches.
first what it is. And then,

Secondly, what Properties it has.

It tells us this, 1. what death is.
That Death is in absence from life, a ceasing from being, when one was
being, to be thrust (as it were out of the present world, and be cast some
where. This is all that Nature informs us concerning the Essence and Being of
Death. Death is a deviding of us from this life, and from the things of this
life, and sends us abroad we know not where.

Secondly, 2. The properties of death, That it is.
Nature teaches us three Properties concerning Death.

One, that it is universal; It has tied all to it, high and low, rich and
poor. Death knocks at the Princes palace, 1. Universal.
as well as at the poor habitation of the meanest man. It is a thing that
respects no man's greatness, it regards no wealth, nor wit, nothing; Death
takes all before it. That Nature teaches too.

Secondly; 2. Inevitable.
Nature teaches that Death is inevitable. If a man would give all the world,
he cannot thrust it out of doors. It takes whole Armies as well as one man. It
scorneth to be resisted by the Physicians: there is no words, no means to
escape it. It is such an enemy as we must grapple with, and it will conquer.
This Nature teaches.

Again, 3. Uncertain.
Nature teaches that death is uncertain. A man knows not when Death will
come to him, or when it will lay hold on him, or by what means it will setch
him out of the world. It may fetch him out of the world at any time, or in any
place, and by such occasion, as it is impossible for any wit to think of
before. This is in substance all that Nature teaches. And the knowledge of
this, it is for good use, as well to remember and consider it, as to understand
it.

But now I go on to tell ye; what the Scripture teaches concerning Death: for
that gives a perfecter and larger information of the thing, then the dim light
of Nature.

The scripture then (over and above that which Nature shows) tells us
concerning Death these things.

First, it shows better what it is; and then,

It shows whence it comes, and what are the causes of it.

Thirdly, it declares the consequences what follow upon it.

And lastly, and bestly, it tellech us the remedy against the ill of Death. In
all which Nature stumbleth, and can do little or nothing.

First, The Scripture teaches, 1. what death is.
the Scripture tells us what it is; It tells us how that it is the
disolution of a man, not the annihilation; It does not make him cease to be,
but takes asunder awhile the soul from the body: It carries the one to the
earth, and the other to another world: so that both continue to be, though they
be not united as before.

The word of God teaches us, that he has created the world (as it were) a
house of three Stories. The middle is this present life where we be. And there
is a lower place, the Dungeon, a place of unhappiness and destruction; there is
a higher place, a palace of glory. According as men behave themselves in this
middle room; so Death either leads them down to the place of unhappiness, or
conveyeth them up to the palace of glory and blessedness. This, Nature is
ignorant of, but the Scripture is plain in. The rich man dies, and his soul is
carried to Hell; the poor man when he died, his soul was advanced to Heaven. So
that Death is nothing but the messenger of God to take the soul out of the
body, and to convey it to a place of more happiness, or more misery then can be
conceived.

Secondly, 2. what are the causes of death.
the Scripture acquaints us further with the cause of death. Philosophers
wondered since nature desires a perpetuity, and continuance of it self, that
man should be so short a time in the world. The Scripture ends this
wonderment and tells us that man indeed was made immortal, to continue for ever,
and should not have died: but sin came into the world, and by sin death. Death
is the mother of sin, and of all misery, that by little and little draws to
death.

I say sin: the first sin of our first Parents whereby they transgressed that
most easy and equal mandate about eating the forbidden fruit. That
transgression that was the treading under foot the covenant of works, and the
disanulling of it, that sin let in Death at a great Gap: and now it triumphs,
and bears rule over all the world.

Nature cannot tell which way in the world a man should die so soon, and that
he that is the Lord of all creatures, should be inferior to a great number of
them in length of life. But the word of God unriddleth this riddle, and tells
us that God made man, that he might and should have lived for ever, but Sin
coming, and coming in the person of the first man, it brought death, and made
all men mortal: and when sin entered. Gods curse came, and that working upon us
poor and miserable creatures, it is the cause that we cannot continue long here.

It was equal that death should follow sin, for since God made man to obey his
will, when man had unfitted himself for Gods service, it was reason that he
should have a short continuance of life, for the longer he endured, the more he
would abuse himself.

Ye see then two things that the Scripture teaches concerning death. 3. what
are the consequences of death. Heb. 9.17.
The third thing it shows is, what follows after death: and that is plain;
It is appointed for all men once to die, and after death comes judgment.
Narure never dreamed of judgment after Death, but the Scripture tells us,
there is a judgment after Death.

Judgment, what is that?

Judgment (ye know) is a calling of a man before Authority, a looking into his
ways, a considering of his actions, a finding out whether he be a sinner, an
evildoer: and if he find him so, to pass sentence according to his evil deeds.
When God has took the soul from the body, he takes the soul first, and after
both soul and body, and presents them before his own Tribunal, and there
searches into every man's life, ransacks his conscience, looks deep into his
conversation, and inquireth into his secrets, opens his actions, and whole
carriage from his infancy to his last breath, and finds out the things that
he has done, and passes sentence according to that he has done.

This Indgment has two degrees. The particular judgment.
First as soon as a man dies. No sooner is the soul separated from this case
(as it were) the body, but instantly it is presented before the Lord Jesus
Christ, and there he passes sentence, either that it is a true believer, a
godly liver, a person united to Christ, that walked as becomes the Gospel of
Christ, and then it receives glory, and joy, and bliss for the present, more
then tongue can express. Or else it finds against him, that he was a sinfnl
man, a wicked man, a hyyocrite, a dissembler, one that named Christ with his
tongue, but did not depart from iniquity, nor live according to the Gospel of
Christ: and then he is delivered up to Satan, to be hurried down to Hell, and
there to suffer the wrath of God according to the desert of so great
wickedness. This particular judgment passes upon every soul as soon as it
leaves the Body.

Then follows the great universal Judgment, The general Judgment.
when soul and body shall be reunited, and stand before God: every particular
man that ever has been, is, or shall be, every man shall appear in their own
persons, their whole lives shall be laid open, all secret things shall be made
known, for God (faith the Apostle) shall judge the secrets of all hearts by
Jesus Christ according to my Gospel. This is the third thing that the word of
God informs us concerning death, that nature could never do.

The last, 5. what is the remedy against the evil of death.
that is the best, the Scripture gives us a remedy against the ill of death.
It is a pitiful thing to hear of mortality and sickness, if there were not a
good Potion or Physic prescribed to ascape the ill of it. To hear tell of
Death, and so tell, as the Scripture says, that it is a going to another world
of weal or woe, and not to hear of a remedy, it is woeful tidings, and would
wring tears from a hard heart.

But the Scripture makes report of death, not only tolerable and easy, but
comfortable and gladsome to a Christian heart: for it shows by whom, and by
what means we may infallibly, and certainly, escape all the hurt that Death can
do: Nay, by what means we may order our selves so, that Death may be beneficial
to us. What is that?

In one short word; It is Christ; I am the resurrection, and the life, he that
believes in me, shall never see death. He means to hurt himself. Again,
This is the message, that God has given us life, and this life is in his Son.
And He that has the Son has life. Our Savior Jesus Christ came into the
world (as the Apostle tells us) that he might destroy him that had the power
of death, and so set them at liberty, that all their lifetime were in bondage
under the fear of death. And Saint John says; He came into the world to
destroy the works of the devil: which are sin and death. So that now Death has
lost his sting, because Christ overcame it: in dying he slew Death, and was the
death of Death: this man Christ, God and Man, he offered himself to his Father
as a Sacrifice for the sins of the world, and dying a cursed death upon the
Cross, so satisfied the justice of God on the behalf of all those that are in
him, that death can do them no harm: It is nothnig else but a passage to
eternal blessedness.

Oh blessed be the name of God, that has been pleased to provide so perfect a
remedy against so mortal an enemy: and to lay it open so clearly and plainly in
the Gospel.

Ye have heard of those things that I thought to put you in mind of concerning
Death, and so I have done with the first point.

The second is, 2. Death is an enemy.
That Death is an enemy. Therefore the Apostle Paul tells us of a certain
sting it has, Oh death where is thy sting? It is an armed enemy, it comes as
a Serpent with a sting that enters into a man's soul, puts it to exream
perplexity, if he taks not order to disarm this enemy.

An enemy ye know is a person that sets himself wilfully to hurt, a man may
hurt his neighbor, either through indiscretion, or unadvisedness against his
will, or he may lay wait to do him hurt, intending misceif, and seeking to
peforme somewhat that shall be injurious to him. We call not him an enemy that
we receive a little hurt from against his will, contrary to his purpose and
intention: but he that studieth, and beforehand desires to be an enemy, Now
Death (as we may say) studieth our hurt in all extremity beforehand.

There is but two sorts of hurt that can come to a man. 1. Depriving a man of
all that is benefitial or comfortable.
One is, to deprive him of that which is beneficial and comfortable, to rob him
of all that is contentful to him in this life. As when a company of Foes break
into a Nation, they burn their goods, and spoil their houses, and rob and take
away all that is comfortable to them, so much as they can. Death is such an
enemy: It desires to bereave a man of that necessary contentment he has. When
it meets with a learned man, it takes away all his learning at one blow,
as soon as he is dead, he cease to be a great scholar. It comes to a rich
man, and robs him of all his goods at one blow too: though he have millions,
Death causes all to be another man's. When it comes to a King, it pulls him
beside his Throne, takes his Crown off his head, and casts both him and it
into the dust, he is King no longer when he is dead. And so in all the benefits
of this life, it takes away the pleasure and contentments of a man; it takes
away the husband from the wife, and the wife from the husband; it devideth
children from Parents, and Parents from children: all the benefits that this
life afford, Death strippeth a man of them all, and turns him naked out of the
world, just as he came he must go, and carry nothing in his hand: Death will
not admit him to take one farthing, or any thing else with him. So he is an
enemy, for he spoileth us of whatsoever is desirable in this life.

But he is an enemy also in inflicting a great deal of ill upon men. 2.
Inflicting misery upon a man.
So death brings torment for the present: It is a terrible thing to wrestle
with; it makes a man bleed, and sweat as it were: No man can encounter with
death, but he feels anxiety and vexation of body and mind, (unless he have
comfort from above to enable him to wrestle with it, but) in his own proper
nature it is so furious an enemy, that it does not cease till it has dragged
the soul into the presence of God, and after, from his Tribunal to the torment
of eternal fire in Hell. That succeeds death, for naturally of its own nature
it tends to the destruction of man, because it is a fruit of sin, and
therefore must needs he the perdition, and overthrow of the soul. For sin
brings destruction in regard it makes God angry with us, and separateth from
him, and by consequence from all manner of comfort: and in regard it separateth
from him, it brings all manner of ill, his wrath, his hatred, and ill will
the greatest of all. Death (I say) properly, and of it self intends, and
seeks to draw all those that it lays hold on to a state of everlasting
unhappiness, therefore it is an enemy. So you see the second point opened.

The third is, 3. Death the last enemy.
that Death is the last enemy, after which there shall be no more.

But I must tell you to whom it is the last, Not to all.
not to all. For there are a generation of men that shall feel death to be the
last of enemies, and in a manner the first. But to the Saints and those that
are prepared for death, But to the Saints.
and those that will use the remedy, to these, and these alone, death is the
last enemy: after once they have grappled, and fought, and encountered with this
enemy, they are at peace and rest; as he says, Happy are they that die in the
Lord, for they rest from their labors. There is no more toil and misery to a
good man after death. And why? Because, death separateth sin from his soul, as
well as the soul from the body, and so taking away the cause of unrest, it must
needs take away misery and unhappiness it self.

Indeed properly, Death does it not, but the Lord Jesus Christ by death. For it
pleases him when his servants leave this world, then they are fit to enter
into a place of happiness in another world, which they could not be, except
they were freed from sin. Death is the daughter of sin, and with a happy
patricide (as it were) at once it destroys it self and sin: and therefore it
takes away all misery, because it takes away all sin. Therefore it is the last
enemy, because it kills the worst of our enemtes, for when we are dead, there
shall be no more enmity between God and us, and so no more enemy. This is the
third point.

The last is, 4. Death shall be destroyed.
that this enemy shall be destroyed. A thing is destroyed, abolished, when its
self cease to be, and it took out of the way, and when all the ill effects
that it would produce, and effect or has, are removed. So the Lord Jesus
Christ abolisheth Death, he destroys it, that it shall never again be known
in the world, or felt by his servants: and he preventeth all those evil
effects that it would work in the soul for eternity, and removes all the ill
effects of it, that it has wrought on their bodies for the present time. Death
takes away a man's goods for the present, Christ abolisheth that, he gives
everlasting substance in heaven. Death takes away friends. Christ abolisheth
that, he sends us to heaven, where we have more friends and better. Death
brings the body to rottenness and corruption, it lays it in the dust, turns
it to putrefaction, Christ abolisheth that, at the Resurrection it shall rise
again in glory. How that is done the Apostle tells us in the end of this
chapter; The body shall be laid in the dust, a weak and feeble, a mortal and
natural body, but it shall be clothed with immortality; This mortal shall put
on immortality, this corruptible shall put on incorruption, then shall be
fulfilled that saying, Death is swallowed up in victory. But this is also
limited, it shall be destroyed, to whom? To those that use the remedy, those
that partake of Christ, those that have put on him, that is the Resurrection
and the life.

Thus I have laid before your eyes briefly these four things, that the Apostle
leads us to treat of concerning death. That it is. That it is an enemy. That
it is the last enemy. And that it shall be destroyed. Now I desire to apply
this, and to make use of it.

First, Use 1. For Examination.
I shall be bold to play the Examiner, to search each conscience a little.
Brethren, let the word of God enter into your souls. Ye hear that there is a
death, and that this death is a sore and bitter enemy: and ye hear that to some
sort of men it is the last enemy that ever they shall encounter with, and be
freed from all the hurt of it, it shall be utterly destroyed. Now do so much as
descend every one into himself, and inquire what care there has been to
prepare for death, to make use of the remedy against death: what time and
pains has been bestowed to seek to get that that is the only means to escape
the Dart of this enemy, and that that is the only cause to procure this
enfranchisement to the soul, from that that else will destroy all.

A man has not fitted himself to encounter with his enemy, when he looks after
wealth, and follows the pleasures, and contentments of this life; these
things will do no good, they will be rather a burden to the heart, and vex
the soul, and increase the mischief, laying more sin upon the soul, and giving
death darts to pierce the soul with.

But when is a man fit for death? and who may encounter with this enemy with
safety?

I will tell ye; How a man may be fitted for death.
That man that takes the greatest care to disarm death of his weapons, to arm
himself with defensive weapons against death. If an enemy come upon a man with
good weapons in his hand, 1. Get death disarmed now.
and find him altogether unweaponed, it is hard for a naked unarmed man to deal
with him: it is hard for a man that never thought of it before, to fight with
one that is skilful at his weapons. Death (I told ye) is an enemy, and an enemy
that is skilful in his weapons: and the weapon of death it is our own sin.
Death brings nothing with it to hurt a man; It finds with us, and in us,
that whereby to hurt us; so many corruptions as are in thy heart, so many
weapons; so many idle words, so many bad deeds; so many swords to pierce thy
heart. Death makes use of those weapons it finds in our selves, and with
them he destroys, and kills, and brings us to perdition.

Now, what have ye done (beloved) to disarme death? what care have ye taken to
break sin apieces, that it may not be as a sword ready drawn for the hand of
death when it comes? as Arrows in a Bow, to shoot at you, when Death lays
hold on you?

That man that has took no care to overcome sin in the power of it, and to get
himself free from the guilt and punishment of it, is unfit for death. If death
come upon him, and find his offenses unrepented of, unpardoned, unsubdued, he
will so order those offenses, that he will thrust them into his foul, as so
many poisoned Darts, that will bring sorrow, and anguish, and vexation, and
destruction to all eternity.

Ye may see then whether ye have any fitness to meet with this Enemy, whether
ye be in case to fight that battle, that of necessity ye must; for Death (as I
told ye before) is enevitable.

If ye have not; Get alone between God and thy self, and there call to mind the
corruption of thy nature, the sins of thy childhood, of thy body, of thy mind,
bring thy soul into his presence, confess thy sins, with an endeavor to break
thy heart for them, and to be sorry for them, mightily crying to him in the
mediation of that blessed Advocate Jesus Christ, that died on the Cross, to
pardon, and to wash thy soul in his blood, and to deliver thee from the
pollution of thy sins. Beg the Spirit of sanctification to bear down those
sins, and subdue thy corruptions. Bestow time to perform these exercises daily,
carefully present thy self before God, thus to renew thy repentance and faith
in Christ, to make thy peace with God: Labor to purge away the filthiness of
thy sin, and then whenever Death comes, thou shall find in thy self
sufficient against it, thou have disarmed it.

But if ye spend your time in pursuing profits, and pleasures, and follow the
vanities of this life, and either ye do not think of death, or ye think of it
no otherwise then a heathen man would have done, to no purpose; ye think of it
to enjoy the world while ye live, because ye know not how soon death will end
the world and you, if you play the Epicures in the thought of Death, to
annimate you to enjoy the outward benefits of this life: to think of it to no
purpose, but only to talk and discourse now and then as occasion serves: then
Death will find your souls laden with innumerable sins that repentance has not
discharged, and undoubtedly it will bring eternal perdition. Have ye thus
disarmed Death?

But again, 2. Get armor against death.
a man's self must be armed, or else he cannot encounter with his enemy, What is
our Armor against Death to keep off that blow.

The Apostle in one word shows us these Armours, when he says, a
Breast Plate of faith, and love, and the hope of salvation a Helmet.

If a man have got faith to rest on Christ alone for eternal happiness, and his
soul filled with the hope of glory, and salvation through him, and then with
love to him, and his servants for his sake; These three virtues will secure a
man against all the hurt that death can do. Faith, Hope, and Charity, the
Cardinal virtues that Christian religion requires, and commands us to seek,
these are Armor of proof against all the blows of death: he that has them
shall never be hurt of Death, because he shall never taste of the second death:
he has only to wrestle with the first Death, and there is no terror, nor
terribleness it that, if a man's heart be secure by these Graces.

Faith whereby we depend on Christ, and on him alone for grace and salvation,
bringing hope whereby we expect and look for salvation of our souls by his
blood according to his promise, and working charity whereby we love him for his
goodness, and his servants for his sake; (If it be charity not only of the lip
to speak well, but that that produces well-doing) I say this is that makes us
that death cannot separate us from Christ, but the further we are from life,
the nearer we are to him, for when this outward tabernacle of our house is
dissolved, we have a building with God eternal in the heavens: and death to
such a man is nothing but the opening of the door to let him out of the dungeon
of the world, and to place him happily in the Palace of eternal bliss.

I pray enter into consideration how ye have behaved your selves in the course
of your lives, whether as Heathens, or as Christians. A man that takes no care
to prepare for death, though he come to the Church from Sunday to Sunday, and
partake of all Gods ordinances, yet if the consideration of death be not so
imprinted in him, that it become a motive to him to labor for Faith, and hope,
and charity, and to endeavor to edify himself in these graces, he lives as a
Heathen or an Infidel: and when death comes to him, it will do him more hurt,
then it will an Infidel, because by how much God has given him more means to
escape, and by neglecting those means, as his sin is greater, so shall his
punishment be.

Secondly, Use 2. For reprehension.
if ye have been careless for to prepare for this enemy; Now be ashamed of it,
and sorrow for it, let your hearts now smite ye, and ache within you: Oh foolish
man or woman (say) I have lived twenty, thirty, forty, fifty years, and some
more; I have labored against other enemies, if men had any thing against me, I
would be sure to take order; I have labored for the things of this life, for
riches and friends, and give my self leave for to enjoy pleasures, and taken
pains to do good to my body: but all this while it never came into my heart
seriously to think, I must die, and after that comes Judgment, that I must
stand before Gods Tribunal, and give account of my ways; I have not labored
to beware of Death and of sin: nor to kill my corruptions, I have not labored
to increase in Faith, and hope, and charity; I have left my self unarmed
against the last and worst enemy. Oh what folly is this, to live in the world
many a long day, and never to consider, that there will be an end of all these
days, and the end of those, the beginning of another life, and a life that
will be infinitely more miserable then this.

If this (beloved) have been any of your faults to be carelessly forgetful of
your latter end, not to consider of your departure hence: if the world have so
tempted you, and pleasures have so enamoured you, that you have forgotten your
latter end, blame your selves, it is the greatest of all follies.

And that I may disgrace this folly, and make you ashamed of it; Consider a
little. That this is to be like children; The Apostle bids us not to be like
children in understanding: but he that forgets Death, and is careless to
prepare for it, is a very child. A little one never thinks he shall ever be a
man himself, and maintain himself, and live in the world by his own labor, or
by that he shall have from his friends, he cares for nothing butmeat, and
drink, and sport, and pastime: we blame their folly, andlaugh at it as
rediculous, and therefore by our diligence we prevent that ill that might else
come upon them. Is it not thus with many of you? ye live and build houses, and
raise your names to be glorious, and to make a fair show in the world: but to
get grace, and to get faith, and hope, and love, and repentance, none of your
thoughts almost run that way, scarce any of your thoughts are so bestowed. Is
not this to be children in understanding.

Again he is a foolish man that knows he shall meet an enemy, and will not
prepare. If a man should hear of twenty or thirty thousand soldiers were
gathered against the City, and besieged it to destroy it; He would not be so
foolish, and so simple then, as to bestow himself in his trade, and to follow
his business, and to give himself to merrimeut, but he would get his weapons,
and he would look about him, help to arm the City, and to make it strong. Why
do ye not consider that your soul is as a City? Death will come against it, and
batter you with sickness, with pains, and at last will certainly take it, and
if the soul be not prepared, will carry it to Hell fire. Why will you be so
retchless, and senseless to eat and drink, and labor to grow rich, to bury your
selves in eatrthly labors, and never think how to escape, how Death may be
kept out, that will destroy soul and body?

I presume you are ashamed of this folly by this time, I hope ye will go away
with remorse and sorrow, for so carelessly neglecting a thing of so great
importance to be provided for.

In the third place therefore I entreat you, Use 3. For Exhortation.
begin this great work this day. Consider (if you have not begun) the enemy
lies in wait for thee, oh man or woman, if thou be never so young, thou may
meet with him before night, if thou be old, thou must meet with him ere long.
Prepare for him betime: think what an enemy may encounter thee in the way. If a
man be to travel, though he be not assured to meet with an enemy, yet he will
strive to get good company, and weapon himself, he will carry his sword,
something he will do, that if a thief come to rob him he may be able to prevent
the danger. Beloved, think that there is an enemy that way-laies us, as we go
along in the world, one time or other he will be sure to come upon us:
therefore stir up your selves, begin this day to prepare for this enemy.

How shall I prepare for Death?

I told you before, it is not amiss in a word to repeat it: Get Faith in
Christ, and Hope, and Charity, and repentance. These will be means to prepare
and help thee against Death. Therefore (if hitherto thou have not) lament and
bewail the sinfulness of thy nature and life. As Soon as thou art out of this
place, get thee into a solitary room, fall upon thy knees, lament thy sins, the
ilness of thy nature and carriage, rehearse thy ways as much as thou can,
condemn thy self before God, mightily cry for pardon in the meditation of his
Son, and never leave sobbing and mourning, till he has given thee some answer
that he is reconciled. And then strive to get faith in Christ, call to mind the
perfection of his redemption, the excellency of his person and merits, that
thou may repose thy soul on him, that thou may say, though my sins be as
the Stars, and exceed them, yet the merit of my Savior, and his satisfaction
to the justice of God it is full: in him he is well pleased and reconciled, I
will stay on him, Lord Chiist, thou have done and suffered enough to redeem me
and Mankind, thou have suffered for the propitiation of the world, though my
sins deserve a thousand damnations, yet I trust upon thy mercy, according to
the Covenent made in thy Word. Thus when a man labors to cast himself on
Christ, to lay the burden of his salvation, and to venture his soul on him, now
he has believed, this Breast Plate, Death is not able to thrust through.

And then, labor that this faith may work so strongly, that it may breed Hope,
a constant and firm expectation grounded on the promises of the Word, that thou
shall be saved, and go to Heaven, and be admitted into the presence of God,
when thou shall be separated from this lower world. He that is armed with this
hope, has a Helmet, Death shall never hurt his head; it shall never be able to
take away his comfort and peace; He shall smile at the approach of death,
because it can do nothing but help him to his kingdom.

And then, labor for Charity, to inflame thee to him again, that has showed
himself so truly loving to men, as to seek them when they were lost, to redeem
them when they were captives, and to restore them from that unhappiness, that
they had cast themselves into. Oh that I could love thee, and thy people for
thy sake, thou did die for them, shall not I be at a little cost and pains
to help them out of misery.

Thus if ye labor to be furnished with these graces, then you are armed
against Death; those will do you more good, then if you had gotten millions of
millons of gold and silver. As you have understanding for the outward man, as
you have care to provide for that, top reserve and comfort life, while you are
here, so have a care for the future world, and that boundless continuance of
eternity. If a man live miserable here, death will end it, if he be prepared
for death, he shall live happily for ever; but if a man live happily (as we
account it) and die miserably, that misery is endless. Ye mistake (beloved) ye
account men happy that abound in wealth and honor, that have great estates, I
say ye mistake in accounting men happy, that enjoy the good things of this
life, that can live in prosperity to the last time of their age, possessing
what they have gotten. If such a man be not prepared for death; Death makes way
for a greater unhappiness after death. For the more sin he has committed, the
more misery shall betide him, his life being nothing but a continued chain of
wickedness one link upon another, till he settle upon a preparation for Death.

And in the last place, Use 2. For comfort
here is a great deal of comfort, to those that have labored to prepare for
death: though to them Death is an enemy, yet it is an enemy that is utterly
destroyed. The Philosopher said, that Death is the terriblest of all terrible
things; so it is to nature, because it does that that no other evil can do, it
separateth from all comfort, and carries us we know not whether.

Death is terrible to a man that is unarmed for death; but to the poor Saints
that have bestowed their time in humiliation, and supplication, and confession,
that have daily endeavored to renew their faith, and hope, and repentance,
Death has no manner of terribleness in the world: if it be terrible to a
Christian at the first, it is only because he has forgot himself a little, he
does not bethink how he is armed.

If God have fitted his servants for death, he has done most for them: if they
have not riches, yet they are fit for death: if they have not an estate amongst
men, it mattereth not a whit if they be fit for Death, if they be miserable
here, in torments, and sickness, when others have health, it is no matter, all
these increase their repentance, makes them labor for Faith, and Hope, and
Charity, whereby they are armed against Death.

Nothing can save us from the hurt of Death, but the Lord Jesus Christ, put on
by Faith, and that furnished with Hope and Charity. If God give a man other
things and not these graces, Death is not destroyed to him. But if he deny him
other things, and give him these graces, he does enough for him, Death is
destroyed to him. His body indeed falls under the stroke of Death as other
men's, but his soul is not hurt. Death lays him a rotting as the common sort,
but the soul goes to the possession of glory, and remains with Christ; When
he is absent from the body, he is present with the Lord. Nay, when the last day
shall come, Death shall be utterly swallowed up, then the poor, and frail, and
weak body, that sleeps in corruption and mortality, shall be raised in
honor, and in immortal beauty and glory, a spiritual body, free from all
corporal weaknesses that accompany the natural body; it shall be made most
glorious and blessed, even as if it were a spirit, all the weaknesses that
accompany the natural being of the body shall be baken away, and it shall enjoy
as much perfection as a body can, and therefore it is called spiritual:
Therefore I beseech you rejoice in the Lord if your souls tell you, that you
are armed against this death.

THE WORLDS LOSS AND THE RIGHTEOUS MAN'S GAIN.
SERMON VIII.
ISAIAH 57.1. And merciful men are taken away, none considering that the
Righteous is taken away from the evil to come.


WHen I first began this Verse, I did never think that all things would have
been so suitable, to the finishing of it, as now I find they are. For there is
no circumstance that can be required to make a correspondency between a former,
and a latter handling, but is to be found in the two surveyes I took upon this
Text. The occasion of handling it now, is the same that was before. I began it
at a Funeral, and now at another Funeral I shall end it. The place of handling
the same as it was before. I began the former part of the Verse, in this very
street, at the other end of it: Now I shall finish it at this. And the time it
is the same, and every way answerable to that it was before. It was begun in a
time of Mortality seared; and now will be finished in a time of Mortality
certain. And that there should be no part of correspondency wanting: this
latter part of the Verse is answerable to the former, it is but the same again
in other words.

In the former part there is mention of the righteous man, here of the mercyful
man, they are both one. In that, he is said to perish, here to be taken away,
they are both the same. There, No man is said to lay it to heart; and here no
man is said to consider it; both the same. So that look upon the whole, both
parts join together: they walk on by pairs two and two, as the living creatures
into the Ark, Male and Female. The first pair sets forth to you the state and
condition of a godly man, he is righteous and merciful: those are the male and
female of Piety. The second sets forth to you the state and condition of a
dying man, he perishes and is taken away: those are the Male and Female of
death. The third sets out the state and condition of a worldly man, he lays it
not to heart, he never takes it into consideration: those are the Male and
Female of carnal security. And that all the pairs should now be made up: the
former part was handled at the burial of a good old Man: this latter now at the
burial of an old and virtuous Gentlewoman: those are the Male and Female of
nature. The former part, that is a complaint that the Prophet made; and so is
the second; and this second is set as a Commentary to the first; this latter
part is as Eve created as a help to Adam, for every word in this latter helps
to expound some word in the former.

The first word in the latter part t^ us of the merciful man, that is the
Exposition of the first word in the former part, the righteous man. Lest any
man should make question who this righteous man was, that the Prophet speaks
of, how we should know him, and define him, and find him; find me a merciful
man, and he is truly a righteous man.

The second word in the latter part is, taken away, that has reference to the
second word in the former, and it is a qualification of the harshness of the
former: there it is said, The righteous man perishes: but lest any man should
scandal at this word, shall we think that he perishes, whose life is hid with
Christ in God? Shall the Scripture say that he perishes, whose name is in the
bundle of life, written in heaven? To lay aside therefore the rigor of the
word, here is the Qualification, he is taken away.

The third word of the latter has reference to the third of the former too. No
man considers it. If any man ask the reason, how it comes to pass, that
people should be without natural affection, that they take it not to heart,
that they are not grieved for Joseph, that they are not stricken with any sense
of their own losses, what should be the reason of it? The reason is in this
word, they take it not into consideration: They trouble not their heads, and
therefore not their hearts with it. (That it may make an aggravation of that.)
They were so far from taking of it to heart, that they never propounded it to
the examination, and scanning of their judgment, they consider it not. So every
word in the latter part is serviceable to the first.

I showed concerning the first part, who this Righteous man is, how great the
dignation of the Spirit of God is, that he will style holy men, that are so
imperfect in holiness, yet because of their holy endeavors to walk in the
ways of God blamelesly, the Spirit styles them Righteous men.

Secondly, I showed how this Righteous man is said to perish: and it what
sense; and how it is impossible they should perish; and why the Holy Ghost
chooses this word, which is more then death, to set out to us the death of the
Righteous man.

And then the last considered in particular; how it is lawful to (...) for the
departure of those that are gone: how that God allows that, how that God
blames for the neglect of it: Men are to lay it to heart, to grieve. How (...)
this griese is to extend.

These were the heads of those things that concern the first part.

I now go on forward to the second.

And that is a complaint (as the former was) that the Prophet takes up over the
people of the Jews for their great stupidity, in that they considered not any
work of God toward them; And it has these two parts.

There is the complaint he takes up over the dead: The division of the text.
Merciful men are taken away from the evil to come.

And the other complaint he takes up over the living, those that are living and
survive them, they care not though heaven and earth be mingled together, though
they lose all their props whereby the earth is supported, they never consider
it.

I begin with the first of these. The first part of the Text.
And that is;

The complaint that is taken up over the Righteous man's departure.

In that I consider two things;

First, look to the meaning of the words.

And then see, The meaning of the words.
what were the motives that made the Prophet take up this complaint and
lamentation: that whereas others wanted it, the Prophet should supply it, and
should give testimony to their departure; The righteous are taken away.

First for the meaning of the words. 1. Of the subject: Merciful men.


It is a proposition, and there are three parts of it.

The subject of the proposition, Merciful men.

The Predicat, Are taken away.

The Affix anexed to it, from the evil to come.

Briefly, look upon the meaning of all these, and they will all afford us some
instruction.

The First is the subject of this proposition; It is said here (and it varieth
from the former) Merciful men.

A man would wonder why he should alter the style, except it were, because the
Spirit of God delights to set out godly men, according to the multitude of
their titles, the righteous and mercyful men: Otherwise the same term might
have been kept in the latter part, for they are both the same in effect. He
that is a merciful man, is a Righteous man, and he that is righteous will be
merciful: yet the Prophet varieth it, righteous men perish, and merciful men
are taken away. There is some special reason of the variation. I conceive it is
one of these three, or all.

The first reason why he uses this word ( merciful men) in the latter part is.
For the greater conviction of their stupidity. They were such as were not
affected with the condition, or loss of righteous and holy men; nay, they were
so stupid, that they were not affected with the loss of mercyful men, that is
more. If there were any sense of piety they should for Gods cause grieve at the
loss of godly men: but if their were any sense of their own good, there should
be grief for the loss of merciful men. Generally (if it be possible to sever
them) the world has more miss of mercyful men, then of righteous men: every
man should mourn for their departure, and miss them, though piety and
righteousness may go unmourned for. But these were come to that stupidity, that
they had no sight nor sense of their own good: being a mercyful man, it is
likely there were many naked that he had clothed, many starved souls that he
had sed; there were parched bowels that he had simpathyzed with, he used to
mourn with those that mourn, to lament with those that lament. Many
Interpreters would have it spoken, that Isaiah said this of himself, in regard
of the persecution that he suffered, (he was taken away by the Saw:) but
whether it were of one merciful man, or of all, a man would think that mercyful
men should not go out of the world without mourners: there are Orphans and
Widows, that will mourn for mercyful men, that have been relieved by them. Yet
this stupidity so benumned them, in their own senses they were so frozen, that
they had no simpathy at all, neither respect to piety or mercy: Righteous men
were taken away, and they looked not on that side, merciful men were taken
away, and they looked not on that side neither. So it is an aggravation of
their stupidity.

Secondly, another reason why he varieth the word, Righteous men first, and
merciful men after, is this; To show how much God honors the works of mercy.
Though it be a glorious title ( A righteous man) yet the Spirit of God will not
let him go without another title, A mercyful man. Righteousness is best known
to God, but mercifulness to men. Mercifulness is an evidence of piety and
godliness. Mercy is that grace that honors God most, and God honors it
most. All the high Elogies that are given to piety in the Scripture, are
specially stated on mercy: God honors it with large and ample promises,
Blessed are the mercyful, for they shall obtain mercy; It has not the least
beatitude set to it, as Basil of Seuleucia well observes. God honors it
likewise with an approbation, When I was hungry ye fed me, when I was thirsty
ye gave me drink: and with a public approbation at the last day, in the
presence of Angels and men, it is mercy that God then magnifieth, Come ye
blessed, when I was hungry ye fed me, etc. God honors it likewise with an
excellent memorial, he always mentions it with honor; see it in Cornelius,
see it in Job, see it in other Saints, they were noted for mercifulness in the
Scripture; here in this place the spirit of God, because the righteous man
shall not go without an Epitaph, he makes on this righteous man a memorial.
Merciful men are taken away.

That is the second reason, that they might understand how far God honors
the works of Charity and mercy.

Thirdly, that the Prophet might instruct them, and us now; who are to be
reputed, and accounted true righteous men. Those that God accounts so. And
those are merciful men. These two, righteousness and mercy, they meet in God,
so they must in every Christian. They are the two ways of God (says David)
all his ways are mercy and righteousness. They are the two ways that Christ
takes in the world: the first way, at his first coming, a coming of mercy; to
call men to mercy; the second at his second coming, a coming of judgment, to
judge the quick and the dead. So they are two ways of God, so says Saint
Bernard; They are the two feet of God, by which he walks through the world:
God visits men upon one of these two feet, either in mercy, or righteousness:
as they are the feet upon which God walks to us; so they must be the two feet
that we walk on toward God: Righteousness, that is one, by which we tread the
way of the first Table in works of piety to God: and mercy is the other, by
which we tread the way of the second Table, in mercy toward men. So that as
the two Tables kiss each other, they are infolded one in another; the love we
owe to our brethren, it hangs and depends on our love to God: the love that we
show to God, is to be testified by our love to our brethren: So these two are
to embrace one another, we must not sever them that God severeth not: according
to this, others will judge of us that we are truly righteons, according to this
scantling we take of our selves. Deceive not your selves if their be not works
of Charity and mercy, slatter not your selves with an oppinion of
righteousness; it is an empty name where mercy is not. So the Apostle makes the
argument, He that loves not his brother whom he has seen, 1 John 4.20.
how can he love God whom he has not seen? So likewise here, is it possible
that there should be righteousness toward God, when there is not mercy toward
men?

It is the first of those pious instructions, that I will commend to this
place. Ostentation of righteousness, there is a great deal in the world, men
desire to be accounted godly men, because they can be reserved to themselves.
They can get pretenses of piety, and zealous they will seem to be for works of
the first Table. Did God give only one Table? No: but we shall be tried by the
works of the second Table; When I was hungry ye fed me not, when I was thirsty
ye gave me no drink. Why do we make boast of piety to God, that men cannot
judge of? For there is one little grain of hypocrisy that spoileth all. We may
act mercy to men but we cannot act piety: piety will show it self here; Here is
the touchstone to give proof of the piety in our hearts, if it bud out in
mercy: the righteous man is mereiful in every kind. Where there is piety, there
will not be reviling, and disgracing, and quarrelling, and contention: it is
impossible that piety in the heart should be contentious, that pure and
untainted liquor should pass through a filthy kennel: if there be grace in the
heart, it will show it self in the hand, in the lip, in the words, in the
actions, in all. It is but a touch that I give you, I know you easily ghess
where I am. I come not to put you in mind of what you know: or rather to put
you in mind. I am not conscious to your courses, but I will tell ye what the
world faith; It is a great deal of wrong done to this parish, and this place,
if there be not much contention in it: and it is not upon this occasion that I
heard it, for before now I never knew any one in the parish, but as the Apostle
faith of the good works of one of these Churches, It is spoken of in all the
world, so the strife of this place is spoken of in all the City. Here is the
fruit whereby you must examine you selves, mercy to men. If we be not those
that nourish brotherly love, there will be no mercy: there is no mercy, where
there are the fruits of uncharitableness, and if there be no mercy, there will
be no piety. Let this therefore be the touchstone of piety; Romans 12.18.
love, and peace with men, as the Apostle speaks; As much as is possible have
peace with all men.

I will speak no more of the meaning of the first part, Marciful men are taken
away. It is the Commentary upon the former

The second is the Predicate of the Proposition, 2. Of the predicat, they
perish.
they are taken away, that has reference to this, they perish.

It is great wisdom in the Spirit of God thus to expound one word by another.
That as in the body of a man, Eccles. 3.
those parts that are of most use, God in wisdom has made them double, has
made them pairs, two eyes, two hands, two ears, etc. (because these are parts
of great use) that if one part fall away and miscarry, the other part may
supply; if one eye be out, a man loses not his sight, he has another, and so
in other parts: so it is in the Scripture; if we mistake one word, here is
another that is more plain to lead us right in the meaning of the Scripture:
for else men would have been offended: Godly men perish; That is more then to
die, that that perishes is lost. But it is plain, they are not lost in death.
Perishing is one step beyond death? If it had been predicated of merciless,
impenitent, unrighteous men, it might have been said so, they perish, they not
only die. But what has the righteous done? who ever perished being innocent?
Who ever suspected and dreamed, that it was possible for merciful men to
perish? Here comes in the interpretation: No, be not deceived; It is a word
frequently used in the world, carnal men think so, but they perish not, they
are but took away. Ye see how one word helps the other: so this word gives
us assurance of the meaning of this Scripture, and of the state and condition
of a merciful man, he perishes not, though the Atheists of the world think so:
he perishes not to himself, for then begins his happiness, when death
comes: though they perish to men's memorial and remembrance, there is no
remembrance of the wise man, more then of the fool (says Sollomon) that is,
worldly men, that mind the world, and their bellies, they take no more to
consideration, when a righteous man, a wise man dies, then a fool; that is, an
impenitent man, though I say they perish to the memorial of the world, they
perish not to God; not to the fruition of his happiness, for Death is but a
porter, a bridge to everlasting life, then begins their glory: Heaven that
was begun before in a mystery, then it is set open to them literally and
personally. They perish not because they are taken away, there is the proof of
it. A man that is removed only from an Inn, no man will say that he is lost.
That that is transplanted from one soil to another, does not perish. A grast or
syens, though it be cut off, and it is to have a more noble plantation; It is
so far from perishing, that it is more perfect, it is stablished in its nature,
it is set into a better.

There are but one of these two interpretations of perishing, and neither of
them can befall a godly merciful man. Either it is a passage from a being, to a
not being: and so the Beasts when they die, perish, because their souls are
mortal, as well as their bodies: it is no more a living creature, there is no
more life it it, it resolves to its first principles; the soul it is nourshed
as well as the body, there was a being before, but now there is a nullity of
being, in respect of a living creature, there is nothing lives. Here is a
perishing from a being, to a not being.

Again, perishing may be a passage from a being to a worse being: so an
impenitent man when he dies, he passes from life to death; yea, to an eternal
death, to a worse being; that is, a perishing, and a proper perishing, that is
worse then to be lost. It is better to have no being, then to have either of
these.

But in neither of these senses the righteous man perishes: he has a being
and a well-beeing after death. His soul has a eral being with God in
happiness, his body has a being of hope, though it be in the grave; Nay, it
has a real being of happiness, as it is a member of Christ, in regard of the
mystical union. So in no sense he perishes, he is but took away, he is but
removed, it is but Exodus, but transitus: his death is not a going out of the
Candle, it is but a translation, a removing of it to a better frame, it is set
upon a more glorious table to shine more bright. The word is well expounded in
Heb. 11. concerning Enoch: whereas in the fifth of Genesis, the Scripture
says, Enoch walked with God, and God took him; in the Hebrews it is said, he
was translated. In the one, he was took away, that is, in respect of the world;
In the other, he was translated; that is, in respect of heaven. They are tock
away; that is, from the place of misery, the Dungeon, the prison, to a place of
glory and happiness. They are took away from the house of clay, to the house
Eternal, not made with hands, in the heavens: they are translated upward, that
is meant in this.

So that there are two observations in this. Observat.
That Piety and Mercy excuses not from death.

Godliness it self freeth not a man from death. Death it is that end that is
propounded to all men. The bodies of godly men are of the same mould and
temper, of the same frame and constitution as other men, their flesh is as
frail, their humors as choleric, their spirit as sading, their breath as
vanishing, they owe the same debt to nature, to sin, to God, to themselves and
their own happiness. They are bound under the weight of the same Law, the
statute law is; It is appointed to all men to die once. It is well said, to die
once, for the impenitent man dies twice, he dies here by the separation of
his soul from his body, that is the first death; and there is the second death
that succeeds that; the death of the soul, by a separation of it from God,
which is far worse. But righteous and merciful men die once; the first death
seizes upon them: It is appointed to all: It is the end of all flesh; In one
place: It is the end of all the earth, in another place: It is the end of all
living, the end of all men, even merciful and godly men are brought within the
compass of this law of Nature, to yield up this debt and due. Righteousness
excuses not, it frees not. It is a law that binds one as well as another. As
Basil of Seuleucia observes, though Adam was the first that finned, yet Abel
was the first that died: Adam committed the transgrestion, the elder son was
Cain, the second Abel, in the course of nature the eldest should have gone
first, but Abel, righteous Abel, that was the moyty, the half of his comfort,
and the greater half, though the younger: Adam sins first, and yet righteous
Abel dies first. He gives the reason to be this, because God would let us see
in the Portal of death, the table of the Resurrection, he would show us the
linnaments of the Resurrection in the first man that dies, that righteous Abel
is took away, that we should be assured that he was but translated, there was
hope of the Resurrection confirmed even in his death. But yet that is not all;
the reason (I conceive) that is more proper to this is: righteous Abal dies
first, to show that even righteous and merciful men must not expect immunity
from death, and from suffering tribulation in this world; it is the condition
that befalls Abel the righteous, as well as Cain the Pharisee; It belongs
to faithful Abraham, as well as to Apostatizing Gemas: to beloved Jacob, as
well as to rejected Esau: to meek Moses, as well as to cursing Shemei: to
Deborah the Prophetess, as well as to usurping Athaliah: to devout Josiah, as
well as to impious Ahab: to tenderhearted David, as well as to churlish Nabal;
to the humble Publican, as well as to the vaunting Pharisee. It is the law and
rule that is set to all, there is no exemption: righteousness, piety, and works
of mercy, then do not exempt.

Eor if they could exempt, how should piety have the reward? when should
godliness come to the full recompense? It is death that makes way to the hope
of reward.

And if it be so, that righteousness excuses not, then neither honor, nor
strength, nor beauty, nor riches, can excuse in the world: for these are of far
less prevalency with God then piety. So the Argument stands strongly, If Job
died that was a merciful man; if Abel was taken away that was a righteous man,
look to other conditions: then Casar, that is the Princes of the world shall be
cut off, their state and pomp shall not keep them: then Cressus that is the
rich men of the world, shall die, their purse and plenty, shall not excuse
them: then Socrates, that is, the prudent and learned men of the world, their
wisdom shall not prevent it: then Helena, that is, the Minnions of the world,
the decking of their bodies, and their beauty, and painting shall be setched
off, they will expose them to death, they shall not free them: then Sampson,
that is, the strong men of the world, those that are healthy, of able parts,
likely to outlive nature, their strength shall not excuse them: that no man
should glory in any thing without, Neither the strong man in his strength, nor
the wise man in his wisdom, or the rich man in his wealth, but if he glory in
any thing, to glory in the Lord. Though we must not boast our selves of piety,
yet as the A postle says, yea have compelled me. If a man may boast of any
thing, it is of piety, that is, rejoice in this. If God have made a man a
vessel of mercy, and an instrument of doing any good: but otherwise to boast of
it, even that shall be the stain, and further disgrace of it: for righteousness
it self excuses not from death; all are subject to the same law, that is the
first observation; Merciful men are taken away as well as others.

Secondly, there is a difference in the manner, though they be subject to
death, yet it is a subjection under another subjection: Death is made subject
to them, they conquer Death. So both stand together, they die, and not die,
because their death is but a translation, but a removing.

There are two persons, two men in every penitent and godly man; there is
somewhat of a righteous man, and somewhat of a sinner; somewhat of the flesh,
and somewhat of the spirit: so according to these two, both laws are kept: the
Law of commination, that is kept, thou shall die the death; there is the reward
of sin; the law of promise, that is kept, thou shall live for ever; there is
the reward of righteousness. Mortality gives the reward to sin, immortality to
piety.

Though they die, they are but taken away. The word implies these two things;

First, it implies that their death is but a temporary death. Taking away is
not a final translation, it does not implie a nullity. Death, though it cut the
knot of nature, yet not grace. It is true, there is the sharp Axe of death,
there is no knot so Gordian, but it will cut it a funder. It is a great knot
that was first knit between the body and the soul, it cutteth that asunder. It
is a sure knot, which is the Conjugal knot between man and wife, it cutteth
that asunder. There is a natural bond and union between Parents and children,
it cuts that asunder. There is a civil union between friend and friend, it cuts
that knot asunder, it takes one friend from another. But there is the mystical
union between the head and the members, between Christ and the Church, it
cannot cut that knot asunder. But look as Christ's body in the Grave, it was not
deprived of the Hypostatical union, so likewise the body of a Saint, when it
lies in the grave, in corruption, it is mellowing for immoratlity, and
eternity: yea, then it enjoys the benefit of the mistical Union, there is
somewhat of a member of Christ that lies in the grave: that dust that the body
of a Saint is resolved into, it is holy Dust, because that mistical Union is
not cut asunder; Death cutteth not that knot. It perfecteth the mystical Union
in respect of the soul, and it is but an interruption of the manifestation of
the union in respect of the body, it is never severed. As the Husbandman has
some corn in his ground, and some in his Barn: the Corn in his ground is of no
less value and account, then that in his house and Barn; Nay, it is of more,
for that that is in his Barn shall not multiply, so many bushels he puts up,
and so many he receives, but that which is in the ground multipiles, therefore
it is in as great account. So it is with God. There are many bodies of the
Saints walking on the earth; and those that are laid in the grave, that are
sown (as the Apostle faith) for immortality. The bodies of the Saints in the
grave, are of no less account with God, then those which walk up and down in
the world, and glorisie him with works of piety: why? the body is sown to
immortality, there is still somewhat of Christ. That is the first thing it
implies; They are taken away, it argues, that their death is temporary.

Secondly, it shows it is deliberate, that their death is not sudden. For
there is a difference between these two, to be snatched away, and to be taken
away. Impenitent men when they are taken away in Judgment, they are snatched
away in displeasure. The godly man, God takes him away, removes him, it is as
gentle a word as could be used, there cannot be a better word to express it in
our translation, then for God to take him away. Job and Moses expressed it so,
and so Isaiah here, to show that Death is never sudden to the merciful and
righheous man, Why? because he is always prepared. It may be sudden in respect
of others, but not to himself. The stroke of Death may be the same to a
righteous man, as to an impenitent man, they may both fall by the prevalency of
the same disease, the same duration of sickness, the same warning given them,
the same sympathy; but there is a difference in regard of the suddenness.

If it be a sudden stroke that overtakes an impenitent man, then it is two
ways sudden; even a premeditated death is sudden to him, because he is not
prepared: sudden death comes not to a prepared man, because he looks for it:
it may (as I said) be sudden to others, but it is not to himself, Why? because
he expects Death, he dies daily, he dies in his thoughts, before he dies in
act, he dies in meditation, before he dies in passion: I die daily, faith the
Apostle, Death when it came to the Apostle, it found him dying, it could not
come suddenly to him; Death finds him setting open the doors: therefore though
it seem sudden death, it cannot be sudden, because he is taken away: the stroke
of Death may be sudden, but the issue of death is not sudden: the stroke may be
sudden to his body, but not to his mind; because he fitteth himself, still for
it. There is the deliberation implied in the word, his death is not sudden, in
that he is prepared: God awaketh his heart to make him look for it, therefore
when Death comech though sooner or later, it does but take him, it shatcheth
him not away; that is the meaning of the second.

The third word is, 3. Of the extent: from the evil to come.
the extent of this act, from the evil to come: that is a word that is not
specified in the former part: it makes both this and that the more full; it
makes a greater demonstration of Gods goodness: he is not only merciful in
taking away, but he takes away from that that is evil, he takes from a bad
estate to a better. An evil that is present, that is simply so: an Evil for the
time to come, God takes righteous and merciful men from both.

That I may lay a sit path for my proceeding in it, Saint Aust in devideth the
nature of Evil well to those two heads: there is the Evil of doing, and the
evil of suffering, that is, the evil of sin, and of punishment. The first of
these, the Evil of sin, is opposite (faith Aquinas) to the increated good. The
second, the Evil of punishment, is opposite to the created good. God takes away
merciful men from both these.

First, 1 From the evil to suffering.
from the Evil of suffering. Two ways he is took from that. He is took away
from the Evil of suffering, that he shall not see it, and that he shall not
undergo it, and endure it.

First, That he shall not see it.
that he shall not see it, that he shall not be a sepectator: that is one part
of taking away. For righteous and merciful men have tender affections, and
yearning bowels, when they see Gods judgments extended over any place or
person; they sympathize with them, they weep with those that weep, and mourn
with those that mourn. God takes them from this sorrow and mourning.

It has always been accounted one part of the happiness of a godly man, to be
taken from the Evil of the place he lives in. God takes Josiah from the evil
to come. Saint Jerome shows it well in Nepotian, he makes this as an Argument
amongst others, that his departure was a comfort and happiness to him, because
(says he) Nepotian is happy that he sees not those Evils, and calamities, and
miseries that are now come on the Church that we see.

Nay, not only in the esteem of godly, and righteous, and Christian men, but in
the esteem of the Heathens it was accounted a happiness to die before a man see
the miseries on the place he wishes well to. Virgil in the eleventh of his
AEniads, brings in Vandall, making a lamentation over his son Pallas that was
slain; after many tears that were shed over him, and doleful words that were
past: the Poet brings in his wife, and faith, it was her happiness to die
before him, that she saw not this misery: the Poet accounted her happy that she
died before, and saw not the misery that was brought on that place, and her
husband. In his esteem then it is one point of happiness, to be taken away
before that Evil come upon a place we wish well too. He expresses himself in
another place, in the first of his AEniads, They are happy that die before
their Country, before they see the ruin of that. Therefore it must needs be a
great happiness for a Christian to be taken away before misery come upon the
Church. Here is one respect the Lord has, he takes them away that they do not
see the Evil he brings on a place.

Secondly; That he shall not endure it.
That they should not suffer it, that is a further degree and a greater. So we
see that it is the happiness that is intailed on other servants of God; Though
it is not a course that God always constantly keeps: sometime he suffers
godly men to live, and to be swept away in common calamities, as the Plague,
Famine, Sword, and the like, even righteous men perish in these times, that is
the course that God sometimes takes. On the other side sometime he takes this
course, that he will preserve them in the midst of danger, he will keep them
alive: he sends calamities, and plagues, and yet he preserves the righteous.
So in the Revelation, he commands the Angel to seal his servants on the
forehead, when he pours his curses on the Earth: Ezekiel, 9
so in the ninth of Ezekiel he speaks to the man with a slaughter weapon, to
mark those that mourned, Exodus 12.
to pass them by: So in Exodus 12. he commands the blood to be sprinkled on
the posts of the doors, that the Angel may pass by: So God when he sees his
mark, the blood of the Covenant on the head of his servants, he passes them by
in common calamities: sometimes I say he takes that course. But he is not tied
to one course always: sometimes, he takes away his servants from the Evil to
come, he does not suffer them to have the sorrow of seeing, or feeling of it.

God when he intends to smite the Earth with plagues and curses, he will make
this way for his course, he will remove the obstables, the Saints that are the
impediments; they hold Gods hands, they wrestle by prayer, they prevail by
humiliation, they cast down themselves, and stand in the gap: that he may
unwind his hands of this burden, of the prayers of his servants, he removes
them by death, he says to them as he did to Moses, let me alone that I may
destroy them. And then, as it is with the Husbandman, when the corn is gotten
into his Barn, he burns up the stuble: till the Wheat be gathered, the Tares
are not turned up. God will not pour his plagues until he have removed the
impediments, those that are merciful men, when they are taken away, he pours
down his judgments. Therefore he takes them away, that they may not see it,
nor suffer it, that is the second.

Thirdly, 3. From the evil of finning.
he takes them from the Evil of sinning, that is a greater blessing, and in two
senses from that. He takes them from it. that they shall not see sin, for that
is a great Corrosive to a godly man. It was one point of David's grievance, that
he saw wicked men suffer; That he shall not see sin com mitted by others.
I humbled my soul with fasting, and I behaved my self as one that mourned for
his Mother. David humbled himself even for his enemies, when they were
afflictied, that was one part of his sorrow. But the chief part of his sorrow
was to see them commit sin, Mine eyes gush out with rivers of tears, because
men keep not thy law; That was a great affliction. Therefore that they may be
eased of that evil, God takes away merciful men, that they shall not see sins
committed; they are offensive to chaste eyes. He takes them to heaven, that
their ears may not be filled with hellish blasphemies, and damnable oaths that
overburthen the ground, that ring their peals in every street, as a man passes
by: there is no hearing such things in heaven. That is one thing, he takes them
away, that their eyes may not be glutted with beholding extortions,
oppressions, murders, contentions, revilings, and other sins in the world. It
is a great ease to a godly man to be took out of evil times: when God leaves
him in times and places that are evil, he shines as a light: when God takes him
away, he has the reward of his sorrow: it cost him grief to see it, therefore
to reward him, God takes him away, that he may not see sin committed.

Fourthly, That he shall not commit sin himself.
God takes them away, that they may mot sin themselves: for heaven is a place
as of no sorrow, so of no sin: though we be unsatiable of sin now, then there
is an end put to it. It pleases God so to deal, in his providence to order it,
that sin brought in Death, and Death carries out sin: that as a skilful
Chimmick distilleth an Antidote out of poison, so does God; Death that was the
reward of sin, God setcheth the translation out of it to eternal happiness: the
Mother, sin, brought forth Death, and Death the daughter carries out sin. That
is it that is the great comfort of a man in death: as now I shall cease
suffering, so here is my comfort too, I shll cease sinning: though my purposes
and endeavors be bent upon piety, yet I am overtaken; I could not tread so
strait, but I did often tread awry; now there shall be a new plain path
provided for my feet, there is no sin in heaven.

That is a great point of wisdom, that God destroys sin with the body, and
raises the body again without sin: if the body should live always, how should
sin end? sin will not be rooted out, as long as we are in the body; while we
carry about us this veil of flesh, we shall carry about us also another veil
of sin: therefore faith Epiphanius, God deals with us, as a skilful
houshoulder with his house. Look as it is in building an old house, if there
grow a Fig Tree, or Ivy out of the house, that it spread the root through the
chincks and partitions of the wall, a man that cuts down the Fig Tree shall not
profit, for it is so fast rooted in the wall, and in the chincks, that either
he must pull down the wall, or else it will not die; Therefore a wise man will
pull down his house, and root out the Fig Tree and then set up stones, and
there erect the house beautiful, and so both are preserved: he has his end in
both, both the house is rebuilt, and the Ivy consumed and rooted out. So it is
in case of sin, there is the house we carry about us, the building, the temple
of our body, the house is man himself, sin is the fig tree, it is such a
fig tree as insinuates it self between every chink, and partition in our
nature; there is somewhat corrupt in every faculty of the soul, and it shows
the fruit in every part of the body, that is an instrument of sin: it has so
wound it self in, that the fig tree cannot be destroyed, cannot be pulled out,
except the house be dissolved, there must be a pulling down of the Temple:
therefore God in wisdom, by Death he takes the Temple, the house in pieces,
and then the fig tree may be pulled out; and then he erects the wall of that
house more glorious then before it was thrown down, while the fig- tree was in
it, while sin was in it: it is raised up without it; that is that the Apostle
faith, Corruption shall put on incorruption, and mortality shall put on
immortality, the body that is sown a natural body, it shall be raised a
spiritual, it is sown in dishonor, it shall be raised in glory. God therefore
takes them away from the evil of sin, he dissolved the body, that he may
purify it, and cloth it with immortality, that it may be a purer body, then
when it was first presented in nature at the first Creation.

We see hereby what those good things are that Death brings; It brings
immunity from the evil of suffering: God takes away merciful men, that they see
not, that they suffer not. And it brings immunity from sin, that they do not
see it, that they do not commit it.

The use is a Pillar of considence, Use
not to be afraid of Death: who would fear that which makes for his perfection,
that is the means of his translation of happiness?

And in respect of others, not to mourn for them that are took away out of this
world, as those that are without hope: they are not took away but translated:
they are removed for their advantage, for the better. Elijah was removed from
earth to heaven in a fiery chariot, shall Elisha weep because he enjoys him
not? No he is took from earth to heaven; Joseph was sold into Egypt, but it
was to be a Ruler, God intended that: it is the same reason, God translates us
out of the world, to give us the end of our hope, even the salvation of our
souls; Shall we mourn as men without hope? God takes them out of a valley of
tears, shall we mourn unsatiably for those that are took out of the valley of
tears? Let us not bring their memory to the valley of tears, they are past it.
God takes them from evil to good, to the best good, the good of immortaity, and
eternity, the good of the enjoying of God, of that that eye has not seen, nor
ear has heard.

It is true, that when we see any impenitent man die, any man die in his sins,
there is just cause of mourning. That was the course that David observed: he
lost two sons, Absalom a wicked son, he mourned for him; he lost the child
that was begotten in adultery, for the life of which he prayed; he mourned not
for the child's departure: and Saint Ambrose gives the reason well, he had a
good hope and assurance that the child was translated to a better estate, he
doubted of Absalom, he died in his sins, therefore he mourned for him, for his
death, not for the child's. So when we see any die in his fins, there is cause
then of tears, and of excessive tears: then David cries, Absalom, oh my son,
my son.

But if there be good evidences of a Saint translated to glory, shall we mourn
as men without hope? As Saint Jerome speaks to Paula mourning for her daughter;
Art thou angry Paula, because I have made thy child mine? (He brings in God
speaking thus) do thou envy me my own possession? my own Creature?

It is true, for the state of an impenitent man, he has his good things here,
and his evil to come after, there is cause of mourning, for that he is
translated from good to ill; his heaven is in this world, his heaven is in his
treasure, in his riches, in his chests, and upon his table; and as he enjoyed a
heaven here, so he must not look for it after, there is a place of another
condition, his heaven is here, his hell after.

But the penitent and contrite, his ill is here, and his good after, his hell
is in this world in suffering, and in mortifying the flesh, in wrestling with
sin, in incountring with tentations, here is his hell, and his torments, but
after comes his heaven, and his bliss, so he is translated from bad to good,
he is took away from the evil to come.

So here is the meaning of all. I have showed first the meaning of the three
phrases.

The second thing I propound is this; What the Prophet bemoaneth, and makes
lamentation for, and these merciful men for if they be took away from evil
present and evil to come, Quest.
evil corporal and spiritual, sufferings extraordinary, plague and famine;
sufferings ordinary, sickness and tentation ^ if it be so that no sin shall
fall upon them to destruction, no tentation fall on them to destroy them here,
much less afterward; if they be took from all these evils, how comes the
Prophet to make lamentation, that merciful men are taken away from the evil to
come? for he speaks it mourningly.

It is one sufficient reason, he mourns over them because others did not.

But there are two reasons that are more special. Answ.
There is the loss of the godly man for the present when he is taken away; that
is a thing to be lamented; And the danger of the world in respect of the loss
of a godly man.

First, The loss of a godly man, a great punishment to a place
the loss of a godly man, that is a great punishment that God sends on a
place, there is a great loss to those that survive.

The loss of their example: they shine as lights, there is a Taper, a Candle
taken away; Ye rejoiced to walk in his light, faith Christ, to the Jews,
concerning John; there was a light not only of John's Doctrine, but of his
example, whereby those that heard him walked. There is the light of grace set
up in the life of the Saints of God: they are as a Taper to guide us in the
paths of mercy and piety that they tread in. Job was set up a light of
patience: Abraham of faith: Cornetius of Charity: and so every grace that the
Saints are eminent in, they are set up as so many lights. When the light is
gone, is there not a great loss to have a candle put out? Though they enjoy
their light, we lose it, the benefit of their example and society; their advice
and counsel. Oh the experience of the Saints, bring a great deal of good to
their acquaintance: I am in this affliction, I remember that you were in the
same case, how did you carry your self? It is a great matter to build upon the
experiences of the Saints of God.

We lose many benefits by losing of a Saint. He is not only beneficial in his
example, but in his prayers. He is one of the Advocates of the world, that
pleads with God, that stands in the gap. Abraham was a strong Advocate for
Sodom, and so was Moses for Israel, and so was Aaron, and so other Saints in
their time. The Saints while they live in the world, there is a great deal of
power in their prayers to withold judgments: and is there then no loss when
they are taken away?

When a Saint is removed, a Pillar is removed, a Pillar of the house, and of
the Earth, and must there not be danger when the Pillar is gone? They are the
Corner stones: when a corner stone falls, there is a great deal of trash and
rubbish falls with it.

There is a great deal of discomfort upon the fall of a Saint.

When God removes godly and merciful men, there is a loss every way: to the
Church, to the State. The Church loses a member, the State a Pillar; godly men
lose an example, wicked men lose an advocate, poor men lose a Patron, all men
lose a comfort.

That is the fitst thing the Prophet bemoaneth in the loss of righteous men.
First it went to his heart that the world should be left empty of piety, and
all those virtuous examples, that God should cut off those precious plants,
those that are looking-glasses for us to see our selves in, and that pitch of
perfection we should breath after, and aim at. That is the first thing.

But that is not all: for their was impendant danger when they were gone. It is
a prognosticating of some evil to befall a place, when God takes them away. If
Noah enter into the Ark, the world may expect a deluge. If Lot be out of
Sodom, let it look for a shower of fire and brimstone: God himself expresses
himself by the Angel that he could do nothing as long as Los was in Sodom; he
had a commission not to rain fire and brimstone while Lot was there, while Lots
person and prayers were there: as soon as Lot was gone, there comes a cloud of
Judgment: and in that a shower. So the Saints when they are translated into the
Ark; when they are took from the earth as Noah was, ( Noah was to ascend from
the earth to the Ark) when Lot is gone to the City God provided for him, the
City of refuge, then we may expect one Judgment or other, for they are means to
hinder, and keep them from being poured out.

That is the second thing in the loss of righteous men. They are took away for
their good, but for our ill: we have lost the benefit of their example, the
comfort of their society, and now we may fear that Judgments will come
plentifully: for merciful men are taken away from the evil to come. So I have
done with the first part of the Complaint.

I will be very brief in the second: The second part of the Text.
that is, over the living, no man considers it: this is truly to be bemoaned.
There is a doudle extent, first of the Act, they consider not; And then an
extent of the person, no man considers.

This Act has a great latitude. It is either an aggravation of the former:
they lay it not to heart, nay, they do not take it into consideration: or else
it is a rendering a reason of the former; they lay it not to heart, because they
bethink not themselves.

Consideration is an act of the judicial part of the understanding, as
incogitancy is a rocking of reason asleep, a shuting of the door of reason.
Neglect, that is a negligence of due care to be taken: on the other side,
inconsideration or incogitancy, that is a neglect of the due course of reason,
due pondering of a thing. A man is said not to consider, that scanneth not,
that examineth not the cause, that lays not the effects and consequences
together, that compares not one thing with another. So that it is thus much
now, they considered not; that is, they pondered not in their hearts, they
examined not according to the rule of reason; they looked not to it what should
be Gods meaning in taking away merciful men from the evil to come; they looked
not forward to the time to come, nor backward to the time past, they were
altogether inconsiderate.

It is a great sin, Inconsideraton a great sin.
and a fruit of sin, and a cause of all sin. It is a sin in it self, for God
has given man Reason to use upon all occasions, to consider Gods works, and
his own works, and those things that befall others and himself. The true
improvement of Christianity is the exercise of consideration. That exciteth a
man to repentance. David lays it as a ground, I considered my ways, and
turned my feet to thy testimonies. A man never repents that considers not
his ways. The want of consideration keeps a man freezing, and settling on the
dregs of sin.

It is a fruit of sin, A frui of sin.
of the first sin: incogitancy brings security, that rocks reason asleep;
then passion has her scope, when reason governs not. It is the trne
punishment of the first sin, and the fruit of it, because reason is decayed in
man by sin, reason was then unrectified, reason grew irrigular.

Nay, A cause of sin.
it is the cause of all sin. We can resolve no particular sin to any other
principle but this, that men consider not before they commit it. The reason why
men go on in excess and riot, and continue in drunkenness, is nothing but this,
they lay it not heart, they look not forward, what will be the issue and event,
they consider not the account they are to make to God, they think not that God
is providing a cup of deadly wine, and that all must appear before the Judgment
seat of Christ. The reason why men's desires of the world, and of living here
are so enlarged, it is the want of consideration of what is the heppiness of
heaven, of the promises that God has made. There is no sin but it is resolved
into this case. So here it is, that the Prophet complains of the want of
consideration, When merciful men were taken away, they consider it not; to
sympathize, to prepare themselves to what God would do after he had removed
these, that when he had removed the obstacles, that then he would pour his
wrath upon them.

Secondly, there is another extent of the Word; that is, of the subject of the
person.

No man. It argues the neglect to be general. A man would have thought, that
upon the mention of the first word, Mercyful men are taken away: the mourners
should go about in the streets; the poor Orphans should weep, because they have
lost a Patron: No such matter, no consideration on no hand; that is a wonder:
had the merciful man no wife? no children? no friend to mourn after him, when
he was buried in the earth? was there no well-willers to him, that had benefit
by his piety to mourn for the righteous man? was there none like to himself?
one righteous man will mourn for another. What is this then, No man? If they
would not regard the piety of the godly man or merciful, when he lived, me
thinks when he died there should be some consideration. A Mountain as long as
it stands, men take no great notice of it ^but if it fall, all eyes look upon
it. The Sun when he is in his strength, there are few eyes that look on it; but
if it come to an eclipse, every man gettteh into his Turret.

Generally men delight to look upon those Stars, that in their opinion they
think are fallen. All these the godly man is. He shines as a star here, as the
Sun in his strength after, he is as a Mountain, as a Beacon upon a Mountain,
more glorious. The Mountain, and the star falls, the Sun is in the Eclipse,
Merciful men are taken away, and no man considers it.

I will not say it is to be taken in the full extent, it implies not a
nullity, but a paucity. As in that place in the Psalm; there is none that does
good, no not one. The Prophet does not imply, that there was not one godly man
at all, but so few that they could hardly be numbered; a great paucity. So here,
No man considers; that is those that considered, were so very few, that there
was hardly notice taken of them, they were hardly in the compass of a Number.

Nay, it is twice noted, No man, no man, to show it it was almost a nullity;
there is not any, not any; that is, they were exceeding few.

What is the reason? Because they were not acquainted with the rule, and way of
piety, therefore they mourned not. If piety were within, it would simpathize
without, as there is like rejoicing, so they would sorrow together.

We are not to think, but they had natural affection, though it were almost cut
off: It is likely if any of their kin were took away, they would mourn: If a
Pather or Mother were taken away, the most impenitent man would have tears;
though not for sin, yet for losses and crosses: then there are those that would
cry with Elisha, My father my father, the Chariots of Israel, etc. If a
brother or a sister were taken away, I doubt not but there are those that would
follow with the voice of lamentation, Alas my brother, alas my sister, woe is me
for my brother Jonathan. We have tears for brethren. Further, if it were but a
child that were lost, a man would be sure to find tears for him, and sigh along
time after, and would say with David; Oh Absalom, my son, my son, would God I
had died for thee my son. All conditions that live find tears in men's eyes, and
consideration of their departure, only the godly and the righteous man finds
none.

Here is their stupidity. Can there be a greater stupidity, then to make a man
die twice? as they die the death of their bodies, so to make them suffer a
death in our memories? as they perish to the world, so to perish also in our
thoughts and meditations. We owe God so much, we owe piety so much, we owe the
memorial of many so much, we owe our selves so much, as to take it into
consideration. And yet no man considers.

This is the fault which we may examine our selves of. For if we now make
reflection of all this upon our selves, we must find a conformity with our
times. There is never a word of this Scripture, but it is true now. I will now
take the parts in order.

First, we cannot deny that evil is to come upon this place.

Nay, it were well if it were to come: it is come already: it has overtaken
us. If we load, the earth with the evil of sin, it is impossible that God
should forbear long. The evil of sin that surchargeth the earth must be
unloaden again, by this burden, by the burden of punishment: one burden must
justle out another. Evils there have been impendant, that we have seen. Evils
there are now present that we begin to groan under: and no man can tell where
that evil will stay. There is evil present, and evils to come, because our
evils are still multiplying: the beginnings of sorrows, and sufferings, and
fears; God grant it may stay. But our state and condition is like them in this,
that they are yet impendant. We see the heavens grown black, judgments are a
ripening. When ye see the sky red, when ye see the sky black, judgment is
beginning, not only beginning to bud, but it begins to spread and enlarge it
self. Thus far there is a correspondency. There is evil that we have cause to
fear and suspect, yet further to come on this place.

Secondly, there is a conformity with the other too, in our negligence. The
world sends forth men now void of natural affection. It was never so before.
For if before they neglected others, yet they were careful of themselves. But
men now desperately neglect their own salvations. There is no respect to God,
no pity of others, no not of themselves.

I do not wonder that men heretofore considered not, when they loved their
lives better then their sins, because they had some sensible taste of that that
was temporal, when they loved their lives better then heaven, But now men love
not their lives best, but their sins better: for though their lives be in
danger, yet their sins are kept.

It is an admirable thing to consider, how every way we are given to plenty, to
riot, to security, notwithstanding God comes near, and brings his judgment
even to the door, and makes it swell. He forbeareth a long time, to try us
with mercies, and then he takes a severe course. Where shall men see the face
of an alteration? our lives are the same, our delights the same, our vanities
and follies the same; we keep the same sins still, as if we were bent to
provoke God further, to see what he will do.

That is an evident sign we consider not for what purpose God sends his
plagues, we consider not what he does, when he takes away others for our
example; none lay it to heart, and take it into consideration, it swimmeth not
in his brain. We begin to tremble, and we think our selves well, if we provide
a country house: but God has beset us in the Country, and in the City. There
will be no flight but to repentance, there is the City of refuge: and there is
no way to repent but by consideration: these must be took to heart before there
can be amendment, and till there be amendment, there will he no removing of
judgment. It is plain then that we are conform able in that part of the Text.

And in the first too. That merciful men are taken away, experience shows it
daily: they are taken so frequently, that there is hardly any left: they are
not only taken away, but swept away. And if there were no other proof, this
representation, this sad spectacle before our eyes, that is an argument to make
the proof of the conformity of the first part of the text with us.

In the text there is mention made of a righteous man, of a merciful man. The
Spirit of God brings in all the parts by pairs. It is fulfiled in the
solemnity, and occasion of this day: by pairs God calls us to piety, by pairs
he gives us spectacles of mortality.

I thought I had come to do the duty for one, to perform the solemnity of one
Funeral: but after, I perceived I was called to do the office for two. It was
not so from the beginning, it falls not out so every day. Here is the true
proof that these are the times of mortality: set the pairs any way, and we
shall see that there is one free, none can secure himself from the stroke of
death. One, a virtuous ancient Gentlewoman: the other a grave learned minister,
but of younger condition: here are both ages took away, and both presented: not
only so, but here are both conditions of life, and both presented together; and
here are both sexes, and both presented together, to teach us, that no sex, no
condition, no age can secure themselves. I will smite the Shepherd (says
Christ, foretelling the Disciples what should befall them.) Here is the smiting
of the Shepherd, and the sheep too: But both together, and I believe this
place cannot send such another pair.

For the one, He was the most eminent for his place; For the other she was the
most eminent for her piety. I was not acquainted with the conversation of
either, and therefore I shall not speak much: and the information I had, it was
not much, for it was needless: I may save a labor for both: for if I speak any
thing false, ye are able to refute me; if I speak any thing true (as all must
be true that is spoken here) yet ye are able to prevent me, and I can say
nothing that ye know not.

For the one; I here that he had the report of a man that was conscionable in
the discharge of his place. And all that I shall say of him shall be only this;
there is cause that ye should take to heart his death. For what is the reason
that in this little Parish that is as healthful as another. (But God is
wounderful in his ways, and we must not search into the judgments of God) that
it is not full eight years, but there have three succeeded, that have been
commended to this place, and have died one after another? Is it so that ye kill
them with unkindness? the world says so I tell ye. I know not, but this I am
sure of, that there have been too many unkind passages: where the fault is,
your selves know. But this is to be taken into consideration, that God removes
them from ye, as if ye were worthy of none. If God send us these helps and
Lamps that waste themselves to shine to us, and to break and dispense to us
the bread of life, shall we not give them encouragement in their studies, that
they may go on quietly and peaceably? A word is enough for that. Howsoever some
of ye would not suffer him to rest, God has taken him to his rest. There is
more might be said, but I will not say too much.

For the other, since I came from my house, I had information at my first
footing in the Parish, they said she was as good a woman as lived. At my first
footing in the house, they said she was a very good woman. Those that have
lived in the Parish, they testify, that she was a woman most eminent for her
piety and virtue. Shall she want a memorial? I asked of those that have known
her of old, they say, she was a righteous woman, for the righteousness of
piety, and a merciful woman for the righteonsness of mercy. She had respect to
both tables, to her duty to God, to her Neighbor. For the mercy of charity,
she was good to the poor: she was a lender to those that were in necessity, and
a giver too. For the mercy of piety she was very compassionate to those that
were in afflictions, she sympathized with them, visited them and comforted
them. For the mercy of peace, in time of contention, she labored to set all
strait, she had a soft answer co pacify wrath. She was a merciful woman, and
God has given her the reward, has took her to his rest. She was a lover of
peace, he has taken her to the place of peace. She was one hat studied
happiness, and he has taken her to a place of happiness. He has took her from
these evils that we are reserved to, and that we may fear.

That is the difference between a godly and an impenitent man. Impenitent men,
if they be took away, they are taken to further evil, if they be left alive,
they are left to further evil. Merciful men, if they be took away, they are
taken away for the eschewing of evil: and if they be left on the earth, it is
for the diverting of evil. They divert them while they live, and shun them when
they die. As they labor to honor God in their lives, so God gratifieth them
in their death, he takes them to himself.

This consideration, and occasion, is a proof of the Text. As it is proved in
all the Text, let us disprove it in our selves, that this word may never go in
the course it lies here, but in a contrary course. That righteous men perish,
and men do lay it to heart, (let it be said so) and merciful men, though they
be took away, yet there are those that take it into consideration. I have done
with the last part, and with the occasion.

THE GOOD MAN'S EPITAPH: OR, THE HAPPINESS OF Those that Die Well.
SERMON IX.
REVBLAT. 14.13. I heard a voice from heaven, saying unto me, write, Blessed
are the dead which die in the Lord, from hence forth, yea, says the Spirit,
that they may rest from their labors, and their works do follow them.


THE Scripture will afford us many Texts for Funerals. Me thinks there is none
more fit, nor more ordinarily preached on than two; and they are both of them
voices from heaven.

One was to Isaiah the Prophet. He was commanded to cry. Isa. 40.6,
The voice said, Cry. And be said, What shall I cry? All flesh is grass, and
all the goodness thereof, is as the flower of the field.

You will say: That is a fit Text indeed: So is this here, A voice from heaven
too. Luke 1.4.
But Saint John is not commanded to cry it, as Isaiah was: he is commanded to
write it.

That that is written is for the more assurance. It seems good to me (faith
Saint Luke in his preface to his Gospel) Most excellent Theophilus, to write to
thee of these things in order, that thou might know the certainty, etc.

It did not please God for many generatious to teach his Church by writing. The
Fathers before the flood he did not teach by writing. They lived long: their
memory served them instead of books: and they had now and then some Divine
revelations. They needed no writing.

But after that the days of man grew short (as they did in the time of Moses
the Psalm 90.10.
man of God: the days of our years are threescore years and ten: then (I say)
when the days of man came thus to be shortened, it pleased God to teach his
Church by writing.

And although, the whole will of God, all things necessary to solvation be
written, yet God did appoint some special things above all others to be
written, some passages of divide truths. As that same history of the foil of
Amalek in the wilderness, Scribehoc ad monumentum, Exodus 17.14. Isa 8.1.
says God to Moses; write this for a memorial in a book. So God commands
Isaiah, to take to himself a great roll, and to write in it with a man's pen.
Ezekiel. 24.2.
So to Exekiel: Son of man, write thee the name of the day, even of this same
day, the king of Babylon set himself against Jerusalem this same day. And Saint
John (to go no further) though he was commanded to write this whole Epistle,
and all the Visions he saw, yet there is some special thing, that God in a more
special manner would have him to write. And here is one; Write this same voice:
this (...) that came down from heaven, write it.

Though that writing adds nothing to the Authority of the Word. For the word
of God is the same Word, and is as well to be obeyed, and as well to be
believed, when it is delivered by tradition, as when it is by writing: yet
notwithstanding we are to bless God that we have it written. How many Divine
truths have been turned into lies? And how many divine Histories have been
turned into fables, when things have been delivered by tradition from hand to
hand, and from man to man? Tradition was never so safe a preserver of Divine
truths.

We are to thank God (I say) for the whole Scripture, Rom.14.1.
for every part of it: for whatsoever is written, is written for our learning
that we through patience, and comfort of the Scriptures might have hope.

But what comfortable thing is this, that here Saint John is commanded to
write? Write, what? Blessed are the dead that die in the Lord, so says the
spirit, they rest from their labors, and their works follow them.

In the which you have five things;

First, The division of the words.
you have a Proposition. Dead men are blessed, Blessed are the dead. Now,
because this is not generally true, therefore.

Secondly, you have a Restriction: all Dead men are not blessed. But who are
blessed then? they that die in the Lord. There is the Restriction.

Thirdly, you have the Time from whence this blessedness beginneeh. From
henceforth, blessed are the dead that die in the Lord.

Fourthly, you have the Particulars wherein this blessedness consists. It is in
a Relaxation of their labors; and a Retribution of their works, they rest from
their labors, and their works follow them.

Lastly, you have a Confirmation of all this. It is confirmed first, by a voice
from heaven; A voice from heaven said write. And then it is confirmed by te
Spirit of God; Even so says the spirit, they rest from their labors.

You must not look that in this shortness of time, I should go through all
these. And I do not intend it. It may be only the first and second. I pray let
me take some time to speak of the occasion of our meeting. I would do all
within the hour.

I begin with the first. Dead men are blessed. Observation 1.
Blessed are the dead.

Blessedness, is a thing that every man desires. He is no man, but a monster,
that would live wretchedly. Every man desires to be blessed.

But that thing which we all desire in common, when it comes to be determined,
most men mistake it. Some place blessedness in riches. And some place it in
honors. Some place it in pleasures. And some place it in health of body. And
some place it in civil virtues. What need I tell you more? S. Austin in his 19.
book DeCivitate Dei, Aust lib. 19. de Civit. Dei.
tells us of no fewer then two hundred fourscore and eight several places of
blessedness. All determined in this life.

To let them pass. Blessedness consists in the enjoying of the sovereign
good. That same sovereign good is God. We enjoy God both in this life, and in
the life to come.

A double blessedness.
From hence there is a double Blessedness.

Distinguish them as you will; Whether you call one Beatudo vioe, the other
Beatudo patrioe, as some do. The Blessedness of the way, and the Blessedness of
the Country. Or whether you call one Beatudo spei; the other Beatudo rei. The
Blessedness of expectation, or the blessedness of fruition. Or whether you call
them (as usually you do,) The Blessedness of Grace here, and the Blessedness of
Glory hereer; It mattereth not in what terms yon distinguish them, but so we
know this, have one, and you are sure of both. There is none have the
Blessedness of Glory, but such as were first Blessed in the state of Grace. And
there is none Blessed in a state of Grace, but shall be Blessed in the state of
Glory.

There is a threefold condition of a Blessed soul. It is here in the body, (as
long as God pleases) But then it is from the Lord.

It is with the Lord, but then it is from the Body. There is a third Condition,
when it shall be in the body again, Phil, 3.21.
and with the Lord for ever. Then is the full consumation of bliss, when this
same body of ours shall be raised up, and made like the glorious body of Jesus
Christ.

But our Blessedness in this life, though we have here a comfortable fellowship
with God, yet, because that it is not per speciem, it is not by sight, it is
but by faith, we walk by faith and not by sight. 2. Cor. 5.7.
Because while we are here (though we do see the face of God in the Mirror or
glass of the Gospel, yet because) we are absent from him, as he is objectum
Beatificans. Because here the tears are not all wiped from our eyes, and we
have not yet a full rest from our labors, nor a full reward for our services.
Therefore our Blessedness here it is nothing (to speak of) in comparison of
that Blessedness which we shall have hereafter, when the soul is separated from
the body, and is with the Lord.

Therefore (says the Apostle) I desire to be dissolved, Phil. 1 23.
and to be with Christ, and this (quoth he) it is melius, it is better: Better?
Yea, it is multo melius, it is much better: Yea, it is multo mag is melius (you
must bear with Saint Paul's incongruity of speech) it is much more better to be
with him. If our hope were only in this life, 1. Cor. 15.19.
of all men, believers, the children of God, were most miserable.

But the hope of our immortal life, is the life of this mortal.

There was some little glimpse of this light, even amongst the Gentiles, (such
as did believe the immortality of the soul.) One of the heathen Poets could
say, No man is blessed till death.

Cressus the Lybian (a man happy in his great achievements) asked Solon; Pray
(quoth he) tell me, what man do thou think happy? He named one to him, (
Tellus) a man that was dead. But (quoth he) whom else do thou think haypy? He
named two btethren more, that did a work of piety to their Mother (it were too
long to tell you the particular story) and they were dead, I think them happy,
quoth he. Cressus began to be angry, that he himself should not be thought a
happy man. Am not I happy? Oh (quoth he) I take thee for a great King, but I
accont thee not happy before death. Cressus grew to misery, and then he cried
out, Oh Solon, Solon, etc.

Here we have a word, a voice from heaven: and the Word confirmed by the
Spirit: and we have testimonies of Scripture: and we have some little glimpse
of this light from the Gentiles: yet notwithstanding, flesh and blood will not
be persuaded of this, that dead men should be happy, that there is a happiness
in death.

There are many things they have against it. First, say they, Death is an
enemy. It is very true, Death is is an enemy, the Apostle calls it so. The
last enemy that shall be destroyed is Death.

And, say they, it is a terrible enemy. It is very true, and of all terrible
things the most terrible: yea, and nature abhors it exceedingly. See it in
any creature that lives: Mark if every creature would not use legs, wings,
hoofs, horns, tusks, beaks, or whatsoever thing it is wherewith God and nature
has armed it, to preserve life.

Solomon says it (but he says it in the person of a carnal man, as he does
many things by Metaphors in his book of Ecclesiastes.) That a living dog, is
better then a dead lion.

Eccles.9.4.
Satan is a liar, and the father of lies, but yet notwithstanding that word of
his was a truth, Job. 2 4
Skin for skin; yea, all that a man has will he give for his life. Vita dum
super est, been est, said Moecenas, when he lay grievously sick of the Gout, So
long as life remains, it is well enough. You have one man that lives in
extreme poverty, eats no bread, but the bread of affliction. yet he would
live. You have another man that carries about him a diseased body, the arrows
of God sticking fast in him, Job. 6.3,
and the venom of them drinking up his spirits, by some sickness; yet he would
live. You have another man, that has a rotten name that stinks while he
lives, yet he would live still.

Yea, and not only wicked men, do make many base shifts to live ( they have
their portion in this life; no wonder therefore they do it) but even Gods best
children, that look for a better life then this, when this ended, are not
willing to part with this life if they could keep it: Do you not remember how
David pleaded for life; Oh let me live, Psa. 119.175. psalm. 39.13. Isa.
38.18,19.
that I may praise thy Name: oh spare me a little before I go hence, and be no
more? Hezekiah turns his face to the wall and wept, oh shall the grave give
thanks unto thee? or shall the dead celebrate thy praise? No, Vivens, vivens,
it is the living, it is the living that must praise thee, as I do this day.

I know indeed that sometime you shall find some of Gods children, wishing for
death, Job 7.15. Number.11.15.
Job, My soul has chosen strangling, and death, rather then my self. Lord I
pray thee (says Moses) kill me out of hand, and let me not see my
wretchedness. Elijah, 1. King. 19.4
when he fled from Jezable for his life, Lord (quoth he) take away my life, for
I am not better then my fathers. He was not willing that Jezable should take
away his life, but he would have God to take it away. You know Jonah his
pettish mood that he was in, when he would needs think to know what was better
for him, then God himself does; Jonak. 4 3.
Lord, take I beseech thee, my life from me; for it is better for me to dic,
then to live.

These men of God, they were sons of men, they had their passions as other men
have; and passion was never good judge between life and death.

I know again, Job 3.20.
that there is question made by Job; Wherefore is light given to a man that is
in misery, and life to the bitter in soul? Such a man I confess, that has
bitterness of soul, he may happily seek for death, as for treasures, and be
glad when he has found the grave.

But let God be but pleased a little to allay that bitterness, let him but lay
up that bitter pill in sugar a little, and then he will like life well enough.

Why do we all this while go from my Text? Surely there be so many voices upon
earth against it, that if there were not a voice from heaven to say, Blessed
are the dead, that die in the Lord, we should scarce believe it.

But then if the dead be blessed, Quest.
why do we not die, that we may be blessed?

There is such a like Question of Scipio in that same book of Tullies; Answ.
Somnium Scipionis. Scipio asked his Father, when his father had told him of
those glories that the soul enjoyed in immortality: Why (says he) do I tarry
thus long upon the earth? why do not I hasten to die? The scholars of
Eugesius, when they heard their Master dispute of the immortality of the soul,
went and laid violent hands upon themselves, that they might go to that
immortality. And so Cato Uticensis after he read Platoes books of the
Immortality of the Soul; made away himself. Many such examples there have been.
And I find oftentimes in your bills many that have laid violent hands upon
themselves, some that cut their own throats, and some that hang themselves. I
pray give me leave a little to speak upon this.

Saint Austin tells me of five causes, for which persons do usually lay violent
hands upon themselves.

The first is this. Five causes of self-murder.
Some do it to avoid some shame, or some dishonor, or misery, or beggary, that
shall befall them. Thus did Achitophel, when he saw that his counsel was
defeated, he went home and hanged himself: Thus have many done to avoid shame
and dishonor. Alas poor wretches; While they seek to escape temporal
punishment, they run into eternal, like our fishes in the proverb, out of the
drying pan into the fire: into hell fire, where the worm dies not, and where
the fire never goes out.

Secondly, some have done it to avoid the terrors of a guilty conscience. Thus
Judas, troubled in conscience, after he had betrayed Christ, he went and hung
himself.

Poor wretch; He had more need he had lived, that he might have healed that sin
of his by repentance. This is not a way to expiate thy sin, this is a way to
increase it. Judas when he killed himself, he killed as wicked a man as was
upon the earth, and yet he shall answer to God, as well for that nocent blood of
his own that he spilt, as he shall for the innocent blood of the Son of God
that he betrayed.

Thirdly, we find some that have done this to avoid some villainy that they
feared should be offered them. As for example. Pelagia a noble Lady, that we
read of in Ecclesiastcall stories, when she was followed by some barbarous
soldiers that would have abused her, she speaking nothing but, never a villain
of them all shall touch me; threw her self over a bridge, and drowned her self.

Some of the Fathers do little less then commend her for this. Saint Augustine
condemns her, so should I. For, why should she that had done no hurt, do hurt
to her self? why should she to escape the hands of the Nocent, lay violent
hands upon her self that was innocent? Our chastity of body is not lost, when
the chastity of our mind remains inviolated.

Fourthly; Some have done this to purchase to themselves a name of valor.
Rasis in the book of the Machabees did thus. And if there were no other thing
in the world to show that book to be Apochriphal Scripture, this is enough, in
that the Author of that book commends Rasis for it.

It is not valor for to fly a danger: it is valor to bear it. If any example
can be alleged to this purpose, that of Sampsons may. But Saint Austin he
answers. The Spirit of God secretly commands him to do it. And we may
verily believe it: for if the Spirit of God had not commanded it, yea, and
assisted him in it too, he had never done that he did, in pulling down the
house upon himself and the Philistims.

Lastly, some have done it, or they might have done it, because Blessed are the
dead. Some will die, that they may be blessed.

Poor wretches; They that diprive themselves of this life, may not look for a
better when this is ended. I will not judge particulars, I leave them unto God.
But in the general, Considering that life is Gods blessing: it is he that
gives it, and it is he that must take it away. Considering that man is not
lord of his own spirit. Considering that God has set us here in our stations,
and we may not move out without leave from our General. Considering that we are
set here to serve God, and we must serve him as long as he will, and not as
long as we will. Or specially considering that God has forbidden us to kill
others, therefore forbidden us much more to kill our selves: therefore surely
(except Gods mercy be greater then I can give warrant for) they that die thus,
die eternally. And we had need beseech God with all earnestness of spirit, to
keep us from such a fearful temptation as this: for they that die thus, die not
in the Lord, and therefore cannot be blessed: for my Text says it of no other,
but of those, Blessed are the dead, that die in the Lord. This is the first
point.

I come to the Restriction. Die in the Lord. Observat. 2.


It may be construed two ways, What it is to ^ie in the Lord Romans 16.1.
the preposition is Ambiguous: for the preposition many times in Scripture
signifies In Domino, or propter Dominum. As Romans 16.1. I commend unto you Phebe
our sister, that you would receive her, in Domino, in the Lord; that is for the
Lords sake, as becomes Saints. And in the twelfth verse of the same Chapter,
Salute the beloved Persis which labored much in the Lord; that is, labored
much in Gods cause, for the Lord. So again, Say to Archippus, look to the
ministry that thou have received, In Domino; that is, for the Lord, for the
Lords service, for his work. I might give you many more instances. There is one
place most pregnant, Ephesians. 4.1. I Paul a prisoner, in Domino; so says the
vulgar Latin, and so is the Greek interpretation, In the Lord. What means
Saint Paul? A prisoner in the Lord, what is that? A prisoner for the Lord, a
prisoner for the Lords cause. And thus you may take the word here in the Text
-- Blessed are they that die, in Domino; that is, such as die in causa Domini:
and thus Judicious Beza, (to whose judgment I attribute much in translations)
he reads it so, Blessed are the dead, qui moriuutur causa Domini: and then in
his Annotations, propter Dominum. And if you take it thus, then the Martyrs
only are blessed. That Martyrs are blessed, the Church of God is so far from
making a question, that they set it down as a Rule. Injuriam facit Martyri qui
orat pro Martyr; A man does wrong to a Martyr, that prays for a Martyr, their
blessedness is so sure: for, He that loses his life for my sake, and the
Gospels, shall find it, says Christ. If he loses a temporal life, he shall
find an eternal. If he lose a life accompanied with sorrow, he shall find
another life that is with joy, such joy as cannot be conceived, such joy as
shall never be ended.

Precious in the eyes of the Lord is the death of his Saints.

There are two things (says S. Bernard) that makes the death of a Saint
precious; the one is a good life before; the other is a good cause for which he
dies. A good life will make it a precious death: but a good cause will make it
a more precious death. But that is the most precious death, that has both a
good life before it, and a good cause coming next.

The Matyrs are blessed, but they must be such Martyrs as suffer for the Lord,
be sure of that, or else they are not blessed. There be some that would be
accounted Martyrs (a great company of such we have had of late) that have died
for broaching of reason, and some for sowing of sedition; some for absolving
subjects from the oath of Allegiance, some for attempting to blow up
Parliament houses. Such as these are not Martyrs. It is not the punishment, it
is the cause that makes the Martyr. Our blessed Lord himself, that never did
evil, was crucified between two evildoers; there was an equal punishment,
there was not an equal cause. It must be the cause that we must look to, if we
look to be blessed.

But I cantot stand upon that. Here is the first interpretation: To die in the
Lord, is for the Lord.

But there is a second, and that is more large, die in the Lord, that is, die
in the faith of the Lord. Salute Andronicus, and Junius my fellow prisoners,
which were in the Lord before me, Says S. Paul; that is, that were Believers,
that were in the faith before me.

And (to let pass many other places) if there be no resurrection of the dead
(says the Apostle) then we that are asleep in Christ, 1. These. 4.
etc. If we believe that Jesus died, then those that sleep in Jesus shall he
bring with him, etc. and Again, He shall descend from heaven with a shout, and
they that are dead in Christ shall rise first. Now what is it to die in Christ
in a large sense?

I will tell you. He that would die in Christ, first he must die in obedience.

There are many works of obedience, 1. To die in obedience
that we are to do.

Our last and greatest act of obedience, is to resign up this same spirit of
ours willingly, cheerfully into the hands of God that gave it.

If we have not attained to that strength, that some have done; that is, to
live patiently, and die willingly, yet we should labor to attain to thus much
strength to live willingly, and to die patiently; So as Christ may be magnified
in my body (says the Apostle) I pass not, it makes no matter, let it either be
by life, or by death.

Phil. 1.
When we have done the work that God has set us to do, we must be gone: and
thus must every one say with himself; Lord if I have done all the work thou
have appointed me to do, call me away at thy pleasure. Here is the first. In
obedience.

Secondly. 2. In repentance
Die in repentance. I remember what Possidonius said of Saint Augustine, a
little before his death, that it was necessary that men when they died, they
should not go out of the world, absque digna and competenti resipiscentia,
without a fit competent repentance. He himself did so, for he caused the
penitential Plalmes to be written, and they were before him, as he lay upon his
bed, and he was continually reading those penitential Psalms, and meditating
upon them with many tears: he died even in the very act of contrition.

I do love to see a man cheerful upon his deathbed: but I do more love to see
a man penitent. There is a day indeed, when God will wipe away all tears from
our eyes; When that comes, then he will wipe away these tears of repentance
too, these tears of godly sorrow: But the Lord grant he may find me with tears
in mine eyes.

Thirdly; 3. In faith.
Die in faith. Indeed if ever Faith had a work to do, it bath then a work to
do, when all other comforts in the world fail us, and friends go from us; then
faith, to lay hold on the promises; I know that my Redeemer lives, and that I
shall rise again at the last day, and be covered with my skin, and shall see
God with these same eyes. Thus faith.

And then fourthly. 4. With prayer.
Die with Invocation, calling upon the name of God. Thus have all the Saints of
God done, continually commending of their souls to God in prayers. Saint Paul
would have us commend our souls to God in well-doing. And it is a necesary
thing every morning we rise, and every night we go to bed, but especially when
we see some harbingers of death sent unto us, then to have nothing to do, Luke
23.46. Act. 7.59.
but with our blessed Lord; Father, into thy hands I commend my spirit. And
with Saint Steven, Lord Jesus receive my spirit.

And next to this, 5. In charity.
let me put in also, Mercy, Charity: Die forgiving one another. Thus our Lord
taught us to do, when he cried out, Father forgive them for they know not what
they do. Luke 23.34. Act. 7.60.
And Saint Steven taught us to do so too; Lord lay not this sin to their charge.

And then lastly, (for I cannot stand upon these things) there must be a death
in Peace. Peace with God: Peace with our own consciences, and Peace with all
the world.

And now the man that dies thus; 6. In peace.
dies with willingness: dies in repentance, dies in faith, dies with
invocation, dies in charity, dies in peace, this man dies in the Lord, and
such a one is blessed.

They that would thus die in him, How to come to die in the Lord.
must live in him. A man cannot be said to die in London that never lived in
London. A man cannot be said to die in the Lord, that never lived in the Lord.
If thou do not live in obedience, in faith, in repentence, in invocation, in
charity, in peace, thou can not die in these. A man must first live the life
of the righteous, before he can die the death of the righteous.

And then again, if a man would die thus, He must be well acquainted with
death: grow familiar with him by meditation. Many things more I might have said
to this purpose, but I am loath to transgress the hour. I have done with that.

Give me only leave now to speak in a few words unto the present occasion.

You have brought here (beloved) the body of your well-beloved neighbor,
Mistress S.H. late the Wife of your late reverent Pastor, Doctor, R.H. to be
laid up together with her Husband, in hope of a blessed and glorious
resurrection. It is long since that I did in this Place perform this service at
the burial of his former Wife, a woman of whom I may not speak, for though I
hold my peace, the very stone here in the wall will say enough of her: and you
that know her, cannot but assure the truth of it.

I am entreated to perform now, the like duty to the second Wise. And I was
easily entreated to do it: for that name of brother and sister, that was
usually between us for many years continued, may very well challenge of me, any
duty I am able to perform. I am straightened in time, and I cannot speak what I
would: and I do perceive already by this that I have spoken, that if I should
speak much more, my passion would not give me leave. Let me tell you one thing
amongst many others, it is a thing extraordinary, and it is for imitation. The
Virtuous woman in the last of the Proverbs, is commended for many things;
Amongst others this is one, She does her husband good, and not evil, all the
days of her life. And mark it I pray you: It is not all the days of his life,
and yet peradventure some woman might be thought a good woman, that does that,
but she may perhaps outlive her Husband. A vertuoks woman will do him good, and
not evil all the days of her life: And for this amongst many other things, I
do commend this virtuous Gentlewoman. I may almost say with the words there in
the end of that Chapter; Many daughters have done excollently, but thou
surmountest them all. So I may say, many women peradventure have done
excellently in this kind; but I do not know of any one that ever has done the
like to her Husband. I pray you hear it.

Her Husband had a brother that lived in Portugal, at the time of his death,
who was there married, he had there three children at least, two sons and a
daughter. This virtuous good Woman would give her self no rest, till she had
these children out of Portugal: she got the two sons hither. And what was her
care? (here is another exceslency of hers) her chief care was for their souls.
What did she? or rather what did she not to win those children from Popery (in
which they have been brought up) and to bring them to the true service of God?
She obtained it, she got it.

When she had done that, won them to our religion, she had not done all: one of
these had a desire to exercise some Merchandise by Sea. She furnished him to
the Sea, she furnshed him with money for his adventures. The other she bound
Apprentise here in the City to an honest trade: and she has given them a
liberal childs portion, I may say so. A child's portion, that they may thank
God (and I hope they will have the grace to do it) that they had, I do not say
such a Aunt in law, but such a Mother.

Here was not all. She sent for the Mother too; she was but sister-in-law to
her Husband: she sent for the mother, she sent for the Daughter: they were
here. She clothed them; she fed them some months: and if she could have won
them to our religion, she would have maintained the Mother while she had lived:
she would have brought up the Daughter, as her own child: But that could not be
done, it was a work beyond her strength.

You see here a virtuous Woman, that did good to her Husband, not all the days
of his life, but all the days of her life: To the very last day of her life,
she never did cease to do good to her Husband in his kindred: and I think I may
say, that she was more careful of his kindred, then of her own. But this is not
all. This kindness you will say was showed to her Husbands kindred. Hear a
little more therefore.

She knew that there were many Ministers that had a great charge of children,
and peradventure would be very glad to have some of their children taken off of
their hands. She has given to the putting out of five Ministers children, to
bind them Apprentices, fifty pounds.

She knew that there were some poor persons of the Palatinate here, which stood
in necessity; She has given to the reliese of them, twenty pounds.

She knew that there were many poor souls, that lay in Turkish slavery. She
has given for the redeeming of them, twenty pounds.

Nay, yet more; She considered, that her Husband was sometime a poor scholar
in the University of Cambridge. And she considered too, that, there are many
Ministers Widows that lived well, while their husband lived, that are fain to
crave relief (the greater is the shame of some men) when they are dead. She
has therefore given five hundred pounds to purchase lands, and with this land
to maintain, partly two Scholars in the University, from their first coming
thither, till they be Masters of Art. And then with the residue to maintain
four Widows, that have been the Wives of honest preaching Ministers. Zacheus,
his offer was, but half of his goods. Lord, half of my goods I give to the
poor. For ought I can perceive and understand, above half of her estate she
has given to charitable uses. I say no more of her. These works of her will
praise her in the gates.

She died in the Country. And I am sorry that I had not information (as I did
desire) of her behavior in her sickness. I have it not: I can say nothing of
it: but thus much. It was not possible, that such a creature, that lived thus
(as we know she did) in obedience to God, in repentance, in faith, with
invocation of Gods mercy, in Charity, in Peace, but that her death was blessed.
She that lived in the Lord, no question but she died in the Lord, and she is
blessed; for Blessed are the dead, that die in the Lord.

Good Lord teach us to number our days, that we may apply our hearts to
wisdom; and grant that as we grow in years, we may grow in knowledge of thy
truth, in obedience to thy will, in faith in thy promises, in love toward thee,
and toward our neighbors for thy sake, that when we come to the end of our
days, we may come to the end of our hope, the salvation of our souls, through
Jesus Christ: to whom with thee oh Father, and thee oh holy Spirit, three
Persons, but one true and immortal, and only wise God, be given, both from us,
and all thy creatures in heaven and in earth, continual praise, honor, glory,
dominion and power, now and for evermore.

Let all those that hear the word of God depart from iniquity. Now the God of
Peace, that brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus, the great Shepherd of
the sheep, through the blood of the everlasting Covenant, make you perfect to
do his will, working in you that which is pleasing in his sight, through Jesus
Christ; Amen.

THE CHRISTIANS CENTER: OR, HOW TO LIVE TO GOD.
SERMON X.
ROMANS 14.7. For none of us lives to himself, and no man dies to himself: for
whether we live, we live to the Lord: and whether we die, we die unto the Lord:
whether we live therefore or die, we are the Lords.


THese words contain an Argument or reason which the Apostle uses, The sum of
the words.
to prove that the weak Christian should be born withal, and that men should
not judge, because of the difference of meat amongst them. He shows that they
did not with the neglect of the knowledge of any truth keep themselves ignorant
in this particular: but it was their weakness. The strong should bear with the
weak, and the weak should not censure the strong: the reason is, because they
agree in one end: they propound one general end to themselves, that guides them
in all their actions, they walk in one way, and in one path, and therefore they
should in these things agree together. The general end at which they all aimed
in their doings is the Lord: He that eats (faith he) eats to the Lord, and
he that eats not, to the Lord he eats not; that is, still he propounds
God as his end, and the pleasing of God in his actions, as the rule of them.
That he may prove this unto us, that they stand thus affected, both of them,
notwithstanding this difference, he brings in this as the general reason,
where to every particular of their lives may be reduced: All their life is
ordered by the Lord: they live to the Lord, they die to the Lord, so that whet
her they live or die, they are the Lords; Therefore all their particular
actions are to the Lord. Whether we live, we live to the Lord, and whether we
die, we die to the Lord.

Now this general reason he propounds two ways. Division.
First, Negatively, None of us living to himself, and no man dies to himself.

Secondly Affirmatively: which consists of two parts. Their duty to God. Gods
acceptance of them, and protection over them.

Their duty to God, if we live, we live to the Lord, and if we die, we die to
the Lord.

Gods acceptance of them; Whether we live or die we are the Lords.

That which we shall now insist upon, is the former part, the negative
expression and proposal of this general reason; none of us lives to himself,
and no man dies to himself.

Now, Explination. None of us
when the A postle affirms this of the believers of those times, he therein
intimates thus much; that it is the course of believers in all times; It is a
duty belonging to all others; of which they must make account, not to live to
themselves, but to the Lord. Therefore though he speaks generally here, yet
there is in his speech a kind of particular universality: a generality with a
restraint. He says none of us: he says not none in the world live to
themselves, for there are many in the world live to themselves, and not to the
Lord: but none of us: none of those that we rank our selves with, that are in
the condition of believers: none of those concerning whom we speak in this
question: none of us live to our selves.

Life in general, lives
is nothing else but that power whereby we act or move. As we read, Genesis 2. God
breathed into man the breath of life, and he became a living soul: he gave him
the power whereby he acted. The acting of this power is the exercise of that
life, whether the action be of the mind, or of the body. And so, as there is a
donble life, there are two sorts of actions of life: there are natural actions
of a natural life, and there are spiritual actions of a spiritual life. When
the Apostle speaks of living, he intends both these. We live not; that is, we
do not the actions of life, whether natural or spiritual, to our selves, but to
the Lord. No man lives to himself.

By himself, to himself.
he means not only a man's person, either soul or body: but all those
advantages, that conduce, to the well-being of a man. No man of us so orders
the actions of his life, with reference and respect to our selves, as the
uttermost end: we do not make our own well-being, or welfare, the uttermost
end of our actions: none of us live to our selves:

You have the sense and meaning of the words; which being a pattern to other
Christians: a thing which the Apostle supposes, is or should be in every
believer, it gives us this point of instruction, whereupon we shall insist at
this time. That is, No Believer, Observat.
none that are in Christ, should make themselves the end in their actions.

None should live; A believer is not to make himself the end in his actions
Object.
that is, spend their time and strength and endeavor, aiming at no higher end
then themselves. No Christian should so spend his time, as to seek himself only
in the actions that he does; None of us lives to himself.

But here it may be objected (for the clearing of the point) May not a
Christian seek himself, in the things that he does? When they do good things,
that which God commands, that they may avoid the punishment: when, being
encouraged by the promise of a reward, they perform the actions of obedience,
do they not herein seek themselves? they seek the avoiding of evil to
themselves, and the obtaining of good for themselves: and doing thus they live
to themselves.

To this we Answer. Answ. A double consideration of our selves.
We must consider, our selves two ways.

First in subordination to God.

Secondly, in competition with him, or oppositon against him.

Consider a man's self in subordination to God: so a man may seek himself; that
is, How a man may seek himself.
he may seek his own good: though not as the uttermost end, wherein his
thoughts rest, yet he has this encouragement. Self-love is a plant of Gods own
planting in the heart of man: and he will not have any man root out that that
he has planted: Self-love lawful.
Grace dries not up the fountain of nature: It does but turn the stream into a
new channel: it guides it the right way. When a man is renewed by grace, and
sanctified, he is the same man in his faculties: he does his actions better
then he did before; and all that he did before, he does them to a better end.
It is impossible that the will of man should incline to any thing, but as he
conceives it good, and good for me: now there is no man can conceive a thing
as good for him, but he must conceive it as good and suitable to him, suitable to
his welfare and condition. The law of God forbids not this, but establishes
it, and commends it, if it be rightly ordered. Thou shall love the Lord thy
God, with all thy soul, and with all thy strength, that is the chief:
notwithstanding thou shall not hate thy self: thou shall love thy neighbor as
thy self: subordinate to the love of a man's self must be the love of his
neighbor; and subordinate to his love of God, must be the love of himself.
Thou may love thy self, but in a degree inferior to God. Thou must love thy
self in God, and seek thy good in God, and not in thy self: therefore it is
that God in the Scripture has set promises and threatenings one opposite to the
other. Now it is lawful for a man to be drawn to obedience, or driven from sin
by any argument that God uses in his Word. When God threatens punishment,
shall not men be awakened? the Lion roareth, and the beasts of the Forest
tremble. When God promises: here is the act of faith to receive this promise,
and to believe it.

Herein Jesus Christ the Author and finisher of our faith, is set as a patterm
for us, he set before him the joy. It is lawful for a Christian herein to
imitate Christ: I speak this for their sakes, to allure them by encouragements
from the Word: that howsoever the avoiding of sin by threatenings is an action
of self-love, without the love of God; yet these two may stand together in a
due subordination one to another, a man's love to himself, and love to God: to
love God more then himself, and so to seek all good in God, and in the way
leading to him.

Secondly, take man as he stands in competition, and opposite to God, in
matter of will and desire. In this case a man must not love and seek himself,
but God. When a man seeks good to himself in a way displeasing to God, herein
he must not seek himself; for he must live to God, and not to himself: when his
thoughts and desires, and affections, are carried for himself principally; this
is against the rule: this is not the state of a Christian, of a believer, thus
to seek himself in any thing contrary to God, or in any thing above him.

Thus you have the opening of it. And it shall appear to be a truth by these
reasons.

For a man to live to himself: The Observaon proved by reason.
that is, to do the actions of life with respect to himself, not to others, and
to God. It is

First a dishonor to God.

Secondly injurious to Christ.

Thirdly, dangerous and hurtful to a man's self.

Eirst (I say) it is dishonorable to God. Reas. 1. It is dishonorable to God.
It is the greatest dishonor the creature can do to the Creator, to exalt
himself, to make himself his end in the actions he does. It is to make a man's
self a God, and to make God an Idol. For what is that incommunicable glory that
God will not give to another, but this, to make himself his end? It is a glory
proper only to God. He made all things for himself, Prove. 16.4. Mark how these
two agree well together, that that, that is the efficient cause, should be the
final cause too: that as God is the maker, so he should be the end of all
things: and as that that gives Being to the creature it is our of it self, so
likewise that, that should quicken and act the creature should be out of it
self. When a man therefore propounds himself as his end, he is said in that to
make himself God. Those false Apostles, Phil. 3.20. it is said of them, that
they made their belly their God; because this they propounded as their end, how
they might advantage themselves in the world, how they might feed and delight
themselves, and exalt themselves, and serve not God. This is to bring God below
a man's self, making God an Idol, and himself God. I say therefore it is the
highest dishonor that the creature can do to God.

Secondly, Reas. 2. It is injurious. to Christ, Phil. ver. 19.
it is the greatest injury that he can do to Christ, to live to himself. Christ
may say truly, and more properly, and fitly to us, then Saint Paul could, say
to Philemon, thou owe thy self to me. We owe our selves to him by all rights
especially by that great right ofpurchase: he bought us to himself, he redeemed
us to himself; 1. Cor 6.20.
You are bought with a price, (says the Apostle) therefore glorify God in
your spirits and bodies, for they are Gods. They are his, and not your own,
because he bought them, bought them when you were slaves, and had inthralled
your selves, therefore you owe your selves to him, he has purchased you to
himself.

In the old Law, the rule was, that if a man had bought another, either out of
captivity, or the like, he was to demand all the work and service, that this
man could do, all his time and strength belonged unto hm that bought him, for
he was his money, therefore he might exact of him the uttermost he could do for
his service, for he bought him. Much more Christ, that has bought us from a
worse slavery, from a slavery under the power of darkness: and bought us with
the greatest price, even with the effusion of his own blood: 1. Pet. 1.18.
He has redeemed us (says Saint Peter) not with silver and gold, but with his
own precious blood; a price far above that, if a man should give all his
wealth. Now when Christ has bought us for himself, we are become not his
money, but his blood; therefore all that we have, and are, is due to him,
because we are his. If we have any good in the world, in things present: if
there be any good to the soul, in things to come, all is by Christ, therefore
all must be unto him.

If a man have a servant, if he be either bound to him, suppose an Apprentise:
or if he be hired to him, suppose a workman or Artificer: if he live by him,
and have maintenance from him: every man expects that his time be to his
Master, and his work for his Masters advantage. If a day-labourer come at night
and demand pay: the Master will ask him, what work he did? suppose the man
should tell him, he had been building himself a cottage, or mending his own
apparel, or had been doing such and such work for himself: but what have thou
done for me, says the Master? Do thou think to live by me, and not work to
me? Do we think to live by Christ, Luke 1.74.
and not serve Christ? This is the very end why he has delivered us from the
hands of our enemies, that we might serve him in holiness and righteousness,
all the days of our life: Mark it: we must serve him, for he has delivered
us; that is, we must do him service: do his work, not some piece of the day,
and the work of another, another part of the day: do somewhat with respect to
God, and somewhat with respect to our selves: but we must serve him all the
days of our life. The whole time of the hyreling is for his Masters service,
and the whole time of a Christian, for the service of Christ: for he has
bought us with the price of his own blood. Then it is an injury to the Lord
Christ, because he has ransomed us at such a price for himself, if we do
things to our selves, and not to him.

Thirdly, Reas. 3. It is dangerous to a man's self.
as it is a dishonor to God, and injurious to Christ, that men should live to
themselves: so it is dangerous to a man's self. And that will appear by
comparing what we lose by it; with what we gain by it. Compare our loss and our
gain together, and we shall see then, that we do our selves the greatest
mischief, when we seek our selves most. 1. A man in seeking himself, I seth his
happiness.
Consider first what we lose by it. Our happiness. What is the happiness of the
creature, but the enjoying of God? We lose our end and perfection. What is the
blessedness of the creature, but to obtain his end? What is the end of the
creature, but the glory of the Creator? Then the creature comes to perfection,
and blessedness, and happiness, when it is most empty of himself, when he most
perfectly, and with due affection seeks God. Therefore in seeking our selves,
we lose our happiness. Saint Paul so conceived of their blessedness: they let
fall themselves in the highest point of self-love, when they stood in competion
with God, or oppsition against God. Moses desired that his name might be
blotted out of the book of life, rather then God should be dishonored. And
faith the Apostle, I could be content to be separated from Christ, for my
brethrens sake: that is, that Christ may be glorified. He knew that his
happiness lay not in enjoying a blessed estate to himself, free from care and
trouble: but that herein his happiness lay, that God may be glorified, and that
he might bring it to pass by any means, that he might serve God, in that end
whereto God had appointed him: and the more perfectly he could attain that end,
the more perfectly he should attain his happiness. So it is with a true
Christian, he is so far blessed, and happy in heaven as he is serviceable to
God on earth, as he lives to him, and does much, and suffers much for him;
when that life that he has, is spent (in the several actions, and turnings,
and changings of it) in the service, and to the glory of God.

Therefore I say consider this: you lose that which you seek: you seem to seek
happiness to your selves, by seeking wealth and pleasures or earthly advantages
to your selves; and while you seek them, with a neglect of duty to God, with a
neglect of the discharge of that work and service he has committed to you: you
lose that happiness that you seem to seek, and which you should seek indeed,
which is the perfection, the end of the creature: the service of his Creator.
So you see what we lose. That which he ga^ns, is but a shadow of gain.


Consider secondly, what we gain. It may be you gain wealth for you selves:
this is somewhat you will say. It may be you gain honor, and esteem in the
World: you gain a name amongst men, or some earthly advantage. Alas! what is
this if it be rightly considered? It is but the gain of a shadow to the loss of
the soul. If it be wealth: does it satisfy the soul? Does it quiet the
conscience? Does it fill aman so, as that he needs no more? All the wealth in
the world cannot do this: there is an emptiness in all these things: there is
fullness to be had only in God, in Christ, in spiritual things: nothing else is
able to satisfy the soul in all its desires, to give it perfect peace.

If the happiness of a man where either in himself, or in any other creature,
he need have nothing to do with God, he need not then to look higher above
himself. But God has placed a vanity both in men, and in all creatures: man is
vain, and all the creatures in the world are vanity, and vexation of spirit.
And when the Scripture calls them vanity, what does it mean, but that they
are empty things? they have not that nourishment in them, that they seem to
have; they have not that in them, that they should have, according to that
esteem that men put upon them: they are empty things: as we say of wells, when
they want water, they are empty, though they be full of other things, as dust
and sand, etc. Or as clouds that have no moisture, and rain in them, they are
empty: so are all things in the world therefore empty; because they have not in
them, that which the heart seeks after: they have not happiness in them, they
have not contentment in them. What is this then, but to forsake bread, and to
seek after husks, like the Prodigal that left his Fathers house, where there
was bread enough, and to feed on husks with swine? to leave the approach and
access of the soul to God, wherein it may satisfy it self to the full, with
that which is food indeed: and to seek somewhat in the world that it cannot
get. I say, this is a man's loss.

Nay, 3. He loses himself. Mat. 16.26.
he loses himself in living to himself: What shall it profit a man to win the
whole world, and lose himself? Mat. 16.26. To lose his soul, says one
Evangelist, to lose himself faith another. A man loses himself, when he loses
his soul. And this he does in the neglect of God, he loses his soul in that
action: when a man gathers wealth by indirect means, or keeps his wealth
and douth not disburse it in the service of God, for his glory, or whatsoever
else a man does; in gaining the world he loses himself. Mark, 10
He that will lose his life shall save it, and he that will save his life,
shall lose it, Mark. 10. A man never loses a shadow more then when he
follows it: the faster he pursues it, the faster still it runs from him:
such is the pursuit after anything out of God: the more a man pursues i^ the
more he loses himself, he is driven so many paces from heaven, so many degrees
from his own happiness. This is the folly and madness of the world, whereby
Satan deludeth men, leading them after vain shows of earthly delights, in
carnal security, flattering themselves in the pursuit of the world, dreaming of
happiness and comfort, and in the conclusion embrace nothing but a shadow and
emptiness. and comfort, and in the conclusion embrace nothing but a shadow and
emptiness. This I say is the misery of man. Now put both together: Consider
what we lose: that that is truly good, that that is blessedness indeed: and
what we get: that that is but a shadow, that that is emptiness indeed. Men lose
that they seem to have (...) and want that they pursue after. A secret
judgment of God, because they sought not that, that they should do. Thus we
see the point opened, I hasten to the application.

The first use is, Use 1. For Couviction.
for Conviction^ Since there is such a truth as this, that no man that
professes himself to be in Christ, that professes himself to be a believer,
should live to himself, that is, do any action of his life, aiming at himself,
as the uttermost end in those actions. It serves in the first place to
convince us, that profess our selves to be Christians, and believers, to be
such as know Christ (though with these differences, some are more weak, and
some more strong;) yet I say, it convinces every man to stand guilty before
the Lord, that if he live to himself, he is none of Christ's. This is the
property of every true Christian, even of the weakest, as well as of the
strongest (for the Apostle speaks of all, None of us, says he, whether weak or
strong Christians, live to over selves) if thou therefore live to thy self,
thou art none of those the Apostle speaks to: thou art none of those that live
and die to the Lord; thou art none of those that are the Lords, whether in life
or death. Let us therefore first be convinced of this, that there is such a
sinful disposition in the hearts of men, that profess themselves to be
Christians, and yet live to themselves. That is the first thing I would
convince you of at this time.

Secondly, I would show you, that whatsoever this disposition is, it argues a
soul and sinful heart. None of us do so (says the Apostle) other men that
have no part in these privileges and comforts, they do so, they live to
themselves.

Thirdly, we will convince you of this life, that it is simply necessary. That
so without delay, every one that is convinced that he lives to himself, may
now begin to leave that course, 1. That there are many that prosesse, the
ms^lves Christians yet live to themselves.
to live to himself, and hereafter live to God.

For the first of these. To convince us that there are many amongst us that
profess our selves to be Christ's, and yet are thus disposed, and have this
sinful affection, to live to our selves. Take this first in the general. If
there were not such a disposition in men's hearts, the holy Ghost would not thus
have directed the spirit of the Apostle, in expressing this, as a note of
difference between them and others, and as an argument that a strong Christian,
should bear with the weak, because they do not live to themselves. The
Scripture gives not rules in vain.

But that yet we may see it more clearly: Complained of. Phil. 2.21.
you shall find this very thing complained of sometime: and sometime forbidden.
Complained of, Phil. 2.21. All seek their own, and not the things of Jesus
Christ. Such a disposition there was in them, that they sought their own,
Forbldden. 1 Cor. 10.24
they lived to themselves. And forbidden, 1 Cor. 10.24. Let no man seek his
own, but every one another man's wealth. A thing expressly, and in terms so
clearly forbidden, as no man can hide himself from the light of it. He is
certainly guilty of the breach of this command, that seeks after his own: that
seeks himself.

But how shall we know (that we may be more sensible of our own case) whether
it be thus with us, How a man shall know whether he lives to himself.
or not: whether we live to our selves, and not unto God?

I will give you two general rules and trials whereby a man may discern whether
he live to himself or not. Rule 1.
The first is this. Consider when a lust, and an occasion meet together, how
you are. I shall show it in diverse particulars. Take it thus.

Sometimes you shall see that a man is put on to a good duty by encouragement:
Instance 1.
sometimes he wants those encouragements. Mark now, how a man determines and
resolves, to act, or to cease his action, by virtue of these encouragements.
Sometimes you shall see that there is a command to a duty, but no outward
encouragement to that duty, that may satisfy the desire of a man's heart in
self-respects. He must obey God in this command, but he shall gain nothing in
the world by it: he shall neither grow rich, nor get more esteem among men, or
have a more easy or pleasent life in outward things: all self-respects fail in
this action. The question is, what a man resolves upon in this? If now his
heart start aside from God, and fall off from the duty, because he wants those
encouragements that a man looks after, a way for himself, fullness to himself:
then it is evident, thou have respect to thy self. Jehu all the while, that his
zeal to God might further him, and the better settle himself in the kingdom of
Israel; he can call others to come up and see his zeal for the Lord; but when
his zeal had no such baite^, and allurement to those actions, then Jehu turns
against God, and falls to Idolatry and other sins: Jehu is not now the man,
when these encouragements fail, that he was before.

You have abundance in John 6.10. Joh. 6.10.
seeking Christ, that still discovered a living to themselves in it. You seek
me (says our Savior) because of the loaves: they had some outward advantage
by him, and therefore so long they sought him.

So the Lord discovered them in Hos. 7. Hos. 7.
to be such as lived to themselves even in holy duties: You cry unto me (says
God) but it is for corn, and wine, and oil: for this they cried: but when they
had corn, and wine, and oil, what zeal had they then? He that should have been
upright when he waxed fat, he kicked with the heel, as the Lord speaks under
the name of Jesurum to Israel. Deuteronomy. 23.
That is one case: Consider when things come thus, that sometime those worldly
advantages fall off from a man in the profession and practice of religion: if
he fall off from the duty too, he is a man that lives to himself. This was the
case of the second and third grounds, they received the seed with joy: that is,
when they were sensible of comfort they followed Christ, but afterward when
persecution arose for the Gospel, they fell off, and took offense. Such as
these live to themselves: they seem to live to God, but it is to themselves:
and therefore when self-respects fail, they fall off too.

Secondly, Instance 2.
take another instance for the clearing of it; Suppose that not only sensible
advantages fail, but sensible disadvantages come in the world. A man is
sensible that he shall disadvantage himself much, if he go on in the ways of
obedience to God. It may be if he make conscience of his ways, he must make
restitution of his estate, unjustly gotten. He must deny himself in a greater
measure of pleasures, that he has unlawfully pursued. He must empty himself,
in works of mercy, and piety, of a great part of his estate, for the good of
others, that God may be glorified by his substance. He shall lose some worldly
friends; some esteem among men. Here are sensible disadvantages to a man. Now
the Question is, what he resolves to do? Here is the command of God; and here
is (the thing whereupon the heart of man, and his affections are set upon)
disadvantages in the world. These come together. Here is an occasion for a
lust, a sinful affection to express it self; If that be laid in the balance,
and shall prevail above the other: that rather then I will endure disadvantage
in the world, I will neglect the way of serving God: this party lives to
himself: whatsoever good he did before in matters of religion, all was done to
himself; I say when these two come together, as you know when two men walk
together, and one servant follows them, a man knows not whose servant he is
till they part: but then when they part, a stranger may know whose servant he
is: he follows his own Master, and leaves the other. So, when God and the
world go together, God and a man's own advantages go together: when their is
nothing commanded, but stands with his own advantages: so long a man's
deceitful heart may flatter, and delude, and misguide him, he may go on in a
false persuasion, and in a strong conceit that he is in Christ, in a blessed
estate. But when these two part: that I shall not only not advantage my self,
but sensibly disadvantage my self in outward things. Here now I say the the
Question is what a man does. If I resolve to cleave to my outward advantages,
and leave God, and leave the ways of God: I live to my self.

A man that lives to God, you shall see it is otherwise with him: as for
instance. David: when he might have had the kingdom of Israel somewhat sooner,
by sin, he would not do it: his heart smote him, for cutting off the ^appe of
Saul's garment; though he might have gained the kingdom of Israel by it, he
would not lay his hands on the Lords anointed: And what was the reason of it?
because he would not advantage himself by disobedience to God; he would rather
want himself.

What was the reason that Daniel, when he saw he was in an apparent hazard, not
only of the loss of honor, but of his life, and that for the performance but
of one duty, prayer, and that but for a short time: yet would not omit it, no
not for a short time, though he might by that not only have saved his life, but
kept his honor in the Court: he prayed to God, even at that time, when he was
forbidden: Why so? because he lived to God, and not to himself. Had Daniel
lived to, and sought himself more then God, he would have dispensed with this,
and saved both his life and honor, though he had offended God in that
particular of omission. But this is the disposition of a heart that is faithful
and upright with God: it will not dishonor God for the greatest advantage that
can come to it self: it will not neglect a duty to God, whatsoever loss it have
in the world.

Thirdly, Jnstance 3.
Take another instance, whereby we may see what we intend in this trial. Let
the will of God, and the bent of a man's own will come in competition together.
God will have me leave this: I will hold it. God will have me forsake this: I
will keep it; It is a comfort, a wordly benefit: I lose my comfort if I part
with it. He that now lives to himself, he will please his own will, and be
disquieted and vexed against Gods will that crosses his. But he that lives to
God, will be conten^ that God should cross him in his will: because he would
glorisie God in his own will, in his sovereignty, in his purity, in his
holiness, and justice, etc. See it in the case of Abraham. Abraham had a strong
love to Isaac, and good cause: yet nevertheless though he could see a comfort
to himself in this son, when God tells him, thou must sacrifice thy son
Isaac, when he had the revealed will of God: Abraham now resolves to show that
he lived to God, and not to himself: therefore he would part with any comfort
of his life for God, when he required it. So David, If the Lord will (says he)
he can bring me back, that I shall see the Tabernacle, and the Ark^ if not: If
he say I have no pleasure i^ thee, lo here I am, let the Lord do with me, as
seems good in his owneyes. When the case is this, when the will of God,
crosses thy will: what now prevails? Does the desire of having thy own will
prevail against the desire of submitting to Gods will? Does it raise murmuring,
and impatiency of spirit? So far thou live to thy self. Therefore consider
this. Here is an occasion now for a lust, and a sinful affection to show it
self: either a man may advantage himself in an evil course, or he cannot but
disadvantage himself in a good course: or when God crosses a man in that he
desires, and delights in, in the world. That is the first trial whereby a man
may know whether he lives to himself.

Secondly, Rule 2.
another trial will be this; Consider if their be any part of the truth of God,
of his revealed will, that for self-respects thou art willing to be ignorant
of, least the knowledge of it, should make the do somewhat to thy own
disadvantage: in this thou live to thy self. See this to be true, in all that
live to themselves.

Balaam, though he professed, that for a house full of gold, he would not go
beyond the word of the Lord, yet notwithstanding he was willing not to take
notice of Gods will, but to go on rather to curse.

Johanan in Jer. 42. professes deeply that he would obey the will of the Lord;
but when he understood the will of the Lord, when it crossed his will: then says
he to Jeremy; It is not the Lord that has bid the say this, but Baruch.

When men cavil against any part of Gods word, Romans 1.
or hide any truth from themselves, and withold the truth in unrighteousness;
Here is a man living to himself. How many points are there in Religion, that
many men are willingly ignorant of? And when they cannot but know them, how do
they labor for distinction? how do they dawb over the matter, that they may
hide the truth from themselves, that it may not work upon their consciences, to
make them leave their profitable fins? Some would have the keeping of the Lords
day according to Judaisme, though it be revealed to them, that there is a broad
difference between the Jews observation, and the Christians keeping of it.
Another man he will not understand Usury to be a sin, because his course is
usurious: he will not know this willingly, because he would not disadvantage
himself. Another will not understand what he is bound to do, to the glory of
God with his estate: in what measure, according to all the good that God has
blessed him with, to honor God, and give the first fruits of all his increase:
nor in what manner, that he should be ready to every good work, to contribute
willingly to the necessities of the Saints: what he should do to pious and
merciful uses, what for public, what for private occasions: he would not
willingly know these things: he should have less ease he makes account. Thus
when a man is not willing to be informed in any thing, to sift the truth to the
bottom, to the uttermost, to know any thing concerning a duty in any kind,
when he labors not to convince his heart, to this end, that he may be
brought in every thing to obey God, when he stands out with God in any one
point: this man lives to himself, and walks not as he should, according to
the rule of God. Now then (beloved) let us be convinced of it, I beseech you,
take it home, and let every man consider of it with himself. Sometime in the
actions of religion there comes matter of glory in the world, and this sets
me forward much: when these things are spoken against, and when I shall suffer
disadvantages, I cannot hold out. At another time, though all things be well,
yet if it cross me in such a course, I murmr, as if it were an unprofitable
thing to serve God. And then again when God reveals his will, my froward and
rebellious heart has hung back, and been unwilling to submit to Gods will in
this point: all this while I have lived to my self. And if it be true: If a man
be in Christ, he lives not to himself, then it follows: if a man lives to
himself, he is out of Christ; If the weakest Christian live to Christ, then the
best that lives to himself is out of Christ. Be convinced of this first.

Secondly, 2. That it is an evil thing for a man to live to himself.
Be convinced, as it is the case of our selves: so it is an ill estate for a
man to live to himself. You see still it is the whole drift of wicked men to
took to themselves. Haman aimed at himself: when the King asked him, what
should be done to the man whom the King would honor? He thought, whom should
the King honor but himself? He looked to himself. Here was the difference
between Haman and Mordecai, both had honor in the world: Haman seeks himself
in all his honor: Mordecai seeks God, and his glory, and the welfare of his
Church in his honor: A great difference. Says Nabal: shall I take my bread,
and my drink, and give it to a man that I know not? Here was a man that lived
to himself. Compare him with Job; He was a foot to the lame, an eye to the
blind; he continually fed those that wanted food. A great difference: Job lived
to God, and therefore he honored God in releeving many with the estate that
God has given him: Nabal lived to himself, therefore he regarded none hut
himself, and his own house, and sheep-shearers, and those that depended upon
him. This is the property of a man out of Christ to seek himself, and live to
himself in all things.

Again consider, others that have gone further in matters of religion, yet they
have still turned out of the way, Mat. 6.22.
as far as they have halted in this, Matt. 6.22. If thine eye be single, the
whole body is light: but if thine eye be wicked, the whole body is darkness. A
single eye, what.
A wicked eye is supposed to a single eye: a double eye is a wicked eye: What
is a single eye? That that looks but upon one object, upon God, and God only,
and God principally: and on all other things in him, and with reference to him.
Now the double eye, is that, that though it looks to God, and do many things in
obedience to God: yet it looks to somewhat else, and takes other things as
greater encouragements: this is a wicked eye, and such a man walks in
darkness: when he looks to God, he has light in the duty: when he looks to
men, and other things, then he turns aside, and runs to by-ways: And
therefore a doubleminded man is unconstant in all his ways. Jam. 1.
What is a double minded man? He is a double-minded man, whose mind is set upon
more things then one: first on the world, and then on God: as far as he sees it
is profitable, he will serve God, or else not. This man is an unconstant man.
You see it is an ill estate.

So much for the first Use, Use 2. For Exhortation.
for conviction. Secondly therefore; As many as are guilty of this, labor to
get out of it, not to live to your selves any more. Let it be enough, that you
have lived thus long to your selves: that you have desrauded Christ of his due,
that has puchased you with his blood, and not served him in holiness and
righteousness, so many days of your life. Now for the time to come, let us
serve him better.

And that you may do thus. Helps.
I will give you two sorts of directions, or helps. I can give you but the
heads of them.

First, 1. Our good is in God, and not in our selves.
be convinced that our good is in God, and not in our selves: our life is in
God, and not in our selves; our selves are in God, and not in our selves: that
as the beams of the Sun are in the Sun, more then in themselves, so a Christian
is more in Christ then in himself. Whatsoever is good and comfortable to him,
is in Christ: he has all by virtue of a union with Christ: he is not at all
happy or blessed, further then he is in him. If then all our good lie in him,
it is great reason all our actions should return to him: that he should be the
Center where all our lines should meet; Ier. 9.24.
the mark whereto all our actions should aim. Let not the strong man glory in
his strength, or the wise man in his wisdom, or the rich man in his riches; but
he that glories, let him glory in this, that he knows me, that I am the
Lord. Jer. 9.24. What Lord? the Lord that shows judgment and righteousness
upon the earth: there is a mercy showed to the creature, but it is I that do
it, faith the Lord. If you meet with a merciful man, God is merciful in that
man: If you meet with a bountiful man, God is bountiful in that man: If you
meet with a man whose lips feed many, God instructs that man. I say, seeing
all things we have, though they have diverse channels and pipes, and
conveyances, whereby God conveyeth goodness and mercy to men, yet nevertheless,
it is in God, and from God we receive all; let us therefore look upon every
creature as instruments in Gods hand, that can do us neither good nor hurt
without him. What good it does, it does by the influence of the supreme cause,
working by that creature: let us so look upon, and conceive of every creature.

Thus the Saints have done in all times. Jacob when he saw Esau; I have seen
thy face, as the face of God (says he.) He saw God in the face of Esau. So in
all good men, we should say, God is good in them. This should make men not to
seek themselves; not to study men more then God: not to study gain with men,
with the loss of God: to please men, with the displeasing of God: but to
venture the loss of all men, that they may please God, if they cannot keep men
and God together. For the affections of men are in Gods hand, and he
fashioneth, and frames them, according to his own pleasure, either to love, or
hatred, as David observed in the case of Shimei, God has bid him curse. Be
convinced, I say, of this, that if we get all the men in the world to be our
friends, with the neglect of God, if we get all the treasures and wealth of the
world: if a man were advanced to the Monarchy of the whole earth: yet these
things are more in Gods hand, then in ours. When a man has wealth, it is not
in his own keeping: riches have wings. When a man has favor, God gives it not
into his own keeping: whatsoever we have, it is secured to us by Gods
protection, and made good to us by his blessing.

Let this be our care, and work therefore, how we may live to God: how we may
enjoy God, in the things we enjoy, and possess God in all things we possess; in
the things we have, still to keep God, and that will keep our estates, and
names, and comforts, and lives, and all. That is the first.

Again secondly; 2. Exercise the grace.
There are certain graces to be exercised, if a man would not live to himself
(for indeed it is the property of a Christian, and none else to live to God,
and not to himself: and he does it by virtue of those graces in his heart, that
empties him of himself, and draws him to God: therefore, I say, there are
certain graces that every one should exercise, if he would not live to
himself.) What are those?

First, Of knowledge.
the knowledge of God in Christ. Get a more full and particular, and
experimental knowledge of God. All our looking to the creature is, because we
know not God perfectly: Cant. 5.1 Sam. 1.
if we did know him, we would account him the chiefess of ten thousand, the
Church when she knew Christ, said so: we would account him (as Elkanah said to
Hannah; Am not I better to thee then ten sons?) better then ten friends, then
ten worlds. Get therefore a more full knowledge of God: that all power is in
him: One thing have I heard once and twice, that power belongs unto God,
says he Psalmist.

Secondly, Of Faith.
Get faith in the exercise more. All the worthies of the Lord in Heb. 11. What
made them live so to God, and not to themselves as they did? because they
believed, they did it by faith: by faith Abraham denied himself: by faith Moses
for sook the pleasures of Egypt: by faith those Worthies, of whom the world
was not worthy, wandered up and down in sheeps skins, and goats skins, and would
not be delivered. When a man gets interest in Christ by faith, he shall see
that in him, that will satisfy all his desires, and answer all his losses.

Thirdly, Of Love.
exercise Love. Faith works by love. The more we love God in Christ, the more
perfectly we shall cleave to him: Love is a uniting grace, that uniteth the
soul to Christ. 1 Cor. 5.
The love of Christ constrains me (faith the Apostle, 2 Cor. 5.) for we thus
judge, if one died for all, then it is fit they that live should not live to
themselves. And the truth is, the more a soul loves Christ, the more it will
live to him.

Lastly, Use 3. For instruction.
a word of the last Use, and that for instruction. Being convinced that such is
the estate of most men, that they live to themselves: and that whose estate
soever it is, it is a sinful estate, and argues a man out of Christ: and that
there is a possiblity of getting out of this estate. Let it be for instruction
to all those, that in some measure live to God, and not to themselves: let it
be to teach them, and persuade them more fully to live to him, and less to
themselves. A man simply censidered without any relation to others, or
dependence upon an another man, he may please himself: but when a man is
considered in his dependence upon God, and his relation to men: he must then
observe the will of his Creator, in that relation God has set him: he must
carry himself as his creature, and observe the end that the creature is
appointed to. Nay, he must carry himself as a Christian, and observe the good
of the body: he must carry himself as a member, to do good to the whole. Let
every Christian labor to do this, if he would have comfort to his soul, that
he does not live to himself, that he is of the number of those that are
accepted of God in life and death. Labor to employ, his time, and strength,
and gifts, and whatsoever he is, and has, to the good of others: As every man
has received the gift, let him minister to others, as faithful dispencers of
the manifold grace of God. If you have received gifts, you have received them
from God, you have received them for the good of others, you have received them
as dispensers: let every man (faith the Apostle) dispense the manifold grace of
God: if the Apostle had said, be dispensers of the grace of knowledge that you
have, for the feeding of the souls of many: and not of your estates: or,
relieve as many as you can with your estates, but take no care for their souls:
but when he says, be dispensers of the manifold gifts of God, his meaning is,
that whatsoever I have wherewith I am able to do men good with, whether it be
inward or outward gifts, the gifts of the mind, or of the outward man, any
thing whereby I can be advantageous to others; I must serve God and men in
improving of that. He that will not live to himself, is bound to serve every
man with every gift he has.

If God have furnished a man with inward gifts, the graces of his Spirit. If a
man have knowledge, and faith, or experience, or comfort, whatsoever graces of
the Spirit he has, there are duties appointed, and a Communion of Saints
expressed, that men may be stirred up to exercise those graces in that communion
for the good of all the Saints. 1 Cor. 14. Ephesians. 4.9.
Therefore we are said to have knowledge to profit with. And gifts to edify
with. All that a man has, God has given him for this end, that God may be
glorified by it: Hercin is my Father glorified, that you bring forth much
fruit. Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works,
and glorify your Father which is in heaven. Men have much benesit by the
graces of the Spirit in others, when they are improved as they ought, they are
as lights amongst men in the world. Grace when it is opened (like the Box of
ointment) raises a desire in others after it. Grace exercised and communicated
to others, it shows the amiableness of it. Christians should therefore do it,
that they may make Christianity lovely: that they may make the profession of
Religion amiable to the world, that is by communicating the graces of God to
others. This every man should do, in his place, in his person, take all
advantages this way.

And as it is good for others, so it is good for a Man's self to do thus, a man
increases his own store. Liberality (we say) is the best husbandry. There is
no promise in the Scripture for hoarding up, there are many to distribute. I
say it is the best husbandry in the world, especially in spiritual things: it
is as the oil, increased in the pouring out: like the loaves, the more they
were broken, the more they multiplied still. We see the hand noursheth it self
by administering food to the mouth: so a Christian, not only exercises, but
increases grace in himself by communicating grace to others.

And what I say for spiritual, I say for outward things. If a man have wealth,
or honor, or any of these outward things, and an opportunity, he should employ
them for others, that it may appear that he does not live to himself. He that
lays up riches only for himself, and his family, lives to himself. He that
follows his calling only for himself, and his family, lives to himself. He
does that which a man out of Christ would do: but a man that would live to God,
he must glorify God with his estate. To do good, and to distribute, forget
not, for with such sacrifices God is pleased, Heb. 13. Charge them that are
rich in the world, that they be not highminded, but ready to distribute to the
necessities of the Saints. 1 Timothy 3. It is a charge laid upon all, to glorify
God with their estates: with their Authority as they are magistrates: as Job
faith, I was a foot to the lame, an eye to the blind, a father to the
fatherless, a husband to the widow: He did all things for the good of others.
All men are ambassadors sent from God, for the good of the bodies, and souls
of others. Am I a neighbor, it is for the good of the body and soul of every
one that converseth with me, according to the manifold gifts bestowed upon me:
and I live no further to God, then I do extend, and communicate all my
particular gifts to the good of others, both for soul and body.

Thus you have the point opened, and pressed, concerning living to our selves,
as a mark of those that are Christ's, that they do not live to themselves. I
beseech you (brethren,) let this be the advantage of Funeral Sermons, that are
preached upon the occasion of the death of our deceased brethren, to teach us
how to live. Let every man hereaster resolve to lead a profitable and fruitful
life: to do all the good he can while he lives, that for much good done to
many, thanks may be given by many on his behalf.

THE IMPROVEMENT OF TIME: OR, THE RIGHT USE OF TIMES SHORTNESS. SERMON XI.
1 COR. 7.29, 30. But this I say, bretrhen, the time is short; It remains,
that both they that have Wives, be as though they had none; and they that weep,
as though they wept not; and they that rejoice, as if they rejoiced not; and
they that buy, as though they possessed not; and they that use this world, as
not abusing it; for the fassion of this world passes away.


THat I may briefly come to open to you the sum of that that I have to deliver
out of this Scripture: The Coberence.
I desire you (beloved in the Lord) in few words, to take notice of the drift
and scope of the holy Apostle in this place: and that is this.

The Corinths (as it seems in the beginning of this chapter) had written a
Letter to Saint Paul, wherein they did propound to him diverse Cases of
Conscience: and did entreat him, that he would send him judgment, concerning
those points. Some five or six we may gather they did write to him about.

One was this; whether he thought it either a lawful, or a fitting thing for a
man to marry.

The second was; Whether if a man were married, his Wife and he might not
separate themselves one from another.

The third was; If they did live together, whether it were lawful, for the one
to deny to the other matrimonial benevolence

The fourth; Whether if one of them being a Believer, and the other an Infidel,
it were lawful, or convenient for the believer to remain a yoke fellow to the
Insidel. These and diverse other cases of concience, they entreated Saint Paul
to resolve them in.

Now the Apostle in the beginning of this Chapter writes an Answer to every
one of these Questions they propounded. To some of them he answered thus;
Indeed I canuot give an absolute determination what is to be done, but I
suppose, this, and this is best. And to another. I advise such a thing: I
cannot directly determine the will of God, but I have received mercy of God to
be accounted faithful, and if you would know my opinion it is this. And so he
gives diverse doubtful answers to their Questions: only he tells them, this
is fittest for the opportunity.

When he has done all, he comes to this I have read. But this I say brethren,
etc. As if he should say; The Questions I have given you an Answer to, I think
you know not what to resolve upon, because I say only this is my counsel, or
this is my opinion. But this I am peremptory in, that is, That they that have
wives be as if they had none: they that weep, as if they wept not: and they
that rejoice, as if they rejoiced not. This, I do not come to say, I suppose,
and I think it sit, or I give my advise, or for the present occasion it is fit
to be thus. But brethren, herein I am consident, and resolute, that you should
be as if not, in all things: in this I am bold. This is the drist of the
Apostle, that he would bring in one thing wherein he is consident, after the
resolution of diverse Questions, wherein he could not be so consident.

So then, Division of the Text.
the words I have read, contain two general things.

First, 1 Presace.
the Apostles Preface to his Exhortation.

Secondly, 2. Exhortation.
the Exhortation it self.

The Preface in these words, But this I say brethren.

The Exhortation in the rest of the words, The time is short, etc.

In the Exhortation there are likewise three things that I would note unto you.
In the Exhortation.


Eirst, 1. The ground of i.
the ground of the Exhortation in these words; The time is short.

Secondly the Exhortation it self, 2. The Exhortation it self.
in these words: It remainech that they that have wives, be as though they had
none: and they that weep, as if they wept not: and they that rejoice, as if
they rejoiced not: and they that buy, as if they possessed not: and they that
use the world, as not abusing it. Here is the Exhortation.

Then the third thing, 3. The motive.
is a spur the Apostle adds to quicken them up, to practice all these things,
in these words; For the fashion of this world passes away.

The first general thing in the words, In the Preface.
is the Apostles Preface, But this I say brothren. And in this I would note but
two things: I will but name them (because I would not be straightened in two
principal points that I would gladly open.)

First here I would note: Obseavation. 1.
How consident, and earnest, and resolute a faithful minister will be, when he
comes to a point that mainly concerns his people. In all other things the
Apostle gives them his Answer, so as it might seem, he had not fully resolved
them. I give my advise, (faith he) and again, I suppose this But now when he
comes unto the right use of the world, that it be not abused: and the thought
of heaven, that they might set themselves about it. Here he comes without ifs
and ands, he sets it down resolutely and positively. Brethren, this I say,
or this you must do. This is one thing that I might note.

Secondly I might note; Observat. 2.
The compellation, or term that he gives them: Brethren. In which, note who
they are, to whom Saint Paul gives the Exhortation. And it seems to me, as
if the Apostle should say; I am putting you now upon a duty, that if I could
not give you the term, brethren, I should hope to prevail little with you. To
come and tell a young gallant that is in the midst of his russe, and his
jollity, and all pleasures: the fashion of this world passes away, and I would
have you use these things, as if you used them not: I know he would not receive
it. Or to come to an old soaked worldling, whose Mammon and penny is his God,
whose thoughts run altogether upon his wealth: and to tell him, that he should
use the world, as if he used it not. Or to come to another that is newly
married, and it may be has made a Goddess of his yoak-fellow for a while, and
tell him that he must be as if he were not married: I should have little hope
to prevail with these. But you are brethren: and because brethren you know the
good things of God, you are acquainted with things concerning eternal
happiness: therefore as long as I can call you brethren, I am bold to put you
upon the duty.

So (brethren) this is my Preface to you. I shall anon speak to a point that I
shall have little hope to prevail with many in the Congregation: when I come to
speak of the immoderate use of the world, and all the blessings in it; it may
be both your ears will be so stopped against it. But as many of you as are
brethren, that have given up your selves to God, and have taken him for your
portion, and his Word for your guide in all things: I hope you will bring
willing and yielding hearts, to resolve that what is delivered out of the word
of God, to embrace it, and to endeavor it, concerning the course of your
lives. And so, this will suffice for the Preface, because (as I said) I would
not be straightened.

Now I come to the Exhortation. In the Ehortation.
It remains that they that have wives, be as if they had none, etc. First I
will in brief open the words, and then come to some matter of instruction.

I begin first with the ground of the Exhortation. 2 The ground of it.
The time is short. The word translated short, signifies in the orignal, Time
cut off. And so the Apostle aluded (as the best Expositors agree) to
Seafayring-men: that have almost done their voyage, The meaning of the words.
and begin to strike sail, and to fold them up together, and are even putting
into the Harbor, and are going to unlade their goods. So faith the Apostle,
the time is short: as if he should say: if a company, that are going out a long
voyage, should strive who should be Master, and who be Masters-Mate, and who
should have this or that office in the Ship, I could not greatly blame them.
But when they are almost at home, when they are within a flight-shot of the
shore, when they begin to strike sail, to take in all, and to go themselves
out of the ship: then if they should fall a quarrelling for places, and
contend, and use all the friends and means they could make, it were a
ridiculous thing, and folly. So it is with us. Time was when the world was in
beginning, and then when a man came into the world, he might say, by the course
of nature, I have a matter of six, or seven, or eight, or nine hundred years,
to go on in my pilgrimage, before I shall end my voyage: and then if a man
should bestow a little time to think with himself; Well, if I can live but to
see my self the father of a thousand children, and might come to people almost
a whole Couutry, etc. then I say, if a man should greet the world, he might be
excused. But brethren, God has cast out the time of our age so, that as soon
as we begin our voyage, we are ready to strike sail presently. We have but a
little time to continue, and much work to be done for another life: therefore
for us to stand striving about wives and children, and courtesies: to cry out
of afflictions, when we are ready to strike sail, and even to go out of the
ship into the harbor, it is a mere folly. These things are not worthy the
while, heaven is the thing we should look after, therefore let us be moderate
in all these things. This is the meaning.

So that the ground of the Exhortation, affords two things. The one I will
but name; The other I will stand upon.

First; Obser. 1.
The time of our life in this world is very short. We have a very little time
to continue in this world. This is a very fruitful and profitable point, but
because I would not be straightened, and because the Apostle intends it not as the
main thing, I do but only name it.

The second thing (and that which Saint Paul mainly intends) is that because we
have but a little time, Obser. 2.
we are even ready to strike sail, and to go to the Harbor presently,
therefore he that had a wife should be as if he had none, and he that used the
world, as if he used it not, etc. And there the Lesson that I no^e is this;
That the serious meditation of the little and short time that we have to remain
in here below, The meditatlon of the shortness of our lives, a special means to
take us off of the world.
should be a great means, to cut us off from the world, and to put us upon
thoughts and actions concerning heaven.

I shall not need to give you a better ground of the point then is in the Text.
The time is short (says he) the time is contracted, you are ready to strike
sail: therefore do this.

I might give you a world of Scripture to prove this. But I will satisfy my
self in laying you down two or three grounds of it.

First, Reas. 1.
we know, that all things that ever a man can enjoy in this world, they all
die, as soon as ever this time is gone. Mark it: All things here below, let a
man dote never so much upon them: let him have wife, and children, and beauty,
and credit, and pleasures, and learning, or whatsoever it is, if his glass be
out, if his time be gone, there is is an end of all those to him. Now, the soul of
man cares not for that happiness, that has no continuance at all in it; Yea,
the rarest thing that mortal men seek, if they should know before hand that
they should enjoy them but a little time, the soul cares not for pitching upon
it. If a man were offered the goodliest woman for his wife, that ever lived in
this world: if God should send him this message; there take her, I bestow her
freely upon thee, but to morrow thou shall die: who would care for marrying? To
be a King, we know, is simply the greatest thing that men seek after in this
world: yet among the Grecian Cities (as that of Sparta) because one was but to
have the Kingdom but for a year, and then to lay down his Crown, and become a
private man: all the wisest men of the City, strove as much not to the King, as
we to get great places. Why? because they knew that that honor was but for a
year; and that would be gone presently, therefore they cared not for it. So the
Apostle teaches in this place. Though thou should have a wife that thou
should love mightily: though thou should have pleasures, that thou take
full content in: Why do thou so? We are ready to strike sail; we have but a
little time to continue. So that because all the blessedness of this life, let
them be never so many, never so great, yet they all die with us, when our time
is ended: he that could but seriously think, that he has but a little time to
continue below, he will never let his heart be set violently upon them: that is
the first Argument.

The second, Reas. 2.
and principle Reason, why the meditation of the shortness of our time should
be such a mavelous means to take us off, from all the things of the world is
this. Because we shall find work enough in this short time, for things that
more concern us. Now the very nature of our soul that God has put into us, is
this that a man cannot intend earnestly and violently, two things at the same
time. Let a man for a certain hour wholly be took up with some business, though
there were a great many other things, that be could find in his heart to think
upon: yet the soul intends that one mainly, and can find no time for the other.
This is our case. We have but a little time: but in that little time, admirable
is the work we have to do, before this time be spent, if we would give a
comfortable account.

What have we to do?

What is the principal thing we have to do in the world.
I tell you in a word. The main and needful thing of all that we have to do in
this little time here allotted us, is; How to shoot the gulf of hell: how to
make our peace with God: how to get his favor in Christ; how to have the
corruptions of our soul cured and healed; how to grow up in grace, and to get
sure evidence against that day, when all shall stand naked before him, that
then we may be found in Christ. Have I ever heard that I have a great work to
do, and that I have but a little time to do it in? Surely then if I seriously
think of it, I cannot find in my heart, to let my soul pitch earnestly upon the
things below. Beloved, our time here, is the only time we have to make heaven
sure. It is the most precious thing that ever we have in the world. Now if a
man have such a precious thing, and but a little of it, will he go and spend it
for toys and baubles.

It is a thing that the Emperor Caligula is laughed at for, in all Stories.
There was a mighty Navy provided, admirable and strange, and all trimmed: and
every one expected, that with it, the whole country of Greece should be
conquered: and so it might have been. But he imploped his soldiers to gather a
company of Cockleshells, and Pibbles, and so sailed home. Had not every one
cause to laugh at the folly of this Emperor? Verily, such a fool is every man,
and so we would acknowledge, if we would but weigh this: God has given thee
but thus much time, it may be twenty years, it may be but a day or two more: in
this time he has furnished thee with that, which may be a means to conquer
heaven it self: now if ^hou lay out this little, about wife, or children, or to
purchase a little wealth, or chese things here below: is it not the greatest
folly that may be?

Suppose that a servant has a great deal of work to do, and knows that he must
give an account to his Master thereof, and that if all be not done, that should
be done, he can never appear with comfort before his Master; and he sees also
that the Sun draws low, and the day hastneth to an end, do you think that this
servant can find time to play? If a man have much to write, and but a little
paper to write in, he must write small and thick, and close as ever he can. So
it is with every one of us: ^ warrant you there is not any soul of us, but we
shall find so many thousand things to repent of, so many graces to obtain, that
we stand in need of: so many evidences or heaven to get, that yet we have not
got sealed, so many particulars concerning better life, that a man may wonder
that ever any one should find one half day to (...) any thing else.

Thus you see the reasons, why the serious meditation of the little time we
have to continue below, should be a mavelous means to take us off from the
world, and to put us upon the study, and thought of better things.

Well now, let me briefly apply this unto you; that so I may come to that I
principally intend.

Oh that we had learned this excellent lesson, Use.
that the Apostle teaches the Corinths here, what wondrous happy people should
we be?

You shall find evermore in the Scripture, the Spirit of God putting the
neglect that is amongst men, The ground of all our neglect of heaven, is he
want of the consideration of the shortness of this life.
and carelessness of heaven, and all the wickedness of their lives upon this,
the not serious meditation of that small time they have to continue below.

If a man come to those that are not brethren, as Saint Paul bespeaks the
Corinths in the Text: they will say; It is true, it is a good point to be pressed
upon a man that is in a consumption, on one whom the Doctors have given over:
to tell him that he cannot continue a week, that his time is short. But for our
parts we are but in the beginning of our voyage: it may be, we are but twenty
years old: we began but the other day to be furnished with a stock: we are but
newly entered: and do you think that we are striking sail? Or another, that
has lived forty or fifty years, in the midst of a full trade, that begins
to get something in the world: do you think that he is striking sail? Thus
people put it off. Alas! what is thy time? What is all thy life? Let God decide
it: does not he say, it is a vapor, a dream, a tale that is told, like a Ship
that sayleth by, and is gone; and that in the turning or a hand almost? If thou
have no more time of life here, but only while a little sand is running out of
a glass, while a Ship is sailing out of sight, while a short tale is told. (God
says it is no more) will thou account that thy voyage is yet scarcely begun?

I beseech you (beloved) all go home, and often think of this point. Say within
your selves: How long Lord, am I like to continue below? and what is there for
me to do before I go out of this world?

But the truth is, Satan labors above all thing to make men put off the
consideration of the brevity of their lives.
men dare not think of this: and the Devil labors for nothing more in the
world then this, to make men put off the serious consideration of the brevity
of their lives, and that they have longer time to continue here, then they
have: because he knows the truth of this, that I have spoken, that the
meditation thereof will stir them up, to make clear all reckonings with God,
before they gohence, and he seen no more. You may find this to be true in your
own experience, how loath men are to entertain thoughts of their latter end: Go
to one that lies sick of a Consumption, and he will tell you: the Docters say,
that I may live, and I doubt not but I shall get up again, such a one has been
brought as low as I, and he is recovered, and why may not I? I once knew one
that when the Physicians came and told him, that he must die: Good Lord (says
he) what a deal of work have I to do: I have all my seed to sow: all my
evidences to seal, that my soul should he saved, etc. Such thoughts should
enter into us now: pitch on them seriously: buckle to them soundly.

We may learn this point of wisdom of the devil himself; He, because he
knows his time is short, he is so much the fuller of rage and malice; and
plies his work with so much the more eagerness. Woe be to the Inhabitants of the
earth, and the Sea, (Revelat. 12.12.) for the devil is gone out amongst men,
having great wrath because he knows that he has but a short time: So should
we do. Think with thy self: the seventh Angel will come ere long, and swear by
him that lives for ever and ever, that there shall be no more time; but GOD
will have an account for the time past. What if the Angel should come now and
swear (as ten to one but there is some man or woman in this Congregation,
concerning whom GOD has determined, that they shall have no more time before a
week be at an end) Put the case it should be any ones case, thine or mine, that
God should say, Go fetch such a man, I will give him no more time; It is true,
I give him some, but now his voyage is at an end, his sail is struck: and then
we should have all to seek, no Christ, no true faith, no evidence for Heaven;
when we must come and give an account to God. What have you done with all your
time? will God say? I must have a reckoning of it.

And then comes in, Imprimis, so much time in drinking, so much in revelling,
so much in dressing my self every day. And then God shall say; Were these the
things I give you time for? Did I bestow time on you, for to be spent about
such things as these? No, it was for Heaven. Beloved, how could we answer to
these things?

It is good and profitable, seriously to consider of this betimes: say to thy
self, I have not long to live, after awhile I must go hence, and be no more: I
must give an account, and a reckoning unto God, of all that I have done,
whether it be good or evil.

But this is not the principal point I have to speak of, 2. The exhortation it
self.
therefore I pass it briefly. I come to the Exhortatiou it self. It remains
that both they that have wives, be as though thy had none; and they that weep,
as if they wept not; and they that rejoice, as though they rejoiced not; and
they that buy, as though they possessed not; and they that use the world, as
not abusing it, etc.

In a word: The meaning of the words.
I take the sum of the exhortation to be, as if the Apostle S. Paul had said
thus; Brethren; you are ready to cast anchor; trouble not your selves: be
steadfast; gird up the loins of you minds: let your care be greatest for
heaven: as for these things that are here below, if you have wives, be as if
you had none; think, as soon as you are ashore, you shall have none: if you be
sick, or under any cross, or affliction, be as though you wept not: suppose you
be as a fellow that is fain to plie the pump all the day, as soon as he is
ashore, he is free: if you rejoice, if you be in prosperity, if you be as the
Master of the Ship that has great preferment, be as if you rejoiced not: Why?
you are almost come ashoare; therefore be, as if not in all these.

I will briefly open the meaning of all these particulars, and then put all
into one point of instruction, and so come further to apply it unto you, as God
shall enable me.

What therefore is the meaning? What is meant by having wives and yet to be as
having none.
first, Let them that have wives, be as though they had none.

To that I answer; A man that has a Wife has two things that another has
not, that has no wife.

The first is, He has a great deal of joy and comfort: he has a second self,
a loving yoak-fellow; one in whose Bosom he can pour his heart at any time:
one that he can make partaker of all his contentments: one that is willing to
help him to carry all his crosses: so in a Wife (supposing her to be a good
Wife) he has that comfort that another knows not of.

Secondly, he that has a Wife, has a great many cares that another has not:
he has a great deal of fear lest he should leave her in distress: a great deal
of care how she, and the children that are begotten by him of her, should be
provided for, when he is gone: so that as Saint Paul says, he cannot but care
for the things of the world, how he may give content to his wife. These two
things a man has, that has a Wife.

Now, What is it to be in this, as if he had no wife?

That is this; In all contentments that come by a wife to use them as if he had
none at all: that is, to be moderate, not to glut himself, and to think, now I
am a happy man, I need no more, God has given me such a yoak-fellow, and I
have abundant joy in it. But to moderate his heart in this.

And for the other thing, for care, and thought how to provide for her and her
children: to go on, as if he had no wife and children to provide for: to leave
all to God: to go on in his calling in obedience to God, and let God do what he
will. And for matter of providing food and raiment, when he is gone, let him
even carry himself, as if all the world were gone, when he is gone. This is to
have a wife, as if he had none: to be as moderate in the enjoying of the
contentments that come by his wife: to be as moderate in cares required for a
Wife, so moderate in them, as if he had no wife at all to joy in, or to take
care for.

For the second; 2. By weeping as if they weept not.
They that weep as if they wept not. That is, for matter of Affliction. One man
comes out, and he exceedingly glories in his happiness that he has a wife.
Another complains: no man is so full of crosses as I: every day one cross
after another: no man has such children: such a husband: such an estate, so
poor, so afflicted, so weak: ever groaning and complaining. Now, says Saint
Paul: be as if not, in weeping. That is, let the thoughts of the neereness of
the shore make you so contented, as if there were no cross at all lying upon
you. For (I still follow the Metaphor the Spirit of God uses) he that is the
poorest man in the Ship, he that does nothing but dress the sails, and (as I
said before) ply the pumpe, and it may be is beaten withal: yet in the midst of
all these, he thinks, I shall by and by cast Anchor, and though I work hard,
yet one hour more will make me free. So it should be with us, in all
afflictions, as if not: that is, Think, Death will come and end all, I am sick
in body, I am crossed in my good name, in my yoak-fellow: Well Death will end all
these, I have but a little while to tarry in this world, and short things must
not be tedious.

On the other side; 3 By rejoicing, as if rejoiced not.
He that rejoices, as though he rejoiced not. That is, in all the contentments
of the world: in all the joy a man has in the things below: as suppose a man
have an estate here, and credit given him, or any thing that makes the world
account a man happy; Remember, all these things will be gone as soon as I die:
as (still to use the comparison) let it be the Master of the Ship, he may think
with himself: all these are under me, I can command them, and punish them if
they disobey: yet as soon as I am out of the Ship, they are as good as my self.
I am now near the shore, and shall be soon out of the place I am in, let me
therefore moderate my self. So let us in all worldly contentments be so
moderate, as if we should take our leaves of them, and they of us.

And so for a man, 4. By buying as If possessed not
to be as though be possessed not. That is, for a man not to enlarge his heart,
as the world is enlarged. But if I have now so many pounds, and therewith buy
such a purchase, and such a purchase: let me live, and carry my self in my
thoughts, as if I had nothing but food and raiment.

And then, 5. By using the world as not abusing it.
lastly comes in the main of all the rest: They that use the world, as not
abusing it. By world he means, all the good things of the world, all that I
named before, and all that you can else think of; Wife, and children,
prosperity, and adversity, every thing on the right hand, and on the left, all
comes within the compass of the World: use all these things so. But especially
he aims at worldly businesses, the things we are exercised about: do them as
not abusing them, as not letting your hearts be set too much upon them: but be
temperate and moderate in all, that we may ever be fit for that great service
that God has to employ us in.

Now, out of all these put together: the main Lesson that I would speak of is
this; That the true servants of God, Observat.
true believers: all the blessings and crosses they meet with in this world,
they must have them, as if they had them not.

This is the point I would open to you. That in wife. children, prosperity,
crosses, think what you can, a believer must be in them, as if not: as if he
were not in that condition.

To give you for the proof of this any other Scripture then my Text, I suppose
I need not: the Apostle Saint Paul (you see) lays it down in so many words.
Yet, for the better confirmation of the point, I will add to that, two or three
other plain places. Only first, I would a little explain to you, what it is for
a man to use all these things, as if not.

And I cannot for my life, Opened.
better lay it open to you, then by such a comparison as this. Look how worldly
men use the things of heaven: so a heavenly man use the things of the world.

To instance in a few duties that I will but name. A believer is to be to the
world as a worldly man to the things of heaven.
Suppose it be the duty of prayer. Bring me out a true believer, and a
worldling, let them both be put upon this duty of prayer. The true believer,
his heart, before he goes to prayer, is so full of care, that he may pray
aright: so full of fear, lest his heart should not carry it self as it should,
when he is in the duty: his heart is so violently bent to it: it so strugleth
and striveth, that he may do it, as may please God. When he has done, he has
much joy and comfort, if he have carried it well: and much sorrow and grief,
if he have carried it ill. Thus a religious heart carries it self in this
duty. Now a worldly man does the duty too: but how? as if not: that is, he has
none of this care before he comes to it: he has none of this trouble when he
is at it: he has none of this perplexity, when he has done, if he have
miscarried in it, if he be able to come off, it is well enough, though it be
performed in never so ill a manner: Why? his mind is after other things, he
intends greater matters, as he thinks. The Minister has taught him to pray,
and he can say his prayers, and so he does the duty, but still, as if not.

Or again, suppose a man whose heart is set upon Mammon, put this man to
recreation; he may perhaps find time to play at Bowls, or Cards, or Tables
with a friend: but how? he cares not whether he wins or loses: he whiles away
the time, but this is not the thing his heart is set upon, that gives him
contentment: but that which his mind is on, is his commodities, his trade, his
merchandise, his business in the world.

Just thus (beloved) it must be with every true believer in the using of all
the things of this life, that is, without care, without fear, without
perplexity, without distraction, and if they come on, so: if they go, so: he
must be pleased if he have them, and content if he want them: and howsoever,
his thoughts must be carried higher and better. To think thus, I am the servant
of God, I have a Calling here, I will follow it in obedience to God. I have a
Wife, I will use her as a wife should be used: I have children, I will have a
care of their education. But I must not come to be distracted, about my
calling, about my wife, and children, and servants, and good name, or any thing
that is here below. I am here to day, it may please God, I may be gone to
morrow: my hearts desire must be, to be content with this that God is my
all-sufficient portion: if I be in prosperity, to be, as if not: if in
affliction, to carry my self so, that in the midst of sorrow and trouble, to
be as if God freed me from all, remembering still that my portion is in another
life.

Thus you have seen both the lesson arising from the Text, and what that is,
that in it is required of every true believer.

And this point I am now to prove, and still I must use the compellation of the
Apostle, Brethren, for as for others I have little hope of. I will (as I
promised) make it plain out of the Scripture, Proved by Scripture.
That a true believer, that would have comfort of it, that he is a true
believer, must be, as if not in all the things of this world. There is one
eminent place for this purpose, viz. 1 John 4.10. Says the Apostle there, Love
not the world, nor the things of the world: 1 John 4.10.
if any man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him. Hence I argue
thus; He that must so use wife, children, credit, friends, good name,
prosperity, without loving of them, it is likely he uses them as if not: for
love is the great wheel that sets all the faculties awork: Now the Spirit of
God does directly forbid all Christians to love the world, or the things of the
world, (as they do) the Scripture absolutely injoyneth that we should not love
them, that is, that our hearts must not be fixed on them.

Another place you have likewise in Colloss. Col 3.1.
3.1. Set not your affections on things below. Now (as I said before) if any
man do any thing, that his affections are not upon, that he does not love, and
joy, and delight in, that he does not take care for, and the like, certainly
that man uses it as if not: but so must every true believer, use the things of
the world so, as that he must not set his affections upon them.

Other Scriptures I might give you, to make good this point, but I am somewhat
afraid to be straightened. Two or three arguments I will add to make it plain, Why
every true believer must be as if not, in all these things.

First, By reason. Reas. 1.
because all the things in this world (which are contained in the Text) they
are all but empty poor things to a believer. To another man who makes them his
God (in his conceit) they are full; The things of the world are emptle things
to a believer.
but to a true believer these things are well known to be but empty things. I
need give you no better proof to make this evident, then that which follows
in the Text: For the fashion af this world passes away. The fashion of the
world, What is that? That is, a thing that is a show without a substance. Nay,
the world signisieth, such a fashion, as is in a Comedy, or stage play, where
all things are but for a while to please the eye: A man it may be acts the part
of a King, that is no better then a beggar or a varlet: so all things in the
world are no better then shadows and empty, like a piece of a stage play: and
no marvel if believers that know this use them, as not.

Secondly, Reas. 2. The things of the world are none of a believers.
another argument why believers must in all these things use them as if not,
is, because they are none of a believers, and being none of his, it is a mere
folly for him, to set his heart upon them. How are they none of his, you will
say? First, for the truth of it, these things below, they belong to the men of
this life: but the treasure and estate of a Believer is laid up in another
life; he is but as a stranger and pilgrim here below, and therefore they are
none of his. And then likewise they are none of his, because he has resigned
them all up to God, in the day when he made the bargain for Christ. Note.
For when we come to be Christ's, we must sell all to buy that Pearl, and in
selling all, we sell not only our corruptions and lusts, but wives and
children, and pleasures, and credit, and all: we have them not now to have and
to hold, to do what we will with them: but now that we have Christ, we return
all to him, and have them as Coppy-hold, to be tenants at will to that great
Landlord: we have only a little time in them. And if it be so, that every
believer has no more to do in this world but thus: that he is meetly at the
pleasure of God, and can properly call nothing his own, but God and Christ,
then certainly, Simile.
he must use all these things as if not. Conceive it thus. A Traveller, goes a
long journey, he comes at night to his Inn, when he is there, he is woundrous
glad, of his table, of his bed, of his fire, of his meat and drink, and every
thing, and he is woundrous welcome; but he does not so delight in them, as the
Host of the house, who is living there, and is right owner, and has the whole
estate: No, he only rests there for a night after his weary journey, but on
the morrow, God be with you, then he is gone. So a worldly man, he may say here
is my estate, here is my stock, all that I have is laid up here. But a believer
says, I am now in my journey, I am here, no other, then a pilgrim, my home is
in Heaven, and while I am passing through this pilgrimage; If I have a piece of
meat in my hunger, and a cup of drink in my thirst, and clothes in my
nakedness, there is all that I care for.

Thirdly, Reas. 3. The things of ^he world hinder a believer in the service of
God.
the last and the main Argument to prove that every true believer must be, as
if not, in all the things of this world; is, because if he be any otherwise in
them, he will be so entangled, that he shall not be fit for the service of
God. And this third Argument will be of the greatest force to a true believer.
For the other two, you will say, if they be none of mine, why do I meddle with
them? and if they be empty, why likewise do I meddle with them? But now
thirdly, if I meddle with them, they will make me directly that I shall not be
a Christian, they will hinder me from the service of my God; this will make a
believer of all things, to look about him. The Apostle says directly, that
none that warreth intangleth himself: Simile.
that is thus: Suppose a man have received press-money to go a soldier, will
he be so mad as to lay out his money upon a Farm in the Country, when upon the
command of his Captain, upon pain of death, he must follow presently. Beloved
he that intangleth himself with the things of the world, and of the flesh, if
his wife, his pleasures, his credit, or any thing have taken up his heart: or
if sorrows and afflictions drink up his spirits, and eat up his very soul; when
God calls this man now to come to prayer, to come to the Church, to hear his
Word, to fight against his lusts, or to do any duty, alas! his head, his heart,
and all, are eaten up, with his Farm, with his oxen, with his wife, with his
crosses and afflictions: so that he is altogether unfit for any service that
God has called him to. Therefore (says Saint John) he that intangleth himself
with these things below, he cannot possibly have the love of the Father
dwelling in him.

This shall suffice for the clearing of the point, I have spent the more time
in it, because I would fain lay as good a foundation as I might, that the
Application may take the deeper impression in your hearts.

We that live in the Country, Use.
when we come up by occasion into the City, and here see all men so full of
trouble, every man so toyled in his work, so full of business, and so little
time taken for any thing else, me thinks that such a point as this to Brethren,
to believers, should be of special use. Now (beloved) this is the sum of that I
have to say; Be in all these things, as if not.

Shall we all resolve, as obedient children to carry this point home, and
examine indeed, Reprehension.
and in truth, whether we be in these things, as if not. But alas what shall I
say? I remember a story of one Thomas Lennot, a learned Englishman, who
reading once in the fifth, sixth, and seventh Chapters of S. Mathews Gospel,
how our Savior Christ faith; You have heard how it has been said of old, you
must do thus, and thus; but I say unto you, you must love your enemies, pray
for them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and persecute you; and
so he goes on in injoyning such strange duties to flesh and blood. He breaks
out; Oh Jesus, either this is not thy Gospel, or we are not Christians. Truly
(beloved) I would to God a Minister might not have just cause to say so in this
point, that when he comes, and reads this of the Apostle; It remains
(brethren) that he that has a wife, be as if he had none; he that uses the
world, as not abusing it: and he that buyeth, as if he possessed not, etc. And
must it be thus, if we mean to be Christians? I would to God (I say) a man
might not break out, and say; Oh Paul, either thou art not the writer of this,
or we are no Christians.

We talk and prosess it in words, that we purpose to do it but, if we come to
the deed, and the truth, it is clean contrary, we are not at all moderate in
the use of these things. In matters of Heaven, and in things that concern our
everlasting welfare, where God would have us take the kingdom of heaven with
violence: Where we should cry out as the Horse-leach his daughter; Give, give,
and never say it is enough: We are even like children that go to school, that
care not how little they have for their money, In hearing, if the Sermon be but
half an hour, we think it enough: and in prayer, and in conference, a little
will serve the turn. Like the Jesuit, that when he thought he had a revelation,
he cried out, Satis Domine, enough Lord; I have revelation enough: So we in
matters of Religion, Enough Lord. But turn us to wives, to children, to
clothes, to honors, to preferments, to riches, to ease, to pleasures, and the
like; there we are as the barren womb, that never faith it is enough. Brethren,
is it not thus?

But me thinks I should bring you some particular instances to convince you,
Particular instances.
that it is thus: and I would to the Lord I could thoroughly convince you of it,
that thus it is with you. But to instance a little. Suppose now, a man comes
and meets with a Citizen in his business, and say to him; How have you spent
this day? Truly (he will say) I am so full of business, that I have not time so
much as to eat my meat. But I hope, you have been at prayer in your family,
have you not? Alas (will he say) I cannot get so much as a quarter of an hours
time. Do you call this as if not, brethren? Come to another, that has a wise:
all his care is for her: oh my wife and children, if I should die, and leave
them poor, what should I do? when I sleep, I dream of them; when I awake in the
morning, my thoughts are of them. Is this to be as if you had no wife and
children? Another, he is ever a complaining and mourning, oh, I have such
crosses, I am so full of affliction; I have lost such, and such friends; and
such, and such an estate: and though I go to Church and hear, such and such
comfortable doctrines, one after another, and all telling me, of the
all sufficiency of God, of the comforts and joys of the Spirit, of the good
things that are laid up in Heaven: yet like Rachel, they will never be
comforted for their brother, for their sister, for their children, etc. What
shall we say to these things? Do you think the Lord speaks not as he means?
or that the Apostle, when he says here absolutely and determinatly, that thus
and thus you must do if you be Christians, if you be brethren? Shall we do the
contrary to all this, and yet think that all will be well?

I know you may put it off (many of you) and allege many things: we have
callings, and we must follow our Callings: if God brings me in employment,
blame me not if I follow it: And I know not how to live, if I do not do thus
and thus.

But be not deceived, How to know whether we use the things of the world, as if
we used them not.
God is not mocked. In a word therefore, to put you on the trial. If thou
find in the midst of thy trading, and merchandising, or whatsoever calling
thon art of, thy heart daily gathering toward heaven: that thou can say,
blessed be God for this, and other commodities, but Christ is my darling: this
is good. And then, in these things, if thou have a care to use them aright, as
well as to get them, and to thank God for them, and that thy project is, how
thou shall do good with that thou have, that thou art always saying with thy
self, Lord how shall I do good with so much as I have got by such a bargain.
God forbid I should say against thee, though thou be full of business from
morning to evening. But alas, there are many good people and godly, that have
hope that they serve God, yet if they go home and examine themselves thoroughly,
their own consciences will tell them, that in the things of this world, they
are not, as if not; but rather, that they have been over-careful, and too full
of distractions in business.

And so for matter of joy: if a man have a little pleasure, or preferment given
him; his heart is so up, that he knows not where he is, he is so transported,
that he has clean forgot himself. This cannot stand, this is not to be, as if
not: and therefore I beseech you in the fear of God think of it.

Now if a man would know, How a man may come to use things, as if he used them
not.
how he should come to have his heart in a good temper, to be in these things,
as if not. In one word, let me tell you that rule of Saint Paul. In all things
be filled with the Spirit, and then thou will not take thought much for other
things: if once you let your souls be filled with the things of a better life:
then wife, and children, and wealth, and pleasures, or any thing else, will not
draw away your heart.

Get a good hand-fast of Jesus Christ: work out your salvation, and that you
may know that you are believers upon good grounds, and that you have the graces
of the Spirit of God in you, indeed, and in truth, that you are new creatures.

And then often think of the rare things that are provided for you in another
life. What; to have God to be your Father, and Angels your keepers, to be
children, to be the companions of Angels. Weigh these things daily, and then
you will be, as if not, in all these outward and worldly things. And until
thou do this: and think withal of that I have formerly said, that thou
art ready to strike sail, I will never believe that thou will be, as if not.
This is the second thing.

A word or two of the Third, and so I have done. And that is the Spur that the
Apostle Saint Paul uses. And it is necessary he should use such a spur, for it
is a very hard lesson.

If you would be, as if you were not, consider this; The fassion of the world
passes away. That is, it signifies (I touched it before) such a fashion as is
on a stage: All these things below, they are but as the Acting of a Comedy, as
a Scaene, it may be it is done in half an hour, and though it make a fine show,
yet in truth there is no substance in it.

There is one, 3. The Apostles Motive or spur.
it is a fashion: besides, it passes away. So then in this spur, there are two
things. I will but name the heads.

First, Obser. 1. The things of the world but a show without a substance.
That the things of the world, (all that I named before) are but a show without
a substance; Even as a Scaene or Comedy, things that have a glorious glittering
show to the eye, but if you look indeed and in truth upon them, there is no
such matter. That is one thing that I note, that our life is but as the acting
of a part in a Comedy: and so by consequence, in all these outward things, thy
contentment in wife, or children, or credit, or pleasures, thou do but act a
glorious part, it may be thou have a goodly outside, fine clothes, rich
apparel, an outward representation of comfort, but look through them, and there
is no such matter.

But the second thing which I rather would press, Obser. 2. The show of the
world is suddenly gone.
is, that it is suddenly gone; it passes away, says the Apostle. As a man
has but a little time to tarry in the world, so all the things he enjoys in
the world, are wondrous inconstant. That look as it is in a Play, he that now
acts the part of a King, it may be next, he may act the part of a Beggar: or as
it is with some of your delicate fashions, that while you are speaking of them,
the fashion is spoiled. Even so, the fashion of this world it will not continue.

That is the sum of that I desire you to take notice of: that if you will not
be persuaded by me, or by the Spirit of God in his unworthy minister, to use
the things of this world morderately, and carry your selves as you ought in
crosses and afflictions: yet know this, that the fashion of these things will
shortly be spoiled. And if they be all so unconstant, what a fool art thou to
set thy heart upon them?

We may learn this wisdom from the foolery of our English Nation, esteemed
now the idlest people of the world for changing their fashion. They will never
make clothes twice of one fashion, but one gown of this fashion, and another of
that, and though he be never so good a Tailor that makes it, yet he must make
no more of the same fashion, but the next Term, they will come to another.
Learn, I say, this wisdom from that foolery: Now, the Lord gives thee comfort
in thy wife, set not thy heart too much upon her, the next Term the fashion may
change: Now, thou art rich, let not thy heart dote upon thy riches, it is but a
fashion, a show, it passes away, to morrow thou may be a beggar: to day a
man, to morrow none.

But if thou would keep the fashion, get the fashion of grace, get a right
to heaven, an interest in God, and be content (in Gods name) to follow his
fashion. If the fashion that God will have thee be in, be to be an humble
dejected man, be content with that fashion: if anon he will have thee on the
topp of the wheel of prosperity, thank God for it, take heed of abusing the
things thou enjoyest. Remember the things of this life are inconstant things;
as a flower, as a nosegay, that seems as a dainty fine thing, but while we
are smelling at it, and praising it, it withers away; so is it with all these
things.

I would I could tell how to speak home to your souls: and yet I know that
little I have spoken, if it be entertained with faith, if you believe this to
be the truth of God, not as the speech that a man makes to you, but as the
speech of Saint Paul, an Apostle of Christ, that sets it down by the direction
of God, that it is thus: I say, if you lay down this as a truth that comes from
God, and seriously think with your selves; I have but a little time to tarry
here below, and when I am out of the world, I shall live for ever in heaven or
in hell: while I do enjoy the things of this world, God will have me to be, as
if not, in them: and there is good reason why, they are shows, and not
substances: Grace and the favor of God is only that which is substantial,
Grace is only substantial.
whatsoever you look upon that is under these, are but shows: riches, and
honor, and worldly contenments they are but shadows, like one in a play, that
is but a Peasant under the coat of a King, these have but only outsides, under
them there is no such matter. This I say which I have spoken, being seriously
considered, and faithfully received, may (through the blessing of God, and your
own prayers to God to teach you this) be a means to moderate you in the use of
all those things that are here below.

SECURITY SURPRISED OR THE DESTRVCTION OF THE CARELESS.
SERMON XII.
1 THESE. 5.3. For when they shall say, peace, and safety: then sudden
destruction comes upon them, as travail upon a woman with child, and they
shall not escape.


IN the latter part of the Chapter going before, The Coherence.
the blessed Apostle St. Paul, (to the end that he might draw those to whom he
wrote, from immoderate sorrow for them that were departed this life:) reveals
to them certain comfortable truths, concerning the Resurrection from the dead,
telling them that death it self is but as a sleep, whence they shall be raised
at the last day, by the voice of the Archangel, etc.

In the beginning of this Chapter, he prevents an objection that some might
make. For, having fallen upon the discourse of the Resurrection, he well knew
the curiosity of man's nature, that leaves those things that are most
profitable, to enquire after such things that God has hid, and therefore some
men might say; Since there shall be such a time, and such a change; when will
those times and seasons be? When shall that great day of the Resurrection come,
when all shall be brought together?

Of the times and seasons brethren (says the Apostle) ye have no need that I
write unto you, verse 1. As if he should say: this is no needful, no necessary
thing for you to inquire into, or for me to tell you: rather let us fall upon
those things that are necessary and useful; for neither you, not I, can tell
the particular time when that shall be: yet know this, that very suddenly such
a time shall come, and that when the world least thinks of it.

The suddenness hereof, he sets down by a twofold comparison.

First, by the coming of a thief in the night: Your selves know perfectly, that
the day of the Eord so comes, as a thief in the night, verse. 2.

Secondly, by the travail that comes upon a woman with child: When they shall
say, peace, and safety, then sudden destruction comes upon them, as travail
upon a woman with child, and they shall not escape, This latter, is that I have
made choice of at this time for my Text.

A little for the explanation of the words;

The meaning of the words
When they shall say, peace, and safety. The Apostle intends not to condemn,
either the speaking of peace to the children of peace: or their rejoicing in
that peace they have. 1. What is meant by peace.
But that which he condemns, is, that they cry peace to themselves, whom God
denounces war against: Men that go on in a course of sinning, and in security:
and yet will persuade themselves, that all shall be well with them in the end;
these are the men upon whom Death shall come thus suddenly, and upon whom the
Judgment day shall come thus unexpected. When they shall say, peace, and
safety; that is, when they are living in their sins, walking on in their
rebellions against God, and shall yet be flattering themselves, that it shall
be well with them not withstanding this, then shall Judgment come upon them,
then sudden destruction comes.

By destruction here, 2. What by destruction.
he means not, the destruction of the body or the soul, the destruction of
their being. For the Soul even after the death of the body shall have a
being: and the body also shall be restored again to its being and parts, in
the resurrection from the dead,

It were happy for wicked and ungodly men, if there should be such a
destruction of there being, as that they should cease to be any more: for then
this body, the members whereof have been the servants of sin, should not be
tormented in Hell: and then this Soul of theirs, that has set all the body on
work in the service of sin, it should not be sensible of that anguish that
shall cause gnashing of teeth. It were well (I say) for them if there should be
such a destruction: it is that which if they might have their desire, they
would wish above all things in the world. But it will not be such a
destruction, it shall be worse with them. It shall only be the destruction of
their joy, and comfort, of all their contentments, of all those things wherein
they solaced, and flattered themselves upon earth: all these things shall be
destroyed.

Their riches that fed their lusts shall be destroyed: and their company that
encouraged them in sin, shall be destroyed: and all things wherein they have
delighted themselves here upon earth, shall be destroyed: the whole earth shall
be burnt with fire before them. And beside this, that same cheerfulness of
spirit, and that free disposition, whereby they encouraged themselves in the
ways of their pride, or whatsoever else it was, that made them seem some body
on earth; all this shall cease and fail them, and forsake them. There shall be
no mirth, no wisdom, no courage, no friends, no wealth, no houses, no apparel,
nothing to pride and delight themselves in, there shall be an utter destruction
of all these things. Then shall destruction come upon them.

As pain upon a woman with child. The manner of the destruction, 1. Sudden.
This shows the manner, the kind of their destruction that shall come upon
them. It shall be first, a sudden destruction: it shall not give them warning,
either of the time or place: as it falls out with a woman with child, her
travel may come upon her, in the street, at the table, when she is talking,
etc. So shall destructiou come suddenly upon them, they shall have no more
warning then these general warnings, 2. Painful.
that they have in the preaching of the Word.

Secondly, it shall be a painful destruction, full of misery and sorrow, as
travail on a woman with child.

And then thirdly; 3. Unavoidable.
It shall be an inevitable destruction, such a destruction as they shall never
avoid. All their wit, friends, power, strength, wealth, or whatsoever else they
have, cannot put off the stroke of Judgment that shall come upon them: as all
the devices a woman has, cannot make her escape her travail, when it comes.

So then the meaning of the words are, as if the Apostle should have said; When
wicked and ungodly men, in a course of sin shall cry peace to themselves, and
flatter themselves in their rebellious courses, then shall a sudden, a painful,
an inevitable destruction, of all their comfort, of all their props, and hopes,
and helps, fall upon them.

In the words, you have a twofold description.

In the words a double description.
First of the state and condition of the men of the world, when Christ shall
come to Judgment. He shall find all the world at rest. As the Angel that stood
among the myrtle trees, spoke in the 1 Zachar. 11. We have walked to and fro
through the carth: Zich. 1.11^.
and behold all the earth sits still, and is at rest. He shall find all the
men of the world in peace: every man applauding himself in some vain conceit,
in some hope and considence or other. They shall cry peace.

Secondly, here is the consequent that follows upon the vain flattery of
themselves: Then shall destruction come upon them.

And that destruction is farther described and amplified by a comparison taken
from a woman with child, to declare the suddainness, the painfulness, the
unavoidableness of it. Thus you have the opening of the words.

Let us now come to the points of instruction that may be raised hence.

First, here you may see, and he that runs may read it, that, They are most
secure, Observat.
that are in least safety.

A man is in the greatest danger, In the greatest security; the greatest danger
when he is in the greatest security. Then a man's Judgment is nearest, when he
least thinks of it, when he least freareth it.

This is the very thing that the holy Ghost would have us to take notice of
here: At that very time, not before that time, they shall cry peace: Nor after
the time when they had done it, and repented of it: But just at the very time,
when they are in the midst of their sins, applauding of their own estate,
living under the power and guilt of sin, then comes the destruction upon them,
and they shall not escape. Thus far the text.

That we may make the point clear, before we come to prove it, give me leave,
first briefly to tell you what we mean by that security, which is upon men even
in their chiefest dangers.

Know therefore, A double security.
that there is a twoford security,

A holy, spiritual, Security. A sinful, carnal, Security.
There is first, 1. Holy and spiritual.
a holy and spiritual security (and that even in this state where into we are
fallen) which consists in a man's reconciliation with God, when he is in
terms of peace with him, having obtained remission of his sins, and his favor
through Jesus Christ; so that God is pleased with him in his Son, has received
him into the Covenant of grace, interested him into all the promises, and is
become his God by a Covenant for ever. Now here a man may be secure, yea, and
he must be so in a spiritual manner. Confidence upon the goodness of God in
Christ, upon the promises of God in the Gospel, is that which is requisite in
every Chriistian: it is that which God commands; Fear not (says he in one
place.) And again, Trust in the Lord. The Scripture is full in a calling for
such security as this; that men should lay aside all those carking, and
distracting cares when once they are in the Covenant of Grace, that now they
should mind nothing but duty, and not be troubled about success.

For (my brethren) it is such a security as makes a man not to neglect duty;
Spiritual security, what.
but such, as freeth a man from those disquiets of soul about the event of
things.

This was that which David had, Psalm. 4.8.
and rejoiced in; I laid me down in rest and peace, for the Lord keeps me in
safety.

This is that which the Lord commanded the people of Israel to do; Isa. 26.20.
Isa. 26.20. Come my people, enter thou into thy chamber, and shut thy doors
about thee, hide thy self, etc. He would have them secure themselves under his
protection, and in his ordinances.

This is such a security, as draws men nearer to God, brings them to
further acquaintance with God, keeps them in a constant communion with God,
causes them to walk in Gods presence, etc. This is a good security.

But then secondly, 2. Sinful and carnal.
there is a sinful carnal security; that is, when a man yet living in a course
of sin, he bears up his spirit against all fear, either of judgments
threatened, or judgments approaching upon him, under a vain hope, of I know not
what mercy in God: and of I know not what assurance from men, and upon worldly
conceits and flatteries, either from others, or his own heart. Here is now a
sinful carnal security, not warranted, but condemned in the word of God. This
is the security, that is ever an ill prognosticator, and forerunner of some
heavy judgment, to fall upon that person in whom it is. This is the security
that we have now in chase.

First then, Carnal security a forerunner of Judgment.
we will make it appear, that it is an infallible sign, of Gods Judgment upon a
person, or a people, to cry peace to themselves, to be secure, and no way
troubled at their estate, when God is at war with them.

You shall see this in instances and examples.

Proved.
See it in particular persons, 1. By particular examples of particular persons.
and in States and Kingdoms; and you shall generally find it, that before the
destroying judgment came upon them, they have been given up to this security we
speak of, this crying of peace upon a false ground.

See it in Agag, 1 Samuel 15.13.
1 Samuel 15.13. The bitterness of death is past. But was it past? Nay, at that
very time, the bitterness of death was upon him, for the very next thing that
we meet withal in the Story is, that Agag was hewn in pieces before the Lord
in Gilgall.

Ye have Belshazzar in Dan. 5. Dan. 5.3.
wondrous secure, carrowsing, and quaffing in the holy vessels that were taken
out of the Temple of the house of God which was at Jerusalem, amongst his
Princes and Nobles, his Wives and his Concubines, as if there would be no
change of his estate, and translation of his Empire. But what? was it so? Nay,
at that very time, the very same hour (faith the text, verse 5.) came forth
fingers of a man's hand, and wrote upon the plaster of the wall of the Kings
Palace, Mean, Mean, Tekell, Upharsin. Thou art laid in the balance, and art
found too light, thy kingdom is divided, and given to the Medes and Persians:
and immediately, In that very night (verse. 30.) was Belshazzer King of the
Caldeans slain; he was took away from all his comfort and jollity.

See this in the Rich man, Luke 12.19.
Luke 12.19. Soul, soul (faith he) take thine ease, eat, drink, and be merry:
and why so? was it because his sonl indeed was washed in the blood of Christ?
Nothing less. But, take thine ease, thou have goods laid up for many years,
thou art well provided against a hard Winter, against a dear year, now take
thine ease. Well, what of this? had his soul any whit the more ease? had he
many years to enjoy that which he had laid up for many years? Nay, mark the
answer of God (verse 20.) Thou fool, this night thy soul shall be taken from
thee; then whose shall those things be, that thou have provided?

It is ordinary (as Job notes of worldly men) thus to flatter themselves: Job.
21.13.
They spend their days in wealth, and in a moment go down to the grave. They
spend their days in wealth: this is that they resolve upon while they live
upon earth, they will be merry, and enjoy their wealth, and worldly
contentments to the height, and want nothing, but in a moment, while they are
in the midst of these thoughts of raising a happiness to themselves out of
their worldly estate, in the midst of these thoughts they go down to the
grave.

So it is also in Nations and States. 2. By general examples of Nations and
States. Luke 7.
See it in two particulars in the 17. Luke. That of the old world; That of
Sodom and Gomorrah; They were eating and drinking, and building, and planting,
and marrying, and giving in marriage, till the flood came upon the one, and
fire and brimstone upon the other, till sudden destruction came upon both,
according to my Text.

Ye shall have Jerusalem in the same case. Their Prophets are flattering them
and crying peace, Jer. 6.14, 15.
peace, as Jeremy tells them, Chap. 6.14, 15. They heal the hurt of the
daughter of my people slightly, saying peace, peace, when there is no peace.
Were they ashamed when they had committed abomination? Nay, they were not
ashamed, neither could they blush; therefore they shall fall among men that
fall at the time that I visit them, they shall be cast down, says the Lord.
Mark the Prophets cry peace; It had been well done of the Prophets to cry peace
to those Israelites, that in truth were at peace with God: but they cry peace
to them, to whom there was no peace. What then? Did the people reform? did this
make those that before were rebellious against God, come in and accept of the
conditions of peace, and forsake their sins, and turn to God? No such matter,
nay though their sins were reproved by Jeremiah, and other faithful Prophets,
yet they were not ashamed, when they had committed abomination, and they could
not blush; they stood it out, they remained in their impenitency. Well, what of
this? Therefore (faith the Lord) they shall fall amongst them that fall, in
that day, at that time, they shall be dostroyed, they shall be cast down, they
shall cease to be a people; at least, they shall cease to be men prevailing
above other people.

In the first of Zephaniah. Zeph. 1.12.
verse. 12. ye have the Lord saying there, that he will visit Jerusalem with
lights, and search it with candles. What to do? to find out the men that are
frozen on their dreggs, that are settled on their lees; that say in their
heart, the Lord will not do good, neither will he do evil. Why will the Lord
visit Jerusalem with lights, to find out these men? He meets with the
conceit, that such men as these have, they think (as the Athiests in Job) that
God is circled in the clouds, and sees not the things below, or as those in
this Prophecy of Zephany, that said, The Lord sees not, neither does he
regard. Why does he not so? Because he wants light. Well then (faith the Lord)
I will bring candles to see with, and visit Jerusalem with lights: and
whosoever he spies out amongst all the sinners in Israel, he will be sure to
meet with those that say, The Lord sees not; that are settled on their dreggs,
that secure themselves under false persuasions, they shall not escape his
wrath; Gods greatest quarrel is against those men that flatter themselves, as
if God did not take notice of their sins, he will surely punish those: it is
for their sakes, why he will bring candles to search Jerusalem with.

It was so with Babylon, Isa. 47.8, 9.
Isa. 47.8, 9. The Lord observes her boasting; I am (says she) a Queen, I sit
as a Lady, I shall neither see loss of children nor widdowhood. Mark now what
God says, Hear now this, thou that art given to pleasures, and dwell
carelessly, both these shall come upon thee, loss of children, and widdowhood;
all thy props, and all thy stays shall be taken from thee, yea, and that in
one day, in a moment, when thou least think of it, suddenly thou shall be
husbandless, and childless.

Nay, Rev. 18.7.
it is that which the Lord speaks of Romish Babylon in the 18. Revel. 7. She
had heard of the pride and boasting of old Babylon, and she would fain be like
it: I sit as a Queen (says she too) and am no widow, and shall see no sorrow:
she stands upon her outward pomp and glory, as worldly-minded men do
(specially when they come to greatness and eminency.) Well, what will the Lord
do? Therefore (verse 8.) shall her plagues come in one day, death, and
mourning, and famine, and she shall be utterly burnt with fire, for strong is
the Lord God who judges her. Thou say I sit as a Lady, I shall see no
change. Well says the Lord, it shall be indeed a famous Church for something,
even for such judgments as shall fall upon it, above all other places: there
shall be famine, and death, and burning: Yea, and it shall be done, when all
outward means that should bring this to pass, seem to fail, and when Babylon
shall seem to advance her self like a Queen above all other Churches, when
there is nothing but strength, and might on her side, then shall God do it, for
strong is the Lord that judges her. He brings in this ( strong is the Lord)
to answer an objection. It shall be done for the Church, even then when the
advers party thriveth most: then when it may be seen to be Gods own work: then
when men are taken off from self-confidence: then when men have none to fix
their eyes on, but God, then will God do this for his Church. He says plainly,
that Babylon shall be burnt with fire, and at such a time, when it appears
that it cannot be done, except he put his strength to the work. Thus ye see the
security of a people or Nation, or Kingdom, it is an infallible sign of
judgment falling upon it,

And is must be so, Confirmed by Reason.
and there is great reason for it. If we either consider the causes of
security, whence it comes: or the concommitants that accompany it; or the
fruits and events of it: it must be that great judgments must befall men, and
places, when they are under this carnal security.

First look to the causes. 1. In respect of the causes of security. Infidellty.
Whence is it that men, that are not at peace with God, yet flatter themselves
that they shall do well? It proceeds from that unbelief, and infidelity, that
is in the hearts of men: therefore they flatter themselves; and pride
themselves in things that will not hold them up in the end: I say infidelity is
the cause that men are so secure.

Did men believe the word of God, that every threatening that goes out of the
mouth of God, against any particular sin, should certainly fall upon the head
of the sinner, durst they go on in a course of sinning against God? Durst they
add drunkenness to thirst? one wickedness to another? No certainly. In that
measure a man has faith; in that measure he fears God and his judgments
that he has threatened.

See it in Noah, Heb. 11.7.
Heb. 11. By faith Noah being warned of God, moved with fear, prepared an Ark.
He believed the word of God was faithful, that had threatened a judgment upon
the world: he believed the word of God, that commanded him to provide an Ark
for the safety of him and his house, and therefore he feared the Deluge to
come, and prepared an Ark.

So likewise Josiah, when he read the book of the Law, and saw what was
threatened against the sins of the people, his heart melted within him: and why?
because he believed that this was the word of God, he believed that God would
be as true as his Word, therefore his heart melted within him, at the sight of
those sins, wherein the people had continued so long a time.

Nay, Isa 61.
it is made a description of a believer in Isa. 61. That he is one that
trembles at Gods word. On the other side: what is the reason why infidelity
does presently bring judgments upon men? The cause is apparent: infidelity it
draws men from God; Heb. 3.
An unbeleeving heart departs from the living God. And when a man departs from
Gods presence, God pursues him with his judgments. All the judgments of God
are upon that place, where Gods presence in his graces is not. If I go (faith
David to the uttermost parts of the earth, thou art there: if I go into the
deep, thou art there. And how there? Not only as an observer, but as a
punisher; that is, when men come to this point, to fly from God: Now, unbeleef
is a drawing of the soul from God to the creature, therefore it provokes God,
for it sets up an Idol in the heart of man, and Idolatry exceedingly provokes
God, and therefore he brings judgments upon it.

Beside that, Deuteronomy. 29.19.
mark the threatening of the word against this, Deuteronomy. 29. When a man hears
the words of this curse, and blesses himself, and says, I shall have peace,
though I walk in the stubbornness of my own heart, the Lord will not spare that
man, but the anger of the Lord, and his jealousy shall smoke against him, and
all the plagues that are written in this book, shall be heaped on him. When is
that? when is the time that the wrath of God shall smoke? At that very time and
instant, when he flattereth himself with his vain conceits, that he shall have
peace though God threaten judgment, then at that very instant, the wrath of
God shall fall upon such a man.

In this manner did God deal with the Israelites, Isa. 6: 9, 10.
in Isa. 6.9, 10. Make the heart of this people fat, make their ears heavy: and
why so? that they may see, and not perceive; that they may hear, and not
understand; lest they should be converted, and I should heal them. How long
shall this be? (says the Prophet) till the Cities be wasted without
inhabitant, and the houses without man, and the land be utterly desolate.

When God gives over a people to be regardless in hearing the Word, that they
hear and do not hear ken, they hear and do not regard, they do not comforme and
reform, according to the doctrine delivered, then God intends to sweep them
away by judgment, that they may be utterly left desolate, as the Text says.

You see then it must needs be a grievous forerunner of a judgment upon a
place, or City, or people, or nation, when they remain impenitent in their
sins, and yet cry peace.

Again secondly; 2. In respect of the concomitants of security.
If you mark the concommitants, what accompanies that carnal security in the
heart of men, and it will appear then, that it must of necessity bring a
judgment upon a Land and place. What is that that accompanies it? A
disposition slighting of God himself. When a man, I say, hears the Word, the
judgments threatened: hears the Law warning him to take heed of wrath: the
Gospel alluring him to repent: and yet all moves him not, but still he
flattereth himself: I say here is a disposition slighting God himself.

God in all his Attributes is slighted. Disrespect of God in all his Attributes.
His power, his wisdom, his justice, his truth is slighted: yea, his mercy, and
patience, and long-suffering, all are slighted, when a man in the course of sin
goes on in carnal security. Especially amongst the rest, this is a slighting
of Gods patience, and long-suffering, and forbearance of men.

Wherefore do men harden themselves against exhortation to repentance, but
because they presume upon the continuance of Gods long-suffering toward them?
Mark how the Lord takes notice of this, Rom: 2: 4, 5.
The forbearance, and long-suffering, the goodness, and mercy of God, should
lead thee to repentance; and therefore God has forbore thee all this while,
that he might bring thee to repentance. But what if he do not? Thou after thy
hardness, and impenitent heart, heapest up as a treasure to thy self, wrath
against the day if wrath. What day is that? The day of the revelation of the
righteous judgment of God. As if he should say; Now you obscure Gods justice
and righteousness from others, and from your selves: Well, God therefore will
take a time to declare his righteous judgment, for that purpose God has a day
of wrath; and thy daily going on in sin, against the long-suffering, and
patience of God, it does but add wrath to that day. Thus it is when God has
borne with a man his own self.

So it is likewise when God warns a man by his patience toward others. What
hardneth men in security? Do we not see God has been merciful to many sinners,
why may he not be so to me too? He gave them repentance after many sins
committed, why may he not do so to me?

Mark what Solomon faith, Eccles: 8: 11.
Eccles. 8.11. Because sentence against an evil doer, or an evil work, is not
executed speedily, therefore the heart of the sons of men, is set in them to do
evil. This they purpose, they resolve upon, they venture upon: God has been
thus and thus to others, patient and long-suffering, and why may he not be so
to them? Well yet I know (says Solomon) that it shall not go well with them in
the end, neither shall the wicked prolong his days; Why? because he fears
not before God. They are not awakned by the example of his judgment on others,
they are not allured by his patience and long-suffering: it does not make them
to fear him: therefore it shall not go well with them in the end.

Thirdly, 3: In respect of the fruit and consequences of security.
Look to the end, what the consequence of this carnal security is, what
follows upon i^. Where there is carnal security, there must of necessity be an
increase of sin, and consequently, a hastening of judgment: for the more sin
hastneth to ripeness, the more judgment hastneth also upon the sinner. God has
set unto particular men a certain stint, Gen: 15: 16.
and it is not known to them, what that stint limited is. Genesis 15.16. The
iniquity of the Amorites, is not yet full. They were a sinful people at that
time: but the nearer they came to the fullness, and stint, and limitation that
God intended to be the immeditate forerunner of the judgment, the faster
judgment hastneth upon them. So for particular persons, there is a certain
stint limited (Let every man look to it.) Note.
The adding of one sin more, may by thy uttermost stint, that shall bring the
last stroke of judgment, and destruction upon thee. Now (I say) this carnal
security is that, that increases sin upon a man. We know how the security of
the Israelites increased their sin upon them. And the security of Sodom, their
pride, and idleness, increased the rest of their sins, and consequently hastened
on their judgment. In Romans 3. when there was no fear of God before their eyes;
when there was a neglect of that, there was abundance of wickedness amongst
them: and what follows? then their was nothing but destruction, and calamity in
all their ways. I could give you sundry instances of this in the word of God.
But I hasten.

You see the reason. Let us now come to make some use of it, that we may not be
prevented.

We have told you, that it is true of States and Kingdoms, of particular
persons, of every man, Use 1. For examination.
that when in a course of sin, and impenitency, they cry peace to themselves,
then judgment and destruction is coming upon them. It serves therefore to
inform us, what to think of our selves, of the estate of this Land wherein we
live: of these times wherein we are fallen.

What can we expect, when we consider to what a height of sin we are come; how
impenitent men are: how obstinate and hard-hearted, and stiff-necked against
the voice of God in the Gospel, and the means of Grace; but destruction to come
upon us?

If we look upon the sins of men, we may perceive even a general ripeness for
judgment. When the sins of the Amorites were full, judgment came upon them.
How near the sins of this Land are come to that fullness, we know not, we have
cause to fear. We see in other Countries the shaking of the sword upon us: it
has not yet awakened us to fear God. At home, we have had the voice of the
Prophets, the Ministers crying unto us from day to day, to return, lest
destruction come upon us: it has not brought us to return from our sins. We
have seen the mercies of God upon particular persons, and families: it has not
awakened men to walk conscionably in their places. We see no reformation, there
is rather an increase of sin. And what can we expect there wants? but one sin,
and when that is come, sudden destruction comes. What is that? Security.

And have we not cause to bewail the general security that is amongst us? May
not the Angel of the Lord return that answer, as he did in the first of Zecha^;
All the world is at rest? Go in to the streets, the houses, the shops of men,
every man is at rest: no man is troubled about his estate, nor affected with
Gods displeasure, either against himself, or the Land we live in. See, is not
the Land as secure as they of Laish, or worse? They were secure, because they
did not here of the danger; of the purpose of the Danites against them:
therefore their security was not altogether so culpable and blameworthy. But I
will tell you what security ours is: nay, the holy Ghost has told us to our
hands, Prove. 23.34. That judgment there, that is threatened against a man that
goes on in sin, seems to be a judgment executed upon us at this time: Thou
shall be as a man that lies down in the midst of the sea, or as he that lies
upon the top of a mast. They have stricken me, shall thou say, and I was not
sick: they have beaten me, and I felt it not, when I awake, I will seek it yet
again. Our security, I say, is like that of a man in the midst of the sea,
and yet asleep: as a man upon the top of a mast, and yet asleep. Nay, men not
only in danger, out such as have the stroke upon them: They have struken me,
and I was not sick; they have wounded me, and I felt it not. Is it not thus
with us, in these dead and secure times that we live in? And shall we say that
we are not asleep? Has not the Lord sent the destroying Angel amongst us, that
has smitten thousands in our streets? and yet we have not felt it. Shall we
say we are not in danger? We are as a man that sleeps on the top of a mast at
Sea: Nay, as a man in the midst of the waves, in a dead sleep, like such as
are drunk, and yet we feel nothing. Truly we have little cause to be secure, we
have little cause to flatter our selves with vain conceits of peace, and
continuance of prosperity, if we look well about us. Where is any man that
takes occasion by what he hears abroad, or sees at home, to enter into the
reformation of his own house, of his own heart?

It may be some men will say; It is an unjust tax that you put upon us; we are
not so secure as you speak of. You shall scarce come to any man's table, but
they will be talking of the jndgments abroad. You shall scarce meet a man in
the streets, but he will leave other occasions, and tell you how ill it goes
with the Churches beyond the Seas. You shall scarce meet with one in the field,
but all the time is took up with discourse of the evils at home, or troubles
abroad. And is this a sign of security?

Alas (beloved) this is to be asleep, in the midst of the waves. Every man is
in the midst of danger, and yet is secure.

How shall that appear?

I will make it appear, by demonstrations and signs, that may convince you
before the Lord, that we add this to the rest of our sins, that in the midst
of our sins and impenitency, we are secure: and therefore that destruction is
coming upon us.

What are the signs whereby we may be convinced of security?

I will give you a few, Signs of security.
that by those you may see whether the Land, the City, your families, your
selves, and all be not asleep, and at rest this day.

The first sign shall be this; 1. Profiting not by the judgments of God on our
selves, or others.
When men profit not by the judgments of God. Certainly it is an evident sign
of a deep sleep in sin, when neither the afflictions that are upon others, or
upon our selves, do any good upon us.

Look how God has smitten others. Has that awakned us? You will say that it
is a secure child that sees his brother beaten, for the same fault before his
eyes, and yet goes on in it; you will say that that is a secure malefactor,
that sees such a person executed before his face, and yet goes on in the same
felony and thest. And must we not say that we are a secure generation, when we
can see our brethren in other Countries, how they have suffered, and yet go on
in the very same fins, that we our selves think the hand of God is upon them
for? We can talk of their sins, of their unrighteousness, and in justice, we
can talk of their neglect of the Lords day, and other holy duties, and for
these we judge them smitten of God. How is it then that we are such our selves?
how is it, that we go on in unrighteousness, in profaning the Lords day, in
neglecting the house of God, and our own families? have they found such
sweetness in these sins, that we walk on in the same? Is it a pleasant and
comfortable thing to be driven from Gods house, and from our own houses? to be
a reproach to all the world? If we think that the hand of God is upon them for
these sins, how is it that we are not awaked? I remember Daniel in the fifth
Chapter of his Prophecy, Dan. 5.
taxes Belshazzar for this: though thou know (says he) how the hand of God
was upon thy father, for this, and this, yet thou have done the like, and have
not humbled thy heart. So may I say; You have kown what God has done to your
brethren in other Countries, yet you do still the same your selves, for the
which they have been punished. Is not this security?

Look likewise upon our selves, and we shall see a general neglect of those
judgments of God, that have been upon our selves. How has God smitten this
Land? this City eipecially, with the Pestilence? and may we not say, we have
been smitten, and yet have not felt it? is not this security, and a dead sleep?
God threatens those in Jer. 31.9. Ier. 31.9.
That escaped the pestilence, that they should fall by the sword, by the hand
of Nebuchadnezar: Why so? because they did not reform, and amend by the
pestilence. What cause have we then to fear, lest we fall into the hands of the
sword of some Nebuchadnezar or other, when the pestilence has done no more
good amongst us, when it has not awakened, and reformed us? Look upon our
selves, upon your houses, upon your dealings, your company, your conversations;
see if there be any reformation, since there was such a mortal calamity, as
drove you from the City, and frighted you from your own houses, and from the
house of God.

Well: these are fearful presages, that when former Judgments prevail not,
worser are a coming. Amos 4.
I have smitten them (says God in the fourth of Amos) with cleanness of teeth,
and yet they have not returned unto me: What then? I have smitten them with
blasting and mildew, and yet they have not returned unto me: What then? I have
smitten them with the pestilence, after the manner of Egypt, and yet they have
not returned unto me: What then? Therefore I will come against them; and
because I will do this, prepare to meet thy God, Oh Israel. As if he should
say; I have now stood out, and tried you, at one or two weapons, and found you
obstinate and rebellious: I have stroke at you with the sword of Famine; I have
shot at you the Arrows of pestilence; I have smitten you with other judgments.
You should now meet me; if not, I have more weapons yet; I will come and bid
the battle against you, and it shall appear who is the stronger, you or I: And
since you will stand out against me, notwithstanding the Judgments executed
upon others, and afflictions upon your selves, see if you can stand out against
my last stroke: you have escaped some lesser sicknesses upon your own bodies;
you have escaped the Pestilence already; but you shall find it a hard task,
when God bids battle, to escape his last stroke, if you will not now be
reconciled, and come in, and seek his face. This is the first demonstration,
whereby it appears, that we are sinfully secure, which is a forerunner of
Judgment, because we are not awakened by the Judgments of God upon our selves
and others.

Secondly, 2. Contempt of the Ordinances.
another sign is this; The contempt of Gods ordinances: the slighting of the
Prophets. This is an evident demonstration that we are under this carnal
security I now speak of.

Mark how the Lord describes a people whom he means to destroy, Zach. 7.11,
12. They refused to hearken, and pulled away the shoulder, and stopped their
ears, that they should not hear: Yea, they made their hearts as an Adamant
stone, lest they should hear the Law, and the words which the Lord of hosts
has sent in his spirit by the former Prophets: therefore came a great wrath
from the Lord of hosts. A great wrath, what is that? Therefore (verse. 13.) it
is come to pass, that as He cried, and they would not hear, so they cried, and
I would not here, says the Lord of Hosts.

Well (beloved) little do you know what time, and ways God has to make you
cry, and roar in the anguish of your hearts, because of Judgments and
afflictions, when you will not now hear God, that striveth with you, and cries
unto you with the voice of his Spirit in his Prophets from day to day. When men
will not hear God speaking to them in his Word, it is always a forerunner of
judgment. In the sixth of Amos, Amos 6.
the Lord challenges his people, and tells them, that he had used many means
for their reclaiming, but nothing would do them good: well now (says he) hear
the rod, and him that has appointed it: As if he should say: there is no more
dealing with you with the Word, but I must come with the rod, with judgment.
Is it not thus with us at this day? May not the Lord say of us, as he did of
the people in Jeremies time? Ier. 9.13.
You have forsaken my law which I set before you, and have not obeyed my voice,
neither walked therein, but have walked after the imaginations of your own
heart. And then what follows? Therefore, thus says the Lord of hosts, Behold,
I will feed this people with Wormwood, and give them water of gall to drink,
and I will send a sword after them, till I have consumed them.

Do not many cry out, as they in Jer. 23.33. What is the burden of the Lord?
Where is it that the Ministers have not been threatening judgment, Ier. 23.33.
and telling you that God is coming out to be avenged upon a sinful nation?
have they not been crying thus, this seven, ten, twenty years? Where is that
burden of the Lord? Well, you shall find what it is, when the day of the Lord
comes, a day of blackness and terror: it hasteneth: and this very security is
an evident sign thereof: even as in the days of Noah, that Preacher of
righteousness: and in the days of Lot, that vexed his soul with the unclean
conversation of the Sodomites; they would not believe their words, but they
seemed unto them, as if they mocked; and then came the judgment of the Lord
upon them.

If this be not the estate of this Land at this day, what means the complaints,
the heaviness of the spirits of the Prophets? What means their tears and cries,
and prayers, because of the obstinacy, and hard-heartedness of people that will
not be drawn from their sins by any means? This is a second evidence or sign,
when all this crying and calling will not awaken, that we are in a deep sleep
of security.

Thirdly, 3. Vain considence.
another evidence is, the vain hopes of this Land. It is a sign of carnal
security, and that we are all in a dead sleep, when we have such idle dreams
out of idle fancies, and vain confidence that delude and deceive men.

What do men rest on, to secure, and persuade themselves of immunity from wrath
and impunity?

Certainly this, that we have the ordinances of God amongst us. Oh the Temple
of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord.

Alas, had not the people of Israel the Ark? and yet the Philistims took the
Ark, and slew the sons of Eli. Jer. 7.11.12.13.
Had they not the Temple? and yet the Lord in Jer. 7.11. Sends them to
Shiloh. Go ye now unto my place which was in Shiloh, where I set my name at the
first, and see what I did to it, for the wickedness of my people Israel. And
now because you have done all these works, says the Lord, and I spoke unto you
rising early, and speaking, but you heard not; and I called unto you, but you
answered not. Therefore will I do to this house, which is called by my name,
wherein you trust, as I have done to Shiloh. Had not the Churches of Asia, the
golden Candlestick? and yet are they not now tributary to the Turk? The
ordinances of God (beloved) are means to increase, and hasten a judgment, when
we shut our eyes, and will not open them, but walk in darkness.

Oh but there was never so many Preachers, nor so many means: there seems to be
a new spring of the Gospel: there are abundance of men that come daily
furnished for the Ministry, and are zealous and forward, and powerful
Prophets, and the like: and therefore it is a sign that much good is intended
toward us, and that no judgment shall come.

But do we not read that immediately before the seventy years captivity, there
were more Prophets then in many years before? Why should we rest in such things
as these?

But nevertheless we have many good people that are full of prayers and tears,
and they shall deliver the Island.

It is true, there are many (blessed be God) and we have cause to wish that
there were many more: Numb. 11.13.
and to say as Moses said to Joshuah, when he would have had him forbid Eldad
and Medad, that prophesied in the Camp of the Israelites; Would God that all
the Lords people were Prophets, and that he would put his spirit upon them. So
we, of such godly men that walk with an upright heart: would God that there
were many such. But yet are not these as Lillies among Thorns? a few amongst
many men? Are not these the objects of reproach, and contempt amongst an
unrighteous generation? Who are the men that are cried down most by the world,
that are most opposed, and injured by all men?

Are not these they that support the land by their prayers, and hold up all by
their standing in the gap? May we not rather fear that God will avenge the
quarrel of his servants upon an ungracious, and ungrateful people they live
amongst?

What shall we speak of other things? Jer. 46.16.
Did no Bozrah, in Jer. 49.16. boast her self of her situation, that she dwelt
in the clefts of a rock? Says God; though thou hidest thy self in the clefts
of the rock, though thou should make thy nest, as high as the Eagle, I will
bring thee down from thence. It is not talking that our Island is situate in
the Sea, and environed with walls: Judgment can leap over the Sea as well as
the pestilence has done our walled Towns. It is a vain thing, and yet if you
hearken to the discourse of most men, you shall see that this is that that
keeps them secure.

Or it may be, Isa. 48.15.
as some in Isa. 48.15. We (say they) have made a covenant with death, and with
hell are we at agreement, when the overflowing scourge shall pass through, it
shall not come unto us. Well (says the Lord) your covenant with death shall be
dissanulled, and your agreement with hell shall not stand, when the overflowing
scourge shall pass through, then you shall be trodden down by it. When judge meant
comes, of all the people in the world it shall certainly meet withyou.

What mean these idle dreams, and vain-conceits, that when we go on in an
unreformed condition, and in a course of sin and impenitency: yet because you
have the Ministers, and the ordinances, and the people of God amongst us,
because we are convenient for situation, and such like things. These are vain
things, they will do us no good at that time: and for the present, they show
our security, our horrible security.

Fourthly, 4. Continual increase of sin.
take another evidence, and that is, the abounding of the sins of the Land.
Were it possible that at such a time as this, of shaking the Rod, the Sword
over us, when judgments are upon the Nation, that there should be such
abundance of iniquity in all places, if men were not in a dead sleep? How does
drunkenness stagger and reel in every street? How does pride vaunt, and boast
it self in every Church and Assembly, though it be cried down never so much?
Alas (beloved) are these times to pride up our selves in vanity? Are these
times to run after the sensual, and sinful courses of an ungodly generation?
These are times wherein God calls for fasting, and brokenness of heart. Lay
aside thy fine apparel (says God to the people) that I may know what to do
unto thee. We shouldlay aside these things, that we may show our selves to be
men awake,

But men generally do so abound in wickedness and ungodliness, that we may
rather conclude, as it is in the Revelation, that the time is now come too
near, He that is filthy, let him be filthy still; that is, let him go on to the
end. It is evident and apparent, that sin is increased since the sickness: it
is apparent that our sins are aggravated, though they are daily cried down. And
now at this time, as if we would defy God to his face, and call upon him to
hasten his judgments upon our Land, upon our Families, and persons, every one
strives (as it were) who shall outdare him most, in our excesses, in
impenitency, in hardening our selves in a course of sin.

These things convince us of our security. There are many more that might be
named, if the time would permit. But put these together, and they may show us
our wretchedness. When we consider how little we have profited by judgments:
how little we have profited by the ordinances: how full of vain confidence, and
idle dreams: how notwithstanding all these we abound still in wickedness, and
there is no reformation of our hearts and lives: what may we not conclude
against ourselves?

If ever people were drowned in a drunken security, we of all people under
heaven are at this time. For of all people under heaven, we are in a manner the
last: God has spared us to the last. We have had warning by judgments
inflicted upon others, for many years together. It has come nearer to us hy
degrees: it began a far off in Bohemia: and then in the Phalatinate, and in
Germany. The Lord would have us see how he comes to us by degrees, by steps,
that at the last we may meet him by repentance. But where is the man that yet
gets out of the bed of security, that comes out of his sleep to meet the Lord?
that comes with a broken heart to beg for forgiveness of his sins past, and to
beg for mercy for the time to come?

Well now, Use 2. For exortation.
since it is so, that we are convinced by these signs that we are in a carnal
and sinful security: we see then (so many of us at least, that are children of
the light, and of the day) what cause we have to be awakened, and to do that
for others, which they will not do for themselves: to be more earnest in
prayer, more frequent in humbling our souls, for our own sins and theirs, that
God may lay aside, and cast away his judgments and displeasure, that either are
feared, or lie upon us.

Is it not a fearful thing, that when the Lion roareth, the beasts of the
Forests tremble; Yet the God of heaven roareth against the world at this day,
and the proud hearts of men, do not tremble before him? Shall the beasts of the
forests be afraid of the Lion, more then the poor worms of the earth, of the
mighty God of heaven and earth? But this is the horrible Atheism and
Infidelity, that is in the hearts of men, that they believe not Gods power and
justice, nor his threatenings.

I beseech you let every man be exhorted, Motives to watchfulness.
to stir up his soul to this business, to awaken himself in his own
particular person. 1. The watchfulness of our enemies.
Consider that there are others that are awake, that may bring you sorrow
enough: be you awakened to prevent those miseries.

Satan is awake to tempt you, 1. Satan.
Be sober and watchful, says Saint Peter, for your adversary the devil, goes
about seeking whom he may devour. Satan is busy, and watching to make you
his prey, watch you therefore, that you enter not into tentation.

Your own Corruptions are always awake. 2. The flesh.
The concupisence, and depraved disposition of the soul, it is awake still to
further every evil motion, to draw you aside by its tentations. Therefore
(says the Apostle) I beseech you abstain, as pilgrims and strangers, from
fleshly lusts, that war against the soul: Do as men in war, when they know
that they have a waking enemy against them, they will be sure to keep their
Watch. Beloved, you cannot but know that your corruptions are awake, you may
perceive it in your sleeps and dreams: take heed that you be not found in a
spiritual sleep, that corruption prevail not over you.

Besides these, 3. Heretics.
the enemies of the Church are awake: Heretics are awake every where to bring
men from the faith, to pervert the faith of many: oh be awake to prevent those.

Besides, others are awaken to ransack houses, to destroy Cities oh: be awake,
that you may be at peace with the Lord of Hosts, the God of Armies, that has
all power in his hand to keep you safe.

Again secondly, Mot. 2. The evil of security. In it self a spiritual lethargy.
consider the evil of this security you are in, of this disposition of heart,
when you cry, peace, peace, to your selves in the midst of Gods displeasure.
It is an evil disease: a spiritual lethargy. That disease we know in the body,
it takes a man with sleep, and so he dies. Oh how many are in this spiritual
lethargy, in this deep sleep of sin at this day, the Lord awaken them. It is
the more dangerous, because it is a senseless disease, a disease that takes the
senses from the soul: and diseases (we know) that take away the senses, are
dangerous: for it is not only a sign, that nature is overcome by the disease;
but besides, it draws men from seeking for cure. Thus it is with the
spiritual lethargy; it shows not only that sin has prevailed in the heart,
that it has overcome grace, and thereupon you have yielded unto it; to your
pride, and covetousness, and vanity, as those that are subdued under a disease:
but it hinders you from seeking the means to escape out of it. Thou say
(says Christ to the Church of Laodicea,) that thou art rich, and need
nothing; and that was the reason she sought not to Christ. It is our condition:
we have knowledge enough, therefore we care not for the Ordinances of God; We
have faith enough, and therefore we care not for increasing it: though none of
us say thus with our tongues, yet most of us believe thus with our hearts. As
David says of the ungodly man, the wickedness of the wicked says in my heart.
So may I say, the neglecting of the ordinances, the carelessness of men in the
use of the means of salvation, says in my heart, that there is abundance of
security, that they are in a spiritual lethargy that leads to death.

As it is an evil disease, 2. In the effects.
so it causes much evil. It is that which drives away the Spirit of God. 1.
It drives away the spirit of God.
It is the counsel of the Apostle, Grieve not the Spirit, quench not the
Spirit: When we neglect the motions of the Spirit, the Spirit withdraws it
self. Does not your own experience tell you this? Consider a little, what
motions you have had: how God by the checks of your consciences, sometime by
secret incitements, as it were a spur upon your hearts, has moved you to duty,
and to leave your sins. How have these moved you? you have had purposes it may
be to perform these duties, to walk in the ways of God, to please him in all
things: the neglect of those purposes, has driven away the Spirit, it may be
God now leaves you to final hardness. 2. It lets in Satan.


Again, it lettethin Satan. When the unclean spirit is driven out, he goes
about seeking rest, and finding none, at last be returns from whence he went,
and finds the house swept and garnished; and he enters in, and brings
seven spirits more, worse then himself. Alas! how many men are there, that for
a sit, in some particulars have altered their course, and have thought to
become new men: yet rushing upon former occasions, and temptations to sin, they
have grown secure and careless, and now Satan has gotten stronger hold of
them, with seven spirits worse.

Nay, 3. Hinders our Communion with Christ.
this is that, that drives away Christ, and the comfortable influence of his
Spirit in the heart. The Church in Cant. 5. was asleep, was in a spiritual
slumber: and Christ goes away, She seeks him whom her soul loved, but she
could not find him. I speak now, to those that were awake, and are now asleep:
their hearts it may be are awake: but they walk not with that watchfulness, and
humility of spirit before the Lord as they ought: therefore now they are heavy,
and destitute of the comforts of the Spirit. Well, they may thank themselves:
Christ has hid himself to teach them to be more watchful.

And to conclude: 4. Brings judgemen^ prosi^ive.
This is the cause of positive Judgments. You know what came upon the old
world, and upon Sodom and Gomorrah, for their security.

And likewise of future Judgments, it is that which casts men from heaven to
hell. Future.
That servant that says in his heart, my Master deferreth his coming, and
therefore he eats, and drinks with the drunken: what is the issue of it? He
shall have his portion given him with hypocrites, where there is weeping, and
wailing, and gnashing of teeth, Mat. 24.

Here is enough (I suppose) to awaken you. Makt. 24.
Whenever the heart of man is held down with secure thoughts of Gods
displeasure, and thinks it is at peace with God, it is an evident sign that
wrath is a coming. Nay (beloved) in that measure you are in carnal security; in
that measure you are under wrath: let that therefore be enough to awaken you:
and say thus with your selves: It were better for me a great deal, to be among
the number of those, that complain, and are mourning Christians; then to be in
the number of those that are full of jollity, and joviality, that rejoice and
sport themselves, that put far from them the evil day: I might then escape the
wrath of God, as they do. Who are they that escape wrath? See in Ezekiel 9.
Those that were awake when others slept, those that mourned, when others
laughed, Ezekiel. 9.
those that humbled themselves before God, when others hardened themselves:
those were the men that were marked in the forehead by the Angel, and they
escaped. Mala. 3.
And in the third of Malachie; Those that feared the Lord, and thought upon his
name, (in those evil times) that spoke often one to another; there was a book of
remembrance of them, and they are Gods jewels; he will be sure to keep them
safe.

But how shall we come to be awakened? Helps to watchfulness.
I should have told you some helps for this: I will but touch upon a few in a
word.

First, I will propound sobriety as a main help. Would you be watchful, and
kept from spiritual slumber, 1. Sobtiety.
take heed that you keep your selves sober. I speak not of sobriety, as it is
opposed to drunkenness, though that be one thing, Be not filled with wine,
wherein is excess, but be filled with the holy Ghost, Ephesians.5. As if he should
say, Ephesians. 51
you cannot be filled with the holy Ghost, and with excess of Wine: persons
that take liberty in excessive drinking, certainly they are destitute of the
holy Ghost, and so of life and salvation. But I mean a further sobriety; that
is, as it is opposed to worldly-mindedness. Take heed that you plunge not your
selves too much in the world, and worldly pleasures and cares: for these are
against the rule of sobriety. Be sober in your diet, in your apparel, in your
gaining, in your spending, in your mirth, in your company, in every thing: that
is, moderate your selves, and your affections in these things. A man may soon
grow to such a drunkenness, by excess in worldly affections, that he may be in
a dead sleep, neglecting Gods judgments, and his own estate, as we see men
that plunge themselves in worldly business are. It takes away the thoughts of
those things that concern our spiritual good.

I say not that you should leave off the business of the world: for every man
must continue in the calling that God has set him. But I say, moderate your
affections to the things of the world: Do worldly business with heavenly minds,
in obedience to God: Do them with waking hearts; to repent for the sins of your
callings, to avoid the sins of your callings. And that that I say of laboring
in your callings, I say of pleasures, and of every thing else; we should be
watchful and sober: as S. Peter says, Be sober and watch.

Secondly, 2. Spiritual exercise.
if you would be free from security, which is a forerunner of judgment; be
sure to keep your selves in exercise. A man that would keep himself awake, will
busy himself in some exercise, and employment or other. What exercise should a
Christian use? The exercise of grace, and of the duties of obedience. Be sure
to keep your selves in the exercise of all the advantages that God gives you
in your lives, to employ your graces in. In difficulties and straits, exercise
your faith. In provocations to anger and discontent, exercise meekness. In
crosses and troubles, and afflictions, exercise patience. In the miseries and
wants of others, whether spiritual or corporal, exercise mercy. And what I say
concerning grace, I say concerning duty. Keep your selves in the exercise of
prayer, and reading, and meditation, and conference, some one thing or other,
some holy employment or other, that may keep the soul waking. For I tell you,
you shall find, that whenever you let fall spiritual exercise, you will at
that very instant fall into carnal security in some kind or other.

Thirdly, 3. Continual fear.
would you keep your selves from this dead sleep of carnal security, then keep
your spirits in fear. Sorrow and grief makes a man heavy; but sear keeps a man
waking; when Jacob feared Esau, he kept a watch that night. Sampson feared the
Philistims, and it wakened him out of his sleep. Fear makes a man watchful. You
may perceive it in your own experience. In that measure that the fear of God
prevails, security is expelled. Keep fear therefore. Blessed is the man that
fears always, but he that hardneth his heart falls into evil. Mark how he
opposes the hardening of a man's self in carnal security, to the fear of God.
Keep your heart in a constant fear. Reason thus; Alas! shall I do this thing,
and sin against God? Will not God be offended and displeased? Shall I go on in
this vanity? Would I have the judgment of God find me in this company? would I
have it seize upon me in this employment, in this business, in this action?
Fear lest God should strike thee in such an act, lest Death should seize upon
thee in such a place, and let that make thee keep a constant watch against the
shares that are in those places.

Fourthly, 4. Good company. Eccless. 4.
keep good company. Company you know is a good means to keep men awake. Two are
better then one, and woe to him that is alone, says Solomon. I say good
company: for there are a company that will infect you. Keep not company with a
froward person, lest thou learn his frowardness. So, keep not company with
drunken, and swearing persons, these are the Devils instruments, to keep a man
in carnal security. No, keep company with those that have a charge given them,
to exhort one another daily, and to consider one another, to provoke to love,
and good works. Keep company with the Saints, and make use of all opportunities
to provoke others, and to be provoked by others. That is the fourth help.

Fifthly, 5. Be always as in Gods presence. Psalm. 139.
would you be kept from this sinful security: then keep God always in your
sight. It is a good way for a man that would keep himself awake, to fix his eye
upon some object. Fix your eye upon this main object, God. Whether shall I
depart from thy presence, faith David. This is that the Lord would have his
people to consider, Jer. 23, 23.
to keep them from sin, in Jer. 23.23. Am I a God at hand (says the Lord) and
not a God a far off? Do not I fill heaven and earth, says the Lord? Can a man
hide himself from God in any secret place? Think in thy chamber, in thy
parlour, in thy shop, in thy house, in thy friends house, in the street, in the
Church, in every place wheresoever thou art, that there God is also. If a man
had but always some one before him as a witness, he would not venture upon
many things, that he now does. If a malefactor should see the Judge before
him: if the child had always his fathers eye upon him: or the servant had
always his Master sitting about him, and above him (though there are many that
are unjust servants) yet nevertheless he would serve him, at least with
eye-service. Now set your selves in the eye of God, that sees you in the dark:
hears you in your most secret whisperings: knows every action of your life, and
every circumstance of those actions. This will be a means to keep thee from
security.

I will add but one more, 6. Consider ^y latter en^
which is the sixth. Consider thy latter end: The night is now coming upon us.
If it were told any of us, that this night thou shall die, as it was told the
rich man in Luke 12. Thou fool, this night shall they take away thy soul: I
think there is none that hears me this day, but he would certainly keep
waking this night. But it is not bodily waking we plead for; but spiritual
waking, a waking from sin, a waking to repentance: And we tell you that Death
is now at the door, ready to seize upon you. We speak not only to you that are
aged, that are at the brink of the grave: but we speak also to you that are
young: Death may seize upon you, and strike you this night: be awakened now to
repentance. Revel. 3.2.
I remember what God said to the Church of Sardis; Be watchful, and strengthen
the things that remain. That Church was asleep, as many of us are at this day.
God comes to awaken you now, as he did them, that that little goodness you
have left, may be renewed and confirmed. You that are quite out of the way of
grace, and go on in a course of sin: sit now down, and humble your souls: get
into a secret corner, wherein you may consess those many provocations whereby
you have provoked God all your days: and resolve to amend, if the Lord spare
you. Begin now, delay it no longer, it may be the last night, the everlasting
night to you: take this warning now therefore; be awakened to repentance.

This is that the Scripture calls upon so much, Bccks. 11.9.
Eccless. 11. Rejoice O young man, in the days of thy youth, and let thy heart
cheer thee in thy youth, and walk in the ways of thine heart, and in the sight
of thine eyes: but know thou, that for all this, thou shall come to Judgment:
As if he should say; You that are in the midst of your delights, that solace
your selves in the midst of the abundance of the earth, which you enjoy, that
sport your selves in the pleasures of this would, know that there will come a
Judgment day, see therefore now, what will best answer God then. Since the end
of all things is at hand, (says the Apostle) let us be sober, and watch. We
know not how near the end of the world is, we know indeed it shall not be yet,
be cause Antichrist must be destroyed, and the Jews called before that day
come: but nevertheless, certainly thy end is near, thy day, thy particular
death (and that is the time of thy particular Judgment) may be sudden: It is
appointed for all men once to die, and after that comes the Judgment; That is
the particular Judgment that comes upon Death; so I say, this may be the night
of thy death, and the morning, may be the day of thy particular doom. Judge your
selves now, that you may not be Judged of the Lord: It was the use that the
Apostle made even to good men: For this cause (says he) many are sick, and
weak, and many sleep: that is, they are dead: what then? If we would Judge our
selves, we should not be judged of the Lord. So say I to you, judge your selves:
now bring your selves as prisoners before the Bar: arraign your selves as
malefactors before the Judge: bring out the particular bills of indictment
against your selves, whereby you have provoked God: yet there is mercy, the day
of grace, and opportunity of repentance, and turning unto God, yet lasts;
therefore do it now. I might add many other helps to this purpose, but these
shall suffice at this present.

We have an example before our eyes, enough to warn us of this. Here is an
example of Death, which should teach us now to awaken our selves, and not to
live securely, as men that dream of a long life, for many years.

Here is a young man dead: took away in the prime of his time, in the beginning
of his days: his sickness though it held him not long, yet it was somewhat
violent. How know you what a short time you have, though you are now young: or
if you live longer: what sickness you may have: it may be you may be deprived
of your reason and senses: therefore now, while health, and reason, and sense,
while these Warning Sermons are afforded, take time, and make use of time, lest
your security make good this Text upon you. When they shall say Peace, Peace,
then sudden destruction comes upon them, as travail upon a woman with child,
and they shall not escape.

A CHRISTIANS VICTORY: OR, CONQUEST OVER DEATHS ENMITY.
SERMON XIII.
1 COR. 15.26. The last Enemy that shall be destroyed, is Death.


IT could be no Parradox to declare, that every man has more enemies in the
World than friends, both wicked and godly. There is no question of it. But it
is true also, that so long as a man's ways please God, Prove. 16.7,
he can make his enemies his friends.

Of all the enemies men have, the spiritual are the worst;

For they are, Common, Enemies. Continual, Enemies.


Common Enemies I call them, because they are every man's Enemies. Others though
they be Enemies to some, they are friends to others, these to all.

Continual, because their war is never at an end. Other Enemies we may have
truce with now and then, pauses, and breathing times, leisure given us, when we
have done one skirmish to make ready for another: from these there is no
intermission nor rest, not for a moment: wheresoever, or whatsoever we are
about, it may be said to us, as Dalilah said to Sampson, Up Sampson thy enemies
are upon thee.

The three principal of these (ye know) are commonly reckoned up to be. The
Devil, the World, and the Flesh. But the Apostle tells us of a fourth, which
he calls our Last enemy, the enemy which shall last of all assault us, the
other will leave assaulting us, when we are in this world; this, when we are
leaving the world, mustereth up his forces against us: sometimes holding us
long play, as the house of David did the house of Saul, till our strength be
wasted and spent; sometimes dispatching us with a sudden stroke, as Absalom did
Amnon, when our hearts are merry within us. This enemy, Death, the very sound
of his name, is like the name of Honiades to the Turks, dreadful to some: the
very dream of it dreadful, as Nebuchadnezars dream was to him, it troubled him,
and the image of it, made him tremble and quake.

But though the hearing of an enemy may cause disturbance; yet withal to hear
that this enemy is overcome and destroyed, the news of that may cheer us.
Behold, this is the news that the Text brings. It tells us of an enemy
indeed, but it tells us withal of the destruction of this enemy. Death is the
common enemy of man kind; Plal. 9.6.
It is our last enemy, we may think it none of the least, because it is the
last: yet here is the destruction of it, Oh thou enemy, thy destruction shall
come to a perpetual end. It is already destroying, and as it is the last, so at
the last it shall be destroyed.

Those are the two points that I am to treat of; The parrs of the Text.
of an Enemy, and of the destruction of this Enemy.

The Enemy is Death, and the last Enemy (as the Text calls it) the last that
shall assault us. In that ye may note two things;

Its Quality, and Its Rank.

First its nature and quality, An Enemy.

Secondly, its order and rank; in what rank it is Fyled, not in the Forefront
of the battle, but it comes behind in the Rear, it comes in the end of the
Army (when all other enemies have given over) and sets upon us at the last.

Secondly, here is the destruction of the enemy, that is the Milk and honey of
the Text. Death though it be an Enemy, though it be a killing enemy, it shall
not be a conquering enemy. He that subdueth all our Enemies for us, will in
time subdue them to us. And who he is, the Apostle tells you in the verse
before the Text, Christ our Lord, He shall reign till he has put down all his
enemies under his feet: And as all His, so all ours too; both those that are
Enemies to him, and to his death. Among the rest, he will destroy that also; As
it is the last, with which we shall be assaulted, so it is the last that shall
be destroyed.

There are three points of observation we have here lying before us.

First, that Death is an Enemy.

Secondly, that Death is our last Enemy.

Thirdly, that as Death assaulteth us last, so at last it shall be destroyed.

I begin with the first of these, That Death is an enemy. And an Enemy indeed
it is; one of the Devils regiment. The Devil he is the General of the Army:
when he brought sin into the world, he brought Death into the world. Sin draws
Death after it, as the Needle draws the thread.

First I will show ye what kind of Enemy it is.

Secondly, Obser. 1. Death is an enemy.
wherein it appears to be an Enemy.

First what kind of Enemy Death is; What kind of enemy.


A common Enemy. A secret Enemy. A spiritual Enemy. A continual Enemy.
First a Common Enemy; 1: A common enemy. 1 King 22: 31
Common to all mankind. The charge it has, is not like that upon the
Aramites, fight neither with small nor great, save only with the King of
Israel. Great and small, King and Keifar, all are marks that this aims at:
Gen: 16: 12.
one killing weapon or other it has for them all; like Ishmacl, The hand of
him is against every man. The young and the old, the strong, and rich, and
noble, Psalm: 89: 48.
and wise, and holy, none can escape, none can keep out of Deaths reach. What
man is he that lives, and shall not see death.

Ye will object to me peradventure. Object.
Those that shall live at the coming of our Lord, at the end of the world,
shall not see Death.

I had thought (I confess) to have stood a little upon this points discussion,
Answ.
but I must not. I have many things to say. In a word therefore; First, these
are but a few, and a few make not a general.

Secondly, though these die not the ordinary natural death, but as Elijah and
Enoch, shall be translated up to heaven; yet in their translation and
assumption, they shall suffer a mutation and change which shall be instead of
Death. Their change is a kind of Death to them, as our death is a kind of
change to us.

Therefore we may account it a common Enemy to mankind, Josh: 23: 14.
for as the Scripture says, Job 30: 23.
It is the way of all the earth. And the Grave it is the house appointed for
all living. It is a common Enemy, and it is the more dangerous for that.

Secondly, 2: A secret enemy.
it is A secret Enemy; And it is the more dangerous for that. Secret Traitors
are worse then open enemies: these may be prepared against, becuase we know
them: those may surprise us unawares, because we see them not, nor suspect
them. Poor Uriah carries Death in his bosom: so we carry death about us,
though like a Moth it lie and fret in the garment, and we see not when it
eats, nor can certainly determine the time when it will grate asunder the
thread of our life. What man living candivine when, and how, and where Death
will seize upon him? it is not for any to determinesuch a thing, it lies so
secret, he cannot find it out.

What a sort of diseases we are subject to, you may imagine how many. Nay yea
cannot imagine how many, when the very eye (as some Occolists observe) have
above sixty diseases. What a many casualties there are every moment, when as
often as we step over the threshold, we cannot tell whether ever we shall come
home again. The fire says, Death is in me; and the water says, Death is in
me; the earth we tread on has Death in it; the Air we breath in, that which
we continually take in, and put out at our nostrils has death in it: Death
dwells with us in our houses; it walks with us in the streets; it lies
down with us in our beds; it is wrapped about us in our clothes that stick to
us.

Benhadad is slain in his Bed. Ammon at his Table. Zachariah in the Temple.
Joah at the Altar. The disobedient Prophet is torn with a Lion. The
unbeleeving Prince is trod to Death in the croude. Abimelech slain with a
Millstone; and Pyrrhus with the fall of a Tyle. Adrian is choked with a fly.
Victor is poisoned with Wine. And one of the Emperors with the bread he
received in the Sacrament. Thus Death waits every where, and yet we spy it
not. It is a secret Enemy, and therefore the more dangerous.

Thirdly, 3: A spiritual Enemy.
it is a Spiritual Enemy. And it is the more dangerous for that. Spiritual I
call it; First, because it is invisible, for the spirits are invisible, they
cannot be seen; Such an enemy is Death, though we must all feel it, yet we
cannot see it: were it any way discernable, we might think of some way how we
might shift and shun it: but it is beyond the ken of our eyes: we are no more
able to see that then the Air: being therefore out of sight, it is out of our
reach, we know not how to grapple with it; we know not with what weapons to
encounter it.

And a Spiritual Enemy I call it, because though it seize on the body, it
strikes at the soul: By Gods decree the death of the soul is a concommitant of
the death of the Body, and were it not by Gods mercy reverst, they wouldstill
come like lightning and thunder, and strike both together.

Again, it is a spiritual enemy, because it fights against us in the strength
of sin. It comes armed with a Sting, the sting of de ath is sin. Some make
question whether if Adam had never sinned, he should ever have died. But
methinks the Apostle Saint Paul puts it out of question; By one man's
disobedience sin came into the world, Rom: 5: 12.
and by sin death. All those Deaths that S. Austin reckons up:

First when the soul is deprived of God, separated from him.

Secondly, when the body is separated from the soul.

Thirdly, when the Soul is separated from the body, and from God, and suffers
torments for a time.

Lastly, when the soul is separated from God, and rejoyned to the body, to
suffer torments eternally. All these are the recompense, and reward of sin.
Therefore Death coming, and being an Enemy thus armed, (whatsoever kind of
death it be) we may well say it is a spiritual enemy, and the more spiritual,
the more dangerous.

Fourthly and Lastly, 4: A continual Enemy.
it is a continual enemy. And it is the more dangerous for that. It lays hold
of us in the womb, and never leaves us, till it has brought us to the Grave.
Beloved, we do not only die when we die, but all the time we live, as soon as we
begin to live, we begin to die. As Seneca says, Every day we die, because
every day some part of our life is gone. As a candle, it is no sooner lighted,
but presently it begins to waste: as an hourglass, it is no sooner turned, but
presently the sand begins to run out. So our life, it is no sooner breathed,
but presently it begins to vapor out. As the Sea, what it gains in one
place, it loses in another; so our life, what we gain one way, we lose it in
another: look what is added to it, so much is took from it; the longer a man
lives, the less he has to live. Death does by us, as Jacob did by Esau,
catches us in the womb, and never leaves us.

So we see it is a Common, a Secret, a Spiritual, a Continual Enemy.

Next we are to consider; Wherein Death is n Enemy.
How and wherein Death shows it self an Enemy. What Death deserves at our
hands, to be thus accounted and seared. Fearful and terrible it is, that is
certain; So Aristotle, It is the most terrible of all terribles. Jeb: 18: 18.
Bildad in Job, calls it the King of terrors, What does Death bring with it
to make it fearful?

I answer, In respect of its attendants. 1: sickness, etc. Heb: 2: 15.
Death has sundry concomitants, and companions that attend it, that make it a
formidable Enemy.

First, the Harbingers that come along with it; Sicknesses, and diseases,
infirmities, old age, and difficulties. These are all fearful to nature, and
through fear of these, Death keeps men all their life in bondage. They make
our lives, as it were a life, rather like a life, then a life indeed. So that
howsoever the Apostle said in another place, 2: Cor: 6.
as it were dying, and behold we live. There Death has the tanquam, and life
the Ecce: yet here we may say, as it were living, and behold we die: here life
has the tanquam, and Death the Ecce. Life is but as it were a life, Plal: 39:
6.
it is but the shadow of a life that man walks in: Man walks in a vain
shadow, and disquieteth himself in vain. It it true, it lights not on all
alike, some it comes on as a Lion, and breaking their bones from morning to
evening, it makes an end of them: to others it is as a Moth in the garment,
secretly in their lives, by degrees, insensibly, pining and consuming them.
Howsoever, what Harbinger soever it brings, it visits us with many touches
and twitches, before it come: falling pell-mel, thick and threefold on us,
when they come. In respect of these, it may be said to be an enemy.

Secondly, 2: Dissolution of the frame of nature.
the dissolution that Death brings. For it dissolveth the frame of nature; It
divorceth, and separateth the Soul from the Body, those two companions, that
have lived so lovingly together, and perhaps have lived a long time together.
This is another thing that makes Death look like an Euemy. Friends and
companions that have lived long together are loath to part: we see in
experience, old folk commonly are more loath to part, when they are old, then
when they are young. Now there is none nearer then the soul and body: there is
none have lived so long, or so loving: it must needs be tedious for these to
part, and be an affliction and vexation, when neither the body can longer
retain the fleeting soul, or the soul longer sustain the drouping body.
Therefore in respect of this also, Death being the cause of this, no marvel
though nature reluctate, and we look upon it, as on the face of an Enemy.

Thirdly, 3. The Grave.
the horror of the Grave: the men of darkness, as Job calls it: the place of
oblivion; the pit of stinch and rottenness; this is another thing that nature
shrinketh and relucts at. For there we must bury out of our sight, that that
once was the delight of our eyes, Ezekiel. 24.16.
as Ezekiel said by his wife. And though it were never so lovely before, yet it
quickly becomes loathsome. Our Beds must be made in darkness, where corruption
and worms, must be the Mattress and Coverled, to lie under us, and spread over
us; Thou shall say to Corruption, thou art my father, Isa. 14.11.
and to the worm, thou art my mother, and my sister. That body of thine, that
God in the womb so wonderfully made, that thou all thy lifetime
(paradventure) have delicately cherished, lapped in Silk, in Fur, pampered with
sweet wines, Death as a proud Tyrant will set his foot upon it, and throw thee
down to the horrid dungeon, where thy flesh shall putrify, and thy bones rot,
and the beauty of it (though sometime it were as the Rose and the Lilly of the
field) shall soon become as loathsome as the dung in the streets. This is
another thing that makes the face of Death dreadful and terrible, when we think
of such privations and annihilations as these, that we shall come from a being
to no being. These cannot but make Death look with the face of an Enemy.

Fourthly, 4. Loss of worldly contentments and actions.
The loss and deprivation of all worldly contentments, and worldly employments:
that is another thing that makes Death terrible and fearful to us. Look
whatsoever contentment we took in any thing here, we must bid it farewell then.
Farewell to all, to prophets and pleasures, and honors, we shall carry none of
them away with us; Psalm. 49.9.
None of our pomp and glory shall descend after us, as the Psalmist says.
Farewell to all the gold and silver we have gathered together, to all the
goodly lands we have purchased, to all the stately houses we have built, to all
the pleasant gardens, and orchards we have planted, to all the sports and
pastimes, we have had, to all our merry consorts we have kept company with, to
all our Jewels and wardrope, to our dancing, and feasting, and music: Death
pulls us from all these, and lays us level with the Dust; It mingleth
shovels and Scepters together; It makes rich and poor, the Prince and the
Peasant alike; I shall see man no more. Isa. 38.11.
All relatians we have now, shall be broken off then, between Husband and Wife,
Parents and children, Master and servants, neighbor and neighbor, friend and
friend: we shall dwell apart with our selves, and not so much as shake hands
one with another.

All the services and employments we are took up with here, shall cease then:
there shall be no frequenting of the Exchange, no exercising of Trade, no
bearing of Office, no working in our Calling. Death is the night that no man
can work in; and Death is the place of silence, where all affairs are cut off:
Where there is no work nor invension, nor wisdom, nor counsel, as Solomou
says in the book of the Preacher. Oh says good Hezekiah; I shall see the Lord
no more in the Land of the living. There is no more service to be done to the
Lord, nor no more in the Church, in that manner as it is now: there is no
exercise of Religion, no Word, no Sacraments, no Fasting, no Alms, no
Preaching, no Prayer, no Confession and thanksgiving. Psalm 6.
The Corse cannot praise thee, the Grave cannot give thanks, they that go down
into the pit cannot honor thee.

Oh (Beloved) how careful and active, and vigilant, and diligent should this
make us to be (when we consider it) for the well improving of that time that we
have lent unto us, and for the well-discharging of those places, and offices,
and duties that are now laid upon us; Considering that Death is an enemy that
will cut us off from all affairs, 5. Consciance of sin, and certainty of
Judgment and uncertainty of salvation.
and bereave us of all opportunities of receiving, or doing, or performing any
service to God at all, either in Church or Commonwealth.

Fifthly and lastly, Conscience of sin, and certainty of judgment, and
uncertainty of salvation (for brevities sake I put them together) these things
come along with Death, and make the face of Death terrible and fearful.

Conscience of sin first of all. For Sin it is the sting of Death. And which of
us is there that does not arm Death with that sting? Who can reflect on the
passages of his life, but he shall find it as full of sin, as the Leopard of
spots. We find nothing in sin now, but oblectation and delight, and therefore
we hide it under our tongue, and hugg it in our bosoms. Oh but when Death
comes once, it thrusts these things out, and oh the horror and anguish that
the poor conscience is tormented and made to smart with.

Again, with conscience of sin, certainty of judgment; that is another
dreadful Arrow in Deaths quiver; Heb. 9.27.2. Cor 5.10.
After Death comes judgment. And we must all appear before the judgment seat
of Christ, to receive according to what we have done in our bodies. First, the
particular judgment that passes upon the soul, it shall never be reverst, for
as the Tree falls, so it lies. And then the General judgment, when the Body
and Soul shall both be wrapped up in the same condemnation. Isa. 33.14.
Oh who can dwell with devouring fire? with those everlasting burnings?

And then lastly; The uncertainty of our future estate. For how many thousands
be there that die, that can not tell what becomes of them when they die, but
they must sing that Farewell to their souls as Adrian to his, My poor wandering
soul, whether art thou going? What will become of thee? Death then being
accompanied with such an Army of Terrors as these, the Apostle might well call
it, as it is in the Text; an Enemy. That is the first thing,

Secondly, we are to consider how it is called the last Enemy.

For two reasons; First, because it is the last that shall assault us. So
Caietan.

Secondly, Why Death called the last enemy.
because it is the Last that shall be destroyed. So the common stream of
Interpreters.

It is the Last Enemy that shall assault us. 1. Because it is the last that
shall assault us. Therefore we have more enemies than Death.
And here I have to note two things;

First, that while we live in the world, we have more Enemies in the world. For
when there are some last, there must be others going before. If Death be the
last Enemy, there are some others beside. I, we have so (God knows) Enemies
on every side. Without us, within us.

The Devil he is an Enemy to us, The Devil.
and vollies of tentation he has to discharge against us. So many tentations,
so many Enemies.

The World is an enemy to us: The world.
An enemy when it seems a friend; When it smileth it betrayeth: it kisseth
and kills. On the right hand it has prosperity to allure; on the left hand
adversity to affright; in every corner, wicked counfell, and company, and
examples to seduce and ensnare us.

Lastly, The flesh.
our own flesh is an enemy. It is a Serpent we carry in our bosoms. The Devil
is a Serpent in Hell: the world is a Serpent in our hand: the flesh is a
Serpent in our bosom. We carry it with us where ever we go: It is a
con-natural, concorporate Enemy. All our other enemies could do us no hurt, if
it were not for that; if this enemy that cohabiteth with us, did not combine
against us. Know (who ever thou art) there is no Enemy like thy self: thy self
is the worst enemy of all. All the sparks that sly out of Satan's engines,
could never sindg a hair of our heads, if our flesh were not as tinder. All the
winds that blow in the four corners of the world, could not make shipwreck of
us, if our flesh were not a treacherous Pilot. Death (that gnaweth the thread
of our soul and body asunder) could not separate them, or them from God, if the
flesh did not what the teeth of it, and sharpen it with a sting.

So then we see, we have a great many Enemies more to encounter us besides
Death, some without, some within. Therefore how should this teach us
circumspect walking? to behave our selves wisely in every thing, as David when
he knew Saul was his Enemy, and had an eye upon him to do him mischief. How
should it teach us to pray with David; Psalm. 27.11.
Lord teach me thy way, and lead me in the right path, because of mine enemy?
That is one thing I have to note.

Again, Therefore likely to be the worst enemy.
another thing I have to note; If Death be the last enemy, then in all
probability it is like to be the worst. Of the Devils regiment it is, (I told
ye before) He is the General of the Army. And (beloved) believe it, the Devil
is very politic and subtle, in marshalling his forces, he will not place his
best Soldiers in the forefront of the battle, but keeps them in the Rear, he
puts them behind, that when all the rest have wearied and tired us, they should
set on us afresh. He is so cunning a disputant, that he reserveth the best
arguments for the last. A cunning Gamester, that plays his best play at the
last; A cunning Archer, that shoots his best shaft at the last. So since Death
is the last Enemy, it is like to be the sorest.

Now the sorer we are like to find him, the carefuller we should be to arm
against him: always to put our selves in a readiness, that whenever he
comes, he may find us weaponed: that if it were possible, we might be always
doing, as if we were dying, it being the height of the perfection, that any
soul can attain to (as the heathens themselves well obierved) for a man to
spend every day, as if it were his last day.

That is one reason why the Apostle here calls Death the last Enemy, because
the last is like to be the worst.

Again, 2. Because it is the last that shall be destroyed.
another reason. As it is the last by which we are assaulted, so it is the last
that shall be destroyed. That the Apostle principally meant here (as
Interpreters commonly understand it) when he says, the last enemy that shall
be Destroyed is Death; he meant that Death is the Enemy that shall be destroyed
last. And this leads me to the last point I propounded to speak of, That
Death is an enemy, and the last enemy, and at last shall be destroyed.

It shall be destroyed, that is one thing.

Who undertakes the doing of it? Who it is that destroys Death.
Our selves; In likelihood Death is more likely to destroy us, then we it. But
as it is said of the seven-sealed book in the Revelation, when there was none
in heaven, or in earth, or under the earth, that was able to open it, Rev.
5.3.5.
the Lion of the tribe of Judah, prevailed to open the book. So the Lion of the
tribe of Judah prevails to destroy this enemy, that none in heaven, or in
earth, or under the earth, but only he, is able to destroy. He says of him, as
David of Goliath, 1. Sam. 17.23. Hos. 13.14.
when he defied the host of Israel, and all men ran away, Let no man's heart
fail him. So says the son of David, The Lord of David, let no man's heart fail
him, I will go to fight with yonder Philistim. Oh Death I will be thy death. It
is spoken in the person of Christ, Act. 3.15.
whom Saint Peter calls the Lord of life. He subdueth all Enemies, and it is
he that will destroy Death, he will not leave him, till he have trod him under
foot.

But when will Christ do this? When Death shall be destroyed.
We see Death plays the Tyrant still, it kills and spoyleth, as fast as it
did? his sickle is in every ones harvest; as fast as the corn grows up, he cuts
it down, he leaves not an ear standing. How long Lord, how long before this
(that the Apostle tells us of) will be?

At last. At the day of the Resurrection.
His meaning is, at the general day of the Resurrection: when the end of the
world shall come, then Christ shall destroy him. And he brings it in the
rather, to assure the Corinths of that, that some of them doubted of; namely,
that there should be a Resurrection. For unless the dead should arise, how can
Death be destroyed? But Death shall be destroyed, therefore it is out of
question that the dead shall rise again.

But what comfort have we in the mean time, if Death be not destroyed till
then? if till then it play the domineering Enemy?

No, Comfort in the mean time.
not so neither. We have comfort enough in that, that Christ has already done.
Though it be not already destroyed, yet it is already subdued. It is not only
subdued, but disarmed, and not only so, but captivated, and triumphed over. He
subdued it when he died; in suffering death he overcame Death; he beat him in
his own ground, at his own weapons; in his own hold he disarmed him. When he
rose again, then he spoiled him of his power, and took his weapons away, and
triumphed over him in the open field. When he ascended into heaven, then he
carried those spoils with him in token of conquest, as Sampson took the Gates
of Gaza on his shoulders, and carried them to the top of the hill. Christ by
Death took the sting of Death away; by his Resurrection he took the strength of
Death away; by his Ascension he took away the hope of Death, for ever
conquering or prevailing more; finally, at the last Judgment he will take away
the name and Being of Death, so that it shall never be more remembered, but
mortality shall be swallowed up of life.

I, Christ has done this for himself (perhaps) but what is this to us?

Nay, Christ has done it, not only for his own victory, but he has given us
victory: he is not only a conqueror, but he has made us conquerors: thanks be
unto God, 2. Cor. 15.57.
that has given us victory.

In a word, Christ has, and will do by Death, as he does by our sins: he has
subdued them already: at the last he will utterly destroy them: sin and Death
both of them are already subdued, at last they shall be abolished and
destroyed, that they shall he no more. As there shall be no more sorrow and
pain, so there shall be no more death and sin: Rev. 7 17. Hos. 13.14.
All tears shall be wiped from our eyes: I will ransom them from the power of
the grave, and redeem them from death.

More then this; This yet adds to our comfort, Christ will so destroy Death,
as be will not only subdue him for us, but also reconcile him to us: not only
foil him as an Enemy, but propitiate, and make him our friend. We have all our
enemies subdued to us, but some are so subdued, that they are reconciled: Death
is one of them, it is a reconciled, as well as a subdued enemy. Instead of
bringing forth children for bondage, it becomes a purchaser of our freedom: it
is so far from plucking us from Christ, as rather it lets us into Christ: so
far from being a loss, as it brings gain: so far from being a damage, that
it is part of our Dowry: therefore the Apostle reckons it as a prerogative,
as he says, that the world, and life, and Christ is ours, 1 Cor. 3 22.
so Death is ours. Indeed if Death were not ours, life were not ours; for our
only way to life now is by Death. Such a friend is this Enemy become, that it
is a Bridge to pass to heaven: the Chariot that we are took up to heaven in.
What we get of life toward life, we lose in death, but what we get in death
toward life, we never lose.

Now for the Application, and conclusion of all. Something I have to say by way
of comfort, and something by way of counsel.

First, Use 1.
by way of comfort; Against the fear of Death, or against overmuch sorrow for
those that Death takes away.

It is true. Death an enemy only to the wicked.
Death is an Enemy. But to whom? only to the wicked that are out of Christ, to
those that have no benefit at all by his Death and Resurrection, and Ascension.
When Death comes and finds out these, they may say as Ahab did to Eliah, 1
King 21.20
and more truly a great deal, have thou found me, oh mine Enemy. (It is the
worst Enemy they have in the world. It is a cruel Sergeant, that catches them
by the throat, and arresteth them for a debt that they are never able to pay:
It draggs them to the Jayl, casts them into the Dungeon, to the chains of
Darkness. I have not a word of comfort to say to them. They have no more
comfort in Death, then they have in Hell, where though they shall lie in
torments and pain, they shall not have a drop of water to cool their tongue.

But to the saithful in Christ, Death to the believer is
there is comfort upon comfort. For though Death be an Enemy, yet remember,
first it is a subdued Enemy.

Secondly, a reconciled Enemy.

Thirdly and lastly, an Enemy that one day shall not be at all.

It is a subdued Enemy, 1. A subdued Enemy.
that is one comfort. The strength and sting of it is gone. When a Be has
lost his sting, and is a Droan, it can hurt no more. So Death is a Droan to a
Christian, it hums and buzzeth, it does no hurt, it cannot sting, the sting is
gone.

Against all those Enemies that I formerly told ye of, that are attendants on
Death, here is comfort.

First it is true: Death comes with ill Harbingers, it brings sicknesses,
and aches, and pain, but there is comfort against this. For when God sends
pain, remember he promises to send patience too: Gant. 8.3.
that he will put his hand under to help, His left hand shall be under us, and
his right hand over us, to catch us: he has promised comfort upon our sick
beds, Psalm. 41.3.
to make our bed in our sickness. We need not make such an Allegory as Ambrose
does: this sweet flesh of ours, the Bed of our soul, it is under infirmities
and weaknesses: God helps us, he makes our bed: he says to the sick of the
Palsy, Take up thy bed: he turns our bed in our sickness, either he sends us
health, (so some exponds it) he turns the bed of sickness, into a bed of
health: or God turns our bed for us in our sickness; that is, he refreshes
us, gives us ease, when we lie upon our sick beds. It is a Metaphor borrowed
from those that attend sick persons, that help to make their Beds easy and
soft, and turn them, that they may lie at ease: So God has promised his
children in the painful time of sickness, to make their Beds easy and soft,
to cause them to lie at ease by the Patience that he will give them.

Secondly, it is true, Death brings dissolution, and dissolveth the frame of
nature, it separateth and divorceth those two loving companions, the Soul and
the Body. But there is comfort in this. For though it divorce the Soul and the
Body, yet it cannot destroy the soul and the body: even the body is in the hand
of god, when it is rotting in the earth, as the Soul is translated to heaven.
Again, though they be separated, yet it is but for a time, one day they shall
meet more joyful, and glorious then ever before, and after that they shall
never be separated again. Lastly, though he separate the soul from the body,
and the body from the soul, yet neither from Christ, nor Christ from them. Nay,
it is so far from separating, that it helps to unite us to Christ, (as I said
before) the dssolution of those shall be the conjunction with him; Phil. 1.23.
I desire to be dessolved, and to be with Christ.

Thirdly, it is true, the horror of the Grave attends Death, and the
putrefaction of this flesh of ours, that must turn to corruptness, it makes it
terrible and fearful. But there is comfort against this. For after that time of
putrefaction, there shall be a time of restitution, and though the worms devour
this flesh of ours, yet in the very flesh of ours, Job 19.27.
we shall see God another day, These eyes shall see him. There is comfort in
that, that when God shall come to restore us with himself, what the Grave has
clothed with corruption, Phil. 3.21.
he will cloth with glory; these vile bodies, he will make them like the
glorious body of Christ, without all corruption.

Fourthly, it is true, Death depriveth us of worldly friends, of worldly
employments, this makes it terrible; Yet there is comfort against this. Though
we be deprived of worldly friends, Heb. 12.23.
it carries us to heaven, to better company, to Angels, to the spirits of just
and perfect men, to God the Judge of all, to Jesus the Mediator of the New
Testament. Nay besides, one day he will restore again those very friends, of
which here we are deprived: though we lose them for a time, in heaven we shall
meet again, and there renew a perpetual league of society and love. So though
it deprive us of worldly benefits, it cannot of heaven, and those are better,
they are not pleasures of sin, Psalm. 16.11.
that last for a season, but at the right hand of God, that endure for ever.

So though it deprive us of worldly services, it carries us to heaven, to
those that are better, that are high and proper to the Church triumphant, such
as befit the Church, to sing Hallelujahs; and such as are profitable to the
Church Militant, by the memory of good examples, and by the prayers they offer
to God, not in particular, for they know no man's particular wants, yet for the
general and common good of all.

Fifthly and lastly; It is true, the consideration of sin, and of Judgment,
and our uncertain estate after death, makes it terrible like the face of an
Enemy. Yet there is comfort against these.

For sin. I told you that though there be a sting in the Serpent, yet Christ
has drawn out that sting, so that being a Serpent without a sting, we may do
as Moses, take it in our hand, put it into our bosom, and it will never do us
hurt, to them that die in the Lord: Death rather came by sin, then for sin; It
is not between sin and damnation, but between sin and salvation.

For judgment? It is true, Death presents judgment, but it presents it
with comfort, for the day of judgment, is the day that the godly look for, and
long for, as the day of redemption, not of confusion; when they shall receive
the sentence by which they shall be absolved, and not condemned. For they know
when God shall come to be their Judge, he shall come to be their Savior.

And so for the uncertainty of our future estate after death. It is true, the
e^t ate of the dead, in regard of natural understanding, it may be a thing
uncertain and obscure, yet from the secret revelation of Gods Spirit, the
Saints in some measure know how it will be with them after death; 2. Cor. 5.
We know though our earthly tabernacle be destroyed, we have a building given
us of God.

All these things are helps to give us comfort against the fear of Death, and
those Enemies that Death comes attended with: that though it be an Enemy, yet
it is a subdued Enemy.

Secondly, 2. A reconciled Enemy.
it may comfort us, to consider that death is not only a subdued, but a
reconciled Enemy; of an Enemy it is made to be a friend: it is so to all the
faithful; such a friend, as they have not a better in the world. It is most
certain; the wicked have not a worse enemy in the world then death, and the
godly have not a better friend; so ye should see if I had leisure to show you,
on the one side from what labor and care, and misery, it helps to free them;
and on the other side, to what comfort, and rest, and peace, and joy, it
helps to bring them.

Lastly, 3. An Enemy that at last shall be destroyed. Rev. 20.
it may comfort us, to consider that as death is an enemy, a subdued enemy, a
reconciled enemy; so it is an enemy, that at last shall be destroyed. The time
shall come when death and Hell shall be cast into the lake of fire; the meaning
is (I think) they shall be shut up in the bottomless pit, where they shall only
have leave to exercise their power on the Devil, and damned reprobates that lie
there in torments. Death on the one side still gnawing of them that they ever
die, and yet Hell on the other side, still preserving of them, that they shall
everlastingly live. But the godly, and the faithful shall have their part and
portion given them in the resurrection to life, where they shall never taste of
death more. What the Apostle says of Christ, Romans 6.9.
is true of all those that are in Christ, when they are once dead, they shall
die no more, Death has no more dominion over them.

But I cannot enlarge those comforts; Yet (beloved) I have a word or two of
counsel, I pray harken to it. Birefly thus.

Christ though he have overcome, Use 2. For instruction.
and destroyed both death and sin for us for ever, yet notwithstanding he will
have us exercised also in subduing and overcoming them; Christ has not so
fought for us, but he will have us also fight for our selves: as he has over
come death, so must we for our parts, that we may have he comfort of that that
Christ has done; How to be prepared for death.
death being an enemy to us, we must prepare and arm our selves against it,
that it may not be an Enemy too strong.

And for your better direction take these few heads.

First, 1. Die to sin.
Remember that death is the wages of sin. It is sin that lead death into the
world: it is in respect of that, that death is an Enemy to us, and were it not
for that, it would be no Enemy at all. Now then (beloved) if ye will not die in
your sins, let your care be to die to sin: labor to have sin die in thee, and
then thou shall not die in that. When thou have committed drunkenness, or
profaneness, etc. think with thy self, this is pleasant and sweet now; but how
will this taste another day, when I shall come to lie upon my deathbed, and my
soul shall set on my pale lips, ready to take her flight, and be brought before
the Judgment seat of Christ? What fruit will these things bring then? What
comfort, and peace, and joy, will it procure to the conscience then? Oh (says
Abner to Joab) know thou not, that this will be bitterness in the end? It
will be as gall and wormwood, therefore if ye would not have death be bitter
then, let not sin be sweet now: part with sin betime. That is the first.

Secondly, 2. Live to God.
learn to walk humbly with God betime, and betime put your selves in a way of
repentance, and new obedience: take heed of dallying with God, and
procrastinating, and putting off the time. What is the reason why a sort die
(as Pline says some do, that are stung with the Serpent Colemion) some
laughing, some raging, some sottish and secure, others hoping, some dispairing?
They have not been careful to walk with God while they lived; because they
wanted care then, they want comfort now. They that remember not God in their
life (says S. Austin) it is just with God to forget them in death. The Apostle
S. Peter would have us look for new heavens, and a new earth, wherein dwells
righteousness. But never look thou to dwell in that heaven where righteousness
dwells, except righteousness dwell in thee: And he exhorts us, that we be
found of God in peace at that day: that is sweet and comfortable indeed; but
remember, Peace and holiness go together, if we would be found of God in peace,
we must be found of him in holiness: Walk in holiness and uprightness, and then
peace shall kiss thee on thy deathbed. Mark the upright and just man, the end
of that man is peace.

Thirdly, 3. Be often in the meditation of death.
the better to subdue Death, be willing to meditate and think often of Death,
learn the Art of dying, practice the way of it betime, learn to die daily.

How shall we do that?

I will show you. Consider we have many little deaths to undergo in the world,
as whave many delights; Learn to inure and acquaint thy self before hand with
the patient and quiet bearing and enduring of these many troubles and crosses
that befall thee, As Agamemnon first overcome the Lacedaemonians by wrestling,
and then by fighting; and Bilney first burnt his finger in the Candle, that
after he might the better endure the burning of his body at the stake. So think
with your selves, If I cannot endure a little, how shall I endure more? If I
cannot endure a light cross, a small affliction, do I murmur at that? Am I
impatient and repine at that? How shall I bear the pangs of Death, when they
come? Therefore let us inure our selves to a meek, and quiet bearing of lesser
stripes, so we may be better able to endure heavier strokes. Many of us lay out
a great deal of care how to live in the world, we had more need take care how
to die, when we shall leave the world. Study the Art of dying; That is the
third.

Lastly, that we may the better subdue Death, that it may not be an Enemy too
strong; 4. Settle all things before hand, that
Learn before so to dispose of our selves, and order our affairs, that when
Death comes, we may have nothing to do but to die. Get all differences
reconciled, all doubts settled, all reckonings ordered: sequester our selves
from all other avocations, that nothing may interrupt us, when that work is to
go inhand with. Put thy house in order (says God to Hezekiah;) I say so to
every one of you. First, concern the outward man,
your outward house, that which concerns your worldly estate, put that house
in order. What? would thou make thy Will and testament, and be troubled
about that, when thou had more need to have that Will and testament,
confirmed, that Christ has made?

And then set thy soul and conscience, The inward.
thy inner house in order, let not conscience be to seek then of any thing that
concerns thee for thy peace toward God and man. Die thus, and die happily.
Though Death be an enemy, yet thou shall not be hurt of it, because it is
subdued, and at last thou shall get the victory over it, when thou shall see it
uttery destroyed.

And now as I have exhorted you to do this, by way of counsel, so yet a little
further I crave patience, that I may encourage you to do it by way of example:
By the example of this blessed servant, and Saint of God, for whose occasion
you have given this meeting, and I have preached this Sermon.

Give me leave to do by her, as Mary Magdelen did by our Savior Christ, to
break a box of Spiknard and pour it on her, that I may anoint her for her
burial. Concerning whom, though I could say a great deal, yet (knowing how well
she was known to you) I should not be afraid to say too much. Yet on the other
side (because the night is far spent, and because she was sufficiently known
to you although I speak but a little, I shall speak enough. She dwelt among
you: who is he that can speak ill of her? who knew her but reported well of her?

The Apostle Saint Paul reduces all the practical parts of Christianity to
three heads; Tit. 3.11.
Living soberly, and righteously, and holily: The grace of God (says he) has
appeared, and teachth us to do all this. She had learned to live soberly; She
was a pattern of sobriety. Sober in her countenance, in her diet, in her
apparel, in her speeth, in all her behavior.

And the grace of God taught her to live righteously, both in those things that
concern the works of justice, and those things that concern the works of mercy,
both are referred to righteousness.

For her justice, I am persuaded she was exceeding careful in all her ways to
keep a good Conscience. I am sure she was a woman very diligent and painful in
her Calling, she was truly one of those good house-wives that Solomon
describes in Prove. 31. and had studied that Chapter well, and attained the
practice of it: she could never endure idleness in any: there was no plague
(she said) to idleness; and that diligence in our Callings sets open a door to
many blessings, and shuts up the door to many tentations. I may call her a
discreet woman, that was a crown to her husband; so Solomon said a virtuous
woman is. He had a rich portion, when God gave him her. Houses and lands come
by inheritance, but a Prudent wife comes of the the Lord. She was an excellent
guide to her family, to her servants: Children she had none. She had such
children as S. Austin speaks of, and he says, they are those children that
women are saved by. What children, says he? Good works: and those children she
was full of. She did the part of a Mother in bringing up her servants that were
with her: insomuch as she would say sometimes (though they were none of her own
children) Behold, here am I, and the children that God has given me. And for
works of mercy as well as justice, she was most open-hearted and handed, not
only to do according, but beyond her ability: always ready upon every occasion
to distribnte, and administer to the necessities of the Saints, and provoked,
and stirred others to the doing of the like. Among her neighbors she lived
unblameably: A woman of a meek and quiet spirit, and Saint Peter says, 1 Pet.
3.4.
Such of God are much set by. She was no tatler, nor busy medler in other
folks matters.

For Piety, she was remarkable. She showed it both in her health and sickness.
In her health, both publicly and privately. In public, She was a religious
frequenter of the ordinances on the Lords day, and on the week days, a
diligent hearer and attender, an exceilent rememberer: one of the best
Remembrancers that I have heard of. And in private, she was excellent for
duties there, both for the discharge of her own duty, by giving ensample to
others, and many times by good and godly exhortations and instructions, and
daily by private reading and prayer, she set apart some time for her self, for
private meditation.

In her sickness, she was a spectacle for thousands to look on. It pleased God
to lay a long and heavy affliction upon her. She had a Cancer in her breast,
that had been on her three years: in the two last years she suffered a great
deal of extremity, as you may imagine by one thing that I shall say. She was
fain to endure a great deal of dressing, with Corrasives and sharp medicines; a
great deal of cutting, and searing, and burning: she was above fifty times
burnt with hot Irons: but (Lord) with what patience did she still endure it?
She would say, It was no matter; sanctified afflictions were better then
unsanctified prosperity. Apelles said, when the picture of a beautiful woman
was to be completely drawn; he must borrow one part from one, and another from
another, and put all together. She had learned this. She had looked on many
good patterns in the Scripture, and had drawn to her self an imitation of them
all, so that she was a perfect and complete Model. Though I say much, yet I
know, I say nothing but the truth. I read of few excellent woman in the
Scripture, but she made them a pattern of one virtue or other. For obedience,
she was a Sarah: for wisdom a Rebecca: for meekness a Hannah: for a discreet
temper, an Abigal: for good huswivery, a Martha: for piety, a Mary, a Lydia. I
know not any necessary thing, that belonged to make up a good Christian, but in
some measure it pleased God to bestow it on her. Thus she continued all her
life in the time of her health: and in sickness with so much patience as (after
a sort) she endured a martyrdom, and I see no reason but we may allow a Martyr
of Gods making, a swell as of man's: I am sure, if God make Martyrs, Prove. 31.29.
I know not any fitter then she, so meek, and patient, and constant. Many
daughters (says Solomon) have done virtuously, but thou surmountest them all.
I will not say so of her, because I decline flattery. But this I will say, that
I know not many excel her, scarce any that come near her. She has the reward
of that she has done, given her of God, and her works follow her. We leave her
to God, and having committed her soul into his hands, we beseech his gracious
favor upon our selves.

THE GREAT TRIBUNAL: OR, GODS SCRUTINY OF MAN'S SECRETS.
SERMON XIV.
ECCLESIAST. 12.14. For God will bring every Work into Judgment, with every
secret thing, whether it be good, or whether it be evil.


DEath and Judgment are two subjects, about the meditation of which, our
thoughts should every day be conversant; we should every day be thinking of
those two days. Every day, upon the day of death, because there is no day
wherein death may not befall us. And every day, upon the day of Judgment,
because as the day of Death leaves us, so the day of Judgment finds us. We
had an occasion like to this not long since. Then (you may remember) I
discoursed of Death considered as an Enemy. I showed you what kind of Enemy it
is: it is a common Enemy: a secret Enemy: a spiritual Enemy. Now at this time
(having the like occasion) I thought it not amiss for me to discourse of that
that comes immediately after Death, that is Judgment.

The Apostle says Heb. Coherence.
9.27. It is appointed to all men once to die, and after Death comes Judgment.
And it is that that Solomon minds us of here in the words of my Text: which
he adds as a reason to that grave advice he gave in the verse before going.
Having discoursed at large in this book concerning the vanity of all earthly
things, and the vexation among those things that are under the Sun: he tells
us where it is best for us to set up our rest: that is, in learning that one
lesson, Fear God, and keep his commandments, for this is the total; all that
God requires. That we might the rather be stirred up to hearken to this
counsel, he tells us, that whether we do or no, the day will come that we
shall be called to an account, when God will bring every one of us to Judgment,
and take a trial of every work we have done, and of every secret thing, whether
it be good or evil.

In handling of these words we have two things in general that Solomon speaks
Division.
of.

First the person Judging.

Secondly the things Judged.

The Person Judging, is God. And there I will speak,

First of the Judge.

And then of the Judgment.

The things that God brings to judgment and trial, he tells us first, every
work, every thing, be it never so secret. And then a more particular
resolution: those things that are good, and those things that are evil. God
will bring every work to judgment, and every secret thing, whether it be good,
or whether it be evil.

I begin with the Person judging. The person judging.
And here first of the Judge himself. God shall bring to Judgment.

God essentially meant, God. Opera Triditatis ad extra suns indivisa. Opera
Trinitatis ad intra suns divisa; cuique persona incommunicabiliter propria.
all the Persons in the Godhead, Father, Son, and holy Ghost. For all concur
in this work, being as the Schoolmen say, Opus ad extra: It is one of the
External works of the Godhead: and it is an Axiom in Dviinity, that the
External works of the Godhead are not to be divided. It is true, there are
certain internal works of the Godhead, that are said by the Schools to be
divided, incommunicably proper and peculiar to every Person: as it is proper to
the Person of the Father, incommunicably, to have his Being of himself. Of the
Son, to be begotten of the Father. And it is the property of the holy Ghost,
incommunicably, to proceed from both. But those works that they call External;
that is, those works by which the power and wisdom of the Godhead are
externally made manifest to the creature, such as creation, preservation,
redemtion: those equally and indifferently proceed from all the Persons: not
from one in particular, but from all in general: and this of Judgment is one.
For as they all concur in the creating of us: so they shall in the judging of
us: all of them shall cooperate together in the executing of justice and
mercy; Justice in the damnation of the wicked, and mercy in the salvation of
the godly.

You will object peradventure, Object.
that the Scripture seems to speak otherwise, though Judgment here be
attibuted essentially to God, in some places it is attributed personally to
Christ; He shall judge the quick and the dead: and therefore oftentimes it is
called in the Scripture, the Judgment seat of Christ, as 2 Cor. 5.10.

Again sometimes this work of Judging is appropriated to the Saints: 2: Cor.
5.10.
Know ye not that the Saints shall judge the world? 1. Cor. 6.2.
1 Cor. 6.2. and by and by again, Know you not that we shall judge the Angels?
verse 3. How shall we reconcile these, when it is said, Christ and the Saints
shall judge?

I answer; Answ.
This threefold doubt is reconciled by a threefold distinction. God is said to
judge, if we respect the Authority of Jurisdiction.

Christ is said to judge, if we respect the Promulgation of the sentence.

The Saints are said to judge, if we respect the Approbation.

The power and right are equally given to all three Persons: but the particular
Execution is given to Christ: How Christ is said to be the Judge.
the Approbation of what Christ does, is ascribed to the Saints. As at at our
common Courts of Assize here: one is set upon the Bench as Judge, and others are
joined in commission with him, as Accessories: the Judge only pronounces the
sentence, and they that sit in commission with him, ratify and approve his
sentence that he pronounces: so at that day; Christ shall sit upon his Throne
as Judge; the Saints they shall join as Commissioners: Christ he alone
pronounces the sentence upon every one that is summoned there to the trial;
but then his Apostles and Saints, that are joined in commission with him (for
such honor have all his Saints) they shall ratify and approve, and give
attestation to the sentence that he pronounces, and say Amen to the
condemnation of the wicked.

So that the difference is easily reconciled, and we see how God, and Christ,
and the Saints are said to judge. The Authority is Gods. The Execution, Christ's.
The approbation, the Saints. The Apostle in Romans 2.16. makes the point plain,
he tells us that God shall judge by Christ; Romans 2.16.
In that day God shall judge the secrets of all hearts by Jesus Christ: So
Christ himself, Joh. 5. The Father Judges no man, but has committed all power
to the Son. Joh. 5.
He has given him power to execute judgment, as he is the Son of man.

Why to him?

For this Reason; Why God has committed the power of the execution of Judgment
to Christ.
That his second coming may be in glory, to make amends for his first coming in
humility; Christ at his first coming into the world, he came meanly, and
homely: at his second coming, he shall come triumphantly and gloriously.

Before he came like a Lamb, then he shall come like a Lion. Before in the
form of a servant, then in the form of a Lord. Before Pilate sat upon the
Bench, and Christ stood as a malefactor: but then Pilate shall stand at the
Bar as a Malefactor, and Christ shall sit on the Bench as Judge. He shall then
openly come to show himself a just Judge amongst men, as before he came to be
Judged: when he came privately he was Judged of them that were unjust: It was
once a scorn that he the Son of man, should be Judge of the world: therefore God
will have him come and appear in that very form he was scorned in, that now
they may behold him in his Majesty, that before would not take notice of him,
when he appeared in humility: that they who the more contemptuously before
esteemed him in his baseness, may now more severely taste of his justice.

God then is Judge. Not men. Not Angels, but God himself. Had men been our
Judges, we might not fear the face of men, because they are vessels of the same
earth as we, took out of the same pit, hewn out of the same rock. If Angels
had been our Judges, we, should not have stood in so much fear, because (though
they be Spirits more glorious then we yet by their own confession) they are our
fellow creatures, and our fellow servants; therefore we after a sort
participate with them in some degree of nature. But neither men, nor Angels
shall be Judges then, but Almighty God, that as much excels men and Angels,
as the heavens do the earth.

And look what is necessarily required to the office of a Judge, it is
incomparably found in him.

To the office of a Judge, Three properties requisite in a Judge.
there are three properties specially required.

Knowledge to discern.

Power to determine.

Justice to execute.

In God, these are all of them transcendent and eminent.

For Knowledge, he is the most wise.

For Power, most absolute.

For Execution most just.

Knowledge to discern, that is the first. He that assumeth the person of a Judge,
must needs be one of wisdom and understanding. 1. Knowledge to discern.
Though he have the Scepter of authority in his hand, if he have not the eye of
wisdom in his head, if he be not able when men plead their case before him, as
the two Harlots before Solomon, to decide to whom the right of the case
belongs, as he, to whom the living child pertained, he is as unfit to be a
Judge, as an illiterate Ignaroe is to be a Priest. The Judges ignorance is the
honest man's overthrow. We commonly paint Justice blind, not because he should
be so that sits in Gods seat of justice to decide Cases, but only in respect of
persons. Blind Isaac was fain to put forth his hands to feel whether it were
Esau or no that came to ask the blessing: it is a hard case, when Judges have
sore eyes, that they cannot discern the right Case, but only by feeling. But it
shall not be so here. God is the Judge, that is of infinite wisdom and
understanding, that is able to discern right and wrong. Of necessity it must be
so, because he is Omniscient, he knows all things: he has the true
understanding of them: it is impossible to deceive him. Earthly Judges they
sometime are blinded in the hearing of Cases that are brought before them, for
what their eyes see not, they are not able to discern, there are no glass
windows into the bosoms and breasts of men, by which they are able to come into
their hearts: all the information they have, is from Evidences and Witnesses,
the hear-sayes, and reports of others: where if any thing be concealed or
mistold, how easily may they miscarry? But Gods knowledge is not so unsound or
uncertain, because he himself is an ear, and an eyewitness of all things that
are: he knows whatsoever is done, he beholds not the actions only, but the
very intentions, he is able to judge of the thoughts and intentions of the
heart. It is but folly to think to hide any thing from him; heaven is not so
high, but he can reach it: hell is not so deep, but he can search it: the earth
is not so wide, but he can spanit: the night is not so dark, but he can see it:
the chamber, the bed, the closet, is not so close, but he can pierce it: He
that sits upon the circle of the heavens, and whose eyes are as flames of
fire, sees every thing. Heb. 4. There is no creature that is not manifest in
his sight, but all things are naked and open; Heb. 4.
like an Anatomized body, (for thence the Metaphor is drawn) where the bowels
are laid open, and every nerve, and muscle, and ligament, every Atome
discovered, so that we may take a full view of it. In a word; if it were David's
commendation, that he was wise, as an Angel of God: how wise must God be, that
infuseth wisdom into the Angels, and in whose sight the Angels are foolish?
That is the first thing requisite in a Judge, he must have knowledge to discern.

In the second place. 2. Power to execute.
He must have power to execute: he must have authority to command: and not be
as an Image set against a wall, for if he be so, Abjects will insult over him:
though peradventure some may regard him, because he has eyes to see, yet
others will contemn him, because he has no hands to punish: so innocence shall
be hopeless of recompense, and the wicked of their desert. Again, if he have
not power, if he have power only to hear, and not to determine: or if his power
be restrained to some petty Cases, and not also extended to matters of greater
consequence and moment: Appeals will be made, (as commonly they are) from
inferior Courts to the higher.

But it is not so here: God is the Judge, who as he is infinite in knowledge, so
he is in power and authority. We style the King Supreme head over all persons,
and in all causes in his Dominions: but God is over all the Dominions of the
earth, supreme over all: not only in all causes, and over all persons, but over
all causes too: even Kings are subject to his regiment: He binds Kings in
chains, and Nobles in fetters of Iron, Psalm. 149.
Psalm. 149. The Kings of the earth (says Saint John) and the rich, and the
great men, and the great Captains, and the mighty men, they shall all hide
themselves, Rev. 15.
in the caves, and rocks, and mountains, Revel 15. crying to the mountains and
rocks, to cover them from the face of the Judge, and from the wrath of the Lamb,
because the day of desolation is come.

Nay God, is not only over all the Kings of the earth, but he is Potentate of
heaven and hell too: He has a commanding power over all: the Angels fear, the
Devils tremble, when they come to stand before God. In a word (as Saint Paul
says) all power is of God; then of necessity follows, that God himself in
his power is most absolute. That is the second thing belonging to the office of
a Judge; as he must have knowledge to discern, so he must have power to execute.

Thirdly there must be Justice in the execution: 3. Justice in the Execution.
therefore the Grecians were wont to place justice between Libra, and Leo; to
signify indifferency in weighing causes, and strictness in executing the
sentence. So the Egyptians signified as much by their Hierogliphical
purtraicture of an Angel without hands, wincking, or without eyes: such a one a
Judge should be: he should have no hands to receive bribes, nor no eyes to
respect persons: the person of a Judge must not take the person of a friend: A
man must not personate a friend in justice, but as Levi, he must know neither
father, nor mother, nor brother. Justice amongst us, is purtraicted holding a
Balance in one hand, and a sword in another: the Balance shows the upright
weighing of causes, and the Sword shows the strictness of the execution of
the sentence.

And if this Execution be wanting both the other are to no purpose. It is to no
purpose to know, and to have power, if their be not Justice. But God is a true
and just Judge; Howsoever it be amongst the Judges of the earth; yet unworthy is
he of the place of a Judge, and fitter to stand at the Bar, then to sit on the
Bench, that suffers himself to miscarry by friendship or love, or bribes, or
suits, or favor, or envy; when either of these prevail, they tie the tongues
of men to plead for wrong causes. Shall a Traitor presume on the Kings favor,
and Mordecai be out of the Kings grace? But there shall be no such thing here:
God is the Judge of all the earth, Genesis 18.
and shall not he do right? Genesis 18. Does God pervert judgment, or does the
Almighty pervert Justice? Job 8.3. When thou stand before the Judgment seat
of God, thou shall neither be elevated with vain hopes, nor dejected and cast
down by sinister and wrong fears: but assure thy self, such as thy cause is,
such shall thy sentence be, as Saint Bernard well; a pure heart shall prevail
more with God then a smooth word: good consciences shall speed better then full
purses, for he is an upright and just Judge, with whom no fair words, nor
friends shall prevail. So I have done with the first thing, The Judge.

Secondly, The Judgment
something of the Judgment: and therein two things;

First that it shall be.

Secondly, in what manner it shall be.

First, 1. It shall be
that it shall be: The text is plain. God shall bring to Judgment. There might
many Texts besides this be alleged consonant, and agreeable to this: but it is
superfluous. Besides Texts of Scripture we have Types also to prefigure it; and
reasons also to prove and confirm it.

Two Types of the last Judgment, Types of the last Judgment. Luk, 17.
our Savior himself propounds, Luk, 17. One was the destruction upon Sodom:
the other, the destruction that God brought upon the old world. Look (as Christ
says) how it was with them of Sodom in the days of Lot, they did eat, they
drank, they bought, they sold, they planted, they builded: and look how it was
with the men of the old world, in the days of Noah, eating and drinking, and
sporting, and marrying, until the very day that Noah entered into the Ark, and
the flood came, and destroyed them all: So it shall be at the last day, when
the Son of man shall come. The Apostle Saint Peter (speaking of the latter of
these) tells us of mockers in those times, that scoffed when they heard of
the Judgment: there has been talk a great while of such things promised, but
when will it come? Where is the promise of his coming? There are scoffers in
these days, but such (if there be any) cannot but speak against their own
consciences, and knowledge: they cannot be ignorant both of the Judgments that
have been, and shall be, (or if they be, they are wilfully ignorant;) That God
did once wash away the sins of the world with a Flood of water, and that the
time is coming, that God will purge the sins of the world with a flood of fire:
the Rainbow in the clouds, as it is a Monument of the one; so it is a
forerunner of the other. The two principal colors of the Rainbow, are blew,
and red, the blew and waterish color of the Rainbow is an evidence of that
Judgment that is past, when God washed the sins of the world away by Water: the
fiery color is a prediction of a Judgment that is to come, when God shall
purge the world by a Flood of fire.

But besides these Types there are diverse reasons that may be given to assure
us, that we have reason to expect this day. Those five Attributes of God,
afford five reasons to confirm it. His Power, his Wisdom, his Truth, his
Justice, his Mercy.

First his Power; Rule 1.
God will have it be thus, for the manifestation of his Power. A work of great
power it will be indeed. All must be brought before Gods judgment seat, every
one, as the Text says after. It may seem strange (peradventure incredible) to
here that all the men and women that ever lived in the world, that so many
multitudes and millions of thousands of all kindreds and nations, should all be
summoned to appear before one Judgment seat. But as Saint Austin faith,
Consider who is the doer, and then thou will not doubt. It is true indeed with
men, such a thing as this is impossible, but with God all things are possible.
Could God at the first draw all things out of nothing, and cannot God as well
bring together all again, when they are turned to nothing? Could he make that
body of thine out of the dust of the earth, and cannot he raise that body, when
it is turned to dust? Could he unite that body to the soul in the time of the
Creation, and cannot he unite it at the time of the Resurrection? Certainly
there is nothing impossible, too hard, to the great and terrible voice of God
(as Saint Chrysostom says) to that voice of God that cleaves the rocks, that
breaks the brazen gates asunder, that looseneth the bands of death. Therefore
unless thou question the power of God, no doubt but he is able, and can bring
all of us to judgment. He will do it for the manifestation of his power.

Secondly, Reas. 2.
as for the manifestation of his power, so for the manifestation of his
wisdom. It is a point of wisdom, when one has made a thing, to bring it to
the intended end for which he made it. Beloved, this is Gods intended end in
making of us: therefore he brought us hither into the world, not that we should
have always a Being here, but that after a certain time we should be
dissolved, and put into an everlasting condition, therefore Saint Peter
speaking of the salvation of Gods elect, he calls it, the end of their faith:
not only the end they aspire, but that end that God has assigned, and
appointed them to. If God should fail of his end, we might call his wisdom
into question: it might give us occasion to say, that he undertook that, which
he was not able to accomplish: so that instead of showing himself wife, he
should show himself weak. Therefore except we should call his wisdom into
question, doubtless he will call us one day to an Account.

Thirdly, Reas. 3.
for the manifestation of his truth: nothing gains God more honor, then that
he is faithful and true, in whatsoever he has promised. Now this day of
Judgment, is the day wherein God has promised to recompense the faith of the
godly, Act. 1731.
and has threatened to punish the wickedness of the wicked: he has appointed a
day for it, faith the Scripture, Acts 17.31. What though it be a great while
since the promise was made: for all this we must not think that God is slack as
men account slackness? the slacknesse of men is when they keep not their
promise according to appointment: we must not think God is so slack, he always
keeps his day that he has set, he never fails of his promise, but when the
time is come, he keeps touch, he breaks not his day. As it is said, Ezod.
22.41. After the four hundred and thirty years were expired that God spoke to
Abraham, the very same day, all the children of Israel went out of Egypt. How
many promises and threatenings after do we read of, wherein he never failed of
the performance of what he spoke, the least tittle? therefore (says Saint
Gregory) we have seen so many of Gods promises, already verified, that we may
be confident, that those that are to come, shall also be accompilshed: surely
he will not fail in this, but as certainly as he has promised, it shall come
to pass. So that unless we shall deny the truth of God (who the Scripture
says, cannot, it is impossible that he should lie) we must of necessity
believe, that for the manifestation of his Truth there will be a day of
Judgment.

Fourthly, Reas. 4.
as for the manifestation of his Truth, so of his Justice, and Mercy. I will
put them together. It is the property of Justice to render punishment to those
that have done evil: and of Mercy to recompense those that have done well. Now
therefore for the manifestation of his Justice and Mercy this day must come. It
is true, here many times wicked men speed better then Gods people: A man may
sin a hundred times, and yet God porlong his days: and the children of God on
the other side, are persecuted and neglected: so that here he gives not
retribution to every one according to his works. Whereas it stands with
equity and justice, that well-doers should be rewarded, and evildoers should
be punished; the stream runs contrary, wicked men speed well, and good men
ill: Naboth cannot have a poor Vineyard, but one rich Ahab or other is ready to
get it away: They ^at my people as bread: and they eat the bread of Gods
people: they eat the inheritance of the fatherless, and devour widows houses:
so that here all is turned topsie-turvey, as if the world were a thing
cruciated, tearing it self. If this world should last always, where were Gods
justice? And therefore for the manifestation of Gods justice and mercy, there
must be a day of retribution, when for that portion of sorrow that the godly
have had here, they shall have a portion of happiness and joy; and when for
that cup of pleasure that the wicked have drank here, they shall have put into
their hands a cup of trembling and wrath. If Dives enjoy his good things here,
let him look for a day, when he shall be denied a drop of water: It Lazarus
have had his ill things here, let him look when the day shall come, that he
shall be rewarded. Except we will divest, and strip God of all his Attributes,
deny his power, his wisdom, his truth, his justice, and mercy, we cannot but
confess, that certainly there is a day to come, when God will bring us to
judgment. That is for the first. That the day of Judgment shall come.

In the next place we are to consider, 2. In what manner it shall be.
as that it shall be, so in what manner, and how it shall be. Briefly; the
manner of this Judgment, is set forth to us in the Scripture, in five
particulars;

First, the Summons. Secondly, the Appearance. Thirdly, the Separation.
Fourthly, the Trial. Fifthly, the Sentence.
First, 1. The summons.
the Summons. All shall be summoned to come before Gods Judgment seat: and
this Summons of theirs shall be by the voice of Christ himself: The dead in the
grave shall hear the voice of the son of man, and they shall come forth, etc.
Job. 5.28. Job. 5.28. Matt. 24.31.1 Cor. 15.
This voice in Scripture is called the Trump of the Angel; He shall send his
Angels, and they shall gather the Elect together, from the four winds, Mat.
24.31. The Trump shall blow, and the dead shall arise. 1 Cor. 15. The Lord
himself shall descend from heaven with a shout, with the voice of the
Archangel, with the Trump of GOD, 1 These.4 16.
and the dead shall rise. 1 These.4.16. At the giving of the Law, there was the
sound of a Trumpet: so when God shall come to punish the breach of the Law, the
Angel shall blow the Trumpet: Trumpets are commonly blown at a Battle, or at a
Feast: at a Feast they sound joyfully: when it is at a Battle they sound
dreadfully: both shall sound here at that day, the sound of the Trumpet to the
godly, shall be as at a Feast: but the sound of the Trumpet in the ears of the
wicked, shall be as a summons to battle.

If we will have the joyful sound of that voice then, we must welcome the voice
of Christ now: God now speaks by men, then by Angels: Now the Trumpet of the
Gospel sounds, then the Trumpet of Judgment shall sound: we must learn o
bedience to this, and then we shall find a great deal of comfort in that: there
is a Surgite that we must hearken to now, arise from sin, Come unto me all yea
that are weary, and heavy laden; if we hearken to this, we shall never fear
that Surgite venite then, Arise you dead and come to judgment. That is the
first. The Summons.

Secondly, 2. The App^arance.
the Appearance: after the Summons all shall make their appearance: We must all
appear before the Judgment seat of Christ, 2 Cor. 5.10. This Appearance it is
general, 2 Cor. 5 10.
and personal: the general, all must come: the particular, and personal, every
one shall come in his own person: We shall appear for our selves, every man for
himself, shall give an account to God, Romans 14.12. In other Courts if men
appear for themselves by another, Romans 14 12.
it is enough, but here, Per se, by himself. That is the reason that this day
it is called in Scripture, the day of manifestation.

First, because Christ himself shall be revealed, and manifested in that day;
We look for the day of the Revelation of Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 1.7.
1 Cor. 1.7.

Secondly, because the Attributes of God shall be revealed then; his patience,
and long animity, his righteousness, and justice, a day of Revelation of the
just judgment of God, Romans 2.

Finally, because we our selves shall be revealed, and manifested, all our
ways and works: the godly, and the works that they have done, though never so
secret: the wicked, and their works, the secret sins that they have committed.
That is the second thing in the manner of the Judgment. First, that all shall
be summoned; secondly, upon the Summons, all shall be made to appear.

Thirdly, 3. The seperaration.
the Separation that shall be made at that time: for when all are congregated,
by and by, all shall be severed and separated: a separation and division shall
be made amongst them: some shall be set at the right hand of the Judge, some at
the left hand: As a shepherd searches his flock, in the day when he is
amongst his sheep that are scatered, so I will search out my sheep at that day,
and I will divide between cattle and cattle, between the sheep and the goats.
The Sheep and the Goats here they flock, feed, and fold together, they will do
so, they must do so. The Tares here must be let alone, and grow with the corn,
till the day of harvest, but yet afterward there shall be a division and a
separation: the wicked and the godly live together here, but at the last the
wicked shall be separated from the godly, like the chaff from the wheat; as
when two travel one way, they pass together, and lodge together, but the next
morning they part, and take several ways; so the wicked and the godly, after
they have been here a time, eating and dirinking, conversing and living, and
perhaps dying, and rotting in the graves together, notwithstanding when this
day, that I here speak of, shall come, then there shall be a separation and
division made, then the sheep shall be set on the right hand; then you shall
know which is Jacobs flock, and which is Labans: which belong to Christ, and
which belong to Satan, then the chaff shall be winnowed from the wheat, and we
shall see which is for the Barn, and which is for the fire.

Go on, you wicked still, seem the same you are not, delude the eyes of the
world, that you have the same heart that you appear; you have Masks and Vizards
now, the time will come your paint shall be washed off, your fig leaves shall
be stripped, and your nakedness shall be seen, and all manifest at that day of
God: there shall be a separation of the good from the bad, as the shepherd
separateth his sheep from the Goats.

Fourthly, 4. The trial.
with this separation, there shall be a trial the Scripture speaks of: after
the conventing and separation, there shall be a trial. I saw (faith Saint John,
Revel. 20.12.) the dead, small and great stand before God, and the books were
opened, Rev. 20.12.
and another book was opened, which is the book of life, and the dead were
Judged out of those things, which were written in those books, according to
their works.

Mark, there are several books, and so as there are several books, there are
several judgments, some are tried by one book, some by another.

First, The books that shall be opened at the day of Judgment.
there are some books, by which the works of men are tried: the book of Nature,
the book of Scripture, the book of Conscience. They that never heard of Christ
shall be judged by the book of Nature: there is enough in the book of Nature to
leave all unexcusable. They that live in the Church, shall be tried, and judged
by the book of the Scripture: Of the Law, They that have sinned under the the
Law, shall be judged by the Law: Of the Gospel, God shall judge the secrets of
all hearts according to my Gospel. Both of them shall be judged according to
the book of Conscience: for God will lay that book so clear and open, that they
shall see what they have done against that Book. Lord, what a many of sins have
we committed here, that we never remember and think of, when they are done. Our
memory and conscience row is a Book clasped up, we see not a thousand things
that are registered there; but when God shall lay open that Book, and enlarge
our memories, and inl ghten our consciences, then men shall clearly see what
they had forgot before: they shall promptly dictate the whole course of our
lives, and aquaint us with every action that has past us, and every
circumstance, to accuse, and excuse. This is the kind of the trial, by which
the works of men shall be tried.

Lastly, 5. The Sentence.
with the Summons there shall be an appearance, and with that a separation, and
a trial, after all these are done, then comes the sentence, then the Sentence
shall be pronounced upon the one, and upon the other: the one Sentence full of
sweetness and comfort, every word droppeth as a honey comb; Come you blessed
of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you, from the beginning of the
world: The same voice that Christ spoke to them here, Come to me: the same
shall be there, Come ye blessed: and as they were careful to come to Christ
here, so they shall make a happy coming to Christ there. The other is a
sentence of Hell, and wrath, and horror, Depart ye cursed into everlasting
fire, prepared for the devil and his Angels: as they desired here to depart
from God, and said to him depart from us; so they shall hear that word of
horror and woe, pronounced at that day: they shall be sent away into fire, to
have their portion with the Devil and his Angels.

Thus brefly, I have showed concerning the person Judging. First for the Judge
himself, God. And then for the Judgment; first, that it must be: and then the
manner how.

I should go on to the next general point; that is, to consider the things and
persons Judged, every work, of every man, whether it be good, or whether it be
evil; And so I should have given the Application, and Use of all together. But
so much for this time.

A TRIAL OF SINCERITY: OR, THE DESIRE OF THE FAITHFUL.
SERMON XV.
ISAIAH 26.8, 9. Yea, in the way of thy Judgments, O Lord, have we waited for
thee: the desire of our soul is to thy Name, and to the remembrance of thee.
With my soul have I desired thee in the night: yea, with my spirit within me,
will I seek thee early: for when thy judgments are in the earth; the
inhabitants of the world, will learn righteousness.


THis Chapter is a sweet Song of the Prophet, (if I mistake not) concerning the
restoration of the Jews And the words of the Text, are the sweet Swan-like
Song of our deceased Sister, which she desired might be her Funeral Song, her
Funeral Text, at this time; and desired it long ago, before any thing, that is
now fallen out, came to pass. And I have accordingly pitched upon it: not only
to satisfy her desire in a just thing: but especially, because I approve her
choice of a fit Text; there being not in the whole Scripture, a portion that
will afford a fitter Character (in my apprehension) for her person: as you
shall understand in the close, to which therefore I shall deser the speaking to
the present occasion.

The truth is I have handled a good part of this chapter formerly, and in this
place: but now we shall clean go another way than then I did, and than I
usually do. I shall only desire to present so much one of these words without
any curious observation or division, as may represent to us a perfect character
of a sweet Christiin-minded man or woman: which may be of singular use, and
very profitable.

There be only two things, The general things observable in the words.
that I shall observe in the whole words? I shall but go them over briefly,
taking out the main points (as I conceive) for that purpose, I shall mention
them.

We have here propounded to to us the complete duty of a Christian. 1. The
duty. 2. The motives.
And we have here some effectual motives intimated to stir Christians up to the
preformance of that duty.

There is a general duty, The duty expressed. 1. Generally. 2. Particularly.
(to begin with that first) that belongs to Christians at all times. And
there are some special duties which concern Christians in some special times.
Both contained here.

The general duty (I shall not, as I said, handle it in my former way of
observation, but only explicate the very words of the Text, and that will be
enough for me.) The general duty expressed.
The general duty (I say) of a Christian, and what should be the temper of his
heart, and spirit at all times, we may find expressed (at least intimated) very
sweetly, with some excellent directions in the Text, in the so th^e
circumstances.

First, 1. In the Object.
we may see here what is the true Object, upon which a Christian soul should be
fixed.

Secondly, 2. In the Acts that are exercised on the Object.
we may see the Latitude of the Acts which a Christian must exercise upon that
Object.

Thirdly, 3. In the manner of exercising.
we may take notice, of the manner, and of the degree in which every one of
these Acts must be exercised. I shall but touch these briefly out of the words,
and then come to the special duties, belonging to special times.

First, The Object.
to begin with the Object. The desire of our soul is toward thee, and to the
remembrance of thy Name.

God, and the name of God, is that, which should be printed in the heart of a
Christian (...) should be that to which the By^ and st^am of his whose soul
runs.

First, 1. God.
I say, it should be fixed upon God. We are here in the world placed (as it
were) between heaven and earth: Now all the manner is, how our Byas is set,
which way that turns. As the Byas is of the heart, so the man is. Our hearts
may be turned downwards to the earth, and to earthly things, and so we shall
run a course of ruin and destruction: our hearts again, the Byas of them, may
be settoward heaven, and heavenly things, and so we shall run the right course
that we ought. It is God that our souls should breath after. Fecisti nos, Do
nine, propter te, faith a Father: thou have made us, O Lord, for thy self, and
our souls are restless till they return again to thee.

As they say of Circles. Simile.
The Circle, the round figure, is the most perfect figure, and the most
capacious figure, because there the line that begins in one point goes
round, till it return into the same again. So this is the greatest perfection
of a man, when he returns to his beginning: he had all from God, and when he
reflects himself altogether back again unto God, he attaineth his greatest
perfection.

And indeed there will be no more rest for the soul in any thing out of God,
then there is for a stone, or a weighty body in the liquid air. Hang a stone
in the Air, Simile.
and do but once remove the force that holds it there, will it, nill it, give
but a way to it, and it will cut through, and never rest, till it come to a
sollid substance, till it come to the earth, if it may to the Center of the
earth. It is so with the soul of man: try it in all the fortunes, and states,
and conditions in the world, as a great Emperor said, I have run through all
things, and my spirit will rest in nothing: and as Solomon gives us this
observation out of all his travel, and experiment that he had made, Vanity of
vanity, all is vanity, and worse then vanity too, vexation of spirit: this is
the sum of all; fear God, and keep his commandenents; as he concludes.

This is the Object, upon which our soul should be set, we should have an eye
to God; laboring to approve ourselves to him: making our approaches, and
adresses, and returns to him; that our soul may rest with him, that we may
enjoy the light of his countenance here, and the fullness, and brightness of his
glory hereafter. This is the first thing in the Object.

Now, 2. The name of Cod.
if a soul be carried toward this Object, toward God; and we can out-go, and
out-grow these worldly things, look above them, and look down upon them with
scorn: then the very name of God will be sweet, and precious to us. To thee,
and to thy name. Every thing which is a memorial, a remembrance of God, Every
thing by which God may be known, will be taken notice of. All his Attributes,
his Word, and Ordinances, and all other things which come within the compass of
his Name (as I suppose there are not many here but know, according to the
ordinary explication of Divines, of the third Commandment, Thou shall not take
the name of the Lord thy God in vain; and the first Petition, hallowed be thy
name; What is meant by the name of God) When the heart (I say) is set upon God,
it even will leap for joy at the very name of God: the very name of God will be
sweet to him. To enjoy God is sweet, and to have but a glimpse of him, to have
him but represented by name, is sweet too. As it is reported of a Father, that
was a godly man, and a Martyr in his time: that he was so frequent in roling
the name of Christ, the name of Jesusin his mouth, that when he died, it is
reported that in his heart there was engraven, and written, the character of
that Name in golden letters. And as Saint Austin speaks of himself; Time was
(faith he) that I found infinite sweetness, it was honey to me to read a piece
of Tully, there was so much eloquence in it: but after I came to be a
Christian, to be acquainted with God, and with Christ, then, me thought, the
leaves were dry, and the beauty withered; I found no such sap, nor relish in
them. And he gives the reason: Because (faith he) I did not there find the
Name of my blessed Lord: they did not bring to my remembrance, they were not
Vehicula; instruments, to convey to my soul, something of my God; Therefore all
that Eloquence vanished, and it was but an empty sound: like a Cart that runs
with speed, rattleth, and makes a great noise when it is empty: so all the
goodly sound of words, when there is nothing of God carried along with it, that
puts us in mind of God, it will have but little savor and relish to a pious
heart. But I must not dilate upon things, lest I prevent my self in what I more
intend. This is the first thing, that I note here: the Object upon which we
should place our hearts and souls: they should be toward God, and toward his
Name.

But then secondly, The Acts that are exercised on the Object.
here is intimated in these words, nay, and directly expressed, the Acts which a
Christian should exercise upon the Object. There are three Acts that are here
mentioned: (for the whole soul must be taken up, and carried with full stream
toward God in all the parts and faculties of it, and so we have it here clearly
expressed.)

First, 1. Of the understanding.
here is an act of the Understanding, the intellectual faculty mentioned: Our
rememberance is toward thy name. There is a remembrance of God and his name.
And this should be one thing which a Christian should take special care of. Our
memories should not be like sieves, Memory.
to let out the clear water, and to return the grains and the dreggs: We should
not have that treasury to preserve rubbish, but to preserve our Jewels: as when
there was a dispute before Alezander that great King, concerning a rich
Cabinet, that he took among his spoils, when he had overthrown Darius King of
Persia; the richest Cabinet of the most costly Jewles, that the world had then
seen: there was a dispute before him, to what use he should put it: and every
one having expressed their minds according as their fancies lead them: the King
himself concluded, that he would keep that Cabinet to be a treasury to lay the
books of Homer in. I am sure, the richest Cabinet that is, is in the soul of a
man, the memory, which is the treasure-house where we lay up all that we know
and learn: it is a rich Cabinet I confess, and therefore the fitter for the
richest Jewel; to lay up the word of God there: as Mary, treasured up those
things she heard in her heart: to lay up the remembrance of God there: often to
think upon God.

It is a very sweet saying of a learned and godly Father: A man should oftener
remember God, then he does breath. As the Commonwealth is maintained by
exportation, and importation of commodities; so is our life maintained by a
continual exportation, and importation of the Air, passing to and fro:
breathing out the Air, when it is too hot in us, and fetching it in cool
again, to refresh and supply the spirits: our life (I say) is maintained by it:
and God is the very fountain of life to us: even as the soul is the life of
the body, so is God the life of the soul; therefore we should always be
remembering of God, so ost as we breath: breathing out prayers to him, or
praises of him in return of his mercy.

Our memories (I say) should be exercised in thinking upon God, in remembering
of God; Remember thy Creator, in the days of thy youth, faith Solomon: We
should begin betimes, and we should never be weary of this. The memory is one
of the brittlest parts, and we are most apt in age to grow to oblivion and
forgetfulness: as that great Orator did sometime, it is reported of him, that
his memory (which was incomparably excellent before) failed him so much before
he died, that he forgot his own name. We cannot forget God, but we must be
worse then he, and do that first, forget our own name, that we are Christians,
that we are sons and daughters of God. Therefore this should be a thing, that
we should often inure our selves unto, not to put the thoughts of God from us,
or think they are too sad and serious, and so to account them as unwelcome
guests: but we should rather often, bath our selves in these sweet delights, in
the meditation, and remembrance of God. That is one thing.

And then secondly; 2. Of the will and affections.
besides the act of the understanding (I will go according to the words of the
text) there is an act of the will, and of the affections: one only named as a
taste of all the rest: for indeed where one is, all are, they are so linked and
chained together, that they cannot be separate: And here is a sweet act of
affection mentioned; The desire of our soul is toward thee.

This should be one part of a Christians character, Desires.
that his desire should be always breathing out, and flaming up toward
heaven: that if he cannot at least obtain the highest pitch of full sayls of
love, and of a full perfection in virtue and grace: yet, whatsoever he comes
short in otherwise, to make it up with abundant desires, ardent longing
desires, not to come short in that to be sure: that will make an excel lent
supply.

And indeed, it is that, that poor and weak Christians must trust to many
times, must relieve themselves with thoughts of: they often find themselves
exceeding short, and defective in performances: if they did not find some
desires working in them, there would scarce be any symptom of life. As it may
be in the body: a man can see sometimes, but little motion in the body: scarce
any symptom of life, the pulse is very weak and faint, and scarce moves at
all that can be discerned: but yet it may be there is some kind of breath
stirring, or else we conclude the party dead: so it is in this case: desire is
that (if there be truth in it, be it the lowest degree of it) which is an
evidence of spiritual life: there cannot be truth of grace, where there is not
unfeigned, and hearty desires toward God, desires to approve our selves to him,
desires to walk with him in our whole course, desires to be defective in
nothing: and that is in some sort true (as you know Divines have determined it,
and if it be not mis-interpreted, there is a certain truth in it) the desire of
grace, Desires, an argument of a gracions heart.
is the grace it self: and the desire of God, is that which makes some union,
and gives us some communion and fellowship with God. For it is impossible that
the heart should desire, and long after God, except it be, that the heart be
pointed with love toward God, except the heart love God: for desire is nothing
but a certain configuration of love: Love is the general affection of the soul
to any thing that is good in all the postures of it. Now if it fall out that
the good thing I love, be absent from me, that I have it not in possession,
then love is shaped out, and shows it self in desires. It must needs be
therefore, that where there are desires toward God, and desires of grace,
there is somewhat of God formed in that person, there is something of grace
begun: at least the first lineaments thereof are drawn in some kind of truth.
This is the second Act that Christians should exercise, and take special care
to cherish: that they have continual pantings, and breathings of desires toward
God: their hearts should work, and beat toward him continually.

But then in the third place, Joined with endeavors.
there is another thing expressed in the words of the Text, and that is, these
desires are not only (according to our Proverb of wishers and woulders)
ineffectuall desires; desires that are mere gaping, to see if the thing will
drop into our mouths or no, without any bestirring of our selves; but here is
joined with them (if we peruse the words of the Text, we shall find it)
endeavors: I have desired thee in the night, and I will seek thee early: the
soul of a Christian desires God in the evening, and his spirit will seek him
early in the morning, (for those particulars of the time, I shall touch by and
by, but now I only take notice of that third distinct act here mentioned, which
is,) our desires must be joined with inquiries, with endeavors, to search
after God, to see if we may grope by any means to find him out, to learn to
know what is the way of his good will and pleasure, how we may lead a life that
may be acceptable to him, and how we may come to the possession, and assurance
of his favor, and be accepted in his sight. Except there be endeavors it is a
shrewd suspicion, Desires without endeavors, false.
that the desires are ineffectual desires, and unformed desires: and not those
that argue any life, and truth of grace. But when our desires are joined with
these bestirrings of the soul, to seek after God, to search him out in his
Word, in his Ordinances, to find his steps, and to find his goings, and so to
maintain a sweet and holy communion with him: that is a sweet act of Grace,
and a certain ratification, and seal of the truth of it.

But then, The manner of exercising these acts.
let me add the third thing. In what height are all these actions to be boiled
up? or in what manner must we tender these services to God in this kind? How
must our understandings lay hold upon God, and treasure him up in our memories?
How must our affections and desires work toward him? how must our endeavors be
carried toward God? The manner of all these will make this complete, and so
make up the full and complete Character of a Christian, in this general duty.

First, 1. They must come from inward principles
the soul must be carried intimately, and most inwardly: the inward motions and
workings of the soul and spirit must be toward God. And therefore the Prophet
here expresses these acts, as the acts of the very soul and spirit of a man.

All outward actions of seeking toward God, and making our approaches and
addresses toward him, they are all such as may be counterfeited, a hypocrite
may act them. There is nothing in the world, no shape of any external thing in
the world; but a Painter with his Pensil can draw the picture of it, give a
resemblance of the thing: and there is no outward action in the world, that
belongs to God, or to Christianity, but it is possible for a Painter, for a
base hypocrite to represent them with an artificial pensil. But the inward
acts of life, that no Painter can imitate: a Painter cannot make a picture to
have heart, and entrails, and lunges, to have life and motion, and spirits,
and blood stirring in the veins: all those things a Painter cannot imitate; he
can make shapes, but he cannot put the life into them: he can make outward
forms, but he cannot put the inwards to them. Now then this is that intended
here: all those outward actions must be animated actions: not dead actions,
actions that have no further bottom then the teeth out wards, that grow upon
the house top: a word growing upon the tip of the tongue, that has no root in
the heart, and so for the rest. But they must have the root in the heart and
soul of a man; that must inwardly be carried toward God. And when the heart
and soul, and spirit of a man (all which words are here used) by a supernatural
grace that is implanted in them, when (I say) they are thus carried toward God,
it is an argument of spiritual life; that there is some life.

Secondly, 2. They must he sincere.
they must be carried sincerely, not for any by, or base respects. When a man
makes toward any person or thing, and professes love to it: and does it not for
the thing it self, but for some by end; he does not love that person he makes
to, but he loves that thing for whom he makes to that person. As for example:
Simile.
A man scrapeth and croucheth, and keeps a do with a man, that he never saw or
knew, one that he is ready, it may be (when his back is turned) to curse: but
yet he will do this for his alms, for his gain, to make a prey, a use of him
some way: this man loves his alms, loves his prey, loves his bounty: but it
is no argument of love to the man. So it is in this case: for a man to make
toward God, and to seem to own him, and to be one of the generation of those
that seek his face, to address himself in outward confotmity, and many other
things, by which another may charitably (if he have no other ground) judge of
him: all this is nothing, except a man may discern something that may give him
a taste, that his spirit does uprightly, and sincerely seek God; that he loves
God, for God himself; that he loves grace, for grace it self; he loves the
Commandments of God, because they are Gods commandments, and because they are
beautiful, being according to the rule of his Word. But otherwise, if it be any
sinister thing, that carries a man on toward God, it is no argument of the
life, and truth of grace. You know it is so in experience: there be many things
that move, and yet their motion is no argument of life: Simile.
A windmill, when the wind serves, moves, and moves very nimbly too: yet
you do not say presently that that is a living creature: No, it moves only by
an external cause, by an artificial contrivance; it is so framed, that when the
wind sets in such and such a corner, it will move, and so having but an
external Moter, and cause to move, and no inward principle, no soul within it
to move it, it is an argument that it is no living creature. So it is here: if
a man see another move, and move very fast, in those things which of themselves
are the ways of God, see him move as fast to hear a Sermon as his neighbor
does; is as forward and hasty to thrust himself, and bid himself a guest to the
Lords Table, (when God has not bid him) as any; the Question is, what
principle sets him awork: if it be an inward principle of life, out of a
sincere affection, and love to God and his ordinances that carries him to
this: it argues that man has some life of grace, But if it be some wind that
blows him on; the wind of State, the wind of Law, the wind of danger, of
penalty, the wind of fashion or custom, to do as his neighbors do: if these
or such like, be the things that draw him thither; this is no argument of life
at all: it is a cheap thing, it is counterfeit, and poor ware.

Thirdly, 3. They must be pitched on God alone.
(that which I have often said to be the principal, and the most considerable
thing (that I know) in all practical Divinity, and which is the most
Charactaristical, of the truth of Grace, and of the life of Piety in any one)
our spirits, and souls, and affections toward God, must be advanced to this
hieght: to be carried toward God, above all other things.

I beseech you seriously think of it: I have often spoken of it, but it may be
there may be some room left for the mention of it now, and some necessity of
pondering it well. It will be the Charactaristical thing, by which a man may
most certainly discern himself. And I would desire to know wherein my defect of
understanding is, if I be mistaken: but it seems to me as a clear thing, that
every one here, that has not a mind to affront the mind of God, he dares not
contest this argument, that it is a rational thing, that if God be the best of
Beings, he should have the best portion in our love.

All reason commands us to love that best, which is best: and to dispense our
love according to the degree of the excellency of the thing. There is no man
but apprehends this clearly. A man may say that he loves his Wife, and he
will prove it: and this shall be his argument, I love her as well, as I do
another woman: Is this the proof of conjugall love? was this the covenant made
between them? has he fulfilled it in this case to her? or (...) to him? There
is no man but sees that there is more required: there is a peculiarity, and
propriety of love required in this case. It must certainly be so here; for we
contract and espouse our souls to Christ, and upon those very terms, for
better, and for worse, to forsake all the world, and to cleave to him alone:
and if our spirits be not raised and advanced to that degree of affection, that
Christ and God be so lovely, and beautiful, in our eyes, and so good (for I
name one sometime, and sometime another, it is all one upon the point) if (I
say) they be not advanced thus high: the conjugal knot was never tied between
Christ and the soul: it is impossible therefore that such a one should have to
plead the benefits that flow from a Conjugal union: neither can he have title
or right to any thing that issues from a marriage with Christ, whose soul did
but equivocate, and would never speak out the words, and who never answered the
interrogations of a good conscience (as Saint Peter speaks in another case)
that when the soul (in the contract) should say, that she takes him for to
love, and honor, and obey him, and to make him her Lord and Savior: if the
soul do not yield to this, which it cannot do, if it do not esteem him the best
of all others, and that all others are to be thrown away, and to be forsaken in
comparison of him. This is the third circumstance I have noted hence, which I
suppose is intimated in these words: Though I have not said it is expressed here,
yet it is so carried with such a fullness ( the desire of our soul is to thee,
and to the remembrance of thy name) as if it were to God only, or at least, to
him principally. But I must hasten.

In the fourth place. 4, They must be universal.
It must be universal love, and so a universal obedience (which is the fruit of
it) which must justify the truth of our affections toward God, and set the
heart in a right frame and temper. Except a man love God, and love all the
ways of God, and all the ordinances of God, and yield himself in subjection,
and resign himself in obedience to them all: if he do but reserve, and make
choice of any one sin, to lie and wallow, and tumble in, he does evacuate all
the other good, he throws down all the other good with that one evil. Will
you come and plead with God, that there is but one sin that you have defiled
and polluted your soul with, and wallowed and tumbled in all your life, and I
hope, God will never refuse me, or bar me out of his presence, and fellowship
and communion with him for that? Yes, you are as filthy, all over as filthy and
defiled, and abominable, and odious to his eye, and to every other sense, as well
with one, as if you had been in ten thousand slowghes one after another. And as
the Philosopher speaks, a Cup, or some such thing, that has a hole in it, is
no Cup, it will hold nothing, and therefore cannot perform the use of a cup,
though it have but one hole in it: so if the heart have but one hole in it; if
it retain the devil but in one thing: as we use to say; in law, one man in
possession, keeps possession, and a man can never have true possession, till he
have voyded all: so, except all be rooted out and extirpated, and a man comes
to yield a full and absolute subjection to Christ universally, Christ has no
part or portion in us, nor we in him.

Lastly, 5. They must be constant.
(there were diverse other particulars, that I thought to have added in this:
but I see I must pass them over) It is not every affection, that may seem to
have some height and universality, though I do acknowledge that they will in
some measure characterise out the truth, but yet there must be this addition:
as it was with the seed that was cast into the good ground, it had depth of
earth: so this must have depth in the heart, it must be well rooted, and
fastened for perpetuity: it must be a constant assection, Simile.
grounded and established in the heart. The Air (you know) is light, and yet
we call it not a lightsome body, because it is lighted by the presence of
another, and when that light body is removed it is dark, you may say it is
dark, for the Air is dark in the night, when the Sun is absent, as it is light
when the Sun is present: those we call lightsome bodies, whose light is
originated, and rooted in themselves. So it is in this case: such are not godly
persons that may have some injections of godly thoughts, and godly affections
cast into them, and be in them for a spurt, and for a brunt, and for a little
flash (like a flash of lightning in the Air) and gone away again presently:
but it must be rooted and grounded in a man, so as that it will continue,
continue so as that the exercise of graces and duties toward God should be
frequent and quotidian: as it is here in the Text: The desire of our soul is to
thee, in the evening, and our spirit shall seek thee early in the morning:
Morning and evening, frequently, daily, to have commerce and communion with
God, to walk with him, to set our selves in his presence, and to approve our
selves to him, to make it our constant trade to do so, to be Gods dayes-men, to
work by the day with him, and withal to be constant to hold out for perpetuity.

Only time can discover truth; and truth is the daughter of time to us: God
knows it before, but we can never know, but by the holding out, but by the
perpetuity. I acknowledge there is a great difference between that which the
Scripture calls temporary faith, and that which it calls saving faith:
there is (I say) a great difference: they do not only differ in this, that the
one holds out, and the other does not hold out: but they differ in their
vital principles, by virtue of which one holds out, because it has a more
noble nature in it: and the other, because it is a slighter timbered thing, it
does not hold out: because the one is a real, and true, and substantial beauty
of grace, the other but a superficial and painted beauty: substantial beauty,
that is founded upon nature, upon our complexion, whether it rain or shine, it
will hold out in both: but painted beauty, one fears a little wet will alter
the painting, another, lest a little heat should do it. A painted beauty will
not hold, but true will hold. And they that do love true, love long, as our
Proverb says: I am certain it is so here, they who do once love God truly,
love God for ever.

I will dispatch the rest in a word. The particular duties.
There be some special duties, besides these generals, which make the general
character of a Christian: I say, there are some special duties, that do concern
him according to the speciallity of times.

Now there is a double time, and so a double posture of a Christian, in which
accordingly he has several suits of graces to put on, and to exercise.

There is a double dealing of God (which is the foundation of it) God deals
sometime in a way of mercy and favor toward his servants: and God deals
sometime in a way of Judgment, and wrath, and displeasure: and he does so,
(though not as an angry Judge, but as a father that is angry) even with his own
servants.

Now accordingly, In times of mercy. 1. Cheerfulness 2. Fruitfulness.
as this general temper, and frame of spirit, should be at all times; so it
should show and discover it self, in those several times. In the time when God
shows favor, then the servant of God is to serve God so much the more
cheerfully, and so much the more fruitfully; to run the ways of Gods
commandments, because God inlargeth his way; and gives him free scope, and
more opportunities, and advantages for it: and to improve those favors for the
advancement of his glory that gave them.

But the particular thing that is especially expressed here (though that be
intimated too, In times of judgment.
and it is noted as a character here of a wicked spirit, that they will do
wickedly in the land of uprightness: that is, in the land where God deals
very gently, and graciously, and uprightly with them every way, and squarely,
that they can no way complain; it is a wicked spirit that does so.) But that
which is specially meant here ( in the way of thy judgments will we wait for
thee) is, that Gods servants will not only, not start (if their temper be
right) from God when he smiles upon them; but they will love him when he
frowneth, they will even then stoop and kiss the rodd, they will then obey him:
Gods children will acknowledge him to be their Father and Lord, and submit to
him, even when he is angry.

Here is a vast difference between the godly and the wicked, Simile.
(as I shall a little touch by and by.) As the Father speaks even to this very
purpose: when sweet ointment is chased, it smells the more sweet, it delivers
the persume the more excellent; but in a dunghill, in a filthy place, stir it,
and the more you stir, the more it stinks. Wicked spirits, when God does but
chafe them, manifest the filth and corruption that is within them; as a man may
know money (as he says) when it falls down, whether it be silver or brass,
it will then betray it self: so here, their language, their speech will betray
them then, and declare what they are. The devil thought that Job had been of
such a temper, that he would have cursed God to his face, if he would lay his
hand upon him, and touch him: but it was far otherwise, because he was of a
better metal and stamp, therefore he blessed God in the midst of judgment,
as he had done formerly in the midst of his mercies. And this is that a
Christian should do: labor to be fruitful in thankfulness, and cheerfulness of
spirit, when God shows favor, and give^ any ease, and mercy to him; and
labor likewise to be faithful and constant to him, even when his judgments are
a broad.

But there be diverse particulars in that, (I will but merely mentich them.)
There be these sour things, as so many sleps and degrees of the duty of a
Christian in the times of Judgment, whether they be impendant, or incombent,
whether they be public, or private, that concern the Church, or particular
persons.

First of all, 1. Perseverance
the duty of a Christian in the times of Judgment (if he be of a right temper)
is Perseverance, to hold out, not to be beaten off for a little storm or shock,
but to keep on his pace, to keep on his way.

Travelers that go to sea: Simile.
merely to be sick a little, or in sport, if there arise but a black cloud,
they presently give over, their voyage is at an end; they come not to venture
shocks, and storms, and danger; they come for pleasure: but the Merchant, that
is bound upon a voyage, whose trade and employment of life it is, every cloud
and wind, does not make him to return back again to shore, and to give over;
but he goes them through: so it is in this case, one that is not indeed and in
earnest traveling toward heaven, he will be easily off upon a little storm
arising; if God do but frown, if there be but a wrinckle in his brow: all his
pleasure in religion is gone, for it was some other things he aimed at, it was
but for pleasure he came in here: but a godly Christian who is bound for
heaven, whose voyage is set for heaven, and his course and the bent of his soul
lies that way, that like a Ship with full Sail is carried toward heaven:
storms will not beat him off, but he will persevere.

Secondly, 2. Diligent exercise of our graces.
there is a necessary use (as there should be perseverance, so) that there
should be a kind of excellency and precellency of all holy duties (which I
mentioned in the general before) which a man should exercise so much the more
industriously and painfully in storms and difficulties. All sweet odours are
refreshing to the head at any time, Simile.
but when there is a stinking place that is offensive, men hold them closer to
them: so it should be with all the graces of Gods Spirit, with all holy duties,
they should be precious to us at all times; but specially in times of stress
and difficulty: Oh then we should cleave close to them, then multiply in
prayers, then multiply in our holy walking with God, then multiply examining
diligently our ways, and looking more strictly and narrowly to our selves;
then we should reflect more seriously upon our lives, and then we should excel
our selves: or else it will not countervail, and be an Antidote against the
evil and bitterness of the times.

Thirdly there should be showed patience in the time of affliction, 3. Patience.
in the time of Gods Judgment: we should not mutter against God, nor struggle,
nor be violent against him: but humbly and meekly lay our selves down before
him. It is the Lord, let him do what seems him good in his eyes.

And Lastly, 4. Prosiciency
there should be a proficiency: that the inhabitants of the earth will learn
righteousness: we should patiently wait upon God in the way of his Judgments,
and withal we should be good proficients, then to learn righteousness. Gods
rod should be to us as the fescue is to the child, the fescue points out to the
child the letter, makes him take notice of it: and so Gods rod points out many
good lessons which we should never otherwise learn and take notice of. I had
never known (as Luthers wife said sometime) what such and such things meant, in
such and such Psalms, such complaints and workings of spirit; I had never
understood the practice of our duty, if God had not brought me under some
affliction: affliction was a Commentary, and fescue to point out my lesson to
me; and by that I understood.

Let me but mention one thing more in a word, The Motives to the duties.
(I shall leave the Application, because I am prevented.) Here is now the sum
of a Christians duty, which I have recommended to you, out of the words of the
verses read: partly general duties that belong to all Christians in all times:
and partly some particular duties which concern them more specially in some
special times. There is a motive or two to press and stir us up to the
performance of these duties. There is one in a verse before those I have read,
(the seventh verse) The way of the just is uprightness: thou most upright do
weigh the path of the just. Here the first Motive is from the consideration of
God. God is a holy overseer of all our ways; God sees and Judges all our
ways.
a spectatour of all our carriage and behavior, how we do carry our selves,
and approve our selves to him. God is not only a spectatour, and an overseer of
our ways, but he is an expencer, a weigher and Judg-of our ways; to reward
every man according to his works: and we should often cast our eyes to God, and
see him looking upon us in our carriages, to put some more awe upon our
spirits, that we may not wantonly break out against God, not daring to do evil
in the presence of that holy God which one day we know, we must be brought to
account for, at the great Judgment. But I can but name it.

There is a second Motive in the close, 1. This alone differenceth the godly
from the wicked.
in those words which stand last of those I read, and a verse following. And
that is from men, from the particular proper character of a Christian: it is
that which differenceth a godly man from a wicked man. Herein lies the
difference of their temper, and of their spirit: the godly man, he is described
already what his carriage is, that is his carriage, which is here limned out in
the Prophets own expression, in their name: but the wicked men they are clean
otherwise, they do not perform these duties; neither the general, nor the
particular.

Now it bohoveth every one to take care to depart from the tents of those
wicked men; that shall be swallowed up, and go down quick to hell every one (as
it was in the case of Korah.) It is the command of God that they should depart
and sever themselves, and make as broad and vast a difference, and be jealous,
and take heed lest they assimulate themselves to wicked men in their lives,
lest they be like unto them in their deaths: that they live not as they do,
lest they perish as they do.

Now, there be two or three things that are expressed concerning these wicked men.

First of all, their Character is to be refractary to God in what way soever he
shows himself to them: if he show his favor, or send his Judgments it is all
one: in the land of uprightness, they will do wickedly, and when Gods hand is
lifted up, they will not see: nothing will do them good: no way of working upon
them, neither by fair, nor by foul means. And we must be unlike them therefore
every way; we must take every dealing of God by the right care (as he said) and
make the right use of it for good.

There is another thing expressed of them: that God will one day meet with these
wicked men: let no man deceive himself: it is not a vain thing to serve God:
nor a cheap, nor a safe thing to rebel against God, for his hand shall be
lifted up, and he will break them in pieces, and the longer he spares, and the
gentler he is, the more heavy it will come at last. Gods Mill grindeth slow,
but it grinds to powder (as the ancient saying is) the more God is
long-suffering, and long lifting up his hand to lay his stroke, the heavier
stroke he lays upon them, and crusheth all to pieces at last.

But there is another thing too: even those wicked men that are so stubborn and
refractary, and scorn Gods word: that lift up the heel and kick against him,
and it may be scoff and jear, and deride the ways of God; time shall come that
even these wicked men shall be convinced, they shall see their envy against the
godly, and hatred against the ways of God, they shall see their foolery, and
they shall at last repent, when repentance shall do them no good: repent, when
they are even turned into hell, when they hear that sentence; Depart from me
you cursed. Therefore now seeing these things will befall the rebellious, that
do not walk according to this rule, according to this Canon which I have
characterised a godly man by: this should be a good encouragement to godly men
so much the more to walk constantly, and to be true to their own way. And if
they do live amongst wicked men, to be rather gainers by them, to grow the
better rather then to receive infection, and corruption from them.

They say that Lillies and Roses, or such like things, if they be planted by
Garlic or Onions, or such like unsavory things, they do increase in sweeness:
the Rose and the Lilly are sweeter: so it should be when godly men are
planted, and hemmed about with wicked men: the vileness and odiousness of their
wicked ways, may make them to loath wickedness the more, and to love
godliness, and to bless God, that has kept them, that they have not run to the
same excess of riot with them.

Instead of all other Application which I thought to have added, as for
example, and for instance: to show us the true Analogy of a Christian; that we
may discern, who is a right Christian, and who is not: we must not discern it
by our fancies, but by those Characters God has set.

And a just apology (in the second place) for those that are branded with
nicknames. If this be the description of true piety, and of a true Christian,
to have the heart and soul breathing after God, and seeking night and day after
him, and setting themselves wholly to walk in the way of uprightness, with
sincerity before God: then certainly they are unjustly branded, whose
consciences do aim at these things, and the consciences of other men may tell
them, that they do so, and they see no other.

And so for conviction of those men that are in the Bosom of the Church: they
may see, if they be not according to this stamp: if they either fail of it,
that there is none of these lineaments to be found in them, nothing toward God
and his name, no understanding, no affection, no endeavors working that way,
(and so for the rest) if they utterly fail of this, they utterly come short,
and are not worthy the name of Christians: but much more if they do deride, and
oppose, and contemn the mind, and the ways of God, which God has chalked out
to us, for our rule and direction: that is a high degree of failing and coming
short, and therefore they may be convinced, that they cannot be right: I doubt
when the Books shall be opened, and every one judged according to the book of
God, which shall be laid for the trial of our lives: if our lives be not
according to that: whatsoever our words be, and howsoever we carry it, it will
not bear us out then.

And it might have been a Use also of Examination; let every one of us examine
our selves, and what our estate is according to this rule, and what degree of
this we have attained to.

And then for comfort, for those that are such according to this rule, whether
it be in the perfection, or in the affection. If they have not the perfection,
yet if there affections stand and run this way, and that they can truly, and
ingeniously say, that they are such in sincerity; there is a great deal of
comfort for them.

And for Exhortation, out of the several branches of the duty which I cannot
meddle with. And out of the several Motives that I propounded out of the words
of the Text.

But (I say instead of all these, this present Sister of ours, whose Funeral we
now solemnize, I might setch an Argument as a Motive to all these several
duties from her example.

To return now therefore to the present occasion.

I will speak something concerning Her, in honor of whose Funeral solemnities,
we are at this time met together, (that gave us the occasion) I shall
(according to my custom) dispatch it briefly.

When any children of God die, the last offices of Love are performed to them
by three several sorts or ranks. The Angels: they convey their souls into the
bosom of their father Abraham, into the bliss of eternity. The Bearers,
attended with the Mourners: they carry their bodies to the bosom of their
mother earth, to rest in tranquillity. The Preachers (as it were a middle
between God and them) they commend their name to the minds of their friends,
the hearers, to live in their memories. My part at the present is to do this:
and I shall do it, not so much to trumpet out her commendation, as to take a
hint of something for your instruction, which may be useful.

But I must entreat you to remember, that you do not use to lace or adorn your
mournings: and therefore you have little reason to expect, any eloquent
adorning, any Festival ornament in such a Funeral argument. My language must be
black, and pathetical, suitable to our sad occasion: it must not be pleasing to
the fancy in the fresh flowers of Rhetoric; my language (I say) must be in
black, but in black laid upon a ground of truth, which shall not blush for
blame, speaking any thing besides, what I do really conceive. As I dare not do
you so much wrong, as to paint or guild a rotten post: so I am willing to do
her so much right, as to set a rich Pearl in Gold.

To pass other circumstances, (as that she was descended of an honest, and
worthy Family, and of good quality: that She had a full and hopeful issue
desending from her self, and such like circumstances, which I leave for
Orators (as unfit for a Divine) to meddle withal.) All that I shall say
concerning Her, shall be out of the Text, in which you may behold a true
picture of her in all the lineaments of her: and out of it, you may be able to
draw, and take a good pattern for your selves.

The Byas of her spirit was toward God, and toward his Name; whose lively Image
she bare, graven in her memory, living in her desires, and (beyond all
pictures) moving also in her endeavors to seek after God. The very
quintescence of her spirit was carried this way, and that intimately,
sincerely, universally, and constantly. With her soul she desired him in the
night, and with her spirit she sought him in the morning: the light of the
morning, and the evening star (as sometime the Star did the Wise men) conducted
her to the Sun of righteousness. In mercies she was not wanton, but thankful
and fruitful: In judgments (as in a fatherly way of correction, She had a deep
share, wherein being exercised with many years weakness, as those that knew
her, knew very well, but yet in such fatherly dealings) she showed her
patience, her perseverance, her prosiciency: and being a Mourner for the
stobbornness of the wicked, she was a gainer likewise by them too: and all
because she looked up to God, who sees and weighs all our paths. In which I
have briefly recollected upon the matter, the sum of the whole things contained
in the text: so that so long as this Text is in the Bible, and so long as the
Bible is in the Church, and so long as any thing (though unworthy) of this
Sermon remains in your memories, she cannot want either a sweet memorial of
her virtues in the book of God, or a stately Monument in the Church, and in
your hearts too.

Happily some may scoff, and some may doubt, as though this commendation flew
too high, or out of sight. To whom I shall briefly answer both. For the former.
It is reported of two great Tragedians, learned and famous in their time:
Sophocles, and Euripides. Euripides presented upon the Scaene all naughty
women: and Sophocles presented all virtuous women: and the ordinary observation
of the wits of the times was (as men are apt to be vainly witted in these
things) they thought that Euripides that presented them bad, presented women as
they were: and Sophocles that presented them good, presented them as they
should be. If I had nothing else to say to the scoffs of any, but only this, I
suppose it will be sufficient: I do believe fully, that I have presented her as
she was: but howsoever you can take no hurt if you do but consider, that it is
spoken as what you should be. I am sure, and I know I have presented what you
should be.

And for any that shall doubt yet, that it may seem to high. I would desire
them only to consider this: I describe in the Text, the very temper and
character of one that is truly godly (such as I conceive her to have been) and
the truth is, there is none that is truly godly, but in some degree or measure
must attain, and do attain to participate in a conformity with this Character:
and therefore I have neither done you (as I conceive) any wrong, and yet done
her right too. And (to draw to an end,) She has left this honor behind her,
that she lived beloved, and died desired.

And, who is there here almost that suffers not a loss in her? Her Husband
has lost a loving wife that honored him highly. Her children have lost a
loving Mother, that loved them tenderly, that tendered them duly. Her servants
have lost a loving Mistress, that governed them gently, and was every way
beneficial to them. Her Brothers and Sisters, have lost a loving Sister, that
answered them in their loves sweetly. Her Neighbors have lost a loving
neighbor: full of courtesy to the rich, full of charity to the poor. And my
self have lost (I hope there is none here so weak to suspect, that I blast the
living, to blazon the praise of the dead, or that I do rob or strip the living,
to cloth the dead with their spoils, but I think I may truly say, I have
lost) as truly and cordially a loving friend, as any she has left behind:
though I esteem many her Peers, and I cannot complain of any.

But to end all. Her gain in Christ countervaileth and sweetneth all our
losses. She was a disciple of Love, she loved her Lord, and loved all his
Saints and servants: and therefore I doubt not, that she was a beloved
disciple, and rests in the bosom of her Love: where not to disquiet her
happiness, and detain your patience any longer, I shall leave her in that
blessed place, and commend you to the blessing of God.

THE EXPECTATION OF CHRIST'S COMING: OR, A MOTIVE To a Holy Conversation.
SERMON XVI.
PHIL. 3.20, 21. For our Conversation is in Heaven, from whence we look for the
Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ. Who shall change our vile body, that it may be
fashioned like unto his glorious body, according to the working, whereby he is
able even to subdue all things unto himself.


IN the seventh verse of this Chapter, the blessed Apostle Saint Paul,
exhorts the Philippians, to be followers together of him, and to mark them
which walk so as they had him for an ensample: And that he might the better
direct them in the duty, (the imitation of his ensample) he shows that there
is a great difference between others that pretended themselves to be the
Apostles of Christ, and indeed were not, and himself: Many (says he) walk, of
whom I have told you often, and now tell you weeping, that they are the enemies
of the Cross of Christ, whose end is destruction, whose God is their belly; and
whose glory is their shame, who mind earthly things. These ensamples he would
have them to avoid: follow not such, but be ye followers of us, for our
conversation is in heaven, from whence we look for the Savior, the Lord Jesus
Christ, etc. and follow those which walk, so as ye have us for an ensample:
This is the example he would have them imitate.

In the words you have these things considerable.

Division of the words.
First, What the conversation of these men was, whom the Apostle would have the
Philipians to follow. Their conversation was a heavenly conversation. Our
conversation is in heaven.

Secondly, the reason or encouragement that they had to this imitation, to walk
so heavenly, while they were on earth: because from thence we look for a
Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ.

Thirdly, the benefit by that Savior, whom they look for from heaven: He shall
change our vile body, that it may be fashioned like to his glorious body.

Fourthly, the means by which this great work shall be effected; According to
the working whereby he is able to subdue all things unto himself.

For the first, (to touch it only in a word) there is from that, these two
Observations clearly arising.

First, That there is a heavenly conversation of the Saints on earth.

Secondly, That while they are on earth, they are now stated in heaven. Our
conversation is in heaven: He says not only it shall be in heaven, (though
there it shall be perfected) but it is now in heaven, in regard of our present
state and possession.

Concerning the first, Obser. 1. The Saints on earth have a heavenly
conversation.
that the Saints on earth have a heavenly conversation. You must know, that the
word here Politeuma, translated conversation, signifies such a course of life,
and of traffic, as is in Cities and Corporations, where many are knit, and
united together in one common society, in one common freedom: Our conversation
is in heaven; that is, we have a kind of heavenly traffic, a heavenly trade,
while we are upon earth.

There are diverse things wherein there is an agreement between the carriages
and conditions of men in Cities, What it is.
and Societies here on earth, and this of the Saints of God, The privileges
thereof.
that have their conversations in heaven. I will only in brief run them over,
this being not the thing that I purposely aim at.

First, 1. Their names are written in heaven.
in Cities and Corporations there is a Register, wherein the names of the
Freemen are enrolled. So in heaven also there is a Register, a certain book of
Records (as it were) wherein are written the names of as many, as God has
appointed to life: Luke 10.20.
Rejoce not (faith our Savior) in this, that the devils are subdued unto you,
but rejoice, that your names are written in heaven: And all that are not found
written in the book of life, are cast into the lake that burns with fire and
brimstone, Rev. 20.15. God in his secret counsel and purpose, in his special
providence and love, takes notice of all his servants, even of their names, and
he has them as sure, as if they were written down in a book, there is not one
man that comes to heaven, but the Lord knows him already to be a man ordained
to that estate and condition.

Secondly, 2. They are governed by the law of God.
as in all Cities and Societies, there is a certain law whereby they are all
governed, in obedience to which they live. So there is a law whereby all the
Citizens of heaven, all the household of God are governed, that law which the
Apostle Saint James calls the royal law: a law which commands the very
spirits of men: a law that disposes the whole man to a heavenly frame, and
subjection to the will of God, the great King of Heaven; so that a man while he
is here below, by degrees is drawn off from the world in his affections, and
disposition, and carriage: and madesutable and conformable to the rule of
righteousness.

Thirdly, 3. They are safety kept.
as in all Cities, there is a kind of safety and security to those that dwell
there, not only as they are encompassed with walls, but also as there is
watching and warding, some waking while others sleep to keep the rest in
safety. So in this heavenly society: the Angels pitch their Tents about those
that fear God: nay the Lord himself is the Shepherd of Israel, that neither
slumbereth nor sleeps: while men oppose them, God defends them: while men are
laboring and plotting, and devising against them, and they (it may be) are
secure and fear no danger; God disperseth and disappointeth a thousand projects
intended against his servants. It was so with his own people Israel: while they
were in the plains, securely lying in their tents: there is Balack and Balaam
consulting upon the mountains how to curse them: but the God of Israel that is
above the mountains, that sits on the highest Heavens, he orders the
matter so, that Balaam for his life, (though he might have had all the wealth
and honor of the Kingdom) could not pronounce one curse against Israel,
because God had said to him that he should not curse.

Fourthly. 4. They have interest.
As in Cities and societies on earth, men have communion and society one with
another, the less have interest in the greater, and the greater in the less,
and all have interest one in another: the inferiors receive from the
superiors, protection and provision, and the superiors, receive from the
inferiors, subjection and submission. So it is in this heavenly Corporation,
in this spiritual Jerusalem: Jerusalem is a City at unity in it self; There is
a communion and fellowship, that the Saints have with God the Father, with
Christ, with the Angels, with the Saints in heaven, and one with another on
earth.

With God the Father: In God.
they have an interest in him, as subjects of his kingdom, as servants and
children of his family: there is not the meanest subject in this kingdom, but
he may make his request known to this Prince: there is not the least servant in
this Family, but he may make his complaint to this Master: they may (as
children) go boldly to the throne of grace, and make their request known unto
him, though it be but in sighs and groans. Mat. 6: 32.
Hence it is that God takes notice of them, your heavenly Father knows that
you have need of all these things; and therefore he will supply them: Chap: 7:
11.
If you that are earthly can give good things to your children, how much more
shall your heavenly father give good things to them that ask him.

They have interest in Christ also: In Christ.
he is their Intercessour, therefore hence it is, that he is said, to sit at
the right hand of God, making intercession for us: He is their Advocate; if any
man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, even Jesus Christ the righteous:
He is their Lord and Captain, the Captain of the Lords Army, Dan 12: 1.
to defend his Church; Michael, the great Prince stands up for the children
of his people.

They have interest also in the holy Ghost, In the holy Ghost.
the third Person in Trinity, they have not only, the love of God the Father,
but the communion and fellowship of the holy Ghost, 2: Cor: 13: 10.
as the Apostle wishes for the Corinthians. Hence it is that the Holy Ghost is
ready to help their infirmities, to in able them to put up their requests, when
they know not how to pray as they ought. Hence it is that he sanctisieth them,
and therefore they are said to be Born again of water, and of the spirit: that
he comfort them, therefore he is called the holy Ghost the Comforter.

As the Saints have interest in the three Persons in the Trinity, in respect of
their dependence upon them, so the blessed Trinity has an interest in them
also: If I be a Father, where is my honor? if I be a Master, where is my fear?
Because they acknowledge God to be their Father, they honor him, because they
acknowledge him to be their Lord, they fear him, etc.

They have interest in the Angels also: In the Angels.
Hence it is that they are called, Ministering spirits sent forth for the good
of the Elect: They were Christ's messengers, his Angels, and now they are made
Messengers, Angels to the Saints, therefore faith Christ, Offend not one of
these little ones, for I tell you, that their Angels behold the face of my
father in heaven^. They have interest in them, not as worshippers of Angels,
which the Apostle condemns, Coll. 2. as foreseeing to what a height Popish
superstition would rise in this kind: I say; not to worship them, to invocate
them, to pray to them, we know no such will worship which is without the rule.
We have an Angel comforting Hagar; we have an Angel defending Elisha; we have
an Angel encouraging Jacob; we have an Angel carrying Lazarus into Abraham's
bosom: But we never had any Angel that stood in this place, to have worship
and adoration. This indeed the Angels have from us, imitation of their
obedience, we pray, thy will be done, on earth as it is in heaven.

They have interest in the Saints also: In the Saints that are in heaven^
yea, in those that are dead: not as though they paayed for us: yet they have a
common desire of the welfare of the whole Church; The souls under the Alter
cry, How long Lord, holy and true, will thou not avenge our blood on those that
dwell upon the earth? All the Saints departed, their souls cry to God to finish
these days of sin, and hasten the coming of Christ. And besides this, this
further benesit we have, that we are all members of the same body; there is a
gathering under one Head (as the Apostle calls it) under Christ: they are the
superior members, we the inferior, all joined under one common Head. That are
on carte.


Lastly, the Saints on earth have interest one in another: by virtue of this
communion they have interest in the prayers, in the gifts, in the wealth one of
another, sofar as necessity and love requires.

Fifthly, 5: They are Enriched with heavenly treasure.
and lastly, as in earthly Cities, and Corporations, there is trading and traff
quing, buying and selling, etc. So here, this heavenly conversation consists
in a kind of heavenly traffic, (as the word imports;) We either are all, or
should be all heavenly merchants, Mat: 13.
even here upon earth. The kingdom of heaven is compared, to a treasure hid in
a field, which when a man finds, he hides it, and for joy departs, and
sells all that he has, and buyeth that field. It is compared to a Pearl,
which when a man descrieth the excellency of it, he gives all that he has to
possess that Pearl: Isa: 55 1.
There is a heavenly thing, that is worth all that we can give, and it must be
bought too. It is our Saviors counsel; come buy of me, yea, come buy wine and
milk without money, without price. It must be bought: but bought without money:
there is nothing that is subject to corruption, that can buy heavenly things:
The traffic of a Christian what.
Buy of me eye salve, that you may see, and gold that you may be made rich, and
garments, that your nakedness may not appear. This must be bought, but what
must we give for it? Christ tells us; he says that he himself is the Pearl, the
treasure, and that which we must give for him, is no more but this; Let a man
deny himself, and take up his cross, and then follow him. He must deny his
worldly pleasures, his carnal affections, the love of his lusts, he must
renounce his sins; If thy right hand offend thee, cut it off and cast it from
thee; if thy right eye offend thee, pluck it out and cast it from thee: What is
that? that a man should dismember himself? No such matter; What then? To do
that which a man accounts as harsh a piece of work, as to pluck out his eye,
or cut off his hand; that is, to mortify his carnal affections, to part with
his sweetest lusts, which a man holds as dear, and sets as high a rate upon,
as on his right hand, or his right eye; there should he no sin so precious, no
gain so sweet, no pleasure so delightful, but a man should be willing to let it
for Christ: there should be no worldly thing whasoever, that a man should so
set his heart upon, but if persecution for the Gospel should come, he should be
contented to leave it for Christ, and in the mean space to let his affections
hang loose to it, that whenever Christ shall call him to part with his
estate, with his contentments, with himself, he may let all fall for his sake,
and the Gospels. This is the heavenly traffic of a Christian.

I might here lay down some trials, How to know whether our conversation be in
heaven.
by which men may be able to judge of themselves in this particular, whether
their conversation be in heaven. I will instance but in some generals, because
I hasten to that I principally intend.

See how thy affections stand; such as is a man's mind, such is the man: such as
is a man's affection, By our affections.
such is his conversation: a heavenly affection argues a heavenly conver
sation; a heavenly conversation, presupposes a heavenly affection: for it is
impossible for any man to walk in a heavenly course, but he that is of a
heavenly mind.

It shows the error of those men that think, that that pitch of holiness,
and careful walking with God in newness of life, is too strict a point to be
pressed: what (say they) will you have us to be Saints? are we not men? shall
we not have infirmities still?

Yes that thou will, when thou have done what thou can. But here is the
thing: What is the bent of thy heart? Note.
what is the strength of thy mind? what is the endeavor of thy whole man?
which way are thy affections carried? What do thou mourn for most? what do
thou rejoice in most? what do thou hope for most? According to thy
affections, so will thy labor and endeavor be. A heavenly heart sorroweth
most for sin, a heavenly affection rejoices most in Christ: Many say: who will
show us any good, but Lord lift thou up the light of thy countenance upon us:
thou have given me more joy of heart then they had, when their corn, and wine,
and oil abounded. A heavenly affection hops most for heaven, and that not so
much, that thereby he way be released from worldly troubles, as that he may be
possessed of those heavenly joys, that are to be had in the presence of God,
and in a perfect communion with him; that he may be freed from sin, and fully
brought into the glorious liberty of the sons of God.

And this is that which stirs him up with all industry and endeavor, and
carries him along mainly, and chiefly to seek after, not the wealth, and
honor, and pleasure of the world, but how he may get into the Covenant of
grace, and an interest in Christ, how he may attain evidences of heaven, and
testimonies of the love of God. He speaks of heaven, as the worldly man speaks
of the world. A worldly man speaks of the world, and the world hears him
(faith Christ) every table ringeth of his worldly talk; every company sounds
of his worldly affections; in every meeting he shows his worldly disposition.
So a heavenly-minded man is always talking of heavenly things: always
laboring to draw heavenly uses out of earthly things: let crosses come, he can
draw comforts from thence, he makes them means to take off his heart from the
world, to set it more toward heaven: as Noah's Arc, the more the waters
increased, the nearer it was raised to heaven: so a heavenly man, the more
worldly crosses come, the higher his soul rises toward heaven: the worldly man
sinketh under afflictions, but he is lifted up nearer to Christ. This is a
heavenly conversation. But I will not stand on this.

The second thing which I told you was observable from the first part of the
Text, Obser. 2. While the Saints are on earth they are stated in heaven.
was this; That in this very life, the children of God are stated in a heavenly
condition. Our conversation is now in heaven, faith the Apostle.

When a man is brought by repentance and faith unto Christ, he is brought into
a heavenly state: actually possessed of heaven. And that in two respects;

In respect of right and title.

In respect of possession.

First in respect of right and title, 1. In respect of right and title.
and that also first in respect of Election: God has elected them to it.
Secondly in respect of vocation: they are begotten again to a lively hope. They
have now the Word which gives them a promise of heaven. They have now the
spirit, which is the seal of their inheritance, you are sealed by the spirit of
Promise, to the day of redemption, Ephesians. 1.13.

Secondly, 2. In respect of present possession.
in regard of possession: they are now already in present possession, not in
full possession, but in present possession: A possession not in themselves, but
in Christ, by virtue of the union and communion they have in him. By the union
and contract that is between Christ and the soul; Christ is become the Husband,
the Christian the Spouse. So that as a Wife if her Husband should travel into a
far Country, and in her name should take possession of those lands, that were
left her by her Father, the Wife now is possessed of those lands, in her Husband,
who in her name has taken possession of them: so Christ entering into heaven,
has took possession of heaven, which is given to us by the will of God; It is
your Father pleasures to give you a kingdom: John 14.
Christ has possessed it in our name: I go (faith he) to prepare a place for
you: and it is my will that they be where I am: I go to my Father, and your
Father; to my God, and your God. All that Christ has in heaven. He has it for
us: He is gone before, that we may follow after: we cannot possibly lay claim
to heaven, we cannot hope hereafter fully, and personally to possess it, if
Christ had not first taken possession of heaven for us.

The Use of this in a word, shall be to stir up every one to look to his hope
of heaven. It is usual for men to profess their hope to be saved, and scarce
any, but they will say, they hope, if they die, they shall go to heaven. Yea,
but thou must now possess it, if ever hereafter thou mean to enjoy it: and
thou must possess it first in Christ: thou must be united to him by faith and
love: those are the bonds whereby the Spirit of God, tyeth us unto Christ:
therefore Christ is said to dwell in our hearts by faith.

Which shows the horrible presumption of many, Presumption to hope for heaven,
without union with Christ first on earth.
and how they add to their other sins this, that they presume that they have
right, and title to heaven, and yet are not united to Christ by faith: as if a
man should give out, that he were the heir apparent to a Crown, or the son of a
King, and yet nevertheless should indeed be the son of a Beggar, and have
nothing to show for his pretended title to the Crown and Kingdom: what would
this be accounted, but high treason against the King? What a height of sin is
this that is in many men, which to their other sins add a presumptuous claim to
heaven, when they have no right to it?

I Remember, Ezra 2.62.
that in the time of Ezra, we shall read of many, that laid title and claim to
the Priesthood: but Ezra searched the book of the Genealogies, and finding
none of their names Registered there, he presently concluded that they were none
of the Priesthood, therefore they were accounted polluted, and put from the
Priesthood. If any man lay claim to heaven; God will search his book of
Genealogies (as it were) he will search the Register of heaven, and if he find
that his name be not enrolled there, if he be not found to have interest in
Jesus Christ, all will be nothing, he shall be cast out to his greater
confusion. This should therefore stir up every one to make good his claim to
heaven now: either now to be possessed of heaven, now to sit in heavenly places
with Christ, ore lse look not to come to heaven afterward.

But to leave this, and to come to that I mainly intend, namely the Argument,
or reason, or ground, of the Apostles heavenly conversation. Our conversation
is in heaven, from whence we look for the Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ.

The Apostle observes here a kind of speech, and that which seems not so
Gramaticall: that he may thereupon build a sound and substantial truth in
Divinity. He had said before, Our conversation is in the heavens, in the Plural
number: but now when he speaks of Christ's coming thence, he speaks of it in the
Singular number, Our conversation is in the heaven, from whence, from which
particular place, We look for the Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ. Of purpose to
show us thus much: that though Christ in respect of his Deity, Christ in
respect of his bodily presence is only in heaven.
and divine nature he be in all places, filling heaven and earth: yet in
respect of his bodily presence, he remains now, and so will till his second
coming (which the Saints look for) in heaven.

Against those Ubiquitaries, that will have the body of Christ to be every
where: In Heaven (say they) visible; Transubstantiation.
in this place invisible. The Papists hence build the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation: they will have the body of Christ, even that very body that
was born of the Virgin, to be now Bread, and the bread turned into it. The
Lutherans will have the same Body about the bread. No, faith the Apostle, there
is no such matter: from thence, from that very place, that very individual,
particular, single place, from the third heavens, where the body of Christ is,
We look for the Savior: he remains there, and so will continue till his
coming to Judgment. Cell. 3.1.
So again in another place, Collos. 3.1. Set your affections on things above,
where Christ sits at the right hand of God; Above, that is in heaven, where
Christ sits, and continues, and will remain till his second coming. Our
Savior told his Disciples in the days of his flesh, that the poor they should
have always with them, but me (faith he) you shall not have always. If this
be true that they say, then Christ has not said true, for he is still in
respect of his bodily presence, and has been, always, with us. But I let pass
that.

The thing I note hence is this; Obser: 3. Expectation of Christ's coming to
Judgment, the best means to work a man to a holy conversation.
That that which most soundly, and effectually settleth the heart of a man, in
a heavenly conversation upon earth, is the looking for the Savior of the
world, even the Lord Jesus Christ to come from thence.

I say, there is nothing that so settleth the heart of a man in a heavenly
conversation upon earth, nothing that makes him so heavenly minded, nothing
that orders him in so heavenly a course, as this, if he rightly look for
Christ to come from thence.

That you may conceive this the better, you may please to take notice, that
there are two things included in this point.

First, that all the Saints of God, while they are on earth, their continual
expectation is, The continual expectation of the Saints is for Christ coming.
for Christ to come from heaven.

Secondly, that nothing is so effectual to settle a man in a holy course while
he lives on earth, as this expectation.

These two things I will open to you at this time.

The first (I say) is, that the Saints and servants of God while they are on
earth, do continually expect and look for the Savior of the world, even the
Lord Jesus Christ to come from heaven.

By the coming of Christ, A threefold coming of Christ.
you must understand his second coming to judgment. For there is a threefold
coming of Christ. A twofold coming in his Body; and one by his Spirit.

The first, was the coming of Christ in the flesh, when he came to take our
nature upon him, and to be born of a Virgin.

The second, is the coming of Christ by his Spirit, so he comes continually,
and daily in the hearts of men, in the preaching of the Gospel in virtue and
efficacy.

His last coming, and his second coming in respect of his body, is when he
shall come to judgment. Never look for the coming of Christ in his body upon
earth in the sight of men, till that great day come, when the Lord Jesus shall
come with thousands of his Angels, in the glory of his Father.

Now then this being the meaning of it: we will prove it. And first, that it is
the continual expectation of all the Saints of God, and the continual desire of
their hearts, their continual waiting, is for the second coming of the Lord
Christ.

As it was before the first coming of Christ in the flesh, Proved.
so it shall be before his second coming. Before the first coming of Christ,
after the promise was made to Adam, all the expectation and hope of the
Fathers, and Believers, was this, when the great Messiah would come: and
therefore faith Jacob, I have waited for thy salvation; and David, I have
longed for thy salvation, meaning Christ, the Savior of the world: and the
Church grows to a kind of holy impatiency; Oh that thou would break the
heavens and come down. And immediately upon the time of Christ's coming, there
were always holy men in those times, that were stirred up with a continual
expectation of it, and therefore it was made a mark of a good man in those
days: It is said of Joseph of Arimathea, and Simeon, and of diverse good women,
as of Anna and others, that they waited for the consolation of Israel; they
continually waited and expected, when the great comforter, and Savior of his
people would come. So shall the second coming of Christ be: from the very time
of his Ascension into heaven, to the time now, and to the time of his last
coming to Judgment, all the eyes of men will be toward him: When I am lifted
up (faith our Savior) I will draw all men after me; which though it be there
particularly understood of his lifting up upon the Cross; yet it is intended in
general of his Ascension into heaven. So that as after the promise was given of
the Spirit; The Disciples waited for the receiving of the gift of the holy
Ghost. So it is now, and will be, since the holy Ghost is already given, there
remains nothing to be looked for, but Christ himself in his second coming to
finish all these days of sin.

And that this is the disposition of all the servants of God, appears by diverse
places of Scripture, 2 Timothy 4.8.
2 Timothy 4.8. faith the Apostle there; Hence forth there is laid up for me a
crown of righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous Judge, shall give me at
that day: and not to me only, but unto them also that love his appearing. The
Apostle here makes a description of all those that shall be saved, and he
faith, they are such as love the appearing of Jesus Christ; now that which a
man loves, he desires, Heb. 6.8.
and looks, and longs for. And in Heb. 9.28. Christ died once for many, and
unto them that look for him, shall he appear the second time unto salvation.
Salvation is brought: to whom? to all those; and only to those that look for
the appearance of Christ. Therefore it is said of all the Believers in Heb. 12.
That they saw things that were invisible, and that they had an eye to the
recompense of reward, and that they saw the promise a far off. They looked
still for those things that were to appear by Christ.

This I suppose is sufficiently confirmed by the Scripture, let us therefore
make some use of it.

Try now what comfort thou have in the expectation of that great appearance of
the Lord Jesus here spoken of. Use. For trial.
This is the most infalible ground, and undoubted evidence, and testimony of
the truth of grace now, and assurance of glory hereafter: if God have now
stirred up thy heart in faith, and holy affection, to look for, and to long and
wait for the appearance of Jesus Christ. Without this there is little love to
Christ. The Church in Cant. 1.2. shows her love to Christ, Draw me (says
she) and we will run after thee. And chap. 2.4. Stay me with flaggons, comfort
me with apples, for I am sick of love: and chap. 5. If you find him whom my
soul loves, tell him I am sick of love. If thou be of the disposition of the
Church, thou will, out of love to Christ, desire nothing so much, as to enjoy
the presence of Christ: The Spirit and the Bride, say come, and let him that
hears, say come: the Spirit faith come, and the Bride (because she is stirred
up in the same affection by the Spirit) she faith come too. Christ faith to his
Church, I come, and the Church she faith again, Come: Here is the agreement
between Christ and his Church, and the same disposition is in all the members
of Christ, a waiting and longing, and desiring for the coming of Christ.

There are many that pretend they wait, and desire for the coming of Christ.
When a man is under any affliction, or in any trouble, then, Oh that Christ
would come and end these troubles. You shall here a man that is abused, and
wronged by the oppressions and injuries of others, and by the unrighteous
dealings of wicked and ungodly men, crying out, Oh that Christ would come and
put an end to these evil times. How to know whether our expectation of Christ
coming be right.
Yea, but if thou have this desire of Christ's coming, that is in a man of a
heavenly conversation. It will appear in these three things.

First, it will appear by the Ground of it. What are the grounds of thy desire?
what are the motives that encourage thee, to long for the coming of the Lord
Jesus? 1. By the ground of it. Heb. 11.1.
That which is the ground of faith, is the ground of hope: that is the
promises: Faith is the ground of things hoped for: and the Word and Promise are
the warrant of Faith: Faith and Hope look both on this, the free promise of
God: so it is said of Abraham, that be believed above hope, because be knew
that be that promised, was able to do it. There is the first thing then: Faith
is the ground: there is none but a true believer, that can indeed aright wait
for, and desire the coming of Christ.

But this will appear more in the second thing, and that is, by the companion
of this expectation of Christ's coming, when it is right, and as it should be in
the soul of a Believer.

The first companion of it, 2. By the companions of it. Which are, 1. Patience.
is Patience: If we hope for that we see not, then do we with patience wait for
it (faith the Apostle, Romans 8.25.) If we have hope, and expectation of Christ
coming, if it be right, it will stay the heart, and calm and quiet the spirit,
in the midst of all injuries and crosses, and afflictions in the world; it
will make us to wait with patience: He that believes will not make have. When
a man believes that there is a time when Christ will put an end to all these
things, it is that which mortisieth and subdueth the rising of his spirit, and
discontentedness in afflictions, it makes him possess his soul in Patience.
There is a kind of impatient waiting of men, in the midst of discontent and
revilings, and evil speakings, and threatings of others: and then, Oh that
Christ would come. But when Faith works kindly in the soul of a man: there is a
calm composedness of heart: a submission to God in the present trial: and yet
nevertheless a rejoicing, in hope of the coming of Christ, and of that glory
that shall be revealed. That is the first thing, there is Patience accompanying
it.

The second thing that accompanies it, 2. Love.
is Love. No man can in truth and aright, hope for, and wait for the coming of
Christ, but he that loves Christ and his coming.

Now this Love must be grounded on our taste of Gods love: Not that we loved
him, but that be loved us first, (faith the Apostle) no man loves Christ, but
first he is loved of Christ: no man loves God, but first he is loved of God:
and the taste and relish of Gods love in my soul, works love to God again: as
from the heat that comes from the Sun, there is a reflection that boundeth
back again to the Sun: so Gods love in us reflects love to God again.

This Love will appear in the secret sighings of the heart: Manisested in
secret longings.
All the creatures groan; yea, we also sigh in our selves (faith the Apostle)
waiting for the adoption, even the redemption of our bodies. There is, I say, a
secret sighing of heart, and that not only in the time of trouble and
affliction: but in the time of comfort and prosperity, when a man has
abundance of outward things about him, yet then, because his love is set upon
Christ, and the perfection and end of love, is the fruition of the object
loved, therefore there is a sighing, a holy discontent, as it were, a kind of
yearning of the heart toward Christ: When shall I come and appear before God?
(faith David) how long Lord, how long? (faith the Church in the Revelation) If
a man love Christ, and his coming only, because it shall end those miseries,
and those troubles that are upon him in this life: this is not so much love of
Christ, as love of a man's self, of his own ease, and peace, and rest. But the
love of Christ is this, when for the enjoying of himself, I long for the
fruition of him whom my soul loves, and I account nothing amiable in
comparison of Christ, nothing delectable, nothing comfortable, nothing sweet to
Christ: this is it that puts the soul out of taste, and relish with any
thing, makes it sigh, as it were, under the enjoyments of all the comforts of
this life, and long for the appearance of Christ, because then he shall he
perfected in the perfect enjoyment of Christ himself.

This is that love of Christ, that is accompanied with Faith in a Christian,
and hope, and expectation of his coming.

Now then, if thou wait for Christ in truth, how comes it, that thou do not
love him? thou caust not wait for him aright, except thou love Christ himself,
and for himself.

And if thou love Christ, Care to walk in Christ.
it will appear, by thy care to walk in Christ: to derive virtue from him in all
holy actions, to derive all heavenly wisdom, all heavenly disposition of heart
from him: to please Christ in all thy ways, to do that whereby thou may
approve thy self to God in Christ. This is the disposition of a heart loving
Christ, and this is that loving of Christ for himself, and in himself that
gives me assurance, that I love the appearance of Christ. That is the second
companion of this waiting for Christ, if it be right, there is a love to Christ.

The third and last companion of a man's waiting for Christ, 3. delight in the
ordinances.
is the continual affection of the heart, those same ejaculations, that
intercourse, that holy and heavenly communion which the soul has with Christ
here. First in his ordinances, having a holy communion with him in them,
waiting at the Posts of the door of wisdoms house, to here what Christ (who is
wisdom it self) will speak to us: waiting if that he will come now (in the
ministry of his Word) in his Spirit, whom we hope to enjoy fully in glory:
Waiting for him likewise in the Sacraments to receive a further confirmation of
our faith in him: waiting for him also in prayer, to receive further
consolation and strength from him. Thus Annah it is said, that She was one that
waited for the consolation of Israel, and served God in the Temple in prayer
day and night. So where there is a waiting for Christ, there will be a
continual intercourse of the soul with Christ, a heavenly and holy communion
with him in duties.

Do thou wait for Christ's coming, and yet run from Christ's ordinances? How
can these stand together? There is no man that can ever wait with comfor for
Christ's coming in glory, but he that now waits upon Christ in his ordinances.
If thy delight be in holy duties, in the worship of God, and that in such
religious performances thou waitest for a further conveyance of the Spirit of
Christ into thee, thou have warrant to wait for, and to expect with comfort the
second coming of Christ.

Try your selves therefore by these things. It is not every one that faith, I
would that the Lord Jesus would come, or I would that these days were full,
and finished. It is not every one that says thus, that rightly looks for, or
desires the coming of Christ. But he that thereby becomes patient, and stays,
and composeth his heart in a calm and quiet temper in the midst of all
crosses, and troubles, and afflictions that befall him, and that upon this
ground, because Christ will come and put an end to my sin, as well as to my
sorrow, therefore I will wait with patience till he come. And again, he that
loves Christ, that sigheth for his coming; and he that now delights in his
ordinances: this man only waits for the coming of Christ.

There is yet a third Trial, 3 By the effects and fruits of it
and that is, the effects and fruits of our waiting for the coming of Christ:
And that is threefold (to go no further then the Text.)

The first is, a heavenly conversation.

The second is, a man's resting on Christ as his Savior and Lord.

The third is, the change of the body, which shall be in the great day, when
the soul and body shall be united together, Who shall change our vile body, and
make it like his own glorious body, etc. But the main fruit whereof we are now
presently possessed, is a heavenly Conversation.

And so I come to the second particular included in the observation before
propounded, viz.

That nothing is so effectual to settle a man, The expectation of Christ's
coming the best means to procure a heavenly Conversation.
and to dispose him to a holy and heavenly Conversation here on earth, as the
right looking for the second coming of Christ.

That this is true, you shall see it brefly, how the Saints of God upon this
very ground have been wrought, and encouraged to a heavenly conversation in all
the parts and degrees of it.

First of all, Proved. 1. It is the worker of Mortification.
ye shall see, that this is that which mortifieth the secret lusts and
corruptions of the heart. A man will never set soundly, and in truth, to the
mortification of his inward corruptions, that does not in truth out of love to
Christ look for his second coming. And the very reason why many are so dull and
dead, and backward to this work (for want whereof they cannot lead so heavenly
a conversation, upon earth) is this, because they do not with love to Christ
look for his second coming.

And that this is so, it will appear by diverse places of Scripture. Set your
affections (says the Apostle) on things that are above, Collos. 3.17.
where Christ sits at the right hand of God: And he does not only say so,
but Mortisie therefore (says he) your earthly members. Wherefore should they
mortify their earthly members? because Christ sits at the right hand of
God; upon whom ye look, upon whom the eye of your faith is fixed: mortify your
members. For what is that that makes a man in truth to dispose and frame his
heart, to be fit to stand in the number of those that are clothed in white
Robes at the second coming of Christ, but even this consideration that none
shall appear then with comfort, but such as now walk in holiness of
conversation?

Certainly that man that does with delight expect his second coming, he will be
most careful to fit himself for the receiving of Christ, and most diligent in
setting himself to the mortifying, and subduing of his corruptions, that so he
may walk before him in all holiness of life. A man that expects the coming of a
King to his house: will he therefore be secure, and do nothing because he knows
certainly that the King will come? No surely, he will therefore, because he is
sure that he will come, make ready and furnish his house, that it may be fit to
receive him when he does come. Even so, because I expect the coming of the
great King, the King of glory (as he is called in Psalm. 24.) I will now open my
everlasting gates. I will now labor that he may possess my soul, I will now
cleanse my self from all filthiness, and pollution of flesh and spirit.

Therefore the Apostle Saint John having said, 1 John 3.2, 3.
We are now the Sons of God, and it does not yet appear what we shall be, but
we know, that when he shall appear, we shall be like unto him: for we shall see
him as he is. He presently infers, Every man that has this hope in him,
purifieth himself, even as he is pure. He that has this hope, that he shall be
with Christ, that he shall see him as he is, he will be careful to purify
himself, as Christ is pure. This is the dispositton of a man that truly longs,
and rightly looks for the coming of Christ, he will be careful to purify
himself. A man that expects to be raised to some great and eminent place in the
Court, he will be careful to fit himself with those necessary requisits that
may make him capable of it, and enable him to go through it with credit and
comfort. So he that expects to have this great honor of the Saints, to be of
the number of those that receive glory and happiness, and comfort by the second
coming of Christ: he will be careful to purge his heart from all corruption,
that it may be capable to receive that comfort.

What daunts a man at the apprehension of death, Guilt of sin causes the
apprehension of death to be terrible.
and makes him have no delight in thinking of Judgment to come? but the guilt
of secret sins, with which he has been, and is so unwilling to part. It is
impossible for any man to look with comfort upon the approach of Death, and to
take delight in, and desire the second coming of Christ, but he who upon this
ground is careful to purge his heart of all secret corruptions and lusts
whatsoever. This is then the first thing wherein it does appear, that the
looking for the coming of Christ, is a special means to work us to a holy and
heavenly conversation.

Secondly, 2: Subdues out worldly affections.
as this is that which mortifieth the secret lusts, and corruptions of the
heart, so it is that also which mortifies our worldly affections. For what is
it that will subdue in the heart, and purge out of it the love of the world,
and worldly things but this, the looking for, and expectation of a better
estate to be had in Jesus Christ at his second coming? What is it that makes
men hold the world so fast? What makes them so gripple of the earth, and to
cleave so close to the things of this life? But because they have no
comfortable persuasion, and expectation of a better estate afterward.
Certainly he that on a right ground, and upon good warrant can expect with
comfort the second coming of Christ, he cares nothing for the things of this
life. Collos: 3: 1.
Therefore faith the Apostle; If you be risen with Christ, seek those things
which are above, where Christ sits at the right hand of God; because, Christ
sits at the right hand of God, therefore set your affections there: But how
shall we come to set our affections there? Set them not (says he) upon the
things of the earth. It is necessary that the soul of a man should have
something or other to fasten upon, some object to take up its delight and joy:
and he that cannot have joy and delight in better things, in things above, he
looks for it in things below: and the reason why he so cleaves to, and clasps,
and huggs with delight the things below; is because he has no better things to
think of, to hope after. He that has a better inheritance to hope for, will
easily let fall these things, and his affection to them, because his hope is in
Christ who shall make him glorious at his second coming. You see then the
necessity of it in this second respect.

But to go further; 3. Keeps us from sinful actions.
it is necessary also for the avoiding of any evil, of any sin in the act. What
is it (...) makes a man regulate and square his course of life according to the
rule of (...), so that he avoids the corruptions that are in the world through
lusts? But this looking for the second coming of Christ.

This Argument John the Baptist used to press upon his hearers the Doctrine of
repentance, because the king dome of God was at hand. This is that upon which
Saint Peter groundeth his exhortatoin unto the people, Act. 3: ^8.
Acts 3.18. Repent (says he) and be converted, that your sins may be blotted
out, when the times of refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord:
Therefore repent, and return unto God, do away your sins, because there will a
time of refreshing come, and you had need then to be found in another hue, in
another state, then in your old rotten withered condition and sinful lusts.
This is the Argument that the Aposte used to the Athenians to bring them from
Idolatry to serve the living God, Acts 17: 30.
because God has appointed a time to judge the world in righteousness, by that
man whom ho has ordained. Even for that reason, because God has appointed a
time to judge the world in righteousness, therefore they should turn from their
Idols to serve the living God. There is nothing that does so unbottome the
heart, nothing so shakes and looseneth a man's hold of sin and unrighteousness,
as the consideration of Christ's coming to Judgment. What will it boot me (will
the soul reason) to keep my sins when Christ will come to judge me for my sins?
What shall I get by going on in a course of sin, when I can look for nothing
then, but a sentence of wrath to be denounced against me? This then is that
that does settle a man in a holy conversation in that respect.

Nay fourthly, 4 Quickness to holiness of life.
this is that also which quickneth a man to the practice of all holy duties in
his place, both in his general and particular Calling. It is the very argument
which the Apostle Saint Peter uses, to stir us up to holiness of conversation;
Seeing (says he) that all these things shall be dissolved, what manner of
persons ought we to be in all holy conversation and godliness, 2 Pet. 3: 11, 12.
looking for the coming of the day of God, wherein the heavens being on fire
shall be dissolved, and the elements shall melt with fervent heat. As if he
should have said: Look now about the whole world, and see what it is that now
can comfort you, if you be such as go on in a course of sin: It may be you will
say, I fear not much, for I have many friends: Yea, but all these shall die. It
may be thou have store of lands; but all that shall be burnt with fire. It may
be thou have many pleasures: but then there shall be nothing but Judgment. The
coming of the Lord, that shall then put an end to all these, and turn the
course of things, the expectation thereof is a special means to take us off
from a course of sin, and put us on to a course of obedience, to make us walk
in another kind of fashion while we are in the world. Therefore the Apostle
Saint Paul when he would ^ir up Timothy to the work of the Ministry, what is
the Argument that he uses? I charge thee before Christ, who shall judge the
quick and the dead. As if he should say; there shall be an appearing before the
Lord, and therefore if thou will give thy account up with joy at that day, I
charge thee to look to thy Ministry.

So may I say to every man in his place; I charge thee that art a Master of a
Family, look to the business of thy family, to the salvation of the souls of
thy people. I charge thee that art a father or a mother, to look to the
salvation of the souls of thy children. I charge thee that art a Christian, to
look to the salvation of thy own soul. And how is the charge? I charge thee
before the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall judge the quick and the dead. Because
there shall come a time, when both thou and they shall be present before Christ
at his appearing; therefore if thou will have comfort in them, and in thy self,
and in Christ; be careful to do the duty that concerns thy place, Looking for
the coming of the Lord Jesus.

So then you see in this respect also there is nothing so forcible an Argument
to settle a man in a holy conversation, in a heavenly course as this, for a man
always to look for the second coming of Christ.

Lastly, 5: Furthers our perseveran^e in godliness.
there is nothing fixes a man so constantly in a holy course as this. Our
conversation (faith the Apostle) is always in heaven. We always walk on earth
as those that aspire to heaven, because we always look for the coming of
Christ. Were thou carefnl to serve God yesterday? do it to day also: it may be
Christ may come now and take thee away by death to day, and there is no
preparation for judgment afterward. Little children (says Saint John) now
abide in him, that when he shall appear, 1 John 2.28.
we may have confidence, and not be ashamed before him at his coming. What is
it that gives a man boldness, and takes away shame from him at the coming of
Christ? What is the reason that a man has not that spirit of fear and
trembling upon him, that shall be upon the hearts of all those that go on in
sin, Rev: 6.
when they shall cry to the mountains to fall upon them? but this, that he has
continued in a holy conversation, and constantly walked before the Lord with an
upright heart. I have finished my course (says the Apostle) I have fought a
good fight, I have kept the faith, henceforth is laid up for me a crown of
righteousness, which Christ the righteous Judge shall give to me, and to all
them that love his appearing. Still the servants of God have encouraged
themselves to persevere in a holy course, from the expectation of the coming of
Christ, that will give them a reward for their constancy in his service. It is
the Argument that the holy Ghost uses to the Church of Philadelphia, Rev.
3.11. Hold fast that thou have, and let no man take thy crown. As if he should
say, There is a time coming when Crowns shall be given: but to whom? to those
that hold out, that persevere in a godly course, Be thou faithful to the death,
and thou shall receive a crown of glory.

This is that, I say, that will make a man go on, will make him that is good in
youth, be good in age also; because whenever he dies, he shall receive his
Crown. This will make a man that he shall not begin in the spirit, and end in
the flesh: this will make him, that having put his hand to the plough, he will
not look back; because he no further looks for comfort in the appearance of
Christ, then he has had care to walk on constantly in a good course.

Thus you see the point proved to you, that a Christian soul has a main
benefit by his looking for the second coming of Christ; and that this is it
that makes him careful to mortify his secret lusts: that this is it that makes
him careful to purge himself from worldly affections: that this is it that
makes him industrious to avoid evil courses: that this is it that makes him
diligent in good actions; that this is it that makes him constant, and to
persevere to the end in all holy ways, and in avoiding of all evil: because he
looks for, and waits for the coming of Christ.

Now then take this for a main trial of your selves, Use For trial.
concerning the former point. Whether you can with comfort look for the coming
of Christ or no?

There shall be abundance at that day, that shall hang down their heads: I saw
(says Saint John the Divine) the Kings of the earth, Rev. 6.15.
and the great men, and the rich men, and the chief Captains, and the mighty
men, and every bondman, and every freeman (men of all sorts) hide themselves
in the dens, and in the rock of the mountians, and said to the mountains and
rocks, fall on us, and hide us from the face of him that sits on the throne,
and from the wrath of the Lamb, for the great day of his wrath is come, and who
shall be able to stand? Would you therefore hold up your heads with comfort and
with joy? that when you hear a Funeral Sermon, it might comfort you to think,
It will not be long before my time shall come, Heb. 2.14.
before my time shall be? would you in truth have freedom from the fear of
death, which Christ has purchased? ( for he took upon him the same nature,
because the children were partakers of flesh and blood, that he might free
them, who for fear of death were hold in bondage all their life.) Would you
have comfort in Christ's coming to Judgment? See how effectually this works in
you.

Is it thus effectual, that because you look for Christ's coming, therefore you
prepare your selves; therefore you purge out your lusts and corruptions,
because there shall be nothing then ( when the secrets of all bearts shall be
manifest) that shall be displeasing to him when he shall come? Are you careful
to let fall worldly affections, because you have a comfortable apprenension of
heavenly joys? Are you careful to turn your course from sin, because you would
not lie open to the judgment of condemnation? Are you careful to do good, to
persevere in the practice of godliness, because he that shall come, will come,
and will not tarry? If it be thus with you, then you may with comfort think of
that day, then you may with cheerfulness look upon the day of death: the day of
death then, is better then the day in which thou were borne: It is better to
thee then the day of thy marriage, it is the day of that great Marriage that
shall be made between Christ and thy soul to all eternity: It is better then
the day that thou obtainest thy freed one, then the day that thou come out of
thy Apprentiship: it is the day wherein thou art set free, and brought unto the
glorious liberty of the sons of God: It is a day that is better then the day of
the enjoyment of the greatest comforts of this life, because it sets thee in
the possession of pleasures that are at Gods right hand for evermore.

Take this consideration therefore to heart: and that you may walk in a holy
course the better, and with more constancy, keep the object always close to
your eye. Think with your selves and say: If we would walk as Saints in heaven,
we must live as Saints on earth. But how shall we do this? Be often thinking of
the coming of Christ: often put this question to your souls; What if Christ
should now come: If he should come now I am in the Church, am I hearing the
Word with that affection that I ought to here it with? If he should come now I
am in my calling, in my world business, do I follow it with a heavenly
disposition as I ought to do? What if he should come now while I am feasting,
should he take me as one feasting with fear lest I should sin against God in my
mirth? What if he should come and take me asleep, have I made my peace with God
before I went to rest?

Work these considerations upon thy soul. When the morning comes, think, it
may be Christ will come and take me away before evening, how shall I walk this
day, that I may have comfort in the coming of Christ? When the Evening is come,
think, it may be I shall never see morning before the great day of the
Resurrection, what now shall I do, that if I die in my sleep I may rest in the
Lord, and so may have comfort in his appearance? Either this moment, either
this minute, settle thy comfort and peace with Christ; or it may be the next
hour it will be too late. And remember that if ever you will live a holy life,
if ever you will have a heavenly conversation on earth, you must be much, and
seriously settled in this meditation: slight it not, pass it not in your
thoughts as a matter of discourse, but let it be a working meditation, let it
be effectual to produce somewhat in you that may warm and heat your hearts, and
to set on fire the whole soul, and to purge out the dross of corruption that
remains in you.

Thus you see what it is that the Apostle here undertakes for himself, and for
as many as walked as he did: they had a heavenly Conversation, and that which
made them have a heavenly conversation, was the looking for the coming of
Christ. This was the fruit of their looking for the coming of Christ, it made
them walk in a heavenly conversation on earth.

There is another fruit of this: by their looking for Christ, they shall find
him to be a Lord and Jesus: We look for the Savior the Lord Jesus: Which word
shows, that all that Christ did for the purchase of our redemption, he did it
by price, and by power.

He did it by price, 1 These. 1 10.
he satisfied his Fathers Justice, and so he is a Savior: We wait (says the
Apostle, 1 These: 1.10.) for his Son from heaven, whom he raised from the dead,
even Jesus, which delivered us from the wrath to come.

And by power to, over Satan: so he is a Lord, the Lord of might. Thou shall
find at the day of Christ's, that he will both be Savior and Lord to thee. A
Savior to free thee from sin and condemnation; A Lord, to bestow upon the
heaven, and glory with the Saints. This is another benefit of our looking for
Christ's coming in the manner before spoken of, we shall find him then to be a
Lord, and Jesus: one that will save us from our sins, and one that has power
to bestow heaven upon us.

Would thou then have this comfort at that day? Let him be so here to thee
in this life: let him be thy Lord and commander of all thy affections, of the
whole man, yield obedience now to his will, and thou shall find him a Jesus
then. He is not a Jesus, a Savior, except he be a Lord and Commander also. But
you see I cannot stand to insist upon this.

The occasion of our meeting at this time, is to commit to the Earth the body
of our Sister departed: She has now the termination and conclusion of all her
waiting and expectation. And after so long a waiting, there remains a
sleeping in the Grave awhile, when the soul rests in the hands of Christ, and
waits for that great day, when body and soul shall be joined together.

I persuade my self well of her, that She was one of the number of those
waiters that shall have joy at the coming of Christ; I had not much knowledge af
her, only I observed in her sickness a good purpose and desire of new and
better obedience, and performing better service to Christ then she had done, if
God should have spared her longer. And she expressed also a great desire of
Christ's second coming; a desire that he would receive her to himself, and that
these days of sin might be finished. Much she was in these desires, and she
had good warrant for it: for she was careful (as I am informed) to set up the
kingdom of Christ in her Family. It is the duty of a good Wife to be a help to
her Husband, especially in matters of piety, and the worship of God: and
therein her example should teach wives to strive herein. She was always
stirring him up to prayer in his Family, to a more careful sanctifying of the
Lords day, herein She was frequent. She was much mortified to the world for
some late years (as it was observed in her daily course by those that knew
her.) Thus she labored to fit her self and her Family, that she might have
comfort in the great Day of the appearing of the Lord Jesus.

I speak upon information, for your edification, to stir you up to labor to
fit your selves for Christ, by purging out of sin in your hearts and lives.
Labor to fit your Families for Christ, that when you, and your servants and
children, shall appear before him, you may look on them, and look on Christ
with comfort, as men that before have prepared themselves for the coming of
Christ, and as those that then shall lift up their heads, because the day of
their redemption draws nigh.

CHRIST'S PRECEPT AND PROMISE OR, SECURITY AGAINST DEATH.
SERMON XVII.
JOHN 8.51. Verily, verily, I say unto you, if a man keep my saying, he shall
never see Death.


IT is not long (men and brethren) since Death rode in triumph through this
City, and did bear down all before him: he locked up your houses, pulled down
your windows, and made the wealthiest among you put upon them the semblance of
Banckroutness, by locking up their doors, and turning their backs to their
houses, and running away, so it played the Tyrant then: there died thousands a
week, and the Grave that always cries, Give, give, was almost cloyed with
carcasses: Death served himself so fast, that the Prison could scarce hold the
Prisoners: It might almost have been said then of this City, as once it was of
Egypt; There was scarce a house wherein some were not dead, at least where
there was not the fear of Death.

Now it has pleased God to show you more favor, and men now die but by
scores; Death goes his old pace, and takes away a few secretly without
observation. But Death is amongst you still, and still will be so long as sin
is among you: and therefore it will not be unseasonable upon this occasion for
me to speak, and you to hear somewhat that may arm you against this last and
worst Enemy, Death: which though he make not such a stir in these times of less
Mortality, yet he will certainly take us all away one by one: And who can tell
but he may be amongst the number of the hundred, or fewer hundreds that die
now, as no man could tell wether he should be amongst the number of the
thousands then?

Since Death therefore is always an enemy, and always fights against us
(though not always with like fury and violence) it is a part of wisdom in us
always to hear, and to practice that which may secure us against the danger of
death. And that is taught in this Text. Verily, verily, I say unto you, If a
man keep my saying, he shall never see death.

Wherein (not to speak any thing of the Context) I pray take notice who speaks
Division.
the words.

The Author of truth: the Death of Death, he that can best tell by what means a
man may shun the hurt of it: he that has vanquished it, and overcome the
uttermost of his assaults: Our Lord Jesus Christ, that has slain death, and
brought life and immortality to light. He gives us this direction for the
avoiding of the hurt of Death. Then observe the manner of his speaking.

Verily, verily, I say unto you: with an affirmation earnest and redoubled. He
never affirmed any thing unture, therefore that which he speaks is an undoubted
verity. He never spoke any thing rashly, therefore that which he affirmed so
earnestly, is a weighty thing, and of great consequence.

And lastly observe (that which I only shall insist upon) the matter of his
direction here comprehended in a hypothetical proposition, which has (as all
such have) two parts. An Antecedent, and a Consequent. In the one he shows
the Duty to be done as a necessary condition for the obtaining of that which is
specified in the other. The first has the Duty; The second the benefit that
flows from the Duty. These two are knit together in a most necessary
consequence. If a man keep my word, he shall never see death.

You see now the only, 1 The duty commanded.
and perfect remedy against the evil of Death; that is, to keep the saying and
word of Christ. If any would know by what means he may be secured against the
terrible of all terrible things (as one calls Death) here is a sure and
certain rule for him, and he need not doubt of it, it comes from the mouth of
Christ, let him keep his saying, and then Death shall never do him harm.

I will first interpret these words unto you, and then make them good by
Scripture and Reason and then apply them, and commit my self and you, and all
at last to the blessing of God.

First then, Meaning of the worsd.
when our Savior Christ says; If a man: we must conceive him to mean
generally, at least indefinitely, If any man whatsoever: for so it pleases him
to in large his promise in the redoubling of the word, that no man may have
cause to say he is excluded, except he exclude himself.

Keep my sayings. Here first I must show you what is meant by sayings: and then
what it is to keep those sayings.

The Saying, What is meant by the saying of Christ, viz.
or words of Christ, is, the doctrine of the Gospel, the Covenant of Grace;
which by an excellency is called His: because by it he brings life and
immortality to light, The Doctrine of the Gospel.
(as I said before) which in former times was hid as it were in the dark, and
not made known so publicly to the sons of men. The Gentiles knew little or
nothing of it. The Jews knew what they knew with much darkness and obscurity.
He that was (almost) the first Preacher of this Gospel in clear terms without
any vail or darkness ( John Baptist) who was as it were between both, he did
delives this doctrine not so darkly as the Prophets before him, nor so clearly,
as after it was by our blessed Savior, and those that succeeded him. Therefore
I say, it is the Saying of Christ by an excellency, because he did in a manner
first begin to teach and declare the same, in the cleareness and sweetness
thereof: and he sent his Apostles abroad to make it plain and manifest to all
the world, that a man may run and read it.

And His likewise it is called, because he is the Author of it, for he is the
worker of that salvation which it declares to us.

Now, his Doctrine of the Gospel has two parts.

The first acquainting us with our misery. Two parts of the Gospel.


The second with the Remedy.

For as the Bond and Acquittance specific the debt, 1. Showing out raisery.
but to different purposes, the one to (...) the Debtor to the payment, the
other to absolve and acquit him: even so the Law and the Gospel both declare
the misery of man, the one to tie it fast upon him, the other to help him the
better to lease it from him. The Physician entreats of the sickness as well
as the Cure, but of the sickness alone for the cures sake: The Judge passes a
sentence of condemnation, and then largly rehearses the crime and punishment
due to the offender: the Pardon likewise makes mention of the fault, and the
punishment, but in a different manner, and to a different end. So the Gospel
declares man's misery, and borrows so much of the Law, that may lay down our
wretched estate in our selves, and so draw in that which is the main and
principal part of it, the remedy of our souls. And this part of the Gospel the
Apostle St. Paul succinctly delivers in a few words, Romans 3.63.
Romans 3.23. All have sinned, and are come short of the glory of God: All have
sinned, and All have sinned in such a short, and measure, and degree, that they
are fallen short of the glory of God, by which the Apostle (I think) means,
life Eternal: that Glory, that (had it not been for sin) he would have bestowed
upon the sons of men, by virtue of the first Covenant he made with them.

The second part of the Gospel, 2. The remedy against this misery.
the words of Christ, is concerning the Remedy, whereby a man may be helped
against this misery. And for that purpose it shows us, Who helps us; And
how he helps us.

And what is to be done by our selves, that we may obtain and enjoy this help.

The Person that helps us, is the Son, Manifest in the flesh, the Son of God
taking our nature upon him, and clothing himself in the similitude of sinful
flesh: the Eternal Son of the Father, 1 The Redemer.
assuming (I say) the very nature of man into the unity of his Person, so
becoming God and Man in the same Person, he is the sole Redeemer, neither is
there any other name under heaven by which we can be saved, but by his alone.

Again, 2. The manner how we are redeemed.
it shows us by what means he saves us: as the Apostle speaks plain enough
in the next verse to that I spoke of before, being justified freely by his
grace through the redemption that is in Jesus Christ. Romans 3.24.
To the intent that he might free us from the Curse of the Law, and wrath of
God, and the danger of eternal Death, he vouchsafed to be made sin for us, to
satisfy the justice of his Father, by enduring the Curse of the Law, and to
accomplish the Righteousness of the Law, by being made (in our stead) under the
Law; so he became a Propitiation for the sins of the sons of men, as the
Apostle says in that place. Thus Christ by his perfect satisfaction made to
his Father, and by that perfect Righteousness whereby he was subject to the Law
for our sakes, has absolutely and fully delivered us from the power of sin and
of Death, and performed the work of our Redemption: by virtue whereof, by the
merit, and worth, and value whereof we are delivered, and saved, and Redeemed
from this Death, and from all other evils that cross our eternal happiness.

And thirdly, 3. The means how to enjoy the remedy.
the Gospel shows us by what means we may become partakers of this happiness
and Redemption in Christ: and tells us of three things, (as it were)
Conditions of the Covenant of Grace, of the New Covenant, which is ratified by
the blood of Christ. I say of three things, the Conditions (on our parts) of
that Covenant, which if we do, we shall certainly be saved by the Redemption in
Christ.

The first is Repentance.

1. The Conditions of the Covenant of Grace.
The second is Believing.

The third is our New obedience.

All and each of these plainly expressed in the word of God.

As for Repentance, 1 Repentance.
it is that where with John the Baptist began his Preaching. It is that that
our Savior commanded his Apostles to declare to the Jews, Repent, for the
kingdom of heaven is at hand. It is that which himself preached at the first,
as Saint Mark witnesses, Mark 1.15.
chap. 1.15. It is that which Saint Paul began with, when he came to the
Athenians, Heb: 6.
Acts. 17. and now he admnisheth all men every where to repent. It was the
first of the foundations of the Doctrine of the beginning of Christ; that was
wont to be taught in the Ancient Church, as withesseth the Author to the
Hebrews, chap. 6. not laying again the foundation of repentance from dead
works, and then he proceeds to the rest. This Repentance is that which the
Lord requires absolutely of the sons of men, as a condition of the new
Covenant, the Covenant of Grace, without which they cannot possibly be made
partakers of the same. The parts of Repentance.


And this Repentance has four parts, every one of which is so needful, that
without it the rest is little worth.

First lamenting for our sins, Godly sorrow for sin.
and being sorry for our iniquities, as David said of himself, Psalm. 38. I will
declare my iniquity, and be sorry for my sins. And so the Apostle Saint James
expresses it, Psalm: 38.
chap. 4.9. Afflict your selves, mourn and weep, let your laughter be turned
into sorrow, Jam: 4.9.
and your joy into tears. Therefore Christ you know, was sent to Preach glad
tidings to the Prisoners and Captives, and the opening of the prison to the
prisoners, and to bring the oil of gladness to those that mourned in Sion. A
man must first be a Mourner in Sion, one that simiteth on his thigh, and says
with Jeremy, Woe to me because I have sinned.

Secondly, Confession of sin.
to this Sorrow must be joined acknowledgement, and confession of sin to
Almighty God, Pro: 28.
for so witnesses the Wiseman, Prove. 28. If we confess and leave our sins,
Psalm: 32: 4.
we shall have mercy. So David says, Psalm. 32.3, 4. I said I will confess my
sins, and thou forgavest the iniquity of my sin. And Saint John tells us in
his 1. Epist. 1.9. 1 John: 1: 9.
If we confess our sins, God is faithful and true to forgive us our sins. So
you see Confession as well as sorrow absolutely required to obtain remission. A
man must even Arraigne, and as it were indite himself before God, plead guilty,
acknowledge his trespass whatsoever it be, and judge himself worthy to be
destroyed for them, or else he repents not though he weep out his eyes with
mourning and lamentation. Firm purpose of amendment.


The third thing requisite is, a firm purpose of amendment of life. Whosoever
will have God to accept his tears, and bend a favorable care to his
humiliation and acknowledgement, he must so acknowledge what evil he has
already done, that he put on a steadfast purpose of doing so no more: according
to the direction that our Savior Christ gives to the man that he had healed,
Joh: 5.
Joh. 5. Go thy way and sin no more: and as Saint Paul speaks, Let him that
stole, steal no more: And therefore the Wiseman puts on this part to the
former, in the before alleged place, If we confess our sins, and leave them,
we shall find mercy. There must be (I say) a settled purpose, and a fixed flat
determination in the soul of every man to cast off those transgressions that he
has confessed, and to return no more to commit them, at least not to allow those
sins that he has acknowledged.

Lastly, Petition for pardon in the name if Christ.
there must be added to the former three, or else they will not avail neither,
an earnest supplication to God for mercy, and forgiveness through the mediation
of his wel-beloved Son Jesus Christ: which was wont to be craving mercy without
this mentioning of Christ, before he was offered, and revealed to the world.
But now it must be so done, as we must specially and particularly prefer our
thoughts and desires to him, in begging mercy at his Fathers hands for his sake
alone. So David, after the numbering of the people, I have done exceeding
foolishly, Hos. 14.2.
but Lord blot out, for give the sin of thy servant: So God commands, Hos.
14.2. Take to you words, and say to the Lord, receive us graciously: So did
David when he renewed his repentance, (and so must all men do when they begin
to repent) Have mercy upon me according to the multitude of thy mercies, and
blot out my transgressions, etc.

These are the parts of repentance. And this is the first thing required at our
hands, as the condition of the Covenant of Grace, without which we can never
obtain life eternal: And this repentance consists of sorrow for sin, and
acknowledgment of it to God, with a firm purpose of amendment, and earnest
petition of pardon, for the sake of the Lord Jesus Christ.

And this is such a Doctrine as the Covenant of works, Repentance only taught
in the Gospel.
the Law, never taught to the sons of men: Nay, verily it will not admit it:
the Law scorns (as it were) to admit repentance, for it excludes sin:
Repentance implies sin in all the degrees and kinds, therefore it is far from
accepting Repentance: if thou have once broke the Law, repent, or not repent;
amend, or nor amend; be sorry, or not sorry; thou shall never be pardoned or
forgiven: It is a rough and stern Schoolmaster, that will whip and scourge
offending children, though they crave pardon never so much: It is a rough
Creditour that will throttle the Debtour, and cast him into Prison though he
confess the debt, and be never so importunate in asking favor and patience.

But the Covenant of Grace, it is a sweet Doctrine, a comfortable Doctrine.
Thou have sinned, oh man, and broken the Law, and fallen from the favor of
God, and all possibility of salvation in thy self: but come, be sorry for thy
sin, acknowledge it to thy Maker; resolve to run on in it no longer, cry to him
for pardon of it; Man's repentance tends to the honor of Gods justice.
he will graciously pardon thee. This is a sweet Doctrine you see, full of
comfort and consolation: yet it is a Doctrine that tends to the honor of the
Justice of God, as well as to the honor of his grace and love: the Lord could
not prescribe other conditions for receiving us to favor, but that we should
repent. What Judge would so abuse mercy, as having past the sentence of death
upon a Malefactor, will yet pardon him, and save him from the halter, if he be
not sorry for his crime, and come and entreat for mercy and favor, and confess
that he has offended, and promise never to do so again? there is no mercy and
pardon for such a one, because mercy must not oppose Justice, though it may
somewhat (as we may say) mitigate Justice. The blood of Christ if it were shed
ten thousand times over, it could never corrupt the Justice of God: it may
satisfy it, but not corrupt it: now the Justice of God were corrupted, if it
should admit an impenitent and hard-hearted sinner to favor, and bestow upon
him remission of sins and life everlasting, that would never leave it, nor
forsake it, nor be sorry for it, but still go on to offend God, and trample
under foot his authority: this being coutrary to Justice in the very nature and
essence of Justice, it cannot possibly be effected, no not by the shedding of
the blood of Christ: the blood of Christ is of that vallue, that it satisfies
the Justice of God, and causes him upon the penitence and humiliation of a
sinner, to receive him to grace and favor.

You see now what is the first part of the Condition required on our side for
the obtaining of life by Christ, that is Repentance.

The next is, Faith in Christ.

This we are taught every where: 2: Faith.
If thou believe in the Lord Jesus Christ (says the Apostle to the trembling
Jaylour) thou shall be saved. John: 6: 29.
And (says our Savior) this is the work of God, that ye believe on him whom
he has sent.

This believing on Christ, Desinit on of Faith.
is I suppose nothing else bnt a staying, and resting, and depending, and
relying upon the merits and satisfaction of our blessed Savior, by the virtue
and merit thereof to obtain remission of sins, and eternal life, and all good
things promised in the New covenant at the hands of God. He that goes quite
out of himself, forgets all his own actions, casts behind him whatsoever
seemed good in him, and wholly claspeth on Christ, and cleaves to him, stays
on him, rests on him for the remission of sins, and for the favor of God,
and for grace and salvation, this man believes in the Lord Jesus Christ: and
this man performs that duty which makes him one with Christ; that causes him
to become a member of that mystical body whereof Christ is the head: and that
causes him to be one with the Father, and to be the child of God, for by faith
we are become the children of God.

This Faith in Christ the Law does not teach, Faith only taught in the Gospel.
the former Covenant would not accect: What? to bring to the Law, the
Righteousness of another, the satisfaction of another, and to trust upon that
to be entertained and received, the Law rejects it. Thou must pay thy self, in
thy own person, and with thy own goods, thou must yield perfect obedience to
the Law, and fully accomplish it in thy own person: it will not receive payment
of another for thee: it will not accept satisfaction of the righteousness of
another on thy behalf.

But, oh the sweetness of the Doctrine of the Gospel. If we have a Treasurer
that is able, and willing to pay the debt, that will tender and make payment of
it, we shall be accepted for his sake; so that we give him the glory of resting
upon this payment, and be not so absurd as to mix any action of our own to that
payment, that ^e has made fully and completely for us. This is a Doctrine of
sweetness, and favor, and great compassion, that though we cannot do it of our
selves, we shall be accepted, if our Surety will do it for us, so that we give
our Surety the glory of being a prefect and able play master, and rely wholly
upon his satisfaction.

The last part of the condition on our side, 3. New obedience.
is that we yield New obedience to the Law: Perfectly to obey it: to which we
are tied hy the former Covenant.

But now this is the obedience of the Gospel, How differenced from that
required under the Law.
a thing far different from the obedience of the Law that was formerly required
in the old Covenant: there a man was tied, and bound to obey perfectly, fully,
completely, without any defect: In a word, he must pay the uttermost farthing;
he must do his duty, his whole duty, in in all the parts and degrees, with all
fullness of perfection, absolutely without any defect or want, without any
imperfection at all. An impossible labor for corrupted men: a service that
none (all having lost those abilities that God gave man at the first) can ever
reach to. But then comes the sweet Gospel, the Doctrine of grace and favor,
of tender compassion, and faith thus; If thou will consent to obey, thou shall
eat the good things of the Land: If you mortify the deeds of the body by the
spirit, you shall live, Romans 8.13. But if you (though never so much in show
under the Covenant of Grace) live after the flesh, you shall die.

Ye see, New Obedience is required absolutely as a Condition of the Gospel, for
the obtaining of everlasting happiness, for the escaping of Death: and Saint
John faith; If we walk in the light, we have fellowship one with another, and
the blood of Christ shall purge us from all sin: so that this walking in the
light, and New Obedience, is obsolutely required of all those that intend to be
made partakers of Christ and his benifits: they must give up their souls and
bodies as instruments of his glory, and not serve sin any longer in the lusts
thereof: they must not give their members as weapons of unrighteousness to sin,
but live as becomes them that are one with Christ, mortifying all the lusts of
the flesh, and quicken themselves, or being quickened with him, to parctise all
good things required in his word, and to obey all his commands, which was first
written in Adams heart, and then in Tahles of stone. This New Obedience is the
same in substance that was required in the former Covenant, but now with a
gracious acceptance of endeavor after perfection, instead of perfection: the
former tied us to the obedience of all that was required, in all fullness, and
then promising acceptance; but the obedience that the Gospel requires, is
striving to this perfection in truth and sincerity, desiring and laboring
after it, in putting out our selves toward it, and then promising acceptance
through the perfection of Christ, in and by which our imperfections are done
away.

Now (Brethren) you understand what this saying of the Lord Christ's is, by
virtue of the keeping of which we must be secured (if we be secured) from the
hurt of Death.

What is it now to Keep the saying of Christ?

It is to inform our Judgments in the understanding of these truths, and
assent to them as truths, and to practice and follow them, to do the duties
which we have heard, to practice the Doctrine of Repentunce, and Believing, and
Obedience.

I confess our Savior does proclaim it thus, Repent and believe the Gospel:
but for the more clear explaining of it, we make new Obedience a thing of it
self, and not included in the Doctrine of Repentance: for it is an act of that
whereof Repentance is a resolute wishing and desiring. A man cannot possibly
rest on Christ for salvation, till he has so asked pardon, as he resolves an
amendment: and when he has this resolution, and relyeth on Christ for the
pardon of his sin, then from him he receives power to amendment of life, and
so his purpose comes to action, and his desire to execution. Thus alone these
two things differ as far as I conceive.

Now I say, this is the Doctrine of the Gospel, and to keep it, is to know, and
believe, and follow it, to believe and obey: as Christ faith, If you know these
things; there is one part of the duty, happy are you if you do them: there is a
second, for they can never be done, except they be done as known. And thus I
have interpreted the first part of the Proposition, namely, the Antecedent.

Let us say somewhat of the latter too, 2. The benefit.
the benefit that follows upon the former duty, and for the obtaining of
which the former duty is necessary, namely, that he shall never see death.

What is it to see Death?

And what Death is meant here?

To see good things in the Scripture phrase, What it is to see Death.
is as much oftentimes as to enjoy them, to have the benefit and commodity of
them, to receive them, to entertain them: Without holiness no man shall see
God; that is, no man shall enjoy God: Blissed are the poor in spirit, for they
shall see God; that is, they shall enjoy God.

On the contrary, to see a thing that is termed Evil, is to be annoyed with
it, to have the hurt of it lying upon a man, and pressing him down: as they in
Jeremy said, Let us go into Egypt, where we shall not see sword or famine;
meaning, that they should not be pursued by war, and want of things needful: so
that by seeing evil, is meant the evil lying upon one, and annoying and hurting
one: and so I suppose it is meant here.

And by Death, What Death is here meant.
is meant, Natural, and (as we may term it.) supernatural, and eternal Death:
For the keeping of Christ's sayings, so freeth men from the latter, as they
never come near it: and so freeth them from the former, as they never dread to
be under the power of the latter. And the first Death of the outward man, which
is the separation of the Body from the Soul, it is no Death if it separate not
both from God, which it can never do, if a man keep the sayings of Christ:
therefore though his body (that keeps the sayings of Christ) be took from his
soul, yet he sees not death so as to have any hurt by it, he feels no ill by
it: nay, it is good to him, for it is a passage from misery to rest and
felicity.

Thus ye have these words as faithfully interpreted to you, as I know how.

And now I will make proof of this Doctrine thus explicated, namely, that thus
to keep Christ's sayings, to know and follow the Doctrine of the Gospel, is the
only sure way to escape the danger and hurt of Death.

Saint Peter acknowledges as much, Joh. 6.68.
when he said to the Lord Jesus Christ, that he had the words of Eternal life,
then he that keeps them is certainly safe against the hurt of Death. Act 5.20.
So the Angel speaks to the Apostles whom the Pharisees had imprisoned, when he
brought them forth of Prison, he bids them speak to the people the words of
this life: since Christ's Doctrine is the word of life, it must needs follow,
that the keeping thereof is a perfect Antidote against the poison of Death. And
Saint Peter when he gave an account to the rest of the Apostles, Acts 11.14.
and the brethren of Judea, of his going to the Gentiles, he says that an
Angel appointed Cornelius to send for him, that he might speak words to him,
whereby himself and his family, should be saved: and those words which cause a
man to be saved, you know will give him freedom enough from Death.

Thus I have proved the point by express Texts: Reas. 1.
and there are two reasons of it.

The first is delivered by the Apostle Saint John in the first Epistle, and
second Chapter, 1 John 2.24.
where he faith, let that abide in you, which you have heard from the beginning
(that is the Doctrine of the Gospel which Christ taught, his sayings,) if that
remain in you, you also shall continue in the Son, and in the Father. He that
has fellowship with the Son, and with the Father can never see Death, for God
is the fountain of life: therefore those that are one with him, and continue in
him, cannot see Death no more then he can be overwhelmed with darkness, that is
where the Sun shines fully; no more then the body can be dead, as long as it
has communion with the soul: so those in whom the word of Christ remains and
stays, they are assured that they shall remain with the Father and the Son:
and therefore being united to that that is life, God the Father, and the Son,
it is impossible that ever they should be hurt by the first, or ever at all
taste of the last Death.

Again, Reas. 2.
the Word of Christ freeth him in whom it remains from the power and hurt of
sin, bringing to him remission of sins, and sanctification. And being free from
sin the cause of Death, it is easy to conjecture that he shall be freed from
Death it self. Let a man's Debt be satisfied, and let the favor of the Prince
be obtained, and a Pardon granted, the Prison shall never hold him long, he
shall not be brought to the place of Execution, but when his guives are knocked
off, he is set at liberty: so when we have obtained power against sin by the
powerful work of the Spirit of God, which always at the same time does bend
the heart of man to rest on Christ for salvation, and heartily to endeavor to
walk before him in holiness and righteousness: when I say, we are thus freed
from the power and guilt of sin, it is impossible that Death should lay hold
upon us as his prisoner, to carry us to the dungeon of Hell, and to hold us
under the wrath of God, and that fiery indignation of his that causes Hell to
be Hell. Therefore certainly the words of Christ are an undoubted truth, and we
must rest upon them without all distrust and wavering, that he that keeps his
sayings shall never see death, and that the knowledge, and believing, and
obeying, the Doctrine of the Gospel, is the only sure way to escape the hurt
and ill of Death it self.

Let us make some Application of this Doctrine to our souls.

First, Use 3. Incitatton to thankfulness.
to stir us up to a right hearty thankfulness unto Almighty God, that is
pleased to cast our times and days, into that age, and those places where the
Doctrine of the Gospel, this Saying of our blessed Savior is so clearly, and
plainly, and evidently laid open to you; and frequently and earnestly pressed
upon your souls: where the Lord comes to declare unto you the way to life;
where he scoreth you out a path, that will bring you quite out of the clutches
and danger of Death, this is the happiness of our present Age, and place where
we live, and this whole kingdom too. The grace and mercy, and favor of our
loving God has so disposed of us, that we do not live in times of Paganism
and darkness, where there was no news of Christ: that we live not in places of
Popish darkness, where the Doctrine of the Gospel is so mixed and darkened with
tricks and devices of their own, that they cannot see Christ clearly. It is our
happiness, I say, that we do not live in those places, and times, where either
Paganism or Popery with their darkness covered Christ from us, and caused us
that we could not clearly see or hear him, and so not keep his sayings: But now
grace is offered, light is tendered to us: we may be saved, we may escape the
danger of damnation, if the fault be not solely and wholly in our carelessness,
and wilfulness, and neglect, and abuse of the means that God has afforded us.

The heathen men that have not heard of Christ cannot possibly attain to life,
(as far as we can judge by the Scripture.) And it is very difficult for the
Papists (that hear so darkly, and are told of the Doctrine of the Gospel, with
so many sophistications) to come to be saved. But for us that have the Doctrine
of the Gospel so plainly, and carefully taught us, and revealed unto us, we may
be saved, and may easily see the way to obtain salvation. So we go beyond them
in happiness.

Oh blessed be the name of the Ever-living God, that beside the peace and
plenty, and other temporal benefits wherewith he has crowned this unworthy
Nation of ours, he has added this blessing of blessings, this King of favors
to give us so clear a revelation of the Doctrine of salvation by faith in
Christ alone. Blessed be his name, and let your hearts say Amen to this
thanksgiving: and let it be one part of your endeavor this day to give solemn
praise every man apart, and his Family apart for this unspeakable mercy of his,
in making you live in the days of Light, and in the bright Sun-sh^ne of the
Gospel: and you shall prove your selves to have begun to have kept Christ
saying, if you be thankful for his making of it known unto, and for writing of
it in your hearts. This is the first Use.

Next, Use 2. Reprehension.
I beseech you let me take boldness to reprove (I fear) a great number of you
of a sin, whereof I will make it appear you are guilty. Men there are that make
large promises to themselves that they shall never be damned, they shall not go
to Hell, they hope Death shall not have power to dragg them from this world to
the place of darkness.

Thou hopest so; Come, render a reason of thy hope. To hope without a ground,
is to deceive ones self with extreme folly. As for example: there are a number
of prisoners in Newgate, or in some other Prison: should they hope for some
man of great wealth to pay their debts, and save them from hanging: should they
not be arrant fools to hope, except they could show some ground for their hope,
and some evidence for their expecting of such a kindness? Thou that hopest,
thou shall never see Death; come answer God in thy conscience: do thou keep
the saying of Christ or no? Where is the knowledge of the Doctrine of the
Gospel? Do thou believe that which concerns thee touching thy misery, and so
apply that to thy self, to make thee a penitent sinner? Do thou believe the
Doctrine concerning the Remedy, and so apply that to thy self, to make thee
perfect thy repentance, by being not only grieved for sin, but taking boldness
to confess it, and ask pardon, and by framing thy self in thankfulness to
amendment of life, and new obedience? Do thou (I say) know this Doctrine, and
so know it as to practice it? Hope and spare not; the more thou hopest, the
better thy hope is; the stronger and surer it is, the more thou glorifiest God,
and the more it shall comfort thee.

But oh unhappy man, if thou find not in thy self the care and power in some
measure to do these things; cursed be thy hopes, because they be disgraceful
to Almighty God, tending to make him a liar, and an unjust person; and because
they are dangerours to thy own soul, tending to rock thee asleep in the cradle
of security. Cursed be those unsound and sandy-built hopes of most men, that
never yet applied themselves to confess and lament their sins; that never
applied themselves to crave pardon, and to resolve upon amendment; that never
studied to throw themselves into the Arms of Gods mercy in Christ for pardon;
that never intended to mortify the deads of the body, and to subdue the flesh
with the lusts thereof: and yet they hope they shall not be damned: thou may
as well hope that the Devil shall come out of Hell into Heaven, as thou to go
out of earth into Heaven. If thy hope be not grounded upon the workings of
these graces, because thou find thy self penitent; because thou find thy
self careful to strive to rest wholly upon Christ for salvation; because thou
find thy self industrious in the study of newness of life: except (I say)
thy hope be thus grounded, it is the vainest thing in the world, and it will
never do the good at the last hour.

Brethren give me leave to tell you that there are two Gospels in the world:
the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the Gospel of Beelzebub (as I may call
it) the Gospel of the Devil, that comes from Hell, and tends to bring men
thither. Christ's Gospel is, Repent and believe, and obey, and be saved. The
Devils gospelis: say you believe, make your selvesimagine that you have faith,
and then never care for repentance and obedience, and you shall be saved.
Christ's Gospel is summed up thus by the Prophets, Return to him and live. But
the Divils goes thus; Assure thy self thou shall live, though thou care not
for repentance. Oh let not the Devil beguile you with that false and
counterfeit Gospel of his, whosoever leans to it, shall find it like the
Author of it, a Liar; and when he has trusted to it, that confidence and hope
of his shall be as the Spiders web, the Beesome of destruction shall sweep it
and him down to the depth of Hell: Death shall have dominion over him, and
carry him from this present world to the region of darkness, into eternal
torment: he shall see Death in the grimness and terribleness of it, he shall
feel it in all the extremity that the wrath of God can inflict upon the
children of disobedience. Use 3 Exhortation.


Thirdly, I have to command and require you in the name of the Lord Jesus
Christ, that you apply your selves to a thing tending so much to the honor of
him, and to the commodity and comfort of your own souls.

I have showed you that Jesus Christ has revealed a way how you should escape
the danger of Death eternal, and the hurt of Death natural. I beseech you now
fall a doing one while, as you have been busied in hearing. To what purpose is
it that you flock to hear Sermons, and throng to receive the Word, except you
lay it up in your hearts, and apply your selves to practice: If thou have not
begun before, now begin: if thou have begun before, now resolve to proceed with
more life and courage: Either begin or persist in the practice of the Doctrine
of the Gospel.

If thou have not repented, I require thee in the name of the living God, to
make this hour the first beginning of thy repentance: and apply thy self to lay
the foundation of that work, before thou lay thy head to sleep. Go and call to
mind thy sins, and make thy cheeks wet, at least thy heart heavy for the
multitude of thy great offenses: down on thy knees in thy Closet; make thy
confession of them to God, sigh for them, mourn for them, labor to weep for
them, afflict thy soul with great sorrow and remorse: then cry for pardon and
remission: as the thiese begs at the bar for mercy, so do thou for the
forgiveness of thy sins through Christ Jesus; and put upon thy self a firm
resolution, and steadfast purpose to go on no more in the ways of wickedness,
to practice gross sins no more, nor no more to allow any sin that thou know
to be a sin, though it be never so small.

Do thus (my brethren) and then you may and will, (it will follow almost of it
self) rest on Christ for salvation. He that so sees his own sins, as
unfeignedly to lament for them, and to judge himself before God, (if he
apprehend the truth of the Doctrine of the Gospel,) he cannot for his life but
come on amain, and throw himself down before Christ, to embrace, and receive,
and entertain him, and lie in his Bosom.

And that man cannot for his life, when he sees the sweetness of the grace of
God in Christ, but resolve to obey him, and determine to walk in the ways of
holiness, and take pains, and use industry for the overcoming of all sin: and
by the virtue of Christ he shall prosper in this.

I beseech you therefore set your selves awork about this great business, to
get Repentance, and Faith, and New Obedience: it is much more needful then
sleep, then meat, then attire: there is nothing in the world so requisite for
thy welfare as these things. Scrape thou riches together in the same quantity
that Solomon did, and ten thousands times more, yet thou shall see Death once
within a hundred, or half a hundred years. Get wisdom, yet thou shall see
Death after a few years. Take pleasure with as much greediness as he did once,
when he forgot himself for a space, yet thou shall see death. These things that
the foolish world hunts after with so much earnestness of desire, will not
secure thee from the sight of the King of fears, Death, as Job calls it. But
if thou once get Faith, and Repentance, and new obedience, then thou have
obtained that, that all the riches, and honor, and pleasures, and learning, or
whatsoever seems desirable in the world, will not help their possessors to.

What will you do? (brethren) Grovel still on the earth? and still be mad after
back and belly? Or will you now begin to think, I must die, I must shake hands
with that dismal enemy, pale-faced Death, that is able to strike terror into
the strongest heart, and amazement into the stoutest soul that is not well
confirmed: and if this Death find me destitute of true Repentance, and Faith,
and New Obedience, it will seize upon me, and dragg me before the Judgment
seat of God, where I shall be Henced away with a malediction and curse, and be
forced to take my place with the Devil and his Angels in unquenchable flames?
Oh what shall I do then to secure my self from the great, from the strong, arm
of death? I will repent, now I will begin, Lord draw me, help me that I may do
it. I will believe now; Lord do thou work Faith that requirest it. I will obey,
Lord enable me to preform such needful duties as thou command me. Shall this
be your practice when you come home? Will you thus study to practice
Repentance, and Faith, and Obedience? and study to cry and call for it, and use
all your endeavor? Or what will you do: will you be as idle and careless, as
negligent and slothful in making after these graces as before? Will you be as
greedy of the transitory vanities of this life, as in former times? Oh abuse
not the word of God. If thou go out of the Church without a full purpose to
apply thy self from hence forward, either to begin, or to proceed in the
practice of the saying of Christ; Cursed be thou in thy hearing, cursed be that
hour that thou have spent, and cursed be thy misbestowed labor, thou
dissembling hypocrite. But if thou labor to practice this of Christ, namely to
keep his sayings, the Doctrine of the Gospel, to repent, to believe, and to
obey, blessed art thou in thy hearing, and in thy doing, and in thy obedience,
happy is the time and the place, and all things that concur together to draw
thee to so needful a work.

I pray ( Brethren) set not your labor upon gold and silver, and money, and
trash, not upon the pleasures and delights, and contentments of the world, not
on any other thing; but mainly and principally above all things let your chief
care be for Faith, and Repentance, and Obedience. If you strive for these
things earnestly, and heartily, and constantly, as sure as the Lord is in
heaven, he will bestow them upon you, and with them, the benefit of benefits,
Freedom from Death.

And now I shall speak comfort to those few that are in the world, Use 4.
Consolation
that keep these sayings of Christ. Let them be of good comfort: if their
capital enemy the King of fears, and the King of Afflictions be held from a
possiblity of doing them harm, nothing can harm them. He that Death cannot
hurt, pain cannot hurt, poverty and disgrace cannot hurt, nothing can hurt
him. You know if the King of an Army be reconciled to a place, he will keep his
Soldiers from spoiling, and burning, and destroying that place. If Death be
put out of power to do thee hurt, and God be reconciled in Christ, because thou
keep the saying of Christ, nothing can hurt thee, thou art the happiest man
under the Sun. Why should the poor, sad, afflicted, grieved, mourning,
lamenting Saints of God envy them that are rich, and jolly, and merry
worldlings, any of their pleasures and profits? any of those things wherewith
they like Idiots make themselves laugh at? What? has not God given thee better
things then he, that thou should murmr and whine, and weep for want of
them? art thou still complaining for want of them?

Remember what Saint James faith, Let the brother of low degree (that is abased
and despised in the world) rejoice, yea, rejoice with great boasting, and
glory, in his Exaltation. This is the exaltation of the Saints, Christ writing
his sayings in their hearts, and inclining them through the operation of his
Spirit, and the powerful work of his Word, to repent and believe, has freed
them from the danger of Death, and interessed them into eternal happiness, and
that bliss that no tongue can express, nor no heart conceive. This is thy
happiness: it is not to be rich, or to be great, for these cannot deliver the
owner from the hurt of Death natural, nor from the danger of Death eternal. But
to have Faith, and Repentance, and Obedience; this is riches and exaltation:
for he that has them shall not alone escape the Dungeon of eternal darkness,
but be advanced to the Palace of everlasting felicity. The Saint is the happy
man: the penitent believer, and true practiser of Christian obedience, he is
the sole and only happy man under the Sun: for whatsoever storm he suffers
in this present world, he shall certainly escape Death, and obtain Glory.
Bless God, and bless thy self in God, magnify him, rejoice in him, take
comfort in thy lot and portion; Death that devoureth Kings, that destroys
Emperors, that conquers Captains, and men of valor, shall not be able to
approach thee for thy hurt, for thou keep the saying of the Lord Jesus
Christ. Rejoice (I say) in this, magnisie him that is the Author of it, and
account thy self happy that thou have rece^ed from him so excellent a gift, as
to be in some measure enabled to keep his saying.

Yea, Object.
if it were so (may some Christian heart object) then I should esteem my self
the happiest man alive ^ but alas, where is this Repentance you describe? where
is this New Obedience in me, that still, still, find my self captive and thral
to passion, to this, and that, and the other lust, and diverse corruptions?
Where is I say, that Repentance, when I find so much fin? Where is that Faith,
when I find so much wavering and quaking, so much aptness to distrust, and
almost to despair?

Where is it? Answ.
It may be in thy heart of all thy complaining, and thou may have it for all
these exclaymings against thy self. Tell me, when thou find those
corruptions whereof, and for which thou speak against thy self, Do thou
allow them or not? do thou confess them, and lament them or not? I confess
them indeed, but with such a final deal of sorrow. Is it such a sorrow as
draws thee to God? and drives thee out of thy self? such as makes thee to fall
before him, and judge thy self worthy to be damned, and submit to his Justice?
Is it such a sorrow as makes thee confess, and then purpose amendment? Such as
makes thee cry to him for power and strength? such as makes thee rest on him
for ability? Do thou determine still, still to amend that that still
troubles thee? Do thou still continue to fight with the lusts of thy flesh
by the spiritual weapons that God has ordained for thee? I say to thee, thy
Repentance, thy Faith, thy New Obedience may be true, though it be weak. When a
man has a shaking Palsy hand, it is a hand. A sick weak man that lies
crying, oh, oh, that can scarce turn himself between the sheets, is a man, a
living man. A poor child that is new born, and has nothing that discovers
reason almost, but the shape of a man? that poor child is a reasonable
creature. Faith begins with weak apprehensions, and faint leanings on
Christ. Deep godly sorrow, and other parts of Repentance, may begin many times
with little And amendment of life begins sometimes at a low soundation, at
small sins. If it be true, and sincere, and constant: if thou go on and
continue in a course of daily renewing thy Repentance, and Obedience, and
Faith, and stirring by Gods means to get the increase of these graces, and to
be upright and sincere in them: thou art blessed in them notwithstaading thy
weakness: take comfort in a little, and be thankful for it: God will give
more, and the only way to get more, is to take comfort in a good measure in
what thou have: and the way to take comfort, is to labor to increase these
graces.

Let not the weak, troubled, seebled Christian be troubled in mind, as if he
had no grace, because he has but a little: as if he did not at all keep
Christ's sayings, because he keeps them but a little. He is a scholar in the
School that begins at Christ-Crosse-row (as we call it.) And he is entered
into the College, that begins but in a low book, with the first rudiments
of Logic. And he is a member of the Family that began to be an Apprentise but
yesterday, and comes not to a deep knowledge of his Art and Mystery, but is
glad to do sorry work.

Believe it (brethren) there may be great conceits of Repentance, and
believing, and obeying, that may make a man good in his own eyes, and be
altogether false. There may be a small measure of Repentance; but if one be
humbled in the smalness of that measure, and labor, and desire, and pray, and
beg for the increase of that measure, and take pains to edisie himself in it,
by the means of God: then it is true and upright, and shall save him. Therefore
rejoice.

It is not with the Covenant of Grace, as it was with that of Works. The
Covenant of Works, the Law required perfection of Obedience to all the things
prescribed: a man must not only love God, but love God perfectly. But the
Gospel satisfies it self with accepting truch of endeavor to the thing
required. If there be Repentance, though it be not in the full perfection: if
thou believe, though not with the fullest measure of believing: If thou Obey,
though not in the highest degree of obedience: this Gospel, this sweet, this
favorable gracious Doctrine gives thee consolation enough. Go home therefore
comforted in the beginnings, and resolved to proceed: and know that thou shall
enjoy that which Christ has promised, freedom from damnation, thou shall
never see Death.

THE YOUNG MAN'S LIBERTY AND LIMITS: OR, GODS JUDGMENT ON MAN'S CARRIAGE.
SERMON XVIII.
ECCLESIASTES 11.9. Rejoice, oh young man, in thy youth, and let thy heart
cheer thee in the days of thy youth, and walk in the ways of thine heart, and
in the sight of thine eyes: but know thou, that for all these things God will
bring thee into Judgment.


SOlomon in the conclusion of this Chapter is exhorting the Coherence.
sons of men to true Religion: and the better to mould and frame them to the
same; he minds them of Death and Judgment; without which there cannot be
planted in us a right care and fear of God. From the seventh verse to the
latter end, he has to do with two forts of men. First, with those that were
glued to this life, and to the delights and pleasures thereof: and he brings
them in, speaking thus; Truly the light is sweet, and it is a pleasant thing to
behold the Sun; verse 7. By light there we are to understand the light of the
Sun shining on us, while we enjoy this mortal life. This many men suppose to be
a very pleasant thing, and they overmuch content themselves in the same. These
Solomon verse 8. refuteth by three Arguments.

The first is this, that though a man live many years, yet let him remember
the days of darkness; that is that a time of Death will come; a time when our
Sun will set, and our light will turn to darkness, though we live never so long,
never so sweetly, never so pleasantly, though we enjoy the light of the Sun,
yet we should carefully remember that darkness abides us. Secondly, faith
Solomon, those days are many. His Argument is thus much. Let a man consider
with himself, though he live many years, yet notwithstanding the days and
years of his life, cannot be compared with the days and years of his Death: a
man is many more years under the ground in the Grave, then above ground walking
on the face of the earth. Thirdly, faith Solomon; all that comes (...) vanity?
That is, if a man may enjoy the light of the Sun, and the pleasures of this
life, that makes his heart^ight ^ome: yet all this is vanity; there is no full
contentment in these things, but an emptiness in them all, and no man knows how
soon he may be bereaved of them.

Now in the words we have read: Solomon has to deal with the young man: and he
is altogether given to jollity and merriment, he forgets God, and the days
of darkness, and his latter end. Well, Solomon gives him the bridle (as it
were) and suffers him to follow his own way by an Ironical concession, or
figurative speech: declaring not what young men ought to do, but what their
course is, and what commonly they do. Re^ce (...) young man in thy youth, and
let thy heart cheer thee in the days of thy youth, and walk in the ways of
thine heart, and in the sight of thine eyes: but know this (there is the
cooling-card) that for all these things God will bring thee into judgment.

In the words we will consider two parts. Division of the words.


First, what young men do.

Secondly, the Medicine of God to heal young men of their default.

That that young men do is this; 1. The sin of young men.
They give over themselves to an inordinate carnal Joy. This Joy is set out
from the time of it: the days of their youth. From the cause of it, their
hearts cheer them. From the kinds of it, they walk in the ways of their
hearts, and after the sight of their eyes.

Secondly, 2. The Cure.
the Medicine with which Solomon would heal young men of this inordinate
carr^al Joy, is this, Know (says he) that for all these things, God will bring
thee into Judgment: that is, it is a most divine and infallible truth, that
every one should know and acknowledge, that whatsoever sins they commit in their
youth, without repentance, they must undergo the dreadful Judgment of God
because of them.

Thus (as briefly as I can) I have opened the words unto you. Though I might
insist on many doctrines, yet not witstanding, I will only handle these two.

The first shall be that which arises from the first part of the Text; what
young men do; what their fault is: For (as I said) it is an Ironnical
concession, not declaring what young men should do, but what they do. The
doctrine is thus much. Doct. 1. It is the sin of young men to rejoice
inordinately.
That it is the sin of young men to rejoice inordinately, and carnally, in the
days of their youth, to walk after their hearts, and the sight of their eyes.

We read concerning the old world, that they were eating and drinking, and
marrying, and giving in marriage: altogether sottish and sensual, till the
wrath of God came in the flood and swept them away. Now lest any should suppose
that this were the fault of old age only, Genesis 6.11.
the Scripture shows, that all flesh had corrupted their way before God, Genesis
6.11.

Isa. 22.14. Isa. 22.14.
Let us eat and drink, for to morrow we shall die. It is thought by learned
Divines, that this speech was not so much the language of Age, as of the youth
in Israel.

Hence Solomon gives a caveat to the young man, Eccles. 12.1. to bridle and
restrain him from his jollity and carnal mirth. Eccles. 12.1.
Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy youth, while the evil day come
not, nor the years draw nigh, when thou shall say, I have no pleasure in them.
And the Apostle Saint Paul, 1 Timothy 2.22. instructs Timothy to fly the lusts
of youth; 1 Timothy 2.22
that is, in carnal pleasures and pastimes, in voluptuousness and sensuallity,
Tit. 2.6.
and the like. And Tit. 2.6. Exhort young men that they be sober minded; that
is, that they leave this drunkenness of understanding, in being overcome with
sensual carnal objects and pleasures.

Job (in the first Chapter of that book) when the young people, Job. 1.
his Suns and Daughters met together to feast, he was afraid lest they should
be misguided in this kind, therefore the holy man in a godly care and
thoughtfulness for their welfare, sacrificed to God, to make atonement for
their sin.

Let us a little consider the reasons of this Doctrine, whence it is, that
young men should be so much misguided in their youth.

The first cause is, Reas. 1. Natural corruption.
natural corruption that they have drawn by propagation from their Parents. A
spiritual leprosy, and malady, and disease, which as it prevails (for the
most part) against age by covetousness, so it gets ground of youth by
sensuallity and voluptuousness. This dams up the ear against reproose: this
hardens the heart against instruction: and makes many young men the soldiers
of Satan in sin.

Again in the second place. Reas. 2. Forgetfulness of Judgment, Deuteronomy: 32: 29,
Men in their youth forget the day of their reckoning and Judgment: they are
not mindful of their latter end. Deuteronomy. 32.22. Oh that they were wise, that they
understood this, that they would consider their latter end. This Precept is
neglected both by youth and age: but especially by those of younger years. For
they feel their blood run warm in their veins, and they are full of spirits
and vigor, therefore they suppose that the Grave, and the house of darkness is
far off from them.

Again in the third place. Reas. 3. Freedom from crosses.
Young men are not broken by afflictions: the fallow ground is not poughed up
by the pressures of afflictons, which through the grace of God are great means
to tame nature, and to subdue the pride of it, and to bring it to a right frame
and temper. Before I was afflicted ( faith David) I went a stray. And Ephraim
faith of himself, Jer: 31.
Jer. 31. I was as a Bullock unaccustomed to the yoke, thou chastisest me, and
I was chastised; I was ashamed, because I bore the reproach of my youth. But
young men are free from aches, and pains, and sickness, and sorrow, much more
then old age: and this is the reason why they are more licentious.

Lastly, Reas. 4 Want of spiritual joy.
young men want true joy in God: therefore they betake themselves to carnal
joy. For sure it is that a man cannot live without joy and contentment: if he
have it not from the Wells of salvation, he will drink it out of watery and
slimy places. Now because men in their youth cannot take in the spiritual joy
of that clear fountain, therefore they drink in the muddy waters of carnal joy.

The use of this point is in the first place an Admonition to all young men,
Use 1. For Admonion.
to take notice of these maladies, and spiritual diseases in themselves. The
first degree of our healing, is to see that we are sick: and till then, Christ
Jesus the Physician of our souls, 1. To take notice of their carnal joy.
has no commission to do us good.

Let young men observe in themselves, first their carnal joy. Solomon here
shows that they rejoice inordinately. Young men's rejoicing proved to be
inordinate.


This may appear to them first, because they rejoice not where they ought: they
solace not themselves in God, in whom is the fountain of joy; nor in Christ
Jesus, 1: Because it is not placed there where it should be.
in whom is the spring of joy; nor in the sacred Word, where there is the
Cistern of Joy. Even as a bone when it is out of joint, out of its place, it
must needs be a disordered bone; so the affections when they are misplaced, are
disordered: and then our Joy, and any other affection are misplaced, when they
are not set upon God and Christ. Now if young men would deal uprightly with
themselves, they should perceive that for the most part in their jollity and
merriment they never think of God, or dream of the world to come. Nay, the
serious apprehension of God Almighty, would quench their joy, and make it
altogether put out.

Secondly, 2: Because it is placed there where it should not be.
the carnalness of the joy of young men appears, because they rejoice where
they ought not, in riot, in drunkenness, in surfeiting, in voluptuousness, many
times in obscenity of words and phrases, in making jeasts of the word of God,
in deriding their superiors behind their backs. As Solomon faith of laughter,
thou art mad; so we may say of this merriment, it is mad merrimemt: he is a mad
man that rejoices in that for which, except he betake himself to serious and
bitter mourning, he cannot be saved.

Thirdly, 3 Because it is excessive in lawful things.
the inordinateness of the joy of young men may appear in this; because they
rejoice excessively in lawful things: for any joy when it is inordinate and
excessive, it is carnal. It is lawful to rejoice in recreations: a whetting is
no letting (as the Proverb goes.) But for a man to let out himself to the
hinderance of the service of God, to the disturbance of his duty to men, it is
unlawful. It is lawful to delight in the blessings, and comforts of God, that
he affords us: we read of the Joy of harvest, in Isa. 9. But for a man to
delight in the gifts of God, more then in the giver, it is unlawful. Now if
young men examine themselves, they shall find their hearts mount not up to God
in their joy and jollity, and that they are excessive in the joy of the
creature, but altogether cold, without joy of the Creator.

Fourthly, 4 Because it terminates not in God.
the carnalness of the Joy of young men may well appear in this; because they
terminate, and conclude not their joy in God. This follows on the former: for
it is impossible that what begins not in God, should end in God. Now when
Joy begins in sin, it cannot end in God, but in the Devil.

Secondly, 2 Of their walking after their own heart.
let young men take notice of themselves, how they walk after their own hearts.
The heart that says; Come, put away pensive thoughts: trouble not your self
about the day of reckoning and Judgment; enjoy the time present: what need
this strictness of conversation: zeal is but rashness; there is no need of it;
take thy sill of pleasures: thou have goods laid up for many years. Thus they
Judge, Hosea 7.
and thus they walk after their carnal heart. This heart is as no heart: as we
read of Ephraim in Hosea 7. He was a silly dove that had no heart: Certainly
the heart that does not guide men in the right way, and direct men to the fear
of God, it is no heart. For as the eye that will not lead us in the right way,
that performs not its office, is no eye: so the heart that leads not men to
God, and to goodness, it is like the heart of Ephraim, it is as no heart.

Again in the third place. 3 Of their walking after the sight of their eyes.
Let young men take notice of themselves, how they walk after the sight of
their eyes. That is, they stand gazing on things temporal, and neglect things
eternal: they see a beauty and luster in these outward things, and perceive no
glory and brightness in Christ Jesus, and in his precious Ordinances.

Beloved, Job 31.1.
if we follow our own heart, and our own eyes it will be thus. We should rather
labor with Job, to make a covenant with our eyes. Oh how few young men are
there that make a bargain and agreement with their eyes, that they Ier: 9.
Oh how few young men are shall not be as open Casements to let sin into the
soul? there, Heb: 11.
that like Jeremy, have their eyes as fountains of water, to weep day and night
for the afflictions of the people of God? Oh how few yonng men are there, that
with Moses, have an eye to the recompense of reward, that they may suffer
affliction with the people of God, rather then to enjoy the pleasures of sin
for a season?

Now I beseech you take a survey of your selves in these things. These are the
vices, and sins, and deformities of young men: to be seen and lamented by all
those that hope to dwell in Gods holy Hill.

The second use of this point, Use 2. For Fxhortation.
is for exhortation to young men: they should labor to be reformed in their
affections and hearts. And away, away with this carnal joy: we ought to cast
it out of us.

Carnal Joy: 1 To abandon carnal joy.
will you know what the event of it will be? It will end in carnal sorrow, and
without repentance in hell it self. Woe unto you (faith our Savior Christ) that
laugh now, Luke 6.26. Job 20.6,7.
you shall weep and mourn. The triumphing of the wicked (says Zophar in Job)
is short, and the joy of the hypocrite but for a moment; though his excellency
mount up to the heavens, and his head reach unto the clouds; yet he shall
perish as his own dung, they which have seen him shall say where is be? He
shall fall away as a dream, and shall not be found; yea, he shall be chased
away as a vision of the night.

But not to give you this only in Precept, Directions how to avoid carnal joy.
but also to show you how to reform your selves in these vices, that Solomon
speci^eth bo bear sway in young men: let me lay you down these few directions.

First, 1 To labor for sorrow for sin.
you must betake your selves to mourning for you sins; as Saint James says, Be
afflctied, and weep, and mourn, let your laughter be turned into heaviuess. If
we be not reconciled to God, if we have not assurance, that we are interested
in Christ, there is no time for us to rejoice, we should rather betake our
selves to bitter mourning: for the wrath of God is due unto us, and we know not
how soon it may fall upon us,

In the second place: 2. Consider the vanity of things.
Consider how vain all things are in which youthful persons rejoice.

If young men rejoice in human wisdom and understanding, 1. Of humane wisdom.
Eccles:1:13.
this is a vain thing. For first, it is gotten with a great deal of trouble,
and vexation of spirit: so faith Solomon, Eccles. 1.13. I gave my heart to
seek, and search out by wisdom, concerning all things that are done under
heaven, this sore travel has God given to the sons of men to be exercised
therewith. And (verse 18.) in much wisdom is much grief, and he that
increases knowledge, increases sorrow. God does so punish the pride and
boldness of the wit of men, even from the fall of our first Parents.

Secondly, Eccles:1:15.
this human wisdom it must needs be a vain thing, for Eccles. 1.15. that which
is crooked cannot be made straight, and that which is wanting cannot be
numbered, by human wisdom; The meaning is this: that the natural wisdom of man
cannot supply the defects of nature which are innumerable: much less can it
furnish the soul with grace or salvation.

Thirdly, it is but vexation of spirit. Solomon though he had gotten wisdom
and understanding, and had experience more then all the Kings of Jerusalem that
were before him, yet (faith he) Behold this is vexation of spirit.

Again, 1 Cor: 1:19.
God will abolish this human wisdom, 1 Cor. 1.19. I will destroy the wisdom of
the wise, and will bring to nothing the understanding of the prudent. Where is
the wise? where is the Scribe? where is the disputer of this world? Has not
God made foolish the wisdom of this world?

Besides, all your human wisdom, it shall not go down to to the Grave: it shall
leave you when you die. There is no work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom
in the grave whether thou go, Eccles. 9:10.
Eccles. 9.10. This is the first thing in which young men often rejoice, they are
prudent and wise: And you see that this is a vain thing.

In the second place, 2 Of worldly honor and cred it. Eccles: 1:16.
if a young man rejoice in his honor, and credit amongst men: this also is
vain. Solomon has showed it, Eccles. 2.16. He declares to us, that all the
honor of the world will end in oblivion, there is (says he) no remembrance of
the wise, more then of the fool, for ever: for that which now is, in the days
to come shall be forgotten, and how dies the wise man? as the fool.

Again, if a man rejoice in honor, and much glory, he cannot believe: so faith
Christ, John 5:44.
John 5.44. How can you believe, since you seek honor one of another, and not
the honor that comes of God only? And it is noted to be the reason why many
of the chief Rulers that believed on Christ did not confess him, (without
which faith cannot be unfeigned) because they loved the praise of men, more
then the praise of God, John 10.43. John 10:43.


Nay further, Gal. 5:26.
the Apostle shows us that this is the cause of envy, Gal. 5.26. Be not
desirous of vainglory, envying one another. Envy is a vexing affection: this
vainglory is the cause of this envy: whereby we shall pine away, when we see
the happiness and welfare of our brethren.

Further, 3 Of worldly pleasures. Eccles:2:2.
if young men delight in pleasures (which is the common course of youth) these
also are vain things. I said in my heart (says Solomon, Eccles.2.2.) Go to
now, I will prove thee with mirth, therefore enjoy pleasure: and behold this
also is vanity. Kings that have had the greatest wisdom to invent them: and
the greatest leisure to use them: yet they never found full contentment in the
same. I made me (says he verse. 4.) great works, Verse 4.
I builded me houses; I planted me vineyards, I made me gardens and orchards,
and planted trees in them of all kind of fruits, I made me pools of water, I
got me servants and maidens; also I had great possessions of great and small
cattle, above all that were in Jerusalem before me; I got me men-singers, and
women-singers, and the delights of the sons of men, as musical instruments of
all sorts. Here were the pleasures of Solomon. But (verse 11.) Behold (says he)
I looked on all the works that my hands had wrought, and on the labor that I
had labored to do, and behold all was vanity; and vexation of spirit, and
there was no profit under the Sun. The wise Solomon that had been trying every
creature, whether it had any thing in it that might give him a true relish;
professed, that there was no profit under the Sun.

Yet further; 1 Cor: 7: 19.
these pleasures shall cease, there shall be an end of them, 1 Cor. 7.29. The
time is short, it remains that those that have wives, be as though they had
none; they that rejoice, as though they rejoiced not; they that buy, as though
they possessed not; they that use the world, as not abusing of it; for the
fashion of this world passes away.

Lastly, Luke 8: 4.
our Savior Christ, in Luke 8.14. shows that the pleasures of this life
choke the word of God, that it cannot bring forth grateful fruit to God.

Fourthly, 4 Of riches.
if young men delight in riches, and rejoice in their estates that God that
given them: this likewise is a vain thing.

For first, many times, wealth is gotten by deceit, and then God blows on it,
Jer. 5.27. Jer: 5: 27.
As a cage is full of birds, so are their houses full of deceit, therefore they
are become great and waxen rich: shall not I visit for these things, says the
Lord? and shall net my soul be avenged on such people as this?

Again, Eccles: 5: 12.
wealch is kept with much sorrow, Eccles 5.12. The sleep of the laboring man
is sweet, whether he eat little or much; but the abundance of the rich will
not suffer him to sleep.

Thirdly, Rev. 18.18.
wealth is lost with a great deal of sorrow and vexation, Rev. 18.18. when the
smoke of Babylon ascended up to heaven; Oh what lamencation there was! they
cried out, What city is like unto this great city? and they cost dust on their
heads, and cried, weeping and wailing, saying; Alas, alas, that great city,
wherein were made rich, all that had ships in the sea, by reason of her
costliness, for in one hour is she made desolate.

But suppose further, that a man should get, and keep his wealth in the fear of
God, yet these things are most uncertain, as the Apostle faith, 2 Timothy 1.16.
2 Timothy 1.16. Charge them that are rich in this world, that they trust not in
uncertain riches.

Lastly, Luke 12.25.
these riches cannot preserve our life: so faith Christ himself, Luke 12.25.
Take heed and beware of Covetousness, for no man's life is preserved by the
abundance of that he possesses.

In the last place. 5 Of friends and Allies. Psalm: 62: 9.
If young men rejoice in friends and Allies: this also is a vain thing.

For, Psalm. 62.9. The man of low degree is vanity, and the man of high degree
is a lie, to be laid in the balance, they are lighter then vanity.

Again, Psalm: 49: 7.
no friend can deliver us from Death, Psalm. 49.7.8. No man can by any means
redeem his brother, nor give to God a ransom for him (for the redemption of
their soul is precious, and it cease for ever) that he should still live for
ever, and not see corruption.

Thus I have showed several things that young men rejoice in, and have showed
likewise that their joy is founded upon vanity, upon nothing. And this is the
second means to heal young men of the inordinateness of their Joy, to meditate
with themselves how vain and frivolous all things are that they delight in.

The third means is, 3 Labor for spiritual joy. Rom: 5: 1.
to betake themselves to seek spiritual joy. The wellhead of this Joy is God:
whom the Scripture calls the God of cousolation. The instrument to convey
this Joy, is Faith, Romans 5.1. Being jnstified by faith, we have peace with God.
The grounds of this Joy are twofold.

First, A twofold ground of spiritual joy.
the good things exhibited.

Secondly, the good things promised.

The good things exhibited; 1 The good things exhibied.
That God has written our names in the book of life. Here is the fountain of
spiritual joy to a true Christian; Rejoice (says Christ) not that the devils
are fallen before you, but that your names are written in the book of life.

Secondly, 2 The good things promised.
the other ground of spiritual joy, is the good things promised us. And those
may be reduced to two heads.

God has made promises, either in regard of evil things, (as we call them) of
afflictions that befall us. Or the weakness of the graces that are in us.

Now in the evil of Affliction, we may rejoice first; In the promise of
protection in affliction.

2. In the promise of Edification, by affliction.

3. In the promise of deliverence from affliction. All in the best season.

Again, for the defects of grace in us; (which indeed is a thing exceeding
grievous to a true Christian.) Here we may rejoice. First;

In the promise of preserving of grace.

2. In the promise of augmentation and growth in grace.

3. In the promise of bringing the weakest grace to perfection.

Here you have the wellhead of Joy. Oh that young men would know God, and
Christ Jesus, and the word of God, and the promises, that they might leave this
sinful and sottish joy whereto they are so adicted. This is the means to be rid
of it, by getting into their souls, the sense and feeling of the true Joy of
the children of God.

Again in the second place; The second Exhertation not to walk after their own
heart.
Young men should be exhorted not to walk after their own heart: which is the
next thing that Solomon notes as a fault in them. The heart (says Jeremy) is
deceitful above measure, and desperately wicked. It is so deceitful, such a
Cheator, that we are not able to comprehend it: it is desperately wicked. Who
will follow a false guide? and a disperate wicked guide? so is the heart of man.

Lastly, The third Exhortation, not to walk after the sight of their eyes.
they should not walk after the sight of their eyes. David prayed; Turn away
mine eyes that I regard not vanity, and quicken me in thy Law. And again: Open
mine eyes, that I may see the wondrous things of thy Law.

There is much danger in following our eyes. Eve was misled by her eye, she
looked upon the forbidden fruit, and saw it beautiful, and so lusted after it.
And, when I saw (says Achan) among the spoils a goodly Babylonish garment,
Joshu: 7: 21.
and a wedge of gold, then I coveted them, and took them. David was defiled by
the eye: 2 Samuel: 11: 1.
He saw Bathsheba from the roof of his house washing her self, and then he
lusted.

Holy men have prayed to God that he would keep their eyes in a right frame and
temper. These are the particulars that Solomon gives to young men in
direction, to take heed of carnal joy: to take heed of walking after their
hearts, or after their sense. And these things (brethren) I have now committed
in direction to you.

The last use of this Doctrine is, Use. 3. To old men.
for old men. For if young men may not rejoice carnally, much less may old men.
Youth may plead for it self, in want of wisdom, and gravity, sobriety, and
experience, better then those of age. If young men may not have evil hearts,
and evil eyes, much less old men.

Look to it, you that hear me this day, that are stricken in age, (as the
Scripture speaks) that are smitten in your limbs with age, that you cannot walk
with activity and nimbleness: and are smitten in your senses with age, that you
cannot well see, and hear, and taste. Oh that your hearts would smite you for
your sins. May not young men rejoice in pleasures, in friends, in honors, in
wealth? Much less may those of old age. Must young men be careful to chase away
all carnal joy, and to get spiritual joy, that begins in godly sorrow? much
more must old men. It is no time for those that are old to rejoice in carnal
things: a few days will make an end of them, and lay them in the Grace. Oh
then, you that are of years, break off your sins by repentance, and your
iniquities by mercy. Rejoice in being good, and in doing good. This Joy will
continue with you: as for the Joy of corn, and wine, and oil, and silver, and
gold; this joy will die when you die. Yea, notwithstanding all the supports of
this joy in this life, yet in another life you may be transported to hellish
torments. Thus much for this first.

In the second place; Solomon shows the remedy against this carnal Joy in
young men: which also may be a preservative against sin, both for young and
old. But know thou (says he) that for all these things God will bring thee to
judgment. The Doctrine is thus much; That the Lord God will certainly bring
men to judgment for all the sins they have Doct. 2. God will bring men to
judgment for all their sins. Masa: 3: 18.
committed.

This is an infallible truth. Know thou this, that for all these things God
will bring thee to judgment. Malach. 3.18. A book of remembrance is written
before God, for those that fear the Lord, and thought upon his name. So the
Lord has a book of remembrance wherein he writes down the sins of the sons of
men; and this shall be opened, Eccles 12: 14.
and unciasped in the evil day, Eccles. 12.14. God will bring every work into
judgment, with every secret thing, whether it be good, or whether it be evil.
2 Cor: 5: 10.
2 Cor. 5.10. We must appear before the Judgment seat of Christ, that every
one may receive the things done in his body, according to that be has done,
whether it be good or bad. 2 These 4: 6.
1 These.4.16. The Lord himself shall descend from heaven with a shout, with the
voice of the Archangel, and with the trump of God. Epistle of Jude, verse.14.
Epist. Jude 14.
And Enoch the seventh from Adam, prophesied of this, saying, the Lord comes
with ten thousands of his Saints, to execute Judgment upon all, and to
convince all that are ungodly among them, of all their ungodly deeds, which
they have ungodly committed, and of all their hard speeches which ungodly
sinners have spoken against him.

For opening of this point, I will briefly show you these two things.

First, what is the reason that God will bring all these things to Judgment.

Secondly, what manner of Judgment it shall be.

For the first. Reas. 1. Because of Gods decree. Heb: 9: 27.
What is the reason that God will bring all these things to Judgment. The
first reason is. His Decree, Heb. 9.27. It is appointed to all men once to die,
and after this the Judgment. Even as it must needs be that man must die,
because God has so appointed it: so also it must needs be that men must come
to Judgment, in regard of the purpose and decree of God.

Secondly, Reas. 2. Because of his righteousness.
God will do this in regard of his righteousness. He is a holy God, a hater of
iniquity. But many times in this world it is well with the wicked, and ill with
the godly. Lazarus he is in woeful misery, and Dives he is in abundance of
prosperity: Now God will show his love to the righteous, and his hatred to the
wicked in this Judgment. If judgment here begin at the house of God; It is
impossible the family of Satan should escape hereafter.

Thirdly, Reas. 3. Because of clearing his ways before all, men and Angels.
God will by this means clear his ways, as the Apostle speaks, Romans 2.5. There
are many ways of God that are dark and cloudy to us, but then God will
manifest himself before men and Angels. Then those ways and works of God
against which the hearts of unsanctified men have boiled, shall appear to be as
they are, holy, and good, and righteous, to their condemnation and terror.

Yet further; Reas. 4. Because of his hatred against sin declared In particular
judgments in this life.
The particular Judgment that God inflicts upon men in this life, may prove
the universal. The burning of Sodom and Gommorah: the drowning of the old
World: the plaguing of Egypt, and the desolation of Jerusalem. These show the
insinite hatred of God against sin: therefore no doubt he will take a time to
revenge himself of the impenitent amongst the sons of men, because of their sins

Lastly, Reas. 5. Because of the horror that is in the conscience of the
wicked.
the consciences of men may prove that there shall be a Judgment. For let a
man commit secret sins, that none knows but God and he, yet many times, he
feels hellish horror: which is a manifest proose, that conscience sees, and
apprehends God as the supreme Judge, that will call all men to an account for
their sins. Thus you hear the reasons why there must be a Judgment.

The manner of this Judgment consists in these particulars.

First, The manner of the Judgment 1: It shall be the last Judgment.
it shall be the last Judgment, after which there shall be no other: which
declares the terribleness of it. In this life, while there is life, there is
hope: Let the wicked forsake his ways, and turn to the Lord, he will be
gracious to him. But then the sentence shall not be reverst: then there can be
no appeal from that Judge, and judgment.

Again it shall be a General Judgment, 2: It shall be a General judgment.
which is the second thing. God judges in this world, and that both in life
and in death: He judges in life, by chastising his children for their faults,
and avenging himself upon his enemies. He judges every man at death. But then
there shall be a General Judgment of all, 2. Cor. 10. We must all appear before
the Judgment seat of Christ. 2 Cor: 5: 10.3: It shall be a manifest jndgement.


In the third Place. It shall be a manifest Judgment. Sometime the Lord Judges
men secretly, by raising up in them fears and horrors in their hearts: causing
his curse in the^ as water in their bowels, and oil in their bones. But then
God shall open his wrath against the children of wrath, before a world of men,
and no eye shall pity them.

Fourthly, 4. It shall be a sudden judgment.
it shall be a sudden Judgment. Even as the flood came upon the old World, when
they were sporting themselves, and deriding Noah that preached to them of the
flood: so shall the fire come upon the World, that shall pass before the face
of Christ, when he shall judge the quick and the dead. As asnare (says Christ (
shall it come upon all that dwell upon the earth. When the Fowler lays a
snare to take a Bird, he gives not warning to the Bird, but surprizeth it
suddenly; so will Christ Jesus, surprise the sons of men, suddenly beyond their
expectation. The Evangelist faith, he shall come as a thief in the night. A
thief knocks not, he gives not warning: so Christ Jesus, beyond the thoughts
of men, will be on them suddenly before they are aware, by his dreadful
Judgment.

Fifthly, 5 It shall be a righteous judgment. Rom: 2: 5.
it shall be a most righteous Judgment. Then God (as the Apostle says Romans 2.)
will render to every man according to his deeds. He will not regard the face of
any: He will not be bribed by wealth or reward: He will not hear the testimony
of the world for the wicked, or against the godly, but deal impartially, and
give to every one according to his doings.

Lastly, 6 It shall be an eternal judgment.
It shall be an Eternal Judgment. So says the Apostle, Heb. 6.2. The meaning
is not, that God shall sit for ever, sifting matters, and surveying causes: but
it is so called from the effect: for the conclusion shall be this, the Eternal
weal and happiness of the godly, and the eternal woe and misery of the wicked,
that shall be plunged by the justice of God into the severest torments.

The Use of this Doctrine. Use 1. A preservative against tentation.
First, it serves as a preservative against temptation: for so Solomon has
made it in the Text, a preservative and bridle to young men, God will bring
thee to judgment, says he: and let me make it so to you. When Satan tempts
you to sin, remember, God will call you to Judgment, even for those faults,
for which you may possibly escape the penalty of men, yet not withstanding is
is impossible for you to avoid the righteous Judgment of God. If Satan would
have thee do any thing, that the word of God, and thy own conscience shows
thee to be hateful, and wicked in the sight of God: say to him, No, no, God
will bring me to Judgment. This is the policy of our Adversary, when he
induces us to evil, he makes sin sweet and pleasant to us: but it should be
our wisdom to make sin bitter and loathsome, even in this meditation, God will
bring us to Judgment for the same.

The Apostle says, Resist the devil, and he will fly from you. But how must we
resist him; not by arguments of our own making, but by arguments of the word of
God: and amongst other weapons, remember to list up this: when Satan would
have thee sin, say, No, no, God will bring me to Judgment. When the Devil
solicited Eve, and circumvented her: she spoke (in the Serpent) to Satan
concerning the Judgment of God: We may eat (says she) of all the trees of the
Garden, but not of the tree in the midst of the Garden, least we die: here
she brought an argnment from the judgment of God: but here was her weakness,
she presently let it fall. It should be otherwise with us, when Satan tempts
us: let us say, we shall die, and be condemned for sin: say so, and continue in
it. If any revolt from the truth he professes, he shall die in his sin. If any
man disquiet the people of God, by vexation, or oppression, he shall die in his
sin. If any man be a drunkerd or Epicure, he shall die in his sin. If any man
be a whoremonger or adulterer, he shall die in his sin: If any man be a
swearer, God has vowed, he will not hold him guiltless, he shall die in his
sin. If any man be an ignorant person, disobeying godliness, and obeying
unrighteousness, he shall die in his sin. If any man continue in gross
wickedness, in any wickedness without repentance, he shall die in his sin, Oh
remember this Judgment of God, this death that God will inslict on sinners for
sin: For the wages of sin is death: and arm your selves with this when Satan
tempts you: if you forget Death and Judgment, you are naked, and unarmed,
your spiritual Adversary, may hit you on the bare, and spoil you as he will.

The second use, Use 2. For Instruction.
is for instruction. Will God bring us to Judgment for our sins. Oh then let us
have to repentance. Beloved, this is one of the last things that God will do:
and this is the greatest thing that Ministers can say: God will judge you for
your sins. The Apostle Saint Paul, he moves the Atheniaus ( Acts 17.31.) to
repentance upon this very ground, because God has appointed a day, in which he
will Judge the world in righteousness. Acts 17: 31.
And surely if this will not awaken us, nothing will, nothing can. What do we
mean (beloved) to suffer our sins to stand upon the score? Where is our
wisdom? Our grace? Are we able to stand before God, when he is angry with us?
Why do we not take off our sins by godly sorrow? If a Judge should say to a
Malefactor, except thou mourn for thy offense thou shall die, and be execnted.
Do we not think he would mourn to save his life? Behold, God faith to you,
except you mourn for your iniquities, you shall die in your sins. Oh why do not
we make our eyes as fountains to bewail our sins? that man is possessed with
extreme hardness that lamenteth not his iniquity, and he treasureth up unto
himself, wrath against the day of wrath, and the declaration of the righteous
judgment of God Well, if we will not mourn for our sins here to repentance, we
shall mourn heareafter in hellish horror, without hope of help or mercy.

In the third place, Use 3. Keep a good conscience.
this Doctrine that God will Jugde us, should make us preserve in our selves a
good conscience. It is the very use that the Apostle makes, Acts 24.15, 16. He
had hope that there should be a resurrection of the dead, both of the just and
unjust, therefore he did exercise himself to have always a good conscience,
void of offense toward God, and toward men. Blessed (faith Christ) are those
that are pure in heart. There is nothing that will be so rewarded, and so
regarded at the last day, as a good conscience. But for those that have stained
their consciences with all wickedness and sin, and have not washed their
consciences with the blood of Christ, and the tears of true repentance, these
shall have their portion without, amongst those that are unclean.

Lastly, Use. 5 To fear God.
this Doctrine should teach us to fear God, and to give glory to him. As Saint
John speaks in the Revelation, the day of his Judgment is coming, therefore
fear him, and give glory to him. If the particular judgments of God that light
upon men in this life should make us reverence his holy Name, how much more
should this last Judgment that is so terrible, and unavoidable?

ABRAHAM'S PURCHASE: OR, A POSSESSION FOR BURIAL.
SERMON XIX.
GENESIS 23.4. I am a stranger, and sojourner among you: give me a posse^ion of a
burying place with you, that I may bury my dead out of my sight.


THis is the Conclusion of all Flesh; they were never so dear before, but they
come to be as loathsome and intolerable now. When once the lines and picture
of Death is drawn over the Fabric of Man or Woman's body, (as it is said here
of Sarah) all their glory cease, all their good respect vanishes away, their
best friends would be fainest rid of them: even Sarah that was so goodly and
amiable in Abraham's sight, must now out of his sight, he must bury his dead out
of his sight.

Oh the strange misery that sin has brought us to, when it devolveth, and
throws down all our glory at once: and the ruff of Mankind in their chiefest
pride, in their greatest jollity, all is tumbled in an instant, in a moment to
baseness, and stink, and misery!

How should we be diligent to get the hope of a better life, seeing this is so
little worth having? And how should our thoughts always fly up to God, since
there is nothing but rottenness and putrefaction found here in the world?

But Abraham, as the Father of faithful men, and a pattern to all loving
Husbands in all ages insuiug, does not this till such time as the dead Sarah
grows noisome to all that look upon her. As long as he could by his mourning
and lamentation prosecute her without offense to his eyes, and danger to his
health, he did it, but now the time is come, when earth must be put to earth,
and dust must return to dust. There is no place for the fairest beauty above
ground, when once God has taken life and breath from it: it must go to its own
elements, and to the rock and pit from whence it was hewn, thither it must
return.

This holy man therefore being well resolved of this, and knowing the doom
already uttered by God upon our first Parents, Dust thouart, and to dust thou
shall return; he cannot keep his dead longer by him; he knows the bed wherein
now she must be laid, therefore he seeks for it to these Countrymen that he
lived withal, that were Heathens and Pagans, but very moral and civil men, as
we may see in this whole Discourse. And he desires them that he might have a
place for his own use and turn: not intimating so much to them, as that there
should be a separation in their very death from Pagans and Heathens, but he
keeps that to himself, and covers it with smooth speech, and elegancy of
language, as his manner was. For indeed it was not lawful for Abraham to bury
his dead amongst the Canaanites, the sons of Heth, of whom he demanded this
peculiar favor at this time: but God would have his children, as they differ
in all their life from Heathens that knew no God, so they should differ in
every point, even in their Graves after death, that there might be no
commixtion, and mingling of light and darkness, and no fellowship between
Christ and Belial. Therefore to continue this hope, and confirm it in all his
Posterity, that were a peculiar and chosen people; It was necessary he should
choose his Grave, his place of Sepulture, that they might be sequestered from
them in their death, as they were in the course of their life.

Now after he had performed that duty that every man owes to his dead friend,
especially to his Wife, the mate of his bosom; he comes to move this to the
sons of Heth, that were Lords of the soil. He was abundant in tears before he
comes to move it: for God which commands us not to lament for the Dead, as
men without hope, does notwithstanding not forbid us to mourn, and sorrow for
them, and to lament: he gives us leave; nay, he rather allows and approves
of natural affection, when we weep with them that weep, and mourn with them
that mourn, and rejoice with them that rejoice.

Abraham knew well in what estate his Wife was, he knew she was in a happy
condition, he knew she was the Mother of the Faithful, and was translated to
the heavenly Paradise: and he was not angry with God for taking away his Wife,
he disdained not the act of his providence; notwithstanding he resolves into
tears and laments. And these may well stand together, if they be not (as S.
Jerome says) rebellious tears against God, and against hope, and against the
faith of the Resurrection: they are qualified and allowed, and accepted with
the Lord, as a testimony of that good affection, and brotherly love that he
commands to be in every one.

After he had performed this, perhaps mourned three or four days for his wife,
he knew this mourning must have an end, he knew that he must commit her to the
ground, and make away with her, that she might not be a means further to
continue, and aggravate his sorrow to no purpose: for with that condition a man
is allowed the use of affections, as that he respects the glory of God, and
give way to weak nature, rather then to any indulgent affection that is too
headstrong and unruly, as though there were no hope in the promise of the
Almighty. Therefore (I say) when he had thus moderated himself, as first to
show by his sorrow that he was a loving husband, and then to show in the
ceasing of his sorrow that he was a wise man, and a faithful Christian, he
comes now to the chief and main point, whereby to make an end of his sorrow,
and take away the cause of further grief, the sight of his dead. He comes to
desire a possession of burial: and because he was a stranger here, he comes to
those that were Lords, chief ones, and desires them to intercede for him to
the chief Lord, to bargain with him for a place that he had sought out, and as
it seems (by Gods direction too) chosen. But I will go no further then the
Text.

Wherein first, consider a certain preamble that the holy man uses to the
people that he now converst with, in these words; I am a stranger, and a
sojourner among you. Wherein the sweetness of his nature does show it self,
that he was both humble-minded, to know and confess that he was a stranger, and
also that he was full of reverence and respect to those that he dwelt with: I
am a stranger among you; You are the Lords, I a poor Tenant; You the Masters of
the soil, I but an In-mate, that came in and was first lodged by you, and with
your consent; and without your consent I will not attempt any thing. That is
the permonition whereby he insinuates into their affections, and makes way for
his speech and petition, that after he was to propound and tender to them.

And then the Petition follows, Give me, because I will not take it of my own
head: Give me, What? A possession, such a thing as I may call my own, as I may
have to my own use, sequestered from all other men's: And Give it me; not upon
gift merely, but for my money, give it me for price: answer me what I shall
pay, that I may acquire and make this purchase.

Thirdly, for what he would have this possession: To bury his Wife, and
himself, and his posterity; A burying place for them. A strange thing; a
strange purchase for a man, to purchase no other ground, but to buy Land for a
burying place.

Lastly, whom he would bury there, my dead. He calls her not his Wife, but
his Dead; because now the contract was ended by Death, and she was no more his
Wife, but one of his loving friends. Burial care after Death, it is committed
to men by God, and by the voice of Nature, therefore give me a place to bury my
dead out of my sight.

It grieved him to see that beauty turned to pale black darkness, that now had
overfaced the face of that beautiful woman: to see that sweet composed body
that was the mirror of the times; and the miracle of woman in those ages, that
it was now subject to rottenness and putrefaction, and did now grow noisome,
that it made men fly from it, that they could not look upon it. That I may
bury my dead out of my sight.

These are the branches of my Text.

First, concerning the humble preface that Abraham makes; I am a stranger and a
sojourner among you.

A mavelous thing to consider the great faith of our Father Abraham, and
patience that he used in the apprehension of Gods promise: for all this land
was Abraham's land, yet he confessed himself a stranger: and Saint Steven says in
Acts 7. that he had not one foot of ground; not a foot in all the land that he
could own.

This is that wherein God is most glorious in his Saints, their expectation,
their patient expectation of Gods promise: that they think themselves as well
for the time to come, for that which shall come, as if they were in present
possession.

When the Lord brought Abraham out of his native Country, out of Ur of the
Chaldees, from the furthest part of Syria, he brought him many hundred miles to
an unknown Land, and he promised to give him that Land, and to his seed after
him: who would have thought but he meant to give him personal possession? But
no, as soon as he was there, the Lord drives him out by famine into Egypt, and
then he understood that Gods mind was not to give it him; but when the sins of
the Amorites were ripe, and the people of Israel were grown to a number, that
they might come by some claim and right, and be such a multitude as should not
be contemned, that they might not come by way of miracle to take possession,
then God purposed to give it him.

So that this thing we may learn hence, that God is infinitely gracious to his
children, when they are content with the appearance of things to come, as well
as if they had present possession. This is that which the Apostle Saint Paul
frequently speaks of in Heb. 11. that the Fathers had regard to the promises,
and trusted upon God, that that should be truly performed that was spoken to
them, and therein they rested themselves, and were as well contented with the
good word of God for the future times, for their posterities, as if they had it
performed in their own persons.

I am a Stranger and a Sojourner.

Here are two words; the one, ( A sojourner,) signifies, he that passes by,
as those that come to see diverse Countries and stay not, but are making
homewards: the other, ( A stranger,) signifies, one that sits by in a
place. Abraham was both of them; for when God commanded him, he was ready at
any time to dislodge and go his way: as long as he found the mercy of God to
him; that is, as long as there was peace, and plenty in the land, he rested
there in that place in his Calling. God appointed him to sit there, and there
he sat, but not as heir of the ground, as a Lord, but as one that did sit
there by favor, as enjoying a piece of ground for his cattle to feed upon,
(for the Land was not full, but they might afford some room to strangers) such
was he, ready to fly when God called him. Therefore when God called him to
Egypt, he presently changed the place, and went to that: and from thence, when
God called him again, he came to Mamre, and there he dwelt with the Inhabitants
of the Land, because he understood that that was the place that God had
selected for him to make his possession.

It teaches us to learn this voice of our Father Abraham; as children learn to
speak by their Parents, and delight in their language; so we should still
delight our selves in this language of the Eather of the faithful, to be, and
account our selves strangers and sojourners among you that be the world, among
you that have your cares so fixed on the world, that you have no care of
heaven: among you that will give nothing, but hoard up riches, and you know not
to whom you shall leave them: among you that have no dwelling above in that
City, whose builder and maker is God: among you that live only on earth, I am a
stranger among you.

And being so (as every Christian must profess himself) it therefore follows,
we must abstain from all fleshly lusts, and worldly desires, and carnal
concupiscences, and appetites: for strangers use not to settle on their dregs
in the Country they pass through, but as men in motion, they take that which is
needful, knowing that they have a Country in another place, the blessed
Jerusalem that is from above, who is the mother of us all.

Secondly, we are to consider here the humble conclusion, that Abraham makes
out of his pilgrimage, out of his strangeness: because he was a stranger;
therefore he will be no meddler; as it is an old rule, strangers must be no
meddlers, they must not take what they will, not buy what they will, strangers
do not purchase land in a strange Country, without the good will of the
Natives. Such was the nature of this holy man of God, he would not so much as
make bold with them for a burying place without their consent. One would think
it had been easy for him to have ventured upon this: whenever a man dies,
the common custom of nature, and the law of Nations yields this privilege
to put their dead into the ground, earth to earth: there is none so barbarous
as to deny, by the light of nature, but that a dead man should be buried,
strangers, or Forreiners, or native Inhabitants: therefore I say, a man would
think that such a man as Abraham, might safely have ventured upon this to bury
Sarah, and never told them, and asked their good will. But no, the blessed man
was of another metal, of a heavenly and sweet disposition, he would trouble no
man, he would give no offense, but carry himself as an Angel of God among them,
harmless to every one, he desires every man's love, he was careful to avoid any
man's displeasure: and therefore he comes to them as to great men, and
entreats them, as if it had been for a Lordship, or a piece of a Province, or
some great matter of estate: he comes to beg a Grave, he desires a burying
place.

This should teach us what ought to be our condition in this world, not to be
audacious and bold, and presumptuous, as commonly we are one upon another. And
even strangers themselves, so forget themselves now adays, that they make no
conscience of depraving, and undermining, and spoiling, and putting Natives out
of their possession: they get to themselves such an impudency, as is strange,
and none of the least reproaches, they neither approve themselves to God nor
men by this bold intrusion. Let strangers be like themselves, to know that
nothing is theirs that they can challenge, they must come to it by the good
will, and consent of the parties, for strangers are not at home, but to be sent
home to their own place; they must presume of nothing out of their place.

If men did consider this, they would not shoulder out, and in jure, and
backbite one another, and all for base worldly pelse, little better then a
burying place, then a Rod of ground to make them a Grave: but men are so set on
it, as though all their hope were here, as though they had no treasure in
another place, as though this were their home, and they had no further motion
to better things. This is the Preface.

Now the Petition follows. Give me I pray you.

Give me, not Gratis, the meaning is not (as after the story shows) he would
not take it for nothing, but give me for price, for reasonable bargain, as you
shall deem it fit to give me. Se here again the excellent moderation of this
great man, this great servant of God: he confessed it lay in their power to
assign and contract with him for any thing: it must be their gift, or else he
would venture upon nothing: I have lived among you, and I would fain die among
you too; as you have given me leave to live with you, I beseech you cast not
away my dead: my Wife is gone the way of all flesh, and I shall follow her
shortly, cast us not away: there is no further corporal living for us to
gether; I beseech you give me a burying place, and then we shall be one
corporation, our bodies will moulder to nothing, and not hurt you; therefore
give me, that which is a common gift, a gift that enemies will give to enemies,
and therefore a gift to strangers, and it is natural to do good to strangers. I
beseech you give me.

What is this he would have? For though this people were very liberal, and
would have given him a hundred times more then this he requested, as we see
afterward by their answer: it would have been a great matter that Abraham
should have been denied: yet this holy man asks such a gift, as they might
well grant without harm.

Hereupon the holy man is to be commended; as for the great beggars of the
world, they cry, Give, give; all the whole Country is not sufficient to
satisfy their desire, but still when they have had this, and that preferment,
they cry still, Give. This blessed man was of more moderation, he had a more
circumcised heart, and desire: he desires no more then they might well
forbear, and part with, and suffer him to have without hindrance.

And so it teaches men their duty, that they should not too much grate upon a
friend, not too impudently demand things that cannot well be parted with: many
men are of such good natures, that they will give away at the first sight of a
Petition, that that shall be a great loss, and damage to them, and after wish
that they had not given it, when they cannot recover it again. There was no
such spirit in Abraham, nor should be in Gods children, they should not be
insatiable, and extend themselves to unreasonable demands: a thing that argues
one altogether glued to this world, and one that has no further expectation
than of things below. Give me: What? A possession of burial.

First, A Possession. He would have it so conveyed, as no man might make claim
of it, but that it should be for him, and his for ever. Therefore it was, as it
were, a Churchyard that he begged, such a one as was capable, and had
sufficient scope and room for his whole Posterity in the time to come, in
times of trouble and persecution: for in this place were the Fathers and those
Partiarchs (though we read not of their Burial in this place in the book of God
many of them, yet notwithstanding it is likely that all the Patriarchs had
their bodies) conveyed to this place, and that the great ones in Egypt, that so
demeaned themselves, that they had favor from the Court, were brought to this
place. For these and himself, and his present Family about him, whom it might
please God to strike with Death he knew not how soon, the holy Father desired a
place separare, that there might be no mingling of the select people of God
with those that were without God in the present world, as the Apostle says.

Now for this, there is no distinction in our time, for Christ being made the
Corner stone, has made both walls one, the Jews and Gentiles being built upon
himself, all this difference is taken away: But at that time it was fit to
maintain a distinction, to keep a note of difference. As God set a mark upon
the flesh of Abraham, and upon the houses of the Israelites in Egypt, so they
kept this in all points, even in their very Graves, that a difference might be
maintained between the seed of the Woman, and the seed of the Serpent to the
uttermost. Give me a possession, a burying place.

Here is the end why he would have this Pessession. A strange kind of
Possession: a thing that every one is born to, no man will deny this: we say
the land in the Churchyard is every man's, every man is born to that land.
Behold such a land, such an inheritance this Father comes to beg. He has not
a foot of ground in all the whole land, no place to dwell in, but by their
leeves; no place to feed on but with there consent; he is content thus to
possess, to have it upon their hand; to have his house upon their liking, and
his field and grass upon their affection, and content to be gone, and depart
upon their bidding: but when it comes that his dead must be buried, there is
no dislodging then, no removing then, that is a Possession, he makes not other
things his Possession, but uses them in a transitory manner.

So that the holy Ghost would teach us this, that a man's Grave is his strong
hold, his Possession. And indeed there is no Possession so durable and certain
as the Grave: all the lands, and all the means that a man has in this world,
it may in the course of time, either by the misguidence of the party, or the
succession of prodigals, be made away, that he that has had full possessions,
may not have a foot of land to call his own: so Possession are alterable,
sometime one man's, sometimes another, and again another, no man knows
whose, because they are still removing. But when a man is possessed of his Grave,
that is a long Possession, that Lease is time out of mind, and it holds to
the coming of Christ to Jndgement.

Though there be a sort of covetous men in the world, that care not for lucre
and gain, to remove dead bodies, to make men pay dear; and yet presently when
the memory of that payment is gone (in this base respect) to remove them from
their natural rest, and to put new bodies in their room. Though this (I say) be
practiced by some, yet notwithstanding the Lord has ordered this that a man
should have his Grave for ever; and that all Christian men should know that
they have no such true inherent Possession, sticking to them, and they to it,
as the Grave. Thus the great God brings us to life by death, making us
possess the Grave here for a time, and after possesses us with life and
glory, and joy in the highest heavens.

Behold Abraham: see how he begins to possess the world, by no land,
pasture, or earable Lordship: the first thing is a Grave. So every Christian
must make his resolution. The first household stuff that ever Seleucus bought in
Babylon, was a Sepulcher stone, a stone to lay upon him when he was dead; that
he kept in his garden. So we should begin to make that our chief utensill: it
should teach every Christian much more to be mortified so to the world, as to
be settled upon nothing for a Possession, so as the ground where his flesh
shall rest in hope, till the Lord receive him, and give him his Spirit again.

A strong kind of entrance this holy man made into the holy Land, that the
first thing he takes possession of, should be a place of burial for the dead.
Even so wondrously God uses to work: the promised seed, it came of the dead
womb of Sarah: and accordingly it is in this great and famous History, that out
of these dead ones, the Lord takes such a firm possesson of this Land, that
when four hundred years were come about, there was such a quick issue, that it
drove all the Inhabitants out of the Land: for out of Sarah that was now dead,
and Abraham, and the Partiarchs that were interred in his Cave, out of their
dead loins the Lord raised a living issue of six hundred thousand footmen,
besides women and children that came under the conduct of Joshua, and
discomfited the Captains of the Land and took possession.

The gracious God out of dead and poor things in the world raises strength and
Majesty: that those that they trampled upon, and accounted as dead men, the
Lord made out of them such a living stock, that all the poor of Canaun was not
able to hold up, and make head against them, (they were such a powerful Army)
but hid themselves in Caves, and became as dead men, to give place to these
dead men.

Here is the wonderful great glory of the Almighty, out of mere nothing, to
work all things, and as he made all things that are seen out of nothing ( for
by faith we learn that things that are seen, were made of things that are not
seen) so he still continues to lay his foundation in baseness and humility, in
a ridiculous manner to flesh and blood, yet out of that he brings large and
infinity majesty and glory, such as no man can aspire in his thoughts to think
sufficiently of. Give me a burying place to bury my dead.

Behold, he calls her Sarah, his dead, he calls her not Wife, though it is
said after in the Text, that Abraham buried Sarah his wife; yet that is in
respect of the time of her life, when they lived together, and in respect of
the former society, and converse they had: but now he speaks to the point, she
is no more his Wise, but his dead. It is translated by all in the Neuter
Gender, not my dead she, but my dead, simply in the Neuter gender, as a thing
which now had not so much relation.

So it is true, when men and women are severed by Death, they are no more man
and wife, but one another dead. For as the Apostle says, Do you not know that
as long as a man lives, his wife is subject to him, and she must not couverse
with another? So likewise for men again: but when God dissolveth the contract
by Death, then as she is free for another man, so she is no more his Wife; so
long as she was alive upon the ground she was his Wife, but now when she is to
go into the ground, he calls her his dead, but not his Wife.

The substance and sum is this; That Matrimony is Gods blessing for present use
of mankind, for the propagating of the Species, to continue the seed of man to
the worlds end, that there may be still a generation to praise God their
Creator; and so being a temporal thing ordained for the office of this life, it
ceasoth when Death comes: there is nothing but Death, and that which Christ
speaks of in the Gospel, can make a separation: when death comes all relations
cease, and a wife is no wife, and a husband is no husband.

Behold out of this, the infinite love of God in Christ that has made all
things, all unions, and contracts, has made all to be void but his own: for
our Lord Jesus in life and death is our Husband, our Lord, our Master, our
Father, as well in the one as in the other: whereas by the intercourse of death
all things are dissolved, two of the best friends that are may part upon
discontent, and body and soul must part at Death, and Husband and wife (the
Symbol of Christ and his Church) must part one from another: yet when all
societies and contracts part, Christ does not part from us, but he is in the
Grave, as well as in the highest heavens, our Husband, and Lord, and Spouse,
and we are his Church still, we keep the same relation, and as strong bonds in
death, as in life.

My Dead. Abraham's Wife, yet she was Abraham's dead. This must teach a man after
he is freed by Death to the combination and contract, yet that there is a care
remaining from the Dead, a love to that, though not as to a Wife: the respects
of Man and Wife are carnal and fleshly, Death comes and cutteth down the
flesh, therefore cutteth off that respect too: but because she was dead, and
there was such bonds hetween them formerly, therefore a man is bound to lament
and sorrow for his dead, as Abraham did here, to love the memory of the dead,
to speak well of the dead when occasion serves, to commend them for their
virtues, to use the friends of the dead (as far as is in their power) with all
courtisie, to be good to the children of the Dead, those that the mother has
left, and not to cast them into the hands of a furious woman, a new Wife, that
neither cares for dead nor living: but to have a special regard to the bonds
and familiarity, and that spiritual acquaintance that God made in this life:
and so to be good to all that come of that issue for their sakes. Let me bury
my dead.

Lastly it follows, why he would bury his dead. Out of my sight. Out of my
sight. Was his grief so aggravated, as he could not still behold her face? or
was it necessary that the carcass it self must be conveyed away? must it needs
be that the body being now no way amiable, but noisome, must be conveyed out of
a man's sight? The best friend in the world cannot endure the sight of a dead
body, it is a ghastly sight, especially when it comes to that dissolution, that
the parts begin to have an evil savor and smell, as all have when they are
dead: then to keep themselves in life and health, it is necessary to avoid
them, to bury their dead out of their sight.

And what so sweet a sight once to blessed Abraham, as Sarah? What so sweet a
spectacle to the world as Sarah? The great Kings of the world, set her as a
Parragon, and she came no where but her beauty enamoured them: she was a sweet
prospect in all eyes, every man gazed on her with great content, to see the
beauty of God, as in so many lines marked out in the face of Sarah. Yet now she
is odious, every eye that looked upon her before, now winks and cannot endure
to look upon her, she must be taken out of sight.

Oh bethink your selves of this, you that take pride in this frail flesh, that
prank up your selves, to make you graceful in every eye: you that study to
please the beholders, you that are the great Minions of the world: you that
when age begins to purle your faces, begin to redeem your selves with
paintings: think of this. Mother Sarah the beautifullest woman in the world, is
loathsome to her husband, her sweetest friend: therefore I heseech you in the
fear of God, leave these fooleries, and vain fancies: remember what danger
Sarahs beauty cast her into; though it were a great gift of God, yet she had
better have been without it, then to have that hazard of soul and body, that
she was brought to by Abraham's travels and necessity: and know it that your
best beauty is to please the eye of God, to look beautiful in his sight: for
the sight of God is never weary; the sight of men will be weary of you, the
best friends you have will loath to see you dead, you will then be grisly in
the eyes of men, but the eye of God it is all one even in the dust, and nothing
can make you so ill-favored, but God will like you: therefore labor to please
Gods eye that never cease: nothing will make him after his affection, whereas
the eyes of men, this life is so full of foul alterations, as the least
sickness brings an abomination unto them.

I see the time prevents me. I will speak a little to the present occasion. We
have here a depositum, a gage, a pawn of a dear Sister of ours, a woman known
to you all to be of a holy Christian conversation: a neighbor full of peace
and quiet, and of good works according to her calling. She was also in the
spiritual part a woman of a very good inclination, loving the Word of God,
curious and attentive in the hearing of it; She was much delighted in it, and
desired to communicate the knowledge she had in the Scriptures to others, and to
speak of it as often as occasion permitted. By this study it pleased the Lord
to work a constant and lively faith in her, to put all her trust and considence
in him. She was now taken upon the sudden, therefore the Lord has left her as
a pattern for us to look upon, to take heed to our selves, that we may make our
peace with God, and look for death every moment, because we know not how soon
we may be arrested.

She was indeed a woman of great trust and faith in God: and one whose mouth
was full of his praise, still admiring and recounting the wondrous grace of God
to her in all the course of her life, in sparing her, in giving her comfort in
her conscience, concerning the pardon and forgiveness of her sins, and
providing for her worldly helps, which she thought never to attain to: and in
many other particulars, She did open the grace of God according to her best
understanding, still giving the praise to his holy Name: and no doubt, if the
stroke upon her had not been so fatal, and as deadly as now it was, we should
have had the like fruit more abundantly at this time. Howbeit she was not as
one altogether destitnte, but she called for, and craved the prayers of Gods
people, that they would lift up their hearts and hands, and voices to the Lord
to look upon her, and release her of her misery and trouble, either by life or
death, for she was content either way.

She had some touches also of Divine Scripture as occasion offered themselves.
As when the light was brought in, she desired to have the light of Gods
countenance to shine upon her. And when her eye-strings were broke, that the
tears did distill down, she desired the Lord God to put her tears into his
bottle, and many such Luminations there were that came from her.

Her surcharged spirits were so taken and stricken, as a man might perceive at
the first, there was no way but one; her self drawing her self within, as
though that in the outward man there were no room for the soul to dwell there,
or to have a fit and opportune habitation.

I must needs advertise you of one thing, that this cnstome of praising and
commending of the dead is very full of danger, because a man may be a liar, and
a flatter before he be aware, when he never intended it. But truly (for ought
that I could discern) this Sister of ours was one that was very well
deserving, of a quiet and moderate spirit, intentive and careful to govern her
house and children, and no way exorbitant, for any thing that I can hear.

It is true that all are not of one Model, as the bodies of men and women are
not of one height and color, so the souls and spirits are not all of one
elevation neither: but we esteem the children of God according to that they
have received, and not according to that that they have not received, as the
Apostle speaks. I say therefore, according to the grace she had received; I
verily believe she was faithful and true to it, that she received not the grace
of God in vain; she sought by all means to nourish and cherish it from one
degree to another, and to proceed from grace to grace. And therefore I conclude
in the judgment of Charity, that we have very strong hopes, and great
probabilities of her happy translation.

She was a Daughter of Sarah, as Saint Peter speaks of Women, that he would
have them demean themselves, as Daughters of Sarah: and such a one she was in
her habit and attire, in the manner of her life, and society, and company: and
therefore I doubt not but she inheriteth with Sarah the place of blessed
mansions, that the Lord has made infinite specious, and wide, and capable for
all blessed souls that put their trust in him.

Now, this let us make use of to our own souls. In that she had not that
largeness of time she supposed to have had, but was surprised so soon and
vehemently, as she could not dispose of her self in that manner, as we know by
experience she would have done: it should be a lesson to us to be ready for
God, to be acquainted with God.

We have had two Corses one after another, one a man, another a woman, both
taken suddenly in respect of the time, though they had thought to have made an
overture of themselves to the world, and thought to have made all things fair
and easy, by the confession and expression of their faith to the world, but
they were not suffered to do it. So, all presume to have time to make the world
know that they be humble and penitent, and to make their confession; but many
put it off till it be too late. Let us not be put off with vain presumptions,
the Lord gives, and the Lrod takes, we know not how soon. We were born we know
not when, we shall die we know not when. The Lord prepare us all for it.

GODS ESTEEM OF THE DEATH OF HIS SAINTS.
PREACHED At the Funeral of Mr. John Moulson, of Hargrave, at Bunbury in
Cheshire; By S. T.
SERMON XX.
PSALM. 116.15. Precious in the sight of the Lord, is the death of his Saints.


THe Psalm was composed by David, to be an acknowledgment of that favor and
grace of God, which himself had experience of at some time or other; but when
or what the particular occasion of it was, we are uncertain. Some refer it to
that escape which he made when Saul and his Troops had compassed him about,
upon the discovery of the Ziphites, 1 Samuel 23.26, 27, 28. Others because
Jerusalem is mentioned in the Psalm, and Jerusalem at that time of Saul was not
built, as they conclude well against the time of the penning of it; so they
find also another occasion, his escape from Absalom, and that great plot, 2 Samuel 15.14. Others include also his spiritual Conflicts, his combattings with
Gods wrath, and his dispairs because of his sins, together with some sicknesses
and strong diseases, accompanied with griefs, and anxieties of mind; In all
which he found God benevolous, and merciful unto him, in the sense of which he
rejoices, and (as it was in his duty) gives thanks and praises unto God. He
says in the fourteenth verse. he would make public business of it, and would
pay his vows, little populo, in the presence of all the people; and good reason
he had, for God has often releeved him, and taken much care to preserve his
life, as he is ever tender of the safety of all his people, for Pretiosa in
oculis Jehovae, etc. Precious in the sight of the Lord, is the death of his
Saints.

The words are a Simple, universal, affirmative proposition; wherein, 1. The
subject or thing spoken of; is, The death of Gods Saints. 2. That which is
spoken of it, is, That it is precious in the sight of the Lord. Which
proposition may be resolved into these three observations.

1. That there be some that are Gods Saints.

2. That Gods Saints do also Die.

3. That the Death of Gods Saints is precious in Gods sight.

1. Observat. 1.
There be some that are Gods Saints. Sanctorum ejus (...) so the vulgar latin
reads it. Misericordium (...) so Pagnin after S. Hierome. Bonificorum (...) so
Piscator Piorum: (...) so Mollerus. The Kings translators have rendered it in
our last English, His Saints, though they have given themselves a liberty in
other places to render the Hebrew that is here by our English ( Holy,) (...)
as Ps. 16.10. hhasideka, Thy Holy one: and the Hebrew word that properly
signifies holy, by our English ( Saints) as Psalm. 16.3. (...)
Kedoshim, To the Saints. The Saint in the Text is in Hebrew hhasid, and
hhasid, is beneficus, and but in a secundary sense Sanctus: Yet whereas it is
rendered by the Septuagint once (...), (...)
venerandus, venerable, which our English translates, (...) Mic. 7.2 (...) Pro.
2.8.
The good man, Mic. 7.2. and once (...), reverend, or as our English has it,
Righteous, Prove. 2.8. Yet in all others places it is translated by the word
(...), Sanctus, Saint, or Holy: and it seems according to the very notion of
the word in use among the Jews themselves, among whom the posterity of
Jonadah, because of their holiness of life, and strictness in religion, were
called hhasidim, (...), Asidaeans, 1 Match. 7.13. as much as, Holy-ones,
Good-men, or Saints.

But not to insist farther upon the translation; The name of Saints, is given
sometimes by the Fathers to holy men departed, and reigning with God, but so
the word is very rarely used in the Scripture: but more ordinarily it is given
to the faithful in this life, and so the notion in Scripture is most frequent.
So 1 Cor. 1.2. To the Church of God at Corinth, called to be Saints, or Saints
by calling: So also, Ephesians. 6.18. Romans 12.13, etc.

There is a double sanctity; 1. Of outward profession. 2. Of inward
regeneration, and so the word is here more specially understood; They are Gods
Saints, whom he separates to himself, or calls unto holiness of life; The
Saints on the earth, such as excel in virtue, Psalm. 16.3.

And there is reason for it, Reas.
that there be some Saints in this life, because that which makes Saints is
attainable here; not Popish Canonization, but Gods Election, Gods Spirit, Gods
grace, the Merit and holiness of Christ; as it is, 1 Cor. 1.2. Those of the
Church of Corinth were Called to be Saints, with all that in every place call
on the name of Jesus Christ; Who was both, 1. A pattern of holiness, that his
people might be so by his example, and 2. A foundation of holiness, that his
fullness might be conveyed to his members.

Use 1. If there be Saints in this life, it is against the Church of Rome,
which shuts up all the Saints into heaven, and suffers none to be Saints, but
such whom the Pope canonizeth. Tho. Aquin. Quod lib 9. act 16 Cajes. Tract. de
Indulg. Canus, 1.5. Cap. 5.
Bellarmine delivers it, 1. That Canonization, which is a public testification
of the assured holiness, and glory of some, by which public worships are
decreed them, is pious and lawful. 2. That this power of Canonization is only
in the Pope. 3. That the Popes judgment on Canonization is infallible. But
Beside that, this third proposition is gainsaid by men of his own side; The
practice it self also of Canonization was unknown till Leo the thirds time,
anno 800. or till fourscore years after that, till the time of Adrian; and it
was ever anciently held, that no man can judge infallibly of another
condition, or may admit any into the number of Saints. The ancient Church had
their commemorations of holy men, and women departed, but without worship. So
may we honorably speak of such as are with God, Luther, L. de capt. Bab.
Melancth. in Apol. Confess. art 4.5.27.
and we do so; Luther calls Thomas Aquinas; Saint, and Melancthon sticks not at
it to, call Authony, Bennard, Dominick, and Francis so too. We seldom name
those glorious Doctors otherwise, then Saint Basil, Saint Greg. Naz. Saint
Ambrose, Saint Augustine. And so we use to commemorate the holy Apostles, the
blessed Martyrs, and the Fathers. And think we have as much liberty as the
Church of Rome; to call godly men of our late acquintance Saints, as I remember
a learned and reverend Bishop of ours to have called Master Greenham. But
withal as the Scriptures do, so we may also call the living believers, and
they are so before they come to heaven.

Use 2. If there be some, let us all aspire unto that honor, to-be such as
excel in virtue, to be put in Albo Sanctorum, and to have our names in the
Calender or roll. Let us follow the footsteps of Christ, and holy men, learn
of me, faith Christ, Mat. 11.29. for, I have given you an example that ye
should do as I have done unto you, Joh. 13.15. And let us follow them that have
followed Christ, to take out the patterns that have been set us by Apostolical
and holy men. In the ancienter times of more pure and servent zeal, people
were ready to run to any lights that did burn and shine among them, to take
example from them, how to regulate their lives; Hence came many religious
professions, (though since much degenerate and corrupted,) who were won to the
immitation of those practices of self-denial, contempt of the world,
mortifying of voluptuous affections, etc. which they saw in them. We might make
a profitable use of the lives of holy men, and Martyrs of old or of late, to
copy out their sanctity. And let it be an encouragement to the study of piety
and religion, to consider what honor it brings along with it, it Saints us, so
that we need not be at that extreme expense and charge, which we read some have
been at in the Court of Rome to procure Canonization.

Use 3. If their be some such here, and they be men holy and religious, then
take we heed that we speak not ill of such, that we abuse them not, that we
open not our mouths against heaven, against them that are Incolae coeli,
Inhabitants of heaven, either by an actual possession of glory, or here by an
heavenly conversation. Devout and religious men, whose thoughts and hearts are
above, do not count this their Country, they do but sojourn with us; abuse not
strangers then, especially these strangers for their country sake. We use to
say, De Sanctis nil ni si bonum; we should not speak any thing to the prejudice
of the Saints. The Romanists are presently upon us, Lorich. in Forotalilio,
haet. 1. de Sanct.
that we forget this rule; Sanctos Dei non esse peculiari honor colendos,
docent omnes hodierni haeretici. So Lorichius accuses us (for we know whom he
means.) The truth is we dare not give them divine worship, nor make them Gods,
Bellarmine indeed in the very beginning of his Retractations tells us, he
allows not the word Divus to be given to the Saints, and that either the word
fell imprudently from him, or writing a B. for Beatus, the Printer mistook it
for D. and printed Divus. But others stick not at the word, nor at much more.
Stratius in an Ode of his thus; Kinaldus Antister beatis additus agminibus
Deorum. And Melchior Nunez. in an Epi^ of his to Ignatius, anno 1544, among
other matters of the Indyes, speaking of the Jesuits Zaviers death, calls it
(...) Zaverii. Bishop Vida in his bymne called Divis caelestibus, after he has
invocated the B. Virgin and others, says,

Tum vos caducicorporis.

Ceu nos onusti pondert.

Quondam mares aut virgins,

Nunc Dii beati caelites.

And to add but one more, Li^si^ in Virg. A pricolli, c^p 30. thus, Tunc libi
audes DEA, dicit omn^s sextus and aetas.


as the Papists (when they have wearied themselves in fitting their
distinctions of latreia and douleia to little purpose) do it roundly enough,
and the people in their practice; But we give them their due, and as much as
themselves would be willing to receive, as we gathered from the behavior of
the Angel that was sent to John, Apoc. 19.10. But in the mean time, while they
make a thriving trade of the flattering of the Dead, they neglect and abuse the
living Saints, not only writing a Dele in their Indices expurgatory upon the
testimony of Pius or Prudens given by some more ingenuous men of theirs, to
some of our Divines in particular; but also traducing the whole estate of our
reformed Churches for schismatic, and heretical.

Use 4. If there be some Saints of God here, let us choose to be of their
acquaintance, and keep their company, because they do best of all know the way
to heaven; and it is good to go safely that journey, by direction of the best
and most skilful guides, lest we miss it in those places where the way turns,
or where the path is not so well beaten as the other Road.

2. Gods Saints do also die. The Death of his Saints (...) holiness frees not
from death. Abel, Noah, Abraham, Moses, David, the Prophets, the Apostles, the
Fathers, are all dead. Your Fathers, where are they? and the Prophets, do they
live for ever? Zach. 1.5. God cuts off both the righteous and the wicked, Ezekiel.
21.4. (...). Men.
The righteous perishes, and the (hhasidim) the merciful men, or the men of
godliness are taken away, Isa. 57.1. Yea, and oftentimes as Menander, was able
to observe it, Whom God loves best he takes soonest. An observation much like
that, in 1 King. 14.12, 13. That son of Jeroboam, who only of that family had
some good thing in him, was taken away young.

But whether sooner or later, Reas.
their holiness frees not from death: rich gilding upon an earthen pot, keeps
it not from breaking. They are made of the same metal, of the same clay with
other men. (...) is Testa, Such a tyle, brick, or pot, as is made of burnt clay.
The Apostles that brought the treasures of grace to the world, were
themselves, Testacea vasa; so Saint Hierome: Vasa fictilia, so Saint Gregory,
but only earthen vessels, 2 Cor. 4.7. clay in the hand of the potter; Isa.
64.8. And therefore all things in this respect come alike to all, Eccl. 9.2.

Use 1. If such die, then Death is not always evil; for sure it is not evil to
them to whom all things work for good, Romans 8.28. The sting of it is gone. And
though it have not a pleasant look to entertain us with, it is but as a rude
Groom that opens the gate by which we must pass to a better place, and to
better company. The godly have many advantages by death, 1. Rest from their
labors. 2. A Crown when they have finished the race, 2 Timothy 4.7, 8.3. Freedom
from danger of sinning any more, Romans 6.7.4. Death frees from a possibility of
further dying, 2 Cor. 5.1. Morior? Desinam alligari posse, definam agrot are
posse, desinam posse mori.
Let me die, says Seneca, and what hurt comes by that? I can be bound no more,
I can be sick no more, I can die no more.

5. They go presently to God. While we are at home in the body, we are absent
from the Lord: We are willing rather to be absent from the body, and to be
present with the Lord, 2 Cor. 5.6, 8. I desire to be dissolved; to be with
Christ, Phil. 1.23.2 Tim. 4.6. We wrong death, when we call it horrid, it is
sin which makes it to be so, else it is but conceit. There is often more pain
in a tooth-ake, then in dying. Tears, and black cloth, and the tremblings of
the guilty do disguise Death, and make it look terrible. He that said, it was
of all terrible things, the most terrible, was himself an Heathen, and knew not
what Christ had done to alter the property. Once indeed it was uncouth and
hideous, but since Christ dyed, it has a more fair and pleasant face. There
can be no danger in that way, which all the Saints have gone. As Phocion said
to one, that by the same sentence of the Judges was to die with him; Art thou
not glad to fare as Phocion does? So are we not glad to fare as the holy
Patriarks, Prophets, and Apostles have done, and to go after them? He that went
this way the first of any mankind, was holy, a Saint, it was Abel whom God
accepted. We use to call those passages and Streights, which have been first
found and discovered by any, by the names of the first Discoverers, as the
Streights of Magellanus, and that a little lower, Schouten Straight, or Fretum
le maire; So if it may afford us any comfort for the passage, let us call Death
no longer Death, but Abels streights. Let us learn, if not to love, yet to
contemn Death, that so we may have the more easy conquest over all other hard
things. It was a bravery in Damindas an heathen (which Christians should be
ashamed to come short of.) When Philip had broke into Peloponesus, and some
Lacedaemonians said; They were likely to sustain much evil, unless they could
reconcile themselves to Philip; Damindas said, O Semi-viri quid nob is poterit
acerbe accidere, qui mortem contemnimus? Ah poor spirited men, what can be
sharp or hard unto us, who have learned to despise death it self?

Use 2. Because Saints, or holy men, do also die, let us make the best use of
them while they are with us; To benefit and profit our selves by our religious
friends, acquaintance, neighbors and kindred. When God raises up some man
eminent for wisdom, and a godly life, he is set up as a light for the town or
neighborhood to walk by; Yet oft-times such as dwell near, are careless, and
neglect their benefit, when strangers farther off draw near unto the light, and
gain by it; as we use to let our own books lie by, and rather make use of such
as we borrow, to take notes out of them, because we know not how soon they may
be called for by the owners, and presume that the other will still be in our
keeping. We should improve our good acquaintance, and walk by the light while
we enjoy it, because many times the Sun sets, and it is night in a
neighborhood or a family, when a good friend, a good Parent, or a good Master
dies. Remember Joash, and Jehojada.

3. Observat. 3.
The Death of Gods Saints is precious in Gods sight. When David was oppressed
with grief, it seems he had such thoughts as these, Surely man is (res
nihili,) a vain and worthless thing, too low, and too unworthy, that God should
take any notice of him, or be careful of him; But at last he overcame such
thoughts, when he had found the experience of Gods tenderness toward himself
in particular, and toward all his people, and now resolves, That God neglects
not his, as if he were not affected with their miseries, but their souls,
lives, and safeties, are dear and tender unto him, as a treasure which he will
not carelessly lose, or suffer men or devils to take away by force or treachery.

Their Death is precious [ Jakar,] (...)
the word of the Text is, in pretio fuit, magni estimatum est. God sets them at
an high and dear rate. The Septuagint renders it by (...), and the Noun by
(...) pretiosus, (...) probatus, and (...) multi pretii: God honors and
accounts well, and has high thoughts of the sufferings of his. See how the
word is translated in other Texts.

1. Honorable, (...)
Isa. 43.4. [Jakarta] Thou were precious in my sight, thou have been honorable.

2. Much set by. (...)
2 Samuel 18.30. His name was much set by.

3. Dear, Jer. 31.20. An filius (Jakkir) presiosus mihi Ephraim. Is Ephraim my
Dear son?

(...)
4. Splendid, clear or glorious, Job 31.26. Si vidi lunam (Jaker) pretiosam and
abeuntem. (...)
The Moon walking in brightness.

Put all these expressions together, and then we have the strength of David's
word, The death of the Saints is precious; that is, 1. Honorable. 2. Much set
by. 3. Dear. 4. Splendid and glorious, in the sight of the Lord.

God is so tender of his people, that

1 He will not have them take wrong, he orders their death, he takes care for
them, he visits and comforts, and assists them in their dying, he helps them
with strength, with memory, in their understanding, their senses, etc.

2. He takes much delight in their sweet, holy, calm deaths, and resignations
of their souls.

3. He takes care of their very bodies too, to lay them up sweetly to rest, in
Repositories, or Dormitories, as the Ancients were wont to call Churchyards,
and Graves.

4. Lastly, he entertains their souls immediately, when they are breathed
forth, and places them, In Sinu Abrahoe, in Abraham's bosom, wheresoever that
is, to possess present joy and quietness,

And no wonder that he does all this, Reas.
because he has bought them, and redeemed them unto himself, with so great a
price as his Suns blood, and has graced them with so many gifts and
privileges, and has made over unto them as Coheirs with Christ, so great and
large benefits.

We may make this Use of it, Use.
to serve for the establishment of us in our belief of him, (...)
and our waiting on his providence. If their Death be so precious, their
sufferings also in any kind are dear unto him. That word in the Text, which is
Death, and which by the Seventy is ordinarily turned (...), yet is taken in the
Scripture sometimes for sickness, or any affliction, Exo. 10.17. For infection,
2 King. 4.40. Number. 23.10, (...). Ez. 44.25. (...).
For wounds, Prove. 26.18. and sometimes in the Septuagint for the soul. The
very sicknesses, and afflictions, and dangers, and wounds, and griefs of his
holy ones are dear unto God. But especially their souls, their lives, their
good and safety. God writes a Ne perdas, Touch not, Destroy not, as a notable
caveat, for the safety, as of Kings most particularly, so also of all that fear
him, and that trust in his mercy.

I have hastened over these points, that I might come to the testimony that I am
to give to our deceased Brother, Master John Moulson, which I may not omit, nor
to be particular in it, having never such a subject of discourse before such an
exemplary man. I would not be bought to flatter a profane and wicked great
one, but here Gods glory in this his Servant, and the edification of you that
are present, require of me that I speak fully; for, he was Vir nec silendus,
nec dicendus sine cura.

He copied out in his life the old way of Christianity, and writ so fair after
those Primitives, that few now can imitate his hand. And truly as in a garden
in which there are variety of flowers, we know not where to pick, so in those
many commendable parts of his, I know not which to choose to present unto you,
or in what method. But you may take notice,

I. Of his moral parts; where I commend four things,

1. His Calmness and moderation of affection. No passion was observed to be a
tyrant in him; they had an oequipoise.

2. His sober taciturnity, an imitable wisdom in this age of talk and prattling.

3. His affable carriage, and easiness of access, by which like another
Poplicola, he gained reputation, and the love of the neighborhood where ever
he dwelt. Some are so hairy and rough like Esau, that they may be discerned by
their handling; and some so churlish as Nabal, that a man cannot speak unto
them; Which sourness and clowdiness of spirit, I wish were not a blemish to
many that give their names unto religion. He honored it by his sweetness and
affalibility.

4. His grave deportment and carriage. As nothing is more contemptible then a
light youthly wanton old man, so the gray head, and wrinkled cheeks accompanied
with sage gravity commands respect from the beholders, as that old grave Bishop
Paphnutius, though he had lost an eye, did from the Emperor Constantine.
Gravity dwelt in the face of this man, and his very presence was such, as would
discountenance the rude and profane.

But all these are but mean commendations in respect of the next.

II. His practice of holiness; Where I will observe and commend unto you,

1. His unoffensive youth, of which they that can remember him since that time,
are confident to say of him, as the Emperor said of Piso; Hujus vita composita
a pueritia; His life was composed, and settled, even from his very childhood;
and then began to sort himself with the gravest company, chiesly with that
learned and godly Master, Christopher Harvy, sometime incombent in this Church,
to whom he was dear. He was observed to be so sober, and modest in his youth,
that he was desired to accompany, and attend an honorable Nobleman to Oxford,
where he was very watchful, and careful of him, and prayed twice a day with him
in his chamber. So ready was he to bear the Lords yoke from his youth.

2. His unmarried estate, which was chaste and modest. He lived above fifty
years unmarried, and in that state expressed two virtues, his wisdom not to be
rash, and his care to keep his vessel clean.

3. His married estate, and course of hous-keeping. 1. When it pleased God to
dispose his heart to marriage, he married in the Lord. 2. When God gave him
Children, he nurtured them, and his Family in Gods fear. 1. He prayed four
times a day. 2. He read three chapters in the old Testament, and three in the
New every day. 3. After dinner he called not for game for digestion, but read a
Chapter before he rose from table. 4. He catechized his children and servants
constantly, according to some plain form. 5. He usually rose early on the Lords
day, which time he gave to meditation and prayer, and what he could remember of
the Sermon, he usally repeated to his people.

4. His exemplary virtues in his whole course of life.

1. His meekness, and peaceableness of disposition; A grace which in the sight
of God is much set by, and a notable testimony of inward holiness, according as
it runs, Jam. 3.17. pure, then peaceable. He was not apt to quarrel in matters
that concerned him not, never being observed to bear a part in any faction; a
favorable interpreter of things not evident, readier to reconcile, then to
make differences, and choosing rather to part with his right then with peace,
as appeared in a suit known unto many here.

2. Though he were meek in his own cause, yet he was zealous in Gods. He could
not endure any thing repugnant to holy Scripture; nor would he neglect, either
seasonably to admonish, or reprove the faulty that were within the compass of
his admonition, or to whet on, and exhort others to love and good works.

3. Yet his Zeal did not miscarry, being allayed and tempered with wisdom, as
the heart is by the brain, and as the conceit is of the Primum mobile, with the
Chrystalline heaven near it. His wisdom appeared, first, in his disscreetness,
in his undertakings, and all affairs, an argument of which some take to be
this; That he was never troubled, not so much as questioned in any Court
concerning any fact. Second, in his observing a fit season, when, and a fit
decorum in speaking. Third in his choice of company, and specially of such
acquaintance as he would be near with and intimate, which were only such as
might be able to afford him spiritual assistance in a time of need.

4. His freeness from worldlyness, and contentedness with his estate, not as
those in Horace, Quocunque modo rem; but he would not improve his estate by the
raising it (as happily he might have done, and as others do) upon his tenants. He
counted himself rich, because he needed not all that he had, but could have
lived with less; for, he that can make a little to be his measure, all else
that he has is his treasure, which was the observation of a good Poet, but a
better and a more mortified Divine.

5. His humility, and even among the very temptations to pride. It is an hard
thing to be humble in an humble and low estate, but much more difficult in the
affluence of outward things. You know his kindred and his relations, yet as he
manifested this grace in his whole carriage, so in particular in not being
puffed with his brothers and sisters greatness, or the advancement of his
children.

6. His diligence in the use of the means of grace; 1. He had a right conceit
of Sermons, most relishing, such as were most wholesome and useful for
edification. 2. He took pains to hear. He was often known in his younger time,
to go ten miles on foot, in those times of greater scarcity. 3. His behavior
in the Church in the time of prayer, and in hearing, was very observable, for
his reverend attendance and devotion.

7. His answerable practice, fitted and proportionable to his exterior
profession. 1. He was much in private prayer. If you would have a trial of
sincerity, follow a man home, and to his closet, and see what he does within
doors; for there may be many respects that may set a man on work coram populo.
Secret prayer if it be constant, cannot lodge long with hypocrisy in the same
heart. 2. He was often, as they say, in secret fasting by himself alone; a Duty
not ouly lamentably neglected in these lazy times of easy Christianity, but
ill spoken of too, as a character of a Pharisie, by such as are loath to be at
the pains of subduing their bodies, and yet are desirous to come off with the
credit and reputation of religion. 3. He was temperate in his dyer, and in his
habit sober and grave, as counting wisdom and grace, a better, and trimmer
dress then Lace, or the fashion; and so he was in his recreations, though
constantly cheerful, yet a man of little mirth or delight in any thing but
spiritual. 4. He was full of charity, which appeared in these particulars. 1.
Always upon the Lords day he had six poor at dinner, to every one of which he
gave a piece of beef away with them besides, and at night he sent what was left
to other poor; Besides what he gave at his door, and what he gave privately to
the poor household of faith. 2. His hospitality according to his rank, was such
as Peter Martyr reported of Martin Bucer, whose table was ever open to any good
people, especially to Ministers, whom he much respected. 3. He sat up many
nights for the comfort of the sick; not thinking that work of mercy
sufficiently performed by an How do you, or a cold visit. 4. He had a Sympathy
with the condition of Christ's Church abroad.

5. In the last place, let us view him in his last act, his sickness and death,
which as the Text has told us, is precious in the sight of the Lord.

1. He prepared himself to die, not only being willing, but desirous also to be
set at liberty, being often at S. Paul's, Cupio dissolvi, which they that were
with him, say, was much in his mouth.

2. He was very thankful for Gods assisting him with memory and understanding
to the very last, for the continuance of which he prayed, and desired others
that were about him to pray.

3. He employed both his memory and speech, for the comfort and counsel of such
as visited him.

4. He made a confession of his faith, but chiefly in the matter of
Justification by faith (which an eminent Roman Prelate called a good supper
doctrine) and in the comfort of that point, he resigned his soul to Christ, and
slept sweetly in the Lord. Thus as his life was holy, his death was precious.
He made no great noise in the world, nor raised greater expectations of himself
then he could well manage, like many exhalations that rise out of dunghils, as
if they meant to reach the sky, but presently fall down again, and wet us: But
as a taper he gave light till he went out, and now he is gone we will leave
upon his Grave, Memoria ejus in Benedictionibus, and apply to him the words of
the Text; Pretiosa in oculis Jehovoe, precious in the sight of the Lord, is the
death of his Saints.

THE DESIRE OF THE SAINTS AFTER IMMORTAL GLORY.
SERMON XXI.
2 COR. 5.2. For in this we do groan carnestly, desiring to be clothed upon,
with our house which is from heaven.


WHen I read these words, I am in a great doubt, whether I should rather admire
the excellency of the temper of these Saints, or deplore the vileness of ours;
so celestial the one, so terrestrial the other; so noble the one, so ignoble
the other; so magnanimous the one, so abject the other. These Saints they did
duly consider, that our life it is but a Pilgrimage: that this whole world is
but a Diversory, or Inn to refresh us for a while; that it is a warfare, all
things within us, without us, our enemies; that this body is but a Tabernacle,
a Tent, a Cottage, an carthen vessel, a Gourd, the scabbard, the prison of the
soul; more brittle than glass, decaying, mouldering of it self, though it be
preserved from eternal injuries of air or weather: they saw the vanity, the
vacuity, the emptiness of the things of this life; their affections were
alienated, estranged, and divorced from the world; they had by watchings,
fastings, grovelings on the ground, tears and groans scoured off the dross of
their souls, and made them polished statues of piety; they had made up their
accounts between God and themselves, and had sued out their pardon for their
defects and failings, and had that seated in their consciences; they did
penetrate the clouds with the eye of faith, and did see the immense good things
laid up for them in heaven, with which being ravished, and impatient of
cunctation and delay, they desire to be vested in the possession of them,
though it were with the deposition of their honse of clay, which they did bear
about them. Of these things they had not a bareconjecture, but a certain
knowledge; For we know, verse. 1. that if our earthly house of this tabernacle
be dissolved, we have a building not made with hands, eternal in the beavens:
from this full persuasion did arise this heavenly affection, in this we green
earnestly.

But alas, how different is our disposition from this heavenly temper! how
pale, how wan is our countenance at the mention of Death! at the least summons
of our last accounts! as vinegar to our teeth, as smoke to our eyes, as a
sudden damp to our lights, as an horrid crack of thunder in the midst of our
jollities, so is the mention of Death. If any ask the reason of this, it is too
manifest; Want of judgment, what is the true good of the sons of men; Want of
apprehension of the happiness of the Saints; Want of faith in God, of Union
with Christ; our souls never make any holy peregrination from the body, and
seat themselves with Angels and Archangels, and trace the streets of New
Jerusalem; we anticipate not the joys of the life to come by devout
meditations and contemplations: we have not our conversation in heaven, from
whence we look for our Redeemer: Our soul thirsts not, our flesh longs not
after the living God. The reason of this is, we hang upon the teats of the
world like babes and children, we suck venom out of it to our souls; we walk
upon our bellies as unclean beasts, (...), we jutt against God, and offend him;
our accounts are not straight and even, therefore we are afraid at the
appearance of our Savior, and of our citation to appear before his Tribunal;
we groan when we hear of death, we groan not that we may die, this is our
condition; and are not these different one unto another? Does not this stain
the verdure of our countenances, and cover us with shame and confusion, to
observe so manifest a declination of the fervor of the Spirit? That you desire
this heavenly temper, I doubt not, I should offer violence to Charity, the
Queen of Graces, if I should think otherwise? For this cause many of you are
strict in the perforamnce of holy duties, agreeable, and convenient to this
sacred time: That your devotions may attain a happy end, let me lend you a
helping hand, whilst I discourse these words which even now founded in your
ears. In this we groan earnestly, etc. Which I will resolve into three
Propositions.

1. That we are strangers in this life without our house. 2. That the Saints
desire their true and proper house. 3. The intention of their desire, In this
we grown, etc.
That we are strangers, do not the sacred Oracles declare? our conversation,
our polity is in beaven, faith the Doctor of the Gentiles, Our life it is hid
up with Christ, Col. 2. We are fellow Citizens with the Saints, of the household
of God. Ephesians. 2. Does not the chief of the Apostles entreat us as Pilgrims and
strangers, to abstain from fleshly lusts, which fight against the soul? and do
not these and the like demonstrate unto us, that a Christian lives with men,
yet above men; in earth, yet in heaven; bound, yet free; detained with us, yet
far above us; living a doubble life; one manifest; the other Hid with Christ;
one contemptible, the other glorious; one natural, the other spiritual; that
his Parentage is from heaven; that his Treasure is in heaven; that his heart is
in heaven, that his root is fastened in the everlasting mountains, though his
branches are here below, that his dwelling is in heaven; though his
peregrination be here on earth, and did not these Oracles tell us thus much,
yet are there not enforcing arguments to convince us of this Truth.

Are not they strangers that are out of their proper place? and are not
Christians while they are here out of their place? Is this world made for Man,
an Ark of travel, a School of vanity, a Laborinth of error, a Grove full of
thorns, a Meadow full of Scorpions; a flourishing garden without fruit, a
fountain of misery, a river of tears, a feigned fable, a detestable frenzy: and
is this the place of man? What means the fabric of our body lifted up to
heaven, our hands, eyes, head upward, but to show us, as Chalcidius the heathen
man observed, that our Progenitors are from heaven, that our place is in
heaven. Every place is adequate to the thing placed in it; is this world
adequate to man? are not his desires infinitely extended beyond the same? Every
place has a conserving virtue in it: Does this world Preserve man? well may it
minister a little food to this beast of ours, which we carry about us, but can
it afford the least savory morsel to the soul? it were to be wished that it
did not poison, contaminate, and desile the soul: so that the safest way for
the soul, is to fly from the world, as from the face of a Serpent: Is this
world the place of man, why does our tender Mother the Church, as soon as we
come into the world, snatch us out of the world; and as as soon as we breath in
the air, bury us by Baptism in the grave of Christ, and as soon as we move in
this world, consigne us with the sign of the Cross, to fight against the the
world, and all the pomps of the same, and are not we strangers?

Are not they strangers, that have different laws, and diverse customs, and
another Prince to rule and command them? You have heard of the Prince of the
air, and the Laws of the flesh; of the fashions of the world, of the wisdom
that is from below, and earth-creeping: Are Christians guided by these rules?
have they not the God of heaven and earth, the Laws of the Spirit, and the
wisdom that is from above, and customs that are from heaven, whereby to
regulate them? Who are the men of this world? are they not those who have the
God of this world to reign in their hearts? who are led captive by him? whose
understandings are darkened, their wills obfirmated, their hearts hardened, their
consciences seared, their conversation defiled with all uncleanness, their
senses open breaches for sin to enter; their tongues blaspheming the name of
God? and are these conversations fit for the Saints? and are they not strangers?

Are not they strangers that are not capable of honors, of possessions in the
place wherein they live, as being not free Denizens of the place? and is not
this proper to Christians, whose duty it is to vilisie riches, and honors, and
pleasures in themselves, as much as they that have these, do others that have
them not? to account riches the greatest poverty, and pleasures the greatest
torments, and honors the greatest ignominy, and power the greatest weakness;
not to possess the world; not to enjoy it, not to account any thing good that
makes not the owner better, not to admit any thing from the world, but so far
as it may advance the true Nobility of man, the purity of the Image of God, his
restitution to his ancient descent, his re-estating him in the possession of
heaven, and the society of Angels and Archangels, to rise up in Arms against
this material world, and to rend himself from this faecaelent matter; and out
of the greatness of his Spirit, and nobleness of his disposition, to be
altogether ambitious of the presence of God, and of these constant and
unchangeable good things? This is the duty of Christians, and are not they
Strangers?

Are not they strangers that have double Impost, and double customs, and the
greatest taxations laid upon them? is not this peculiar unto the Saints in this
life? have they not afflictions laid upon them in the greatest measure? must
they not through many afflictions enter into the kingdom of heaven? Have they
not tears, and that in abundance, for their meat, and for their drink? Have
they not enemies from within, and enemies from without? Must they not be
conformable to their head Christ, their elder brother: as he had his double
portion in this life, of afflictions and punishments; so must they have; as he
was sanctified by afflictions, so must they also. The gold is not pure, unless
it be tried; nor the water sweet, if it have not a current; nor the vessel
bright, unless it be scoured; nor the Saints fit for heaven, unless they be
prepared by afflictions: what man was there that ever set himself seriously,
either to reform himself or others, that found not great opposition from
himself, and from others? and are not these strangers?

Are not they strangers that are ad placitum Principis to stay in the Land, or
to be gone, according as he shall manifest his royal pleasure by his
Proclamation? and are not we here in the world upon these terms? how soon all
of us, or any of us shall be dismissed, who knows? who dares promise to himself
the late evening, or secure himself of the least atome or moment of time? he
that dreamed waking of long continuance, had scarce liberty to dream sleeping,
for that night they took away his soul; and he himself was branded to
succeeding generations with the name of a fool, and are not we strangers?

Did not the Saints of God, whose judgments were most refined, those that had
the honor to approach most near unto God himself, always so repute
themselves? Does not the holy Patriarch that wrestled with God, and has
principality over him? Did not he acknowledge that few and evil were the days
of his pilgrimage? Did not he that was a man after Gods own heart, that had a
special promise that his house should continue for ever? Yet did not he
acknowledge that he was a stranger as well as his fathers were? is it not his
earnest prayer unto God? I am a stranger upon earth, hide not thy Commandments
from me: as if he had said, I am a Traveller upon earth, I am speeding to
Jerusalem, which is above; I am to pass through this dark calignous world; thy
Word is a light to my feet, (a lanthorn to my steps; the rule, the square, the
cannon of all rectitude; hide not this light from me, lest I run out of the
way, or linger in the way, or stumble, or fall in the way; I am a stranger upon
earth, etc. What should I instance in particulars? are they not summed up to my
hand by the Apostle? Heb. 11.13. All these Patriarks, Prophets, Saints, all of
them did acknowledge themselves to be strangers. Examples have in them an
universality of Doctrine and instruction, especially the examples of the
Saints, because Praxis Sanctorum, is Interpres pracceptorum, the practice of
the Saints, is the best interpretation of the precept. Examples have in them a
directive force, because those that are best disposed in mind and body, are a
rule for the rest. Examples have an incentive force, to give life, spirits,
vigor, transmitting by a kind of Metem Psychosis, the soul, the spirits, the
resolutions, the affections of the pattern, to him that reads it, extorting
deep sighs, and tears, and groans, and other alterations at their pleasure. And
if any Examples have this force, have not these much more? Other examples have
the testimony of men, these have the testimony of God himself, he is not
ashamed; (a wonderful condiscention of the one, and the supreme elevation of
the other) to be called their God, the God of Abraham, and of Isaac, and of
Jacob; the Father of the faithful, and the God of the believers: There are
examples whereof men boast, but God is ashamed of them, corrupt examples of
wicked; the imperfect examples of heathen men, of these God is ashamed; but of
these God is not shamed, and shall we be ashamed of them?

We are then strangers. Let me instill into your ears, the voice of that was
heard in the Temple, before the ruin of it, Migremus hinc, Let us go from
hence. Let me say unto you with our Savior, (...), Let us go from hence, let
us truss up our fardels, and on with our sandals, and promote our way to
heaven; Let us depose and lay down all burdens and impediments, and make our
selves expedite, and fit for our journey; we are in an Inn, let us look about
us, and leave nothing behind, but carry all with us, or send it before us; we
have but an instant of our abode here, let us employ it to the best advantage:
It is the greatest loss, it is the most shameful loss, it is the most
irrecoverable loss that may be, to lose this instant upon which eternity
depends, eternity of misery, or eternity of felicity: let us follow our
Savior, let us seek his face, let us ascend with him, let us not rest here.
Sleep may overtake us, a false Prophet may deceive us, the snare may entangle
us, the Army of the enemy may fall upon us, let us be above all these; Let us
seek those things that are above, What? where Sun and Moon are, nothing less;
Where then? where God is? where Christ? who is our house, our temple, our
habitation, that we may be clothed with him; this is the desire of all the
Saints, and this leads me to the second point.

That the Saints desire a true and proper house; In this we groan earnestly,
etc. What is meant by this house, whether the Joys of heaven, or a Glorisied
body is hard to determine by the context; I incline to Calvin's opinion, that
both are meant, as making up that complete house which the Saints desire, the
one as the introition, the other as the consummation of their bliss; and into
both these houses, I shall labor to introduce your spirits and affections.

The first house is the Joys of heaven, a kingdom elsewhere; for the
amplitude, for the abundant sufficiency, for the honor, royalty of them; yet
because many in kingdoms see not the face of the King, and of those that see
his face, few are of his house and family; and of those that are of his Court,
few are familiar with him, or converse with him; and of those that converse
with him, few are his sons, his heirs. Therefore this kingdom is an house
wherein all see the face of God; all are of his house, all converse with him,
all stand in his presence, all are his sons, all are his heirs; a house so
situated, as never any; upon the brow of that hill, which is the beauty of
perfection, the delight, not of the whole earth, but of heaven it self, in the
purest air that ever was, even purity it self, free from all malignant vapor;
a place irriguous with the crystal streams of Paradise it self, a place
enriched with all the precious things the heart of man can desire; an house not
built by man, but by God himself; not of terrestrial feculent matter, not of
gold or silver, but that which excells all valuation whatsoever; the hanging or
or naments of which house, are not of Arras, or Tissue, or cloth of Gold, or
whatsoever is more precious with men, but far above these, such and so
excellent, that Neither eye has seen, nor ear has heard; neither has the
like entered into the hearts of men. The delights of this house are such, that
if all the contentments and delights that ever ravished the hearts of men in
their private houses were put together, yet were they but as a candle to the
Sun, as a drop to the Ocean: Oh the stateliness and magnificence of the Hall of
this house, wherein are Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, Confessors, Saints,
Angels, the blessed Virgin especially, all of them praising and lauding God!
Blessed are they that dwell in this house, they will be still praising thee.
Here in this life are variety of employments according to the diversity of men's
Callings, and their necessities; but there shall be no necessity, there shall
be but one work, the work of Praise, a duty which in this life is performed
with fatigation and weariness; but their it shall be done with all sweetness
and delight, increasing with the continuance of the same. No vain thoughts, to
interrupt this duty, no weariness of the flesh to weaken this duty, no
necessity or indigency to rend us from this duty; but as it will be our
happiness to love, and see God, so it will be the exercise of our happiness to
admire, and to laud God: while we are here, such is the weakness of our
apprehension, that we cannot with the same act conceive the work, and the
workman; we cannot think of the benefit, and the author of the same, then we
shall be enabled to join both these together, so to admire the work, as at the
same time to praise the author; so to contemplate the benefit, as at the same
time to fall down before the benefactor. Oh the stateliness of this presence,
where the face of God, the beauty of God, the Majesty of God is seen in so
glorious a manner, that even Angels, and Archangels cover their faces, not
being able to behold steadfastly the great luster of the same! Oh the loveliness
of the chambers of the King, made for the soul to repose her self in all
spiritual delight, after her labor and travel in this miserable world! oh the
beauty of the Mansions of this house prepared by Christ himself for the soul,
to refresh her self with all spiritual food! and oh the variety and excellency
of the food of this house, the understanding shall have his food, morning and
evening knowledge; a clear view of all things, not in themselves, or in their
causes, but in their exact Idea's, subsisting in the essence of God, but
especially the radiant vision of the face of God, the Essence of God, the Sun
of righteousness. The will shall have her food, goodness, joy, delectation, not
by measure, but drowned in the full ocean of these, with that stability and
confirmation that she cannot will that which is evil; The affectiens shall have
their food, being fully satisfied beyond their desires. The Body shall have his
food, being made an impassible, clarified, Agil, spiritual body, defecated, and
purified from this feculent elementary food, and all other alterations common
to it with beasts: and which is most wonderful, the King of Kings shall gird
himself to reach out these Joys unto us; they shall be administered unto us Ve
jad Hammelek, by the hand, by the power of a King; Did I say this of my self,
who would give credence unto me? but Truth faith it, Luke 12.37. Blessed are
those servants whom he shall find watching; verily I say unto you, that he
shall gird himself, and make them sit down to meat, and will come forth and
serve them. Oh wonderful dignation! who ever heatd of the like? Stat Cato dum
Lixa bibit, the Lord stands, the servant sits; the Lord is girt, the servant is
loosed; the Master is reaching out full bowels, and the servant is inebriated
with the rivers of these pleasures; once he girt himself to wash his Disciples
feet, and the servant was astonished to see so great a Majesty condescending
to so mean ministry; shall we not be much more ravished with this ineffable
dignation, when he shall again gird himself to supply the soul with
unspeakeable delight, as if God himself intended nothing in heaven, but to heap
content upon them that sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, in the kingdom
of heaven; This is the fatness, the excellency of this house; with the weak
adumbration whereof, I doubt not but that your hearts are so taken, that ye
have reduced all your desires to this one, with the Psalmist; One thing have I
desired of the Lord, which I will desire, even that I may dwell in his house,
and behold the beauty of the Lord. And I wonder not when I contemplate the
Mafesty of God, I wish my self all fear; and when I consider the power of God,
I wish my self all humility; and when I meditate on the goodness of God, I wish
my self all Love; and when I contemplate the Beauty of God and of this bouse, I
wish my self all desire, and so do you also: and therefore with unanimous votes
you request me to conduct you to the gates of this house, whereby you may enter
into the same, and according to the magnificence of this House, so there are
many gates whereby we may enter; and all of these reaching even to the Earth
with the foot of Jacobs ladder.

There is the gate of Faith, by it we have (...), access unto God, and that
with boldness; by this we lay hold on the Throne of Grace; by this we prostrate
our selves at his feet; by this we adhaere, and cleave close unto God; by this
we live in Christ, and Christ in us; by this our hearts are purified, our
conscience washed with the blood of Christ, and fitted to see God, and to enter
into the holy of holies, unto which no unclean thing can be admitted. This is
one Gate.

Another is the gate of Hope, which enters within the Vail, and brings us
nearer unto God; this grace takes us by the hand, and leads us through the
streets of New Jerusalem, and shows us the Temple of the Lamb, and the Lamb
sitting in his Temple, assuring us that we shall live there with him; this is
(...), heaven before heaven, the life of the Soul, the keeper of Christ, the
keeper of God: This is a second Gate.

There is another gate, the gate of Charity; by this we enter not, but press in
unto God, and are not led, but transported unto God, and carried in a fiery
Chariot. By this grace we approach not near unto God, but forgeting the
greatness of his Majesty, we lay hold on him, we hang upon him, we embrace him,
we familiarly converse with him; we freely consult with him, we inseparably
cleave unto him more close then any Polypus does unto the Rock.

Another gate, is the gate of humility, a low gate, but a sure and certain
gate, the exaltation of the soul, the honor, the dignity of the soul, that
which subjects the soul immediately to God, and so seateth it above all the
creatures; that gate whereby the soul steals into heaven, though the gate be
never so straight, by crouching, bowing, bending, pinching of it self. At these
gates, if you knock earnestly by devout prayer, and frequent Alms, you may
enter into this glorious and magnificent house, with which the Saints desire to
be clothed upon: and this is the first house which they desire.

There is another house which the Saints desire, and that is the house of their
bodies glorified: while they are here in this life, they have a cottage rather
than a house, a cottage seated in a low watery myrish place, exposing the soul
to Agues, Fevers, and variety of diseases, so that she is sometimes down; at
the best but crasie and valetudinary: scarce any vicissitude and change, either
of age, or place, or calling; but the soul is dangerously affected with it, and
in great hazard; a dangerous Cottage, ready to fall upon the soul, and crash it
in pieces; a cottage full of holes and rifts, in every storm, and tempest of
adversity it rains through this cottage into the soul, and makes the soul
unhealthy; in the Sunshine of prosperity, the beams of the Sun beat upon the
soul, and make it faint and weak, many times a ruinous cottage, so that the
inhabitant is forced to spend almost all his time in repairing it, in keeping
it up, in supplying the necessities of it; distracted, rent, and torn with
cares and sollicitudes for it, so that little time is left for better duties,
for duties proper to the inner man, and when the soul sets her self to these
duties, then this Cottage is an impediment unto her, taking off her mind from
it by some sudden gust of a vain thought, or hindering her by some
indisposition, or compelling her by some urgent necessity, to break off before
she is willing. These and the like encumbrances do much afflict the Saints,
therefore they desire to be clothed upon, with a pure house, a pleasant house,
a lightsome house, a healthful house, a durable house, a glorious house, that
might be a help and encouragement to the soul in holy and religious duties. In
this we groan earnestly, etc.

You that are owners of the wonder, are not ignorant what a wonder man is, a
composure of different natures, Celestial, terrestrial, Angellical, beastial,
corporal, spiritual; greater then the world, less then the world; the richest
Pearl, and the basest foyl; the Image of GOD, and a piece of clay: you are not
ignorant how these two are affected one to the other in the Regenerate man, if
the body be sound and well, it kicketh against the spirit; if it be ill, it
afflicts the Spirit, How do I love my body, as my fellow servant, and eschew it
as a mine enemy? how do I hate it as my clogg, and reverence it as my
fellow-heir? I buffet it as a slave, and embrace it as a friend; I chastise it
and keep it under, and then I want a companion to assist me in the works of
piety; I cherish it, and nourish it, and then am I stung with the lusts of it;
it is a flattering enemy, a treacherous friend. Oh my conjunction; and oh my
alienation! that which I fear I embrace, and that which I love I fear: before I
make war with it, I am reconciled; and before I am reconciled, I am at
variance: what a strange mystery is this! therefore the Saints mortify and
crucify their bodies, they gird them close with the cords of strong
resolutions, they macerate them with watchings and fastings, and make them
thin, and pale, and wan, that so they may be serviceable to the Spirit; they
labor that their hands may be translucent with fasting, as the hands of
Elphogus were, that their countenances may be living documents of humility,
that their bodies may be as transparent glasses, wherein the thoughts of their
hearts may be seen, that their souls may have no more residence in the heart,
but may as evidently be seen in every part of the body as there. This they aim
at, and when they have done all this, yet they complain of the dullness,
deadness, heaviness, lumpishness of the body, and are at enmity with it, and
cry out, Oh miserable man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of
death? not that they are simply enemies to the body, but to this earthly
corruptible body, this sinful body that depresseth the mind musing of many
things, and desire the deposition, and laying down of the same, that so they
may receive a glorified, a clarified, an incorruptible spiritual body, not made
of a spirit, but serviceable to the spirit; they desire that these eyes may be
so defecated, that if they cannot behold the essence of God, yet they may
steadfastly behold the Empirian heavens, the splendor of our Savior, and the
luster of the bodies of the Saints, more bright then the Sun seven times; they
desire that these hands may be blessed with the contractation of that sacred
body that redeemed them, they desire that this body may be so transparent and
lucid, that the soul may sally bout freely, not at the eye alone, but at every
part to contemplate those glorious objects, that it may be so prelucit, that
the very thoughts of the heart, and the divine fancies that are in the
imaginative part may be seen through it, that it may be so stripped of corporal
density and grosseness, that like lightning it may be here and there, that it
may be fit for raptures, and extrasies, and the Soul no more doubtful whether
she be in the body, or not in the body; This the Saints desire and long after.
And let me speak this of you oh triumphant Souls that are now in bliss without
the least impeachment of your happiness. This even you thirst after, you esteem
it an imperfect estate to be without your bodies, though you glorify and
praise GOD in your souls, yet you count it an imperfect work, and say with the
Psalmist; In death no man remembers thee, and in the grave no man shall give
thee thanks, though your spirits do it without ceasing, without failing, yet
the whole man does it not; and such an insatiable avidity, there is in you of
the praise of God, that unless it be done totally and fully, you think it not
done at all, therefore you desire this glorified Organ; but the Saints on earth
being much more depressed with this heavy clay, cry out with these Saints; In
this we groan earnestly, etc. To be clothed upon with our house, etc.

An impropriety of speech I confess, for men do not cloth themselves with
houses, yet of eminent elegancy and pregnant, with variety of instructions: to
show the fitness of this glory to every soul, as apparel is fitted to every
body: to show the comeliness of this glory; as apparel is an ornament to a man:
to show the firm adhesion of this glory, the whole man as a garment does cleave
close unto him: to show the redundancy of this glory, that a man shall invelopp
himself in this glory, as a man does inwrap himself in his garment: to show the
Author of this glory, he that made garments to cover man's nakedness in Paradise
below, he makes robes of honor to adorn him everlastingly in Paradise, which
is above: to show the undeservedness of it on our part, that these garments
they are not webbs of our own spinning, but robes of Gods giving: to show the
all sufficiency of this glory, in this life we need houses to dwell in, and
raiment to cover us, and food to nourish us, and fire to warm us; but this
glory it shall be a Magazine of all spiritual store, an house to shelter us, a
garment to cover us, Manna to feed us, water to refresh us, it shall be all in
all unto us. These and many more instructions are folded up in the Cabinet of
this Metaphor, which streights of time will not give me leave to unfold, and
spread before you, but must leave them to your private meditations; and so
passing (though unwillingly) from these two houses which the Saints desire; I
must raise up your attention to their ardent affection unto them. In this we
groan earnestly, etc.

Wherein you see the intention of their affection, and the expression of it;
The intention not (...), Desiring, but (...), Desiring earnestly; The
expression of it by groans; In this we groan earnestly. The one the soul, the
other the body; the one the form, the other the exercise; the one the root, the
other the branch; or if you will, the one the fire, the other the fuel; the one
the flame, the other the oil that nourishes the flame.

The first is the intention of the affection. As those that are in a longing
passion die if they be not satisfied: as the pregnant Mother groans to be
delivered of her burden; as those that are pressed under a heavy weight, faint
if they be not eased; even so the Saints pressed down with that (...), that
eternal weight of glory, mentioned in the precedent Chapter, a burden which
did both press them down, and raise them up; that did both straiten them and
enlarge them; like the feathers of the Dove, which add to her Mass, but take
off from her gravity, which makes her more corpulent, and yet more light; even
so this weight of glory so pressed down the Saints, that it raised them up to
the Throne of the Lamb, and feeling this body of sin, this body of death, which
they did bear about them as plummets of lead hanging at their feet; they desire
est-soon to be stripped of all encumbrances and impediments, to depose and lay
down this cottage of clay, that so being absent from the body, they might be
present with the Lord; this was the violence of their affection. In this we
groan earnestly, etc.

An affection, worthy the name of an affection, truly grounded, and therefore
towering so high, that it is almost invisible to our weak sight. There are some
in this life that are fed with gall and wormwood, with tears and groans; upon
whom the wheel of oppression is roled, breaking all their bones, so that they
seek for death, as for pearls and hidden treasures, as an end and period of
their miseries. Others there are who seeing the vanity of the things of this
life, and ballancing with them the trancendent excellency of the Soul of man
above the world, had rather be idle, or not be at all, then to be so basely and
meanly imploved, and rewarded, as the world does remunerate her favorites.
Others make bitter invectives against the body, as the only impediment to the
soul in her more pure speculations, placing the happiness of the soul, in the
separation from the body; all these come far short of this divine affection,
which has not her rise from the miseries of this life, or from the vanity of
the creature, or from the incombrances of this cottage, but from a true
apprehension of the love of God, from a deep panting after union with him, from
a taste of the powers of the life to come, from a Soul inflamed with a coal
from Gods Alter. Look upon these Saints in my Text, they were indeed exercised
beyond measure, with those things which we call miseries, calamities,
afflictons; at the mention whereof we quake like Aspen leaves; but were these
tainted with impatiency? were these groans fuliginous vapors from a
malecontented spirit? Did they not account these afflictions their Justs and
Barriers, and Tournaments, and exercises of honor and Chivalry, at which
Angels, and Archangels were present with their Euges and approbations, God
himself the chief Spectator, and rewarder of these exercises, they themselves
triumphing and boasting in their trials, with the impress of the Apostle on
their shields of faith; We are persuaded, that neither death nor life, nor
Augels, nor Principalities, nor powers, nor things present; nor things to come,
nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature shall be able to separate us from
the love of God which is in Christ Jesus; They were more Eagle-eyed by the
strength of grace, to pry into the nothingness of the creature, then all the
Philosophers by the strength of nature; they did mortify, and crucify, and
keep under the body, with the lusts thereof, and more truly detest the
corruption of the outward man, then any Platonist whatsoever: but were these
the grounds, the rise of this celestial affection? nothing less, to see God, to
enjoy God, to dwell with him, to converse with him, to be dissolved, to be with
Christ: these transported their affections; not the emptiness of the things
below, but fullness of things above; not the baseness of earthly things, but the
glory of celestial things; not the miseries of this life, or of this crazie
vessel, but the happiness of the life to come; they had but a glimpse of this
strange light darted into there souls, and the whole world was darkness unto it;
they had a gust of sweetness cast into the palate of their souls, and all
things else were bitter and unsavory: Christ was placed in the summity and
height of their souls, and the desire of the full fruition of him caused that
fainting, that earnest longing in their spirits.

You will say if this be so, what will become of the greatest part of
Christians, who are afraid to die? who are so far from groaning to depose this
Tabernacle, that they groan at the least intimation of dissolution? It is true
that all men receive not this saying, neither is it for every one to attain to
this perfection. As there are two forts of faith, so there are two forts of
Christians; there is a strong faith, and a weak faith; and there are strong
Christians, and there are weak Christians; the strong Christian is willing to
die, and patient to live; the weak Christian is willing to live, and patient to
die; he goes when God calls, but he could wish that God would defer his
calling; he has good hopes of heaven, but he desires a little more to enjoy
the earth; he loves God more then all, yet his affections are not fully taken
off from all; he is not perplexed with the fears of Hell, yet he is not
ravished with the joys of Heaven; he has much strength but knows it not: as
many a Spectator of a prize, is better able to perform it, then he that
undertakes it; but either through faintness of heart, or ignorance of his own
strength, dare not put it to the hazard, but had rather commend another man's
valor, then try his own; whereas a strong Christian, a man grown in Christ,
sends a challenge to this Giant Death, singles him out, as a fit object of his
valor, grapples with him, not as with his match, but as his underling,
insulteth over him, sets his foot on the neck of this King of terrors, and
by conquering him, captivates with great facility all other petty fears of
ignominy; poverty and the like, which therefore are dreadful, because they tend
to Death, the last, the worst, the end, the sum of all feared evils: this is
the unconquerable crown of Faith; this is the glory of a Christian, this is the
Diadem of honor wreathed about his Temples, advancing him above all other men
whatsover.

But you will say, may a man desire death! Is this now a question, what means
the agony of the Apostle? I desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ. What
means the earnest longing of the Spouse? Apoca. 22. The Spirit faith come, and
the Bride faith come; and let him that hears say come. What means her fainting
in the Canticles? I am sick of love, let him bring me into his chamber: Let me
see his face, I am sick unto death: Let me die lest I die, that I may see him for
ever. What means the Character of a true Christian: As many as love the
appearance of the Lord, which cannot be without death: What means the
incredible contempt of death in ancient Christians, insomuch, that it was a
received Maxim with the Heathen; Omnis Christianus est contemptor mortis. What
means the heroical encouragement of old Hilarion, Egredere anima, egredere,
quid times? Go out my soul, go out, why tremblest thou? What means the words of
old Simion in the flames; Thus to die is to live? What means the rapture of
Saint Chrysostom, that he would thank that man that would kill him, as
transmitting him more speedily to those unconceivable Joys? What means this
groaning, and thirsting in my Text? Do not these demonstrate that it is lawful
to desire death? Not simply in it self, or for it self, it is the separation of
those two whom God has coupled; it is a cessation of being; it is an evil of
punishment, the daughter of sin: to desire it simply, were to desire evil,
which is abhorrent to nature; much less ought we to hasten our death by violent
means. Let their memories be buried in perpetural silence, as the botches and
ulcers of Christianity, who out of impatience have perpetrated this heinous
sin, a sin against God and man; against nature, against grace, against the
Church, against the commonwealth, against all things: The Heathen man could
say, that we are the possession of God, to be disposed of by him, not by our
selves: the body is the structure of God, the work of his hands, the Tabernacle
which he has made, and not to be removed, or to be taken down, but by his
command: while we live, we may advance the glory of God, the good of others; we
may impeople heaven, make up the ruins of Angels; to hasten our death, were to
envy this glory to God, this good to others: In that distraction of our Apostle
between two good things, his own glory, and the good of others; you know which
way the scales inclined, to the good of others; as if he had said, let my glory
be deferred, so Gods glory be increased; let my joy be increased, let my joy be
sulpended, so the joy of Angels, and of the Court of heaven be intended by the
conversion of sinners; Nay more, this is a small thing; Let me be an Athema, so
Israel be blessed, let me be blotted out of the book of life, so thousands be
inserted; let the bowels of Christ be straightened to me, so they be enlarged to
others; this is life indeed, this is the end of our life: this will comfort us
in this life, and crown us in the life to come. He that can truly say, that
while he lived, he lived to God, not to himself, that he sincerely propounded
the glory of God, and the good of others unto himself; this man may write upon
his Tomb, (...), I have lived: take this out of the life of man, and what is
it but a mere death, if not worse, though it be protracted to the years of
Methusalem twice told? Thus, simply to desire death is not good; but cloth
this with some circumstances, and then to desire death is not only warrantable
but commendable; when we have done all the good we can, when our lives will be
no more serviceable to Church or Commonwealth, when we have with all fidelity
done our Masters work, when we have the testimony of a good conscience, that we
have fought a good fight, that we have kept the faith, that we have finished
our race; then may we say with old Simeon, Lord now let thou thy servant
depart in peace; then may we with our Apostle lift up our eyes to the crown of
righteousness, which the righteous Judge has laid up for them that fear him;
then we may expect the Euge of the good servant, Well done good and faithful
servant, enter into the joy of thy Master.

Again, when we are called to be Holocausts, or sacrifices, oblations of sweet
savours, the Frankincense of the Church to perfume others, to deliver up our
lives unto God, to seal his Truth with our blood to encourage others; then we
ought to run unto death with all alacrity, rejoicing that we are counted worthy
to suffer for his Name, to triumph, to boast in this out of these cases, to
have such a taste of God, such a relish of the joys of heaven, such a longing
after the presence of Christ, as not to be ready, but to be willing; not to be
prepared for the stroke of death, but to be desirous of it, to esteem of death
as the funeral of sin, the interring of vice, the period of miseries, the
Charter of freedom, the Pattent of exemption from evil of sin, from evil of
punishment, the day of our birth, the season of harvest, the seal of our
victory, the heaven of our happiness, our introduction into heaven, our
inauguration into a kingdom; the Chariot of our triumph, the day of our return
to our proper house, to our Parents, to our best friends. This is the affection
which is required in us, at which we ought to aim. Let this house of clay be
resolved into the principles of the same, what wonder if that which is built be
thrown down; and that which is compounded, be resolved; and that which was
borrowed of the Elements, be repayed again; and that which was taken from the
earth, be committed to the custody of the earth. Nay, let me triumph in the
resolution of this piece of clay into the exilest atome, and admire the counsel
of God, that this Carcass is crumbled into the smallest dust, and sifted into
the coursest bran, even to dust and ashes; were not this body resolved into
dust, who would believe his original to be from the earth? what pride, what
elevation would follow? what carking and caring for this earthly Tabernacle? if
now when we see it to be but a spawn of worms, and the food of Emmits, there is
such immoderate excess; what would there be if the body were exempted from
putrefaction? what desolations would follow in Cities, in Towns? how many would
dwell in monuments with those whom they have honored, or affected in their
lives? if many now be so impotent, that though the body be putrified, they
cannot forbear embracing of it, and to solace themselves, make Pictures of
their dead friends, and dote upon these; what would they not do if their bodies
were immortal? What neglect would there be of the soul, the better part of a
man? who would know the virtue of it, that it is not only salt to the body to
keep it sweet, but the life, the beauty, the comeliness of the body? Who would
believe the consummation, the period of the world, if our bodies were immortal?
who would mind heavenly things? who seek those things that are above? what
deifying of the body would follow? what Idolatries? what superstitions? what
Temples built? what Alters erected? what variety of Ceremonies instituted to
the body? All which God has plucked up by the roots, by this putrefaction, and
incinneration of our bodies, by this, teaching us to contemn earthly things, to
have our cogitations on heaven, to think upon this scale, to ascend up to this
Mount, to aspire to this intention, which that we may, let me add fuel to the
fire, and oil unto the flame, the expression of this aflection, to the
intention of it, earnest groaning, to eager desiring.

In this we groan earnestly. That is, for this we sigh out, not our breath, but
our spirits: we groan out, not fuliginous vapors, but our very hearts, we weep
not tears but blood; for this we immolate the sufferings of our bodies, and
macerate them with watchings and fastings, we roll them in dust and ashes; we
exercise them in all humiliation and repentance. And this is to groan
earnestly, in my Text.

This is the negotiation of the outward man whereby it treads for heaven, this
is the conversation of a piece of clay into a pile of frankincence; this adds
wings unto our Prayers; this opens the ears of God; this dissipateth the
clouds of his countenance; this inclines him to clemency toward us; this
makes the Widow continent, and the Virgin unspotted; this lifts up the
voluntary Eunuch to the kingdom of heaven; this perfects the grace that is in
the soul; this washes away the stains, and contaminations that are in the
soul; this is the beauty and comeliness of a Christian. How lovely were the
Ninivites? how glorious was the King in sackcloth, sitting in his throne of
dust and ashes? what were his Robes of Majesty and Royalty to these ornaments,
they might dazzle the eyes of the body for a time, these dazzle the eyes of the
mind, even at this day, after so many hundred years; they might procure him
honor with men, these made him honored by God himself. Let corporal eyes look
upon an abject, and mean appearance of a King in these weeds, yet do not
spiritual eyes see through these garments, Humility, Patience, submission, fear
of God, and the like? and are there any Jewels like unto these? what are those
garments which are the labor of a worm, to these robes that are the works of
Gods Spirit? What is a chain of Pearl, to a chain of warm and successive tears,
beaten out of the rocks of a broken and contrite heart? they may adorn the
body, this adorns the soul; and which is more, binds the hands of God himself.
Let whose will admire the victories and triumphs of David over the enemies of
Israel, which are indeed worthy of admiration; I admire him in his watchings,
and fastings, and sackcloth; by them he overcame flesh and blood; by these he
overcame God; by them he overcame men, by these he made conquest of himself; by
them he enlarged the territories of Israel, by these he enlarged the bounds of
heaven; by them he made Hadadezer fly, by these he made the Angel put up his
sword, and God to reverse his sentence; by them he did remove temporal evils;
by these he did procure everlasting good unto himself and others. This is that
humiliation which this sacred time requires, not abstinence only from meats
which pamper this carkess; this is not the body of this fast, but a vehement
intention of religious duties above other times; he that prayed twice a day
before, let him now do it seven times; he that fasted but once in the week, let
him now do it three times, or ostner, as his body will permit him, though it be
to the sickness of the body, it is an happy sickness of the body, which is the
sanctity of the soul; he that gave Alms a little, let him now double, or
treble his liberality; he that did delight before in recreations, let him
devote that time to prayer, to humiliation: do not our sins require this? our
own sins? the sins of others? if not our own miseries (for which we bless God)
yet do not the miseries of other Nations, the Churches of God require this? Do
we not now beat our breasts, and hang down our heads, and rend our hearts, and
punish our selves for our sins, that God may not punish them? Did not our sins
call upon us for this duty, yet is not the sight of God, the presence of our
Savior, the joys of Heaven, the equality with the Angels, the glory of a
Kingdom worthy a tear, a groan, a sigh, a fast, are they now so contemptible
or mean, that no violence is requisite? with what face shall we appear before
our Savior at his Tribunal, when he shall demand of us his tears, his
watchings and fastings? when he shall say unto us, were are my tears? are they
water spilt upon the ground, not to be gathered up? Where are my sighs and
groans, have they vanished in the air? where are my watchings? what not a tear,
for so many tears? not a fast, for so many fasts? not a groan for so many
miseries which I endured? Had I shed but one tear, should it not have broken up
a fountain of tears in thee? Had I setched but one sigh, should it not have
made thy life a perpetual sigh? But when I have done so much for thy sake,
shall it be lost? will thou do nothing for thy own self? shall I cast so much
seed into the ground, and reap nothing again.

Oh my beloved, what are all our afflictions? what are all the afflictions of
our selves, to the least drop of gall that he tasted, to the least scourge
which he suffered? how can we say that either we loved God or our selves, if we
do not these things in testimony of this. If ye shall not perform these duties,
it is a small comfort for us, that we have freed our souls? it is your
salvation we thirst after, and say in a better sense, then the King of Sodom;
Da nohis animas, Give us your souls: and without this we have no comfort, we
may be acquitted at the bar of God, but we shall not be crowned in his Throne;
for what is our crown, but you that hear us; but if you shall thus groan, as I
doubt not but you do in secret, it is not I, but God himself has promised.
that they that sow in tears, shall reap in joy: that they which mourn here,
shall be comforted hereafter; that they which groan here, shall be refreshed in
their proper house; In this we groan earnestly, desiring to be clothed upon
with our house which is from heaven. Which God of his infinite mercy grant, etc.

THE CARELESS MERCHANT: OR THE WOEFUL LOSS OF THE PRECIOUS SOUL. SERMON XXII.
MATT. 16.26. What is a man profited, if he shall gain the whole world, and
lose his soul?


THe Patriarch Jacob in his vision at Bethel, saw the Angels of God ascending
and descending, Genesis 28. So from the thirteenth verse of this Chapter, we have
the Disciples of Christ ascending and descending. For first their general
speaker Simon Peter, had made a notable confession of our Saviors Divinity,
and had received for the further encouragement of himself and his brethren,
such an excellent testimony from our Savior, that the Angels of heaven might
behold, observe, and embrace; Blessed art thou Simon Bar-Jona, for flesh and
blood has not revealed this to thee, but my father which is in heaven: and I
say thou art Peter, and on this rock will I build my Church, and the gates of
hell shall not prevail against it. Which words were not only appropriate to
him, (they were spoken to him) but they were common to all the Apostles: For as
Origin argues, Origin.
shall we think that the gates of hell prevailed not against Peter, but did a
against the rest? Therefore that which was said to him, was said to all, and
being such a glorious commendation; behold the Angels ascend.

But secondly, what if the earthly mind of man dream of a Messiah temporal, and
that they must be promoted to places of eminency, and styled gracious Lords?
the case is too palpable: for if Christ warn his Disciples, and tell them of
his approaching death at Jerusalem, he shall be sure to meet with a check; no
such matter, it shall not be so to thee. Oh! here is a strange metamorphise, a
sudden alteration; before a Confessor, and now a controller: there is no
wisdom of the spirit in this, and therefore no commendation for this, but
because he was somewhat too forward, get the behind me, for thou art an offense
to me; behold the Angels descend. And surely this carnal wisdom had been able
to weigh them down to the nethermost hell, had not the wisdom^ of the wisest
curbed, and subdued, and restrained it. What, not suffer? Yes, Peter also must
suffer; and all that will follow Christ, must renounce all the inticements of
the world, and mortify all the corrupt exorbitancies of the flesh, and resist
all the temptations of the Devil. For what is a man profited if he gain the
whole world, and lose his soul?

Which words are an exaggeration of the woeful estate of a temporizing
Professor, Parts of the Text.
of a carnal Gospeller, and they reach to our consideration these four generals.

First, the excellency, and worth of man's soul, which is of greater value then
the whole world.

Secondly, the possiblity of the loss, a man may lose his own soul.

Thirdly, the compossibility of outward prosperity, he may lose his soul in
gaining the whole world.

And then lastly, the woeful bargain in such an exchange, What is a man
profited? Of these in order.

First of the surpassing excellency, The excellency of man's soul.
and dignity of man's soul: it is valued and prized here above the whole world.
It was the plausible conceit of certain Ehilosophers, that the world was a
great man, and that man was a little world: a little world indeed, but as Saint
(...) rearms him, a great wonder: for within this little world, there is a
reasonable soul worth all the world. To render an exact definition of the soul,
it requires the tongue of an Angel, rather then of a man: it passes the
comprehension of travelers to apprehend the nature of the soul: for these
three, God, Angels, and man's Soul, they are unknown to us; we may sooner admire
their excellency, then conceive their nature; and argue of their opperations,
then attain their knowledge; of such sublimity is the soul of man, so Angelical
and Divine; the excellency whereof is commended to us by three distinct voices,
of Nature. Grace. Glory.


For, 1. By nature; and that in respect.
first in the order of nature, it is the greatest thing, says Plato, that we
may conceive in a narrow room: the most noble thing that all the frame of
nature affords; and that, Plato.
In respect of the Orignal. In respect of the Image.


In respect of the Original, 1. Of the original.
the soul of man has no beginning here (...) there was no voice directed to
the earth, or to the water, for the production of (...) soul, but a serious
confultation of the sacred Trinity, and a breathing into his (...) the breath
of life. Aug.
Says Saint Austin, he created it by infusion, and (...) creation. And the
Philosopher well concludes, that the soul as it is not from without, Manichees
. it is only divine. Therefore the Manichees extolled it too high, when they
deemed it a portion of Gods substance: let not others abase, and depresse it
too low, to think it is derived from Parents; it comes not of their substance:
it is enough for them to be the fathers of the flesh, God alone is the Father
of spirits, as the Apostle makes the antithesis, Heb 12.9.2. The Image. Plato.
Aristocle.
Heb. 12.9.

Secondly, for the Image, the soul is most like God, says Plato; says
Aristotle, it is of the nearest kin, of the greatest consanguinity, as I may
say: and the Lord himself signifies so much, After our Image let us make man.
Then the soul of man is not stamped with a Roman Caesar, but with Gods own
Image and superscription; and that

First in respect of the substance, In respect of the substance.
being not only a spiritual, intellectual, incorporeal, invisible essence; but
explaining by the plurality of Powers, in the unity of Essence, the plurality
of Persons in the unity of the Deity.

Secondly, The indowments.
being furnished with singular indowments; as in the state of innocence with
perfect wisdom, and holiness, and righteousness. Yea, still in the state of
sin, some generals are lest, some broken fragments of the creation, moral
qualifications that may lead us by the hand to the knowledge of our Master.

Lastly, The command over the body.
in regard of the comanding power it has over the body. It is to the body, as
Moses was to Pharaoh; a God to the body; it actuates it, and moves, and
commands, and restrains it; whereby (next and immediately under God) we live
and move, and have our being. Seeing then the soul is the immediate work, and
character of God himself, so excellent for the Original, and for the Image, let
nature conclude that the soul in-these regards, is of greater value then the
whole world.

Secondly, 2. By grace.
in the Kingdom of grace, the price of the soul is far above the dignity of
the world; and that in the grace of Redemption, and the grace of renovation.

For first, 1. In Redemption.
in the souls redemption, the soul amounts so high, as that the whole Creation
is not able to discharge it; It is not gotten for gold, nor silver is not
weighed for the price of it; it is not valued with the gold of Ophir, or the
precious Onix. It cost more to redeem the soul of sinful man: the precious
blood of the eternal Son of God; he could only redeem it, that at the first
created it; Ye are bought with a price, the precious blood of Christ.

Secondly, 2. In renovation.
in the grace of renovation, nothing is able to cleanse it from sin, but the
Spirit of God. The spirit alone must enlighten the understanding, and rectisie
the affections, and purisie the will, and sanctify the conscience, and seal up
the Image of God in righteousness, and true holiness. And the soul thus
renewed, is as a Garden enclosed, a spiritual Paradise, where the God of heaven
delights to dwell, the Spouse of the Beloved, and in the phrase of the Church,
As the Lilly among the thorns, so is my love among the daughters. Seeing it
appears that the universal World is not able to redeem, or being redeemed, to
renew, or renewed, to parallel the soul; let grace subscribe to that which
nature concludes, that the soul is of greater value then the whole world.

Lastly, 3. By glory. Bern.
for the passage of glory, the contents of the whole Universe are not able to
come near the soul. Says S. Bernard well, well it may be busy, and took up
with other things, but it cannot be satiate, and replenished with them. And
Democrates imagined, that if there were millions of worlds, it were all one in
comparison of the soul for blessedness. The world is transitory like the dew of
the morning, it fades as the grass, and as the flower of the field; whereas on
the contrary, the soul of man is the subject of immortality, capable of an
exceeding, surpassing, eternal weight of glory. For if in the time of grace we
behold as in a glass, the glory of the Lord, and are changed into the same
Image, from glory to glory, by the Spirit of the Lord. How resplendant shall
the soul of the righteous be, in the beatifical vision of Gods excellencies?
How wonderful shall that divine capacity be, that shall be capable of God
himself for a perpetual residence? Insomuch that the most ancient of days
shall give fullness to the Soul, of knowledge and wisdom, and his sacred Spirit
that shall fill it with the fullness of God, with contentation, and the sacred
Trinity shall be all in all to it. Seeing then the Soul is capable, and is the
subject of the happiness, and joys of heaven, and partner with the glorious
Angels in the fruition of the chief good, let the sentence of glory join to
Grace and nature, that the Soul is of greater value then the whole world.

Behold then, O man, out of the mouth of three witnesses: (for I may say in
this case, as Saint John says in another, There are three that bear record in
heaven, the Father, the Word, and the holy Ghost. Behold, out of the mouth of
three Witnesses) the surpassing excellency, and dignity of thy soul; it is the
breathing of God, the Image of God; he created it with his Word, redeemed it
with his Son, and in whomsoever his grace abides, he will crown it hereafter
with his glorious presence.

What then remains, Use. To take especial care of our souls.
but that we esteem our souls accordingly as God values them. Let us not with
the unhallowed voluptuous in these times, make Lords of our bodies, and slaves
of our souls. Let us not spend our days in providing for the lusts of the
flesh. Let us not in affectation of fair possessions, of able servants, of
hopeful sons, and good friends, content our selves with bad souls. A man's soul
is himself, Plato. Aug.
says Plato. And O wretched wight, says Saint Austin, how have thou deserved
so much ill of thy self, as among all thy goods, to be only thy self bad? O
remember the sublimity of thy precious soul: thou know not what a precious
pearl thou have in thy body, like the hidden treasure in the Gospel, it is of
greater worth than the whole field. I say not as he did, know that thou have a
God in thee, yet know that in that better part of thy nature, thou art like to
God: for he has given thee a soul of his own breathing, and stamped it with
the impress of his own Image; and created it capable of the fruition of his own
presence in endless glory. In the consideration whereof, walk worthily of this
precious divine inspiration. Thy Soul is a spirit, let thy thoughts be
spiritual. Thy soul is immortal, let thy meditations be of immortality, and
renounce thy body and good name, and gifts of the world, for the gainig of thy
soul; for what shall it profit a man to gain the whole world, and to lose his
own soul? So much shall serve to be spoken of the first point: the surpassing
excellency and dignity of the soul, it is vallued and prized here above the
whole world.

Now, The possibility to lose the soul. Mat. 24.
the next is the possibility, that a man may lose his own soul. The mention
whereof causes me to remember, that passage between Christ and his Disciples,
Mat. 24. The Disciples point Christ to the stately buildings of the Temple; but
they were soon damped, when Christ told them, that after a while there should
not a stone, be left upon a stone. So perhaps, you are taken with admiration at
the former part of the discourse, concerning the excellency of man's soul, but
are damped, to consider that a man may lose it. It is a substance immortal, in
respect of the being of it; but defiled with sin, it is adjudgeable to death in
regard of the well-being; and a posibility so to die, is nothing repugnant to
the immortality of the soul. The damned spirits they are always dying, and are
never dead; they are always deprived of Gods comfortable presence, and are
never released of their hellish torments; As the Apostle says in another case,
as dying, and yet behold they live; as living, and yet behold they die. The
soul expiring is the death of the body, and God forsaking is the death of the
soul.

But you will say, Quest.
how is it possible?

The question is soon resolved, Answ.
if we ponder the causes of death. A thousand mortal maladies there are to kill
the body, How the soul may be lost.
and there are a thousand deadly diseases to destroy the soul. There is no sin
so small, but in the rigor of Gods justice, and in its own nature, it way damn
the soul.

When God in the beginning stated man in Paradise, he gave him a special caveat
about the tree of knowledge, he gives him a command thus; In the day thou
eatest, thou shall die. What, for bare eating? No, beloved, but for the sin,
for tansgressing so small a commandment of so great a God. Sin alone makes a
separation between God and the soul, and causes the death of the soul; the
soul that sins, the same shall die. It may teach us, that for the time that we
live in this world, there is nothing easier then to sin. There is a tree of
Life, and a tree of Kuowledg, and by eating of the tree forbidden comes death:
there is a way of felicity, and a way to destruction; there is a God of
salvation, and a ghostly enemy, and by adhering to the pricipality of sin, a
man may lose his own soul.

Is it possible then that a man may lose his soul that is so precious? Use.
and have we not great reason to try, and to suspect our selves, touching our
standing toward God? Is there not a main necessity to seek the means to
preserve us in the compass, and seals of grace? It is lamentable to consider
how in bodily diseases men can open their grief, and seek for help, and send to
some learned Physician. We can go to some noble learned council, in case of
law. But alas the soul lies wounded in the way, over laden with the grievances
and pressures of sin, distracted with the affrightings of a troubled
conscience, as if there were no balm in Gilead, no Physician there, as if there
were no Minister to afford help. There is no seeking abroad: a Lion is
pretented to be in the way, and Solomon's sluggard, folds his hands to sleep. O
let not these things be so. Be not as the Horse and Mule that have no
understanding. Neglect not the helps of your preservation in grace: but, be
continually watchful with suspicion and jealousy, and abstain from fleshly
lusts, that fight against your souls. The Poet could say, Thieves rise by night
to rob, and kill, and steal, and wilt not thou wake to save thy soul.

God (for the most part) says Saint Chrysostom has allotted to nature all by
two's; two hands, two eyes, two feet, two ears; ears, eyes, hands, feet, two of
all, that if we chance to maim one, we can help to relieve the necessity of it
by the other: but he has given us but one soul, if we lose that, what shift
shall we make for another soul? a piercing contemplation, if we had grace to
consider it. Therefore, O my soul, tender thy self as my own happiness, if thou
be translated to heaven, the body in time shall come thither; this corruption,
shall put on incorruption; this mortal, shall put on immortality. Again, if
thou be haled with the fiends to the nethermost hell, the body in time shall be
tormented with thee. It is altogether just with the righteous God, that they
that meet in sin, should also consort in suffering. Save thy self, and save
all; and by woeful consequence, lose thy self, and lose all: For what is a man
profited, if he gain the whole world, and lose his own soul. So much for the
second point, the possibility of losing a man's soul.

3. A man may lose his soul in gaining the world.
Come we to the third, the compossibility of outward prosperity; he may lose
his soul, in gaining the whole world. In the diversity of opinions concerning
the chief good, some there were that placed it in riches; others in honors;
and how ever they differed in their judgments, yet both agreed in this, that
they were both deceived. For how ever it cannot be denied, but that riches, and
honors, are the blessings of God; Note.
yet again they are no demonstration of a blessed man. Lest any man should take
them to be ill, they are bestowed upon them that are good: lest any man should
reckon them for the chief good, they are bestowed likewise upon the evil:
external blessings are but common favors vouchsafed to good and bad. Was
Abraham rich? so was Abimelech. Was Jacob rich? so was Laban. Was David a King?
so was Saul. Was Constantine an Emperor? so was Julian. Salvation depends not
on the multitude of riches, or emminency in place: the tallest Cedar has the
greatest fall; and the fairest houses many times the greatest ruin; and outward
prosperity uuguarded with inward sanctity, may soon lose the soul.

For first, 1. Rich men.
rich men are tainted with covetousness, which is a kind of secret Idolatry,
Collos. 3. and covetousness which is Idolatry, says the Apostle.

If you would know the reason, Are covetous.
the more tenaciously a man loves his own, the less devotion he offers to God,
you cannot live in the service of Mammon, and of Christ; the mouth of the Lord
has spoken it, you cannot serve God and Mammon. If the young man in the Gospel
have great possessions; if Judas carry the bag; if Demas embrace the present
world; then fearewel Christ, farewell Paul, and farewell soul too. So true is the
saying of the Apostle, They that will be rich fall into temptations, and
snares, and many foolish, and noisome lusts that drown men in perdition and
destruction. Where, he says not they that are, but they that will be rich: It
is not simply money, but the love of money that is the root of all evil. Riches
are good with a good conscience: but if the soul be infected with avarice, if
it savor of that bitter Collaquintida, Death is in the pot, and how hardly
shall they that have riches enter into the kingdom of heaven? For the desire
of worldly men, it is as the unsatiable thirst of a dropsy patient: there is
no means that they leave unattempted, no policy unachieved for the
accomplishment of their ends, and advancing of their estate.

Balaam for a bribe will almost curse where the Lord has blessed. Ziba for an
inheritance (as much as in him lies) will bring his Master within the compass
of treason. Demosthenes for a little more gold, instead of pleading, will
pretend he has a cold. May not the Church have a Balaam? And the Princes Court
have a Ziba? and the bar have a Demosthenes? There is no greedy Monopolizer
wheresoever they be, in City or Country, but they are moralized Eagles; and the
coals that they carry shall fire their own nest; They shall have Ahabs curse
with Naboths Vineyard, and Gehezies leprosy with Naamans reward; and while
with an eager pursuit they hoard up unrighteous Mammon, it is but wrath heaped
up against the last day; they heap up wrath to themselves against the day of
wrath.

Secondly, Ambi^ious. men
great men are in danger of ambition, and a swelling inordinately upon their
promotion. And the ambitious man is so strangely dazzled with the beams of his
own luster, ut imperio, etc. that in the greatest of his power, he thinks of
nothing but how to be greater, he forgets the Lord that made him, and God that
raised him out of the mire, to set him with the Princes of the people. And like
that famous fool in his new coat once, he knows not himself. So by means of
this impediment; though God have some Noble, and some worldly-wise, that he
has drawn to himself: yet by means of this impediment, not many mighty, not
many Noble are called. The gates of heaven are too too strait for the swelling
dimensions of ambition: there is nothing so easy to pride, as to purchase a
fall, and there is no fall so great as from heaven. It is a sign that Lucifer,
if he long for dainties shall be cast out of heaven. It is a sign that Adam, if
he desire the Apple shall be cast out of Paradise. It is a sign that
Nebuchadnezzar, if he glory in Babel, he shall be cast out of his Kingdom. It
is a sign that Haman by abusing his promotion, shall be exalted to the
gallows. To comprize it in aword, the greater the dignity of eminency and
honor, the greater the execution of pains, and horror. The sum then is this,
in a world of promotion, and temporal advancement in worldly possessions, and
unmeasurable treasure, the covetous, and ambitious man may lose his own soul.

Now, Use. To tax covetous men
for a word of Application, if this be so; how taxable then are the thousands
of worldlings in this kind, that imagine the gain of this earth to be the
greatest happiness? Bern.
That say to the Gold, thou art my God; and to honor, thou art my glory? That
make Gold their God, and Mammon their Mediator. Says Saint Bernard, Yea
covetous generation that glory in silver and gold, in that that is not yours,
nor precious; precious it cannot be, but by the avarice of the sons of Adam
that prise them. Again, if they be yours, take them away with you when you go
hence. Yet the children of the world are wholly for great Diana, Gods of silver
and gold, multitudes of lands, and revenues, and advancing of their secular
estate.

Many can complain of the vanity of this world, and the deceivableness of it;
but few complain of that Idolatrous confidence that themselves repose in this
false world: there are few that recount, how in enjoying outward things, Martha
without Mary, prosperity without piety, they may lose their own souls. O let a
word of exhortation prevail against this sore disease, if riches increase, take
heed of covetousness; be covetous of spiritual things, for immortality, there
hoard up your treasure in heaven.

Again, 1. Ambitious.
for ambition take heed of it, be honorable for humility, and ambitious for
heaven; Love not the world, and the things of this world; exalt not your selves
against the Lord of glory. Thou know not what a day may bring forth: boast
not of to morrow. O fool, this night shall they fetch thy soul. And what is a
man profited, if he gain the world, and lose his own soul? So much for the
third point, the compossibility of outward prosperity, a man may lose his soul,
in gaining the whole world.

The fourth and the last, The loss by this gain.
is the woeful disadvantage by such an exchange, What is a man profited? You may
call it not unfitly the account of the careless Merchant; or a Summary
collection of gains and losses. For (a little to countenance the allegory)
every unsatiable worldling is but merchant adventurer, a ventrous Merchant, he
exchangeth his precious Soul for the deceivable riches of this world. But when
God in his judgment transports him to his own place, the unfortunate Island of
damned spirits; then he begins when the time is past, to cast up his doleful
account, to campare his gains, and his losses; and after all the ennumeration
of his imaginary gain; so much by usury, so much by extortion, so much by
fraudulent dealing; the total sum is collected to his hand. What is a man
profited? whence the observation might be this; that, When the gain of the
world, Observat. The worlds gain with the souls loss it comes to nothing.
is attended with the loss of the soul, the over plus will be just nothing.

The bargain is such, as that there is nothing gotten by it. That is too
sparing an expression, it is short of Christ's meaning, who conceals the worst,
and refers it to our own collection: for (by the way) it were a happiness to be
nothing, it were profitable for the damned: but this comes nearest Christ's
meaning, it is a loss unredeemable, and such as the world cannot countervail,
when a man for the gaining of the world forfeits his soul. Let us see it in
some particulars.

First, if it be a man that glories in the resplendency of his fortunes, and
blesses himself in magnifying his estate; a Commander of Kingdoms and Nations,
an ingrosser of preferments and dignities; yet

First, 1. Death takes all away.
Death will attach him, there is no carrying it away: he must of necessity take
his leave of his Mammon, and then whose shall all these things be for which he
has lost his soul? Who gains by the smallness of the Epha, the greatness of
the shek^e, the refuse of the wheat? Where is the man that gloried in his
abundance, and store, and thought himself the only happy man? says the Prophet
David, I went but by, and he was gone, I sought him, and his place could not be
found. There is a lively expression that illustrates it, Jer. 17.11.
Jer. 17. As the Partridg gathers young that she brought not forth: so he
that gets riches, and not by right, shall leave them in the midst of his
days, and at his end shall be a fool. What not before? Yes, he was always a
fool; but then by conviction, his own conscience shall call him so; by the
confession of his own tongue, which shall call him so; by the proclamation of
just men, they shall proclaim him so; Lo this is the man that took not God for
his strength, but trusted in the multitude of his riches, and strengthened
himself, etc.

Secondly, 2 He loses the chief good.
having lost his supposed good, he loses the fruition of God the chief good,
the countenance of the beatifical presence, the fellowship, and melodious
harmony of the glorious Angels: his place and portion with Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob, in the kingdom of heaven. And all proportionable to his own deservings.
In his lifetime he refused God, being dead God refuses him: he turned his
face from the poor and needy; God in his affliction eternally turns his face
from him. A loss so exceeding great, that whosoever descends deepest in the
meditation of it, yet he shall be at a loss, Chrysostom.
and to seek for a full definition of it: For as Chrysostom truly affirms,
though a man tell thee of ten thousand hells, all is one in comparison of this
misery, to be discarded of blessedness and glory, and to be hated of Christ.

But if this be so, 3. Possessed of the greatest ill.
what shall we say to further misery? having lost the chief good, he receives
his punishment with hypocrites, and unbeleevers in the dungeon of extreme ill.
A place where there is nothing but horror of conscience and desperation; a
company of affrighting devils; and with all this, weeping and wailing, and
gnashing of teeth. Instead of merriment, and jovial laughter, and scurrulous
lascivious songs, and wasting, and abusing the creatures of God, nothing but
weeping, and gnashing of teeth. So that having come into the chambers of death
and closed in the straits of the grave; the man like the hedg-hogg, leaves the
apples behind him, and only reserves the prickles of a wounded spirit, Simile.
in that sentence of Babylon; As much as she bath gloryed her self, and lived
delitiously, so much terment give her.

Lastly, 4. Without hope of deliverance.
that that is the hell of hells, that nothing may be wanting to his diserved
woe; he is out of hope of all gracious means of deliverance, he must never look
for the revokation of Gods sentence, though with Esau, he seek it with tears,
he must never look for mittigation of his horror, though he heg with the
unmerciful glutton, for one drop of water. The date of repentance is out; the
day of grace will never dawn again: the justice is implacable, the fire
unquenchable, the worm unsatiable, and all continual without intermission for
ever-more.

O! bottomless depth of horror; oh unexpressible torment of a forsaken soul!
what greater misery, Bern.
says devout St. Bernard, then always to be wishing for that which shall never
be, and for the removing of that that shall never cease to be. Therefore the
sum is this; Has the covetous exchanged his soul for riches; the ambitious for
honors: has he lost it for the riches of Cressus; the power of Alexander; the
Empireof Augustus; the glory of the whole world? yet in consideration of The
end of his life The loss of his God The extremity of his pain The eternity of
all
What is a man profited?

Now then for some application, Use. To prevent this misery betimes.
and to draw toward a conclusion: suffer the word of exhortation (brethren) and
captivate your thoughts to the obedience of Jesus Christ. You especially whom
God has blessed above others, concerning the enjoyment of outward, temporal
things. If ever you be desirous to escape the direful slaughterhouse of Hell;
to escape those burnings, and those everlasting yellings, while you have time,
bethink your selves of some saving course to fly from the wrath to come. And
now in time cast up your accounts: take heed lest for the love of this present
world, you lose your God, the life of your souls. There is a way that seems
right to a man (says Solomon) but the end of it is the manifold ways of
death. Some Babilonish garment, some Naboths Vineyard, some sweet preferment:
but if the means be unlawful, if it disturb conscience, and prejudice the glory
of God, and occasion the destruction of thy soul, then say, What shall I do
when God shall rise up? and when he shall visit, what shall I answer? This will
be the reckoning of fools at the last, What has pride profited us? and what
has riches brought us? Surely the gain will be no other then what Promethius
is fabled to have had by Pandora's box, a place to be tormented. Or what
Hercules got by Dianira's garment. Such will be the final issue of all
Mammonists, that live amongst Christians, and under means of better
reformation, and more sanctification in their ways; I say this will be the
final issue. The worm of despair always gnawing, and never dying; and the flames
of eternal Tophet never to be extinguished. Therefore in such a case, if thou
tell me thou know what thou do, and what thou gainest. Let me tell thee,
thou little know thy damage, and what thou have lost. Alas, what are the
goods of this life, when they are compared with eternal damnation? and the
sweetness of imaginary gain, what proportion has it with the bitterness of so
great a loss? Riches have wings, they take their leave; honor is transitory;
pleasures fly away: whereas the soul of man is the subject of immortality. And
thy poor neglected soul must bide by it for an everlasting pledge, and pay the
debt.

O! then, contemn this glory that is nothing; First seek Gods kingdom, and the
glory of it; suffer not heaven to stand at so great a distance to thy soul,
taste and see how gracious the Lord is, by one drop of water from that
celestial fountain; by one crum from that heavenly table; and then as
concerning the things below, thou will account them as dross and dung, in
comparison of that joy, and peace of conscience. Resolve as Themistocles, when
he saw a goodly booty, he would not stoup to take it up: leave these things for
the Children of this world. But let your care be to please the Lord, and to
gain the peace of a good conscience; First seek the kingdom of God, which
consists not in meat and drink; but in righteousness, and peace, and joy in the
holy Ghost. Remember the vanity of the things of the world; remember how unable
the soul is to enjoy hell, and to lose heaven without eternal horror: and in
consideration hereof. Use the World, as though you used is not; and use this as
a proof, hide it in a sanctified memory, and write it in the table of a
sanctified conscience, (if it were possible with a pen of Iron, and the point
of a Diamond. What is a man profited if he gain the whole world, and lose his
own soul?

CHRIST HIS SECOND ADVENT: OR THE APPROACH OF The God of Recompenses. SERMON
XXIII.
REVEL. 22.12. Behold, I come shortly, and my reward is with me, to give every
man according to his works.


THe Angel having described to Saint John (in the Chapter immediately before,
and in the former part of this Chapter) the exceeding great joy, and glory, and
felicity, that all the godly shall have in the kingdom of heaven, by comparing
it to a City built with precious Stones, having twelve gates, and twelve
foundations: wherein there is no darkness, they needing no candle, nor the
light of the Sun: for Christ Jesus the Sun of Righteousness, is the continual
light thereof. And that therein is no misery, no cross, no imperfection; no
want, no calamity, but continual joy and rejoicing. Where their songs are
Halelujah, and their shields felicity, in the continual enjoying of the
presence of Almighty God, the glorious Trinity. Having, I say, thus described
these joys, he does in the words of my Text, for the comfort of the godly, Who
( have here no continuing City, but) are strangers, and forreiners, and
pilgrims, and travelers to another City, and seek a Country. And in this their
travel, they meet with many crosses, and afflictions, and miseries.

And likewise for the terror of the wicked, that make this world their
kingdom, and are the chief Lords and commanders of the same: for the comfort of
the one, and the terror of the other, the Angel here in the person of Christ
says, he will come, and that shortly, to be a speedy deliverer of the one, and
a just Judge against the other.

Behold, I come shortly, and my reward is with me, etc. Parts of the Text.
observe these particular branches.

First, the word of preparation or attention, in the first word, Behold, which
is as it were a Trumpet that sounds before the coming of the great Judge,
bidding every one to fit, and prepare himself to hold up his hand at the bar,
Behold.

Secondly the Person, and that is the Judge himself, speaking in the person of
the Angel. I, Christ Jesus himself.

Thirdly, his action, I come.

Fourthly, the speediness of his coming, shortly.

Fifthly, the end of his coming to Judgment, and that is to reward every man
according to his works.

Sixthly, and lastly, the quantity, and the quality of the reward inclusively
set down; which is according to the quality of the works: for if the works be
good, there shall be a great, and good reward, but if they be bad, the reward
shall be accordingly. The small model of time will not suffer me to run over
all these particulars: therefore my meditations, and your attention, shall be
in one doctrine from the words in general; and that is this, that, Christ Jesus
will hasten his coming to Judgment, Doctr. Christ will come to judgment to
reward the godly and ungodiy.
to reward the godly with everlasting, and eternal felicities: but the wicked
and ungodly, with endless woe, and perpetual misery.

For the proof of which doctrine, you may consider these four things.

First of all the certainty, and celerity of Christ's coming to Judgment.

Secondly, the signs that prognosticate his coming.

Thirdly, the Judgment it self.

Lastly, the end.

For the certainty of Christ coming to judgment, I persuade my self that there
is none here among you so ignorant, that he does not know, or so Atheistical
that he does not believe: you know it is an Article of our belief, that he
ascended into heaven, and there he sits at the right hand of his Father in
glory, and from thence he shall come at the end of the world, to judge both the
quick and the dead. Therefore I may spare the labor, and the time in any
further proof of that.

Now concerning the speediness of his coming to judgment. The speediness of
Christscoming.
If so be the day of Judgment was at hand sixteen ages since, as both Christ
and his Apostles proclaimed; if then even in Christ's days the ends of the
world were come, as Saint Paul says, 1 Cor. 10.11.1 Job. 2.18.1 Pec. 4.7.
1 Cor. 10.11. If then was the last time, as Saint John faith. 1 John 2.18. If
then the end of all things were at hand, as Saint Peter says, 1 Pet. 4.7. can
we think that now it is far off? Nay, so sure, and so certain as God is God,
and his Word is truth, and not one jott nor tittle thereof shall pass away, he
is near at hand, he will come shortly.

But, Two benesits concerning Christ's coming to judgment.
before we proceed, there lies two stumbling blocks in the way, that we must
remove, wherewith many stumble concerning this point. In the time of the
Apostles there were two heresies confuted: the one by Saint Peter, the other by
Saint Paul.

Saint Peter in 2 Pet. 2 Pet. 3.3.1. Consuted by S. Peter.
3.3. he wills us to understand, that in the last days there shall come
scoffers, men living after their own lusts, saying, Where is the promise of his
coming? You preach so much that Christ Jesus is coming to Judgment, and to
call every one of us to account for our ways, our words and actions, but where
is the promise of his coming? for all things continue alike from the beginning
of the Creation. Miserable men! that would be persuaded that the day of
Judgment should never come, because it was deferred: but such jesting, and
mocking, and scoffing at this great and terrible day heretosore used, and
indeed now practiced in the whole progeny of unheleevers, it may be an argument
to us, that it shall not be deferred; for so says Saint Paul, 1 These. 5.3.
when they shall say, peace, peace, and safety, then destruction shall come on
them, as travel on a woman with child, and they shall not escape.

But Saint Peter answers these scoffers that asked, Where is the promise of his
coming? he gives them two answers; The one in verse. 8. the other verse. 9.

In the eight verse. he says Christ defers notlong to come to judgment: for
says he, one day with the Lord is as a thousandyears, etc. alluding to Psalm.
90.4. A thousand years in thy sight, Psalm. 9 0.4.
are but as yesterday, since they pass as a watch in the night. As if he should
say? were it possible for a man to live a thousand years; yet those thousand
years in respect of God, as soon as they are past, they are as one day in
respect of men: nay, they are but as a watch of the night; that is, but as
three hours. The old Jews they divided the night into four Watches, and
appointed to each Watch three hours; as may appear by comparing of these places
of Scripture together, Mat. 14.24. Number. 14.25. Luke 12.38. So then the words
bear this exposition, Mat. 14.24. Numb. 14.25. Luke 12: 38.
that a thousand years in respect of God, are but as one day; nay, but as a
Watch of the night; that is, but as three hours. It does plainly show to us,
that Saint Peter meant not to speak distinctly of a thousand years, but of a
long time: so that his meaning is, innumerable years in respect of God, are but
as one day. Saint Peter might as well have said 2000. or 3000. or 10000.
thousand years in respect of God, are but as one day. Thus you have his first
answer to those scoffers, that said, Where is the promise of his coming?

His second answer is in the ninth verse. where the Apostle says, The Lord is
not slack concerning his promise. Where is the promise of his coming? Why,
says the Apostle, The Lord is not slack, as we account slackness. For we
account them slack that go slowly about a work, but God is not so to be
accounted slack; but says the Apostle, He is patient toward us, and would have
none perish, but come to repentance. Then the slackness of Christ's coming is
his patience, because he would give us time to repent, and have us prepared
before he come. O! then beloved, let us not make a mock as others do of this
patience, but while we have time, let us take time, that when he comes we may
be worthy of him. Thus you have the first heresy confuted.

The second was quite contrary to this, 2 By S. Paul.
set abroach by certain false teachers, who taught the Thessalonians, that the
day of Judgment was so near, that it should happen in their age. Where (by the
way) you may take notice of the exceeding great subtilty of the Devil, that
labors by all means possible to bring men to one of these extremes. Either
that the day of Judgment shall never come, or it shall come in such a limited
time and age. And indeed it is ranked among the opinions of some, that held
that the day of Judgment should be just 6000 years after the Creation, 2000.
before the Law, 2000. under the Law, and 2000. under the Gospel. But Saint Paul
answers these false teachers among the Thessalonians, 1 These. 2.
and all of the like opinion: therefore to arm them against their assaults, he
bids them for a certainty believe it. 2 Thessal. 2. that the day of judgment
was not at hand. And he gives the reason verse. 3. For, says he, that day shall
not come, except there he a departing first, and that man of sin, the son of
perdititon be revealed.

But how is it that the Apostle tells the Thessalonians, Object.
that the day of Judgment was not at hand, seeing it is plain in the places
before recited, that the end of the world was at hand, and that now was the
last times? Heb. 9.26.
and Heb. 9.26. Christ appeared in the end of the world. It was in the end of
the world that Christ appeared to sacrifice himself for our sins; how is it
then that he tells the Thessalonians here, that the day of the Lord is not at
hand?

Master Calvin says the answer is easy: Answ.
for, says he, in respect of God it was at hand, but as for us, we must be
continually waiting for it. But Master Beza, and Rollock give another
Exposition, which I take to be more natural to the place: for, say they, in all
those places where it seems to be avouched, that the day of the Lord is at
band: they understand the word in the Original, to signify generally a time
drawing near. As to say the day of judgment may be this day as well as to
morrow, and to morrow as well as this day; and many days hence as well as now.
But in that place where he says it is not at hand, they understand the word
precisely, to be meant of a precise time: so the Apostle speaks truly, the day
of judgment is not at hand, so as that any man can say, it shall be this hour,
or this day, or this month, or this year, or this age. This is no more but the
doctrine of Christ; Of that day and hour, no man knows, no not the Angels in
heaven; no, not Christ himself as man, but the Father only.

So you see it is plain and evident, that the day of Judgment is at hand; but
in what precise limits of time or age it shall happen, it is uncertain. Our
Savior Christ tells his Apostles, Act. 1.7.
Act. 1.7. It is not for you to know the times, and seasons, that the Father
has put into his own hands. It is not for you to know these times: Then
beloved, why should we have an ear to hear, where God has not a tongue to
speak? Let it suffice us to know that it is at hand, which if we make good use
of, it will make us wary and watchful, and Vigilant over all our ways; that we
say not with the evil servant, Our Master defers his coming; let us eat and
drink, and beat our fellow servants: but betake our selves to the good servants
duty, to watch. Watch we therefore, we know not the day and hour, when the Son
of man comes. But when he comes and finds us doing well, dealing faithfully,
and living holily; happy, nay thrice happy shall we be: we shall be sure to
partake of the blessing of those upon mount Gerrazim, we need not fear the
curse of those upon Mount Ebal. We need not be afraid of the Thundering, and
lightning on Sinai, nor the fire, and tempest, nor smoke of the furnace, nor of
the sound of the Trumpet: for all our joy shall be in Sion.

But when he comes, if he find us living wickedly, dealing unfaithfully,
cursed, nay, thrice cursed we be, we are sure to partake of mourning for joy,
of ashes for beauty, of a rent for a girdle: whatsoever becomes of our
garments, assuredly our hearts shall be rent in sunder. Watch we therefore, we
know not the day and hour, when the Son of man will come.

In the second place, Signs of Christ's coming.
that the children of God may be armed, and prepared for his coming, he has
set down in his Word, certain signs which being effected, and come to pass;
they may easily judge, that then the day of redemption draws nigh.

Now these signs are of three sorts. Of three sorts.


Some are in respect of us a long time before he comes to judgment.

A second sort are imediately before his coming.

The third, in his coming.

The signs that prognosticate his coming long before are these; 1. Long before.
The preaching the Gospel to all the world. Mat. 24.14.


First of all the preaching of the Gospel to the whole world, which is set down
by Christ, Mat. 24.14. The Gospel of the kingdom shall be preached to the
whole world, for a testimony to all Nations; then shall the end be. Which words
of our Savior Christ we are not so to understand, as that the Gospel should be
preached to the whole world at any one time: for that never was; nor I think
never will be: but if we so understand it, that the Gospel shall be preached to
all Nations successively, and at several times: then if we consider the times
since the Apostles, we shall find that the sound of the Gospel has gone out to
all the Nations of the world, as it was spoken by the Prophet: so that this
first sign is already past, the end cannot be far.

The second sign is, 2 The revealing of Autichrist. 2. These. 2.3.
the revealing of Antichrift, says the Apostle, 2. Thessal. 2.3. That day
shall not come, except there be a departing, and that man of sin, the son of
perdition, which is Antichrist be revealed. Concerning this sign, in the year
of our Lord, 602. after Christ; S. Gregory seems to avouch, that whosoever
takes the name of universal Bishop, and Pastor of the Church, that was
Antichrist. Five years after, Boniface succeeding him, by Phocas the Emperor,
had the title of Universal Bishop of the Church, and ever since, all their
successors have taken that name, so that it is evident that at Rome has been,
and now is, the Antichrist; so that the second sign being fulfilled, the end
cannot be far.

The third is the general departure of the most from the Faith. 3 General
deparure from the ftaith.
There has been a general departure in former times: when Arrius spread his
heresies, almost all the whole world became an Arian: and for the space of 500
years together, from the time of Boniface, the world was so infected with
Popish heresies, that the faith of Christ could scarsely be discerned; they
were as a handful of wheat to a great deal of chaff; so that this sign it is
already fulfilled in part; but there shall always be a falling away, and a
departing from the faith till Christ come to judgment.

The fourth sign stands in exceeding great corruption in the manners of men. 4.
Corruption in manners. 2 Timothy 3.
And the Apostle makes this a sign of Christ's last coming to judgment, 2 Timothy
3. This know, that in the last days perrillous times shall come, men shall be
lovers of themselves, covetous, boasters, proud, blasphemers, disobedient to
parents, unholy, without natural affection, truce breakers, false accusers,
incontinent, fierce, dispisers of those that are good, traitors, heady,
high-minded, lovers of pleasures, more then lovers of God. The Apostle makes
this a sign and mark, that shall be in the last days. Beloved, if ever this
were fulfilled in these days of ours: for there is a general corruption in the
manners of men. It is very hard to find those that in all truth and sincerity,
labor to discharge a good conscience toward God and men. And Christ has said
himself, that when he comes to judgment, he shall scarce find faith on earth;
such a general corruption there shall be in the manners of men: so that this
fourth sign being already past, the end cannot be far.

The fifth sign is exceeding great persecution, 5. Persecution of the Church.
and affliction of the Church, and the Saints of God. This has been fulfilled
in former times. You know there were ten fearful persecutions in the Primitive
Church. And so it is fulfilled even in these days of ours: for the Whore of
Babylon, that spotted beast; she labors to make her self drunk with the
blood of Gods Saints. There are but few years, nay, months, or weeks, wherein
some of the blood of Gods Saints is not sacrificed to appease the wrath of the
Persecutors. Then if in these days, this sign be fulfilled, the end cannot be
far.

The sixth is a general security, 6. General security.
so that men will not be moved, neither with the preaching of the word of God,
nor yet with judgments from heaven: they have such exceeding dullness and
deadness of heart, that neither of these will move them.

For the former, you know God has sent many judgments amongst us; we have had
fire, and famine, and pestilence, and invasion of foreign enemies; inundation of
waters, thunder and lightning from heaven; but all these will not work upon our
hearts. The Lord he has scourged us often, but yet we set light by his
corrections, we harden our hearts against all his judgments, our hearts will
not be softened, and mollified; what effect has all these wrought, where is our
humiliation, our repentance, and reformation.

And for the preaching of the word of God, alas that can get no entrance at
all: men's hearts are so crusty, and so hardened, that the seed of Gods word it
lies uncovered, it takes no root at all in the heart; it works no reformation
at all: so that if ever this sign were fulfilled, it is in these days. It
shall be says Christ, (speaking of the general security that shall be, when he
comes to judgment) as in the days of Noah and of Lot, they were eating and
drinking, and marrying, and giving in marriage, till the fire came from heaven
and burned them, and the water over-flowled the world: so that this sixth sign
being past, the end cannot be far.

The seventh and last sign of Christ's coming to judgment, 7. Calling of the
Jews.
is the calling of the Jews, which the Apostle, Romans 11.25. calls the
fulfilling of the Gentiles. When God has the number of his Elect among the
Gentiles, then the Jews shall be called again: but of the time, and the
manner, and number, the word of God does not reveal it: so that it is likely
this sign is yet to come, all the rest are fulfiled, and therefore the end
cannot be far.

The second sort of signs, 2. Signs immediately before Christ's coming.
are such as are immediately before Christ's coming to Judgment; and that is
the darkness of the Sun, Moon, and Stars, The Sun shall be darkened, the Moon
shall lose her light; the St^rs shall fall from heaven, the very powers of
heaven shall be shaken, the foundations of the heavens shall tremble. Alas,
what shall the little shrubs in the Wilderness do, when the tall Cedars of
heaven shall be shaken? what shall poor sinful man do, when the Angels shall be
afraid?

The last sign shall be in Christ's coming to Judgment, 3. In Christ's coming.
Mat. 24.29. it is called, the sign of the Son of man; Then shall appear the
sign of the Son of man; and then all the tribes of the earth shall mourn. What
this sign of the Son of man is, Divines do vary. Some hold it is the sign of
the Cross, which all eyes shall behold, even they that pierced him, as John
says, Revel. 1.

Some others (which I rather assent unto) take it to be the glorious beams of
Revel. 1.
Christ's Majesty, immediately before his personal appearance to enlighten the
world, being darkened, by reason of the want of the light of the Sun and Moon.
So you see what these signs shall be. The signs that prognosticate Christ's
coming. Those that shall be fulfilled long before, they are all effected, but
one, as you heard. Therefore it stands us all upon, as wise Virgins, to prepare
oil in our lamps, that when our Bridegroom Christ shall come, we may be ready
to enter into eternal joy. So we come from the signs that prognosticate the
judgment, to the judgment it self.

Concerning the judgment it self; 2. The Judgment it self.
You must know that after death there are two judgments; Two Judgments.


The particular Judgment is immediately, 1. Particular.
as soon as ever the breath is gone out of the body. As soon as ever the soul
is gone out of the body, it is conducted by the Angels before the Tribunal seat
of God, and there receives the particular sentence, either of joy or torment,
according as it lived in the body in this life. We need not speak of this; we
have example for the proof of it in Scripture, of Dives and Lazarus, the one
whereof being dead, was presently carried to joy, the other presently to
torment.

The other is a general judgment; 2. General.
so called, because it shall be of all men in general that ever lived, and
breathed upon the face of the earth, men, women, and children; all shall be
presented before the Tribunal seat of Christ; all must hold up their hands at
the Bar of his judgment; all must give an account of all their words, thoughts
and actions: all must receive the sentence either of, Come ye blessed, or, go
ye cursed. After which sentence once pronounced, there shall never question be
made of the end of the joy of the one, or the ease of the torments of the other.

But here arises a question; Quest.
you know the world consists but of two sorts of persons, Joh. 5.24.
believers and unbeleevers. For the believer it is evident and plain, Joh. 5.24
He is passed already from death to life; he has everlasting life already; he
shall not come into judgment. Joh. 3.18.
And for the unbeleever it is as plain, Joh. 3.18. that he is already
condemned, even already: both are judged already, both the believer and
unbeleever; the believer is saved already, the unbeleever is damned already,
what need therefore a general, a second Judgment?

To this I answer, Answ. Necessity of a day of Judgment.
that there is a very great need of it, both in respect of the justice, and of
the mercy of God, whose property it is always to reward the godly, and to punish
the wicked, which seeing he does not to the full in this life, it must needs be
that a day will come that he will fully do it.

You know the course of the Lord, as David speaks; good men have bands in their
death, and wicked men are lusty and strong; good men are in evil condition; and
wicked men in prosperity. Diogenes the Cinnick, seeing Harpalus a thief long in
prosperity; he was bold to say, that wicked Harpalus his living long in
prosperity, it was an argument to Diogenes, that God had cast off his care of
the world, that he respected not men's affairs. And indeed the prosperity of the
wicked, has brought the Saints of God to a stand. David's foot slipped almost
in seeing the prosperity of the wicked. Psalm. 37: Job 24.12. Jer. 12.
It made Job to say, Job 24.12. Men groan out of the City by reason of
oppression, and the souls of the slain cry out; and yet God charge them not
with folly. This made Jeremiah, to expostulate his cause with the Lord, Jerem.
12. Let me talk with thee of thy judgments, Why does the wicked prosper, and
they that transgress thy commandments? Psalm. 37.11.
This makes the godly take up that passionate complaint, Psalm. 73.11. How does
God know it? is there any knowledge in the most high? Certainly, we have
cleansed our hearts in vain; in vain we have washed our hands in innocence: in
vain we labor to live godly lives; Why? Every day we are chastened: for the
Lord corrects us every morning. And these have the wealth of the world, they
have the world at will, We in Christianity know this to be true. Dives has the
world at will, while poor Lazarus is shut out of doors, hungry and thirsty,
cold and naked, full of necessity every way. This being so, the day must needs
come, that the one shall have fullness of glory, and the other of misery.

But to answer those places before cited. To the former, Joh. 5. where it is
said, The believer is passed already from death to life; he has everlasting
life already. It is true, he is passed already from death to life, by faith he
has it already, and by hope; he shall not come into judgment; that is, of
condemnation, (so we must understand it,) but there is a judgment of
absolution that is to be executed; and so when the Lord Jesus Christ shall
descend from heaven with the sound of a Trumpet, and the voice of the
Archangels, then the dead in Christ shall rise first, and be caught up in the
clouds to meet Christ, and then they shall be set at his right hand, and hear
that heavenly sentence; Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom
prepared for you, before the beginning of the world. You see the answer to
that, that believers shall not come into judgment; that is, not the judgment
of condemnation, but of absolution at the last day.

Now for the other place, Unbeleever condemned already how.
where it is said, Joh. 3.18. the unbeleever is condemned already.

It is true, he is condemned already, and that three ways.

First of all, he is condemned already in the counsel of God.

Secondly, he is condemned already in the word of God.

Thirdly, he is condemned already in his own conscience.

First, in the counsel of God; God has made an eternal decree of
Predestination, whereby he has elected some to salvation, and predestined
them thereto, and others to damnation. In this Gods eternal decree, the
unbeleever is already condemned: nay, before ever he came into the world, as
you have it in the example of Jacob and Esa^, Romans 9. before ever they had done
good or evil, God hated the one, and loved the other.

Secondly, in the word of God he is condemned, Jo. 3.18. Why? because he hates
the light, and loves darkness.

Thirdly, in his own conscience he is condemned: for the continual horror
thereof gives him no rest, day nor night; there is a worm continually gnawing
there, and a sting tormenting him: but the full execution thereof is to be in
the day of wrath, when he shall be set at the left hand of Christ, and hear the
sentence, Go ye cursed into eternal fire, prepared for the devil and his
Angels. O, what a terrible day will this be to all the wicked workers of
iniquity: for Christ Jesus the Judge shall come then, to give them their
reward. This shall be a black, a sad, a woeful, dismal day to them: they shall
not be able to look on the Judge, he shall be so terrible to them. You see the
terriblness of the Judge set down by Saint John, Revel. 20.10, 11.
Revel. 20.10, 11. where it is said, he saw a great white throne, and one
sitting thereon, from whose face f^ed heaven and earth, and their place was no
more found. Heaven and earth are great and mighty creatures, insensible
creatures, that have not sinned, they fly, and tremble, and hide themselves at
the coming of the great Judge: and shall man, silly sinful man, think to stand
before the Judge without trembling? Indeed if a man could present himself
spotless without blame, he needed not to fear; but alas it is far otherwise,
there is none that does good, and sins not, says Solomon. The most
righteous before men are stained, and poluted in the sight of God; and may cry
with the Leper, Unclean, unclean, what is man that he should be pure? or the
son of man, that he should be just with God? Job 15. Psalm. 14.2.
The Angels of heaven are impure in his sight, how much more filthy man, that
drinks iniquity as water, Job 15. So in Psalm. 14.2. When God looks down from
heaven upon the sons of men, to see if there were any that would uuderstand and
seek after God; Will he find any that frames themselves according to the rule
of perfection that he requires? surely no; but this he finds, they are all
corrupt, and abominable in their doings, there is none that does good; no, not
one: so sinful is man in his whole race: sinful in his conception, he is
conceived in sin, before ever he sees light in this world, when he is covered
with the rich hangings of natures wardrobe in his mothers womb, then man
tumbles in sin, as the word in the original signifies. He is sinful in his
birth, in his life, in his thoughts, his words and actions; and shall he that
is thus spotted, and stained, and polluted, stand before the pure Judge of
heaven and earth without trembling? surely no; The mighty, the Kings of the
earth, the Captains, high, and low, of what condition soever; as many as have
not made their garments white in the blood of the slaughtered Lamb Christ,
they shall tremble, and fly to hide themselves; and cry to the mountains to
cover them, before the face of this glorious Judge.

We come now to the last thing, and that is the end of Christ's coming to
Judgment. The end of Christ's coming you know is to give a reward. 4. The end of
Christ's coming.
And this reward shall be both to the wicked, and to the godly: for he shall
give the reward according to every man's work.

First, I will speak of the reward of the wicked.

And after conclude with the reward of the godly.

The reward of the wicked shall be endless woe, The punishment of the wicked.
and perpetual misery in hell. There was never any man that descended into that
fiery lake, and returned thence to tell us, what torments are provided for the
wicked in Hell: but yet as by one drop of the Sea water, you may conceive of
the saltness of the rest; and as a man may guess at the stature of a Giant, by
the length of his foot; even so we may have some conceit of those endless and
easeless, and remediless torments prepared for the wicked in hell, by a taste
of the miseries we have in this life. Great may the grief of a man's heart be,
even in this life, as great as mortality is able to bear. Can we read of the
mourning of Joseph, of Hannah, of Job, of Jeremy, of Jerusalem and not be
moved? our hearts are hard. Can we read of the hideous torments invented by
Tyrants, Caldrons of boiling oil, roasting upon spits, tumbling down Mountains
in barrels of nails, rending of joints with horses; can we read of these
merciless torments, and not be moved? our hearts are harder then a millstone.
Alas, beloved, these are nothing but shadows, but counterfeit to those torments
that are prepared for the wicked in Hell. For though the bowels of hell labor
to empty the bowels of judgtment, yet she has an immeasurable portion for her
children now living; nay, for those that are unborn, a patrimony of blackness,
of brimstone, of the wrath of God, of wailing, and gnashing of teeth.
Certainly, death shall take them away, but they shall never die; they shall
consume for ever, and yet shall not be consumed; they shall be in fire
unquenchable, Psalm 60.3. Isa. ult. Ezekiel. 38, 12. Rev. 14, 10.
and yet see no light. You may read of the wine of giddiness, Psalm. 60.3. of a
strange kind of Worm, Isa. ult. of fire and brimstone, Ezekiel 38.22. of the
Wine Press of Gods wrath, Revel. 14.10. All these, and if worse then these can
be, are prepared as so many torments for the wicked workers of iniquity. Their
cup is the deadliest that ever was drunk, even of Gods wrath wherewith they
shall be filled for ever; their worm is that that continually gnaws upon the
conscience: they shall be tormented in fire and brimstone, before the Lamb and
his Angels: Not such as that of Sodom and Gomorrah; for then there were hope
that they might be converted at the last into heaps of Ashes, or pools of
Pitch; but such fire and brimstone, that as a bottomless Mine gives them
neither rest night nor day, the smoke of it ascending for ever; and is
appointed for a time, and times, till time shall be no more. Their torment in
such a measure, as neither eye has seen, nor ear heard, nor heart of man has
conceived. But, beloved, all this is but general; if the time would suffer, we
could show the torments of the damned in particular; as,

First, Eternity of the torment of the wicked.
the eternity of those torments, in that they shall never end; and I verily
persuade my self, that this is a great increase of their torments, the very
conceit and thought that they shall never end, it is a great increase and
aggravation of the torment. You know there is no grief and sorrow, or misery in
this life, but time will either deminish it, or take it quite away; either the
tormented, or the tormentor will die: but in hell there you have them tormented
day and night, for ever and ever, neither the tormented, or the tormentor die,
but they live to endless woe. O! says a godly Father in his meditations, if a
wicked sinner in Hell did know that he were to continue there no more thousands
of years, then there are sands upon the Seashore, or no more millions of Ages,
then there are piles of grass upon the ground, yet this would he some comfort,
that at last they should have an end; but this word never, it bre^ the heart,
that after they have continued there so many thousand years, and millions of
ages they are as far from the end of their torment as at the first.

Secondly, Extremity of torments.
we might note (...) in the extremity, and strictness of those torments, the
straitness of them, there is no mercy showed; Take him, and bind him hand and
foot, and cast him into utter darkness. And again, the gate is shut, after the
sinner is once cast into Hell, there is no getting out again, the gate is shut.

The straitness of these torments may be exceedingly laid down to us, in the
Parable of the rich Glutton, who in hell roaring in everlasting flames, lift up
his eyes, and saw Abraham a far off, and Lazarus in his bosom; he desired
Abraham to send Lazarus but to dip the top of his finger in water, to cool his
tongue: a small request: he asks not to be delivered from his torments; or for
a flaggon of water, but for a drop; yet to see the strictness of those
torments, it was denied him. Dives had before, the world at will, what his
heart could desire: but Lazarus comes to his gate full of soars and hungry, yet
he refused to refresh him with crumbs from his table; see the just judgment of
God against the merciless wretch. Dives refused to give a crum; when he asked
he is denied one drop. So that as Saint James speaks, Iam. 2.
Jam. 2. there shall be judgment merciless to them that yield no mercy.

Beloved, all you that have the wealth of the world, remember this example,
when the poor distressed members of Christ come to your gates, shut not up the
bowels of compassion, open your hands, and your hearts to relieve them: for as
I said before, there shall be judgment merciless to those that show no mercy.
But I come to the last thing that I will but only name; that is, the reward of
the godly, that everlasting, The reward of the godly.
eternal felicity in heaven. The time will not suffer me to speak largely, and
particularly of the reward of the godly, which is a great encouragement, and
comfortable to the servants of God. I will only speak in general. The Prophets
when they spoke of the Kingdom of Christ, they set it out by good things;
there is no need of their good things; Nation shall not rise against Nation,
they shall break their spears into mattocks. Isa. 2. Isa. 12.
The wolf shall dwell with the lamb, and the Leopard with the Kid; They shall
eat of the tree of life, and the hidden Manna there. They shall be made pillars
in the Temple of God. There they shall be clothed with long white robes. Which
places take us by the hand, and bring us to some conceit of those joys.

How then does it stand every one upon now, while we have time, to labor to
have intrest in those joys? Thrice happy is that man or woman, that comes to
enjoy those joys. It is spoken of Christ, that he, the joys of heaven being
set before him, he sustained the cross. Saint Paul accounted all but dung that
he might win Christ, and come to those joys. And Ignatius faith, that breaking
of bones, fire, and gallows, quartering of limbs, come what will, so I may come
to those joys. I would we had all the like zeal after those joys. Our
coldness in seeking those joys come from a base esteem of them, for if we did
esteem them, we would labor exceedingly after them.

Many things for use might be inferred hence. Use 1. Comfort.
As first here is comfort, and encouragement to all the Saints of God, the
servants of Christ, that take pains to live a godly life. However here they
endure afflictions, and mockings, and reproaches, and scoffs of the world, yet
Christ has a great reward for them. Let them rejoice, great shall their reward
be. Give me a man then that has buckled with the sins of the times, that has
studied the advancement of Religion; give me such a one as has encouraged
those that are feeble, that has provided for the Lords Prophets, that has
reformed the abuses of the Lords day, as Nehemiah; what will inflame his zeal
more then this, that Christ his Savior sees it, and regards it, and will
reward him? And lest he should faint before the reward come, he says, he will
come shortly. This comforted Elias in the Wilderness, and Jeremiah in the
Dungeon, and Job on the Dunghill; so that they were more then conquerours
through Christ.

Secondly, Use 2. Terror to the wicked, Mal. 4.1.
is it so that Christ shall come to Judgment, and has his reward with him;
here is terror to all the wicked workers of iniquity. Behold, faith Malachie,
Mal. 4.1. The day of the Lord comes, it shall burn as an oven, and all the
wicked and ungodly of the earth, shall be as stubble and straw, and fuel for
the furnace of Gods wrath. What a woeful and heavy day will this be to all the
wicked and ungodly? Methinks they might conceive the terror, and they shall
cry out at the last day, when he shall come to reward them: is not this he
whose laws we have contemned? whose sides we have pierced? whom we have nailed
to the Cross? whose Ministers we have reviled? whose servants we have
reproached? And this shall strike great terror to the hearts of all wicked
men, when Christ shall pronounce against them, Go ye cursed. Whither? to the
devil and his place of torments: Then they shall cry to the mountains to fall
on them: Oh that some wild beast would follow them, and tear them in pieces,
but it will be too late: their part and portion is in that Lake that burns with
fire and brimstone.

Lastly, Use 3. To be fitted for the day.
this would stir every one up to fit himself, to prepare for this Judgment.
And let us continually therefore lift up our hearts to heaven; and as the
Apostle speaks, wait for the appearing of Christ to Judgment. Then all tears
shall be wiped from our eyes: there shall be no more sorrow, and mourning:
there we shall fit with the Saints, and sing with the Angels, Halelujah,
halelujah, all praise, and honor, and glory, and might, and dominion, and
majesty, be to him that is upon the throne; the Lamb Christ Jesus for evermore.

THE SAINTS LONGING FOR THE GREAT EPIPHANY.
SERMON XXIV.
TITUS 2.13. Looking for that blessed hope, and the glorious appearing of the
great God, and our Savior Jesus Christ.


THe former Verses you may remember, I chose to speak of upon another occasion.

I showed you how the grace of God, that brought salvation to all men; appeared.

Secondly, how it teaches those men to whom it brings salvation. Every man
would be glad to be saved by grace, but they love not that grace should teach
them: now grace saves none, but whom it teaches, it first teaches them, and
then saves them. Now it teaches us as the Apostle faith, three lessons.

First, Quid vitandum, what we are to shun: ungodliness, and worldly lusts.

Then Secondly, it teaches us, Quid faciendum, what we are to do, to live
soberly, and justly, and piously in this present world. Soberly toward our
selves; righteously toward our Neighbor, and piously toward God; this is the
second Lesson.

Then it teaches us a third lesson, quid expectandum, what we must look for;
looking, faith the Text, for the blessed hope, the glorious appearing of the
great God, and our Savior Jesus Christ. The two first points I handled then.
And I told you, I would reserve the third point, till it pleased God to give me
a fit occasion.

It has pleased God to give me a fit one, but a very sad accasion; It is the
Lord, let him do what seems good in his eyes.

I will go over the words in particular, and observe something out of them. And
then out of altogether, I will raise this Doctrine; that, A child of God must
live so soberly, so justly, so godly in this present world, as becomes a man
that looks for a more blessed hope, at the great day, at the appearing of the
great God, and our Savior Jesus Christ.

I begin with the first. Looking, four things in it.
The first word is Looking, and it has in it these four things;

First, 1. Earnestness.
earnestness: a Saint of God must look, and look earnestly. The Apostle when he
sets down the looking of the creatures (for the creatures look too together
with us, to be freed from the bondage of corruption, in the glorious liberty of
the Sons fo God; when he speaks of the looking of the creature) he uses a
strange word which signisieth a putting out of the head, looking to see what it
can epsy a great way off, to see if there be any sign of his coming, Romans 8.19.
Romans 8.19. And he tells us that the creature does not only put out the head
and look, but waits, and groans, and sighs, and travelleth as a woman in pain:
and quoth the Apostle, not only the creatures do thus, but we that have the
first fruits of the spirit. Nay, if the creature put out the head, and groan,
and wait, and is in pain till that day come, how much more should we that have
the first fruits of the spirit? Earnestness, that is one.

A second thing is Patience. 2. Patience.
If (quoth the Apostle) we hope for that we see ^ot, then do we with patience
wait for it. There is patientia spei; The Thessalonians are commended for it,
1. These. 1.3. Heb. 10.36.
in 1 These. 1.3. The patience of hope. And as the Apostle says, Heb. 10.36.
Opus est vobis patientia, you have need of patience in this looking: for
considering,

First of all, 1. The time is uncertain.
that the time is not known to us, when this Lord will appear. It is not for
you to know the times and the seasons, that the Father has kept in his own
power.

And considering secondly, 2. It seems long.
that that time, either longer or shorter, may seem to be long, omnes celeritas
in desiderio; All have that can be made, is but delay to a man that languisheth
in desire: hence comes those often, usque quo? how long Lord? how long?

Thirdly, 2. Gods strange working.
considering, (as the very heathen man could call them) those wondrous workings
of God. It is many times seen, that Gods working seems to go against his word.

And then fourthly, considering how busy the Devil is to discredit the truth
of Gods promise, and to weaken our faith, I say again with the Apostle, you
have need of patience. There is the second thing.

There is a third thing necessary, 3. Joy.
that is, Joy to think of this same day. Says the Apostle, there is a crown of
righteousness laid up for me, and not for me only; but for all them that love,
that appearing; and where love is, there will be joy; joy is a sweet motion of
Gods spirit: spiritual joy, I speak of that; either upon the fruition of some
good thing present, or the expectation of future; there is rejoicing under the
hope of the glory of God, Romans 5.1.
Romans 5.2. And faith the Apostle Peter, whom you have not seen, and yet love,
whom though you see not, you believe, and believing you rejoice, with a joy
unspeakable and glorious. It is such a joy, as the world cannot give us; and
such a joy, as the world cannot take from us.

Lastly, 4. Diligence
this looking has also with it, a care and diligence to prepare our selves
against that coming. Mark the Apostle, 2 Pet. 3.14. faith the Apostle, Seeing
we look for these things, 2. Pet. 3.14.
let us use all diligence, that we may be found of him in peace. You know how
the wise Virgins, because they looked for the Bridegroom, they had trimmed
their lamps, and made all things ready to meet him. So then where this
excellent looking for this blessed hope is, there will be all these; The
blessed Hope. Blessed hope.


Hope is put for the thing hoped for; the blessed hope, is the hoped for
blessedness; and this consists in two things;

A freedom from all ill, both of soul and body.

And a fruition of all good, both in soul, and body, in the whole man.

First, 1. In freedom from all ill.
this blessed hope consists in this, in a freedom from all ill. First, that
there shall be no more blindness in our understandings; no more rebellion in
our wills; no more terror in our consciences; no more weakness in our memory;
no more sin, no more power to sin; here is a non posse pecari. No more
temptations of Satan; no more allurements of the world; no more frailties of
the flesh; no more hunger, no more thirst, no more weariness, no more sickness;
no more megrome in the head, no more palsy in the hand; no more gout in the
feet; no more diseases, and no more death. For if we shall be freed from
corruption; how much more shall we be freed from vexation, and infirmity, and
deformity. Here is freedom from ill.

Well, 2. To enjoy all good.
here is not all; it is not enough to be freed from ill: but here is the second
part of this blessed hope, to enjoy all good.

First, this is our blessed hope, that the Image of God shall be wondrously
perfected in our fouls; and all the faculties of it. This is our hope that God
shall be to our understandings fullness of light: that he shall be to our wills
abundane of peace; to our memories a continuation of eternity. In a word, God
shall be All in all. This is our blessed hope, that this vile body of ours, as
vile as it is (as the Apostle calls it, a body of vileness) it shall be raised
up again, and made like the glorious body of Christ by that mighty working:
that this corruptible shall put on incorruption, and this very mortal, shall
pus on immortality. I, and this is the blessed hope, that both in soul and body
being blessed, we shall be gathered together to the Congregation of the first
born. Where we are sure never to find any enemy, and we are sure never to lose
a friend. Where we shall have the society, and company of Gods Saints, and of
the blessed Angels. And in the beatifical vision and fruition, and communion of
God, we shall have such joy, as neither eye has seen, nor ear has heard, nor
tongue can express: such joy as cannot be conceived, and shall never be ended.

Oh, blessed be that God, that is the author of this hope; and blessed is the
man that is partakers of this hope.

But when will this be? for quoth the Apostle, If our hope were only in this
life, of all men living, we were most miserable. Why, but when must we look for
it then? At the appearing of the great God, and our Savior Jesus Christ.

At the glorious appearing. Appearing of Christ, twofold.
The word is at the Epiphany, at the appearance of glory, at the glorious
appearing. There is a twofold Epiphany of Christ: an Epiphany of grace, that
was his appearing in our flesh, to work the work of our redemption. And then
there is an Epiphany of glory here spoken of.

There was no glory, 1. In the flesh in humility.
in the first Epiphany, and appearing of Christ. It was no glory for the
Creator to become a creature, for the Lord, to become a servant; for the Word
to become an Infant. He was our joy, and yet he sorrowed; he was our strength,
and yet he was weakened: he was our confidence, and yet he seared: he was our
Savior, and yet he suffered: he was our life, and yet he died. There was no
glory in that. He came to be minor Patre, less then his Father: but that is not
all, yet he might have become a glorious creature, as the Angels are glorious
creatures. No, it was less then thus; he was a little lower then the Angels, in
that he was made man. But in that he suffered, he was a great deal less then a
man: he was a little less then an Angel, in that he was made man, but in that
he suffered, he was a great deal less then a man. For what was he? hark what
David faith in his person, Psalm. 22.
I am a worm and no man, the very offscouring of men, the outcast of the
people: there was no glory in his first appearing.

But now his second appearing shall be in glory, 1. To Judgment in glory.
it shall be every way glorious.

First, 1. His person.
his Person glorious.

And then his Throne glorious, 2. Throne.
he shall come and sit upon the throne of his glory.

And then his attendants glorious, 3. Attendants.
the Angels, thousand thousands ministering to him, ten thousand thousands
standing before him, and all glorious.

Again, 4. Administration.
his administration of justice shall be glorious: for if he got himself glory
on Pharaoh when he drowned him in the Sea. What glory will he get when he shall
throw the Devil, and wicked men into hell fire? there is glory in his
administration of justice.

Then glory in his Saints, 5. Saints. 2 These: 1: 10.
as the Apostle, I These. 1.10. faith, that God shall be mavelous glorious in
his Saints. For when Christ that is our glory shall appear, then we also shall
appear with him in glory. Here is the glorious Epiphany of Christ, a glorious
appearing.

But of whom?

The great God, and our Savior Jesus Christ.

Some there are that would make these two, to be two persons. The great God,
say they, that is God the Father; and our Lord Jesus Christ, that is, God the
Son. Thus the Arrians; thus the Semi-Arrians; and thus (which I wonder at)
Erasmus, and thus some others.

But first of all, you never find in the New Testament of the Epiphany of God
the Father: that same glorious Epiphany is ever of the Son.

Then the Greek makes it plain methinks: for had there been two persons, the
Apostle should have said thus, (...), there should have been two Articles; but
here is but one Article: it is apparent to them that understand the Greek, it
is but one Person; that same person is the mighty God, the great God, and the
Savior Jesus Christ.

The great God. Christ is God.
Christ is God. I need not stand to prove that now, among you. And that same
incommunicable Name of Jehovah, by which I find him called in Scripture, and
those incommunicable properties of the Divine Nature.

Immortality.

Immutability.

Immensity.

Omnipotency.

Omniscience, which are all ascribed to Christ.

And then those names that are proper only to God, as, The Creator, The
Governor,
of the World.

And then the worship that is due to God alone, is given to Christ in the
Scriptures, ipsius est, solus est; all these being given to him, prove him to
be God.

And lest you should think he is God now, by participation of the Divine
Essence, in which sense the Angels are called Elohim. Or as Majestrates are
Gods by representation: you shall find by what Epithites he is called God. 1
Ioh. Isa. 9.6.
The true God, 1. Ioh. The mighty God, Isa. 9.6. God blessed for ever, Romans
9.5. and here, the great God.

And so he is great God; Christ a great God.
great, not in bodily bulk, but great in Essence, Great in Majesty, great in
power.

And this may first be a wondrous comfort to Gods children. Use 1. Comfort to
Gods children.
Does thy heart condemn thee? hark what S. John faith, God is greater then our
he art. Again, does the Devil terrify thee? hark what our Lord faith, No man
shall be able to take them out of my hand. He is able to keep us to the day of
Salvation: a great comfort to Gods people.

A great matter of terror to wicked men, 2. Terror to the wicked.
that this Judge shall be the great God: for who is able to stand before him,
when he is angry? Do you remember, when the band of Soldiers came to apprehend
him in the Garden; he said no more, but Ego sum; it is I faith he, and
presently they fell down to the ground: they were beat down with the very
breath of his mouth, as a man is sometimes with the wind of a bullet: or as the
walls of Jericho, with the found of the trumpets of Rams, horns. The very word
Ego sum, it was no more; they fell all to the ground. Now I may say with that
Father, what shall he do when he comes to Judge, that was able to do thus, when
he was to be judged? Quid regnatores patuerit, etc. what shall he do when he
comes to reign, that was able to do thus, when he was to die?

But alas, Object.
you will say, if he be so great a God, so glorious; how shall such a poor
wretch as I, stand before him? I confess my self a poor, wretched, and grievous
sinner, how shall I stand before him?

Oh, Answ.
mark here, he that is called the great God, he is called, the Savior Jesus
Christ.

Here is the comfort; Comfort that Christ the Savior is Judge.
he is a Savior; he came to work the work of Redemption, He was made like us
in all things, sin excepted, that he might be mereiful. And it is wondrous
comfortable, that in that very nature he shall be our Judge, in which he stood
before the Judge, at the judgment seat of Pilate: God has appointed a day,
faith Saint Paul, in which he will judge the world in righteousness, by whom?
by the man Jesus Christ, Act. 17.31.
Act. 17.31.

O, but what a comfort of comforts is that indeed, I pray mark our Lords words,
John 5.27. God the Father, faith he, has given all authority to his Son to
judge. Why? Mark his reason, because he is the Son of man. He does not say, he
has given him power to judge, because he is his Son, but because he is the Son
of man.

It made sweet Saint Bernard cry out, O verum Patrem misericordia. etc. O true
Father of mercies, that would have men judged by man: he has been a man,
and lived; he knew no sin; he knew temptation; he knew what is was to be
tempted; he knows that we are tempted, and he knows that we are but men; he
remembers that we are but dust. Thus I have gone over the words briefly.

There is a general Doctrine to be touched, which I can but touch, in a word it
is this; Every true Christian must so live, Doctr. Every Christi. an so to
live, as expecting the appearing of Christ.
as a man that waits, and looks for this blessed hope, at that glorious
appearing of the great God, and our Savior Jesus Christ.

The holy men that lived before Christ's first Epiphany, his first coming here
in the flesh, they are described thus, to be men that looked for that coming.
After his coming, Anna the Prophetess, the Scripture faith, she spoke of
Christ, to all that looked for redemption in Jerusalem, Luke 2.36.
Luke 2.36. and in verse 25. it is said, that old Simeon, a devout man, and one
that looked for the consolation of Israel. And the like is said of Joseph of
Aremathea, he was a just man, one that feared God, and looked for the
redemption of the people of God: he looked for the kingdom of God. There was
looking then.

And the Children of God now in the New Testament, they are all described by
this, looking for the second coming of Christ. Gods children are still looking
for this second coming. Let me give you but a place or two of Scripture. The
Apostle says, Phil. 3.20. Jude 21.
Phil. 3.20. Our conversation is in heaven, from whence we look for the
Savior, says S. Jude, verse. 21. Keep your selves in the love of God, as men
that look for the mercy of God, at that great day, to eternal life. Gird up
your loins, says our blessed Lord, and let your lights be burning in your
hands, that you may be as men that look for the coming of the Bridegroom.

Indeed, beloved, if we look into the lives of men, I cannot tell, whether I
shall say, they look for his coming or no; this blessed hope. Will thou
profane the sanctified day of rest? will thou blaspheme the great and glorious
name of God? will thou wantonly abuse the creatures of God, in drunkenness?
will thou lie, and steal, and whore, and yet tell me thou look for that
blessed hope? surely thou do not. If quoth the Apostle, we do look for these
things (in the place named before.) 2 Pet. 2.14.
2 Pet. 2.14. Then let us do our diligence, that we may be found of him in
peace. If thou do not thy diligence, that when he comes, thou may be found in
peace, never tell me thou look for him.

There was never time yet for us to lie, and wallow in sin, to think nothing
that we do dishonest: there was never time for these things since time was.
Surely there is no time for it now. All the days since Christ, are called the
last days; all of them are the last days, since that day of the first
Epiphany: but there is a day that will be the last of all those last days. And
methinks it will not be long before that last day of all come: methinks I see
the day broke already, it is break of day already. Therefore brethren, if you
do indeed look for the coming of Christ, for this blessed hope, at his
appearing, be diligent, that you may be found of him without spot, in holiness.
I have done with the Text.

I come now to the occasion at this time. You have brought hither, a dead body
of a very good neighbor of ours, and whom I acknowledge, I ever found a kind,
and a loving friend. You have brought it here to be laid up in the Grave, in
hope of a blessed and joyful resurrection. I need not speak much of his life
here: an ancient inhabitant; When it pleased God to call me first to this place
26. years since, I found him then in the chief office of the Church; and diverse
times since he has been in it: and I have seldom known any more painful, and
more industrious, and more honest in those places then he was. We have all
known him a man humble in his conversation, just of his word, true in his
promises, merciful in his dealing, charitable to the poor, ready to every good
work. His life was such a life; as the Apostle would have ours to be, a life
sober, and just, and pious in this present evil world. He lived, and lead a
life pious, in regard of God, just in the regard of men, sober in regard of
himself; I can say no less of him, and I will say no more of him.

I know you desire to hear of his death, and it has much afflicted my soul, to
hear what unjust aspertions have been upon the manner of it. There was a sudden
stroke indeed of Gods hand; and it was in my house, and seeing that it so
pleased God, I am glad that it was in my presence and sight, that I might give
the better testimony of it. The suddenness of the stroke made him liable to
some misconstruction, and has given many men occasion to pass a very
uncharitable, and unchristian verdict of him.

I beseech you let me give you a true naked relation how it was. I never knew
any men of so peaceable a disposition, but there might be sometimes some
difference between them: there was between Abraham, and Lot, between Paul and
Barnabas; and there was between another honest neighbor and him; both men of a
peaceable disposition. They did not desire to go to law; they desired the
matter might be put to Arbitrators; they chose four honest Gentlemen to take up
the matter between them; they made me as an unworthy Umpire, in case they did
not agree. On Thursday last they met, and each of them pleaded their cause. And
let me say thus, that if this brother of ours had been judged to do any wrong
in that cause; if he had uttered one word of falsehood to help his cause, if he
had used one word of imprecation, wishing any curse to himself; then it had
been peradventure, a just thing with God, to have taken him at his word. If he
had sworn one oath, if he had uttered but one uncharitable word against his
neighbor; if he had showed but any malice or spleen against him; if he had
been but transported with passion, as a man may easily be in his own cause, we
are but men. I say, if he had been but transported with passion; then
peradventure some men might have thought it had been the stroke of divine
justice upon him; but let me tell you, I have the witness of honest Gentlemen
that were the arbitrators, and will justify.

First, that his cause was good, and that there was not one word spoken, but
was confirmed by honest witnesses present.

Then, he used no kind of imprecation in the world; no, not as I remember, so
much as a protestation; or any asseveration, there was not one oath sworn,
either by him, or by others that were present.

There was not one uncharitable word spoken by him: there was not any malice,
or ranckour, or hatred appeared, either on the one side, or the other between
them; he was no way transported with passion.

He did plead his cause, but with that meekness of spirit, with that quietness,
with that sweet temper, and that Christian moderation, as more could not be
required in any Saint of God. Therefore brethren, let me only tell you thus
much, while this was in agitation, I could not perceive that he was moved at
any thing; he was not stirred, he was not earnest in his cause. Till it pleased
God to touch him; and he had some sense and feeling of it: rising from his
stool, he sat rubbing of his cheek, or his neck with his handkercheif. He fell
upon the neck of a Gentleman that sat close to him, who perceiving that he was
not well, asked him how he did? he was scarsely able to give us an answer, I
perceived that he was stricken with the dead palsy. Brethren considering these
things that I have told you before; I beseech you judge not, that you be not
judged; condemn not, that you be not condemned. You owe a duty to the truth,
every one of you; and by that duty that you owe to the truth, I was about to
say, I charge you as before God; but I beseech you as before God, stop the
mouths of all them that shall either be forgers, or spreaders of such notorious
lies: though it pleased God it were by a sudden stroke of his hand; and how
often has he done it, when men have been worse busied? he was but seeking to
work peace.

Though it pleased God suddenly to take his speech from him, yet I beseech you
know this withal, he was pleased not to take his life presently away; nor his
understanding from him: from Thursday about four of the clock that he was first
stricken, he lived till Saturday night, or Sunday morning, I know not whether:
but in this time on Friday night I was with him, and I perceived by the lifting
up of his hand that he knew me; I put him in mind of some gracious promises
that God has made to us in Christ. I asked him whether he believed those
promises of God, and whether he found any comfort in those promises, and then
he lift up his hand. I asked him, and desired him, if he found any assurance of
Gods favor in Christ, to make the same sign; he lift up his hand again. I
asked him if I should pray with him; he desired it, and at the period of every
Petition, his hand went up to God. And one thing I observed more, that in one
petition of mine, in that prayer for him, that it would please God to deliver
him from the malice of Satan, that would be most busy when we are weakest; he
held up his hand higher then before, and continued holding it longer.

And blessed be our good God, that we can hold and keep an intelligence with
him, not only by speech, but with our very hands: that lifting up of the hand,
and those groans of his spirit, I make no doubt, but they prevailed at the
hands of God. And so as he lived, I make no question but he died, a holy
servant of God: and I hope his soul is now in heaven, and we are come to lay up
his body in the earth, in the hope of a blessed, and joyful Resurrection.

LIFE'S APPARITION: AND MAN'S DISSOLUTION.
SERMON XXV.
JAMES 4.14. For what is your Life? it is even a vapor that appears for a
little while, and then vanishes away.


THere are two main things to which the corrupt nature of man is subject and
obnoxious; rash judgment, and vain confidence; both spring out of one root,
and that is Pride; where Pride possesses the heart, it will make a man rash in
the judging of others, and presume vainly, and confidently upon himself; At all
these evils the Apostle strikes here in this Chapter, both Mother and Daughter:
both root and branch.

To take heed of Pride, that is the Mother sin; he exhorts us to
thankfulness: where instead of waxing proud of our selves, he would have us
humble our selves; and he brings this argument to persuade us, because they
that humble themselves, God will exalt. The only way to be exalted, is to be
humble; he compares the state of man, (in respect of his future condition) to a
pair of Balances that are hung on a beam, the lower the one balance is down,
the higher the other is up; the lower we humble our selves in this life, the
higher God will exalt us in the next.

The two main evils which are the branches of this root, the Apostle reproves
in the eleventh Verse. First, rash judging of others, the fault of those that
are apt to speak evil of others; Speak not evil one of another, says the
Apostle. That that commonly we call the sin of Detraction, Aquinas says, we
are guilty of two ways, either reporting of another that evil we should not,
or in not reporting of him that good we should; in the one we offend, when we
do either accuse him of that ill that he is not guilty of at all, or aggravate
against him that ill that he is guilty of, making it appear greater than it is;
in the other we are guilty, when we do cut off all the good parts in a man, as
if they were nothing at all, at least when we extenuate that worth and goodness
that is in him, making it appear less than it is.

From this the Apostle disswades us by three Arguments; First, because they
that do this, they do wrong the Law; He that speaks evil of another, speaks
evil of the Law; for the Law would have us love. Secondly, they that do this,
they do wrong God, they take Gods office out of his hands, when they take upon
them to judge others: for he is the only Judge, and none else; for he is the
only Lawgiver, that is able to save us, and to destroy us. Thirdly and lastly,
they wrong their Brethren, when they censure and judge their Brethren beyond
their Commission, they take upon them more than they have Authority; as if he
should say, you exceed your Commission in this, you take that upon you, that
you have no warrant for: Thus against the rash judging of others.

Then against vain-confidence in our selves, this the Apostle strikes at too:
at a confidence out of which a man prefixeth unto himself, what he will do this
day, and to morrow, what he will do this year, and the next year; what he will
buy, and sell, and gain. Go to now (says the Apostle) you that say thus among
your selves, to morrow you will go to such a City, and tarry there a year, and
buy and sell, and get gain; This is a foolish confidence, and the Apostle
endeavors to reprove, and suppress it, By way of Correction. By way of
Direction.


His Correction is drawn, first from the ignorance of the persons that make
such accounts as these; you say you will do thus and thus to morrow, you show
your ignorance; you know not what shall be to morrow. Secondly, by the
uncertainty of the thing they reckon upon, then which nothing is more
uncertain, nothing so uncertain as that is, therefore it is not to be reckoned
upon; Consider (says the Apostle) what is your life; you talk of doing this
and that to morrow; What is your life? it is even a vapor that appears for a
little while, and then vanishes away.

His directing Argument is in the next verse, where he teaches us how we
should speak of things future, and things present.

Of things future, not to speak too peremptorily of them, but with condition,
If we live, and if God will. And then for things present, not to rejoice
boastingly in them, for there is nothing here to be boasted of, or rejoiced in.

The thing that I have selected for this present time and occasion to discourse
upon, is only that argument of the Apostle, wherein the shortness and
uncertainty of our life is represented: the Apostle sets it forth to us by way
of Question, and Answer; First, he puts the Question, What is your life? as if
he should say, it is a thing not worthy the reckoning of; Build upon nothing to
be done to morrow, upon so vain a foundation as that is: and to show the
uncertainty of our life, he comparatively describes it, and sets it forth, he
says, It is like a vapor that appears for a little while, and vanishes
away.

According to the method that the Apostle has laid down, so shall my Discourse
go on; and first I will say something of the question he lays down: And then
I will say something of the words of the Text.

First, Obs. 1.
to let us see what a poor uncertain thing we trust to, when we build upon
life, the Apostle throws out this question, Your life, (says he) What is your
life? Where first the Apostles phrase he speaks in is worthy to be observed,
your life, not ours: yours that make such accounts and reckonings as these,
promise to your selves what you will do in following your worldly business, and
increase your worldly gain; What is your life? The life of Worldlings the
Apostle would secretly tax, as some Expositers collect, noting a difference and
disparity between Christians in their ways, and Worldlings in theirs;
Worldlings are altogether for this Life, and the things of this Life, they
never dream of any other to come; Post mortem nihil, etc. as the Epicure in the
Poet. Death that is an anihilation, and after death there comes nothing;
Therefore all their projects and practices draw downwards, they project for a
worldly Life, their buyings and sellings, and markettings, and profits; these
are the things they mind and seek after, all the thought of their hearts are
bent upon these cares, all the days of their Lives are spent upon these
things: but there is another manner of Life that Christians look for: Col. 3.3.
There is a life hid with Christ in God; they know there is another Life to
come after this, therefore their hearts are set upon other manner of objects.
They are not such as have their affections set upon the World, they make not
account of themselves as men of this World. Plato being asked the question what
Countryman he was, he said, he was a Citizen of the World; a Christian is not
so, he is no Citizen of the World, but a Citizen of Heaven; therefore it is
said, We have our conversation in Heaven, Phil. 3.10. The Greek word properly
signifies Citizens, or Burgesses; therefore Saint Jerome in his Epitaph upon
Neapotian renders it so; and Beza pertinent to the sense, though not proper to
the Text, We carry and behave our selves like Citizens, or Burgesses, or
Freemen of Heaven; they have all their affections (...) all their thoughts and
desires bent that way: if they can obtain that, they have as much as they
desire to crown their wishes withal: they care for no other buying but of the
truth; they fear not selling but of their Souls, they wish no gain but Heaven.

And indeed this Life does only deserve to be called a Life: this Life which
the Saints, which Christians live: the Life that they live to God; and this
Life is that that must prepare them for a better Life, the life in Heaven. Of
any other Life but this, we may ask the question in the words of the Apostle,
What is it? what is it? It deserves not so much as the name (as he says)
though in name it be a life, indeed it is a death; but pretermit the disparity
and difference between lives; some are comparatively, and other simply
considered. The Life simply considered is the subject of the Apostles question,
What is your life?

Questions always in the Scripture are emphatical, whether they tend to magnify
and advance, or to the villifying and abasing of what they aim at; this here is
most emphatical, to show us how poor and base a thing Life is, like that
question in Job, to show how poor and base a thing man is, Job 7.17. Lord, what
is man, that thou art mindful of him, or set thy heart upon him? So David,
Psalm 8.4. Lord, what is man, that thou art mindful of him, or the son of man,
that thou desire him? He shows how poor and base a thing man is: and he
himself gives the answer to it, Psalm 114.6. Man is like to vanity? Nay, more
plainly in Psalm 39.6. Surely man is vanity; nay, surely (says the Prophet)
man in his best estate is altogether vanity. What could have been more
emphatically spoken? there is not a word there but it has its force; Man is
vanity; Every man is vanity; Every man in his best estate is vanity; Every man
in his best estate, is altogether vanity; and then there is a word of
asseveration by which he seals and buckles up all; Surely, every man in his
best estate, is altogether vanity. If the Apostle had but barely and nakedly
said what he had to say concerning the uncertainty and shortness of man's life,
it had been sufficient if he had said thus: Your life is a vapor that appears
for a little while, etc. but he fetches it in with a Quere, he puts it to a
question, as if he would demur, and have us to pause and consider of it, he
brings it in with a, What is your life?

By the Apostles leave we may be bold to quit another question with him, what
the Apostle means to express it thus? Surely it is to inculcate that into us
more thoroughly, and to make us pause upon that more seriously: such questious
as these make a great stop in a man's way, as Amaza's body in 2 Samuel 12.12. it
stopped the passage of the people, that they could not get forwards; so the
interposing of such questions as these, make a stop in our ways and
proceedings; they make us take new thoughts and think again, they make us enter
into new cogitations, whether it be better for us in that we are doing to
persist, or to break off.

Let the consideration of it teach us wisdom, Use.
especially in perusing, and foreknowing of our worldly business, when we are
about it, let us ponder and pause, and suppose, and put the question, whether
do I well to do thus? or what is it that I thus eagerly pursue? what is it that
I seek after?

Is it honor that I am ambitious of? why what is our honor but a breath? a
height that many are raised to, out of favor rather then desert? like Phaetons
Chariot, or Icarus Plumes, a Pinnacle of honor, upon which he that stands must
expect advancement, or ruin; to some it is a cloud of smoke, that the higher it
mounts, the sooner it dies.

Is it riches that we set our hearts upon? let us ask the question what is
riches, but thick clay? as Habakuk terms it, red and white earth, as Bernard
faith, or the baggage of the earth, as another expresses it; as baggage is to
the Army, so is riches to men, it cannot well be left behind, but always
hinders the march, and sometime loses the battle; in the getting of them there
is a great deal of labor, in the keeping of them a great deal of care, and in
the foregoing of them, a great deal of sorrow; a man may have them and not be
happy, a man may want them, and yet be contented.

Is it pleasure, we are in love with, and dote upon? let us ask the question,
what is pleasure? as a rose senced with thorns, as a honey comb filled with
stings; there is sweetness you will say, but it is very dangerous; forward it
casts smiles, but backward it throws darts; that joy is like the cracking of
thorns; when it goes out, it is as the snuff of a candle, there is a great deal
of bitterness, sometimes in the greatest joy we have.

Lastly, is it life we build upon? ask what is your life? the Text answers
that, It is a vapor that appears for a little while, and then vanishes away.
If we could thus ponder, and pause, with serious meditations upon those worldly
businesses, that we so eagerly pursue; and put these questions to our selves in
the pursuing of them; Beloved, they would peradventure help us so far to see
into the vanity and vexation of them, as that the edge and heat of our desires
would be abated and pulled down.

I have done with the Question the Apostle propounds; What is your life?

Now I come to the words of the answer; It is even a vapor that appears,
etc. Wherein the shortness and uncertainty of our life is set forth; in the
description of it observe two things;

First, what.

Secondly wherein.

First, what it is compared to: A vapor.

Secondly, wherein it is compared to a vapor: In two things.

The shortness of abiding.

The suddenness of departing.

First the shortness of abiding, a vapor, that appears for a while.

Where first observe, that the Apostle faith it appears only; he says not it
is, but it appears so; it rather appears, then is any matter of substance.

And then this appearing is but short, for a little while, it tarries not.

And then the suddenness of the departure, as the abiding is but short, so the
departure of it is sudden, it is gone ere we are aware; and when it is gone, we
know not what is become of it; there is not so much as any print or memory of
it left.

To what our life is compared, Observat. 2.
that is the first point I am to speak of, it ts compared to a vapor. If the
Apostle had given no answer at all to the question he puts, we might have
imagined his meaning; and from other places of Scripture have abundantly
supplied it. How many times and places of Scripture sets forth the shortness,
and uncertainty of our life, by sundry similitudes and comparisons? sometimes
it is compared to a dream, sometimes to a span, sometimes to a shadow,
sometimes to a weavers shuttle; sometimes to a swift post; sometimes to a short
race; sometimes to a watch in the night; sometimes to a flower in the field;
sometime to a tale that is told. All these are significant expressions, to show
the shortness and uncertainty of life; so that from other places of Scripture
we might answer the Apostles question, though he had said nothing; but his own
answer expresses it fitly and fully, by a pregnant, and pertinent resembling
it to a vapor.

The Philosophers observe differences between vapors and exhalations, though
both are drawn from the earth yet the matter of an exhalation is moist and hot;
the matter of vapors moist and cold: Exhalations rise from the superficies of
the earth; Vapors lie in the earth: exhalations continue longer, vapors
shorter; but I need not stand upon Philosophical distinctions, your life is a
vapor.

Observe how the resemblance holds between the one and the other. First, a
vapor is nothing but a breath, therefore it is called so, of a word that
signifies, blowing or a breath, or nothing but smoke, therefore Act. 2. it is
called a vapor of smoke; and such is our life, a vapor, because breath is
nothing but the breath of life; So Moses called it in Genesis 2.7. and when a man
dies, it is said his breath departs from him; Therefore the Prophet Isaiah, he
brings it as an argument, to show what a vain thing it is for a man to trust
upon one, that has no more hold of his life then so; Cease from man, whose
breath is in his nostrils; what account is to be made of him, yea, it is even
as smoke, his days pass, and vanish away as smoke.

Secondly, vapors are ingendered in the earth, and they lodge in the caverns,
and hollow places of the earth; that is their mansion house, where they have
their being, such a vapor is our life; for this body of ours wherein our life
is, it is a body of earth; Man has his foundation in the dust, Job 14. and
there God has provided a receptacle and dwelling place, for our life to be
received into, and contained; it is said, when God gave it Adam first, he blew
it into his nostrils, there he made a lodging for it; therefore man is said to
have his breath in his nostrils, in regard of which there is no trust to be
given to him, nor no account to be made of him.

Thirdly, Vapors are drawn out of the earth by the Sun into the air, some to
higher regions then others are; yet when they are all at their highest, they
have no fixing nor settling, but are carried, and agitated, and tossed by the
winds, till at last they be dissolved in showers, and dewes, and fall back to
the earth; so it is with our life, we come all at the first as vapors out of
the earth, and there we have suns that draw us up, the favor of Princes
peradventure, or great persons, some to higher regions then others; some are
drawn to high places of honor, but when they are there, they have no settling
no fixing, as vapors in the air; they are hurried and tossed, and carried to
and fro, from one wind to another, and after a long and restless motion, at
last they fall down to the earth again, out of which they were taken.

Fourthly, where the earth exhales many vapors, the earth is not so pure and
wholesome as other places; for by experience we find the healthfullest places
are in the hilly high Countries, but moarish low grounds have least health, and
shortest lives, because of vapors; our life is a vapor in this respect; Many
ill airs continually exhaled in our corrupt natures, the world is full of
inordinate concupisence, and the Devil poisons every place where he comes; so
that while we live here, we live in a Moarish ground, and full of ill vapors
and air, and therefore the higher we climb the safer; as God faith to Lot in
another case, when he bid him get him to the Mountains, and there he should be
safe; so if we can get up to the Mountain, the mount Sion, the place and
habitation for God, and his blessed Angels for ever, there we shall dwell in
safety, for there are no foggs and mists of temptations; there are no ill ayrs;
there is nothing that favors of sin or misery, either to breed us anoyance, or
threaten vexation; So you see the first thing what it is our life is resembled
unto, and how filthy the resemblance holds.

The second is, wherein it is compared to a Vapor. In two things; The
shortness of abiding. The suddenness of departing.


The shortness of abiding, it appears for a little while.

Where first observe, Observat.
the Apostle uses the word of appearing, it is a thing rather in appearance
than in deed; of show rather than substance; such is a Vapor, when it first
arises, and breaks out of the Earth, it makes a great swelling to the eye, as
though it would fill the air, and darken the Sun, yet it has no solidity nor
substance with it, but it is a mere empty tumor; it seems and appears to be
something, but really it is nothing; And such is our life, it is rather a life
in appearance than indeed; and therefore Saint Austin knew not whether to call
it a living death, or a dying life; for truly it is another manner of thing
that deserves to be called Life; only that deserves to be called so by which
the Soul lives to God, and by which the Soul lives hereafter with God; that is
the life of the Soul, this is the life of the body; that is the life of Faith,
The life that I live is by Faith in the Son of God; He calls not that life by
which the body is united to the soul, but that he calls Life whereby the Soul
is united to God; the Soul may be dead though the body be alive, if it be a
stranger to the life of God, Dead in trespasses and sins, it may be dead while
it lives, Ephesians. 5.14. Awake thou that sleep, and a rise from the dead, and
Christ shall give thee light. He that lives in sin is dead in sin, and the Soul
lives when the Body is dead; therefore that cannot be the true life by which
the body breaths, but that by which the Soul subsists; if the Soul when it is
separate from the body may have happiness, and live with God, that deserves
truly the name of life; but if it be a stranger to it, though it live, that
Life is a dead life, nay the worst death; the Scripture calls it the second
Death, where though we never die, yet we are ever dying: the Life that we live
here, it is rather a thing in appearance than a being.

So all these things that belong to this life, all the joys, and all the
sorrows of it, they are rather appearing joys, and appearing sorrows, than
true joys, and true sorrows.

Consider first the joys of our Life, they are not sound and true, but false
and vain joys, if any wicked or ill thing be the object of joy, as it is of
too too many, they rejoice in doing wickedly, that is a false joy, they rejoice
in that they should sorrow and mourn for: and not only wicked and unlawful, but
worldly outward things, such as we may rejoice in, honors, pleasures, riches,
and friends; yet these being well examined, there is no solid true joy, but a
vain joy in them, for they afford no rejoicing to the Soul; it is only matters
of spiritual joy, the joy in the Holy Ghost that the Soul rejoices in, and
with that joy the Soul is ravished, though it be bereft of other; as again, the
Soul may be overcome with spiritual sorrow, though there be abundance of
outward joy presented to it, Prove. 13.14. our joys are but appearing joys.

Consider our sorrows, and they are but appearing too, whether it be loss of
comfort that we sorrow for, or sense of pain, being rightly examined, we shall
find that they be rather shows than true griefs, for there is nothing can bring
true grief upon the Soul, but only the pain of sin; nor no loss can bring any
true sorrow upon the Soul, but the loss of Gods favor: sorrow bestowed upon
other things, it is but counterfeit sorrow in comparison of this, therefore in
Heb. 12.11. the Apostle faith, that the chastisements that we suffer here, they
seem grievous, and not joyous; they seem grievous, as if all that we suffered
here were rather seeming than real; and undoubtedly the Apostle said right, for
whatsoever chastisement a man has here, he may possible have more matter of
joy than of sorrow; to the same purpose the Apostle, 2 Cor. 9.6. where he
describes the afflicted estate of the Saints (as God knows they are subject to
many afflictions) he does it with an, As it were, because he would vilify the
terror of it, and not grant their condition so miserable as it appears, as it
were dying, as it were wanting, as it were sorrowing; it is but as it were such
as they were not: so in Isai. 29.8. the Prophet there tells us how it is with a
hungry man, and with a thirsty man, when he dreams, he dreams he eats, and he
dreams he drinks; But it is only the fancy of a dream, he finds it quite
otherwise, he finds his stomach as empty as his hand, so it is with our life
here, it is no better then a waking dream; where we seem to do what is done,
and we seem to be what we are: Says the Poet, what is one, and what is
another? Man is like a shadow of a dream; he that seems something now, anon he
falls and comes to nothing; and he that seems nothing now, anon he rises and
comes to something.

Thus you see that all that ever we have here, it is but only seeming, it is
not real, whether they be our joys, or our sorrows, they are but seeming
joys, and seeming sorrows; yet again this appearing, and seeming life of ours
it indures (faith the Apostle) but a little while.

Indeed vapors last not long, for the first matter they are made of, affords
not them any continuance; and besides that, they are easily dispelled and
dispersed by the Sun; such a vapor is our life. Out of the same Argument you
may see that our life can continue but for a while, it cannot last long.

First, it is but a breath, as a vapor is. Again as vapors are apt to be
dispersed, and dispelled easily by the hot Sun, and the cold wind, so hot and
cold diseases, and insinite sort of other casualties are easily apt to
dissipate it; it is true, some vapors hang longer in the air then others, so
this vapor of life it may keep longer residence in some bodies then in others,
but when it is longest, it is but a little while; David determins the date of
it within the term of 80. years: the strength and vigor of it in the opinion
of the Philosopher is of less continuance; the mind decays at 45. years, and
the body decays at 35. If we compare the life of man with other creatures,
then we will say it is but a while: the Raven, the Elephant, the Stag, they
outlive man double and treble.

If you compare it with the life of the world, then you will confess it is but
a little while, for the world has continued and lasted some thousands of
years, and there is not one man of ten thousand that holds to a hundred.

If we compare the continuance of this present age, to ages that are past, you
will confess it is but awhile; in former ages men lived some two hundred, some
four hundred, some five hundred, some nine hundred years; now, more die before
ten, then after sixty so that if once our life were said to be but the breadth
of a hand, now I may say our life is but a singers breadth.

If we compare it with eternity, I am sure you will say it lasts but a while;
for eternity cannot be measured with any revolution of days, or months, or
nights, or years; therefore in comparison of that, the life of man is but a
vapor, and a vapor that endures for a little while. I need not insist to
prove this point, the truth of it is confirmed every day, I will only give you
the use of it.

First, Use 1.
is it so, that the life that we lead, is rather a seeming, appearing, then a
real life; then learn not to be deluded with shows, and appearances, not too
much to be taken with the joys of this life, they are but appearances, and the
sorrows of this life, they are but shows; we codemn fools that are taken with
shows, and not with substances; as the Poet faith of Ixion, when he thought he
embraced a goddess, he embraced a cloud; we embrace a cloud, when we think we
embrace any good thing of this life; the world deludes us, as Michal did Saul,
when he thought he had found David, he found nothing but an Image of David, and
a pillow of goats heir; so what good things the world promises, they are not
good things, but the image of good things; honor is but the image of honor,
they are only truly hon ourable that God honors, and such honor the world
cannot bestow; she promises riches, but they are but the image of riches; they
are only truly rich, that are rich in God, and the world cannot bestow that;
she promises pleasure, it is but the image of pleasure; pleasure is only in
the presence of God, at his right hand for ever more, and such pleasure the
world cannot give; she promises life, but it is but the image of life; that is
only the true life whereby the soul lives unto God, and hereafter with God, and
such a life as this the world is not able to give. Therefore let us not dote
upon the world and worldly things, but learn as the Apostle exhorts, Col. 3.2.
To set our affections on things above; those are the only real good things,
these are but imaginary.

In the second place, Use 2.
this appearing life of ours, it lasts but a little while; this may afford to
us comfort, and instruction; first comfort to those, whose life here is full of
troubles and sorrows: the shorter time they have to endure, the more patient
they may be in enduring of it; nay, there is no greater blessing for those that
live here wretchedly and miserably, then the abreviating and shortning their
days; Why is light given to them that are in misery, (faith Job) and the life
of them is bitter to their soul, they long for death, and desire it, and dig
for it, more then for treasure; and rejoice and are exceeding glad when they
find the grave. As the misery of our life may be the more easy, considering
the shortness of it, so the shortness of our life may be the less grievous,
considering the misery of it; for if God should lengthen out many men's lives,
what would it be but a lengthening of their misery. But our life it is but a
little while, therefore let us endure it with comfort.

And as it serves for comfort, so for instruction; for if the life we live in
here be but for a little while; then learn to bestow this little time of life
that we spend here, as profitably, and as faithfully as we can, both for the
receiving and doing of good. Thou that live now under a good Magistrate,
under a good Minister, under a good Father, under a good Master, gain all the
good thou can now, for peradventure they shall live; nay, certainly they
shall live but a little while; and when their life is once quenched, thou
kmowest not what light thou may have to walk by. And for our selves, since
our life is but a while, let us be careful to do all the good we can, be
stirring betimes, while we have opportunity, let us do good to all. It is the
madness of the Epicures, because they shall live but a while, they will live
only to themselves; Let us eat and drink, because we shall die to morrow; and
that is the reason; they die as beasts, because they care not to live as men.
When they sing out their first canto, we will fill our selves with pleasure,
the burden of the song must be, that we have wearied our selves with sin. And
it is the folly of the Mammonists, considering that they have not long to live,
to put off the doing of all good till they die, whereas the rule of Christ is,
to work while we have day, for shortly the night will come, when no man can
work; They contrary put off all their work till night; all the day their
charity sleeps, and does nothing; as one said wittily, that that men give then
they give of other bodies then their own, for they give that that they can keep
no longer, and though it be said to be given by their Will and Deed, it is
rather their Deed then their Will, for if they could have their will, it should
never be their Deed, they would rather be possessors of it themselves, then
that others should be their Executors, but be exhorted to do works of charity,
and other good works, while you have time, while you may make your own eyes
your overseers, and your own hands your executors, while you have oppertunity
do good to your selves, and others, and the rather, because you know not how
long opportunity will be afforded, or took from you; For what is your life, it
is even a vapor that appears for a little while.

Thus of the first circumstance, wherein the resemblance consists, the
shortness of abiding.

The next is the suddenness of departing, Observat.
It appears for a while, and then vanishes away. And here my discourse must be
like a vapor, short, it suddenly vanishes away, that is the nature of a
vapor, for as there is no matter to give it a fixed foundation; so when it
appears for a little, it soon dissolveth and vanishes away to nothing; and
such a vapor is the life of man, it is gone suddenly, it is gone before we are
aware, and when it is gone, there is no memory of it remains, no print of it;
how suddenly and quickly, in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye have many
been deprived, both of breath and life, as one would put out a candle, or tread
out a snuff. It is true, sickness is one common Bailiff that arrests men at the
suit of Death, but many a one has been made the prisoner of Death, that was
never arrested at the suit of Death; yea know Abel was murdered in the field;
Eli broak his neck from the chair; Absalom was snatched up in an Oak; the
disobedient Prophet was slain by a Lion; the disobedient Prince was trodden to
death in a crowd; Abimelech was slain by a piece of a millstone; Pope Adrian was
choked with swallowing a fly; Pelus slain with a fall of a tile. Such is our
life as a vapor, as the sand of an hourglass, ever spending, and ever running
out; as Gregory has it in his Morals, Look how many days a man adds to his
life, so many steps he takes to his death; So Jeremie to Heliodorus, we are
ever dying, for we every day change; when I am writing this, all the points of
my pen spends a point of my life; nay, while we are hearing this Sermon, we are
passing on.

I will make a little Use of it, Use 1.
and then I have done.

First, make the Use the Apostle does to them that build upon futurity, and
think they may do what they list; you that think you will do to day, and to
morrow, what you list. Oh, faith the Apostle, what reason have you to build on
to day, and to morrow, when ye know not what a day will bring forth? We may not
promise our selves life for to morrow, much less may we do as the fool in the
Gospel, promise years, when we cannot assure our selves of a moment of life, if
we might assure our selves of a moment of life, in which it might be said, it
were impossible to die, we might possibly be immortal, and not die at all, but
as Ambrose faith, corruptible, is not so capable of incorruption, but since it
has been subject to fall, till it does fall, it is ever declining; there is no
building nor trusting to uncertain futurity, we must not rest, and trust on
those things which are to come, but only upon God, and speak conditionally of
them, not absolutely; refer the success and disposing of all things to come, to
the will and good pleasure of God, remembering what our life is, so make less
account of our life, and of our selves and all.

Secondly, seeing our life is so vanishing, let us ever prepare for death, for
sudden death, because life is vanishing; Thou know not in what hour thy
master will come; Therefore every hour we should so bestow our selves, that our
Master may find us at work.

For this, two things are requisite;

First, ever think of death, death cannot be sudden to that man, that ever
thinks of it.

Secondly, be careful to lead a godly life; the goodness of the life consists
not in the long continuance of it, but in the well employing of it, it may be
any man's case to live well, it can be no man's to live long; our comfort is,
though our life be momentary, yet notwithstanding this very moment of time, is
enough to gain to us here-after eternity, and how much better is a short time
well spent, for the purchasing of eternal happiness, then a short time ill
spent, for the purchasing of eternal misery? your life is momentary, yet
eternity depends on it, if it be spent ill, eternal misery, if well we are
eternally happy: howsoever here we vanish as a vapor; yet one day we shall
become as fixed stars in the right hand of Christ, we shall shine as stars
for ever.

Thus I have showed how the life of man is compared to a vapor that appears
for a little while, and then vanishes away. Beloved, I pray let not this
Sermon pass as a vapor, let not all of it pass away, in the found you here,
but fix it as a nail in a sure place, in your understanding, in your memory, in
your affections; and remember how short and sudden every man's end and life is,
or may be; O that my people were wise, they would understand this, they would
consider their latter end.

We have a spectacle here before us, that was a real comment upon this Text;
She did understand the Doctrine of it, and was excellent in the practice of it;
A Gentlewoman that deserved a better Orator to commemorate the virtues that
were in her, and to give her praises due; it had been a fitter work for your
reverend and worthy Minister, whose absence at this time I supply, he could
have spoken more fully of her then I can, because he was acquainted longer with
her then I was; I account it a part of my unhappiness, that I knew her so
little a while, and peradventure you will say it is a part of her unhappiness,
that this office is done by one that knew her so little a while; It is true
indeed, I am not able to say much of her, for my knowledge of her was but a few
weeks or months, by reason of our neighborhood in the Country, but then I
observed her to be one of the ornaments of her sex, and every thing that came
from her was graceful and comely; the sweetness of nature and grace, in my
opinion concurred in her; But I must deliver the most that I have to say, from
the report that I have from others, yet from very good hands. Solomon faith, A
good name, is as a good ointment poured forth, like the precious Alablasterbox
that Mary broke on the head of our Savior, the smell of it perfumed all the
house; I may say of her, as the Apostle faith of Demetrius, She was well
reported of by all, and I am persuaded she was reported well of the truth it
self, she had a name answerable to her virtues; Solomon faith, A prudent wife,
or a good wife, is the gift of God; she was a Theodosia, that was her name, The
gift of God; and a gift God bestowed to the comfort of him that had her.

She was constant both in the performance of public duties and private, in
hearing Gods word, not only on the Lords day, but (as occasion gave leave) on
the weekdayes, and she was not only constant at good exercises abroad, but
(which was the crown of her commendations) she was so at home also, she was
constant in reading the Word; I am credibly informed, that she read over the
Bible seven times in the seven years that she was married; she constantly made
use of that she heard, I my self saw no less then two quires of paper writ out
with her own hand, collected partly out of other books, out principally out of
Sermons, not noted at Church, when she heard them, but when she came home,
being in this like Mary that laid up the sayings of Christ in her heart; her
daily spending of her time was commendable, and exemplary; in the morning up to
prayer with her family, and then unto private prayer by her self: from prayer
to reading, and then to work; and then to prayer, and to dinner, and then to
work; this was her continual course of life without interruption. She was a
Sarah for obedience, Rebecca for wisdom, Mary for piety, Martha for
houswifery, a true Lydea, she heard, and God opened her heart, that she
attended to those things she heard. A true Dorcas, full of good works; they
that knew her, knew her (so far as wisdom and discretion dictated to her)
full of charity, of good works, and almsdeeds. But her life was a vapor that
appeared for a little while, and then vanishes away. She verified my Text too
truly, in that it pleased God suddenly to call her, even in the prime and
strength of her years, she was but a young woman, and she dyed in Childbed.

You that are Childbearing women, I wish you to set this pattern and example
before your eyes, and learn by this spectacle to see how near you walk to the
brink of your grave, when you come to be delivered of child; I wonder therefore
by the way, that any should find fault with that solemn thanksgiving, that is
appointed by the Church to be rendered to God for women, for his preserving them
from the great danger of Childbirth; there is but a step between you and
death, you should then have a care to prepare for your death; I see a great
deal of time spent to prepare all brave and fine. God may quickly turn all your
chambers, and hang them with black, and turn your jollity into mourning;
therefore you shall rather prepare for your winding sheet, and for your grave;
for undoubtedly she did so: and I may in some sense apply that literally of
the Apostle to her; In bearing of children she is saved. It is true, the
Apostle gives that as an argument of comfort to women, because before he had
preached obedience to them, a doctrine that they do not well relish, yet he
gives two reasons, because Adam was first made, and she first sinned, that is
another reason; yet lest she should be too much discouraged with that of the
Apostle, and because the pain of childbearing was threatened to women for a
part of their curse; the Apostle adds that as a comfort; In bearing of children
they shall be saved. Notwithstanding the pain and sorrow of childbearing was
inflicted as a punishment upon them, yet under that curse there is a way of
salvation opened; if they be such women, says the Apostle, as, continue in
faith and charity, with holiness and sobriety. These virtues being eminent in
this dear Christian sister of ours, no doubt but in bearing of children she is
saved; that is, she found under that curse, a way to a blessing, an everlasting
blessing of salvation.

How she disposed her self in the time of her sickness; those of the family
well know; truly I have not often, scarce ever heard of a woman of her rank and
quality, (for she was a woman well descended, and well bred,) and yet I never
heard of a woman more beloved, and more bewailed: her Husband complains of his
loss, never man lost a better wife; all the servants, never any had a better
Mistress; and all the neighbors, never any had a better neighbor. Concerning
her in the time of her sickness, they can give a better, and more particular
testimony then I; I only did one office and service to her, when in the absence
of your reverend Pastor, I was called, I visited her an hour or two before she
went, when (God knows) she was faint and weak, and able to breath but a few
words, but they were sweet; I told her, I hoped, and doubted not, but that as
she had made a Christian profession in her life time, so now she would seal it
up: she answered; I have endeavored to serve God, but with a great deal of
infirmity and weakness, I rest not upon that, I rest upon my evidence, and
there is my comfort; I doubt not, but he that has given me the evidence, will
also give me the inheritance. I think these were the last words she spoke.

Thus she is gone to her rest, her body to rest, as a prisoner of hope, till
the Resurrection, her soul rests in the arms of God; I have no more to say to
her, or of her, then that Christ said to the woman in the Gospel; Woman, go in
peace, thy faith has saved thee.

SAINT PAUL'S TRUMPET: OR AN ALARM FOR SLEEPY CHRISTIANS.
SERMON XXVI.
ROMANS 13.11. And that knowing the time, that now it is high time to awake out
of sleep.


THe holy Apostle in this Chapter he delivers a number of precepts, and general
rules for satisfaction, and enforces them with sundry reasons. Among them all,
the words that I have read, they are one principal, both Precept and Reason
enforcing it; Considering the season, it is time that ye arise from sleep.

These few words may be called, Saint Paul's Trumpet, to rouse the sluggish
Christian. They were the occasion of the conversion of that famous instrument,
Aug: lib. 8. Confess. Cap. ult.
St. Austin, as he says in the eighth Book of his Confessions, the last
Chapter. He reports, that when the time of his Conversion came near, he was in
a mavelous great agony, and conflict, beset with a number of Temptations,
whereby Satan would still have detained him in the spiritual sleep he was in:
being in this mavelous conflict, he could not but go from his Chamber to his
Garden, and there he prostrated himself on his face before the Lord, and
earnestly, and ardently called upon God. And in his Prayer (as himself records)
he seemed that he did hear the voice of a Child speak to him, Toll, lege: Take
up the book and read. Hereupon running back again to his study, his Book being
open, the first place that he cast his eye upon was this Verse; It is now time,
considering the season, that you awake ou^ of sleep. And (says he) with the
end of the sentence, I found an infused life. He found in the reading of this
sentence, as soon as he had read it, the life of grace infused into him, and
his conversion was complete. This place of Scripture has been famous in the
Church, for the conversion of that famous instrument. I would to God (as we do
not despair) that the Lord would bestow the same blessing among some of us; who
not only hear these words read, but are now to be expounded in your ears.

For the understanding of which, Parts of the Text unsolded.
we are to inquire of diverse things for the meaning of the words.

First, we are to inquire what is here meant by sleep; It is time to awake out
of sleep.

Secondly, what is meant by arising, or awaking out of sleep.

Thirdly, who they be that must arise, or wake out of sleep.

Fourthly, and lastly, why the Apostle does bestow this exhortation upon sleepy
persons that cannot hear what he says?

For the first of these, what is meant by sleep?

Sleep threefold.
Sleep in Scripture is threefold, Natural. Moral. Spiritual.


Natural sleep is that spoken of, 1. Natural. Psalm. 3.5.
Psalm. 3.5. I will lay my self down to sleep, and rise again. This natural
sleep is the rest, and restitution of nature.

Moral sleep, 2. Moral. Dan. 12 2. Act. 7. ult.
is natural death; this is the death, and dissolution of nature, of which the
Scripture speaks, Dan. 12.2. They that sleep in the dust, shall rise again.
And Act. 7. ult. When Steven had spoken these words, he fell asleep; that is,
he died.

Spiritual sleep, 3. Spiritual, compared to sleep.
it is the sleep of sin, and security: this is the death and privation of grace
in the soul; as the other is the privation of life in the body: of this our
Text speaks; It is time to arise, or awake out of this sleep; the sleep of
sin, and security.

Now the state of sin and security, is compared here to the state of sleep,
because there are many resemblances and likenesses between the state of a
sinner, and a sleepy man: for what effect sleep has in the body, the same
effect has the sleep of sin in the soul. I will show it you in a few
instances, and so pass it.

First; 1. For the time, the night.
They that sleep (says the Apostle) sleep in the night. The same that the
Apostle aims at here; It is time to awake out of sleep: because the night is
past. The night is a time to sleep in. So, those that sleep in sin, it is
because they are in the night of sin, there is a darkness, the Canopy is spread
over them, the Sun of grace, and the day of salvation shines not upon them:
their eyes are closed up in darkness, as it is with a sleepy man.

Again, 2. Exposed to danger.
when a man goes to sleep, he puts off his clothes; he lies naked, exposed to
all dangers. And when a man is in the sleep of sin and security, he wants his
garments, to be clothed with Christ's righteousness and holiness: he lies
naked, exposed, and open to all Gods displeasure, and all the arrows of Gods
wrath. So in Deuteronomy. D^ut. 32.
32. when the Israelites, the people of God, had made a Calfe, Moses came and
saw them naked; that is, destitute of Gods protection, and wanting that
garment, that armor of proof, that righteousness that before they had upon
them.

Again, 3. Willingness.
a man naturally lays himself down willingly to sleep, he is willing to take
his rest. So it is in the sleep of sin, every natural man is willing to lay
himself down to sleep in sin, to take his ease, and rest in sin; for there is
no man but has free will to sin, though no man bath free will to good.

And again, 4. Suddenness.
as sleep it surprizeth a man suddenly oft-times before he is aware, or before
he can remember himself where he is, or what he is doing: so the sleep of sin,
it often surprizeth a man before he is aware. As we see in the Disciples of
Christ themselves, Mar. 26.
Mat. 26. bodily sleep surprised them, even then when they intended to watch;
and when Christ appointed them to watch: but the sleep of their minds and souls
was much more: for that was not a time to sleep, if they had known what they
had been about.

Again further, 5 Insensibleness, and immovableness.
as the sleep of the body binds up the senses, and makes a man senseless of that
which is good or evil: he that sleeps, offer him a Kingdom, it moves him not:
threaten him, draw a sword, offer a stab him, he stirrs not, he is not
sensible; he is unmovable: a man that is asleep, where you left him, there you
shall find him still. So it is in the sleep of sin, it binds up all the
spiritual senses, that a man that is in this sleep, he wants a seeing eye, and
a hearing ear, he knows nothing, he sees nothing of God, (but that which will
make him in-excusable:) he tastes not, he feels not how good God is to him.
Offer him the kingdom of heaven, and grace in the means; it moves him not:
threaten him, draw out the sword, the weapons of Gods wrath against him, he
fears nothing. As he is insensible in these courses, so he is immovable, look
where he was at the first, there shall you find him still, there is no
difference: but he is as a dead man, as long as he sleeps thus in sin.

To conclude this point: 6 Vain fancies.
sixthly, the sleep of the body deludes a man with many vain dreams, and foolish
conceits, false joys, and false fears, and false hopes, etc. which are nothing
true. So the sleep of sin in the soul, it has the same effect, it feeds a man
up with false joys, and false hopes: it casts him down with false fear, where
no fear is. A man in the state of sin, he fears the face of man, the eye of
man, the word of man, the hand of man: he fears not the eye of God, nor the
word of God, nor the mighty power of God. So likewise for false joys, a man
that is a beggar, he dreams that he has gold enough, that he tumbles in it. So
beggars in grace, those that have not a rag of righteousness upon them, they
dream that they are rich, and increased in goods, and that they have need of
nothing, when they know not that they are poor and beggarly, and naked, as the
Church of Laodicea. So this spiritual sleep, it fills a man with false conceits.

A man sometime when he goes to sleep, 7 The continuance.
he thinks not to sleep long, but to take a nap, and wake by and by, yet it may
be he sleeps beyond his compass, sometime he wakes no more: So, it is with a
man in sin, he hopes to wake, he thinks to sleep but a little, but sometime he
sleeps long, and sometime he never wakes. So we see how aptly the spirit
compares the state of a man in sin to sleep. This is the first thing in the
meaning of the words.

Now the second thing is, 2 What meant by waking.
what is meant by waking, or arising out of sleep. To wake, or to rise out of
sleep, is for a man to do in the matter of Christianity, as a man that awakes
out of sleep. And for a man that wakes out of sleep, there are three things he
does, and so out of the sleep of sin.

First, 1 To open the eyes to see the light.
there must be an opening of the eyes, and a beholding of the light. And this
is the first thing in awaking out of the sleep of sin and security: a man must
labor to open his eyes, to behold the light of Gods word, and that shining
grace that the Lord propounds to him in the Scriptures: he must open his eyes
to behold the light; and that will discover such objects as will keep him
awake. Therefore men sleep so much in the night, because they are in the dark,
and not in the light; they see objects in the day time that keeps them awake.
So for this sleep of sin, if we would keep awake, let us open our eyes to
behold the light of grace; and in the light of the Scriptures we shall see
objects that will help to keep us waking: we shall see Gods displeasure, the
wrath of God, we shall see those things, that eye cannot see, nor ear hear, nor
has entered into the heart of man. We shall see them in their beginning and
degrees; though the full degree cannot enter into the heart to conceive, and
this will help to keep us waking.

Then in the next place when a man has opened his eyes to see the light, 2 To
rouse the senses.
then there must be a rouzing of the senses. This awakes a man, when his senses
that were bound up by sleep are loosed, that now he is able to see, and to
move, and to talk, etc. What unbinds the spiritual senses of a man in this
sleep of sin? only faith in the Son of God, that opens the eyes of them that
were dead in sin; it restore; new senses, and life, that they are able to walk
in the ways of God, and to move in the actions of godliness and Christianity.
Therefore the second thing that a man must do to awake himself out of sleep,
is to get faith in his soul, that he may suck virtue from Christ, and to get
his senses loofed that he may see, and taste, and feel the goodness of God,
which without Christ he cannot attain.

Thirdly, 3. Get out of bed.
and lastly, a man must get out of his bed, to awake him out of sleep, when his
eyes are open and his senses loosed, leap out of the bed; that is by
repentance: this is to cease to do evil. Therefore when the Apostle exhorts to
rise out of sleep, these are the three main things the Apostle aims at, wherein
he expresses it plentifully. First, to get the true knowledge of God, to see
those objects that may allure, and draw our minds. And then labor to get faith
in the Son of God, whereby our senses may be unbound. And then to get out of
the bed of sin by repentance, to cease to do evil, and learn to well: this is
to awake out of the bed of sleep.

Thirdly, 3 Who must awake.
who they are that must arise out of sleep? Every man: for so the Apostle
plainly expresses it, Ephesians. 2. Awake thou that sleep, whosoever thou art
that sleep, awake, and rise out of sleep.

But who are they that sleep?

Two sorts of men: Quest. Answ.
all sorts of men may be reduced to two heads; The Natural Man. The Regenerate
Man.
And both sleep.

The natural man is in a fast, 1 The natural man.
dead sleep; you shall as soon get a rib out of his side; (as God did out of
Adam, when he was asleep) as wake him. You shall sooner drive a nail into his
temples, as Jael did to Sisera, then awake him. He is in a fast dead sleep, in
the sleep of death: as a man in a Lethargy that never wakes again. Therefore
this man had need to arise, to be called upon, and to be rouzed out of the
sleep of death: Awake thou that sleep, stand up from the dead, that Christ
may give thee light; Arise as a man arises out of the Grave, out of the bed of
sleep. This is the man that is in a dead sleep.

But not only these are in a dead sleep, 2 The regenerate.
but the regenerate also are in a sleep, and they keep not themselves so
waking, and so watchful, as they ought to do: therefore the Apostle applies it
to himself, and to all the Saints; It is time for us to awake out of sleep. He
puts himself in the number: For he that is most wakeful had need to be more,
and to rise out of sleep still. Cant. 5. It is the voice of the Church; I sleep
but my heart waketh. Cant. 5.2.
Even the Church her self that was waked already in part, in a great part: yet
she confessed that she slept. Her sleep was not so dead, and so fast as
formerly, yet she slept, and slumbred; I sleep but my heart waketh. It was not
a hearty, Mat. 25.
a dead sleep as the other was. So in Mat. 25. it is said of the wise virgins,
as well as of the foolish, they all slumbred and slept. The foolish slept; that
is, they were fast asleep: the wise virgins they slumbred. And so the Disciples
themselves, by the side of our Lord, even when a temptation was near, and the
tempter was upon them, they fell fast asleep, and were not able to watch with
Christ, no, not one hour, as Christ says.

Thus we see (brethren) that those also that are Regenerate, those that have
received the greatest measure of grace, and are in the highest form in grace
(for who was higher then Saint Paul) they themselves have need to be called out
of sleep; It is time for them to awake out of sleep, though they be waking
persons: even those that have received grace to believe, and obey, and be
watchful in some measure, even these must be called out of sleep.

Therefore in Revel. 3.2. Rev. 3.2.
It is the counsel that is given to the Church of Sardis, that had received
some grace, and was in some measure watchful: says the holy Ghost to that
Church; Be awake, and strengthen the things that are ready to die. He tells them
in the words before, Thou have a name to live, but art dead; that is, thou art
even almost dead, there is a little life of grace in thee, thou art almost
dead: for so it is explained in the words following: awake and strengthen the
things that are ready to die. Thus we see the difference between the calling of
the wicked, and the godly in their sleep. The one is called from sleep, to
stand up from the daad: the other to streng then the things that are ready to
die. And thus we see the persons who must wake.

In the next place, 4. Why the Apostle calls upon those that are asleep.
Why does the Apostle call upon sleepers to awake out of sleep? We see natural
men, are as dead men, in a dead sleep, he does but lose his labor, and spend
his breath, they cannot hear and understand. And the godly likewise, it is with
them as with a man in a sleep, they are drowsy, and do not much intend what is
spoken.

To this I answer briefly; Exhortations not in vain.
Exhortations in Scripture are never in vain, fall where they will.

This voice of exhortation, 1 To the godly.
if it come upon regenerate men that are awake in part, it is a means to awake
them more: it is a means to keep them awake, as it was a means to awake them at
the first.

If it fall upon wicked men that are in a dead sleep, 2 To the wicked.
it serves (if not to awake them, yet,) to convince them, to make them
inexcusable: for such a man might object, What is this to me? I am called on to
awake, I am in a dead sleep; can I hear if I be in a dead sleep? But know this,
thou that art in a dead sleep, that art not able to hear, thou art not able to
hear, because thou have cast thy self into a dead sleep. For this is the
difference: Suppose a man in the night season be in his first sleep, tell him a
message from God, what he would have him to do; he understands it not, he knows
it not: it is no sin of his, because he is a-sleep: because God has ordained
this sleep to be due to nature. But it is not so in the sleep of sin, God does
not cast a man into the sleep of sin; but man himself, and the devil: therefore
if thou have cast thy self into this sleep, that thou know not what God would
have done; it is thy sin, and shall be thy damnation: look to it. The
exhortations and precepts fall not in vain, as the rain returns not in vain,
either they awake a man more that was awake before; or they convince him that
is not awake: because he is fallen a sleep by his own sin, and the malice of
the devil. To come therefore to the Use, and Applicacion.

The point thus opened, The dead sleep of the world.
leads us to the consideration of that woeful sleep that oppresses the world.

And then to consider the sleep that oppresses the Church of God.

First, to consider the sleep of the wicked and unregenerate, those that are in
the dead sleep of sin. Even as the Prophet observed in his time, so now who
does not see all the world at rest and at peace? like Lachish that secure
people; a dead people, crying peace, peace, to themselves, and fearing nothing
till they be awaked; there is nothing but security. To show this in some
particular instances, what a number of persons be cast into the dead sleep of
sin.

First of all Idolaters, 1. Idolaters.
whereof there are a numerous generation every where; they are fast asleep in
the bed and bosom of that whore of Babylon, that has enchanted, and bewitched
them with the cup of her fornication. They have laid themselves down to take a
nap upon her lap, as Sampson did upon Dalilahs, till they lose their locks, and
their life as he did: and all the means that GOD has used a long time: all the
light of grace, the light of knowledge; all the ministry that has been so
powerful and so plentiful, cannot pull them out of her lap: but the Lord has
threatened, not only Jezahel that whore and strumpet, (by which he means, that
whore of Rome) but all those that commit fornication with her, Rev. 2.
to cast them into a bed of sorrow; he will cast them upon a bed of little
ease; and he will slay her children: The conclusion of this fearful sleep shall
be death. Even as Sisera when he slept, the nail was driven into his temples.

So likewise a generation of unclean adulterers, 2. Adulterers.
they are asleep upon the foul bed of voluptuousness, and uncleanness; blow a
trumpet in their ears, ring a peal of Ordnance against them, that is able to
make the stones quake, and the rocks to break asunder; tell them that
whoremongers and adulterers God will judge. Nay, let the world ring a peal of
infamy, and shame upon them, follow them with infamy, and reproaches for their
sin, yet all this awakes them not: they will scarce open their eyes, except it
be in the twilight, as Solomon says, a little to wait at their neighbors door
for his wife or his daughter; till the Lord also cast them upon the bed of
shame, and sorrow, and scorn, and curse, from which they shall never rise. It
is a lamentable thing that a man's conscience hearing this, should not apply
this to his heart, that he should dare to shut his eyes, and dare still to cast
himself on his bed, not thinking what will be the issue of it.

And so likewise, 3: Drunkards.
a monstrous generation of Drunkards, monsters in nature, for no unreasonable
creature so much extinguisheth the gifts of nature as they. These cast
themselves upon the bed of vomiting, and filth, that no covering is large
enough to hide their shame. Let a man speak to them, and advise and counsel
them; there is no hearing of him in their cups, as Abigail observed in her
husband Nabal. Nay, let God speak to them, and pinch them in their bodies, in
their strength, in their estates: Prove: 23.
let the Lord make them feel the smart; be their dangers never so near as
Solomon describes them notably in Prove. 23. a drunken man is as he that sleeps
on the top of a Mast, in the midst of the Sea, in most extreme peril, yet,
says he they have smitten me, but I felt it not; they have beaten me, but I
discerned it not; therefore when he wakes, he will follow his cups still.

The like we may say of a number of Sabbath Breakers, 4: Sabbathbreakers.
that cast themselves upon the bed of profaneness, and Atheism: sometimes for
form, and fashion, they will come to the Temple perhaps, and listen a little to
the word spoken: but presently you shall see and observe them, that they cast
themselves fast asleep, as Eutichus, when at midnight Paul was preaching, he
falls from the loft, and his life was gone from him. But there is this
difference, that was at midnight, these will do it at midday. So little have
men gained of instruction, and of the knowledge, of the fear of God; of all
that they have heard, that they can scarce keep their eyes, and their ears
open, a quarter of the exercise, to hear what God says to them for their own
good.

What shall I speak of those unjust, 5: Oppressors.
injurious, usurious persons, whose jaws are as knives to cut those that they
deal with? those that use injustice in their weights, in their wares, in their
lights; that use any manner of deceit for the defrauding of their brethren. And
these cast themselves upon the bed of their mischief, and solace themselves in
their present unjust gains, in getting unjust riches.

Let a man speak to these, and tell them their estate out of the Scriptures;
alas they hear not; deal with them, as we deal with men in a swoon; rub them,
and chafe them, and if that will not serve the turn, pinch them, prick them,
and wring them, and make them smart, if it be possible to make them feel: alas,
such a man dies in our hands, there is no life to be got in him. All that we
can get from such a wretch for our love to him, and our testimony of him, it is
some brush or blow. This senseless man lays about him, he knows not upon whom.

In one word, 6: Security.
when I consider the secure course of a multitude of men amongst whom we live:
it seems as if they had found that Cave of sleep which the Poets fain, and
speak of, a place very fit for these persons. A Cave of sleep, as they describe
it, where never Sun shines: a place far remote from all company: a place where
the houses have no doors for fear the hindges should wake them: a place where
they suffer no cocks, nor clocks, nor nothing that may hinder them from sleep.
And the Generation of men that I speak of, they seem to descend from Severats,
a kind of people that are loose, and lazy, and sleepy, and lascivious, that
will not endure any Clocks, or any artificers that use tools and hammers to
knock, that they should not trouble them.

But why do you speak these words they seem strange to us?

But yet truly, your selves shall say they be true in the Application.

For first, do we not see most men in general, (except some few whom the Lord
has taken into his own teaching,) that they cannot abide the place of the
Sunshine, the place where the Sun of the light of grace shines, they remove
themselves from it, they absent themselves upon any occasion, as if a man
should set himself to run from the light of the Sun.

So likewise do we not see that men cannot abide the society of godly men, of
religious men fearing God, that deal truly with them in exhortations, and
admonitions, and loving rebukes, etc. They will none of this. So do we not see
how ready, and willing natural men are to chase away, (if it were possible) all
the Lords Cocks, and all his servants, that they might not cry against their
sins, that they might not awaken them, nor come near them. They are set so fast
asleep, that they cannot abide any servant of God. And for the ministry of the
Law, which Jeremie calls, as a Hammer to break the hard heart, and to knock,
and rap the sleepy soul, it is an intolerable thing; they cannot endure this
hammer; they cannot abide these dogs that bark against their sins: whereas
dumb dogs that can neither bark, nor bite, those they can like well enough.
Somewhat they would have, they are content with a formal fashion: but these men
that speak against their sins, that discover their estate in sin; these they
cannot endure. Now tell me if these men live not in a carnal sleep? and are
found in the Cell, and Cave of darkness, wherein they desire to sleep for ever?

To come from these, The sleep of the Church.
in the second place let us consider, that not only these natural men, and
worldlings, are cast into a dead sleep; but would not a man marvel, that even
Christians should sometimes be cast a sleep? Would not a man wonder that the
Disciples of Christ that were so near to the side of their Master, that were
following their Masters exhortation in the former Precept that he taught them,
that were so near temptation, that the yoke was even upon their neks; would not
one think it a wonder, that they should not watch one hour with Christ?

Therefore Brethren, let us take notice of our security much more, that are
infinitely behind the Disciples in grace: let us rate our selves for the
heaviness, and dullness of our hearts.

But because we are Baptized, and hear Sermons, etc. we can make no man believe
that he is asleep.

Therefore let us try, and consider, whether those that hear the Word, and are
Professors of the life of grace; those that are already awakened, be not in
such a fearful slumber, as may well be called asleep.

First of all therefore, Signs of sleepy Christians.
this is one mark of a man that is asleep, he hears not, he understands not the
things that are spoken to him: 1: Carelessness.
so it is a mark of a sleepy heart and conscience, when a man hears not, nor
understands the word that he does hear: when he hears not that which is spoken.
It is one Judgment upon wicked men, the Book of God is clasped to them: such a
man reads and hears, and discerns not. If the Book be open, his heart is
clasped fast, he takes no good by it. And this is not the least part of the
misery upon the Saints, that this book is not so open to them, nor they do not
so understand it, nor discern that which is in it as they might.

We hear the word many of us many times, and we seem to receive it: but yet who
is he that may not find in himself, that the sleep and security of his mind and
soul, makes him not much to attend and regard it? that he is not careful and
industrious in the keeping and maintaining of that he hears, and the framing
himself according to it? And so it comes to pass that it is with Gods word that
we hear, as it is with Physic when it is given to a man that is dead, it works
not, or when he sleeps immediately upon it: so when we hear the word of God,
and fall into a sleep upon it: into the sleep and sluggishness of earthly
cares, the Word is unprofitable, if works not that effect that else it would.

Again, 2: When men intend nothing but sl^.
a man that sleeps, you shall know it by this, he does not mind his ordinary
business; he neither troubles his head, nor his hands with it; his business
sleeps with himself: he does nothing but sleep, while he is asleep he can do
nothing else. So hereby we may know our selves to be in a marvellons sleep of
sin, when we give not our serious thoughts to God, and to the practice of
piety, and godliness: it is an argument of sleep and slumber in us. The mind of
man should intend the principal thing for which God has put us in the world;
when we give not our thoughts to God, and mind not the things of Gods Kingdom,
it is a sign we are asleep. When we move not, nor stir not our hands and our
feet in the ways of Gods Commandments as we should, it proceeds from this
sleepiness and drowsiness. Whereas would we be wise for our selves, and awake
as we should, We should neither be idle, nor unfruitful in the work of the
Lord. We should ever be doing somewhat that might glorify God, and further our
own reckoning, But this is a sign of a sleepy person, in the main and
principal things, his heart is not upon them, his hands and feet move not in
the ways of God; he works not to the principal end for which he came into the
world.

Thirdly, 3 Wasting of time.
you shall know a sleepy man by this, he knows not of the passing of the time;
but so much time as he sleeps he wastes, it is as the time of death to him; for
what is sleep but the shadow of death. Even so it is with many of us, that
profess the teaching of Grace; Alas, how do we waste time insensibly? and pass
away the time: some deck away the time, some play away the time, days, and
weeks, and months together, as if time were not made for some other business:
as if we had received time for such employments as these, for our recreations,
and sports, and pleasures: and not rather that we might further our Repentance,
and our Reckoning, and help the servants of God, and get Oil in our Lamps, and
Faith in our Souls, and patience against the time of trouble, and get assurance
of a blessed inheritance, when we shall be turned out hence. Time is given us
for these ends; and yet we (silly men as we are) devise pastimes to our selves,
as if our life did not pass away, whereas Job says, it is as a Weavers
shuttle. Let us consider Brethren, time will pass that we may improve it, and
not waste our time.

Fourthly and lastly, 4 Decay of natural heat.
to conclude this Point, a man that is addicted immoderately to sleep, you
shall know it by this, it destroys natural heat, and that being destroyed by
immoderate sleep, as by a sudden mighty shower, this man grows pursie, and fat,
and lazy, he grows idle, and unfit for the exercises of manhood, or of his
Calling, and the like. So it is when a man is immoderately and excessively fast
asleep with the cares of this Life, the lusts of his heart, the pleasures of
this present world, or whatsoever it is that luls him, and rocks this Cradle;
when he is thus asleep, he grows fat and pursie, his natural heat is gone, he
falls from his first zeal, and affection, and desire, and practice.

Alas Brethren, we may speak to the shame and sorrow of many (I doubt that hear
me) that have exchanged their care of godliness; that have exchanged their
seeking of God in the means, with company, with good-fellowship, with
Drunkenness. And let the Lords Mariners come to them, and say, Up sleeper,
call upon thy God; why do thou not do thy first works? Why art thou lazy? he
grows angry as Jonas was, that thought he did well to be angry to the death.
This is the misery of many that live under the teaching of the Gospel; in the
light of the Gospel. This is another mark, and a sign of sleep, when we cannot
abide of any thing to be wakened.

To draw to a Conclusion: Exhortation to awake from sleep.
the last Use of this Point, it serves to rouse, and to raise us from this
sleep and security; this slumber that is in the best of us. And know my
Brethren, I speak not now to those that are out of the Church, and those that
are notoriously wicked, those that are scandalous, and rebellious to good
Counsel: but I speak to those that live in the bosom of the Church, those that
profess goodness and godliness; yea, those that are Disciples, and are near the
side of Christ: let this exhortation be to them to raise and rouse themselves
out of this sleep. It is time, says the Apostle, that we rise out of sleep.
The sum of this Exhortation I will propound, and then draw to a conclusion.

First consider how unprofitable a man, 1 It is unprofitable.
a Christian man is, when he is asleep: What is a man when he is asleep? but
that there is hope of awaking, and to come to the actions of life again, a man
that is asleep, he lives but the life of a Plant, there is nothing but being
and nourishment: a waking Beast is more profitable, but that (I say) there is
hope that afterward he will awake So when we sleep, and slumber, and tumble,
and toss our selves in dead security, how unprofitable are we to Gods glory,
and to our own selves? Saint Paul says, that Onesimus was unprofitable before
his conversion: but now, says he, he is profitable both to thee and me. A man
that is asleep, is unprofitable: and certainly he that is asleep in security
and sin, this man is most unprofitable to Gods glory, and to his own soul.

Secondly, 2 It unfits for duty.
consider when a man sleeps, and slumbers in sin, how unfit he is for any
Christian duty and exercise, for the main parts of Godliness and Christianity?
How unfit is a sleepy man for the actions of life, and of his calling? and how
unfit and unable, and indisposed is a man that sleeps in sin, to the actions of
spiritual life? There be some main parts and branches of our general Calling,
to which this sleep makes us unable.

The first of them is the exercise of godliness, 1 Exercise.
the main thing in the profession of a Christian to exercise himself in
godliness: how unfit is a sleepy Christian for this? who sees a man that is
asleep that works in his Calling that can do any good in it? So how can a
Christian exercise himself in the actions of his general Calling, when he
sleeps? in his praying, in his hearing, in his reading? if these duties be done
coldly, what are they worth? Actions that are done in a man's sleep, they come
to nothing: so a man that sleeps in sin, let him do never so many good actions,
they are of no value.

A second main branch of our Christian Calling, 2 Combat.
is the spiritual combat, to fight against our corruptions. Now alas how unfit
is a sleepy man, either to expect, or to repel an enemy? when he is asleep he
lies open to all disadvantage. Sisera himself, a strong and noble Captain, was
so weak, that a silly woman Jael show him when he was asleep: therefore we know
this part of our Christian calling cannot hold as long as we sleep in sin.

Thirdly, 3 To wait our Masters coming.
another part, and main branch of Christianity is, to expect our Masters
return, to wait for the coming of our Lord, that we may enjoy that sweet
blessedness that he has promised, and made us expect and wait for: now how
unfit is a sleepy man to wait for his Masters coming? to set things in order?
Thus we see in these particular main duties of Christianity they cannot be
performed by men that are asleep, therefore we had need to wake our selves: if
we will either honor God, or profit our selves, if we will be fit to do
service to God, or to his Church, we must keep our selves awake, especially in
the main duties of Christianity.

Thirdly, 3 Our enemy sleeps not.
consider while we sleep, and are secure, the enemy never sleeps, he is then
most watchful against us. We may sleep, and think we do well enough to take our
ease, but Satan sleeps not; we have a watchful enemy to deal with.

And then he has some advantage by our sleeping; Mat. 13.
in Mat. 13. in that Parable, The enemy sows tares, while men slept: he comes
into the field of the heart, where the word of God, the good seed is sown, and
what does he do there? he sows a crop of thorns, and they make the heart of a
Christian, like the field of Solomon's sluggard, Prove. 24. Prove. 24.
I passed by the field of the sluggard, and it was all thorns, etc. Thus is the
heart that is neglected of a man that is sleepy, and secure in sin. When do
robbers and thieves assault the house? In the dead time of the night, when they
may take men at advantage, in their first sleep, then they come and break into
the house. Shall thieves and burglaries watch at midnight to break the house,
and cut men's throats, and wilt not thou watch to save thy self?

Further consider, 4 Gods mercy sleeps not.
as the enemy never sleeps, so Gods mercy never sleeps, Gods mercy is ever
watching over us, to do us good; and it watches to keep us watchful: for what
should all the mercies of God do to us, but keep us watchful? Our God that we
serve is not as Baal, the God of Idolaters, perhaps he is asleep, and must be
awaked, or he is chasing his adversaries; No, no, the strength that keeps
Israel, slumbers not, nor sleeps. Therefore let not Israel slumber nor sleep:
because God watches over his children, let them watch with him, and keep
themselves near to him.

Fifthly, 5 Gods judgments sleep not.
if this will not move thee, then consider as Gods mercy sleeps not; so Gods
judgments sleep not. Tha^ man that sleeps in sin, let him know that Gods
judgments sleep not. As Balaam when he was out of the way, the Angel watches
him, and catches him in this corner, and in that corner; he could go into no
corner, but the Angel with his drawn sword was ready to meet him, and to slay
him. And the Apostle says of those that were led away by false teachers; Their
damnation sleeps not. Gods judgments are always waking: thou may sleep on
both sides in sin, but Gods justice sleeps not. And thou that art the Lords,
if thou sleep, know that correction, and chastisement sleeps not, and they
will awake thee, thou were better to awake by slighter means.

To conclude all, 6 We are all to meet death.
consider that all of us, there is no man upon the earth, but we are all going
to meet the mortal sleep of death; and if we shall when that meets us, have our
own consciences tell us, that we have also a spiritual sleep within us; that we
carry a spiritnal sleep to meet that mortal sleep, what a miserable, and
mournful state will that be? when the heart of man or woman that is coming to
die, shall say, and speak aloud, and witness against his Master, O, thou have
been a sluggish and sleepy Christian: thou have had good means but thou have
not kept thy watch, thou would sleep do what the exhortations of the Word
could, thou would be a drowsy Christian. Hence it comes to pass that so
many, when on their deathbed they come to grapple with that mortal sleep, and
then conscience porclaims against them, then they cry, Oh that I had but one
day, but one hour more, that I might waken, and strengthen the things that are
ready to die, and that it might be better with me then it is. But alas now
their short day is past, and one perpetual night to come, and now it is too
late, as it proves many times. Therefore let not time go, but know that that
mournful day must come upon us, we must meet that mortal sleep: Let us labor
to shake off spiritual sleep, drowsiness of spirit, and make our peace in the
mean time, that conscience may witness with us, and for us at the day of death,
and judgment. Let us labor to be watchful, and desire to be ready for the
Lord, and to have our accounts ready for him. This shall suffice for the words.

Now for our occasion: because this is my first occasion of this kind, I must
enter with a preface, and that is this: that as I have ever been in the course
of my ministry, so I shall be very sparing in the praise of the dead, because
I know that these exercises are appointed for the instructing of the living,
and the consolation of those that survive, and not for the praise, and
commemoration of the dead.

Besides, I know, and see by daily experience every where, how few there be
that in their life time deserve the praise of Religion in their death. For my
part I never did, nor never will gild a rotten post, or a mud wall, or give
false witness in praising; to give the praise of Religion to those that deserve
it not. I desire those of my congregation would make their own Funeral Sermons
while they be living, by their virtuous life, and conversation. As the Apostle
says, He has not praise, that is praised of meh: but he that is praised of
God.

THE RIGHTEOUS MAN'S RESTING PLACE; OR, AFENCE AGAINST UNNECESSARY FEARS
SERMON XXVII.
GENESIS 15.1. After these things, the word of the Lord came to Abraham, saying:
Fear not Abraham, I am thy shield, and they exceeding great reward.


THe tender mercy of God is seen in nothing more, than in afflicting his own
people, for he proportions his castisements, not to our deserts, but to our
streugth: and you shall ordinarily observe, where Almighty GOD lays a heavy
affliction, he gives an extraordinary assistance; when he leads any of his
people through a hot fire, he is with them in extraordinary manner.

This holy Saint ( Abraham) as he was the Father of the Faithful, so he was a
pattern to all the faithful in both these, both in his trials, and in Gods
assistance. There was never any man called to more trials than he: to leave his
Country, and his Kindred, and his Fathers house; and after to sacrifice his own
Son. And there was never any man more assisted from God; as we see in those
many apparitions that God vouchsafed him: Comforting him, sometimes in Dreams
and Visions. Sometimes he appeared to him in an admirable and most friendly
manner, talking with him, as a man does with his Friend. One of them are in
this Chapter; The Lord appeared to Abraham, and comforted him in the midst of
his trials and troubles.

Where you may see an admirable encouragement that God gives to his servant
Abraham; Parts of the Text.
You may note,

First, the encouragement it self; that is, not to fear.

Secondly, note the time, when God gave him this encouragement: when he had
encountered with those Kings immediately before, as we see in Chapter 14. And
when he was to encounter with many evils and troubles after, then the Lord
appeared to him.

Thirdly, note the manner, how God is pleased to reveal this comfort; that is,
by way of vision: God appeared by vision.

Fourthly, note the ground of this comfort, and incouragemeat that God gives
him, and that is taken from a twofold Argument.

First, what God was to him, in regard of any evils, that he did feel, or fear,
he was his shield to bear them off. Secondly, in regard of all the good things
that Abraham could lose in the world, an exceeding great reward: he would be to
him all in all. So you see this portion of Scripture affords plentiful matter
for instruction, and consolation. All that I will speak of at this time, I will
wind up in this proposition; that is, that, They that are in covenant with God,
Propos. They that are in covenant with God, may be without carnal fear.
and labor to keep his covenant (as faithful Abraham was, and did) they may be
a people without all carnal, and inordinate fear.

For Abraham felt much, and had just cause to expect more, but in the midst
of all, God appeared to him, and bid him he should not fear. And what was
spoken to Abraham, is spoken to us: for he was the Father of the faithful, and
they that are of the faith with Abraham, are blessed with him. So then the
blessing of Abraham, and all the encouragements that were given to him, they
belong not to him only, but to all that are the spiritual seed of Abraham, to
all the faithful: so that the Proposition is not limited to him, but extends
to all.

A Doctrine, if ever needful, it is now. We know how it is with all men that
are out of Covenant with God. Adam as soon as he had sinned, he runs from God,
he was afraid, and hid himself from the face of God, so every unregenerate man
is (except his conscience be ignorant, in a dead sleep, and cauterized:) for he
sees God on the one side a revenging Judge: and he knows himself on the other
side to be guilty, and therefore he cannot but with amazement and fear
continually tremble before God: and he desires if it were possible, that there
were no God at all, that he might never be called to account for his doings.
But now the child of God, a faithful Abraham that is in covenant with God, he
may in the midst of all evils lift up his head with joy and comfort, even
when wicked men are at their wits end, and know not whether to turn themselves.

It is (I say) a point needful to urge in these times, wherein we hear abroad
of wars, and rumors of wars, and so many distractions: and what they feel we
have cause to fear: but now it is seasonable at this time, when we see the King
of fears act his part before our eyes: he that the Philosophers call, the most
terrible of all terribles; that is, Death, that tends to the extirpation, and
abolition of nature, in regard of our being here. I say there cannor be a
better argument treated of, then somewhat that may fence us against the fear of
this evil.

Now for the opening of this point.

First, consider what fear is.

And then what fear a Christian should be freed from.

And then how it comes to pass that a Christian is exempted from all slavish,
and inordinate fear.

And then come to make some Use of it to the present occasion.

First, 1 What fear is.
that we may know the point the better, let us consider, what fear is in
general; And fear (beloved) is such An affection or passion of the soul that is
stirred up with a through apprehension of some future evil, that is very
difficult to be resisted by the party, or patient.

It is an affection, or passion of the soul: for it makes a real transmutation
in the man.

It is such an affection, as is stirred up with the apprehension of evil: for
evil is properly the object of fear: we do not primarily fear any thing that is
good, axcept the loss of it, and it is ill to lose any good thing.

Again, it is evil future: for if the evil be present, we grieve, and not fear.

And it is such an evil as is difficult, and hard to resist, an overcome with
patience: for if it be a small evil that is easily conquered, you contemn it,
you fear it not. You see then what fear is in general.

Is all fear prohibited?

Not the fear of God, etc. Kinds off fear.
Fear is often commanded in Scripture, know then there are diverse kinds of fear.

First, 1 Natural.
natural fear, and that is called natural either in regard of the material or
efficient cause.

When the party that does fear, is phlegmatic, or melancholy, and so is
naturally inclined to fear, this may be called a natural sear.

Or, in regard of the object, when there is somewhat in that which is
destructive to nature: and therefore the fear of death, it is natural to man,
and so whatsoever may prejudice nature.

Now this natural fear is an affection that Almighty God concreated with the
soul, it is naturally good, it is morally neither good nor evil, but according
as it is determined by circumstances.

Again, 2 Carnal fear.
there is a carnal evil fear, namely, when a man fears the evil of punishment,
more then the evil of sin; a corporal evil more then a spiritual: a temporal
more then an eternal. He is afraid of losing something he enjoyes, or of not
getting something he desires, etc. In either regards there may be a carnal
fear, as I shall explain it to you more anon: and this so far as it is carnal
is ever to be condemned.

Thirdly, 3 Servile fear.
there is a servile fear: and this is such a fear as looks at the punishment
only, and not at the sin: when a man is afraid of the judgments of GOD, and
never fears sin, that is the cause of it. And so withal, when this fear is only
servile, and is retained in the heart, that man desires still to sin; there is
a love of sin, a wishing that God would give him leave to sin, and let loose
the reins to him: that if it were possible there were no God, no Devil, no
Heaven, nor Hell, that he might sin were possible there were no God, no Devil,
no Heaven, nor hell, that he might sin freely. And if he abstain from sin at
any time, the cause is, that there is this punishment that is the consequent of
sin, and not out of love to God, or obedience to his commandments.

Now this servile fear, though in it self it be not savingly pleasing to God,
yet it is a thing that is good, as S. Austin observes; for that man that fears
servily, he does that which is good, though he does it not well: because that
is a thing that depends upon the disposition, and will of him that does the
thing, though the thing be good as far as it goes. Act 2.
It is good for the restraining of evil men from outrages in the world, and it
is a preparative in the way to conversion, as it is Act. 2.

Lastly, 4 Filial fear
there is a filial son-like fear, that arises out of the consideration of the
greatness, and especially of the goodness of God, whereby a man so hates
punishment, as he hates sin also the cause of it.

Now there are diverse degrees of filial fear.

One degree we call innitial fear in this World.

And a degree of perfection in the world to come.

In this world the fear we have, has one eye upon the punishment, and another
eye upon the commandment, or love of God. And here many make a doubt, whether
they are to do that which is good, having an eye to the recompense of reward,
or to abstain from evil out of the fear of punishment.

For answer briefly. And thing almighty God has made a motive to us, to
encourage us to do well, or to deter us from evil; we may make a motive to our
selves, and as long as we do so, we do well. It was so with Adam in Paradise,
this was propounded as a motive; In the day thou eatest thereof thou shall die.
Then to abstain from the forbidden fruit, partly out of fear of punishment, If
Adam did so, he did well. So, every one of us in regard of any evil, we may
have an eye to the punishment, that will be the consequent of the thing: for
Christ urges this to his own Disciples, Fear not him that can kill the body,
etc. And to do things merely without any respect to punishment at all; I know
no reason why any man should aspire to that perfection. For God while we are
here, has given us these motives, to stir us up to avoid evil; and it is well
if we can heartily and truly, out of love to God do it, by all the motives that
God has propounded.

To have a fear merely for punishment, and still to retain the love of sin, and
no respect or love to the commandment of God, this is not acceptable to God in
a saving manner: but to have an eye to God, and to abstain from sin, partly out
of love to God, and partly out of fear of punishment, this is acceptable to
God. For a man must love himself in subordination to the love of God; and
therefore he may look to the avoiding of evil, and to the getting of good
eternal to soul and body.

Now these fears, we may consider of them thus. The natural fear may be
accompanied with the Spirit, but it comes not from the Spirit, that must be
ordered by the word of God.

Secondly, carnal fear comes not from the spirit, nor is accompanied with it:
this is ever to be mortified, this we must take heed of; and this fear Abraham
is exhorted against here.

Thirdly, the fear that is servile, it comes from the spirit, but it is not
accompanied with the spirit. As the dawning of the day the Sun is the cause of
it, yet the Sun is not present when the day dawns, but some glimps goes before
him: this we must cherish, so as we bring it to filial fear, and then we deal
aright in that.

Lastly, for filial fear, we must cherish that at all times, we must labor to
get still a more reverent respect of the Majesty of God. So I have briefly
showed you what fear is.

And what fear we must labor to be freed from; all slavish and carnal fear, in
regard of the world, or any thing in the world; any ill that may befall us, or
any good that may be taken from us. Now you see that a Christian is such a man
as may live without all fear, that is carnal; Fear not them that can kill the
body. And in Isaiah 8.12. Isa: 8: 12.
Fear not their fear.

What is the ground of this?

I will tell you briefly; Reas. We are delivered from our enemies either, Luke
1.47.
Christ came into the world to deliver us from all our enemies that we might
serve him without fear, in holiness and righteousness, Luke 1.47. So then the
ground is this, that man that has no enemies; that man that cannot possibly be
molested with any evil, what need he fear? For there is no evil in the world
that can surprise a man that is in covenant with God, that labors to keep his
covenant, but by the power of the Spirit he may conquer it. For only evil, and
evil future is the object of fear. Now, if there be no evil that can befall a
child of God, but such as may be conquered, he should contemn it, and not fear
it. Now all the enemies of a Christian are either reconciled or conquered and
foiled, and what then need he fear them?

For God that is an enemy to every man naturally, 1 By reconciliation.
he is reconciled; Christ has made our peace with God, he has made our
atonement, we need not fear him slavishly: though we may, and must fear him
with a filial fear, we must not be afraid of him with horror, as to run from
him; but we must so love him, as to reverence before his footstool.

Again, in regard of the evils of the world, they are enemies too: but how?
Christ has been pleased to sweeten these to us: all things in the world (says
the Apostle, speaking of afflictions, Romans 8.) they work for good to them that
fear God. Shall a man be afraid of his own good? Nay, there is nothing in the
world that more works our good, then afflictions, and losses, and crosses: we
might spare any thing better then them: shall we be afraid of that that works
our good? Death it is reconciled, and made our friend: It was the greatest
enemy; Christ has pulled out the sting, and changed the nature of it; he has
made it the birthday of eternity, a sweet passage to a better life. Death
brings not evil to a man that is in covenant with God, but rather terminates
all evil, that he is molested with in the world. So then some enemies are
reconciled and made our friends, and these we have no reason to fear.

Again, 2 By conquest,
there are some that are irreconcilable, and they are conquered and overcome.
The Devil will never be friends with us, therefore Christ has spoiled
principalities and powers; and trampled Satan under-feet: and now if he walk
about, yet he is in his chain, he can bite, but he can hurt none but those that
willingly betray themselves into his hands.

For sin, it is of a condemning nature; but those that are in covenant with
God, and walk with him, it is removed as far from them as the East is from the
West, it is thrown into the bottomeless sea of Gods mercy, so that it shall
never anger God or hurt us any more then if we had not committed it; Who shall
lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect?

Nay more, God has bestowed his Spirit, whereby he has freed our hearts, and
whereby if a man labor to stir up the grace of God in him, and to walk
comfortably as he might in the presence of God, he might through the power of
God free his heart from these horrors and fears; for faith the Apostle, ye
have not received the Spirit of bondage to fear again: but ye have received the
Spirit of adoption, whereby we cry Abba Father. The Spirit of bondage casts
down the soul mith horror and fear, but we have the Spirit of God to assure us
that we have God for our Father reconciled in Christ, and so by consequent that
our sins are pardoned, that death is overcome, that Principalities and powers
are spoiled, and all things in the world, (though contrary in themselves yet)
they shall work for our good. So you see the ground of it, a Christian has no
enemies, some enemies are reconciled and others are trampled under foot that
they cannot hurt him. And we receive this freedom by the Spirit of God, that
if we would stir it up, and labor to walk as becomes Christians we may make
our lives very comfortable.

Briefly for Application.

Use 1. The power of grace must reflect on a man's self.
First, let us all take notice of the command that God gives to Abraham, of
this encouragement, and make use of it to our selves; and know that the power
of grace, and Religion must reflect upon a man's self. He (beloved) shall be
accounted the best Christian before God, and in the sight of judicious men,
whose Religion is practical, and reflects upon himself. Now there are many
busy ones in the world, that meddle with the conversations of others, and are
still talking, and complaining of things without themselves; but surely, he is
a happy man that reformes himself, and that sets in tune his own affections and
passions: as this in particular, to labor to be without slavish and inordinate
fear. Alas we may complain of many that find fault with many things, but if
they look within, there is a combustion of a great many unruly affections, and
passions, and these are the things we never complain of: we find not fault with
our selves as we should, we should take notice of the Law of God that it is
spiritual, to set in order our hearts and minds and souls, as well as our
tongues and hands. The law of man reaches but to the outward man, if a man
keep himself in order in regard of these, thought is free, and the Law does not
take hold of a man for his affections, but the Law of God does, therefore you
know that lusting after a moman, in Gods account is reputed adultery, the
hating of a man's brother in his heart is accounted manslaughter; he is
accounted a murderer that hates his brother: so he that is angry unadvisedly,
you know what he is in danger of: and that man is accounted guilty before God,
that cannot order his affections in regard of those unruly passions that are
within him. This I observe by the way. God in Scripture takes especial notice
of it; and I am persuaded it is an infallible distinguishing character between
an hypocrite and a sincere child of God: an hypocrite labors to wash the
outside, he has a demure countenance, clean hands, smooth language, etc. these
things are good, but he goes no further, he makes no conscience of secret
contemplative wickedness, of the lusts of his heart, and the thoughts of his
mind: these things he never enters into himself to mortify. But that man that
is conscionable, so walks with God; as that a wrie affection, an inward lust
after somewhat that is evil, troubles him, and humbles him before God: the
vanity of his thoughts in secret cause him to mourn before God: this is a sign
of a man that walks before God, and accounts God a Spirit that searches the
hearts and tries the rains: and therefore if ever we will approve our selves
to God, let our Religion be practical, and reflect upon our selves, and among
other things upon our inward man to set that in order.

Secondly, Use 2. Possible to live without fear.
by way of instruction, we see what happy men and women we might be if we were
not our own foes, if we could attain this pitch to live without fear that
nothing should trouble us, were it not a happy condition? surely it is a thing
feazable, some Saints have attained it in a great measure; you know David when
Ziglag was taken, his wives gone, all the spoil taken, and the people were
ready to stone him, what did poor David? he can encourage himself in the Lord
his God notwithstanding this. So it may be with a poor Christian, his friends
may forsake him; perhaps the world is gone, riches take to themselves wings, it
may be his body is crazy and all things are out of order, yet this man can
encourage himself in the Lord his God, he can say to himself fear not Says
David, though I walk in the valley of the shadow of death, Psalm 23
a doleful condition, yet I will fear none ill, Psalm. 23. And in another place,
though ten thousand should compass me in on every side I would lay me down and
rest. Though the Apostles were watched by soldiers, laid in the stocks, and
for ought they knew the next day they should be brought to execution, yet they
sing as merrily and sleep as heartily as if they had been on a Throne, and had
been Kings in a Palace. Thus a good conscience will make a Christian happy, if
he be not his own foe: but our hearts are entangled with the world and worldly
things, that for the most part we see not this privilege. But I leave that.

Next it may serve to reprehend and chide the most of us, Use 3. Reproof for
inordinate fear.
yea all, in that we are distracted with fears unnecessary, such as spend our
spirits, and consume our precious time, such things as make our lives
uncomfortable, and dishonor God, and our Religion and profession, and all to
no purpose.

Some things we fear a great while before we need, 1 We fear too soon.
perhaps that we need not fear at all. One faith Lord, what would become of me
if I should loose my wife? if I should loose my children? or loose my estate?
What would become of me if the times should be hard, if there should be a dear
year? I can scarce bring both ends together now.

Another faith, what shall I do when I am old, and cannot take pains for my
living? thus men fear a thousand inconveniences. What need we meet evils half
way? what need we create to our selves such troubles? sufficient for the day
are the troubles of it.

But in regard of carnal fear, 2 Too much.
all things make us afraid more then we need, and the fear of ill oft-times
perplexeth a man more then the ill it self that lights upon him. And men of a
melancholy disposition they frame to themselves such strange Chimera's,
Imaginations of things that perhaps shall never come to pass, and so trouble
themselves with a great deal of fear. Thou art afraid of such and such losses,
perhaps thou may die first, and such things perhaps shall never befall thee:
labor to prepare thy heart before hand, and then fear them not.

I will show you the inconveniences of this, 1 It brings a great deal of ill.
briefly.

First of all, these fears of losses and crosses, and the like, they often
bring a great deal of ill to men; nay it brings a great deal of ill as the
natural event and consequent of it, Isa. 66.4
partly by the judgment of God, Isa. 66.4. I will bring their fears upon them.
And that that wicked men fear shall come upon them. This is the way to bring
ill upon them, when men will needs be miserable is it not just with God they
should?

The Romans will come and take away our Empire, and so it was. Saul was afraid
that David should succeed him, and so he did. When men will not learn to live
by faith, it is just with God to bring that that they fear upon them, because
they dishonor him by unbelief.

In the second place it not only brings ill, 2 It unfits the heart to bear
evils.
but it makes the heart unfit for ill when it comes. In the fear of man their
is a snare: but in the confidence of the Lord, there is a sure reward. In the
fear of man there is a snare: what does fear do? It insnares a man, it binds a
man hand and foot, and lays him flat before his enemy when he comes, and then
his enemy tramples upon him. It so weakens the Spirits and disheartneth a man
before it comes, that when it comes he is no way able to bear it. For the fear
takes away all the joy and content that a man may take in the present good that
he enjoyes at the hand of God, that he cannot enjoy that, because he fears I
know not what ill that may come; and then when that ill comes he is not able to
bear it, his spirit is so weak.

I might show much hurt that this fear does both to the soul, and to the body
of man.

To the body of man, It hurts the body.
how does it weaken and contract the Spirits? and bring diseases? and some
times death it self?

Fear does much hurt to the soul, Naturally. Spiritually.
It does hurt to the soul.


Naturally, 1 Natural.
it weakens a man in regard of the operations of his sonl, that the body is not
a fit instrument for the soul to work by. It makes a man do diverse things
rashly and inconsiderately, and diverse things out of incogitancy, that he knows
not what he does; he is unfit for holy duties, unstable in all his ways.

As he is thus in regard of his place and calling, 2 Spiritually.
so in regard of the duties of Gods service, he cannot do these with a quiet
heart, with a peaceable spirit, while he is possessed with these fears.

You shall see almost all the sins in the world come from this fear. Fear the
ground of most sins.
What was the reason that Abraham and Sarah did equivocate? was it not fear (in
that particular) of men more then God? and so they put God upon a miracle to
preserve Sarahs chastity in the case of Abimeleck.

What was the reason that Aaron yielded to make an Idol for the people of
Israel, and so joined in Idolatry with them? he was afraid of the people that
they might do him some hurt, he durst not trust God with his preservation.

So Peter denied his Master out of fear; What is the reason that a Minister
does not sometimes reprove sin? that a Magistrate does not sometimes reform
that that is amiss? It is slavish fear, they will not trust God to maintain
them in his own cause. What is the reason that many servants lie, etc. it is
out of a slavish fear of their masters.

And so in regard of the things of the world, men are inordinately afraid that
they shall lose somewhat they possess, and therefore they take indirect
courses. Still this slavish fear, and horror, and distrust of God, it is
almost the cause of all sin, as we may observe in the world.

This being so prejudicial, Use 4. To sense our hearts against it.
in the last place, let us fence our hearts against this fear. By this means we
shall honor Religion, and make our lives comfortable, encourage other Saints
of God, and draw people to like Religion, when it yields such sweet contentment
to the souls of men.

For do but once again muster together all our enemies, No cause of fear.
and see if we have cause of fear.

For our spiritual enemies. 1 Of spiritual enemies.
Will any man fear a wounded foe? for the Lord God has wounded Satan, and
trampled him under our feet, and brought us as Joshua did his Captains, to set
our feet upon the neck of principalities, and powers, that through the mighty
power of God, we are more then conquerours; and shall we fear such an enemy as
this? Shall we fear those sins that we are humbled for, and which God has made
as if they had never been?

For the evils of the world: 2 Of worldly evils.
Why should we fear them? those corrections that are immediately from God, there
is no cause of fear in them. As thus: If God take away thy Wife, or thy Child,
or thy friend, or a part of thy substance, what cause of fear is there: Fear
not (faith God) I will chastise thee in measure, Ier. 46.28.
and will not make a full end of thee, (Jer. 46.28.) yet thou shall not be
altogether uncorrected.

And then remember, God proportions the correction to our strength, as a
Father, not as a Judge: he aims at our amendment, not at our ruin; If he take
away a friend, that we doted too much on: if we set our minds too much on the
world, and worldly things, God will deprive us of them, and so by this be all
in all to us, and draw us nearer to himself: have we cause of fear? to fear
that that comes from God?

No, Object.
will some say, if we fall into the hands of God there is mercy, but the
mercies of men are cruel. What if unreasonable men deal with us, have we not
reason to fear ill from them? they are outrageous and cruel, they bend their
malice against us; and if the enemy should come and make an in-road into our
country, and bring devastation, what should we do then?

I answer, Answ.
first in all things that fall from men, there is a provident hand of God:
therefore faith our Savior to his Apostles when he would encourage them, faith
he, there is a providence even concerning sparrows, there is none of them light
on the ground without the providence of God. So, when he would encourage his
Disciples against their adversaries, your very hairs are numbered. As if he had
said, Almighty God knows how many hairs every man has upon his head; he
numbers all our joints, he tells our steps: there is nothing befalls us, but
what the provident hand of God is in. And wicked men, the Devil and all his
instruments, God has them in a chain, they cannot go one step further then he
gives them leave.

Again, consider what God laid to Abraham here; I am thy shield. In regard of
all the evils that men attempt against us, whether in regard of scoffing, or
persecution, and open hostility, or whatsoever, God is our shield. And the
Psalmist calls him elsewhere, our strong tower. You know how it is, if men
encounter a strong Tower, the enemy must first batter the Tower about their
ears before they can hurt the men. If a man fight with an enemy, he must pierce
his shield before he can hurt the man. We may speak it with sacred reverence to
the Majesty of God, they must overcome God himself, before they can hurt his
people in doing any thing that shall prove in the event hurtful, as long as
they keep close to God.

The Lord intimated this to the people of Israel: The Egyptians marched, and
followed hard after them, to devour them with open mouth, God when he saw that,
he removes the pilsar of the Cloud, and set it between them: as if God should
have said to them, you deceive your selves, to think to conquer my people, you
must conquer me, before you conquer them. So God is our strong Tower, our
shield, and our deliverer, and he will find deliverance for his people some way
or other, from the evil, or in the evil, or out of it; as shall turn to our
exceeding advantage.

For, suppose the worst that can be supposed, that wicked men are let loose on
us, to do all that their malice can invent, they can but touch the body, the
shell of the soul, and let the prisoner out of doors. Upon this argument Christ
incourageth us; Fear not them that can kill the body, but fear him that can
kill both body and soul. As if he should say, Do the enemies threaten death,
they promise you life: the greatest advantage, and the happiest day that ever
can befall a man that is in covenant with God, is the day of death. Then all
they can do, is to kill the body for a while, which God will raise, maugre the
malice of the Devil, and all his instruments, and possess the soul of that
bliss that is prepared for it.

And in regard of Death, why should we fear that? if we be in covenant with
God, the nature of it is changed, the sting is out, and it is become beneficial.

But you know the Saints die still.

The red Sea swallowed up the Egyptians, Object.
but contrariwise to the Israelites, it was a wall of protection on the right
hand, Answ.
and on the left. That then that was the ruin of the Egyptians, it was the
protection of the Israelites.

So, it is in regard of death, that that is the entrance to the doleful misery
of evil men, that is the most blisseful and joyful day to a child of God that
can be, for then he rests from his labors, and his works follow him.

But notwithstanding all this, Quest.
it is hard to live without fear, I enjoy many things, I am afraid to lose
them, and my children are afraid, and loath to part with me, my heart wavers,
and is full of perplexity, how shall I be freed from this?

I know, fear is a natural thing deeply rooted in nature, think not to get the
conquest wholly, Answ. How to get the conquest of fear:
but by little and little.

Labor to get the Spirit of God that is supernatural, that must overcome this:
for the strongest resolution of the most resolved spirit in the world will not
overcome it, 1 Labor for the spirit:
it must be by a power that is stronger then our own, namely by the Spirit of
GOD, that we being assured by the Spirit, that God is our portion, and living
the life of faith, we may not fear any thing in regard of this world.

Secondly, 2 Keep covenant with God
labor to keep our covenant with God: there is an admonition, Numb. 14.9.
Only, (faith God) remember you do not rebel against God, and then fear not this
people: for God is with you, but he has for saken them. The righteous is bold
as a Lion, but the wicked fears, and oft-times where there is no fear.

What is the reason we are so faint-hearted? that we fear the loss of the
things of this world? because we are not assured that God is our portion: for
if a man were assured, that what he loses here, God would make up in regard of
his presence, that he would be All in all, instead of wife, and goods, and
children, and honors, etc. it is impossible that this man should fear the loss
of any thing: for he possesses all in God, and he cannot be lost.

In particular labor to strengthen faith, 3 Strengthen faith.
make God our strong Tower, and live by faith, he shall not be afraid of ill
tidings; why? his heart is fixed, trusting in the Lord, Psalm. 1.12. When men
make the things of this world their portion; when they make riches, and the
arm of flesh their portion, that they must rely upon; here is a reed that will
either break, or pierce a man's hand. No wonder that this man fears in all
occasions, and extremities, because he forsakes the Lord, and cleaves to the
creature. But that man that lives by faith is without fear; As Peter when he
began to sink, faith Christ, Why do thou fear? O thou of little faith. The
reason he did sink was fear, and why did he fear? because his faith failed him,
he did not lay hold upon God, and Christ.

Lastly, 4 To place our love aright.
let us remember to order our selves aright, in regard of our love, and this
will keep us from inordinate fear. For we must conceive that love is the
fountain of all other affections; we love things, and therefore we desire them,
if they be absent, and we rejoice in them if they be present, and we fear the
loss of them, to be abridged of them. Now let us order our love aright, in
regard of the things of this world, and we shall never fear much: August.
for it is the observation of S. Austin, we fear to lose somewhat that we have
attained, or not to enjoy somewhat that we desire; so it arises from love,
somewhat that we love and affect, we are afraid of the loss of it, and this is
the cause of fear. Now in regard of wealth, a man is afraid he shall not have
enough; he shall not have a competency; it is because he loves the things of
the world too much. A man is afraid of Death, why? because he loves his body
too much. A man is afraid he shall lose his children, or his Friends; what is
the reason? he loves them too much, too inordinatly. We should labor to love
them only in, and for God, and then we shall not be afraid of the loss of them,
but shall be content to be disposed in them, and in our selves, as God shall
see convenient in his heavenly wisdom.

A word for the occasion, and that I will dispatch in a word.

You know the occasion of our meeting at this time, and in this place: it is to
perform this last rite to the body of a Child that God has taken lately to his
mercy. You see how Almighty God is pleased to dispose it sometimes, even
ost-times from the Cradle to the Grave, out of the Swadling-bands to the
winding sheet: God will have it so sometimes: and when it is so, we must lay
our hands upon our mouths, and be content with the will of God.

For those that are Parents, let all learn this lesson, not to dote too much
upon their children; not to be enamoured too much upon such flowers: you know
how soon God takes them away, before you be aware. It is not their wit, or
their comeliness, or agility, and nimbleness, or healthy constitution, or any
thing that can award them from the stroke of death when God sends it: Therefore
learn to love them, in, and for God, for his sake, and you shall have no cause
to fear the loss of them, or grieve immoderately, when they are taken away;
why? because they are all alive still to God; and this tender Babe is not lost,
he is but sent before, he is alive still in the presence of God, the soul
stillives, and the body shall live, and is in Gods account, Christ has the
charge of it, and will raise it at the last day. That man can lose no friend,
that loves his friend, in, and for God: because they live with God, and he
shall enjoy them at the last day.

Again, as we may mourn for the loss of our friends and children (or else we
were without natural affection) so we must rejoice that they have gained: as we
have lost them, as they are taken from us; so they are taken from the evils of
the world, from a great deal of sin and misery; and what that might have been,
the Lord only knows; therefore we have cause to be thankful.

And (beloved) be thankful too, if God spare any; if he take one, he might have
taken all, and prepare for it too: be thankful for them that are lest.

And remember, labor betimes to instruct your children in the fear of God: let
it be the first thing we infuse into them, as soon as they be capable: namely,
the elements of Christian Religion, holy, and heavenly things, why? because
they may be taken away before we are aware. It may be we have but a little
time, but a few opportunities to do good to them. I tell you what our
conscience will tell us else, that we have not been so careful to instruct our
children, as they have been capable. And this will cut sore, and lie heavy on
our conscience: and therefore let us do it betimes. Not only to prevent the
Devil, and his temptations: but because you see how suddenly they may be taken
away from us in a moment.

So Children should be admonished to learn to know the Lord God in the days of
their youth: how soon that evil day may come we know not (that the wise man
speaks of) therefore betimes while ye have opportunity do it.

And for our own part, let us learn this;

First, when God crops such flowers that rise in the bud; when he takes away
such Children, be thankful to God that he has given us a longer time, that he
has enlarged our days, and prolonged our years; that he has given us such a
great deal of space, and opportunity, to glorify him here, to do him service
in the land of the living, to get evidence of our Calling and election, and to
get assurance of our peace with him. Let us praise God for the length of our
days, a blessing of God in it self, and a blessing to us if we improve it.

Again, every one remember, if Children do die, old men must die, any man may
die. For it Death strike such as do but begin to live, then we that have lived
long, it is time and reason to expect death, and not to fear it.

I speak not this, as if we should be slavishly afraid of death: while we are
so our lives are not comfortable. What is the reason that we fear it
inordinatly? because we love our lives, we love our bodies, and the world
inordinatly, and not in, and for God.

And then by the continual spectacles of mortality, Simile.
let us be acquainted with death. A vizour, and apparition to a Child, scares
him, and he runs from it at the first: but at last he grows thoroughly
acquainted with it, and fears it not: so it is in regard of death, many men
will not endure to hear of death, they will not endure to think of it, they
will not endure to hear a Funeral Sermon, or to come to the house of mourning,
to be put in mind of their latter end: Death is a strange vizour to these men
and women, they are afraid of it, and run from it, but if we did often think of
it, as often as we think of sin, in the cause of it. And when we feel sorrow,
think, here is a harbinger of death. I feel pain in me, ere long I must
surrender to the stroke of Death. And as often as we see spectacles of mortality,
to read a lecture of Death. And when we lay our selves down in our beds think
of Death. And upon all occasions come to the house of mourning, and think of
Death. If the Serpents sting be plucked out, a man may handle it, he is shie at
the first; but after, finding it cannot hurt him, he fears it not. So we have
cause to thank God for death, as well as for other things; thus far; because he
has changed the nature of it, and made it a sweet passage to another life. And
then though God take Children, or friends, or goods, or any thing in this
world, he will be our exceeding great reward, he will be All in all to us here,
and hereafter.

THE RIGHTEOUS JUDGE: OR THE RULE OF JUDGMENT.
SERMON XXVIII.
JAM. 2.12. So speak ye, and so do, as they that shall be judged by the Law of
Liberty.


Upon the like sad occasion, I have already handled something out of these
words.

The last thing that I came to was; That in the day of Judgment God will call
both the Doctr. Both words and actions shall be called to account.
words and actions of men to account.

He will bring their words and their actions to judgment, not only their
works, 2 Cor. 5.10. God will bring every work to judgment; and so Eccles. 12.
He will bring every thing to judgment, whether good or evil. But besides
that, he will bring every word to judgment too, even the very vain words of
men, of every idle word men shall give account, Matt. 12.36. And the very rash
and passionate speeches of men, what they speak in passion, and repent not of,
even those passionate speeches that they thought might have easily been passed
by, He that calls his Brother fool, Matthew. 5.22.
shall be in danger of hell fire, Matthew. 5.22. Then much more those evil
speeches against God, Jude 13.14.
Jude 13, 14. He shall come with thousands of his angels in judgment against
all those that have spoken against him. They have spoken against God, they have
reviled him, he shall judge them for all their evil, and cursed speakings
against him says the Apostle. They in fury and madness fell to evil and cursed
speaking and slighted God and despised him; therefore he shall come in great
glory with thousands of his Angels, to make it appear that he is more glorious
then they thought him to be, and he will now stand for the vindicating of his
honor, and the manifesting of his glory in such a terrible appearance at that
day. Against all those that speak evil, and against all their cursed speakings
against him says the Text, evil speaking against God, is cursed speaking.
Because it exposes a man to a curse, it leaves him under a curse that shall
appear at that day to be just against him; so we see God will bring both words
and works, to judgment at that day.

And the reasons are.

First, Reas. 1. The Law binds men in speeches.
because the Law of God binds men in their speeches as well as in their
actions. I say the Law that shall judge them does now bind them in their very
speeches as well as in their actions. You have two commandments expressly
taking notice of the words of men. The third commandment of the words of men
concerning God, he that takes the name of Godin vain, he will not hold him
guiltless. And then the ninth commandment of the words of men concerning men.
Thou shall not bear false witness against thy neighbor. Now God that has made
a Law to bind, and to order men in the matter of speech, certainly he will
judge men by that Law. You know that Kings and Princes, and Parliaments, and
Kingdoms, they make not Laws in vain, but they are the directions whereby the
judges proceed in their course of judgment upon malefactors. So I say Gods Law
it is not in vain, it is not a bare direction only to us in point of
obedience, but also the express rule whereby Christ himself will proceed in
matter of judgment.

Again secondly, Reas. 2. Words injure God and man.
there is great reason that words as well as actions should be brought to
judgment, because God and men are injured by words as well as by actions.

First concerning God, you read of some, Psalm. 73. that set their mouths
against God, and against heaven. Indeed they can do no more hurt to God then a
man that shoots an Arrow at the Sun can hurt the Sun by shooting at him; but in
their intention they set themselves against God in as much as their tongues are
set against him. Levit. 24.11.
And in Levit. 24.11. The word there translated to blaspheme, it is in the
original, that the man stabbed God, or did pierce God, he offered a kind of
violence to the holy name of God. Such sinful speeches as are forbidden in the
third Commandment, and do concern the name of God or any of his attributes or
ordinances, any thing that is spoken against them, or without due reverence and
respect to them, they are there said to be a stabbing of God, in the Hebrew
phrase, or a piercing of God, a wounding of God, doing some violence to God
himself. Now I say when such wrong and injury is done to God, shall not God
take a time to right himself of those that injure him?

Secondly, it is an injury done to men. You know it is a common thing in Law to
have actions against men for speeches, they make speeches actions; they make
them liable to the penalty and censure of the Law for speeches. So the Law of
God proceeds according to the very speeches of men, whereby they have
discouraged his servants in any kind at any time, in any duty of Religion, and
course of his worship, or whereby they have brought an ill report on it. As
those spies did upon the Land, therefore, they might not be suffered to go into
the Land: So I say when men bring an evil report upon the duties of godliness
they shut themselves out of the kingdom of God.

So likewise when men make that which is straight become crooked: It is said of
Simon Magus that he perverted the straight ways of God, Act. 8.
that is, he did as much as lay in him to make the straight ways of God to
seem crooked, that as a man that puts a stick in the water though it be
straight when it is put in, yet it seems crooked when it is in: So when a man
puts colors and shows upon good actions and courses, as if they were folly and
indiscretion, and unadvised, and hypocrisy, and vain, or whatsoever is ill,
this is to make the straight ways of God crooked; to make that that God
accounts straight to be crooked, this is a setting against God: therefore Peter
says to Simon Magus, pray if it be possible that the thought of thy heart may
be for given thee. So you see Saint Paul speaks to Elymas the sorcerer upon the
same ground, Act. 13. Thou child of the devil and enemy to all righteousness,
will thou not cease to pervert the right ways of God? Now I say, here are the
words and speeches that men speak against the ways of God: these are speeches
that argue men in a state, whereby they are liable and open to judgment, and
exposed to wrath, therefore we should take heed of such words.

The use may be to condemn those that make light account of words; Use. To
condemn those that make light account of words.
they think they may speak (it may be) in rashness, and hastiness, and they may
be excused for uttering them, it is there hastiness, and their passion, and it
was done unadvisedly, etc. I but the Law of God is transgressed, the Majesty of
God is offended, the anger of God is provoked. You know what old Eli said to
his Sons; My sons, if a man sin against a man, man may plead for him, but if he
offend against God, who shall plead for him? I say who shall take up the matter
with God in such a case as this, when the offense strikes against God, and his
ordinances, and his worship? Therefore take heed there is much evil, there is
life and death (as Solomon says) in the power of the tongue, that is, a man
may utterly destroy himself by the very words he speaks unadvisedly (as he
thinks, and will plead for himself) or passionately and rashly.

Again much more does it concern those that proceed to other kinds of
wickedness in the tongue, we instanced in some particular instances then, that
we cannot now stand on.

We came to direct men to carry themselves in their speech, as David, to set a
watch before the door of their lips, Pal. 39.
he prayed to God to do it; And Psalm. 39. I said that I will take heed to my
ways that I offend not in my tongue. Psalm 131.
And then he prays to the Lord, Psalm. 131. to keep a watch before the door of
his mouth. He knew well enough that there will be a time, when the words that
we think are slight and vain shall be brought to judgment, idle,
unprofitable, frothy talk, much more railing and reviling speeches, most of all
the highest blasphemies and execrations, these shall most certainly be brought
to a greater censure at the day of judgment. But I will not stand on that I
then handled.

Now there remains three things more.

The first is this, that in the day of judgment God will proceed according to
his Law: So speak and so do as those that shall be judged by the Law.

I say, Doctr. God will proceed in judgment according to his Law. Ioh. 12.48.
In the day of judgment God will proceed with men according to his Law.

He will proceed according to his word written: therefore labor that your
speeches and actions may be such that they may be agreeable to that, John
12.48. The word that I speak to you (says Christ) shall judge you at that day.
There is not a word that Christ speaks, but it shall judge: he speaks not in
vain, he is the judge that speaks. Now you know Christ speaks two ways.

Either in himself, Or, by his Ministers.

In himself, and so either that that he spoke when he was on earth in his own
person; then all the words that he spoke at that time are those words by which
he will judge men, as far as they concern morral actions, by those words he
will judge men at the great day: for he spoke nothing but what was according to
his Law.

Or else that which he spoke in his Apostles immediately, by a certain and
infallible work of the Spirit, directing them to such truth as that they could
not err in speaking: now in this Christ still spoke in them. The same way
Christ has in speaking to this day: therefore says he, he that hears you
hears me, and he that hears me hears him that sent me. That which he
spoke to them, he spoke in them concerning all the Ministers of the Gospel.
What we speak as Ministers, that is, as men that look to the direction of our
Lord; for we are but Ambassadors, and our words are so far of value and power
as they are the speeches of our Lord; and as we speak the word of him whose
Ambassadors we are. Now I say look what the Minister thus speaks as the
Ambassador of Christ to the people, that Christ will confirm at the day of
judgment. Now it will appear what we speak as Ambassadors, if we speak
nothing but what is agreeable to the text of Scripture rightly understood.
Therefore mark it, whatsoever sin we denounce the judgment of God against, and
urge Scripture for it, it is the very rule that Christ will observe in judging
men. Or else that speech could not stand, what ye lease on earth shall be
loosed in heaven, and what ye bind on earth shall be bound in heaven, We bind,
when by declaring of men's sins, we denounce the judgment of God against such
sins, and so pronounce men to stand under the wrath of God that remain in those
sins: says Christ, what you thus bind on earth shall be bound in heaven, that
is, Gods act shall ratify and confirm the same sentence in heaven which we
denounce here upon earth by virtue of this word.

So when we come to distressed souls, and declare to them that they stand
acquitted, and that by the Word of God; and so as Ministers of the Gospel by
virtue of the truth revealed to us, declare that they are freed from the bond
and guilt of their sins, upon those evidences of repentance that they manifest:
I say, it is ratified in heaven. Therefore you see there is no other way of
proceeding, but look as Christ's own words when he was upon the earth, so the
same that are as his own words, that is, those truths that are drawn from
Christ's truths have the same power upon the hearts and consciences of men now
to cammand them, and shall have after to judge them, as ever they had.

But here it may be objected: Object.
it should seem that all men shall not be judged by the Law, because there are
some men to whom the Law has never been published: for what shall we say to a
great part of the world, that have not yet received the Scriptures: we know
that the Scriptures have not been published to a great part of the world: at
this day there are many Heathens, many Pagans, that never had the Scriptures;
therefore how shall they be jndged by the Law? except you say, that only those
shall be judged by it, that have been under the preaching of the Gospel, and
have had the help of the Scriptures?

We answer, Answ. All men judged by the Law. The Law not alike expressed to all.
that all mankind, and every particular man is under the Law, only the Law is
not alike expressed to them, it is not revealed alike to all sorts. All have
the Law, and the Law written too: but either it is written in the hearts of
men, and so it is naturally in the hearts of all the Sons of men. Or else in
the Scrptures, and so it is more clearly and evidently manifested in the
Churches; but yet nevertheless in the hearts of men is the Law written, as much
as shall be sufficient to condemn them, as we see, Romans 2, 14.
Romans 2.14. says the Apostle, If the Gentiles which have not the Law, do by
nature the things contained in the Law, they having not the Law are a Law to
themselves, and show the effect of the Law written in their hearts, their
consciences accusing, or excusing them before God. The Gentiles that had not
the Law, that is, not the Law written in the Scriptures; yet nevertheless they
are a Law to themselves, that is, they have certain principles, certain rules
which remain in their natural consciences, whereby they either accuse or
excuse, as they do good or evil. And even these do show that they have a Law
that does bind them, and shall condemn them; because that when they would not
obey even that Law, that is, even those principles whereupon their consciences
wrought to accuse or excuse they were sinners against the Law. So that we see
no man shall be condemned at the day of judgment but by virtue of the Law: and
however all have not the Scripture, yet they have a natural conscience, and the
Law written there whereby it accuses, or excuses. Howsoever it be true that
things are not alike expressly manifested to other people and to us that have
the Scriptures, yet they have so much manifested to them as shall condemn them.

And the reasons of it are these why it must be so.

Reas. 1. The Law is Gods scepter that he ruls by.
First, because the Law of God is Gods Scepter, whereby he governs and rules
the Church, Psalm. 110.2. he shall bring the rod of thy power out of Sion. The
rod of thy power, that is, the Scepter of thy power: that Scepter whereby thou
do authoritatively and by power rule over the Churches: and what is this
Scepter? It is the Word, as we shall see, Isa. 2.3, 4. The Law shall come out
of Sion. So then the Scepter, the rod of the word that is brought out of Sion,
is the Law that comes out of Sion, the word of God, the Law of works and the
Law of faith; for both these come out of Sion, the Law of works as far as it is
the rule of life; and then the Law of Faith, both come in to rule the Church of
God. Yea, this is the rod of Christ's power, therefore he will manifest his
power, and make all men subject to it. What power? There is a power of Christ,
such a power whereby he manifests his own greatness and sovereignty over all
his creatures; over those creatures that have not sense, that have not reason;
that is not this Law. But this power here, the Scepter of his power is that
whereby he manifests his sovereignty, over reasonable creatures, Angels and
men; therefore if they will not obey him, yet it shall be a Scepter of Iron to
crush them in pieces. Therefore we see the very Angels themselves that would
not obey the directing commandment of God, the rule of life, in that
particular place wherein they were; they found it a Scepter to crush them down;
and they were cast out of their place for their sin. So likewise men; you see
what the Apostle Peter speaks of those that perished in the time of Noah,
because they would not receive the Word preached to them, but they would be
lawless and disobedient, or like men that would be under no Law, therefore they
felt the force of it in the effect of the Law, in the fruit and penalty of the
Law upon them. So I say Christ still rules by power in the Law; in so much as
that when the Law and command prevails not, then the punishment prevails; and
they that will not subject themselves to the Law, they shall be subdued under
the punishment of the Law: that is the first thing.

Again secondly, Reas. 2. Because the law is a rule.
it must be that Christ must proceed in judgment according to the Law; because
the Law is the rule. Now you know a rule is a note of distinction, it is that
that being straight and right in it self, which does distinguish and discover
things that are crooked. So the Law of Christ, it is a straight rule in it
self: therefore whatsoever is contrary to it, is crooked and perverse. And he
will declare a righteous proceeding contrary to the unrighteousness of men.
How? by that rule that discovers unrighteousness. How shall Christ appear to be
righteous in his Law, except he have a rule whereby unrighteousness shall be
discovered? Now that is discovered by the Law, the right rule, as it is, Psa.
19. The statutes of the Lord are right. Now rectum is index sua oblique, that
that not only declares its own excellency, but the unrighteousness, and
obliquity of the contrary; therefore Christ shall proceed by the Law, because
that shall most clear his proceedings. For all the world will grant that that
is a righteous rule; Therefore Micah 6.8. when the Prophet would deal with men
that were unrighteous, that would walk wilfully, and rebelliously against God,
and then serve him with outward performances, wherewith shall I come before the
Lord? and how before the high God? he has showed thee O man what is good, that
is, to do justly, and to walk humbly with thy God. So that now, look what rule
it is that shows what is good, that is the rule whereby the righteous Judge
will proceed in judgment: Now the Law shows what is good, he has showed in
his Law what is good: therefore he gives a brief sum of the Law there, to walk
humbly with God, that is the substance of the first Table of the Law: and to do
justice, that is the substance of the second Table of the Law; therefore says
he, he has showed thee what is good, this is a righteous rule, that discerns
between good and evil. Look what that is that in the directions of life
discerns between good and evil, that also in the proceeding of the Judge will
clear his justice, either in rewarding the good, or in punishing the evil:
therefore Christ must needs proceed according to his own Law in judgment. Thus
the point is opened.

Now a word or two for application.

Is it so that Christ will proceed in judgment by his own Law: then it serves
in the first place for the just reproof of those that neglect the Law, Use 1.
Reproof of those that neglect the law.
that neglect this direction that Christ gives them. Ala^ is it a small matter
thus to slight the Law of God? the Word of God? why, you shall be judged by
this: God shall judge the secrets of all men (says the Apostle) in that day
according to my Gospel, Romans 2.16. not only that look what he has spoken of
the judgment shall prove true; but that in the judgment there shall be a
proceeding proportionable and agreeable to what he has spoken in that word
that he calls his Gospel. Therefore take heed how you slight this Word, it is a
dangerous thing. Says Solomon, Pro 13.13. he that despises the cammandement
shall perish. He that despises the commandment, when God has revealed his
will in matter of duty, for the direction of life (for that he calls the
Commandment there) now if a man come to despise this, he shall certainly
perish says Solomon.

When does a man despise the commandment?

Quest. Answ. To despise Gods commandment, what?
You know to despise is when a man accounts a thing of no force; that (...),
despise not Prophesying. The word is, account it not a thing of nothing,
account it not a slight matter.

Now you know a man accounts a thing as a thing of nothing when he undervalues
it, when he gives it less acknowledgement then it is worthy of. As if a man
come to buy a Jewel or a Pearl in the Market, and offer a slight and small
matter for it, he had as good bid nothing, the undervaluing of a commodity, is
as the accounting of it worth nothing. In spiritual things when a man accounts
the Law of God below it self, that is, when he makes it not the chief direction
of his life, then he accounts it as a thing of nothing, and despises the Law.

For either the Law is somewhat by Gods appointment, or not at all; if it be
somewhat by Gods appointment, then it must have that place that God has
appointed it, or else we give it not any esteem according to the appointment of
God, but according to our own Fancy. I say if we give the Law esteem according
to Gods appointment, and by virtue of his Word, then we will give it the esteem
that God has put upon it, that is, that it shall rule us in all our actions;
and that it shall be our supreme rule and guide, that a man shall account
nothing else as the sufficient direction of his life but the Law. Now when men
come to this, that they will prefer their own opinions before the Law; when
they will prefer the opinion of other men before the Text of Scripture: when
they prefer the customs of the world, before the rule of the Word. This is now
to despise the Law, to make it as a thing of nothing. As you see it plain, it
is ordinary in Scripture thus to tax men; as when they would account the
traditions of men above the word; In vain they worship me, says God, they
become vanity themselves for accounting the Law vain. So when they preferred
the customs of their forefathers equal with the Law, they despised the Law:
this mixture, this joining of other things with it, it is that that the
Scripture calls the despising of the Law: Therefore it is a dangerous thing to
despise the Law, is it not dangerous to despise the Judge? the Law shall be
your Judge; that is, the rule whereby the Judge shall proceed.

You know it is the aggravation of the fault of a Malefactor, that he not only
transgresses and sins against the Laws of the Kingdom, but that he has
despised the Law: if he have been heard to speak any speeches to the contempt
of the Law, this is a great aggravation of his sin: how much more shall it be
in the day of the Lord? Men's Laws are imperfect, and therefore are revoked
many times, and repealed, and reversed, but this Law of God is a perfect Law,
and therefore it shall never be reversed, it shall never be revoked nor altered.
Now for a man to slight and neglect this in any point or degree it is a high
contempt against God himself. That as a man might say of the Jews; when Christ
came amongst them, he offered himself to be their King; but being they would
not take him for their King who (if they had taken him so) would have been
their Savior; therefore the time shall come that he will be their Judge and not
their Savior. So I say concerning the Law, the Law now published in the
preaching of the Word; those that will not now take it to be their counselor
shall find it then to be their condemner. If this be a harsh saying, as they
speak of the command of Christ, Joh. 6. This is a hard saying, who can bear it?
Matthew. 25.41.
If the Commandment of Christ concerning obedience seem harsh, then how harsh a
saying shall that be, depart ye cursed into everlasting fire? If it be so hard
a thing to stand to the command of the Law, how hard a thing will it be to
stand under the penalty and censure of the Law? Therefore I say, let men take
heed, they shall find that even that very faith commanded that they have
slighted, it shall prove heavy: they slighted it in obedience, it shall prove
heavy in the judgment and punishment.

Secondly, Use 2. Admonition to observe the Law: 1. For direction.
it may serve for admonition, and so to teach us how to carry our selves. If
the Law of God be the rule whereby he will judge us. First then look to the law
for direction, look to the precept, to the command of God for the directing of
our lives. I know not how, but I am sure, by the malice of Satan it is come
into the world, into the Church, that some men (upon pretense of giving the
doctrine of justification by grace, and by the merits of Christ the full virtue
of it) would put men off from all obedience, as if therefore we were not to be
under the direction of the Law, because we are freed from the Law by Christ.
They distinguish not between the penalty of the Law, and the command of the
Law: the same Christ that has freed us from the punishment of the Law (as many
as are in him by faith) has subjected us to the command of the Law, and that
in his own person; and not only so but in his own precept. Therefore he became
an expounder of the Law, Math. 5. and shows that the Law is spiritual, that it
is a thing that binds the conscience, and would have all men look to the
direction of the Law. And the Apostle Saint Paul, then whom no man ever spoke
more fully of justification by Faith, yet the same Apostle would not have the
Law as it is a direction of life abolished; but would have men so much the more
new, as by new arguments and encouragements they are set upon the duties of
obedience.

But I say, such is the malice of Satan as to draw men upon such grounds as
these are (not rightly understood by them) to I know not what course of
Libertinisme; and though they pretend a course of obedience to the Law, yet
they will not do it as to the Law. Whereas it is evident that the Law is
appointed as a curb to our corruption to cure and purge out that. And therefore
it is for men to be wiser then God, to ground their actions upon another
principle and ground, then God grounds them.

Indeed the servants of God do not the actions of obedience simply, because of
the Law written in the Scriptures, but they have the Law written in their
hearts too, so the Spirit of God is a Spirit that guides them according to the
Law, and disposes them to those actions that are suitable to the Law: yet he
never excludes, or puts them from the Law, from subjection to the Law in point
of obedience. I say therefore errors creep in amongst men to dream of a
liherty from obedience, when the Scripture speaks of a liberty from the Law but
in other senses, not in matter of duty.

Secondly, 2. For trial.
let men look to the Law for trial too, Gal. 6.3, 4. If a man think he is
something when he is nothing, he deceives himself: but let every man try
himself, and prove his own work. Let him prove his own work: by what shall he
prove it? Why, by the Law. By the Law here we mean the whole Word of God, the
Law of works and of Faith. I say let him prove his works by this Law, by the
written Word of God. Therefore if a man would now know how it shall go with him
at the day of judgment, let him begin to judge himself by this rule
beforehand, Let him reason thus, either I shall stand as condemned, or
acquitted: if as condemned it is by the Law, therefore (mark) so far as I go on
in any sin against any known truth of God, so far I stand in the estate of a
condemned person.

Therefore consider beloved, you do exceedingly wrong your selves, because you
do not look thus upon you actions; you look not upon them as upon things that
are transgressions against the Law that shall judge you: and that therefore if
the Law of God condemn such actions now, then thou stand as a condemned
person by virtue of that Law.

Alas, durst men go on without repentance in any course of sin, if they took
themselves as condemned men (in truth) by virtue of the Law? There is not any
word that thou speak, but as soon as it is spoken, thou stand in the
estate of a condemned man, and if thou interest not thy self in Christ, and
come not in, certainly the Law will pass upon it. Therefore seriously consider
of this, that there is no evil or particular sin that you go on in, but if the
Law condemn it, Christ will condemn it too at the day of judgment. Therefore
you must beforehand condemn your selves that you may not be condemned of the
Lord, 1 Cor. 11.32. Judge your selves, and you shall not be judged of the Lord,
But yet this remains a truth still, that he that does not condemn himself,
that does not take off his sins by unfeigned repentance, he stands a condemned
person before the Lord, because he stands condemned in the Law.

Therefore I beseech you beloved plead not any privilege in Christ; (I speak
this the rather because men use the Gospel to their own destruction, I say
plead not privilege by Christ) if you go on in the allowance of any sin; shall
we continue in sin that grace may abound? God forbid says the Apostle. So I
say when a man will come and plead, I believe, and I hope to be saved by Faith,
yet nevertheless it may be thou art a swearer, a vain spender of thy time, it
may be thou art a neglecter of the duties of the worship of God, and of thy
duties toward men, etc. thou art a man in some constant course, in some way of
sin or other: I say this shows thee to stand as a condemned man, and in the
state of a condemned man. I say not that such a man shall infallibly be damned,
because God may give him repentance that he may come out of the snare of the
devil; but we say he stands for the present in the state of a condemned person,
and he is condemned by the Law, and remains so till this be reversed by
repentance, till he have sued out this pardon by interresting himself in Christ.

Therefore consider this seriously, that there is not that sin in thought that
thou committest, not any act of sin whatsoever; but because of that sin thou
art condemned in Law, therefore thou stand in the state of a condemned
person for that sin: therefore there must be somewhat done now to take off
this. I say a man may have a pardon, and yet if he sue it not out it is of no
force, or use to him; so let no man talk he is a justified person by Christ,
but thou must sue out this pardon. Therefore we are taught, upon daily suing,
to renew our daily prayers for the pardon of sin. There must be a daily suing
out of the pardon, and that upon this ground: so there must be a daily
condemning of thy self, and of sin in thy self. Alas what shall become of a
world of men and women? (I speak not of those that are without, we leave them,
they are condemned in the sight of all the world, but) we speak of those that
are now in the Church; of those that go somewhat forward in the profession of
Religion, and hope and are persuaded that they are in a good case, and yet have
little care to set things right between God and themselves; but though such and
such actions be condemned by the Law, yet they hope that there is a general
mercy that will pardon it, though they never sue out their pardon. I say the
Law shall pass on thee till thou do that that concerns thee, to be released
from the rigor and sentence of the Law, he that confesses and forsakes his
sins shall find mercy, Prove. 28.13. This must be done, and so in other
particulars; the Scripture is large in these things, and somewhat must be done
by us to sue out this pardon: that though there be an act of pardon in God, a
free act, yet there must somewhat be done by us to sue out this pardon for our
selves, or else we stand in the state of condemned persons.

But these things I leave to your meditations, and so I fall upon the next
point, which I will briefly touch, and that is no more but thus: that since
there shall be a proceeding in the day of judgment by the Law, wherein men's
actions and words shall be brought to account; therefore, The consideration of
the day of judgment, Doctr. The consideration of the day of Judgment should
move to holiness.
should be an effectual insentive and provocation to stir men to a holy, and
conscionable walking in this life.

So speak and so do, as those that shall be judged by such a Law. Since the
Apostle makes this use of it to direct us both in our speeches, and actions, I
say we may learn hence, that the consideration of the judgment to come,
wherein Christ will proceed according to the Law, it should be an effectual
means to make us careful of holiness and new obedience, so to speak and so to
do as those whose words and actions must be brought to judgment. Now that this
is so, and is intended so, and has prevailed with the servants of God, I might
prove many ways. I will rank and order the proof under these heads.

First, I will show you how this has been a means to draw some to the ways,
and duties of obedience.

Secondly, how it has been the way to direct, and guide others in those
actions.

Thirdly, how it has confirmed and strengthened them in those actions: and by
this we shall see what it should be to us.

Frst, 1 It has drawn some to obedience.
we shall see how it has been a way to draw men to the actions of obedience.
How are men drawn to be obedient? First, they are drawn from their own sins,
from their own evil ways. Now the consideration of the judgment to come, it
has prevailed, and been used for this purpose, to draw men from their sins. As
we see in Eccles. Eccles. 11.9.
11. says Solomon to the young man; Rejoice now in thy youth; it is
Ironnically spoken, but now, says he, that for these things thou shall come to
judgment. That is, let this cool thy courage, and moderate thy excessive joy,
know that thou shall come to judgment. Act. 17.30. Now (says he) God calls
upon all men, every where to repent: because he has appointed a time in which
he will judge the world. He calls men to repentance by this argument, because
he will judge the world, and has appointed a time for it. You know repentance
it is nothing else but to forsake our former evils: Now he calls them to
repentance, because he will judge the world, and so calls as he draws men from
sin.

First, 1 To forsake the world.
he draws men from the world to God by this. You know that even worldly
affections hinder men from coming to the obedience of Christ: therefore, says
the Apostle, Phil. 3.7.
I account all as dung, etc. Philip. 3.7. Why? because he looked for a
Resurrection, his thoughts were upon that: and says he verse 20. our
conversation is in heaven, from whence we look for the Lord Jesus Christ.
Therefore we are drawn to this holy course of obedience, because we look for
Christ from heaven.

And then again in the disposing of men to new obedience: 2 Disposing the heart
to obedience.
there is not only a forsaking of sin, and the world, but besides that, there
is an inward qualifying of the heart: Now the heart is qualifyed; that is, it
is fitted by certain qualities to the service of God, Eccles. 12.10.
by the help of this consideration, as we see Eccles. 12.10. You see the sum of
all, fear God, and keep his Commandments: for God will bring every work to
judgment: Upon this ground he minds them to fear God, which is that quality
that disposes a man to keep his Commandments; he persuades them upon this
ground: because God will bring every work to judgment. Let us have grace in
our hearts to serve the Lord with reverenee and fear, Heb. 12.
Heb. 12. I say, this qualifies and disposes us to the service of God; and we
are fitted to seek, and to serve God with due reverence and fear, by the
consideration of the judgment to come, that he is a God that will judge the
world. Rev. 14^
So in Revel. 14. he would have the Nations to fear God, because he will come
to judge the world. So much for the first thing: you see the consideration of
the judgment to come, prepares men to holiness.

Secondly, 2 It quickens to actions of obedience.
besides that, it quickens them to all the actions of obedience, when they are
in it: when now a man is in a good course, and his heart is prepared to seek
God aright, yet nevertheless there are many temptations, and many corruptions,
that sometimes indispose, and unfit his heart again. Now then the consideration
of the judgment to come, it serves to revive and quicken the heart to these
actions, too.

Those of a man's particular Calling.

1 Of particular calling.
Those of his general Calling.

For his particular calling, the Apostle exhorts Timothy, and charged him,
before God and Christ, that shall judge the quick and the dead, to be faithful
in his ministry; He would have him faithful in his ministry upon this ground,
because Christ will come with his elect Angels, to judge the quick and the dead.

And so for our general Calling, 2 General calling.
Act. 24. I desire to keep a good conscience before God and men upon this
ground; because I believe the Resurrection, and so a judgment to come. So in 2
Pet. 3.11. Seeing all these things shall be dissolved, what manner of persons
ought we to be in all holy conversation and godliness? Why? all these things
shall be dissolved, therefore we had need to be other manner of persons then we
are, to be better kind of persons then we have been. Thus, I say, the servants
of God quicken themselves to more holiness, upon consideration of the judgment
to come.

Thirdly, 3 It confirms in obedience.
they have been confirmed, and strengthened upon this ground: for when the
heart of man is brought to this plight, that he must be ever cheerful, and
lively, and active in the service of God: yet there are many discouragements,
and temptations to draw him out of the way again; that it may be he may fall,
if he have not somewhat to support him, and hold him up: therefore the
consideration of the judgment to come, it has kept the hearts of Gods servants
in a good frame, when they have been in it. Says the Apostle, be constant, and
immovable, always abounding in the work of the Lord, for as much as ye know
that your labor is not in vain in the Lord, 1 Cor. 15. As if he had said, You
know this, that there will a time come when it will appear that you serve not
God in vain, therefore for the present be constant in the good you are in: Hold
fast that thou have till I come, says Christ to the Church of Philadelphia,
and let no man take thy crown, Rev. 3.21. Christ will come, and it is but
holding fast awhile, and then the Church shall have a crown; and the servants
of God shall have a crown of glory, an abundant recompense of all that they
have done in the service of God, therefore hold fast. Hereupon, Jam. 5. the
Apostle exhorts co patience, because they should meet with many persecutions,
and oppositions, be patient, for the coming of the Lord draws near. Bear the
injuries that you suffer for the present, and the indignities, and the unkind
usage of men, for the coming of the Lord draws near, when you shall have a
plentiful harvest: so he goes on illustrating this by a comparison taken from a
Husbandman that waits for a harvest, and then he shall have a plentiful crop,
and increase, for all his pains in Winter, and in seed time: so says he, the
Lord will come, and then you shall have a plentiful increase.

A word or two for the Use of this.

Use. Showing the cause of the worlds profaneness, and the Saints dejectedness.
Since this is the Use that the servants of God have made, and that we should
make of the Judgment to come, therefore to be more careful in the duties of
obedience, and holiness, so to speak, and so to do, as those that shall be
judged. It first shows the cause of the discouragements of Gods servants, and
the profaneness of the world, is, because they perfectly believe not the
judgment to come. The hearts of Gods servants would not droup so, they would
not be so faint, so dejected, and discouraged, if they believed that there were
such a judgment to come, wherein Christ will abundantly recompense all their
sorrows, and labors, wherein he will bring his reward with him plentifully.

Again, the wicked world would not be so profane as they are: drunkards, and
swearers, and Sabbath Breakers, and all sorts of wicked persons, they would not
give themselves so to sin as they do, if in truth, they did perfectly believe
there were a judgment to come; when all their words, and actions, their
company, their time, and every thing shall be brought to account. I say, the
cause of all prohaneness is this, here it begins; men believe not the judgment
to come. The Apostles were troubled with these kind of scoffers; Where is the
promise of his coming? So they hardened themselves upon the observation of the
continuance of the seasons upon the face of the earth in like manner from the
beginning. 2 Pet. 3.
Well, says the Apostle; God is not slack, as men count slackness, but is
patient, and forbearing, that men may repent; but at the last he will come, and
come with flaming sire. So, this is certain, whatsoever you think, and put the
evil day far off from you, yet there is a judgment coming, wherein all your
actions, and affections, and speeches, and your whole conversation shall be
scanned, and brought to the rules of this law that you have despised.

Therefore let men take heed, and know it is a device of Satan to harden their
hearts; either to think that the law is a dead letter, I mean in respect of the
directing use of it, that it is of no use to direct them; it is a device of
Satan to put them off: for they shall find that that law will judge them, that
now should direct them. And then again for men to think that there shall be no
Judgment, or not such proceedings according to the law: this is a trick of the
Devil, to keep men in profaneness, and hardness of heart.

Therefore secondly, Use. 2. To strengthen faith of the judgment.
if we would grow up in holiness in the fear of God: Let us prefect, and
strengthen our faith in assenting to this truth, that there is such a judgment
to come, wherein our words, and actions, and all shall be brought to account.
Therefore so speak, and so do, as those that shall be judged. Thou art now in
company, and thou speak amongst men; but thy words are with God, they are
written in thy conscience, as it is in Jeremy, upon the Table of thy heart,
there they are written: the words that thou have for gotten seven years ago,
it may be twenty years ago, and never tookest a course to get them blotted out
by repentance, there they are written, and these words shall be brought to
judgment, and so many actions as thou have neglected, therefore look to it.

First bewail those words and actions past, as things that else will come to
judgment, if thou judge not thy self beforehand.

And then again for the time to come, set on a resolution to walk daily, as one
that may die every day, and then shall be brought to judgment. Therefore judge
thy self daily, renew thy Covenant, settle thy peace on a right ground daily,
and perfect holiness in the fear of God daily, as one that expectest a
Judgment. Saint Jude condemns those that feasted without fear. They were at
their Tables, companying, and feasting, Jerome
as men without fear. S. Jerome speaks of himself, that whatsoever he was
doing, he had a fearful apprehension of the day of Judgment; Always, says he,
whether I eat or drink, or whatsoever I do, I here the Trumpet, and the voice
of the Archangel saying, Arise ye dead, and come to judgment. Well, I say, do
thou so, let this be thy serious thought, and do it not slightly; but think
that this may be thy last word, and thou must be brought to judgment for it:
this may be thy last opportunity, and thy last action, and thou must be brought
to judgment for that. Do things in this manner, as those that so speak and so
do, that they must be judged.

Would thou be content to have thy oaths brought before Christ in judgment?
if not, take heed of swearing: for it is judged already by the law: therefore
judge, and condemn thy sins in thy self, and forsake them, that thou may find
mercy. Would thou be found guilty of Sabbath-breaking at the day of
Judgment? if not repent of thy former guilt, and be more conscionable of
sanctifying the Sabbath after. And so I may say of every sin. Would thou be
found an Usurer? a Deceiver? unrighteous in any course? a scoffer? a profane
person? Would thou appear before Christ so in judgment? If not, repent of
thy guilt in this kind, that thy sins may be done away, when the time of
refreshing shall come from the presence of Christ. And in the mean time set thy
self in a contrary course to that thou have been: do as one that would have
Death find thee in a good course: for as death leaves thee, judgment shall find
thee. If Death find the in a state of repentance, in a course of reformation of
thy evil ways, judgment shall find thee so too. Let Death therefore find thee
as a man interest in Christ, as a man humbling thy soul, abhoring thy self for
thy former sins: let Death find thee as a man reforming all those evils that
are condemned in the Word, and in thy conscience. Now when I say, let Death
find the so, I mean, set about it presently: for how soon Death may set upon
thee thou know not, whether to night or no: and if this be not now done, if
thou set not about it now, it may be too late, thou shall have no more time,
therefore do that now, and go on constantly after, knowing that Death may find
thee every moment. Therefore it is that God keeps from us (upon purpose, as it
were) the certain knowledge of the time of Death, that we may be always
prepared for Death.

SINS STIPEND: AND GODS MUNIFICENCE.
SERMON XXIX.
ROMANS 6.23. For the wages of sin is death; but the gift of God is eternal life,
through Jesus Christ our Lord.


THe latter part of this Chapter, from the 12 Verse to the end, is spent in a
grave and powerful dehortation of the faithful, from security in sin: against
which the Apostle uses sundry arguments. That which he presses most is drawn
from the several ends to which sin and righteousness does lead men: The end of
sin is death, verse 21. therefore that is not to be served: The end of
righteonsness is life everlasting, verse 22. therefore that is to be embraced.
Because there is now difference in the manner of the proceeding of these two
ends, Death coming from sin as from the meritorious cause, but life from
Righteousness, another manner of way: therefore the Apostle adds this Epilogue
and Conclusion in the last Verse, plainly showing, and more clearly expressing
the manner of them both: For the wages (says he) of sin is death, but the gift
of God is eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord.

In which words we have a description of a twofold service.

Parts of the Text.
Of sin in the former clause.

And of God, or righteousness in the latter.

And how both these are rewarded.

The one with death; it pays us well.

And the other with life, which is bestowed by the free gift of God through
Christ. These are the two parts, the two general points that we are to consider.

First, the wages of sin is death, says the Apostle.

[ Of sin] That is, of the depravation, and corruption of our nature, and so
consequently of every sin, that being not only it self sin, but the matter, and
mother of all sin, when sin has conceived it brings forth death, when sin is
put forth, whereby he signifies the general depravation and corruption of our
nature, from whence all sin flows. So it is here.

[ The wages] The word in the original signifies properly victuals, Meaning of
the words.
because victuals was that that the Roman Emperors gave their soldiers as
wages, in recompense of their service: but thence the word extends to signify
any other wages or Salary whatsoever. The wages of sin [is death] by death here
is signified and meant, both temporal and eternal death, especially eternal
death; for it is opposed to eternal life in the next clause of the sentence,
therefore that is that that is principally meant, The wages of sin is death,
that is eternal death. This for the exposition of the terms.

The point to be observed from this first part of the Text is this; that, Death
is due to sin, as wages to one that earns it.

To such a one wages is due in strict justice, Doctr. Death due to sin as wages.
if a man have a hired servant, he may bestow a free gift on him if he will, if
he will not he may choose; but his stipend or his wages he must pay him unless
he will be unjust, for it is the price of his work, and so is due to him that
he cannot without injustice withold it. After such a manner is death due to
sin: the very demerit of the work of sin requires it, as being eraned. God is
as just in inflicting death upon sinners for their sins, as any man is in
paying his labourer or hired servant their wages: for this is the general plain
scope of the Apostles words here.

So in the beginning God appointed, Genesis 2.17. where he told Adam concerning
the forbidden fruit, in the day that thou eatest thereof thou shallt die the
death. As if he should have said, when thou sinnest, death must be thy wages.
The same is repeated, Ezck. 18.20. where it is said, the soul that sins
shall die, expressing the wages of sin, it is death, that is the recompense of
sin: if sin have his due then death must follow. So the Apostle had showed
before in this Epistle, Romans 5.12. that by one man sin entered into the world,
and death by sin, so death went over all men, for as much as all men had
sinned. All had sinned, therefore all are paid with death. And Saint James
shows the consequence and connection between these two, the work and the wages,
he tells us, Jam. 1.15. that when sin has conceived it brings forth death.
All these places are evidences that death by Gods ordinance, by his appointment
is the due of sin, as due to it, even as wages is to a hired servant or one
that has earned it.

What death is it that is due to sin?

Quest. Answ. What death due to sin:
Both temporal and eternal death. I say both deaths; concerning both which the
truth is to be cleared from some doubts. It was the Pelagians error to think
that man should have died a natural death, though he had never sinned: so they
thought that the natural, 1. Temporal.
temporal, bodily death, was not the wages of sin. Contrary to the Apostle in
the place I speak of, Romans 5. where he makes that death that goes over all men,
(which must needs be natural death) to enter by sin, sin brought in death; no
sin, no death at all.

But it may be objected, Object.
when God told Adam in the day that he eat the forbidden fruit he should die
the death, he meant not temporal death there, as the event shows, for such a
death was not inflicted upon Adam in the day that he sinned; for after he
sinned he lived still in the world naturally, he continued living many years
after.

I answer, Answ. How Adam died a natural death, as soon as he sinned.
not withstanding all this Adam may be said to die a natural death as soon as
he sinned, because by the guilt of his sin he then presently became subject to
it, and God straightway denounced upon him the sentence of death, therefore it
may be said, he straightway dyed. As a condemned person is called a dead man
though he be respited for a time.

Besides the Messengers and Sergeants of death presently took hold of him, and
arrested him for sin, as hunger and thirst, and cold, and diseases, daily
wasting of the natural moisture to the quenching of life. Indeed God suffered
him that the sentence was not presently executed, so to commend his own
patience, and to give to Adam occasion of salvation, the promise of Christ
being after made, and he called to repentance, by that means to attain a better
life by Christ, then he lost by sin.

It is objected again, Object.
Christ redeemed us from all sin, and all the punishment thereof; but he did
not redeem us from bodily death, from temporal death: for the faithful we see
die still even as others do: therefore it is concluded by some that temporal
death is not the wages of sin; for then when we were free from sin by Christ,
we should be freed from that.

Our answer to this is, Answ. How Christians freed from temporal death.
that Christ has freed all his elect, not only from eternal, but even from
temporal death, though not from both in the same manner.

From temporal death first, in hope of which the Apostle speaking, 1 Cor. 15.
says, The last enemy that shall be destroyed is death, meaning temporal death,
at last then it shall be destroyed, mortal shall put on immortality, as the
Apostle speaks: but in the mean time it is destroyed in hope, though it remain
indeed, and must be undergone, even of the faithful in this life.

Howbeit to them Christ has changed the nature of it, Christians undergo
temporal death, why.
and now they no longer undergo it as the wages of sin, but for other causes.
As first, the exercise of their graces, their faith, and hope, and patience,
and the rest: all these are exercised (as in other afflictions so even) in the
death of Gods Children.

Secondly, the total removal and riddance of the relics of sin from which
they are not freed in this life: but when they die, then all sin is taken away:
for as at the first sin brought death into the world, so to the faithful now
death carries it out again.

Thirdly their entrance into heaven, and to be at home with the Lord, from whom
we are absent as long as we are at home in these bodies.

Fourthly, Simile.
to prepare their bodies for renewing at the last day, that is done by death:
for as a decayed Image or statue must first be broken that it may be new cast,
so these bodies of ours must be broken by death, that they may be cast into a
new mould of immortality at the general resurrection. But here as some sin
remains, so death remains, though we be in Christ, yet we are still in that
estate wherein, it is appointed to all men once to die.

Thus even temporal death is left to the Children of God to be undergone,
before they come to heaven. It is left to them I say, and that justly in
respect of the remnants of sin, yet they undergo it no other way, but for their
own good and benefit. However temporal death in its own nature to an
unbeleever, is the wages of sin.

And as temporal, 2 Eternal death.
so eternal death: for when God told man that in the day he finned he should
die the death, he meant not only temporal but eternal death, he meant that
principally, as I showed before, in that the Apostle opposes it to eternal
life in the next clause of the sentence: Now Christ has freed all believers
actually from eternal death.

But how eternal death should be the wages of sin, may be doubted: because
between the work and the wages there must be some proportion, that seems not to
be between sin and eternal death: for sin is a finite, a temporal thing
committed in a short time, and that death is eternal. Now to punisha temporal
fault, with an eternal punishment, it seems that it is to make the punishment
to exceed the fault, and that is against justice.

But for an answer to this doubt, Answ.
we must know, that however sin considered in the act, Sin infinite three
ways. 1 In respect of the object.
and as it is a transcient action it is finite, yet in other respects it is
infinite, and that in a threefold consideration.

First, in respect of the object against whom it is committed: for being the
offense of an infinite Majesty, it deserves an infinite punishment: for we know
oftences are reckoned of for their greatness, according as the greatness of the
person is, against whom they are committed. If he that clips the Kings coin, or
deface the Kings Arms, or counterfeit the broad Seal of England, or the Princes
privy Seal, ought to die as a traitor, because this disgrace tends to the
person of the Prince, much more ought he that violates the law of God, die, the
first and second death too, because it tends to the defacing of the Image, and
the disgracing of the person of God himself, who is contemned and dishonored
in every sin.

Secondly, 2 The subject.
sin is infinite in respect of the subject wherein it is, the soul of man.
Seeing the soul is immortal, and of an everlasting substance, and that the
guilt of sin, and the blot together stain the soul, as a crimson, and skarlet
die upon wool: and can no more be severed from the soul then the spots from
the Leopard: it remains as the soul is eternal, and as that is everlasting, so
sin is infinite in durance, and continuance, and deserves an infinite wages,
and punishment, which is eternal death.

Thirdly, 3 The sinners desire.
it is infinite also in respect of the tie, between the desire, and endeavor
of an impenitent sinner: for his desire is to walk on still in sin, and except
God cut off the line of life, never to give over sinning: but he would run on
infinitely, committing sin, even with greediness. And it is reason that as God
accepts the will for the deed in godliness, so he should punish the will for
the deed in wickedness: if we sin according to our eternity in our will and
purpose to sin, God will punish us according to his eternity: it is just, that
they that would never be without sin (if they might have their own will) should
never be without punishment. Thus we see eternal death is the wages of sin,
though sin be committed in a moment, though it be a transcient action in it
self, yet it is just with God to give it the wages of eternal death. So you see
Death, both temporal and eternal is the wages of sin.

We come to the Use of the point, being thus declared.

First, Use 1. Original lust a sin.
it teaches us (contrary to the Doctrine of the Church of Rome) that original
lust, and concupiscence in the regenerate is a sin: for how else should God be
just in inflicting temporal death upon infants that are regenerate? actual sins
they have none; and if they have no original sin neither, then God should
inflict the wages of sin, where there were no sin, which connot be, because
there is no iniquity with God. Therefore certain it is, that after
regeneration, this original lust, though the guilt of it be taken away, Basile
yet as sin it remains, the substance of it still remains, and will as long as
we live in this world. For it is in us, as it is well compared, as the Ivy is
in the wall, which having taken root so twines, and incorporates it self, that
it can never be quite rooted out till the wall be taken down: so, till body and
soul be taken a sunder by death, there will be no total riddance of Original
corruption, and the depravation of our nature, it is still in us, as appears by
the temporal death, even of the best Saints, of those that are most sanctified
in this life, it shows there is remainders of corruption in them still: for if
there were not sin, there would not be the wages of sin: there would not be
death, if there were not sin.

Secondly, Use 2. Confuration, no sin in it self venial.
the Use of it is to take away a fond Popish distinction of mortal, and venial
sin: they teach some sins to be venial; that is, such sins as in their own
nature deserve not death, whereas the Apostle here speaking of all sin in
general, he says, the wages thereof is death. And how can it be otherwise when
all sin is the transgression of the Law, and Saint John defines it, and all
transgression of the Law deserves, 1 John 3.5.
and is worthy of the curse, which is both the first and second death, for
Cursed is every one that continues not in all things that are witten in the
book of the Law to do them. There is no sin then, but it is worthy of death,
therefore there is no such venial sin as they dream of.

We deny not, Sins mortal, and venial how.
but that some sins are venial, and some mortal in another sense, not in
respect of the nature of the sin, but of the estate of the person in whom the
sins are; so we say all the sins of the Elect are venial, because they either
are or shall be pardoned. And all the sins of reprobate persons are mortal,
because they shall never be pardoned. It is the mercy of God (and not from the
nature of the sins) that makes them venial: for otherwise every sin in it self
considered (be it never so small) is mortal: for if it work according to its
own nature, it works death of body and soul.

It is a foolish exception that they bring against it, that thus we make all
sins equal; and that we bring in with the Stoics, a parity of sin, because we
say all are mortal. It is a foolish cavil: for it is as if one should argue,
because the Mouse, and the Elephant, are both living creatures, that therefore
they are both of equal bigness: Though all sins be mortal, they are not all
equal, some are greater, and some are lesser, according as they are extended,
and aggravated by time, and place, and person, and sundry other circumstances.

Suppose one should be drowned in the midst of the Sea, and another in a
shallow pond: in respect of death all were one, both are drowned: but yet there
is great difference in respect of the place, for depth, and danger. So there is
great difference in this, though the least sin in its own nature be mortal, as
the Apostle says here, the wages of it is death.

Thirdly, Use. 3. In spectacles of death to see the heinousness of sin.
seeing the wages of sin is death, it should teach us what Use to make of
death, being presented before our eyes at such times as this: hereby we should
call to remembrance the grievousness of sin that brought it into the world: by
the woeful wages we should be put in mind of the unhappy service. Had there not
been sin, there would have been no death: upon the death of the soul came in
the death of the body: first the soul died in forsaking God, and then the body
died being forsaken of the soul: the soul forsook God willingly; therefore it
was compelled unwillingly to forsake the body. This is the manner how death
came into the world by sin, therefore death must put out sin.

That householder, when he saw tares grow among his wheat, he said to his
servants, the envious man has done this: So whenever thou feast Death seize
upon any, say to thy self, sin has done this: this is the wages of sin: and if
man had never sinned; we should have seen no such thing.

Fourthly, Use. 4. To deter us from sin.
this must deter us from sin, since it gives such wages. Indeed the manner of
sin is for the most part (if not always) to promise better, but it is
deceitful, and this is the wages it pays thee. The wages of sin is death. The
word (...), translated wages, some take it quasi (...), of the evening, because
wages are paid in the evening. So the morning of sin may be fair, but the
evening will be foul when the wages come. At the first sin may be pleasing, but
remember the end, the end of it is death. Like to a fresh River that runs into
the salt Sea, the stream is sweet, Similles.
but it ends in brackishness and bitterness. Or like to Nebuchadnezzars Image,
the head was gold, but the feet were of clay. Or sin may be compared to that
Feast that Absalom made for Amnon; there was great cheer and jollity, and mirth
for a while, but all closed in Death, in bloodshed, and murder. It deals with
men, as Laban dealt with Jacob; he entertains him at the first with great
complements, but used him hardly at the last. Or as the Governor of the feast
said, Joh. 2. Joh. 2.
All men in the beginning set forth good wine, and then that which is worse: so
sin gives the best at the first, but the worst it reserves for the last.

This should keep us from every sin, though it seems never so pleasing, and
never so sweet to us, remembering that the worst is still to come. We read that
when the people saw that Saul forbad them to eat, 1 Samuel 14.
though they were exceeding hungry, yet not one of them durst touch the honey
for the curse, though they saw it: so the pleasures of sin may drop as honey
before our eyes, but we must not adventure to taste of them, because they are
cursed fruit, and because of the wages that will follow. Never take sin by the
head, by the beginnings, as the greatest part do; but take it as Jacob took
Esau, by the heel; look to the extreme part of it; Consider thy end, and thou
shall not do amiss.

Jezabel might have allured a man, when having painted her face she looked out
of the window, but to look upon her after she was cast out, eaten of dogs, and
nothing remaining but her extreme parts, her scull, and the palms of her hands,
and her feet, it could not be but with horror: so sin may allure a man,
looking only on the painted face, in the beginning, but if a man cast his eye
upon the extreme parts, it would then affright, and deter him, for the wages,
the end of it is death. What a world of people run blindly, and desperately on,
they turn to the race of sin, as the horse to the battle without fear, as if
the Psalmists Tremble, and sin not, were rather. sin and tremble not. Whereas
we have great cause every one, to tremble at the least motion of sin in our
selves, to which so dreadful, and woeful wages is due.

Lastly, Use. 5. To be humble and thankful.
for this point, so many of us as have repented, and have already left the
service of sin, we must hence learn, as to be humbled in our selves,
considering what danger and misery we have escaped; so to be more thankful to
Christ, that has freed us from so wretched wages due to our sins, and that by
taking the whole punishment upon himself. For we must know (beloved) that the
best of us, by nature are children of wrath, as well as others: the stipend
that we have earned is eternal death, and surely it has been paid to us,
nothing could have kept it from us, but only the satisfaction of Christ, coming
between Gods justice and us. Think we then if we can, what misery it is that we
have escaped (as many of us, I mean as be in the state of grace) we have
escaped death, the hurt of temporal death, we have escaped eternal death. What
is that? a separation from the blessed presence, and glory of God: destruction
of body and soul for ever, unutterable torments, company with the devil and his
angels, and the rout of reprobates: darkness, blacker, and thicker then that of
Egypt, Weeping and wayling, and gnashing of teeth in the infernal lake; that
worm that never dies, and the fire that never goes out. This is the wages of
all sin: and that it is not rendered to all sin, and to all sinners, the cause
is only this, that the payment has been already exacted of Christ in the
behalf of all true believers; therefore in their own persons they are
discharged: how infinitely are we bound in thankfulness to him? and how careful
should we be to walk worthy of it? resolving never to return to the service of
sin again, but to make it our whole study, that we may please and honor such a
Redeemer, that has redeemed us from such misery as this; that we may please
him: for we had deserved eternal death, as well as others, and he has not only
freed us from that, that we had most worthily deserved, but most freely also
bestowed that upon us, that we could never deserve; for so it follows in the
next point. The gift of God is eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord.

That is the second thing to be considered, the reward of the service of God.
You have heard of the reward, the wages of sin. Now the reward of the service
of God is eternal life, Life twofold. 1 Natural. 2 Spiritual.
it is called life. There is a twofold life belongs to men.

The one is natural, and is common to all, good and bad in this world.

The other spiritual, proper to the faithful, begun by the union of God, and
the soul, and maintained by the bond of the spirit: and this life has three
degrees.

The first is in this life unto death; 1 In this life.
and it begins when we begin to believe and repent, and come to a saving
knowledge of God, and of his Son Jesus Christ: as it is said, This is eternal
life to know thee to be the very God, and whom thou have sent Jesus Christ, Job
17.5.2 In deathy
Joh. 17.3.

The second degree is from our death to our resurrection: for in that time our
souls being freed from our bodies, are withal free from all sin, original, and
actual.

Thirdly, 3 Afterth e Resurrection.
after the Resurrection, when body and soul shall be reunited, we shall have
immediate communion and fellowship with God, and so enjoy a more perfect and
blessed life then ever (...) could here. And this spiritual life, with all the
three degrees of it, is the life here spoken of, especially the last degree,
the perfection of it in heaven.

It is called eternal life, A thing eternal three ways.
because it shall never end; For a thing is said to be eternal three ways.

First, which has neither beginning, nor end, so God alone is eternal, and
none but he.

Secondly, which has no beginning, and yet shall have an end: so Gods decree
is eternal, for it never had a beginning: yet when all things decreed are
fulfilled, it shall have an end.

Thirdly, which has a beginning, but never shall have end, and so the life of
Gods Saints had a beginning, as all created things have, but it shall never
have an end; and this eternal life, it is called here. The gift of God through
Jesus Christ our Lord.

Because we cannot deserve it, but it is given, and bestowed on us freely for
Christ. So then the point of observation from the latter part of the words is
this; that, Our salvation it is the free gift of God, given us only for the
merits of Christ. Doct. Salvation the feee gift of God.


For observe I beseech you the Apostles words, when he had said, The wages of
sin is death, he does not add, and say, but the wages of righteousness is
eternal life, but he calls that the gift of God. To make us understand says
Damascene that God brings us to eternal life merely for his own mercy, not for
our merits, or else surely the Apostle would have made the latter part of the
sentence, answerable to the former.

But here perhaps some may ask why eternal life should not be the wages of
righteousness, Quest.
as well as death the wages of sin?

I answer, Answ.
because there is not the same reason between sin and righteousness.

For first, sin is our own, it merits it, but righteousness is none of our own,
it is the holy Ghosts and it is due to God.

Then again sin is perfectly evil, and so it deserves death, but our
righteousness inherent is not perfectly good, it is imperfect in this life, and
nothing that is imperfectly good can merit (as wages) eternal life: therefore
the Apostle makes such a manifest difference between them, he calls death, the
wages of sin, but eternal life, the gift of God, it is the free gift of God
through Christ. Indeed eternal life sometimes, many times in Scripture is
called a reward. But there is a reward of mercy as well as of justice. Nay God
is said sometimes to reward his children in justice. How is that? Though the
reward come originally from mercy, yet accidentally it comes to be justice,
thus, because God has tied himself by promise to reward, now promise is debt
from a just man. Austin.
Thus the Lord may be accounted a debtor. How? says Saint Austin, as a
promiser, if he had not promised eternal life, otherwise he ows us nothing at
all, much less eternal life which is so great a thing.

Yet it may be doubted, Quest.
how eternal life is the free gift of God, seeing it is given for the merits of
Christ, as it is here expressed the gift of God through Jesus Christ our Lord,
that is, for the merits of Christ; now a man that gives a thing upon merit, he
gives it not freely.

I answer it is free in respect of us; Answ.
whatsoever Christ has done we did not merit it.

If it be replied, Christ's merits are made ours, and we merit in him, and so it
cannot be free. I answer, this reason were of force if we our selves could
procure the merits of Christ for us, Joh. 3.
but that we could not do, but that also was of free gift, Ioh. 3. God so loved
the world that he gave his only begotten Son, that he that believes in him
should not perish: he gave him freely, of free gift; so that though eternal
life be due to us by the merits of Christ, yet it is the free gift of God. I
will stand no longer in proving the truth of the Doctrine. I come to the
application and use, to conclude with the time.

First, Use. 1. Confutation of merit. Romans 8.
it serves to confute our adversaries of the Church of Rome in the point of
merit. They look for heaven and eternal life as wages, we see the Apostle
teaches us otherwise, that eternal life is not given in that manner, but
another manner of way; It is not given as wages, it is the free gift of God.
And in Romans 8. he says, that the sufferings of this life is not worthy of the
glory that shall be revealed: all our sufferings, all our works they are not
worthy of the glory of God, we connot properly merit them. This was the
constant Doctrine of the primitive Church: that a good life when we are
justified, and an eternal life when we are glorified; they all grant that all
that is good in us is the gift of God; that eternal life is not a retribution
to our works but the free gift of God. When God crowns our merits, he crowns
nothing else but his own free gift: these and many other sentences we find
among the ancient Fathers, plainly convincing our adversaries, that in this
point they swerve not only from Scripture, but from all sound antiquity.

Secondly, Use 2. To humble us.
then to come to our selves, this should humble us in respect of our own
deservings; do all the good thou can, take heed it do not puff thee up, think
not to merit heaven, alas thou can not do it: for what is it to the Almighty,
(as it is said in Job) that thou art righteous? Thy well doing extends not to
him, thou can do him no good, therefore thou can look for nothing at his
hands since thou can do him no good: but all that thou do in his service,
it is not for his but for thy good, yet he commands thee, and thou art bound to
do it, but all thou can do is no more then thou art bound to do. Therefore
when thou have done all that thou can, acknowledge thy self to bean
unprofitable servant, and thou have done no more then thy duty. If thou have
many good works, yet thou have more sin; and the least sin of thine in the
rigor of justice, will deprive thee of thy interest in God. Therefore thy
appeal must be to the throne of grace, and thy only plea must be that of the
Publican, every one of us, God be merciful to me a sinner; when we have done
all we can, it must be mercy, and not any merit of ours that must bring us to
heaven.

Thirdly, Use 3. Comfort.
here is comfort for the children of God, in that this inestimable treasure of
eternal life is not committed to our keeping, but God has it in his keeping.
It is his gist, it is not committed to the rotten box of our merits, then we
could have no certainty of it, the devil would easily pick the Lock; yea
without picking he would shake in pieces the crazy joints of the best work we
do; he would steal it from us, and take it away, and deprive us of this
excellent benefit: but the Lord has dealt better for us, he has kept it in
his own hands, he has laid it up in the Cabinet of his own mercy and love that
never fails: for with everlasting mercy he has compassion on us, Isa. 54. he
loves us with an everlasting love. It is his mercy that we are not consumed,
because his compassions fail not: and whom he loves he loves to the end. It is
laid up in the mercy of God, he will have it his gift; lest we should keep it,
and it should be lost, he has reserved it in his own hands. Therefore in
temptations when they drive us to doubt of our attaining of eternal life, let
us cast our eye upon the keeper of it, it is the Lord, he is wary to discern,
and faithful to bestow it: therefore let us comfort our selves and say every
one of us as Saint Paul, 2 Timothy 1.12. I know whom I have trusted, and I am
persuaded that he is able to keep that which I have committed to him against
that day.

Lastly, Use 4. Thankfulness.
seeing eternal life is the free gift of God, it must make us thankful to him
for it; which we should never do, if we deserved it; does a master thank his
servant for doing his duty? So, if we did think heaven were our due, we should
never be thankful for it. Pride is a great enemy to thankfulness; therefore the
way is to humble our selves, and to consider that we deserve no good thing at
Gods hands, then we will take this great benefit at Gods hands most thankfully.
Especially when we consider, it is all that God requires of us, as he says,
Psalm. 50. Call upon me in the day of trouble, I will hear thee and deliver
thee, and what shall thou do? Thou shall glorify me. Glorifying God, and being
thankful to him, is all the tribute we are to pay to this our royal Lord; and
shall we deny him this? It is a small benefit that is not worth thanks; We set
eternal life at too low a rate, if we forget to be thankful. There was never a
precious Jewel afforded so cheap as eternal life for our thankfulness.

If we did know what it were to want it, we would give ten thousand worlds
rather then be without it. Therefore as Naamans servants said to him concerning
his washing in Jordan, if the Prophet had commanded thee a greater thing,
would thou not have done it? So if God had commanded us a great matter for
eternal life we should have done it; how much more, when he says take it, and
be thankful; be but thankful.

Thus I have described to you this twofold service, the wages of sin, that is
death, temporal, eternal: The service of righteousness, the wages, and reward
of that, eternal life, which is not wages but the gift of God. So that I may
now say to you as Moses did to Israel, Deuteronomy. 30.19. Behold I have set before
you life and death, cursing and blessing. Therefore choose not cursing, choose
not sin, nor the wages thereof, it is death: but choose life, that you and your
seed may live. If we follow sin, the wages will be death; if we apply our
selves to righteousness in the service of God, our reward shall be eternal
life, not that we deserve it, but that it is the pleasure of our heavenly
Father to bestow it upon us, For the wages of sin is death, and the gift of God
is eternal life, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

THE PROFIT OF AFFLICTIONS: OR, GODS AIM IN HIS CORRECTIONS.
SERMON XXX.
HEB. 12.10. For they verily, for a few days chastned us after their own
pleasure, but He for our profit, that we might be partakers of his holiness.


THere are two things (among many others) eminently in Jesus Christ, which
declare him to be an all-sufficient Savior of his people; and these the
Scripture frequently sets forth unto us in a most sweet conjunction, Isa. 45
24.
Righteousness and strength: So the Prophet, Surely, shall one say, in the
Lord, have I Righteousness and strength. There are two things likewise in a
Christian, which are of eminent sufficiency, in order to his salvation, and his
possession of the Glorious Inheritance, purchased by this Savior; Faith and
Patience; often spoken of severally, and in particular, but withal jointly and
together, as might be manifested by the allegations of Scripture; as, be not
slothful, but be ye followers of them, that by Faith and Patience inherit the
promise, etc.

Concerning these two which are so eminent in the called of God, and are
sufficient in order to their possession of the purchased inheritance; The
Analysis of the Chaper.
as the Scripture abundantly treats of, so most frequently in the Epistle,
and more especially, in the 10, 11, and 12. Chapters.

In the latter end of the tenth Chapt. you have the Apostle there, first
dogmatically handling the doctrine of Faith, as the necessary means to attain
everlasting life, and as the principal conducement to the possession of glory,
and to the saving of the soul; The just shall live by Faith.

In the beginning of the eleventh Chapter, he shows the absolute necessity of
Faith, to an acceptable walking, and well-pleasing of God; For without faith
(verse 6.) it is impossible to please God: and the whole Chapter is further
spent in setting down the glorious Examples, of Abel, and Enoch, and Noah, and
Abraham, and the rest of the Elders, eminent for then Faith, by which (says
he) they received a good report: All whom, did worthily in their days, and are
now become famous to posterity; standing out to this day, also many living
voices, calling upon us to become followers of them, that we might together
with them, be at length made partakers of the glorious inheritance of the
Saints in light.

The Apostle, have spoken much to this purpose, goes on, to that other grace
we spoke of, so necessary to the constitution of a Christian, and to the
enabling of him to a well and faithful managing of his Calling, and condition,
and that is Patience. Propounded by way of exhortation in the first part of
this twelfth Chapter; and urged with respect to the necessary uses of it, both
concerning duties done, and afflictions to be endured, in the verses following.

First with respect to duties, which the Apostle propounds under the Metaphor
of running in a race (for such is the course of a Christian life; which the
Saints of God are called to the finishing of) Let us run the race that is set
before us; and run with Patience.

Secondly, it is urged with respect to sufferings, and that of two sorts, from
men, from God.

From men, from whom the faithful are to make account of sufferings in diverse
kinds, in shame and derision, in proud and insolent contradictions, and
(according to their power and opportunity) in bloody persecutions, You have not
yet resisted unto blood, verse. 4.

From God: and here the Apostle is more large, urging his exhortation to
Patience, and a quiet applying of our selves to God, according to all the
states and conditions he is pleased to bring us unto, and according to all his
several administrations toward us; very strongly, laboring to fasten it in
the hearts of the Saints of God, as a nail in a sure place; first alleging
that same passage of Solomon in the Proverbs; My son, despise not thou the
chastening of the Lord. And then he further strengthens his exhortation by
invincible arguments. (I do but touch upon these things, have ening on to the
main thing I intend; only desiring to give you a plain, and brief Analasis of
this Scripture, with the context of it.) The Apostle (I say) drives on this
exhortation by strength of argument;

And that first of all, by propounding to the godly, that whereas the Lord is
pleased, to exercise them with afflictions; to make them drink many times of a
cup of bitterness, yet they have reason to be quiet and patient, because this
way the Lord gives a proof of his love to his children: and those that are
wise and godly, will be glad (they have reason so to be) that God should take
such a course with them, as whereby he may give them a demonstration of his
dear love and affection: Now herein the Lord evidenceth his love and affection
to his people; for all the afflictions and chastisements that he exercises
them withal, flow from his love, and are as fruits thereof, For (says he)
whom the Lord loves, he chasteneth, and scourges every son whom he receives,
verse. 6.

Secondly, he propounds it to their consideration as a course wherein the
Lord gives an evidence of his peoples adoption: For, what son is he whom the
Father chasteneth not? But if ye be without chastisement, whereof all his
children are partakers, then are ye bastards and not sons, verse. 78. Now the
godly should be glad, to have the Lord take such a course with them, and so to
order out his administrations concerning them, as that they may have some
comfortable evidence to their souls, that they are his adopted ones, and such
as he will one day acknowledge for to be his children.

But thirdly, and that which more concerns our present purpose: the Apostle
urges his exhortation by a comparison that he frames, between God, the Father
of spirits, and men, that are fathers of our flesh: we have had fathers of our
flesh, and they verily, for a few days chastened us, and we gave them
reverence; shall we not much rather be in subjection to the Father of spirits
and live? they chastened us for their pleasure, but He, for our profit, that we
might be partakers of his holiness. Wherein you see the comparison is laid out
in several particulars; and the preheminency, the advantage of the comparison
is given to God; for so is the scope and intent of the Text.

It lies thus briefly; First, We have had fathers of our flesh, and God is the
Father of Spirits; if we have been contented to undergo the discipline of our
earthly fathers, much more have we reason quietly and patiently to submit our
selves to the proceedings of the Father of our spirits.

Secondly; They for a few days chastened us, and we gave them reverence; it is
but a few days neither, that the Father of spirits means to keep us under
his discipline: suppose it be all our time, and perhaps it shall be so, yet all
that is, but the time of our minority; and therefore if we have been content to
submit to our earthly parents, their discipline for a few days, shall we not
much more be in subjection to the Father of spirits, to his chastisement,
though it be for our lifetime? for the disproportion is infinitely greater
between the time of this life, compared with the state of maturity and ripe age
which the Saints shall come to hereafter; and the time of our minority and
childhood, compared with the state of full age and manhood in this life; for
alas, how short are our days! they are spent, even as a tale that is told.

But lastly, that the Apostle might overpower the spirits of the godly, and
quiet their minds, and make them compose themselves to a patient waiting upon
God, and a willing submission to whatsoever condition he shall bring them into;
Our earthly parents (says he) according to their pleasure, and many times in
the strength of passion, and with overmuch unadvisedness and heat of blood,
not so much respecting the weak condition of their children, chastened us; but
he, that is, our heavenly Father, the Father of spirits, for our profit; and
what profit? that we might be partakers of his holiness.

This is an Argument (I conceive) very suitable to the occasion of our meeting
together at this time, in regard of those whom more especially, and nearly it
concerns, the Parents of this deceased young Gentleman; whom the Lord is
pleased now deeply to afflict, and to reach out to them a bitter Cup; I shall
endeavor therefore to speak somewhat in this Argument: And though it concerns
them in a more special manner; yet, it is a meditation, that concerns us all to
take knowledge of; and such a one, as if we belong to God, and that the Lord
has a purpose to bring to heaven, we shall have occasion in our time, to make
often use of.

Passing over therefore other things, let us come to consider of this latter
part of the verse; and of the latter part of the comparison here framed by the
Apostle, in order to the strengthening of his main Argument, whereby he urges
his exhortation, to the patient bearing of those Afflictions that God shall be
pleased to exercise us withal: Our earthly Parents for a few days chastened
us after their own pleasure, but He, the Father of our spirits, for our profit,
that he might make us a partaker of his holiness.

In the words themselves, we have to consider these particulars: And the main
pillars of our discourse for the present (letting pass the rest) shall be
these severals.

First, we are to take knowledge of this point in the general, viz. That God
Almighty is graciously set to procure, and further the good and profit of his
people.

Secondly, and more particularly, That in all the afflictions and chastisments
he brings upon his people, his eye and aim is at their good.

Thirdly; The great profit, and benefit that God aims at, and intends to
his people in all his fatherly administrations, especially of castigation, is,
that be might make them partaker of his holiness.

I begin with the first, Propos. 1. God is pleased to set himself to procure
the profit of his people.
and the more general point. You see the Text imports it plain enough, that
God Almighty is graciously set, for to procure, and promote, and further the
good, and benefit, and profit of his people, of such as fear his name, of such
as he is pleased to receive for his own: his heart (I say) is set upon them to
do them good, he is studious of their profit, he has a due respect to their
benefit, in all his dealings and administrations to them.

Next to his own glory, (which is dearest to him of all things else, and good
reason too, for that is better then salvation and eternal happiness. But I say
next to his own glory) and the glory of his beloved Son Jesus Christ; the main
thing that he aims at, is, that he might make his people happy with him; and
that they might be every way profited, and advantaged both in soul and body;
and furthered to eternal happiness.

This will appear to us, Proved by instances.
if we consider first,

The ordinances of God, which he has appointed in order to his peoples good.

Secondly, if we consider his commandments and impositions. And,

Thirdly, if we consider all his various administrations toward them.

All which will clearly manifest to us, that Gods aim in all, is, at the profit
and benefit of his people.

I shall touch but upon some particulars, and on them neither I shall but only
glance; because I would keep my self within the compass of the time.

First, 1 In his instituting Ordinances in the Church.
consider the Lords ordinances that he has provided for his people, and
calls them out to give attendance upon; they are all with respect to his
peoples profit, and an eye to that. As for instance;

That great Ordinance which God has set up in his Church, 1 The preaching of
the Word. Act. 26.18.
namely, that of preaching, and dispensing of the sacred mysteries of the
Gospel; it is with respect to his peoples profit; To open their eyes, and to
turn them from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God, that
they may receive forgiveness of sins, and an inheritance among them which are
sanctified by faith in Christ; That they might be brought into the fellowship
of this mystery, and be enriched with all the treasures of the Gospel, 2 Timothy
3.16.
And the Apostle says, that all Scripture (which this ordinance of Preaching
is to be conversant about, that Scripture which we are to break abroad among
you this way) it is profitable; Profitable for Doctrine, for reproof, for
instruction, for correction; and it will make the man of God perfect; So
profitable, as that it is able to perfect a man, to make him wise to salvation;
and we need no more wisdom.

The like might I speak concerning the Sacrament of the Lords Supper; 2 The
Sacrament of the Supper.
It is instituted of God with an eye to his peoples benefit, that they may come
to be made partakers of that profitable flesh and blood (for so I may justly
call it) of the Lord Jesus, It is not the blood of Bulls and of Goats; it is
not the blood of all the men in the world, that is profitable for such
purposes, as the pacifying of the wrath of God, the quenching of the flames of
his displeasure, the purging of the conscience from dead works; of those we may
say as David in another case, what profit is there in my blood? But there is
profit in the blood of Christ, and with respect to that, this ordinance is
provided in the Church, that the people of God, attending thereon according to
his institution may come to be made partakers of the virtue and benefit
thereof; having the remission of their sins, thereby sealed up to their
consciences, through faith in that blood.

The like Instance might I give of Prayer, 3 Prayer.
and the rest of those holy ordinances which God has set up in his Church; but
I will name no more, lest I be prevented. Only by the way consider this: Most
unworthily do we deal with God, with Preaching, with the Sacrament, and with
all these holy ordinances, if so be we do not reap profit, Unprofitable living
under the ordinances, a taking the name of God in vain.
and benefit by them: A soul that lives unprofitably under the dispensation of
these, does but take the name of God in vain: Every time we come to hear the
Word preached, and to attend upon the Sacrament, and go away from them, no
better then we were when we came to them, we take the name of God in vain; and
deal unworthily with these holy things: They are given to profit with, and we
shall but increase our own guiltiness, if we be not profited by them.

But I say (brethren) this is that which God has respect unto in all his
provisions for his people, in the Institution of all his ordinances; their
profit and benefit: and when he finds any ordinance that is not for the
benefit of his people, though they be of his own institution, yet he takes them
away; therefore the Apostle speaking concerning the Mosaical Rites and
institutions of the Ceremonial Law, he calls them unprofitable, and beggarly
rudiments, and so God himself counted of them, and for their unprofitableness,
there was a gracious disanulment of them.

But especially and above all, 4 Sending of Christ into the world in our nature.
this will be most apparent if we cast our eyes upon the Lord Jesus, who is
indeed the substance of our preaching; and of our receiving the Sacrament, and
of all the ordinances of God, and of all his promises: it is with respect to
our profit that the Lord has been pleased to ordain him, both in respect of
his person, and the constitution of that; and in respect of his offices, and
all his fatherly administrations concerning him: a gracious respect he has had
in all to the profit of his Church, as might appear in the several particulars.

A body have thou prepared for me, (says he in the Psalm) why? That Christ
might be the more profitable to his people; fitted thereby to converse with,
and to communicate himself unto them. The word was made flesh, and therefore
made flesh that he might dwell among us; that there might be a meet cohabitation
with him.

And as this was the respect God had in his incarnation, so it was in all his
humiliation. What was the reason that he was acquainted with sorrows and
griefs, and miseries, both from God and men? but that he might be the more for
our profit; that we might have a merciful High Priest, that he might the better
know from experience the way to commiserate, and compassionate his people in
their distress.

Yea in his death, in his resurrection, in his ascension, in his preferment at
Gods right hand; in all these administrations of God the Father concerning his
Son, he had a gracious respect to the good and profit, and benefit of his
people.

Again secondly, 2 In his command and injunction.
consider all the appointments of God, his injunctions and commands to his
people; he does in all aim at their profit; as it is in Deuteronomy. All these things
I command thee for thy good. The Lord requires nothing at his peoples hands
but it is for their profit: Deuteronomy: 10: 13.
He calls upon us to believe, it is that we might have the profit of his word
and promises. He calls upon us to repent and to leave our sinful ways,
Matthew. 5.29.
if thine eye off end thee pluck it out, if thine hand offend thee cut it off,
for it is profitable for thee that one of thy members should perish, and not
that they whole body should be cast into hell; he has an aim at our profit, we
think hard of it (as we are naturally apt to do, through a deep affection we
bear to our base lusts) that God should come so near to us and deal so strictly
with us, and to command us to pluck out our eyes, and cut off our hands, that
is, to part with our dearest corruptions; Alas (my brethren) if God saw that it
were good for us, that it were for our profit to keep our lusts, he would not
take away one of them from us, but we should have them (as I may say) with all
his heart: but he knows that as they are not for his glory, so they are not
for our profit, he sees that there is not any good to be gotten by our
retaining of them; therefore it is (I say) that he is so strict in his
impositions, that he so often calls upon his people to repent and to cast
away their sins.

Thirdly and lastly, 3. In his several administrations.
consider all the administrations of God to his people, and we shall see that
in them all, he has a respect to their profit. As for instance: he is pleased
to suffer sin and corruption to remain in his servants all the while they are
in this life, 1 Permitting sin to remain.
he could wholly take it away and free them from it, even in this world: But he
knows that it is for their profit to suffer these In-mates, these Cananites to
remain that they may be as pricks in their eyes and thorns in their sides; to
make them the more weary of the world, and the more desirous of heaven.

He is pleased many times to suffer his people to have sin not only tyrannizing
and 2. To prevail.
usurping, but prevailing against them; but it is that thereby they may attain
to a greater degree of humiliation. He suffers them sometimes to fall, for
this very purpose that he might exalt them. He is pleased to permit the Devil
to buffet them, and to use them very hardly: were it not for their profit, he
would tie him up in Hell, and give him no such leave as this; but (as he said
to Saint Paul) lest they should be exalted above measure, the messenger of
Satan is sent to buffet them.

Yea the Lords withholding of his spiritual comforts; 3. Withdrawing his
presence.
his deserting of his people, the hiding of his face from them, the withdrawing
of those sweet and gracious manifestations of himself unto them, it is all with
respect to their profit; that they may be taught the more to prize the comforts
of his spirit, and to walk more worthy of them when they do enjoy them.

He is pleased sometime to suspend his answering of their prayers, 4.
Suspending his answer to their prayers.
and to hold them long in the expectation of the return of their requests: it
is for their profit; that they may he thereby stirred up to ply the Throne of
grace with more frequent and earnest prayers; that so the greater their
adventure is (as I may say) the greater their return may be: It being in this
case with them as it is with Merchants, the greater adventure they send forth,
and the longer their ship is out, the greater and more advantageous is the
return.

Many times again, 5. Denying their particular suites.
he is pleased not only to suspend his answer to their prayers, but to deny the
granting of his peoples request in the very kind they sue for: But even in this
too he has respect to their profit: he hears them (as one well said)
according to their profit, though not according to their wills: so he dealt with
Moses concerning his request of entering into the Land of Canaan.

Again the Lord is pleased to keep his people many times in a low condition,
and in mean estate, to put them into bare commons and hard pastures, while
others are grazing in full meddows; it is with respect to their profit, to
teach them the more to depend upon him, to enable them the better to live by
Faith.

Again, 6. Deprives them of their dearest blessings.
for this purpose he takes from his servants dear blessings, the Wife from the
Husband, the Children from the Parents; as we see verified this day in this
place concerning our friends here, the mournful survivers and attendants upon
this sad occasion; but in these administrations he intends his peoples
profit, as we may see in the case of Job; the Lord takes away all his children,
but (says the Apostle) ye have heard of the patience of Job, James 5.11.
and have seen the end of the Lord: he was no looser in the conclusion, but God
returned at length all into his bosom again, nay double.

In a word, for this very purpose it is, even for their profit (for alas it is
not Gods own benefit he seeks after but his peoples in all his administrations)
that they live, that they do, that they suffer, that they die, their death is
in order to their gain, as the Apostle says, to me to live is Christ, and to
die is gain.

To make some application of this, and so to proceed.

First, Use of exhortation.
let us here take occasion, as many as are the called of God according to his
purpose; and implanted in this glorious relation of children to a father; let
us learn to advance his name; and according to his name let his praise be in
all the Congregations of the Saints. Truly (as Moses) said once) their Rock is
not as our Rock: So may we say, other fathers are not as this Father, our
Father is set for the good and profit of his children. The devil (...) a
father, so our Savior speaks, you are of your father the devil; he has
children, and he studieth nothing so much as that they may live all their days
in pleasure; striving to lead his followers altogether in pleasant paths: But
alas he has no aim at their profit, it is their loss he seeks; and therefore
at last he makes them pay full dear for all their pleasure and content. But now
God, he is a wise Father, and in all his dispensations to his children (though
they seem for the present unpleasant) he has an aim at their profit. Let this
be for his praise.

Secondly, let us labor to believe this, that God in all his dealings and
administrations toward us, has an eye to our profit. How hard soever the
condition be that he puts us into, if he take from us the desire of our
eyes, the delight of our hearts, our liberties, our estates, our children; yet
be persuaded of this, that God does it for my good and benefit.

And thirdly, labor to reap the fruit and benefit that God aims at and
intends, and would have us receive from all his administrations. When we are
called together to give attendance upon the preaching of the Word; then think,
what am I come hither for? is it not for my profit? would God have me trifle
out my time? surely the Lord would never have singled out a day of seven for
himself, but that he might likewise make his people partaker of spiritual
advantages, and heavenly benefits; and therefore I lose a day, and never hear
well, except I hear to profit. And thus what I say of this Ordinance, I might
likewise speak of the rest before named. And so for this present occasion; the
Lord now you see is pleased to call us to the house of mourning. Was it think
ye? the purpose of God, that we should meet together here in a customary
complemental manner, to do things in a common garb, only to eat together, and
drink together? No, the Lord calls us to a house of mourning, for our profit,
that we might consider the end of all men, and that we that are living, might
lay the thing to heart.

And for you that are in present distress, in regard of this particular
affliction; reckon upon this, that God has done this for your profit; labor
ye therefore to reap the fruit of it; be not so much poring upon the
affliction, and altogether complaining of the bitterness of the cup; but follow
on after the profit and benefit that God intends you thereby. And let every
one labor to improve all administrations of God to this purpose; that as he in
them all intends our good, so let us pursue after the benefit.

Secondly, Use 2. Of instruction.
let it instruct us further concerning our duty; even to walk worthy of such a
God as namy of us as are in relation to him, as children to a Father, and
servants to a Masler; How should this first of all, win us over to such a
Father, to such a Master? and to make it our highest ambition, to be the people
of such a God, the children of such a Father, that is devoted to the profit and
advantage of his children and servants? This is the gracious goodness of God,
he takes pleasure in the prosperity of his servants: their profit is his
pleasure: Let us therefore walk worthy of such a Father, of such a Master; And
seeing he intends our profit, and that we cannot profit him, let us labor to
walk in all well-pleasing: We cannot profit him, let us labor to please him.

Lastly, here is a word of instruction for Ministers, we should in this case
(as those that are entrusted with the sacred ordinances of God) labor to put
on the mind of God (so the Apostle, we have, says he, the mind of Christ.) We
in the course of our Ministry, as God aims at his peoples profit, so should
we, not aim at our own praise, and at our profiting by them, but that we might
profit their souls. O blessed preaching, when people profit by our preaching,
when they are by that increased in knowledge, in love, in faith, in every grace.
Such a Preacher was Saint Paul: I please all men (says he, 1 Cor. 10. ult. but
how?) not seeking mine own profit, but the profit of many, that they may be
saved. Oh labor to preach profitably, that our people may thrive under our
ministry. This is that which God aims at, and this is that which we should
aim at too.

And thus I have done with the first, and more general proposition arising from
the words of the Text. I come now to the second and more particular thing that
we are to consider hence; and that is, that, As God graciously sets himself
to procure his peoples profit in all his administrations; Propos. 2. Gods aim
in afflicting his children, is their profit.
so this is that he aims at, in all the afflictions and chastisements, he
exercises them withal.

It is no pleasure for him to be lashing and whipping his people, to hold them
under such sharp discipline, it is for the profit of the children: so the Text
expresses it, but he for our profit.

Which first of all implies, that afflictions and chastisements are a means
conducing to the profit of those that undergo them: A point plain in the Text,
and the Scripture abundant in the proof of it; and the experience of the Saints
in a plentiful manner confirming it. Gen 41.52.
It is good for me (says David) that I have been afflicted. And Joseph gives
this honorable testimony of God, The Lord (says he) has caused me to be
fruitful in the land of my afflictions; and thereupon gives his child a name
suitable.

Afflictions and chastisements, Afflictions they are profitable.
they become profitable, as the furnace to the gold, to purge out the dross, to
make a separation between the pure metal, and the ore.

Profitable as physic to the body, to purge out the malignant humors.

Profitable, as soap to the cloth, to fetch out the stains, to take out the
greasy spots (it is the Scripture expression, their hearts are as fat as
grease) to make them white.

Profitable, as the Thunder to the Air, to purge it, to make it more commodious
to breath in.

Profitable, as the wind to the water, to make it the purer by its ventilation.

Profitable, as the pruning knife to the tree, to make it more fruitful.

These and the like metaphors we have, and by them we are to conceive of the
good, and benefit that comes to us by Gods castigation, and fatherly exercising
of his people with his discipline, and rod of Affliction.

But what are these blessed fruits, what is the profit accruing to the soul of
the people of God by this means?

I can but name part of them. The blessed fruit of afflictions.
Besides that which is expressed in the Text, that we might be partaker of his
holiness, there are these gracious effects of afflictions. Weaning from the
world: a bringing us into more acquaintance with God. Manasseth when he was in
affliction, 2 Chronicles. 33.12
he besought the Lord his God, and humbled himself greatly before the God of
his Fathers, and prayed unto him; and then (says the Text) he knew that the
Lord he was God. God by this means makes us know our selves: the vanity of the
creature; the sinfulness of sin; the sweetness of the Word; the excellency that
is in the promises; makes us more compassionate to others; keeps us from
hell; and many other fruits there are of afflictions.

But to pass this.

A second thing employed in the Doctrine is this, that as afflictions are means
conducing to our profit, so God in exercising his people with them, mainly
intends it. The Lord (says Moses) led thee through that great and terrible
wilderness, Deuteronomy. 8.15.
wherein were fiery Serpents, and Scorpions, and drought, where there was no
water, suffered thee to hunger, brought thee into hard straits; but what was
Gods aim in this? that he might humble thee; and that he might prove thee, to
do thee good at the latter end. By this (says the Prophet, Isa. 27.9.
speaking of the afflictions of the Church) shall the iniquity of Jacob be
purged, and this is all the fruit to take away his sin.

This I say is that which God intends by the afflictions of his people: and
this is that which the servants of God, by faith have been able to apprehend,
and to interpret the Lords meaning in all his sharp dispensations toward them:
As the Propbet Habakuk, having made a terrible description of the Babylonish
rod, he concludes in the twelfth verse of his first Chapter; Hab. 1.12.
Art not thou from everlasting, O Lord my God? We shall not die, O Lord, thou
have ordained them for Judgment: and O mighty God, thon have established them
for correction.

This is that likewise which the Saints of God have looked for, The Saints of
God have walted for the profit of afflictions. 2 Samuel 16.12.
and expected, that while the winds of afflictions have been blowing, some ship
or other should come home richly fraighted. So David, when that storm of
cursing came from the mouth of Shimei: Oh (says David) let him alone, let him
curse, it may be that the Lord will look on mine affliction, 2 Samuel 16.12.
and that the Lord will requite good for his cursing this day. So when
Rabshaketh came up against Jerusalem: Let him alone (says Hezekiah) answer him
not a word, Isa. 37.4.
it may be the Lord will hear the words of Rabshaketh, whom his Master has
sent to reproach the living God, and will reprove the words which the Lord has
heard; It may be the Lord will open his ear upon this rage and blasphemy, and
consider his people and do them good. The Saints of God, I say, have expected
good, and benefit from Gods afflicting of them.

For the use of this, Use 1. For reproof.
and so to draw to a conclusion. In the first place: Seeing this is Gods intent
in all his administrations to his people, especially in his castigations of
them, and reaching out unto them such sharp and bitter potions. It may serve to
check and control all those hard thoughts, that we are apt to suffer to lodge
within us, Gods children prone to misconster the intent of God in their
afflictions.
concerning Gods dealing with us, in the time of our distresses. Apt we are to
speak foolishly and unadvisedly concerning God, and to misconster his
administrations. This has been the frailty of Gods dearest servants in their
affliction. I shall one day (said David) perish by the hand of Saul. Woe is me
(says Isaiah) for I am undone, because I am a man of unclean lips. The Lord
(says the Church) has broken my teeth with gravel stones, 1 Samuel 27.1. Esa.
6.5. Lam. 3.16.18. Isa. 49.14.
and covered me with ashes, he has removed my soul far off from peace, and I
said my strength and my hope is perished from the Lord. The Lord has forsaken
me (says Zion) and my Lord has forgotten me. Job though for a good while he
carried himself very fairly, and demeaned himself very warily toward God; yet
when he began to be wet to his skin, then he speaks foolishly, and unadvisedly,
falls to the cursing of his day; not to the cursing of his God, as Satan
thought he would, but of his day, though that was too much, and ill beseeming
so holy a man, The Saints, I say, are apt to mistake themselves this way, and
to over-shoot themselves in this case. We should therefore humble our selves
before the Lord for this distemper of soul, and labor to keep down such
unquiet thoughts, and hard disputings that are apt to rise within us against
God, and his dispensations: And consider, that whatsoever our thoughts are, yet
the Lord knows his own thoughts concerning us; as he himself speaks in Jer.
29. howsoever (says he) you may think that I intend to cut you off for ever,
yet I know my thoughts that I think toward you, even thoughts of peace, and
not of evil, to give you an expected end.

Again secondly, Use 2. For comfort.
it may serve to comfort the godly concerning all the means and instruments of
their sufferings, whether they be men or devils. Wicked men and devils whom God
uses as a Rod to chastise his people, their malice is great, and their rage
violent, and they march on with much fury against the godly; they intend their
utter ruin and devastation, and purpose nothing less. But O Assyrian (says
God) the rod of mine anger, Isa. 10.57.
and the staff in their hand is mine indignation: howbeit he means not so,
neither does his heart think so, but it is in his heart to destroy and cut off;
But (says the Lord) whatsoever his meaning is, I know what my intentions are;
he is but the rod in mine hand, and I will give such strokes with it, Simile
. as my people may bear, and such as may be for their profit. This, I say,
should comfort us concerning all the instruments of our suffering, whatsoever
they be. The Physician, you know, applies the horse-leaches to his distemppred
Patient, the Horse-leech intends nothing but the satiating and filling
himself with the blood of the sick party; but the Physitan has another aim,
even the drawning out of the putrified and corrupted blood. God suffers
wicked men and devils as Horse-leeches to suck his people, to draw their blood,
but it is in order to their good; it is no matter what wicked men think, though
Ashur think not so, yet God purposes it, and aims at it, Isay. 12.12.
and in conclusion effects it; and then (says he) it shall come to pass that
when the Lord has performed his whole work upon mount Sion, I will punish the
fruit of the stout heart of the King of Assyria, and the glory of his high
looks.

Again in the third place. Use 3. Exhortation to a patient expectation of the
fruit of affliction.
Seeing this is Gods aim in all his afflictions, whatsoever the instrument be,
how sharp soever the castigation be, or of what nature, whether it be in a
spiritual way by sore temptations and buffetings of Satan, or outwardly by
losses in our estate, or death of friends, etc. seeing I say this is Gods
purpose and intent that his people may be profited; Let us quietly and
patiently apply our selves unto God, and expect the quiet and peaceable fruit
of righteousness, that shall spring up in due time, to those that are this way
exercised by the Lord: Look for it and press on to this, quietly to wait on the
Lord our God for a blessed fruit of such administrations.

An argument ab utili, is an argument of great prevail: what will not men do
for Profit? It is for profit that men rise up early and go to bed late, and eat
the bread of carefulness. The Husbandman takes much pains and plows his
ground, endures many sharp storms, and piercing winters; the Merchant runs
diverse hazards abroad, and all for profit: so should we be willing patiently
and quietly to submit, to Gods dealing, humbly to apply our selves to his wise
and fatherly administrations, seeing he intends by it our profit. And take
heed of murmuring and repining against the Lord: this will make him indeed to
lay heavier blows upon us; an impatient Patient makes the Physician deal more
harshly, and a struggling child procures for himself the more and sorer
stripes; what though our potion be bitter, so long as it is wholesome, have we
not reason to submit our selves?

But here is the main thing we stick at. Object.
You may happily reply; Indeed if we could see our corruptions subdued, our
hearts humbled, the pride that is within us abated, and that God would be
pleased to bring us more nee^er to him, and make us more heavenly minded, and
wean our affections from the world; If we could see the fruit of all our
sufferings and temptations and crosses, it would be an abundant satisfaction to
our souls; but alas, alas, we cannot see this profit; our hearts are still full
of many spiritual distempers, and great prevailings of evil there is upon us;
notwithstanding all these Storms and Frosts, and tempestuous hard Winters, yet
these weeds of wickedness grow and are mavelous lively: this is the
bitterness of the cup, and this is that which sinketh the heart most under all
those pressures which lie upon us.

To which I answer, Answ.
first, we must judge rightly and wisely; and consider well whether it be the
time for the fruit of affliction to spring forth. No affliction for the present
seems joyous; and no affliction, it may be for the time of its working
appears commodious: But (says the Apostle) they do bring forth the quiet
fruit of righteousness.

Again secondly, we may perhaps bear too much upon the physic: alas!
afflictions and crosses of themselves they will rather drive us further then
draw us nearer unto God; we are therefore to submit our selves unto. God in his
way of administration, and to entreat his blessing upon them, that through that
they may be made successful. As every creature, so every condition both of
prosperity and adversity, is sanctifled to us by the Word and by prayer.

And take heed of disputing against the Lord, as we are apt to do, he is wise
above all that we can conceive, he is wonderful in working, and knows now to
bring about the good of his people in a wonderful way: what if he will plunge
thee into the mire in order to holiness? what if Christ will put clay upon a
man's eyes in order to sight, a medicine more likely to put out his eyes.
Considering therefore that God is wise and wonderful in his working; let us
apply our selves to him, and in due time we shall see the fruit and benefit of
all his administrations.

I should now have come to the third and last proposition, and that was, That
this profit that God aims at in all his castigations of his children, is to
make them partakers of his holiness. And this is profit indeed, when God
thereby draws us from the world, and makes us more heavenly minded, and more
dead to the creature, purges away our dross, and takes away that filth and
corruption that is in us; oh this will acquit all the cost, and make amends for
all the labor and pains and hardship we have been made to endure. But I shall
forbear to insist upon this.

So much for the Text.

There is a word to be spoken according to custom with respect to the occasion
of our meeting. I have done the main part of my task, which was to present to
you a word of instruction; and therefore for the occasion concerning this young
gentleman disceased, whose Funerals we now solemnize, I shall but speak a few
words and so conclude.

I need not to speak any thing concerning his parentage and descent; nor much
concerning his education, I am cousident that that was religious and gracious,
and such as wherein there was a second travel in order to his spiritual birth,
that Jesus Christ might be formed in him.

For his own particular, though I can speak nothing upon my own knowledge
(being a mere stranger) yet I have such a testimony concerning him, from those
that deserve credence both of me and you, as that I shall conclude that of him,
as may give us good hope concerning his final and eternal estate.

If so be contrition of heart and sorrow for sin? If earnest and constant
prayer unto God; If lamenting of youthful miscarriages and the not answering of
time and means, and opportunities, and religious education, and that godly care
that was exercised in order to his spiritnal welfare and building of him up in
the knowledge of God and of Christ. If, I say, the lamenting of the neglect of
opportunities of this kind: If so be the desire of the prayers of others for
him, and that out of a sense of his own disability to plead his own cause: If
so be a gracious communication of God unto him in ways of comfort in the time
of his sickness, supporting him under diverse pressures, and many sore and
grievous temptations that lay upon him: If so be his settled resolution
concerning his spiritual estate; and the satisfying of others in many doubts
and disquiets of spirit that rose within him. If so be the due respect to the
Lords day, the desire of promoting the sanctifying of it both by himself and
others, with a continual grief proceeding from a sense of his own disability to
answer to the occasion and duties of the day. If there be any thing to be
concluded of concerning Religion, from such passages as these; then (brethren)
I have all these as so many materials put into my hand to build withal, and so
to rear up a testimony before you concerning this disceased.

And thus in brief have I testified of him; and to you all he (though dead) now
speaks, but in a more special manner to you that are young men: his death, and
that example we have in him of mortality, is as a loud Sermon preached unto
you, concerning the care you ought to have, to bethink your selves in your
younger years of the things that concern your spiritual and eternal welfare,
and how much it concerns you now to give all diligence to make your calling
and election sure. Your thoughts (it may be) are too much upon your patrimony
and inheritances, your houses and possessions, your great estates and your
matches, that thereby you may (as you use to say) raise your fortunes: too too
apt you are to be taken up with these considerations and to pursue thoughts of
this nature: but you see by this example how God may come and prevent the
accomplishment of all these, and in that day, in that very day all these
thoughts will perish, death may come and marry you to the dust, and call you,
not to your fathers mansions, but to the common house appointed for all living,
Job 17.4.
where you must say to corruption, thou art my father, and to the worm, thou
art my mother and my sister: this was his condition, and so may yours be too:
Therefore you young men, remember you your Creator in the days of your youth;
and know you that God has provided instructions and counsels in his Word that
are directed to young men, that they may know how to cleanse their way, and to
fly the lusts of youth, and betimes to begin with God, that so whether they
live to old age, or be cut off in youth, they may be gathered to their Fathers
in a good and a full age, like a Shock of Corn, and so receive the blessing of
the promise.

SPIRITUAL HEARTS-EASE; OR, The Way to Tranquillity.
SERMON XXXI.
JOHN 14.1, 2, 3. 1 Let not your hearts be troubled, you believe in God,
believe also in me.

2 In my Fathers house are many Mansions, if it were not so, I would have told
you, I go to prepare a place for you.

3 And if I go and prepare a place for you, I will come again, and receive you
unto my self, that where I am, there ye may be also.


IN the 33. verse of the former Chapter, our Savior Christ told his Disciples,
that he must now go away from them; Little children, yet a little while I am
with you, and you shall seek me, and as I said to the Jews, whether I go you
cannot come, so say I now to you.

This message of the departure of Christ from the earth, of his being took from
them, did exceedingly sad their hearts, and very much perplex and disquiet
their spirits; they knew what a comfort they had in the presence of Christ;
they knew what a faithful Teacher he was, what a mighty Protector he had been,
how gracious and full of Heavenly comfort he had manifested himself to them at
all times in his being with them; and they could not now think of parting with
him without much perplexity and disquiet, and trouble of spirit. The sum of the
words.
Therefore the words that I have now read, are the speech of our blessed
Savior to comfort them, strengthening their hearts against those disquiets
under which they were exercised;

In which words you may briefly observe these three things, Division.
for time will not suffer me to stand much upon them.

First, a duty whereunto they are exhorted.

Secondly, the means whereby it may be performed.

Thirdly, the lets that were to be removed, that hindered them in the
performance of the duty in the use of these means.

The duty that is to be performed, is in the beginning of the first verse, Let
not your hearts be troubled.

The means whereby to perform it, in the words following, You believe in God,
believe also in me.

The lets and impediments of the performance of it in the use of these means,
are so many objections and doubts, as are wisely prevented by the wisdom of
God, in the two verses following.

I shall take them as I come to them in order, and but give a brief touch upon
every one of them.

First, the duty that is to be performed, it is this, to stablish and comfort
their hearts, Let not your hearts be troubled.

The word that is here translated, Explication.
trouble, it signifies such a trouble as is in water when the mud is stirred
up, or when the waves and surges are raised by some tempest or storm; It
signifies such a trouble as is in an Army, when the Soldiers are disranked,
and routed, when they are disordered, and it shows thus much, that those
distempers that are in the hearts of men, in the affections of men, do
exceedingly hinder their judgments, that they can see no more, nor discern
things no better, then a man can do in a muddy water. All the affections are as
so many Soldiers in an Army disordered, that keep not their due subordination
to their leader and guide, by reason that the understanding that should guide
the will and affections, is now made a servant to them.

And this distemper of spirit arises from the inordinacy of the affections,
the inordinate motion, and agitation of them.

This is called trouble, Let not your hearts be troubled; Be not disturbed
thus, and disquieted, and disordered; So that no faculty of the soul can
perform its own work; So as that it is disabled to judge of things according to
truth, but that you are misled, and deluded by mists and appearances.

It is with the mind in sorrow, Simile.
as it is with the eye in tears, that cannot see a thing clearly, so the mind
cannot judge of things distinctly, when the soul is disturbed; Let not your
hearts be troubled.

But that which our Savior aims at here, has a particular respect to the
affections of fear, and grief, when these are in the excess, the mind is
troubled, when a man over-fears any thing, or over-grieves any thing, he is
troubled and disquieted; Let not your hearts be troubled; that is, grieve not
for things more then they are to be grieved for, and fear not things more then
they are to be feared. For all these will dis-joynt the soul (as it were) it
will put the spirit to much pain and disquiet, as a bone out of joint;
Therefore by all means keep your hearts in a right state, in that order that
God has set them; Let not your hearts be troubled.

That, that I will briefly note here, shall be but thus much; that, Men are
wondrous prone, Doct. 1.
even the very best men, to be disturbed in their passions and affeictions.

Our Savior Christ speaks it here to his Disciples, to those that he had
taught, before whom he had gone, as an excellent example all his days, yet
these holy men, these followers of Christ, that had followed him through so
many dangers, and after so many teachings, and instructings of them; he had
need to call upon them, to stir them up to consider of their own estate, that
their hearts might not be troubled.

You may see the Malady in the Medicine. Every prohibition in the word
supposes a corruption, and an aptness in the natural heart and spirit of man,
to sin, and transgress in that particular; Therefore when Christ speaks to his
Disciples, and tells them they should not be troubled. It shows that even the
best men, are subject to excess of passion, and affection, to be disturbed, and
troubled, through immoderate fear, or grief, for that was the case of the
Disciples.

Now briefly I will show the grounds of it, and come to the Application,
because I will hasten. Ground:
and then apply it.

First, 1 From God. Psalm. 84.
it arises many times from the hand of God. The Lord is said to be a Sun, and
a shield; The Lord will be known to be a Sun, and a shield to his people.

Now, look as it is with the earth when the Sun withdraws his light, it is
all dark and cold, and dead; So it is with the hearts of the best men, when God
withdraws the light of his countenance from the soul, it is as the earth at
midnight. And as it is with Soldiers in the battle, if their shields be taken
from them, they are exposed to every dart, and danger; every thing may annoy
them, and wound them. So it is in the state of the soul; if God withdraw
himself from it, and do not now support it as before, and do not fence, and
strengthen it as at other times, the fiery darts of Satan will pierce deep into
the soul, and the spirit will not be able to uphold it self against these
assaults.

Now God withdraws himself sometimes from his servants, Why God withdraws the
light of his coun^e^ance from his people.
and that in special wisdom. past, present, to come.
Sometimes God does it in respect of the time past, 1 For correction of their
former abuse of his mercies.
and so he does it by way of correction. First, to correct his children for
their former wantonness, they have abused the expressions of love, and now as a
Father takes away the light from his child, when he sees he makes no better use
of it then to play with it. So God sometime takes away the light of his
countenance; that is, he casts clouds before himself, he does not manifest
himself in that loving favor, when his servants neglect that reverence and
fear that he expects from them in the midst of his mercies.

Secondly, 2 Of the neglect of their duty.
this he does sometimes as a correction of their negligence, when God has
called on them, from time to time, and they have neglected calling on God; he
has called upon them for duty, and for the leaving of such particular evils,
and they have neglected it. Now God withdraws himself, to make them know what
it is to do so; And because they will not know what it is to hear his voice,
when he calls, he will make them feel it, by his not hearing their voice when
they pray.

Sometimes he calls to them, Cant. 5.
as he did to the Church in the Canticles; Open to me my sister, my Spouse, my
love, etc. The Church is negligent and careless; I have put off my clothes, how
shall I put them on? I have washed my feet, how shall I defile them? Now he
withdraws himself from the soul, and what is the the end of it? The keepers
strike her, and the watchmen take away her vail; and now she is left to
trouble and perplexity, because Christ had absented himself, whom she would not
entertain, when he offered himself; Thus God does to correct that, that is past.

And farther, 3 Of their carnal security.
God does it sometimes to correct that carnal considence, and security
whereunto men are wondrous prone, when they go on in a clear way with much
comfort, with wind and tide. I said in my prosperity (says David) I shall
never be moved, thou Lord have made my mountain so strong; but what follows
upon it? says he, Lord thou hidest thy face, and I was troubled, now trouble
came upon him, trouble of Spirit, because he rested too much in that outward
mountain, in that outward condition whereunto God had exalted him, and he
placed his hope too much on this, and thought it should be always thus, now
God turns his hand and then David is troubled: and that is the first particular
in the first cause.

But secondly, God has a further aim, and that is for the time present, and
that is,

First, to inform all his servants where there strength lies, where all their
good lies, it lies not in themselves, 3 To teach them wherein their present
comsort and happiness consifts.
it lies not in any creature: And therefore God will have them seek it in him,
and that they may do it, he draws them to it by sense, they shall be deprived
of comfort in respect sometime of outward conveniences, and in respect sometime
of the light of his countenance shining upon their souls,

How do we know that the Moon shines on the earth by a borrowed light? but
because we see it is not always alike in its light, Simile
we see sometimes it has a full light, and sometimes it is enlightened but by
the half, and sometimes by some little part, where we see this disproportion
that it is not always alike, we know by this that the light of the Moon is
borrowed from somewhat else, from the Sun.

Now how do we know that the heart of man is fed and relieved, and supported
with comfort from without it self, with borrowed and received comfort? but by
this; Because the state of Gods servants in respect of the spiritual quiet, and
satisfaction, and contentment of heart is not always alike, but sometime they
have abundance of joy, that they seem to be (as it were) in heaven. Sometimes
they are perplexed with many disquiets and griefs, that they seem to be cast
down to the deep, as it is said of the Mariners in Psalm. 107. what is the
reason of this? but that no flesh should glory in it self; that every man might
know that whatsoever he has to make his life comfortable, and pleasing to him
it is from God that dispenses it to men in that proportion as seems good to
his own wisdom.

God will have us know that all the happiness of our spirits is in their union
with the chief of spirits, with himself; and that when they are but a little
separated from him, when he does but a little withdraw himself from them, they
are as a thing that is dead; how shall we know that the branches have sap from
the root, that it is that that makes them flourish and grow? but by this: If
you do but cut them off from the root they whither presently. So it is with the
spirit, with the heart of man; if God do but a little withdraw himself, let sin
but make a separation between God and man, now a man is like a withered branch,
he has nothing now to revive him, because he is divided from the root: At the
least it is with him as it is with a tree in Winter, though the sap remains in
the root; so though he remain in union with the root, yet the moisture is
gotten into the root it self, and does not now infuse it self into the
branches; I confess the servant of God that is once united to Christ shall
never be separated, the union it is now, and always shall be, but
nevertheless, the sap and comfort of the Spirit, it may remain in the head, our
life may be hid in Christ, and may not appear in us at all: And we are then in
that estate as if we were branches cut off, whereby it may appear, that
whatsoever life and comfort, and strength of heart we had, it was from Christ,
and by the influence and work of his Spirit.

And then for the time to come, 3 For prevention.
God does it to prevent some distempers that might grow on the hearts of his
servants if they should always be in a like state of spiritual joy. God does
it to prevent pride, Paul was apt to be lift up with those revelations,
therefore a messenger of Satan was sent to buffet him. 1 Of pride.


And so it may be to prevent carnal confidence in the creature, 2 Of considence
in the creature or in habits of grace.
a man would begin to ascribe somewhat to himself, to his present condition, if
it were always thus with him, you know what the Apostle Paul says, 2 Cor.
1.10. We received in our selves the sentence of death that we might not trust
in our selves, but in God that raised the dead; look to what end Paul received
the sentence of death, to that end Gods faithful servants sometimes receive the
very sense of death (as it were) and the sense of the destitution, and want of
all spiritual comforts for the present; Why? That they might not trust in
themselves, or in those habits of grace and comforts they have, or in any
creature whatsoever. The work of Gods spirit in the regenerate soul, it is but
a creature, a work of God, and God will not have men trust in any such thing,
in what then? In him that raises from the dead; God will bring them to such a
state, that they shall seem as dead men, as destitute of all spiritual comforts
they have, that they might trust in him that is able to raise them out of such
a state as that, that look as he is able to give life to the dead body, so he
is able to give comfort to the distressed soul, Ground.
that is at that time, in the shadow of death.

Secondly, 2 From Satan.
it comes sometimes from Satan; and that is thus, Satan wonderfully sets
himself against the seed of the woman, especially against the promised seed,
Christ, he will always be at his heel, Genesis 3.16. and in his opposition against
Christ, he sets against the very glory of Christ among men, and that is his
kingdom, he would not have Christ exalt his kingdom over men.

Now the kingdom of Christ consists as the Apostle speaks, not in meat and
drink, but in righteousness and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost; If he cannot
keep a Christian, a true believer, from unrighteousness, he will labor to
interrupt his peace: if he cannot keep him from the habit of peace, peace in
the grounds of it, yet he will keep him from the exercise and effects of that
peace, from joy, he will hinder that as much as he can, that he may not have
the sense of his blessedness: he knows that spiritual joy strengthens a man to
all spiritual duties; and his endeavor is to weaken all the servants of
Christ, in all their services; and therefore he does, at least labor against
that with all his might, that if they will needs go on, yet nevertheless to
propound, and occasion as many things that may be troublesome to them, and
disquiet their hearts, as he can.

And there are two principal ways (that I may but touch them) whereby Satan
How Satan causes trouble in the hearts of Gods servants.
wondrously prevails in this particular.

The one is by stealing out of their hearts those precious promises, those
comforts, whereby the Word of God revives the soul. 1 By stealing out of thest
hearts the promises of the Gospel.
You have forgotten (says the Apostle) the consolations of God. And the devil
meets in man with two advantages, to help him in the effecting of this; First
he turns the thoughts upon new objects, and herein he does diametrically, and
directly set himself against God in the way of his special providence: Heb. 12.
that very thing that God in wonderful wisdom has wrought in the heart for
the ease and comfort of man, Satan makes it an occasion of trouble, and that is
this, the variety of man's thoughts; what is the reason that God has framed the
mind of man to change his thoughts continually, and to have innumerable
thoughts? Certainly for the very ease of the Spirit of man, for the very ease
of the soul of man: For if the mind should keep intent upon any one thought
long, it would so work upon that, that it would weary it self out in working,
as we see men by excess of grief in particular cases, grow to be frenzy, and
destracted, and the like: Now this aptness of the mind to run to variety of
thoughts that God has made for the ease of man, Satan turns it as a help to
hurt him. A man shall run on into a world of business, of temptations, and
distractions that shall draw him from the thought of those things that he has
heard for the relieving of his Spirit wherein God spoke comfort to his heart,
that he may the better fasten those discouragements on him, that he desires.

Secondly, another advantage he has for this end is this, that is, he
wondrously prevails upon the heart of man by a careless neglect that is in men:
every man loves ease; There is such a spirit in man, such a disposition in the
spirit of man, that he avoids the things ordinarily that have great labor:
this disposition to ease, and rest, Satan serves himself on, and makes great
use of; so when a man has come from hearing the Word, and reading the
Scriptures, whereas he should now be exercised, and labor in meditation to
work those things on his heart, that now the root might fasten, and things
might settle on the soul, he passes by these easily; now the heart of a man
lies open as the high way, Matthew. 13.
you know the parable, Matthew. 13. when the seed fell on the highway, the Fowls
of the air came, and picked it up, and it was gone presently, where there is no
pains taken with the heart of a man, as there is none taken with the high way,
that the seed that falls there might grow, as in the plowed ground, when there
is no pains taken with the heart, now every notion, every direction, and every
spiritual instruction it lies lightly there, and is soon carried out, this is
the advantage that Satan makes of a man's love of ease.

But there is another thing concerning the way that Satan takes, 2 By
presenting to the soul the truths of God in false glosses.
not only to steal it out of the mind by those two ways, but again by
presenting the very truths of God to men in false glosses, so as a man cannot
discern them in their own shape, and nature, but in such colors as he presents
them to them. If the time would have served, I might instance in several
particulars; I will but touch upon one or two, and leave the enlargement to
your own meditations. Sometimes, things that are great, and of precious use,
shall be presented small, and of no account: and things again that are small
and little, shall be presented wondrous great: The mercies of God, the
Attributes of God, the promises of the Gospel, the sufficiency of the merits of
Christ, these shall seem small things, little to be regarded, less then ever
God intended them to be: And on the contrary, a man's own sins, his own
distempers shall be made exceeding great: Worldly things shall be presented, as
things of the greatest consequence; and spiritual things as mere accessories,
as things that depend upon them, and that come in after. Sometimes again,
things that are most necessary to be understood and known, things that should
be particularly applied, shall be presented obscurely and confusedly; and
sometimes things of lesser consequence, the knowledge whereof is not so
necessary, shall be presented with more clearness, and with strong persuasions
to the study and knowledge of them. But I will not stand on this: this is
enough to give you a taste of Satan's subtilty this way, whereby he wondrously
prevails in bringing trouble upon the spirits of men.

Thirdly, Ground, 3. From our selves.
it is from our selves, and so it comes to pass from that general corruption
that is in our natures, from whence all other sins flow, that the spirits of
men are troubled, and disturbed, by things that fall out from day to day.

And first it comes to pass, From some distemper of the body.
that the soul of man is miserably in bondage, and captivated, and inthraled,
and is deprived of liberty (as it were) through the distemper of the body; as
in Melancholy and sickness, we see how the soul is dis^urbed by the very
diseases, and distempers in the body it self, and that by virtue of that
simpathy in the soul with the body, it rises from the union of it, to the body
by the spirits: but this I will pass by.

Sometimes we see the soul subdued with lusts and corruptions, 2. Prevailing of
some strong lust.
somestrong lust, some strong sin or other prevails; And then as it is with the
Fowl that is now flying in the air, it may be there is bird-lime cast upon the
wings of it, it falls down presently, Heb. 12.1.
and can fly no further; so it is with the soul, somewhat presses it down,
somewhat compasses it about, and coups it in, as that expression is used, Heb.
12.1. Let us cast off the sin that compasses us about, and that presses so
heavy down, that we may run with patience the race that is set before us.

And sometimes the soul is disturbed by inordinate passions, 3 Inordinate
passions.
which arise from that general distemper that is diffused through every
faculty, and so the understanding looks upon things as through a mist, it sees
nothing clearly, and in most common things it is blind, and it is led by blind
affections too, and when the blind leads the blind, both fall into the ditch,
says Christ: and so the memory that should retain the precious treasures, Heb.
1.
the promises of the Gospel to relieve the soul in all cases, it is like a
leaking vessel that lets things run out, as it is Heb. 2. Take heed that the
things you have heard, run not out, says the Apostle, alluding to that
Metaphor.

And the very conscience it self that should be conclusive, it now rests in
generals and uncertainties, conscience should determine what my case is, whether
I be the child of God, or no; whether I be in the state of grace or no, to put
a man to bring things to particular: now for the most part by man's own neglect
it remains in doubt, it may be I am, it may be I am not, it may be I have a
right in the Covenant of grace, it may be not, etc. And now because conscience
is not come to that resolute conclusive act that a man may determine of his own
particular case, hence it is that every thing troubles, and disquiets him. Thus
beloved you see the reasons of it.

We will briefly pass it over with a word of Application. Use 1. To teach us
compassion toward those that are in trouble.


And first it should teach us compassion toward those whose spirits are
troubled; our Savior Christ says here, Let not you hearts be troubled; He
considered of them in their weakness, and does not much upbraid them with it,
but helps to bring them out of it in much mercy, and love, and so should we.
There is such a disposition rising from the pride, cruelty, and
uncharitableness of the hearts of men, that they are apt to add to the burden
of the afflicted, and to make their afflictions more by their censuring of
their troubles. You know the speech of old Eli a good man, but yet he failed in
that, when he saw Hannah in great trouble of spirit, uttering her heart before
the Lord; Lay away thy drunkenness, (says he) he thought she was drunk, at
lest with some passion, and all came but from perplexity, and disturbance of
spirit, and in that manner he rather added to her grief then eased hen; So Jobs
friends you see what they said, they presently judged him in that case, as one
that God had cast off for hypocrisy, and for his pride, and covetousness, or
for some one thing or other, and therefore it was thus with him; Nay, Christ
himself, the censure of all men was thus much concerning Christ himself; Isa
53.4.
We did esleem him stricken, smitten of God, and afflicted. The intent of the
phrase is, as one smitten for his own ill, as if God had now manifested that he
did not acknowledge him to be so holy and righteous. So thus you see the
inclination in the heart of man, to uncharitable jndging of those that God has
cast down, and suffers to be exercised under many afflictions, and troubles;
Let us learn then spiritual wisdom; let us learn love, and spiritual mercy, to
judge more favorably of the state of those whom we see troubled in spirit.

Many times God infeebleth, and distresseth the spirits of his best servants,
to abate the pride of men, that none might exalt himself before God; Nay, in
the very thing wherein they have excelled, in the same thing he sometimes
abaseth them: you see Abraham he is called the Father of the faithful; his
excellency was his faith, yet faithful Abraham is detected in Scripture of much
unbelief in some particulars; Who would think that he should expose Sara, as he
did to save himself? that he should do it, that was called the Father of the
faithful? you have heard (says the Apostle James, of the patience of Job, the
very excellency of Job was his patience: who would think that ever patient Job
should utter such things as he did, sometime, even cursing the very day of his
birth? David a man of a cheerful spirit, a man full of the praises of God, a
man wondrous large, when he comes to speak of the glory of God at several
times. A man would have thought him of an invincible fortitude, and courage,
yet nevertheless you shall have David so cast down, as that he thinks the Lord
had forgotten him, and that the Lord would show no mercy upon him, that the
Lord had hid himself from him, and that he would never regard him more; who
would think that ever David, that abounded so in the comforts of the spirit
sometimes, should be so dejected at such times as those were, when he was in
such a conflict?

Why does God do this? God suffers his servants to be in inward distress, and
why.


To show thus much, that the very best of his servants in the chief of their
excellencies are dependant on him still, they have nothing of themselves, or
from themselves. Therefore they shall sometimes seem to want that they have,
that the very having, and using of it, may be ascribed to his glory. Then let
us now reason thus, when we see the servants of God in trouble, exercised under
disquiet; Let us conclude, now God is glorifying himself. This the Apostle
infers, He will rejoice in his infirmities, because the power of Christ is
manifested by it.

For our selves, it should teach us (according to the intent of this place)
above all things to labor, that our hearts may be kept in that blessed plight
of spiritual joy, that we may be strengthened with freeness of heart to serve
God in our inward man; Let not your hearts be troubled.

How should this be done?

The Text tells us here (and so I come briefly to the second thing observable
in the Text, the means) you believe in God (says he) believe also in me.

As the words are read in the translation, they seem to be uttered by way of
concession, as much as if Christ had said, since yon already believe in God,
now believe in me. The Syriack seems to express it otherwise, and so render it
by way of command, and to make here an intimation of two duties, as a help of
quieting the heart, and so it reads it; Let not your hearts be troubled,
believe in God, believe also in me, propounding a twofold object, where-about
faith should be exercised, that the heart may be quieted in the time of any
trouble.

The first is God, considered in the Trinity of persons, in the unity of
Essence.

The second is Christ, Mediator, God, and Man.

Now, says he, believe in God, that is the first, rest upon God.

Then the second is, believe in me also; as one that is the Mediator between
God and you, now making your peace with God; So the second part seems to be the
prevention of an objection; For when he says, Let not your hearts be troubled,
believe in God, they might say, Alas, shall we believe in God, that are sinful
men; The sinners in Sion cry out, Who shall dwell with consuming fire? etc.
Therefore says Christ, believe also in me; that is, know that God will be your
God, in, and for my sake he is reconciled, and well pleased with you. Therefore
in all your approaches to God take me with you, look up to God, pray to him,
depend upon God through me, still keep me as a Mediator between God and you,
and this will preserve your hearts in peace. The time would not serve, if I
should go over things particularly and in a full way; Therefore I will touch
the heads of things, and it shall be thus much; that, A special means to
preserve the heart of man from excessive sorrow, Doctr. 2. Faith is a special
means to quiet / the soul.
and fear, from trouble, and disquiet of spirit, is faith.

Let not your hearts be troubled; But how shall we help it? Believe in God,
believe also in me.

And this we shall see through the Scriptures, David found it thus, Psalm. 40.
he speaks to his disquieted soul; 2 Cron. 20.20.
Trust in God, I will wait on him, he is my God. Jehoshaphat in that excellent
speech to his Soldiers, that were now troubled, for the multitude of their
enemies against them; Believe in God, and you shall prosper, believe his
Prophets, and you shall be established; that is the way to stablish the heart,
to believe in God, revealing himself in his Word. It is noted of Moses, in Heb.
11.27. He therefore endured all that he did, because he looked on him that is
invisible. And those three companions of Daniel, Dan. 3. Our God (say they)
whom we serve is able to help us, but if he will not, we will not worship thy
golden Image. There was matter of trouble and disquiet in the heart to be put
to such a plung, that they must either worship, or be cast into the Furnace,
heated seven times hotter; Well, this eased them of all trouble, 2 Timothy 1, 12.
and disquiet; they knew whom they have trusted, and he was able to keep that,
that was committed to him, to the coming of Christ. As Saint Paul expresses
it, with which he also rested abundantly satisfied.

On the other side, the want of this, has been the cause of that perplexity,
and disquiet that has been upon the hearts of Gods servants at all times. That
was the reason that Abraham was so disturbed, and disquieted, in that fear of
what should be done to him in Egypt, certainly he failed in this, in resting
upon God.

Moses was wondrously troubled, when the Lord bad him go to Pharaoh, and
deliver Israel out of Egypt (says he) Lord send by him whom thou should
send, I am a man of a stammering tongue, says the Lord, I will be with thy
tongue; He bids him quiet his heart in that perplexity, and rest on him that
made the tongue, to be with his tongue; And because there was another secret
that troubled him, the Lord knew his heart, God says, go, the man that sought
thy life is dead; as if he should say, Moses though thou will not confess it, I
know what troubles thee, thou art afraid that the men that sought thy life are
alive in Pharaohs Court, and that therefore when thou come thither, thou
shall be executed. No, says he, they are dead, he would have him rest on him,
and that would revive his heart, that he should not be troubled and disquieted.
So you may see in other servants of God, that this was always the reason of
any indirect course they took: Jacob and Rebecca, in that case; why did Rebecca
use that device in getting the blessing with Jacob? Because she failed in her
trust in God, she saw how she was perplexed with the daughters of Heth, Esaus
wives, and many troubles that way; And Isaac was dim-sighted, and had many
weaknesses upon him, she knew not how he might mistake, and give the blessing
to the other, therefore she devises a way to get the blessing, but she got
many sorrows; you know what a hard service it cost Jacob, and how many evils it
exposed him to, and all was, because through fear, and disquiet of heart, he
cast not himself upon God in his way, but they would find out ways of their
own.

It should teach us in all disquiet of spirit, Use.
to look principally to the strengthening of our faith. This is called a
shield, Ephesians. 6. when all the darts of temptation that fire the soul, and
perplex it many ways, are cast upon a man; here is a shield to preserve and
keep him safe. Therefore let us ever have this for our use whose and found. You
shall find that even the servants of God have so far been in a comfortable
estate, as they have been in the exercise of their faith.

Take David for an example, when Ziglag was burnt, and his Wives, and servants,
and goods, and cattle, were all carried away, and the Soldiers in the rage of
their hearts, and discontent, began to think of stoning of him, yet faith the
Text, Then David comforted himself in the Lord his God; When there was no
comfort in his Soldiers about him, or in those that were near him, every thing
was taken away, at this time David comforts himself in the Lord his God. So
Job, see how quiet his heart is, and well satisfied, when he rested on God, in
the greatest occasions and troubles, his goods was carried away, his sons were
slain, all added to Jobs misery, but he comes to this; The Lord has given and
the Lord has taken away, blessed be the Lord; when he can look above the
creature to God, and settle his heart upon this rock, he finds comfort in it.

On the other side, the servants of God are never out of trouble, and disquiet
when they neglect this, as the Disciples in the tempest upon the Sea, Math. 8.
they cry out they are utterly undone; Save Master: says Christ, Oh ye of
little faith! The not exercising of their faith did so perplex and disquiet
them as it did, and if you look upon all the complaints of the lives of men,
for the loss of such friends, and the decay of trading, for the ill dealing of
Customers, for sickness, etc. Men are always complaining. What is the reason?
Because they place too much hope and confidence in the creature; they look not
above these things with the eye of faith, and hence comes that disturbance, and
disquiet, if the outward means be taken from them, they look not upon that God
that has all means and opportunities in his own hand.

You believe in God, believe also in me. They that would have their hearts
quiet by believing in God should especially exercise faith in resting on
Christ. Doctr. 3. Faith that quiets the soul, must be pitched upon God in
Christ.


Believe in me, says Christ, for the heart of man flies off from God; Alas,
the Lord is holy, and I am a sinful man, he is righteous, and I am sinful, who
shall come before this holy and righteous God? Now when faith can look upon
Christ, and set him between God and me, and look on God through him, now the
soul rests, he looks on God as a Father through Christ his Son; when the soul
looks on Christ, as my husband married to me, as my head, and I am united to
him as a member, as my Lord that has taken me into his protection, when the
soul thus looks on Christ, now it looks upon God in all his attributes,
wondrous glorious, and comfortable to the soul. This is the thing that I can
but touch at this time; There are two things considerable in it.

First, there is no ground of reposing the soul upon God, but by believing in
Christ, he is the Mediator. Therefore in John 8.24. says Christ, Except you
believe, that I am he whom the Father sent, you shall die in your sins. The
Jews, they did believe in God, they were the children of Abraham, and
worshipped the God of their Fathers, and believed in God; but, says he, except
you believe in me, that I am he that God has sent as Mediator; you shall die
in your sins. And so in this Chapter; I am the way, the truth, and the life, no
man comes to the Father, but by me; there is no other way to the Father. That
as the high Priest under the law was in all things pertaining to God, he was
between God and the people. So Christ our great high Priest is in all things
that concern the glory of God, and the salvation of man, and the acceptance of
a sinner, in all things between God and us; Here is the first thing.

Secondly, it is worth our consideration, how Christ comes to be thus, he was
willing to die, a cursed, a shameful, and cruel death of the Cross, and to be
despised and abased, and all this for man, and yet Christ crucified is
despised, and scorned in the world, therefore if ever you will have acceptance
of God, believe in me, [ In me] that am now going from you; that am to be taken
away by a cursed ignominious death: Here is another truth then, They that
believe in Christ, Doct. 4.
must believe in Christ abased, and Crucified, as well as in Christ in Glory.

That is a thing that flesh and blood despises, indeed all the World speaks
well of the profession of the Faith, and believing in Christ, when Christ is in
triumph, Conquering to conquer: every man glories in Christians, but when
Christianity and profession is cried down in the world, when Christ is
Crucified, when all the World speaks ill of the ways of Christ, and of the
obedience of Faith; now to obey a crucified, scorned, despised Christ in the
sight of the world, to rest on him in the midst of his abasement, this will
comfort the heart of a man in the times of the greatest trouble, there is great
reason it should be thus.

For Christ is the Almighty Glorious God in the midst of his abasement, his
Divinity was not a whit abated, nor his Divine Excellencies diminished by all
his Sufferings; you see Christ in the days of his flesh, he cast Devils out of
men, and they obeyed him; The Devils were subject unto him, when he conversed
among men in the body; nay on the Cross he saved the Thief that confessed him
in the sight of all his Enemies, when he was a crucified Christ, at that
instant he triumphed on the very Cross, and saved a sinner that believed at
that time, to show that he was as mighty on the Cross, as he is now at the
right hand of the Father.

Now I say, is not Christ's glory a whit diminished in his abasement? why should
our belief be abated for all the scorn and despite of the world that is cast
upon the profession of the Faith of Christ?

Now briefly some Application of this, and so to take in the rest withont
amplification, because the time is past.

It should teach us in all disquiet, Use.
to know what course is to be taken; every one will say, I rest upon God, there
is sufficient in him to make me happy. But how shall I come to have interest in
God? The well is deep, where is the bucket? what is the means to relieve my
Soul, and to supply my wants? Believe in me, says Christ; let the Soul look on
Christ immediately as the Mediator between God and us: this is that I should
have spoken of, and a word of Exhortation to the purpose.

You will say, Quest. Answ. What it is to believe in Christ.
what is it to believe in Christ?

The first thing that is done in this, is receiving Christ upon Gods offer of
him, God offers Christ in all his Offices, as King, Priest, and Prophet, as a
Lord and Savior to the Church, and he would have men take whole Christ, or no
part of him. Now if the Soul answer to this offer of God, he shall be my Lord
to rule me, my Prophet to instruct me, my Savior upon whom my Soul shall rest
for Salvation; this is the answer of the Soul to God, this is the receiving.

Now you must know there must be a right propounding, and a right apprehending
of Christ

You must know first what it is to receive Christ as a Prophet, as one that
will instruct us in the truths that are contrary to natural principles in the
corrupt understanding of man, he will lead you now in the way of the
Wilderness, in by-pathes, in crooked, rough ways, he will teach you to deny
your selves.

The first rule that he gives, What it is to receive Christ as a Prophet.
is for a man to deny himself; as if he should say, that is the first work: he
dyed to pull down all the old frame, and to set it up again; for what is the
understanding of man, but a frame of false principles? for the natural mind of
man, it is nothing but a habit, a heap, a pile of false principles, that every
man perishes by the delusion of his own understanding; now the first work of
Christ is to dissolve this frame, and to blot out these rules whereby men walk
when they are lead by sense, and natural reason, and observation of the world;
now these must all be taken away, and a man must resolve all now into the
authority of Christ's speaking. A word of Christ is enough against a thousand
examples in the world, and against a thousand reasons of a man's own corrupt
heart. This is to receive Christ as a Prophet, when I will not walk by the
rules of my deluded reason, and corrupt mind, after which I was carried before,
but the Word of Christ shall carry me in all things, here is obedience of Faith
in matter of Doctrine.

And so to receive Christ as a King, As a King.
would you know what a King he is? he is a holy King, whose laws are all right,
the Law of Faith is a righteous Law, and the obedience of Faith must be
obedience to righteousness, that is righteous obedience wherein a man labors
more and more to perfect holiness in the fear of God.

Hence comes all that care to mortify corruptions, and to frame the inward man
to conform to those rules that are taught by Christ as a Prophet; the soul
receiving Christ as a King gives it self to obey all the rules and directions
that Christ in his Word as a Prophet has lest: and this it does in faith, that
is, looking upon his authority that has commanded it; for that is properly an
act of faith when things are done upon this ground, upon the authority of him
that has revealed it, I believe it to be his will, because he has revealed
it; and it is my duty, because it is his will; Thus the soul resolves all to
Christ, as a Prophet and a King.

And then it rests on him as a Priest, As a Priest.
and comforts it self in Spirit, now for a man when he wants comfort he must
not separate the offices af Christ, and say, I will rest on Christ as a Priest;
these are errors and delusions. Shall a man be saved by a half Faith, by a
piece of Faith? To look on Christ in one office, and to think to be saved only
by that without concurring, and concomitating in the other offices? Beloved as
Christ is entire in all his offices, so the faith of a believer is entire
looking upon all his offices; therefore we must receive him as King, Priest,
and Prophet, that he may be wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and
redemption, that he may be all to the believing soul, for present, and for
future happiness, else if Christ be not all, he will be nothing; men must not
please themselves to look upon one office of Christ; and to neglect all the
rest.

When this is done come to the main matter, the soul is beaten off; as when a
man is in a Boat getting to land after shipwreck, there comes a storm and beats
him back again when he thinks he is even at the shore, but still he takes hold
on the Boat and keeps his eye upon the shore: So the soul when it comes to this
to be beat off again, still it keeps the shore in its sight, and directs it
self toward Christ, that should be the end and aim of all a man's endeavors,
the true object of faith; I beseech you consider this point.

But a man will say, Quest.
though I be careful to receive him (I speak of weak Christians, or of strong
Christians that are weakened by temptations) Alas what hope have I in Christ,
Christ is in heaven, and I am upon the earth?

Did Christ when he was upon the earth, Answ.
so tender the trouble of his servants at that time, as that when he himself
was to suffer, yet he took care to comfort them, be not you troubled but
believe in me; As if he should say, though I be exposed to a world of trouble,
and at this time my soul is heavy unto death, yet be not troubled: was he so
careful when he was in his own troubles on earth to comfort them? and will he
not now be so in heaven, when he is in blessedness? certainly the soul that
has recours to Christ shall not return empty; therefore see how Christ is
expressed in heaven, Matthew. 25. Come ye blessed, etc. For what you have done to
these you have done to me, he is in heaven; and so Saul, why do thou
persecute me? he is in heaven, yet in respect of his Church he is below;
therefore be assured that Christ has not put off the bowels of love to his
people, he will be the same if thou receive him as a Lord and Savior, as ever
he was to his Disciples.

But it may be objected, Object.
we are exposed to many uncertainties, though we believe in Christ, and we find
not the comfort of it here.

Therefore Christ says, Answ.
rest not upon things present, here you are in Tents, but you shall come to
your fathers house, there is a place provided for you, between which and this
there is as much difference as is between a house and a Tent, between a man's
own mansion and an Inn. And though you have hard entertainment in the world,
yet you shall have an abiding place after.

But you will say, Quest.
indeed there are mansions, but there are abundance to receive them, what shall
we do?

There are many masions, Answ.
therefore look as there are many children to be brought to glory, so there are
many places to receive them in glory, and to settle them there: we see what a
vast body the Sun is, and the Stars are, yet they seem but little sparks in
comparison of the heavens above us, but what is the heaven of heavens that
contain all these? infinitely beyond in its own compass; there are many
mansions.

But how shall we come to heaven?

Quest.
Says Christ, Answ.
I go to prepare a place for you; as if he should say, all that I have done, is
for your sakes, I die and ascend, and sit at the right hand of God for your
sakes, I will come at the day of judgment to bring you to glory, all that
Christ does now, as God-man, as Mediator between God and us, all is for our
sake.

But when Christ is taken from us, Quest.
how shall we get thither.

Says he, Answ.
I will come, and bring you with me, I will come in glory at the day of
Judgment in the clouds and enable you to meet me; and thence bring you to those
heavenly mansions in my fathers house, never doubt how these things shall be
done, I will do them all; Thus Christ would confirm their faith, there is the
greatest happiness and comfort in this, wherein he would have them settled; this
should stir us up to settle our hearts this way; But the time is past, this
shall be sufficient for this time.

FAITHS TRIUMPH OVER THE GREATEST TRIALS.
SERMON XXXII.
HEB. 11.17. By faith Abraham when he was tried, offered up his son Isaac, and
he that had received the promise offered up his only begotten son.


THis Chapter does speak in the commendation of the Faith of many of the
Patriarchs, and Abraham among the rest is brought in, with a manifest testimony
of his Faith: there be two things observable, which Abraham's Faith strengthened
him to act, one was to give up his Country, the other was to give up his Son:
to give up his Country in verse 8. By Faith Abraham, when he was called of God,
to go out in a place which he should after receive for an inheritance, obeyed,
and he went out not knowing whether he went. To leave our friends, our parents,
to take our journey we know not whither, to live among we know not whom, and
all this upon a bare word; this was not an easy thing, to part with good Land
for some good words; this was a hard matter, sense derides it, and reason
contemns it, and will not hearken to it, but Faith can see more in Gods
promise, than sense can find. Abraham will leave his Country, when God calls
him to it, but never shall lose his inheritance by believing and obeying: no
man did ever yet hazard his estate, who could part with it upon obedient terms.

A second thing that he is to part with, is with his Son, his only son, his
first begotten son, in this Act of faith; Abraham sails against wind and tide,
where he breaks through the contentments of the world, not only of sense and
reason, but of natural affection. The story in a word is this, God after many
years patience, at length gave Abraham a son in his old age, he was the child
of many prayers, and of many tears, the parents delight, and to Abraham's
thinking an heir of life, because a child of the Promise; he had not long spent
his gray hairs in a strange land, but God on a sudden calls upon Abraham to
give back his son, his very son Isaac, as we may read in the 22 of Genesis. Now
what does Abraham do? how does he behave himself? does he expostulate with God?
Any thing, Lord but spare my son Isaac. Nay, the Text says, he offered up his
son; Does he murmr and grumble against God in this manner; Lord why do thou
single out this delight of mine? why do thou seem to envy this blessing of
mine? No he offered up his Isaac; as if the Text had expressed Ahrahams
language thus; O Lord my God, what is it that thou call for? whom is it that
thou call for? is it for my only son Isaac, the son of my love, the son of
thy promise, the son of my age? verily Lord thou shall have him; it is true, I
love him dearly well, but I love thee better; I got him by believing, and I
shall never lose him by obeying; if Isaac were a thousand sons thou should
have them all, though I am a father, yet Lord thou art a God, if I give him, he
is a sacrifice acceptable, and though I kill him, yet thou can quicken him
and raise him again; I shall never lose my Isaac, though I part with my son,
for thou have said, in Isaac shall thy seed be called.

Now the parts of these words are two; Devision of the words.
First, we have Abraham's great trial.

Secondly, we have Abraham's acquitment.

First his trial, Abraham was tried when he offered up his son.

Secondly his acquitment, by Faith Abraham offered up his son.

In the former we may observe three particulars;

First, the person that is tried, Abraham.

Secondly, the Person that tried him, God.

Thirdly, the thing wherein he was tried, it was no ordinary thing, it was to
part with a part of himself, to offer up his dear son Isaac.

In the latter part two things are observable;

First, his quickening up himself in his obediential act, he offered up Isaac,
says the Text.

Secondly, the powerful cause which did enable Abraham to so difficult a work;
By faith Abraham when he was tried offered up his son, and he that had received
the promise offered up his only begotten son.

Now I cannot handle all these parts by several pieces as they lie, therefore I
will deliver to you the juice and substance of all that I have to say, in two
Propositions, there might be many more collected from these words, but I will
speak of no more, the first is this;

That strong and great trials may befall strong and great Christians.

The second Proposition is this;

That faith will make a man acquit himself in great trials. Now for the first.
That strong and great trials may befall strong and great Christians. Doct 1.
Strong trials befall strong Christians.


The Text clears it in Abraham, about his son, his only son, a great trial,
there are ten remarkable steps in this trial of Abraham in oftering up his Son.

First, 1.
had it been to part with a dutiful servant, this had been something, but to
part with a Son, this is much more, this we know that the relation of a servant
is much less then that of a child.

Again, 2.
if he had been to part with a faithful friend, such a one as Jonathan was to
David, this would have tried him, but to part with a tender Isaac, this is much
more.

Again, 3.
if it were an adopted son that he were to part with, it were not so much, but
to part with a natural son, one that was a part of himself, a part of his own
body.

Again, 4.
if he were a son amongst many more, but he must part with his only son, his
only son Isaac.

Again, 5.
if Abraham had been young, and might have enjoyed another son, it had not been
so much, but he is the only son of his old age.

Again, 6.
if it were the son of his old age, if it had been an Ishmael, this had not
been so much, but his only son Isaac, a child of promise, and of prayer, a
child of many tears.

Again, 7.
if it had been a son wherein he took no great delight, that his affections
were not so much set upon, it had not been so much, but it was the son of his
love; he must not only part with his only son, and the only son of his old
age, but his only son whom he loved.

Again, 8.
if it were but only to part from him, to have him taken away, this had not
been so much, but he must kill his son, he must cut his son all in pieces, and
so offer him up to God, wherein his heart might have disputed with that sinful
act of murder.

Again, 9.
if another had been to do it to cut his son in pieces, but Abraham must do it
himself, the tender Father must take away the life of his tender child.

Again, 10.
it had not been so great; if Abraham had been to do it presently, or near to
some of his friends, that might have hindered him from this Act; but Abraham
must go three days journey, and must go to an unknown place, and there must
pour out the heart and blood, and life of his Isaac.

In these many particulars we may see the greatness of Abraham's trial; O the
height and depth, and breadth of this trial, no one could impose such a trial,
but a God, and none could answer such a trial but an Abraham.

Job may come in as another instance, Job 1.8.
God gives Job this testimony, that he was an eminent person, None like him in
the earth, a perfect and upright man, and one that feared God, and eschewed
evil; He seemed to be the tallest Cedar, and yet he had the sharpest winds, his
eminency in grace, would not deliver him from trouble, he is tried many ways,
in the loss of his cattle, and then in the loss of his servants, and then in
the loss of his children, and in the loss of all his children at once, and all
on a sudden, and at such a time, the time of his greatest prosperity: he is
tried by his near friends, condemned for an hypocrite, and by his own wife
contemned, and tempted to curse God; and he was tried by God himself, He wrote
bitter things against him, and fastened his arrows in his spirit.

But to leave these instances, let me crave leave a little to touch upon two
things for the full and clear opening of this point.

First, I will show you wherein the strength of a trial may consist.

And secondly, Wherein the strength of a trial consists.
I will show you, why God is pleased to lay strong and great trials, upon
strong and great Christians.

First, wherein the strength of a trial may confist, and I will observe six
things which may make a trial great.

First, one is the goodness, and kindness of the agent that deals with us, when
any near to us in a singular relation to us, shall seem to turn against us, and
spoil us, and persecute us, when a dear friend shall prove a bitter enemy; O
this is a heavy trial, no sword cuts so sharp as this, nothing makes a greater
wound then this; when God himself shall seem to reject: He who had said thus
much, I will be a God to Abraham, and I will bless thee, and multiply thy seed,
and yet now to command him a Duel with his son: for a man to meet with a
condition of trouble and sorrow, when he expects all mercy and compassion, and
tenderness of love; O this does cause singular sorrow: to meet with waves in
the midst of the Ocean, it is a common thing, but to thrust the ship into
some harbor, and there to meet shipwark, O this is very much: for a Christian
to find scorns, and hard usage from the world, this is but an ordinary thing;
but when he looks up to heaven, and receives such looks and frowns from God,
that fetch tears from his eyes, and from his heart, this is much more.

Secondly, the strength of a trial may consist in the neerness of an object,
when the trial is not that which rends the garment, but rends the heart; for a
woman to lose her ring, is not so much, but to lose her husband, this is much
more; for a man to lose an outward thing is something, but to lose a child is
much more; this many times is the renting of the loins a sunder, for David to
lose a servant is not so much, but when David loses Absalom, then he cries out,
O Absalom, my son, would God I had dyed for thee. O Absalom my son, my son. God
is pleased many times to try his servants, by taking away the delight of their
eyes, and the joy of their heart, and the hope of their lives.

Thirdly, the strength of a trial may consist in the neerness of a comfort, a
trial is strongest when it seems to pluck away the thing that is nearest the
heart, when God plucks away a Child sucking at the breast, when he takes away
that whereon our delight is fixed; when God on a sudden, does take away and
cousume the Gourd that shadowed Jonah, when he snatches away the thing that we
take content in; O this will enter to the quick, and greatly amaze us, when out
affection is placed, and settled in a designed object, in a person that we
nearly love, and now to take away that comfort, and as it were to diverse the
heart from the heart; O this goes near us, this does exceedingly trouble a
person.

Fourthly, the strength of a trial may consist in the suddenness of it, to
enjoy a comfort, and on a sudden to have it taken away as it were in a man's
sleep, such a thing that he did not dream of, when he did not expect that such
a thing would befall him, if a man had heard something before hand, he might
have been better fitted for it; When the Prophet saw the Cloud ascend out of
the Sea, being warned of abundance of rain, he hastened to escape. So if a
person have fore-notice of such a cross that would fall upon him, he might be
somewhat armed and prepared, he might in some measure be able to bear his
trial, like a little Boat well managed may meet with lofty waves, but when the
affliction shall take a man at unawares, when it takes us before we can gather
our selves together, before we can put out our selves in prayer; for a man to
go forth, and come home and find a wife dead, and for a Woman to go forth, and
come home and find her Husband dead: for a tender Mother to kiss her child, and
lay it down to rest, and the next turn to find her child dead; this is a great
trial.

Fifthly, the strength of a trial is in the successiveness of a trial, the
repetition of a trial, when Jobs messengers come with news of one affliction,
having scarce delivered their message, and their errand, but another comes,
when there is a course of trial one after another; Thou, O Lord, have set me as
a mark, says Job; Why a mark? why God had, as it were, singled him a man for
sorrow and trial, one arrow had no sooner lighted on him, but another comes and
pierces him; Now this does deeply prove our patience, and makes us sometime
wonder, that the Lord should give us no rest, when one affliction shall succeed
another, without any Cordial when the handkerchiff shall no sooner wipe off one
tear, but presently another distills down; Herein is a great strength of trial,
the heart is wonderfully cast down.

Sixthly, the strength of a trial may consist in the strangeness of our
obedience to it, as when a matter is put upon us as a duty to be obeyed, and
has some contradiction to the precept of God: when a trial does cross the
precept of obedience, and jussle against the promise of God, that a man can
hardly obey God, but he must make God a liar. Abraham could not have obeyed God
in killing his Child, but he must run against that other command, forbidding
murder; he could not defer it, but he must violate his faith; Now this does
exceedindly distract the Soul with a great trial, the more contrary the trial
is to the precept of obedience, the greater is the trial, and the more near to
the person. But I proceed to the next question.

Why the Lord does impose great trials upon great Christians, Why God lays
strong trials, on strong Christians.
the reasons of it may be these;

First, great grace will be obscure, and will scarce show it self, unless there
be great trials; Reas. 1.
and therefore S. Paul when he was lift up to the third heavens, lest he should
be exalted above measure, there was given him a thorn in the flesh, he is
beaten down with temptation, that the grace of God might the more appear. God
does hereby prevent our fall, Reas. 2.
and does hold great grace in great conflicts, that the soul might have little
leisure to admire its own fullness.

Secondly, great trials for great Christians, because who is more able to
sustain grear trials then great Christians? God is wise in all his actions; and
as Paul speaks in another case, there was milk for babes, and meat for strong
men; so when he imposes any affliction, he considers the person, and so
proportions the affliction: he imposes the greatest burden, upon the greatest
Christian, a little blast is enough for a tender oak, but a well grounded one
may endure the strongest winds: a poor weak Christian, a little trial will cast
him down, but a well experienced Christian that has enriched himself with the
promises of God, that has hardened himself with the receipt of singular
comforts, one that knows the life of faith, that has gotten singular
patience, he can endure a hard storm, he can go through great trials with great
comfort; He can say with Job, though thou do kill me, yet will I trust in
thee; he will be able to go through many sad nights, and great trials, his
faith will make him conquer all.

I come to the second point, and that is this; that, Faith will make a man
acquit himself in great Trials. Doct. Faith acquits a man in great trials.


Though Abraham is put upon it, in a great trial, in offering up his son, yet
by faith Abraham acquits himself, and offers up his beloved son.

The meaning of the proposition is this, that faith will enable a man to give
back his dearest comfort again to God, though Isaac lie in Abraham's bosom,
though Isaac lie at Abraham's heart, yet Abraham's faith upon Gods call will take
him thence, and present him to that God who gave him.

Faith makes a man resign up willingly unto God his dearest comfort, as Job
did; The Lord has given, and the Lord has taken away, blessed be the name of
the Lord. Beloved, remember this, faith can take a mercy and be thankful, and
faith can part with a mercy and be content. Paul he had learned how to abound,
and how to be in want; and this lesson was the lesson of faith: faith makes a
Christian take from Christ, what it injoyes, like one of the blessed Martyrs,
his condition was, if God gave him any mercy, he was cheerful; if the Lord take
away any mercy, he fits down with contentment, quieting his soul in patience,
if God give him any mercy, he was not swollen with pride; if God take away any
mercy, he was not cast down with sorrow. Do thou remember me, O Lord; says
faith: Lord I am unworthy the least of all thy mercies and goodness. Lord do
thou call for this blessing back again? why here it is Lord, do what thou
please; like an honest debtor, says he, if you can spare me a little, I will
thank you, but if you will have it, here it is; as the blessing is a gift of
Gods kindness, so neither does faith account of any mercy, but a borrowed, a
lent good which God may require when he pleases.

There is a double acquitting of our selves, one is a necessary acquitting, and
the other is a pious, and Christian acquitting: there is this difference
between a godly man, and another, when God calls for any one of thy comforts,
it must be restored, God is the Lord of life, and whether we are willing or
not, when he calls, the comfort and we must part, and in this respect a man who
wants a lively faith, may acquit himself in a trial, when he sees that floods
of tears will not help him, specially when he sees it is past recovery, he
resigns up a comfort, when he can keep it no longer, he will part with a
blessing when he cannot avoid it. But then there is a pious acquitting of our
selves, when God calls for a comfort back, the hand of Faith presents the
comfor to God again, when God calls for Isaac, Abraham presently resigns up his
beloved Son again, upon this ground; God is the Lord who gave him, and now the
Lord calls for him back again; I, and the Lord shall have him; thus Faith
acquits the soul in great trials, and joins with God against all our own
contentments, to set down with much patience in great losses, to submit to Gods
call, and Gods appointment.

Now the reasons why Faith can acquit a man in great trials may be these. Reas.
1.
First, Faith can exalt Gods will above all, and submit our wills to Gods will,
remember this. God is the Author of mercy, when he will he gives us, and when
he pleases, he takes it away again. It is well to have abundance, says
nature, and sense, we cannot be without it: no says Faith, I will yield to
Gods will, it is good to enjoy this says Sense; it is better to part with it,
says Faith, when God calls for it.

Secondly, Reas. 2.
Faith can give God the glory of all outward comforts; this is a great occasion
of stilling our souls, to find out the right owner of our comforts; if a man
did once discern that by faith, that God is the Author of all comfort, and that
all mercies come from God, this would make us submit in the day of trial: this
is certain, God is the God of our bodies, and of our souls, and of our
comforts; who has more right to a possession then the owner, all our comforts
are but Gods servants, God is the great Landlord of heaven and earth, the God
of all our possessions; what if he be pleased to gather a flower, we are but
tenants at will, and whatsoever our outward estate is, Faith over-looks all,
and submits all to God, and receives it by Gods permission, and does as it were
hear the Lord say, I must do what I will with mine own; Faith makes a man say,
nothing is mine own, my Child is not mine own, my Wife is not mine own, it is
Gods possession, when God calls for it; Faith resigns it up as Gods due, faith
renders unto God, the things that are Gods.

Thirdly, Reas. 3.
Faith can make the soul acquit it self in great trials, because faith finds no
loss by obediencial submission, for all our unwillingness to resign up, and to
part with any comfort, it does arise from infidelity, or from the stubbornness
that is in a person, when a man haves and holds his comfort contrary to Gods
will; or else it does arise from a conceit that some damage will redound to
our selves, ^parting with such a blessing, but faith sees safety enough to
yield up all into Gods hands, who is the Father of mercy, and God of all
consolation. Thus we see Abraham being put to it about his only son, he gives
up his child, his Isaac, and God bestows Isaac upon Abraham again; nay, a
further degree of blessing confirmed with an oath; In blessing, I will bless
thee, and in multiplying I will multiply thee, and will multiply thy seed as
the stars of heaven; This is ever true; faith makes a man give back a blessing
with this conclusion, either God will continue the comfort to a person, or else
he will give him more, or a better for it.

Fourthly, Reas. 4.
a fourth reason why Faith can make a man acquit himself in great trials,
because Faith can find all losses made up in God alone; Faith can find God as a
most ample and universal good; Faith does look upon God as a particular good,
and such a good that answers all again, that abundantly makes up all losses:
There be many broken pieces of comfort that must concur to make up our outward
good; for our good here below is a compounded good, the Wise is a part that
makes up our good below; and our children are a part that makes up our good
below, and our health, and our riches, and our friends; many of these concur
together, to make up our good here below is a compounded good, the Wife is a
part that makes up our good below; and our children are a part that makes up
our good below, and our health, and our riches, and our friends; many of these
concur together, to make up our good below: but God is all this in himself, and
much more, whatsoever good, whatsoever comforts, are in a Child, a Wife, a
Husband, or in friends, in riches, in health, all that is in God, and much more
to faith: what is that thou see in a Husband, or in a Wife, or in a Child,
that thou may not see in God? What is that thou find in a friend, that
thou may not find in God? and what is there in riches, that thou may not
have much more in God? the Husband can do thee no good without God, who can do
thee so much good as God? the Husband can comfort thee, who can comfort thee so
much as God? a friend may counsel thee, and direct thee, but he cannot deliver
thee; Faith sees more in God than in riches, more in God then in all outward
blessings; bring all the outward comforts together, they cannot make up a
Christians comfort; Faith is never satisfied with these things, it is not a
Child alone, nor a Husband alone, nor a Wife alone, nor a friend alone, that
makes up a Christians comfort, but God alone can do it; whatsoever is in any
outward comfort Faith find it much more in God, God and his favor, God and his
gracious countenance, these make up a Christians comfort, this alone supports
the Christian, and in the want of all things Faith can comfort it self in the
favor of God; in the loss of all things, Faith can find all again in the
favor of God. This is a fourth reason why Faith makes a man acquit himself in
great Trials.

A fifth reason, Reas. 5.
why Faith makes a man acquit himself in great troubles, because Faith knows
upon what terms we possess all these outward comforts, upon what small grounds
we possess them; upon moveable and changeable titles. Faith looks upon all
these things, as upon things that he must part from; we have here no abiding
City, our place and being here is but for a short time, and remember this, God
never bestowed any comfort upon thee and me, with an assurance of an immortal
possession, all the assurance that he has given thee is nothing, all the
creature is but vanity, it is of a shifting nature, and therefore it is said of
riches, that they do take to themselves wings, they skip away, honor is soon
gone, riches are soon gone, the life of man is soon gone, the life of man is
but a breath, a vapor which is presently consumed, but a glass of a brittle
substance, all our comforts are of a changeable nature; that whereon we set our
affection, is taken from us in a moment.

Thus I have opened these two points, now give me leave to make some use; I
will spare to speak to you of the occasion of our meeting together, for Funeral
Sermons are not for the advantage of the dead, but for the instruction of the
living: there are two Uses that I will make of those two propositions; I know
many more may be produced, but I consider the time.

The first Use is this; Since great trials may befall great Christians, then let
us prepare for great trials, Use 1.
for as much as such kind and degrees of affliction and crosses may besal us.
There are two things that a man should always provide for, one is while we
live to provide for Death; the other is while we are in prosperity, to provide
for affliction, for a change: and for this consider two things.

First our outward condition is but a shadow, it has a natural aptness to
change, there is not a person that hears me this day, but this may concern his
outward condition; Man is born unto trouble, says Job, as the sparks fly
upward; as if trouble were his natural sphere wherein he is to move.

Thou can not assure thy self of life, no not a moment; nor of any of these
outward comforts, neither can thou promise thy self security in any state or
condition, though thou may get assurance that God will save thee, yet thou
can never get assurance, that God will never try thee; we see that Death
enters into many houses of this City at this time; in one house, one has lost
a Father, another has lost a Wife, another has lost a Husband, another has
lost a Child, another is in sorrow for the loss of a dear friend; and therefore
we should provide for a change, because the next commission of Death, may enter
into our houses; it is our sins that puts our lives upon these conditions; our
sins do always leave something contrary to our comforts, to alter and change
our present condition, Death takes away our life, and plucks away our comfort,
and dis-inherits us of all these outward things; how soon does Death lay honor
in the dust? how soon is beauty ecclipsed by deformity? our strength laid down
by weakness? our health overcome by sickness, our life overtaken by Death? all
these may eclipse our comforts, these clouds may soon darken our sun; one
thing or other every moment is ready to put out our candle, to darken our day,
to cease our life; alas what is life but a shadow? What is honor but a blast?
what are the things we do so much pride our selves in? they are but as Jonahs
Gourd, which perishes in a moment, and many times the cause of our sorrow and
affliction; the loss of them a greater grief then the want of them, this
staff on which we lean will soon be broken; a Ship may last for a while, but
she will sink at the last. What is the Wife man's verdict of all things under
the Sun? he concludes they are all vanity; that is not enough, they are nothing
but vanity; that is not enough neither, they are nothing but vanity, and
vexation of spirit, things less then nothing: then how little is it that we are
to expect from them? we should provide for a change; not only our outward
condition is thus changeable, but our inward condition too; our spiritual
comfort is changeable, though there is stability in the main, yet a Christian
meets with many intermissions. Beloved, if our condition were not changeable, I
would hold my tongue from exhorting you to provide for a change.

Secondly, as our outward condition is cast upon many changes, so when these
changes do befall us, when they come to strip us of our comfort, verily they
will put us to it. Thou art mistaken, thou think thou can bear a loss, or
a cross, it is not so easy a matter to bear the loss of a Child; or a Husband,
or a Wife, or a Father, or the loss of a dear friend; it is not so easy a
thing to bear the loss of an estate, as thou think, thou shall find it a
hard matter to bear in worldly sorrow, we may seem to take courage before
affliction comes, but when afflictions and trials fall upon us, then we are put
to it: it is with us, as with a Ship, when the Sun does shine, and the Seas are
calm, and the Wind fair, then she goes on pleasantly in her motion, but in a
storm all little enough to keep her steady: in our easy days, in our days of
peace, in our calm estate, then we can hold up our heads well enough; but in
our losses and crosses, we shall hardly bear up, unless the Lord do mightily
support us.

We may observe two sorts of persons in the world, 1.
some are insensible persons, who are like the Rock that nothing can break it;
who are so hardened, that though God do scourge them, yet they feel it not,
though God does threaten them, they fear not, though Gods hand be already upon
them, they regard it not; a condition not so much now to be checked, as to be
deplored. To such persons it is all one, whether God bless, or whether God
curse; whether he speak by his Word, or by his Rod, it is all one to them, they
feel nothing, nor fear nothing.

Secondly, 2.
there is another sort of persons, who are sensible persons, sensible of Gods
love, and sensible of Gods anger; they know that God is good and wife, that he
does not strike off our comforts from us, but upon some special cause. Now to
stay upon God, and to yield to the Lord; It is the Lord, let him do what seems
good unto him. God does not deprive me of such a comfort, but he sees it best
for me. Beloved, it were good to learn this lesson, it will cost thee something
in a near trial, to acquit thy self by faith, to acquit God, and to submit to
his chastisement, to kiss the rod, to judge the sin, to bend the soul, to better
the life, this were an excellent lesson to learn in all our trials and
afflictions.

Secondly, Use 2.
if great trials may befall great Christiaus, and faith is that which will make
a man acquit himself in great trials; then get faith, use faith. What faith is,
I have diverse times discovered in this assembly, whence it comes, from heaven,
how we may attain it, by the word and Prayer; but to omit these, I say get
faith, labor for this grace of faith, if there were no other reason but this,
it is able to support us in our days of trial, it is able to give us comfort
in our greatest sorrow; this were motive enough to make us labor to get faith,
the day of trial being so common, and we apt every moment to fall under some
trial or other.

There be four virtues and special effects that faith works in the soul, which
will enable us to go through great trials, and therefore we should labor to
get this grace of faith into our souls.

First, faith gets assurance; Secondly, breeds submittance; Thirdly,
dependence; and lastly, conveyance.

First, faith gets assurance, it can eye God as our God, though the storms be
very great, yet God can quiet it. When a man though he sees his outward comfort
dead, yet Faith sees it in the hand of a living God; Faith assures the soul,
God will put an end to the trial, though there be a changeableness in the
outward condition, yet there is safety in God, and setledness in God. Though a
man may look with a dull eye upon his loss, yet if he can look upon God with
the eye of faith, as his God, the absence of a poor creature cannot so much
trouble him, as the presence of a gracious, and a glorious God, can comfort and
support him.

Secondly, submittance is another effect of faith, which faith works in the
soul: our outward condition is subject to many changes, and many times we meet
with them, and we are hindered in our comforts, and naturally we grow
impatient, and murmur and quarrel with Gods providence; but now there is a
virtue in faith, it fashions the heart, and the mind to the condition, faith
makes a man submit to God in all estates, to make us stoop to our burden, it
is the Lord says Eli. 1 Samuel 3. let him do what seems good unto him; and in
the 39. Psalm. says David, I was dumb, and opened not my mouth, because the
Lord did it. Observe this, unbelief makes a man dumb, and faith made David
dumb. Zachary, because he believed not the word that the Angel spoke, he was
dumb; and David because he believed the word of the Lord, he was dumb; unbelief
procures dumbness, as a judgment from God, but faith makes a Christian dumb
from complaining, it quiets the soul in silence from murmuring against God, it
does not make a person dumb, as not to pray, and to praise God, but dumb in
complaint. Good is the word of the Lord, says Faith.

A third effect of Faith is dependence, it will make a man trust God in
frowning days, though he kill me, yet will I trust in him, says Faith: we can
never lose any outward comfort, but Faith can find a better in God, though an
outward loss may come, yet Faith can make it up in God, in the want of an
outward comfort it will trust God; Lord what wait I for? says David, truly my
hope is in thee. Though the Christian estate may be at some time moanful, yet
at no time it is hopeless.

A fourth effect, that Faith works is conveyance, it can convey something to
enable the soul to bear it up in all trials: as Faith is an active grace to
enable the soul to the performance of duty; so Faith is a passive grace, to
strengthen the soul to suffer and bear affliction; To you, says the Apostle,
it is given not only to believe, but also to suffer for his Name. Faith will
call in strength enough to bear affliction: we see many times a poor Christian
by the strength of faith is able to bear a great loss, and undergo a great
trial. God is pleased to exercise a Christian with great affliction, but Faith
carries the soul along through all: remember this, Faith bears Gods trials,
with Gods strength, there is a power in Faith which exceeds all outward crosses
and losses; Faith draws strength from the Promise, for there is no cross nor
affliction, but Faith can find a support in the promise of deliverance. Faith
makes a man see the affliction, as it were, come out of the hand of the Lord,
out of the hand of Mercy; Faith can convey comfort to the soul in affliction,
by making it see the chastisement delivered from the hand of a wise and loving
Father, that our chastisement is for our profit, for our future advantage, and
that this is sent for our personal good: if thou could get but a sensible
denial of thy self, and by faith see all things measured out by the Lord: this
would make us with patience, take from God what he imposes upon us; Faith will
make a man conquer himself, it will silence all murmuring, and make the Soul
bear its cross with patience.

THE PRIVILEGE OF THE FAITHFUL: OR, The Joint-Inheritance OF ALL BELIEVERS.
SERMON XXXIII.
1 PET. 3.7. As Heirs together of the grace of life.


TO let pass all by-passages, The sum of the words.
you have in this Text the privilege of Women, which is the very same with
that of Men, especially in relation to the greatest privilege that belongs
to either of them. The very privilege it self (as at the first view of the
Text may appear to you) affords a fit Theme for such an occasion as this is;
which is the solemnization of the Funeral of a Grave, pious, and prudent
Matron, who was indeed while she lived a Mother in Israel, in the Church of
God: who in her lifetime testified much love to the Saints of God, and in that
respect I may say deserved (now she is taken away) this respect of Gods Saints
and Children, which by you is now showed to her in accompanying her to her bed
of rest.

The forenamed words of my Text, Parts of the Text,
does branch it self forth into two parts.

One sets out the privilege it self.

The other, the partakers thereof.

The Privilege, therein you may observe two points;

First the kind of it, Life.

Secondly, the ground of it, grace.

The partakers of this privilege are set forth in a compounded Article,
Joynt-heirs, Coheirs, heirs together, having relation to Women.

The simple consideration of the Word, shows the right they have to the
forenamed privilege, they are heirs. The compound shows the extent of it,
Coheirs, one with another, Men and Women, heirs together of the grace of life.

That yet you may a little more distinctly discern the scope of the Apostle in
this Coherence.
Text: in a word, note the inference of it upon that which goes before, or the
connection of it therewith. Lift up therefore your eyes but a little higher to
the words going before, and you may observe the Apostle giving a direction to
men to honor Women, notwithstanding they are the weaker vessels: Vessels they
are, therefore capable of that which God shall be pleased to infuse into them,
his grace: they are weak vessels, so are men also, they are earthen vessels:
these are the weaker; these comparatively may be said to be as glassie vessels,
and yet notwithstanding, you have a common saying, that a glass with good
keeping may last as long as an earthen Pot, but both brittle: Now
notwithstanding this Sex be brittle, and the weaker, yet to be honored, and
that upon this ground, because partakers with Men, and as well as Men, of the
greatest privilege, the grace of life.

Were this a meeting for the solemnization of a Marriage, I might further
descan upon this plain-song, that arises from the inference, of Men's honoring
of Women. What have I said, if it were a Marriage solemnity? surely, howsoever
here be before our eyes, the eyes of our bodies, a visible object of mortality;
yet notwithstanding, here is before us, an invisible occasion of rejoicing, as
at a Marriage solemnity, to the eye of our soul, understanding, and faith: for
while here we live in the world, Jesus Christ our Spouse, he has his friends,
friends of the Bridegroom, his Ministers and messengers, that in his name come
to us, woo us, use all the means that may be, to move us to accept of Christ
for our Lord and Husband; When a man accepts of this offer, there is then the
contract consummated, in regard of the Mutual consent that passes between the
one and the other; Christ having his Proxies here, we the Ministers being for
him; and every believing soul for himself. This contract continues so long as
here we remain in this world; when we depart, the body is laid in the
Bride-bed, quietly to rest, and sleep, till the Bridegroom be pleased to come
and awake his Spouse, and it will be a blessed voice that he shall come withal,
Come ye blessed of my Father, receive the kingdom prepared for you from the
beginning of the world. As for the soul, that goes immediately to Christ, and
is in his Fathers house with him; the Spouse in that part, with her Husband the
Lord Christ, enjoying an eternal, inviolable communion, and sweet society.

But howsoever this is thus to the invisible eyes of the soul, we now must look
upon the object here before us; and answerably order out matter; and therefore
with this touch I let pass the inference, and come to the substance of the Text.

You heard the sum; you heard the parts. But we must hear proceed, Huesteron
and Proteron, and clean invert the order of the words, as I hope your selves
will discern, if you do but well mark the order and method: Life is in the last
place; grace before it; the right, that comes before it; and the extent of
that right, before all. I suppose therefore you will think that first it is
meet, to lay forth the privilege it self, Life: and then to speak of the
ground of it: then of the right that we have; and then of the Extent of that
right: and this order I purpose to follow.

First, The first branch of the Text: Explication
therefore concerning the Privilege it self, Life.

For brevities sake, I forbear to speak much of the diverse acceptations of
life, and distinctions thereof, as it is in the Creator, the only true God,
Father, Son, and holy Spirit: or as it is the invisible and glorious creatures,
the Angels: or as it is in men, who are animated by a reasonable soul: or as it
is in those creatures that are guided only by sense, Beasts, Fowl, Fish: or
otherwise, as it Trees and Plants, that come forth out of the earth, having a
vegetative life only.

The life here meant, 1 What life it is that is here meant.
is that we call eternal life; consisting in our communion with Christ our
Spouse: and this is a life proper to the Saints; proper unto them, because
coming from the grace of God, extended unto them alone; proper unto them,
Eternal life proper to the Saints.
because they are heirs of it. And in this extent, there is a restraint;
howsoever the extent be in diverse considerations, yet a restraint, a
qualification; only believers, only found true Christians, to them it is proper.

And this life is to be considered, either in the Inchoation and beginning
thereof; or in the consummation and accomplishment thereof.

In regard of the Inchoation of this special life of the Saints, Begun in this
world.
it is here begun in this world; I [now] live (faith the Apostle, speaking even
of this life) by the faith of the Son of God: Gal 2.20.
And the Just shall live by faith. This life it is by Christ's dwelling and
living in us: Heb 2, 3.
I now live; yet not I, but Christ lives in me, faith the Apostle in the place
before quoted.

The other, Consummated in the world to come.
it is in the world to come, and it is by a sweet feeling and fruition; it is
by our abiding with Christ, and living with him: in which respect, faith our
Lord Christ, to the penitent believer upon the Cross, This day (the very day
that he dyed) shall thou be [with me] in Paradise: Phil 1.21.
and so Saint Paul says of himself; I desire to be dissolved, and to be [with
Christ,] implying that upon the dissolution, immediately there is a fruition, 1
These. 4.17
a communion with Christ: And the same Apostle, speaking of those Saints that
shall be upon the earth at the very moment of Judgment, when the dead (faith
he) are raised, then shall we also that are alive, and remain, be cought up
together with them in the clouds, to meet the Lord in the air, and so shall we
ever be [with the Lord.] Now then, mark, here you see the soul has present
communion with Christ upon the dissolution of the body: and the body also shall
have communion with him at the great day of the Resurrection of all flesh.

Now this life and communion with Christ is proper to the Saints, by virtue of
their union with Christ; A mistical union. For Christ the Son of God, he is
life originally in himself, Joh. 5.26.
for as the Father has life in himself, so has he given to the Son to have
life in himself. He is also Life communicatively, communicating life unto us;
Joh. 6 33.
therefore he is said to be the Bread of life, and in this sense, because he is
that Bread which comes down from heaven, and gives life unto the world.

The Use of this point (my brethren) is manifold. Use 1. For instructiou.
I will but touch it. First, it does instruct us in the great love, and good
respect, that God bears to us children of men, that of his own good pleasure
has written our names in the book of life; and has sent his Son to purchase
life for us; and to bring us also to this life. Beloved what love the Father
has showed to us in Christ!

Secondly, Use 2. For demonstration.
this is a demonstrrtion of the woeful plight wherein naturally men are in this
world: they may seem to be of some account, they have a life that is far
different from the life of Plants, and also from the life of Beasts; they have
a reasonable soul to animate them: Oh but this, this is not the life; Natural
life indeed is a death compared to this life, that is here noted to be proper
to the Saints, which comes by grace, whereof we are heirs: and therefore of all
natural men it may be said, as the Apostle said of the wanton Widow, 1 Timothy
5.6. Ephesians. 2.1.
she is dead while she lives; even so are all such dead while they live, dead
in sins and trespasses: and if so be those that are in this kind dead, continue
so till the death of the body seize upon them, woe, woe, woe to them, upon this
follows an eternal death, endless, easeless, and remediless torment upon body
and soul for ever.

Thirdly, Use 3. For consolation.
the Saints have here consolation, against the mortality and corruption whereto
they are subject here in this world; wherein their condition is common with the
condition of all; for that that befalls one, may befall every one, in regard
of the outward estate and condition, All must die. Nay further, here is
consolation against the distresses, and afflictions, and pressures, whereto the
Saints are subject above others for their profession sake; 2 Timothy 3.12. Act
14.22.
in this very respect they are hated, they are persecuted, all that will live
godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution; and through many afflictions we
must enter into the kingdom of heaven. Where is now there comfort? surely this,
that is set before us: you heard that natural men are dead while they live: but
those that are in Christ, do live while they may seem to be dead; Jonah lived
when he was cast into the Sea, swallowed up by a Whale, and was even as it were
in hell; so the Saints, though swallowed up as we may say, in the tempestuous
sea of this world by cruel Whales, yet notwithstanding they still live that life
that is begun here in the world, whereof you heard before: And to this purpose
the Apostle Saint Paul, in 2 Cor. 4.9, 10, 11, 12. shows plainly, that though
they are given up unto death daily for Jesus sake, yet they are not destroyed,
not clean swallowed up, but that they live in Christ, and that Christ lives in
them: We are perplexed, but not in despair; perseouted, but not forsaken, etc.
And this is it that does comfort them, both the fruition of that life that they
have here; and their expectation of the accomplishment, and fullness thereof in
the kingdom of heaven.

Now (my brethren) this is the rather to be observed of us, because of all
others, the Saints seem to be most subject to death. And the truth is, here is
matter of admiration in regard of their happiness, that notwithstanding that
condition whereto they are subject, there is a life they enjoy in this world;
there is a better life prepared for them hereafter.

And what can be more desired? Life of all things else is most esteemed: Men
are ready in sickness, and in other distresses, to spend all that they have (as
the Woman that was troubled with the bloody issue, Mark. 5.26.
spent all that she had upon the Physicians) to preserve life, Eccles. 9 4.
to recover health. Solomon (speaking according to the conceit of men) says,
that a living Dog, is better then a dead Lion, any life better then a death,
thus they imagine; Job 2.4.
and Satan well knew men's account of life, when he could say, Skin for skin,
yea all that a man has, will be give for his life. Now, if so be that this
temporal life here, that is but a flower, but a bubble, but a blast, but a
breath, yea, that life that in the shortness thereof is subject to so much
perplexity as it is, be notwithstanding so highly esteemed; what is the life
here promised, that while here in the enjoying, Phil. 1.7
in regard of the first fruits thereof is accompanied with such a peace as
passes understanding, Romans 14.17.
accompanied with the very joy of the Holy Ghost, and in the consummation
thereof, such contentment, such glory, as the tongue of man cannot express, the
mind of man cannot conceive? It is noted of the Apostle Saint Paul, when he was
caught up to the third heaven, and saw but a glimps of this life, he did there
see (they are his own words) unutterable matter, 2 Cor. 12.2.
things that cannot be expressed. And therefore in this respect he says (and
that which he says may be most fitly applied to this) the things which eye
has not seen, 1 Cor. 2.9.
nor ear heard, neither has entered into the heart of man, are such as God has
prepared for them that love him. This is that Life which we are so to consider
of as it may make us say with the Apostle, I account that the sufferings of
this present time are not worthy to be campared with the glory Romans 8.18.
which shall be revealed in us; for our light affliction which is but for a
moment, works for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory. 2 Cor
4.17.


It will be here said, The second branch of the Text.
whence comes this? or what may be the ground thereof?

My Text tells you; It is styled here, Grace of Life.

Neither will I here insist upon the diverse acceptations of grace; as it is in
man, as it is Gratis data; Eternal life comes from divine grace.
or as it is in God, as it is Gratis faciens, making us accepted with himself:
It is more clear then need to be proved, that eternal life it comes from
divine grace: Grace is the ground of it. Being justified by grace, (says the
Apostle) and again, by Grace you are saved. Tit. 3.7.
And indeed all things that bring us thereto, are in Scriptures attributed to
Grace. Ephesians. 2.8.
And needs must it be so. For,

First, Reas. 1.
out of God there can be nothing done to move him to do this or that, as if it
should be done for our sakes, either meriting or procuring of it. He is
independent, and we are depending upon him, and whatsoever we have is out of
our selves, and comes from him.

Again, Reas. 2.2 Cor. 3.5.
in Man there can be nothing. What is there in man but misery? whatsoever man
had, or has; if there be any good thing, he has it from this fountain of
goodness, all our sufficiency is of God.

And this is briefly to be noted against that proud and arrogant position of
our Adversaries, Use 1. For confutation.
concerning the merit of man's works; as if man, by any thing in him, could
merit or deserve this life, it is not the merit of life, but the grace of life.
Surely they know not God, they know not his infiniteness, his all sufficiency;
they know not man, his emptiness, his impotency, his vileness, his cursedness;
they know not this life, they know not the reward, the excellency of it, the
disproportion between any thing that man can do, and this life that is thus
graciously bestowed, that have such a conceit: Let them therefore pass with
their foolish opinion.

For our own parts, Use 2. For Consolation.
it affords to us another ground of comfort, and that in regard of our
unworthiness: for as we are creatures, we are less than the least of Gods
mercies; but as we are mortal creatures, dust and ashes, much more unworthy of
any favor; but as we are sinful creatures, having provoked the Justice of God,
most, most unworthy of any grace, of any life, most worthy of all judgments
and vengeance, of eternal death and damnation. Where is now our hope? what
ground shall we have that have nothing in our selves? surely this, the ground
of this life, the grace of God. What God does, he does for himself, for his own
names sake; Grace is free.

And these two joined together, give evident demonstration of God to be a God,
in the thing that he does confer upon thee, and in his dealing of it: the
greatness of the gift that he does give, and the freeness of it. For who can
give life, but the God of life, that has life in himself? And then again to do
this altogether upon mere grace, upon his own good pleasure; it is a divine
property. And this is it that does encourage us to come unto God,
notwithstanding our unworthiness.

And in this respect in the second place we have here a Use of instruction: Use
3. For Instruction.
to acquaint our selves with God, with the freeness of his Grace; to plead it
unto God when we come unto him, and notwithstanding our unworthiness, and our
wretchedness, yet to press this, Lord, what thou do, thou do for thy own
sake, out of thy mere grace, this makes me bold to come unto thee. Specially
upon the consideration of that greatest evidence of Gods free grace, and rich
mercy in giving his Son to do whatsoever is requisite for the satisfaction of
his Justice: so that here Grace and Justice do sweetly go together for the
strengthening of our Faith; Grace in regard of our unworthiness; Justice in
regard of our rebellion; God does what he does for his own sake; his own Son
has made full satisfaction to his Justice.

And finally, Use 4. For exhortation.
this should the more enlarge the heart to God again: a gift the freer it is,
the more worthy of praise it must needs be, the more acceptable to him that
receives it, when he receives it from mere Grace; and he that gives it, is
thereby the more worthy of praise: so that lay these two together, life, and
the grace of life; and then tell me what sufficient thanks can be given to him,
who out of his Grace does bestow this life?

Thus from the privilege in the second part thereof, The third branch of the
Text.
come we to the partakers of this privilege.

And first of the simple consideration of it, The Saints have right to eternal
life by inheritance.
Heirs, so that we come to a right unto that eternal life by inheritance; as we
are Heirs.

So do the Texts before-noted expressly set it forth, We are justified by his
grace, that we should be heirs of eternal life, Tit. 3.7. And Saint Paul gives
thanks to God for the Collossians, that he had made them partakers of the
inheritance of the Saints in light. And our Lord when he does give us
possession hereof, inducts us thereunto with this, inherit the Kingdom prepared
for you, Mat. 25.34. take it by inheritance; here is your right.

Now we may not think that this ground of right to our eternal inheritance
comes by our natural generation, for so we are heirs, and children of wrath,
as the Apostle notes in Ephesians. 2.3. It cannot come by nature, for so it is
Christ's prerogative, the true, proper, natural Son of God; and thus (as the
Apostle faith) God has appointed him heir of all things, Heb. 1.2. but it is
by another grace, whereby we are made children: A double grace in this respect:
a grace of Adoption; and a grace of Regeneration. A grace of Adoption, for God
gives to us the spirit of Adoption, whereby we are moved to cry and call,
Abba, Father; and by this grace we are children, and being children, we are
heirs, Coheirs, not only one with another, but (as it is there noted) heirs
together with Christ, Coheirs with him by virtue of this grace of Adoption. So
likewise by the other grace of Regeneration, we are qualified hereunto; Saint
Peter in his first Epistle, chap. 1. verse 3. blesses God, Blessed be the God
(says he) and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which according to his abundant
mercy has begotten us again to an inheritance incorruptible, etc. We are
begotten to this inheritance.

This might again be pressed as a further Argument against the forementioned
presumptious Doctrine of Merit: Use 1. For Confutation.
that that comes by Inheritance, comes not by Desert. But I pass it over.

This does afford to us matter of consolation (for this Text is full of
consolation every word of it) Use 2. For Consolation.
against the baseness whereunto in this world the Saints seem to be subject,
that are scoffed, that are despised: howsoever they appear here in mortal man's
eye, yet notwithstanding in truth they are Heirs, they have an Inheritance.

And as it does administer to us matter of comfort, Use 3. For Direction. 1.
and a ground of holy boasting, and glorying in the Lord; so it affords to us
direction, to carry our selves as becomes Heirs: not to set our love too much
upon this world, not to dote upon it; but to be lofty minded, to have our heart
and affection where our inheritance is, namely in Heaven, to wait with patience
for it: Be followers of those (says the Apostle) that through says and
patience inherit the promise.

And likewise to make sure to our selves our inheritance; 2.
look to our evidences; Give all diligence (says the Apostle) to make your
calling and election sure. Do but make your Calling sure, that you are truly
and effectually called, then it solloweth by just and necessary consequence,
you were elected before the foundations of the world, and shall be saved. Many
other Meditations do arise out of this right we have to that life which by
Grace is conferred upon us.

Consider we the extent hereof, The fourth branch of the Text. All of all sorts
have a right to eternal life.
Heirs together; joynt-heirs: so as all of all sorts have a right to the life
of Saints. I speak here of outward conditions, whether they be great or mean,
rich or poor, free or bond; whatsoever they be, they have all a right, they are
joynt-heirs, they are heirs together. As it is with us in some places, there is
a title of Gavil kind, that gives a joynt-right to all the Sons that a man
has: and so for Daughters, all Daughters are coheirs: so this tenor is (as I
may say) Gavil kind, Acts 10, 34
all have a right thereunto, no exception of any, because God is no respecter
of persons.

This (my Brethren) serves as an admonition to those that are great, Use 1.
For Admonition.
or may seem to be higher than others here in this world, if they be Saints,
let them not despise others, who are Saints too, they are Coheirs with them;
they are fellow-brethren, there is not an elder Brother among them, Christ only
is the Elder Brother. There may some have a greater degree of glory; there may
some have greater evidences thereof in this world, and greater assurance, yet
not withstanding they have all a right to the inheritance, they are all
Coheirs.

And this again is another comfort to the meaner, Use 2. For Consolation
general.
and weaker sort: that howsoever there may be some difference in regard of
outward condition here, yet notwithstanding in the greatest privilege there is
no difference at all: and therefore to conclude, concerning these, and other
consolations ministered to you, I will use the Apostles words, Comfort your
selves with these things, 1 These. 4.18.

And particularly concerning the Female Sex (because the Apostle here applies
it to them, Particular.
and says of them as well as of men, that they are Heirs, Coheirs of the same
inheritance) this therefore is to be applied to them, for when the Apostle
makes distinction of outward conditions, in Gal. 3.28. he puts in this, Male
and Female, and of these he says, All are one in Christ, no difference: for
the Female at first were made after the same Image that the Male were, He made
them Male and Female in his own Image, Genesis 1.27. Both sorts have the same
Savior, and are redeemed by the same price: A Woman said, My soul rejoices in
God my Savior, Luke 1.47. they are both sanctified by the same Spirit: the
Apostle says, that when an unbelieving Husband is knit to a believing Wife,
The Husband is sanctisied by the wise, as well as in the other case, the Wife
is sanctified by the Husband.

And this my brethren gives a check, to the undue, the unjust consure, that
many do give to this weaker vessel, that this Sex is (as it were) the
imperfection of nature, and I know not what; I will not stand upon it, as most
unworthy the confutation.

But for the Sex it self, it is a particular consolation against that matter of
griese which it might conceive through Eves first sin, not only in sinning her
self, but in taking Satan's part to tempt her Husband, whereupon followed
subjection to the Man, and likewise pain in travel, and bringing forth of
children. But notwithstanding (says the Apostle of that Sex) they shall be
saved, if they continue in faith and charity, 1 Timothy 2.17.
and holiness with sobriety. So that, you see they have a right too.

And the truth is, that God has graciously dealt with them in making them the
means of bringing forth the principal ground of this right of the one, and of
the other, which is the Lord of life, the Savior of the world, who was born of
a Woman.

Now this Sex is to comfort themselves in this, that notwithstanding there be
some differences in outward condition, yet they are made partakers of the
greatest and best privilege, 1 Timothy 2 21.12.
alike joint- heirs of the grace of God. I find but two things that in
Scripture are exempted from that Sex, two privileges, one to have jurisdiction
over the Husband, another, publicly to teach in the Church of God: But yet
notwithstanding, mark a kind of recompense made for this: The former is but
particular between Husband and Wife: but in lieu therefore a Woman may reign
over many men, yea, over Nations, Isa. 49.23.
Queens shall be thy nursing mothers, says the Prophet Isaiah to the Church.
And for the latter, to recompense that, they may be, and have been endued with
the gift of prophecy: so that we see how God does every manner of way
encourage them.

One word more concerning men, and so I will conclude this point. Namely
admonition to them, answerably to respect the other Sex as those that are
Coheirs with them, and therefore while they live, according to their places,
according to their gifts, according to the bond of relation that is between
them to respect them: and to show the same when they are dead by a decent
comely Funeral, and maintaining their credit, and giving of them their due
praises.

Thus much for the Text.

And now (my brethren) give me leave, I beseech you, to step a little further,
and to speak a word concerning this object before me. Howsoever I am not
over-forward at any time to speak much on such occasions; yet at this time I
suppose I should do much wrong to the party in concealing those things that are
meet to be made known to the honor of that God who bestowed those excellent
endowments upon her, and also injury to those that knew her. I do not fear to
be accounted a flatterer by any that hear me, and if any else shall imagine any
such thing, it may, it must needs be their envy, in that they censure what they
know not. My fear is, lest those that did know her should think that wrong is
done to her by that little that shall be spoken, for enough cannot be spoken of
her.

You see here a black Hearse before you, a body in it deprived of life, and
within these few days animated by a divine soul, now (as we have just cause to
believe) glorified in heaven.

The body of Mistress I. R. in regard of Marriage, being the Daughter of Master
I. B. a Gentleman in C. It seemed that as God endowed her with excellent parts
every way, so she had good education. She was married to Master I. R. a grave
prudent man, that lived in the forenamed place, who had been twice Major
there, and long continued Alderman, still relied upon, when any matter of
employment was to be performed, and therefore often chosen to be a Burgess of the
Parliament out of that Corporation. In the beginning of her marriage (she
attending to the Word as Lydia did) God was pleased to open her heart, and that
specially under the Ministry of a reverend Pastor now some years with God,
faithful, painful, powerful in his place while he lived, who yet lives in the
many works he published in his lifetime. I say by his Ministry being wrought
upon, she wonderfully improved the grace that was so wrought in her; and used
all means for the growth thereof, by continual applying her self to the public
ministry of the Word, conscionably on the Lords day, frequently also on other
days, both in that City, and in this also, whither she came often times upon
sundry employments, both while her Husband lived, and likewise since she has
been a Widow, which has been about the space of five years. Now I say as she
did thus help on the growth of grace by this public means, so also by private
diligently reading the Word, not contenting her self with a coursory reading it
over by task (as some do) but she had a Paper-book by her, and in reading would
note down particular points, note specially duties that belonged to such, and
such persons, to Magistrates, to Ministers, to Husbands, to Wives, to Masters,
to Servants; General duties that belonged to Christians, as they were
Christians; and that in such a manner, as if so be they had been the Common
places of some young Divine. And here (by the way) let me tell you what my self
have seen of an Alderman of this City some while dead, who left behind him
Volumes of books written with his own hand: his manner was, first he would
read, and after that he would walk up and down, and meditate upon what he read,
and write down the sum and particulars of it as he conceived, by which means he
made himself excellently skilful as in Divine, so in humane learning. Thus did
this grave Matron, hereby she came to much knowledge: she gathered also many
signs whereby she had evidence of the truth of grace, and there yet remain
diverse such heads noted by her with her own hand, signs of grace, signs of the
truth of it, of the growth of it, of the effects of it, means to grow in grace,
etc. An excellent course.

Thus she showed piety in reading of the word of God: the like she did in
prayer, hearing others perform that duty in her Family, but specially (when she
was both husband and wife, both master and mistress, Death making a division
between her dear Husband and her self) she used to pray her self; and those
that heard her, and have given testimony thereof admired her gifts that way.

Frequent she was (as apeared in her often retiring her self to her Closet) in
her constant and secret devotion; yea, also she took occasion of much fasting,
specially when she heard of the troubles of the Church. The cause of the Church
much affected her, either in matter of rejoicing, or grief: she continued it
till her dying-day, and still her heart was upon the peace of the Church,
praying for it.

As thus she exercised her self in this holy manner, so she did likewise
wonderfully respect those that were the Ministers of God: Amongst many others,
I have heard long ago that worthy Minister (before mentioned from whom I have
received most of what I have now related) speak much of her, and of her worthy
Husband in this respect: The feet of those that brought the glad-tydings of
salvation were beautiful to her.

And as she was careful to testify her respect to them, so she her self gained
no little recompense thereby, for she was still asking them questions, still
desiring to have such and such doubts resolved by them.

As thus her piety was manifested, so likewise was her Charity, constantly
every week giving relief to the Poor; ready upon all occasions that she was
moved to, to open her hands, and to open them wide, and that again, and again,
not wearied in doing good.

Sober and grave she was in her carriage and attire, and therein a good example
to the younger sort. And thus she continued even to her dying day; full of
sweet meditations upon her deathbed, my self partaked of some of them. Being
asked what evidences she had for her salvation? she answered, good: whether she
doubted not? she replied no: though she were of a tender conscience, yet she
had laid such a foundation, as her faith remained firm. She sweetly ended her
days with prayers of her own; with desire of the prayers of Ministers still as
they came to her; for as she hearkened to, and desired the benefit of their
counsel when she lived, so she desired the comfort of their prayers now in her
death: thus I say with a sound testimony of her faith, and of her good estate,
she ended her days and we may be assured that she is in the Number of those
that are Coheirs of the grace of life.

I remember the Philosophers make mention of a word which contains in it a kind
of collection or combination of all in one. I may say of her that the graces,
and virtues, and ornaments of others seemed to be gathered together, and to
meet in her: And so her piety toward God resembles her to the two pious
Hanna's, the one the Mother of Samuel, the other the Daughter of Phanuel. Her
charity resembles her to Dorcas, her love to the Ministers of God, to the
Shunamite that provided a Chamber, a Table, and a Candlestick for Elisha. In
her relation to her Husband, she showed her self a true Daughter of Sarah. In
her relation to her children which she had, a Bathsheba and Eunice; To others a
Priscilla the Wife of Aquila, ready to instruct as occasion was offered. And so
my brethren she has showed her self a follower of those that through faith
and patience inherit the Promise.

It remains to us to set such examples before us, and to be followers of
them, as they have been followers of others, and as others have been followers
of Christ, that so walking in their steps, we may also be in the number of such
as have the comfort of this Text, to be Coheirs of the grace of life; which
that you may do, etc.

PEACE IN DEATH: OR, THE QUIET END OF THE RIGHTEOUS.
SERMON XXXIV.
LUKE 2.29. Lord now let thou thy servant depart in peace, according to thy
Word.


IN the Text it self (to let pass other things) you have; First, a Request: and
secondly a Reason upon which the Request is grounded. Of each of these in
order; and first of the first; The Request.

The sum whereof is, That he may die. Whereof is considerable.

First, the disposition of the servants of God, in respect of death, viz.

1. A desire and longing after it.

2. A care to be always ready for it.

Secondly, the warrant or guide of that desire, [ according to thy Word.]

Thirdly, the nature and quality of the death of the Righteous, [ a departure
in peace.]

Of each of these apart.

The point that arises from the first branch of the first general part, ( viz.
the desire and longing of the Saints for their day of death) is this; that, The
servants of God have in them a contented, Doctr. 1. The servants of God have a
comfortable and willing expectation of death, Proved.
comfortable, and willing expectation of death.

The rise of this Observation is obvious enough: one spirit works in all Gods
servants, and brings forth like effects, though not always in the same
measure, that therefore which is true in Simeon (which the very first view of
the words import) that the coming of Death was expected, and desired by him, is
in some degree verified sooner or later in all that are the Lords. Phil. 1.13.
Hereunto agrees that of Saint Paul; I desire (faith he) to be dissolved, etc.

And he averrs the same of all true believers, viz. that they groan earnestly,
desiring to be clothed upon with their house which is from Heaven, and that
they are willing rather to be absent from the body, 2 Cor. 5.8. etc.
and to be present with the Lord, 2 Cor. 5.8, etc.

The foundation of this desire, The ground of the desire of death in the Saints.
is the knowledge and right understanding of the truth of that speech of
Solomon, to wit, that the day of death is better, then the day of a man's birth.
They have learned to know that the day of death to Gods servants, Eccles. 7.1.
is the day of freedom from all miseries, and of entrance into eternal
happiness.

The miseries of this life which even the best are subject unto, are many, Loss
of goods, loss of credit, loss of friends, aches, pains, diseases, severs,
consumptions, etc. bondage under original corruption, and the fruits thereof,
as unbelief, pride of heart, ignorance, covetousness, distrustfulness, hatred,
lust, etc. the buffetings and temtations of Satan, society with the wicked: all
these miseries, even the Holiest and dearest servants of God are exercised
with, and diverse of these do make them many times mourn exceedingly, Romans 7.24.
and to cry one while, O wretched man that I am; and to groan out another while
Woe is me that I am constrained to live in Mesech, Psalm. 120.5.
and to have my habitation in the tents of Kedar: of all these miseries Death
is the end to Gods servants.

And so also it is an entrance into happiness: for albeit their bodies rot in
the Grave, and be laid up in the Earth, as in Gods storehouse until the last
day, yet the soul forthwith even in an instant, comes into the presence of the
ever-living God, of Christ, and of all the Angels, and Saints in Heaven, the
spirits of just men made perfect, Thilip. 1 23.
to Abraham's bosom, to be with Christ. Et quanta (...) felicitas? What greater
happiness? It was much that Moses obtained to see the back-parts of God, but
how much greater favor is it to see him face to face, Exodus 34.23.
to have eternal fellowship with God the father, with Christ the Redeemer, with
the Holy Ghost the sanctifier? The knowledge of this benefit of Death, makes the
face of it comfortable to Gods servants, and causes them to strive with their
own natural weakness, that so they may even long for their day of dissolution.

But now against this point diverse Objections may be alleged. Object. 1. Romans
6, 23.
For first, the Apostle Paul says, that Death is the wages of sin. And
elsewhere he styles it Christ's enemy, 1 Cor. 15.26.
the last enemy that he shall subdue is Death. How should not death then be
rather a day of misery to be trembled at, then a day of happiness to be longed
for?

To this I answer, Respons. Death considerable two ways.
that we are to distinguish touching Death, for it must be considered two
ways; First, as it is in its owe nature: Secondly, as it is altered by Christ:
in the first sense it is true, that Death is the wages of sin, and the very
suburbs and the gates of hell. But in the second taking of Death, it ceases to
be a plague, and becomes a blessing, inasmuch as it is even a door opening out
of this world into Heaven. Now the godly look not upon Death simply, but upon
Death whose sting and venom is plucked out by Jesus Christ, and so it is
exceeding comfortable.

But then secondly it is objected, Object. 2.
that we read of many that have prayed against death; Psalm. 6.4, 5.
as namely, first David, Return; O Lord, faith he, and deliver my soul; oh
spare me for thy mercies sake, Isa. 38.3.
for in death there is no remembrance of thee. Secondly, Hezekiah when the
message of death was brought to him. Math. 26.39.
Thirdly, Christ himself; Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from me.

To all these I answer, Respons. Why some of the Saints in the Scripture have
prayed against death.
first touching David, that when he composed that sixth Psalm, he was not only
grievously sick, but also exceedingly tormented in mind, for he wrastled and
combated in his conscience with the wrath of God, as appears by the first Verse
of that Psalm, therefore we must know, that he prayed not simply against Death,
but against death at that time, in as much as the coming of it was accompanied
with extraordinary apprehensions of Gods wrath; for at another time he tells us
that he would not fear, though he walked through the valley of the shadow of
Death. Psalm. 23.4.
And the like I say touching Hezekiah, that his prayer proceeded not from any
desperate fear of Death, but first that he might do more service to God in his
Kingdom. And with such a kind of thought was Saint Paul's desire of dissolution
mingled. Phil 1.23.24.
Secondly, he prayed against Death then, because he knew that his death then
would be a great cause of rejoicing to evil men, to whom his reformation in the
State was unpleasing. Thirdly, because he wanted issue, God had promised before
to David, 1 Kings. 8, 25.
that there should not fail a man of his seed to sit upon the throne of Israel,
so that his children did take heed to their ways. Now, it was a great
discomfort to him to die chidless, for then he, and others might have thought,
that he was but an Hypocrite, in as much as God had promised issue to all those
Kings that feared him, and for this cause God heard his prayer, and after two
years gave him a son, Manasseh by name. And so I say the same touching our
Savior Christ, that he prayed not against Death, as it is the separation
betwixt Body and Soul; as appears by what the Apostle faith, Heb. 7.5.
that he was heard, in that he feared, for he stood in our room, and became a
Curse for us, it was the Curse of the Law which went with Death, and the
unspeakable wrath and indignation of God which he feared, and from this
according to his prayer, he was delivered.

But thirdly we see in most good men a fear of Death, Object. 3.
and a desire of life, and I my self (may some godly man say) do feel my self
ready to tremble at the meditation thereof, and yet I hope I belong unto God.

I answer, Respons. Two things consider able in a Christian.
that there are two things to be considered in every Christian, Flesh, and
Spirit; Corruption, and Grace; and the best have many inward perplexities at
times, and doubtings of Gods favor: Now it is a truth which our Savior
delivers, that, the spirit is willing, but the flesh is weak. And as in all
other good purposes there is a combat betwixt the flesh, Mar. 26.41.
and the spirit; so is there in this, betwixt the fear of Death, and the desire
of Death; sometime the one prevails, and sometimes the other, but yet always
at last the desire of Death does get the victory. Carnal respects do often
prevail far with the best, care of wise, children, and the like. These are
their infirmities, but as other infirmities die in them by degrees, so these
also at last are subdued, and the servants of God seeing clearly the happiness
into which their Death in Christ shall enter them, 2 Cor. 5.2.
do even sigh, desiring to be clothed upon with their house which is from
Heaven.

Here then is a good Mark by which we may know our selves to be Gods servants,
Use. For Trial.
viz. by the state of our thoughts and meditations touching Death. I will so
deliver it, as may be most for the comfort of those that truly fear God. I
demand therefore of thee: Do thou know that the confident and comfortable
expectation of Death is the work of the Holy Ghost in Gods servants? Do thou
desire unfeignedly, that the same may be wrought in thy heart? Do thou labor
to know what happiness comes by Death to those that fear the Lord? Do thou
grieve at thine own weakness, to whom the thought of Death is sometime
troublesome and unsavory? Do thou pray the Lord so to assure thee of his
favor in Christ, that death may be desired before it comes, and welcome when
it is come? Do thou when thou hear this speech of Simeon, wish that thou
were able to use the like words, with the like resolution? Surely, these things
show that thou art Gods servant, and that by Death the Lord will draw thee to a
place of rest.

If these thoughts which I have now named be strangers to thy heart, and thou
do not love to trouble thy self to study about Death, it is an evil sign. The
servants of God are not wont to be so secure in matters of this quality.

And thus much for the first particular, in the first general part. the desire
in the godly of death: the second is their care for it: the point thence is,
that.

It is the care of Gods servants to be always so prepared for death, Doct 2. A
special care in the servants of God to be always ready for death.
as at what instant soever the Lord shall send it, they may be comfortably
ready to entertain it.

So much may easily be gathered out of Simeons words here ( Nunc dimittis.) Now
let thy servant depart. He did not (as it were) take a day over, in which, and
against which to be provided, as though he should have said, Lord, now will I
settle my self to make provision for my last end, but even now, Lord, at this
very instant, if thou will; Death has been my ordinary meditation, and if thou will now call me home to thee, I am ready to depart.

As in the former point I showed you how Saint Paul's longing agreed with
Simeons, Oh let thy servant depart, faith Simeon; I desire to be dissolved
(faith Paul.) So here I will show you, that there was the same care in respect
of Death, in Saint Paul, 2 Timothy 4.6.
as in Simeon. Now, if thou will; (faith Simeon;) I am now ready to be offered
(faith Saint Paul.) 1 Cor. 15.31.
And elsewhere, I did daily. I am ever thinking upon death, and daily making
provision for my end. This was holy Jobs mind; All the days of my appointed
time will I wait till my change come; Job. 14.14.
there was a continual expectation. So teach us to number our days, prays
Moses, that we way apply our hearts to wisdom. Psalm. 90.12.
And what wisdom did he wish, he might apply his heart unto? but this, a holy
care to make provision for another world, seeing in this there was no
continuance? The same in effect, the Author to the Hebrews professes touching
himself, and those that were like to him; that they had here no continuing
City, Heb. 13.14.
but did seek one to come. We know (faith he) here is no abiding, we dwell in
tents which must remove, in houses of clay, which will be broken, therefore we
desire to be ever ready for that place, which is of more perpetuity: And so
much may be gathered from that which is upon record concerning Joseph of
Arimathca, he did not only make ready his Tomb in his lifetime, but in his
garden, his place of solace and delight: and how could so good a man, so often
think on death, without laboring and caring to be ever provided for the same;
Luke 12.36.
and therefore our Savior Christ compares his faithful servants unto those
which daily wait for their Masters coming.

Now the reason which so much prevails with the godly in this particular, Reas.
1.
and which ought to be of sufficient force with every one; is first, the
certainty, and uncertainy of death. Psalm. 89.48.
Morte nihil certius, As sure as Death, is an ordinary Proverb; What man is he
that lives, and shall not see death? (faith the Psalmist.) That all must die,
it is Heavens decree, and cannot be revoked. The thing it self, we see is most
certain: yet for some circumstances most uncertain: for first

Tempus est incertum, No man knows when he shall die, in the night, or in the
day; in Winter, or in Summer; in youth, or in his latter age.

Secondly, Locus est incertus, None know where they shall die, whether at home,
or abroad; in his bed, or in the field; who knows but that he may die in the
Church of God, even while he is asleep at the Word?

Thirdly, Mortis genusest incertum: No man can determine how he shall die,
whether suddenly, or by a lingering sickness; whether violently, or by a natural
course. These things the servants of God know full well, and seriously weigh
the same, and that makes them to make conscience of continual preparation, that
whenever, or wheresoever, or howsoever they die, they may with comfort
commend their souls into the hands of God, 1 Pet. 4.19.
as into the hand of a faithful Creator.

Secondly, Reas. 2.
they know the misery of being taken by Death unprepared: put case a man should
die as Ishbosheth, 2 Samuel 4.5.6.
lying upon his bed at noon; or as Jobs children, while they are seasting; Job
1 19.
or that a man like the rich man in the Gospel, should have his breath taken
from him at the very instant, having made no provision for another world, what
hope can there be that such a one should be saved?

They know thirdly, Reas. 3.
that the time of sickness is the most unfit time for this business of
preparation: the senses are then so taken up with the pain of sickness, that a
man cannot think seriously upon ought else; and besides, it is not in our own
power to turn to God when he will: ordinarily God forgets those in sickness,
that forget him in health: Note.
And it is commonly seen, that that preparation for Death that begins but in
sickness, is as languishing and faint, as is the party from whom it comes; And
although Vera poenitentia be nunquam sera, yet sera poenitentia est raro vera.
Though I say, true repentance be never too late, yet late repentance is seldom
true; when men leave their sins, because they can continue to practice them no
longer, what thanks have they, or what can that repentance be? These things
work with Gods servants, to study to be ever ready for the Lord, not to delay
preparation, but to seek continually to be provided.

My exhortation hence shall begin with that speech of Moses, Use.
Oh that men would be wise to understand this, Deuteronomy, 32.29.
and that they would consider their latter end. I would there were a heart in
us to entertain this doctrine in our best thoughts. I remember the Complaint of
old, that men had made a Covenant with Death, and were at agreement with Hell.
Esa. 28.15.
Death indeed will make truce with no man; but here is the meaning, Evil men
persuade themselves, that they are in no danger of hell, or of the grave. Death
will not come yet thinks the oldest man: and when it comes, I hope I shall do
well enough, thinks the most godless man. Thus men cousen themselves with
their own fancies, and so Death steals upon them at unawares, and becomes Gods
Sergeant to arrest them, and to carry them away to eternal condemnation. Who
amongst us is able to say truly, and upon good ground, as Simeon, Now Lord, if
thou will now command Death to seize upon me, welcome shall it be unto me, I am
even now ready to receive it? How many are there that are extraordinary
ignorant in the means how to escape the sting of Death? How many extremely
secure, that never in their lives, yet thought earnestly upon this, how they
may die with comfort, and end their days in peace? How many profane ones,
that set light by Death, being apt to say like those Epicures, Edamus, etc. Let
us eat and drink, for to morrow we shall die? How many that do put all to a
desperate adventure, God made us, and he must save us, and we shall do as well
as please God, and there is an end?

How many are there, whose hearts, albeit they be in the house of God, and in
his presence, are notwithstanding fraughted with malice, with envy, with
worldliness, with disdain, with secret scorning, repining at the Word which
they hear with wearisomeness, with spiritual sleepiness and security? You that
are such as I have now said, think in your consciences, what, would you die? if
God should now stop your breath, and ascite you by Death presently, to appear
before his Majesty, being thus full of ignorance, of security, of presumption,
of unsanctified, of vicious, of malicious, of covetous thoughts, could you find
in your hearts to say, Lord, now let us depart? Sure we could not: but Death
must needs be to us, as it is said to be to the wicked, Job 28.14.
Rex terrorum, the King of terrors; if it should come upon us, and find us in
this case; And yet what know we how soon, how suddenly we may be overtaken?
some of us drop away daily, some young, some old, some lie sick longer, some
lesser time; and how soon it will be our turn we cannot tell; Our hreath is in
our nostrills, we are all as grass; If the breath of the Lord blow upon us, we
do suddenly wither, as the slower of the field, and return again to our first
Earth. Why will we not labor to be now ready, since it may be always truly
said, We may now depart, either while we are here, or in our way home, or in
our beds, or at our meat? Who can truly say to himself; I am sure, I shall not
die this hour?

It may be now thou will demand of me, What shall I do, that I may be ready?

To insist upon particulars, How to be prepared for death.
would be too long, only therefore in a word; The best preparation for death,
is a reformed life. He that lives religiously, cannot but die preparedly: And
it is a thousand to one, if a wicked liver make a gracious end. The Scripture
makes mention of a double Death, and so likewise of a twofold Resurrection: the
first Death, is the death of the body, which is the separation of it from the
soul. The second death, is of the soul, which is the separation of it from God.
The first Resurrection, is the rising from the Death of sin to a new life: the
second is that which shall be of the body out of the Grave, at the day of
Judgment. Now what faith the Scripture; Blessed and holy is he, that has part
in the first Resurrection, on such the second Death has no power.

Would thou then be freed from the second Death, hell, and destruction, when
thou art dead? 1 Timothy 5.6.
Now that thou art yet alive labor to have a part in the first Resurrection:
Note what Saint Paul faith of the wanton widow, that she is dead whilst she
lives. So he that lives in the pleasures of sin, and in the ways of his own
heart, and after his own lust, he is dead in soul, though he be alive in body,
and if he seek not to come out of this grave, eternal death shall be his
portion.

Well then, would thou prepare for Death? would thou be able always to
say, Lord, now, now I am ready, labor to know God out of his Word ( that is
eternal life;) Jo. 17.13.
Labor to feel Christ live and reign in thee by his Spirit, labor to renounce
every sin, do not go on in any known sin against conscience, renew thy
repentance daily, and still survey the state of thy soul, that wickedness may
not get dominion over thee. Let Death come when it will, though the Lord should
so visit thee, that thou should drop down suddenly, yet it shall not find
thee unprepared, thou have a part in the first Resurrection, there is no fear
of the second Death: But if thou will cherish thy heart in evil, thou will go
on in thy ignorance, in thy careless worship of God; in thy profaning the
Sabbath, in thy whoredom, oppression, malice, drunkenness, excess,
voluptuousness, thou make ready for hell, and it is not thy, Lord save me,
or, I cry God mercy, etc. that shall serve thy turn. I will tell thee who thou
art like unto, even to a man appointed after a year or two, to be burned, and
in the mean space must carry a stick daily to the heap, so thou heapest up
wrath against thy self, and make thy score so great, that when Death comes,
thou shall not know how to be prepared. And thus have I finished the first
general part of my Text, touching the disposition of the godly in respect of
Death.

I proceed now in a word to the second, the ground, rule, or warrant of this
desire, and preparation for death, ( according to the word) as if Simeon had
said, this desire that I have now to end my days, proceeds not from any carnal
coffeehouse, because I am now old, and can take no great comfort in worldly
things, but the ground of it is, thy word and Promise; thou, Lord, have
revealed unto thy servant, that I should not die before I had seen my Savior;
This word is now fulfilled, and the sweetness thereof has given me that
encouragement, that I do even long to be dissolved, and to be united unto thee.
Or again thus, Oh Lord, this care that I have had to provide thus for Death,
and to be always in a readiness, it has not come from my self, nature never
taught it me, but thy Word has instructed me; If I had not proceeded according
to thy Word, I should never have known how to have prepared my self to the time
of dissolution. This is the meaning of the words, and so the Doctrine is plain;
( viz.) that, Men ignorant in Gods word can never take comfort in death, nor be
truly prepared to undergo it. Doct. 3. Ignorant men can neither take comfort
in, nor be truly prepared for death.


This is plain, if we consider the Exposition which I have already given of
that part of Simeons speech. It is a general Rule, that of our Savior, Ye err
not knowing the Scripture. Math 22.29.
A man ignorant in the Scripture, can never rightly perform any spiritual duty.
Hence was that of David, Thy testimonies (faith he) are my delight, and my
counselors. Psalm 119 24
If any matter came in hand that concerned his soul, straight to the word of
God went he, to know thence how to do it; as a man for his Lease, or conveyance
goes to a Counselor for direction: So again he confesses, that if Gods Law
had not been his delight, Psalm 119, 9 93
he should have perished in his afflictions. And so, no comfort, no true quiet
in any trouble, much more at Death, without the guidance, and information of
the Word. The assurance that the sting of Death is plucked out, that Gods wrath
is appeased, that sin is pardoned, that Heaven gate is opened; whence shall we
fetch these, but from the Scripture? the directions for a holy life, which is
the best preparation for Death; where shall we find them, but in the Scripture?

Here then we see is a Caveat to all that have no will, Use.
nor desire to be acquainted with the Scripture: Diverse think they should have
done well enough, though we had no such Book as we call the word of God. To be
a Scripture-man is a byword, a reproach, a matter of disgrace; and sooner will
men listen to some idle Pamphlet, then to a matter of Scripture. Well, beguile
not your souls, with these vain conceits, with your Popish and carnal
imaginations. I say, and testify from this place, that that man or woman,
which cares not to be taught out of Gods book, cannot die like a Christian:
Who can teach thee the way to die well, but God? And where does God teach, but
in the Scripture? If our thoughts of Death, if our provision, and preparation
for Death be not warranted, and guided by Gods word, it is all in vain. Lord,
faith Simeon, my desire of dissolution is according to thy Word; my care to be
prepared, has been ordered by thy Word; he cannot die with comfort, that
cannot make the like profession. And this may serve for the next general part,
the ground of this desire, and preparation for Death, it is Gods word; Lord,
now let thou thy servant depart according to thy Word.

The third and last part follows, the nature and quality of the death of the
Righteous, (A departure in peace, or a peaceable dismission.) Here are two
things, first a dismission: secondly, a dismission accompauied with peace.

The word ((...)) translated (Let thy servant depart,) may well be Englished
thus, let thy servant loose; Lord free me, enlarge me, set me at liberty. Hence
we learn; that, The servants of God do by Death receive a final discarge from
all manner of misery. Doct. 4. Death freeth Gods servants from all misery.


This is evident out of the force of the phrase here used: Simeon knew that so
long as he lived, his soul was (as it were) imprisoned in his body, and in it
he was held in bondage under the remnants of Original corruption, subject to
the assaults and temptation of Satan, in continual and daily possibility to
trespass and sin against Cod, beside other afflictions and grievances in the
body and estate: but he had withal this knowledge and understanding of the
nature of Death, that it was an enlargement to the soul, and a freeing of it
utterly and finally from all those, and the like encumbrances.

The same may be gathered from the phrase used by Saint Raul, Phil. 1.23.
I desire (faith he) (...), 2 Timothy 4.6.
to be dissolved, and (...), read the time of my departure; the words show that
there coms a liberty by death to the souls of Gods servants. The phrase that
Saint Peter uses, is worthy our observation for this purpose. First, he terms
death, (...), the laying down of a burden, and by that 2 Pet. 2.14.
(...), the laying down of a burden, and by that means the soul is lightened and
eased. Secondly, he terms it (...), a going out from a place and condition of
hardship. 2 Pet. 2.15.
The second book of Moses which relates the dyparture of the Israelites out of
Egyptian bondage has the same name Exodus. As for the point it self, Rev.
14.13.
namely, that the death of the Righteous, is to them a discharge from all
misery, the Scripture bears witness to it: Blessed (said he) are the dead,
which die in the Lord, even so faith the spirit, that they may rest from their
labors. As long as they live here, they are diversely troubled, when they die
their labors are at an end, and they are received into rest, Saint John tells
us, that in his vision he saw, the souls of them that were slain, Rev. 6.9.
lie under the Alter. Now the Alter in the time of the law was a place of
resuge and safety, and thence it appears, that by death the servants of God are
est-soons received into a place of holy security, where there is no expectation
of any further misery. They are said to be received, (...), into Abraham's
bosom, Luke. 16.22.
into the fellowship of the same happiness with Abraham, the Father of all true
believers.

The Doctrine in the first place makes against those of the Church of Rome, Use
1. Consutation of Purgatory.
which maintain a place of torment, even for the servants of God after this
life, where they must be tried for a time, before they can enter into Rest, and
happiness. This place they term Purgatory, the torment here they hold to be
unspeakable, and far surpassing any torment which the wit of man is able to
devise. But this place among others is sufficient to overthrow this dotage, for
how were death to the Righteous a dismission, a loosing, a freedom from misery,
if there followed after it a torment of far greater extremity then at any time
before was ever tasted of? So that the death of the servants of God being (as I
have proved it to be) an enlargment from misery, certainly the soul is not
bound in any new Prison, whence it must expect, and wait, and pray for a second
dismission.

In the next place, Use. 2. For consolation of the Saints.
this Doctrine makes much for the comfort of Gods servants: the face of Death
to the wicked is very dreadful, the day of it is to them the beginning of
sorrows, their souls are instantly arrested by the damned spirits, and kept in
everlasting chains of darkness: but to those that are the servants of God it is
otherwise I may by way of allusion to the phrase of my Text, compare their day
unto that which happened unto Joseph, Genesis 41.40. Rev. 21.4.
in which he was brought out of prison to be Ruler over all the land of Egypt.
So is their death unto them a day of Bailment out of prison, a day in which all
tears shall be wiped away; In which they shall have beauty for ashes, and the
oil of gladness, Esth. 8 17
for the spirit of heaviness; and the long white robes of Christ's
Rightcousness, by which they shall be presented blameless unto God. That day
shall be to them, 1 John: 3.2.
even as was the day of escape to the Jews, a feast and a good day in which
they shall see God as he is, 1 Cor. 13.12.
and know him, as they are known of him.

But happily thou may say, Quest.
how shall I know that the day of Death, is the day of dissolution, and this
kind of dismission?

A very necessary quaere indeed this is: Answ.
for every man almost is ready to challenge to himself a part of this
happiness, How to know whether the day of death be a discharge from all former,
and following miserles.
and it is a matter presumed upon by many, which shall never enjoy it. I will
therefore give you one certain mark, by which we may know assuredly, that the
day of our death shall be to us, a day of enlargment, and of final discharge
from all, both former and following miseries, and that is this; if in the time
of our life here, our being subject to corruption, and sin, has seemed unto us
the greatest burden, and bondage. They which have groaned and mourned under
their own natural corruptions, as it were under some heavy and tyrannous yoke,
or as the Israelites mourned under their Egyptian Taskmasters, to them only
shall the day of death, be a day of freedom. If sin be not a burden to thee;
if thou do not many times lament, and even mourn to think how thou art
carried captive unto evil; if thou do not with griese feel how thou art
clogged with corruption, and hindered by it from doing the good which thou
should, certainly death will be to thee the biginning of thy thraldom, and
after it thou shall be a perpetual bondslave unto Satan in the kingdom of
etetnal darkness. Mark this all ye that take delight in evil, to whom it is a
pastime to do wickedly, and who seek rather how to satisfy, then how to
suppress your own corruptions, who repute it a kind of happiness to follow the
swing of your own lusts, and to have liberty to do as your own hearts do lead
you; when you die, this shall be your reward, even a most miserable and endless
captivity under Satan, him have you served in the lusts of sin while ye lived,
his slaves shall you be without hope of releasement, world without end. This is
the right Application of this Doctrine, death is a day of enlargement to the
godly, it is a dismission.

The next particular is, that it is a dismission accompanied with peace, the
lesson we are taught hence is; that, The servants of God have at their going
out of the word, a comfortable, quiet, and peaceable departure. Doct. 5. The
Saints at their going hence have a comfortable and peaceable debarture.


Thus Simeon here, he prayed for no other thing, but that his end might be as
the end of the Righteous is ever wont to be, even a departure hence in peace.
Hence is that general rule of the Psalmist, Mark the perfect man, and behold
the upright man, for the end of that man is peace. Psalm. 37.37
Agreeable whereunto is that of Solomon; that, the righteous has hope in his
death. Prove, 14.32.
And memorable to this purpose is that which is storied of old father Jacob,
showing unto us the quiet end of the Righteous, He gathered up his feet into
the bed, Genesis 49.33. Genesis 13.25.2 King. 22.20.
and so gave up the Ghost. It was the blessing promised to Abraham, that he
should go to his fathers in peace. And the same was made to good Josias. There
is a twofold reason hereof.

First, the assurance which they have of the favor of God in Christ. This must
needs breed quietness, when I am persuaded in my soul and conscience, that all
cause of danger after death is removed, and that God is, and will be, gracious
unto me in his Son. What cause of fear is here lest, what occasion of
perplexity?

If any man shall doubt whether the servants of God have this assurance; Reas.
1.
I prove it thus, that all of them first or last, have it in some good measure.
If any man (faith the Apostle) have not the Spirit of Christ, Romans 8:9.
he is none of his. Hence it necessarily follows, that all that are Christ's,
have the Spirit of Christ, but now the office of the Spirit is to bear witness
with our spirit; Chap: 16.
So that all that are the Lords, as they are endued with Gods Spirit, so they
feel this Spirit bearing witness to their souls of this Adoption.

Secondly, Reas. 2.
the comfortable Testimony of their own consciences touching their former care
to glorisie God by a Religious and godly conversation: Hence came Saint Paul's
peace, I have, says he, fought the good fight, I have kept the faith,
Therefore I am sure there is laid up for me a Crown of life. 2 Timothy: 4.7, 8.
Isa: 38: 3.
Hence Hezekiahs, I have walked before thee, oh Lord, in truth, and with a
perfect heart. Not that they do ground their hope upon the desert of their
fore-ran courses, but because they know good works to be the way, Ephs; 22 10.
and do understand by the Scripture, that a holy life here, is the first fruits
of a glorified life hereafter. Thus we see the truth of this point, and the
reasons upon which it is grounded.

Now here some may object; Object. 1.
first, We see many worthy men, that have made a great, and an extrordinary
profession of Religion in their lives, and which have also carried themselves
unblamable, yet to give appearance of much anguish and perplexity, and even of
a kind of despair in their death. How can we say then, that all good and holy
persons have a peaceable departure?

I answer first, 1 Respons. Joh. 7.24. The unqulet departure of many of the
Saints cleared, with the grounds thereof.
We ought to remember the Rule our Savior gives, not to judge according to the
outward appearance. It is a very weak argument to say, that this, or that man
dies without peace, because to the standers by he makes not show of peace.
Certain it is, that as a man may have peace with God, and yet himself for a
time, by reason of some tentation not feel it; so a man being sick, or going
out of the world may feel it, and yet others that behold him cannot perceive it.

Secondly, we must know that these outward unquietnesses, which do many times
accompany sickness, do happen as well, and as ordinarily to good men, as to the
most wicked, such as are ravings, and idle-talkings, and strange accidents in
the body; in this sense all things come alike to all. Eccless. 9.2.
God has made no promise in Scripture, that those that serve him shall be
freed in their deaths from violent sicknesses. Therefore these things must not
be thought to be any abridgment of their peace.

Thirdly, we must consider, that with the best servants of God, Satan is most
busy, when his end is nearest, and when he is (as it were) out of all hope of
prevailing. The red Dragon in the Revelation, Rev. 12.12.
had greatest wrath when he knew his time to be short. When the evil Spirit was
commanded once to come out of the child, Mark. 9.26.
then it rent him sore. Now these temptations, though for the time they be very
violent and extreme; so that the party may (happily) utter out some words, and
speeches of despair, yet be they no final prejudice to the inward peace.
Interrupt they may, but utterly quench it they cannot, because the power of God
is made perfect through weakness. And so even in death, Satan receives the
greatest foil, when he thinks to get the greatest victory.

Thus then I answer in one word; The peace of Gods servants at death is not
ever in the like measure felt by them, but yet it never dies in them: they
which behold their death do not always see it, yet they themselves, sooner or
later are sure sweetly and secretly to feel the same.

My reason for my assertion is grounded, first upon that of the Apostle; God
commands light to shine out of darkness: 2 Cor. 4 6.
He brings his servants to Heaven by the gates of hell, out of sorrow and
anguish, and tentation, he raises out their greatest quiet.

Secondly, because the love of God is eternal and unchangeable. Whom he loves,
he loves to the end. Esa: 54.8 John 13.1. Object. 2.
It is impossible that the Lord, albeit he try, and that sharply, yer should
finally for sake those that are his in their greatest extremity.

But again secondly, if you make a peaceable death to be the reward of the
Righteous, what say you to this? There be many that in all their life gave
little evidence of any Religion, or grace, but of the contrary rather, yet in
their death were very quiet and still, and seemed to all that were by, to have
in them no manner of vexation, no troublesome thoughts, no perplexed motions;
shall we say that these were good men, because they seem to go away in peace.

It is true indeed, Respons. The seemingquiet departure of the wicked, with the
grounds thereof.
it is the common opinion, Does a man lie quietly? has he his memory to the
end? died he like a Lamb? surely then he is gone to heaven: but this is an
absurd collection; for,

First, sometime this outward calmness is an ordinary consequent of some
diseases, as Consumptions, and such like, by which Nature being formerly
weakened, has not power left to make resistance.

Secondly, this outward calmness is no argument of a peaceable and quiet soul.
The Psalmist tells us of the wicked in whose death there are no bands.

Thirdly, Psalm 73.4:
we must distinguish between security and peace, betwixt carnal senssesness,
and true spiritual quietness. Nabals death was quiet enough, yet he were but a
fool that would adventure his soul with Nabals. 1 Samuel 25.37.
I see many ignorant persons, many of heathenish, and brutish comversation,
very quiet in sickness, without any fear of hell, and judgment to come, making
no doubts, casting no perils, asking no questions, complaining of no sins, and
so away they go without any more ado. What, shall I say that these died in
true peace? God forbid. No, when I compare together their ignorant, secure,
benumbed, hardened kind of life, with their senseless and drowsy kind of death,
I must say, that these are fearful signs, these things argue that the Devil had
quiet possession, Luke 11.11,
where he made so small a do. Thus then notwithstanding these Objections I
will conclude, that a peaceful death, is the peculiar and individed privilege
of Gods servants. Excles. 8.12. Esaias 57.11.
However it be, yet I know (says Solomon) that it shall go well with those
that fear the Lord, but there is no peace to the wicked says my God.

We may make Use of this first to be a trial betwixt our Religion and the
Romish: Use. Confutation of Purgat^y.
for from this Doctrine I avouch that Religion to be no true Religion: because
a Papist by the Rules of his own Religion can never die in peace: This is a
hard saying, thou may object, or how can I make it good? I answer by two
reasons.

First, every Papist is taught to believe under pain of Anathema, and the great
curse, that whosoever dies, if he have not in this life attained to
perfection, and thoroughly purged himself from the remainders of sin by works of
satisfaction, his soul must after-death go into Purgatory, and there continue
until he has made a full satisfaction: now the pain of Purgatory is held for
the time to be as great as the pains of hell, differing only in this, that it
is not perpetual: Now I would fain know, how can a man die comfortably and in
peace, and with a joyful heart, when he thinks with himself, that albeit
(perhaps) after some years he shall go to heaven, yet in the mean space his
soul must go into such a place of unspeakable torment, where if the matter be
not well plied by the prayers of them that are alive, and by well seeing the
Priests, they may hap to lie for many years? I say, how can the Doctrine of
Popery beget a peaceful death, when it teaches an expectation of such an
hellish Purgatory,

Secondly, every Papist as he is bound of a certain to believe a Purgatory, so
further must he believe, that he cannot in this life be assured of salvation,
otherwise then by a kind of confused hope, which may deceive him. Now he which
by the witness of his own conscience is sure that he has deserved hell, and
cannot attain to any certainty of discharge, what comfort can such an one have
to die? he knows that when he is dead, he must come to his account before God,
but yet can have no assurance that the Lord will acquit him in Christ Jesus.

I wish that this may seriously be considered by us, for the establishing of us
in the truth of Religion: I say again and testify, these reasons which I have
alleged being weighed, that a Rapist by his own doctrine can never expect that
which Simeon did, a departure hence in peace: He knows he must to torment, he
is caught that he cannot know in this world that God will pardon him.

In the next place let us come nearer home to our selves: Use. 2. Exhortation.
Genesis 3.19.
that we must all die, nothing more certain, Dust thou art, and to dust
thoushalt return. God has decreed it, and it cannot be revoked: if our end be
not peaceable, our estate after cannot be happy. Let our care then be spent
about this one point, how one may attain to this, to end our days in peace: I
doubt not but we will all be ready to say, we hope so to do: but this is
nothing, for when the wicked man dies, his expectation perishes. Prove. 11.7.
Job 27.8.
What becomes of the hope of the Hypocrite (said Job) when God takes away his
soul? But what course then shall we take, that we may finish our course with
joy?

I will tell thee in few words, (I touched it a little before) the best means
for a peaceable departure, is a godly and religious life: I have fought the
good fight, says Saint Paul, and he could comfortably from thence infer, that
therefore there was laid up, for him a crown of righteousness. It was Christ's
own inference, I have glorified thee on earth, 2 Timothy 4.7.8. Joh. 17.4, 5.
I have finished the work which thou gave me to do, and therefore now, O
Father, glorify thou me with thine own self.

The reason of it is first Gods promise: Psalm. 119.1.1 Sam. 2.20.
blessed shall be the undefiled in the way: Those that honor me, I will
honor, said God. Now this promise God will not break. He that goes this way,
though it be with much weakness, with many falls, with sundry imperfections,
with diverse wanderings, yet he cannot miss of the promised peace.

Secondly, life eternal has three degrees, the first is in this life, when a
man repents, and believes, and is purged from dead works, to serve the
living God; The second is in death, when the body goes to earth, and the spirit
returns to him that gave it. The third is at the last judgment: These three
degrees hang together like three links, Luke 13.3.2 These, 5.24.
the second follows the first, and the third the two former; the last cannot
be hoped for, where the first is wanting: for except ye repent, ye shall all
perish. The first being obtained, the last must needs ensue: for he is faithful
that has promised. So then, would thou have peace in death? labor for
grace in thy life; would thou end thy days happily? make conscience to
spend them holily. A godless man that lives in sin, may die senslesly, or
sullenly, he cannot die peaceably. Oh consider this all ye that forget God,
that spend your days in vanity, and your years according to the lusts of your
own heart, that have hitherto hated to be reformed, and will not be reclaimed
from your former fashions, but live yet still, as you were wont to do. Think a
little with me of your last end, which how near it is you do not know; when
your consciences a little awaked, shall make report of your life past, how in
matters of God you have been ignorant, superstitious, careless, neglecting his
worship, despising his Word, blaspheming his Name, mispending his Sabbaths, in
dealing with men you have been cruel, false, unmerciful, oppressing; in the
usage of your own bodies unchaste, vicious, lustful, proud, wanton, wallowing in
excess; what peace can your souls have, when these things be thought upon? what
calmness of spirit? what hope of entering into rest? how can you think that the
end can be comfortable, when the life has been abominable. What answer made
Jehu to Joram, when he demanded, Is it peace Jehu? What peace (said he) so long
as the whoredoms of thy mother Jezabel, 2 King 9.22.
and her witchcrafts are so many? So when Death comes like Jehu marching
furiously against you, and you enquire of him, whether he comes with peace or
no, he will answer what peace, when your whoredoms, and your gross and crying
sins are yet in great number? What peace, when these make a partition betwixt
your souls and the Lord? Certainly there can be no peace, but a fearful
expectation of judgment, Heb. 10.24.
and violent fire to devour. Suffer me then to conclude this exhortation, as
Daniel did his speech to Nebuchadnezzar; O King, break off thy sins by
righteousness, and thine iniquities by showing mercy to the poor. Dan. 4.27.
So say I, break off your sins by repentance, your ignorance by seeking after
knowledge; your contempt of Gods word by a reverent yielding to it; your
security by a standing in awe of God; your neglecting the exercises of Religion
by careful using of them; your whoredom by chastity; your drunkenness by
sobriety; your malice by charity; your oppression by mercy; your falsehood by
fidelity; this is the way that will bring peace at the last; thus, and thus
only you may find rest for your souls.

THE VITAL FOUNTAIN: OR, LIFE'S ORIGINAL.
SERMON XXXV.
JOHN 11.25, 26. I am the Resurrection, and the Life; he that believes in me,
though he were dead, yet shall he live: and whosoever lives, and believes in
me, shall never die.


THese Words that I have read to you, they are part of the conference between
Martha, and Christ, when Christ was coming to Bethany to awake Lazarus from the
sleep of death. The conference is laid down from the beginning of the 21.
Verse, to the end of the 27. and Martha meeting with Christ, begins the
conference, as we may see, verse 21, 22. Then said Martha to Jesus, Lord if
thou had been here my brother had not died: but I know that even now
whatsoever thou will ask of God, God will give it thee. Here Martha manifests
her affection to her dead brother, and her faith in her living Master: she
manifests the strength of her natural affection, and the weakness and
imperfection of her faith. The strength of her natural affection, appears in
this, that she was persuaded if Christ had been there present, her brother
Lazarus had not died, he would not have suffered Lazarus to have dyed: which
for ought we know is more then she had sufficient ground for. Then the weakness
and imperfection of her faith appears in this, that she rested too much upon
the corporal presence of Christ, that she ascribed no more power to Christ,
then that by his prayer he could attain at Gods hands as much as ever any holy
man did; namely, the life of her brother. I know, says she, that ever now
whatsoever thou ask, God will give it; Whereas Christ being true God, was
able to work any miracle by his own power.

Now the answer of Christ is laid down verse 23. Jesus said unto her, thy
brother shall rise again. Christ, to comfort Martha, passes by her infirmity,
and promises to her, that he will restore her brother to life again, that she
shall enjoy her brother again: but this promise is only laid down in general
and indifinite terms; Thy brother shall rise again. Christ does not say
expressly, I will raise up thy brother to life, but he speaks only in general
terms, Thy brother shall rise again: which we are to ascribe to the modesty,
and humility, that always may be observed in the speeches of Christ; Thy
brother shall rise again.

Then we have the reply of Martha, laid down in verse 24. Martha said unto him,
I know he shall rise again in the Resurrection, at the last day, Martha was not
satisfied with this promise of Christ: for it seems she durst not take it in
the full extent of it, therefore she replies, that as for the last Resurrection
she knew indeed, that her brother, and all others that were dead, should then
rise again, this did comfort her: but for any other matter of comfort she could
not gather any from the answer of Christ, and his promise: therefore Christ
replies again in the words of my Text, And Jefus said unto her, I am the
Resurrection, and the life, he that believes in me, though he were dead, yet
shall he live, and whosoever lives and believes in me shall never die. Christ
would have Martha know that he was true life, yea, the fountain of all life,
and such a fountain of life, that whosoever did believe in him, and cleave to
him, nothing should hurt him, no not Death it self. Thus you see briefly the
coherence, and the scope of the words. We come now to show you the meaning of
them.

In these words we may observe these two parts. Parts of the Text.


First, here we have laid down a compound proposition.

And then the distinct Exposition, or explication thereof.

First, here we have laid down a compound Axiom, or Proposition, a copulative
Proposition, wherein Christ affirms two things of himself.

First, I am the Resurrection.

Secondly, I am the Life.

I am the Resurrection, I am the Life. Now the difference between these two, we
may conceive with reverend Calvin to be this. I am the Resurrection.

That is, I have all quickening power in me, I am able to restore, and give life
to those that are dead. And then I am the life; I have such quickening power in
me, that I am able to preserve, and continue the life that I have given, or
restored to any; I am the Resurrection and the life.

And then follows the Exposition of this Proposition, and of the several
members of it: for the truth of a copulative Proposition depends upon the truth
of both the parts and members of it, therefore there follows the Explication,
and confirmation of both the parts of this Proposition.

First of the first part, I am the Resurrection, this is explained, and
comfirmed in these words; He that believes in me, though he were dead, yet
shall he live. I have such a quickening power in me, faith Christ, that I am
able to restore spiritual life to that soul that is dead in sins, therefore I
am able to raise up the body that is dead in the grave; I am able to give
spiritual life to the soul, which is greater, and the more difficult work; and
if I be able to do the greater, I am able to do the less: he that believes ix
me, faith Christ, though before he were dead in trespasses and sins, yet he
shall live, he shall live the life of grace.

Then follows the Fxplication and confirmation of the second member of the
Proposition in these words, Whosoever lives and believes in me, shall never
die. I am the life faith Christ, for whosoever believes in me, and so is
restord to spiritual life, he shall never die; he shall never die, to speak
properly, for he shall never perish, he shall never die, this life shall never
be taken from him, neither here nor hereafter; not here, for he shall continue
to live the life of grace: not hereafter, for though the body shall die, yet
this separation of the body from the soul, it is not so properly a death, as a
passage to life; a passage from the life of grace, to the life of glory. And
this body also that is separated from the soul, it shall be quickened again, and
shall be raised up to live for ever; therefore he that believes in me, shall
never die. Thus you see the words expounded.

Now from the first member of this Proposition, I am the Resurrection; and the
Exposition, and confirmation of it in these words, He that believes in me,
though he were dead, yet shall he live. Hence the point of Doctrine I will
observe is this; that, Jesus Christ is the Fountain, and Author of all life.
Doct. Jesus Christ the Fountain and Author of all life.


He is able to give and restore life to those that are dead; He is the
Resurrection. Now, whereas there is a double death, and a double Life, and
consequently a double Resurrection; we must understand that Christ is the
Author of both: in this place we are not to exclude either. Therefore we will
endeavor to expound this general doctrine in these three particulars.

First, Christ has such a quickening power in him, that he is able to raise up
those dead bodies of his, that now lie in the Grave.

Secondly, Christ has such a quickening power in him, that he is able to raise
up the soul that is dead in sins, to a spiritual life.

Thirdly, we will show you why Christ, as in this place, so elsewhere, does
express both the state of the faithful here, and their estate after, under the
same phrase of speech, he comprehends both under this term, I am the
Resurrection.

For the first of these, Christ is the Author of life, he has such a quickening
power in him, that he is able to raise up the dead bodies of his out of their
graves. We will speak first of this Resurrection that is of the body, though it
be later in time; Because that naturally we are more apt to conceive of the
death, and life of the body, then of the death and life of the soul. And
secondly, because that the understanding of this Resurrection of the body, will
give light to the understanding of the other, of the soul.

And here first we will show briefly what this Resurrection of the body is.

1 Of the body.
And then prove that Christ is the Author, and the fountain of it.

First the Resurrection of the body is this, Resurrection of the body, what.
when the soul that was actually separate from the dead body, returns again to
its proper body, and being united to it, the man rises up out of the Grave,
with an immortal, incorruptible body to lead a glorified life. This it the
Resurrection of the body.

Now that Christ is the Author of this Resurrection of the body it is evident:
For as Christ himself by his own power, raised himself being dead in the Grave,
John 2.19. faith Christ, destroy this Temple, and in three days I will raise
it again, speaking of the Temple of his body. And so again, Joh. 10.18. I have
power, faith Christ, to lay down my life, and to take it up again: so likewise
Christ by his quickening spirit he will raise up the bodies of those that are
now dead in the grave, as we may see, Joh. 5.28, 29. Marvel not at this, faith
Christ, for the hour is coming in which all that are in the grave, shall hear
the voice of the Son of man, and shall come forth, they that have done good to
the resurrection of life, etc. In this regard Christ is called the first fruits
of them that sleep. 1 Cor. 15.20.
For as the first fruits being offered to God, did sanctify the whole crop;
and the owner hereby was assured of the blessing of God upon all the rest: so
Christ is the first fruits of the dead, and his Resurrection it is an assurance
to the faithful of their Resurrection, and the cause of it: both an assurance,
a pledge of it, and likewise a cause of it.

Therefore herein Christ the second Adam, is opposed to the first Adam: As the
first Adam who was the root of all mankind did communicate death, and
mortality to all those that spring from him: so likewise Christ the second Adam
by his Resurrection he conveyes life, and a quickening power to all his members,
as we may see 1 Cor. 15.21.22. For since by man came death, by man came also
the resurrection of the dead: for as in Adam all die; Adam he communicates
death and mortality to all that spring from him, even so in Christ shall all be
made alive. Christ he conveyes life to all his members, and they are all
quickened by his Spirit; therefore Christ is called a quickening spirit, 1 Cor.
15.45. The first Adam was made a living soul, but the last Adam a quickening
spirit; not only a living, but a quickening spirit. And this quickening power and
virtue, Christ did manifest before his resurrection, by raising up three from
death, namely, by raising the Widows son, Luke 7. and Jairus his Daughter,
Luke 8. and Luzarus here in this chapter. And at his resurrection also he
manifested this his quickening power, in that he rose not alone, but raised the
bodies of many of his Saints with him, many of his Saints arose with him, and
as they rose with Christ their head, so also they ascended to glory together
with Christ their head, and the resurrection of these it was an effect of the
resurrection of Christ, it was by the power of Christ's resurrection. Of these
we may read, Mat. 27.52, 53. The graves opened, and many bodies of the Saints
that slept arose, and came out of their graves after his resurrection, and went
into the holy City and appeared to many. Thus you have the first conclusion
proved, that Christ is the Author of the resurrection of the body.

Now in the next place, the second conclusion is this; that, Christ is the
Author and Fountain of spiritual life also. 2 Of spiritual life.


He is the Author of the Resurrection of the soul; and the resurrection of the
soul it is this, when the Spirit of grace, (of which we were all deprived in
Adam) returns again to the soul of a natural man, and so quickens the man, that
the man begins to rise out of the grave of sin, and to lead a new life, a
spiritual life, the life of grace: this is the resurrection of the soul.

Now that Christ is the Author of this Resurrection also, of this spiritual
Resurrection: we may demonstrate this by a multitude of Divine testimonies, but
we will single out some few of the chiese, we need go no further then this
Evangelist, which affords plentiful testimony for the confirmation of this
truth: As in Joh. 4.10. There Christ speaking to the woman of Samaria, he said
unto her; If thou had known the gift of God, and who it is that said unto
thee give me drink, thou should have asked of him, and he would have given
thee living water. Here the Spirit of Christ it is compared to living water, by
an allusion to the water that continually springs out of a Fountain. And the
Spirit of grace is compared to living water from the effects of it: because the
Spirit of grace restores spiritual life to the soul, and then preserves this
life; therefore it is living Water, and Christ is as the Fountain of this water
that yields, and gives this living, quickening water of the Spirit.

Again in Joh. 5.21. there Christ challenges this power to himself, As the
Father raised up the dead, and quickneth them; so the Son quickneth whom he
will. As Christ when he was upon the earth, he raised whom he would from the
death of the body, so now being in heaven, he raises whom he will from the
death of the soul. Yea, the voice of Christ sounding in the ministry of the
Word, accompanied with his quickening Spirit, is of power and efficacy to raise
those that are dead in sins, as we may see Joh. 5.25. Verily, verily, I say
unto you, faith Christ, the hour is coming, and now is, when the dead shall
hear the voice of the Son of God, and they that hear it shall live.

Again in Joh. 6.35. there Christ styles himself the Bread of life, and the
Living bread; Jesus said unto them, I am the bread of life; and in verse 48. I
am the bread of life; and again verse 51. I am the living bread. Christ is the
living bread, the bread of life, who as he has life in himself, so he
communicates spiritual life to all those that seed upon him. And here is a
broad difference between this Bread of life, and ordinary bread, ordinary food:
for though ordinary food can preserve natural life where it is, yet it cannot
restore life where it is not; but Christ is such living Bread, that he restores
life to those that are dead in sins, and preserves that life that he has
restored, thus he is the living Bread.

Again Joh. 15.1. there Christ compares himself to a Vine, and the faithful to
so many branches; I am the true Vine, faith Christ, and my Father is the
husbandman. And in verse 5. I am the Vine, ye are the branches. Now as the
branch of the Vine sucks juice and sap from the stock and root of the Vine; so
all the faithful receive spiritual juice and life, from Christ their head. As
Adam he is a common root of corruption, and spiritual death to all that come
from him; so Christ is a common root of grace, and spiritual life to all those
that are his members. And in this regard Christ is compared to a head, and the
faithful to his members. Collos. 1.18. Christ is the head of his body the
Church. Christ is the head; and the faithful are his members: therefore as in
the natural body, the head that is the principium, the fountain of sense and
motion: it is the head that by certain nerves and sinews conveyes sense and
motion to all the members of the body: so in the mystical body the Church,
Christ is the head that conveyes spiritual life and motion, to all that are his
members, to all the faithful. Thus you see the second conclusion explained and
proved also, that as Christ is the Author of the resurrection of the body, so
he is of the resurrection of the soul too, it is he that raises the soul to
spiritual life.

Now in the third place we are to show the reason why this double quickening 3
Why both comprehended under one term.
power is here comprehended under one term, I am the Resurrection. Now that
this double power of quickening, is to be understood here under this one term,
we need not, I hope, spend time to prove: for that Christ speaks here of the
spiritual resurrection, and the spiritual life; this I take to be evident from
Christ's own exposition in the words following; He that believes in me, though
he were dead, yet shall he live: He that believes in me, though he were dead
in sins and trespasses before, yet he shall live the life of grace, therefore I
am the Resurrection.

Again, that the resurrection of the body is not here excluded, it may appear
from the scope and intent of these words of Christ; for the scope of these
words here, is to persuade Martha that he was able of himself, by his own power
to raise up her dead brother, to restore him to life, says he, I am the
resurrection, I have power to restore spiritual life to the soul that is dead
in sin, and this is the greater work; therefore I am able to restore natural
life to the dead body, to restore the body that is dead in the Grave to life
again.

Now the reasons why this double power is here comprehended under one term, I
am the resurrection; the chief reasons I take to be these two.

First, this double quickening power is here comprehended under one term, in
regard of the Analogy, and proportion between these two, between the restoring
of the body to life, and the restoring the soul to life.

Secondly, in regard of the certain inseparable connection between these two.

First, 1 In regard of the Analogy.
I say in regard of the Analogy and proportion between these two, the
resurrection of the body, and of the soul; now the proportion and analogy
consists especially in these four things.

First, as in the resurrection of the body, the living soul must first return
to the dead body, and quicken it before it can rise again: so here in the
Resurrection of the soul, the Spirit of grace must return to the soul that is
dead in sins, and quicken it before it can rise again: so that there is a
similitude in regard of the first beginning, and principle of this Resurrection.

Again, 2.
secondly there is an analogy, and proportion, in regard of the point and
term, the state from which the Resurrection is: for as in the resurrection of
the body, the body rises from the state of corruption, from the bondage of the
Grave; So here in this resurrection of the soul, the soul and the whole man
rises from the state of spiritual corruption, from the bondage of sin.

The third proportion is in regard of the estate to which a man rises: for as
in the resurrection of the body, a man shall rise again without those
infirmities that the body had before, he shall rise to lead another kind of
life, a glorified life: so in this resurrection of the soul the sinner rises,
and is raised up to lead a new kind of life, a spiritual life: and therefore it
is called Newness of life, Romans 6.4. that we should walk in newness of life:
both in regard of the new principle, and fountain of i^, the spring of grace in
the soul. And in regard of the new effects, and new operations, which are
answerable to the new root.

Fourthly, there is a proportion also in regard of the perpetuity of both: for
as in the Resurrection of the body, the body shall rise an immortal body, not
subject to death any more; so here in the resurrection of the soul, when the
sinner is restored to spiritual life, he is raised up to a durable immutable
estate, he shall continue to live this life of grace, and the immortal seed
that is put into him, it shall never die: so Christ says, verse 26. He that
believes in me, says he, and so lives, he shall never die, he is raised to
an immutable estate, to such a life as shall never be subject to spiritual
death again. Thus you see that analogy, and proportion between these two, and
in this respect they may both be comprehended fitly under one term.

2 In regard of the connection.
Secondly in regard of the infallible connection between these two: for
wheresoever the resurrection of the soul to the life of grace goes before,
there the resurrection of the body to the life of glory will certainly follow
after: for as the spiritual death of the soul did necessarily draw after it the
mortality, and death of the body, so the spiritual life of the soul does
necessarily draw with it the immortality, and the resurrection of the body:
therefore as in the Sacrament the name of the thing signified, is given to the
sign, in regard of the near conjunction, and relation between them: so here in
regard of the near conjunction between these two, that they are never separate,
therefore they may both fitly be comprehended under one term. Thus we have
endeavored to expound the general doctrine in these three particulars. We have
showed you that Christ is the Author and fountain of the Resurrection of the
body: he has the quickening power in him whereby he is able to raise those
bodies that are dead in the grave. Then he is the Author of the Resurrection of
the soul too; he is able to quicken those souls that are dead in sins. And then
we have showed the reasons why these two, the Resurrection of the body, and of
the soul, are both comprehended under one phrase of speech, I am the
Resurrection. Now I come to the Use and Application of that, that has been
delivered. And the Use of the point is,

First, for comfort.

Secondly, for trial and examination.

Thirdly, for exhortation, and direction,

First the Use of the point may be for comfort here, Use 1. Comfort.
here is matter of sound comfort to all those that are the faithful members of
Christ Jesus: if thou be united to Christ by says, Christ is the Fountain of
life, he will be the Fountain of spiritual life: therefore here is comfort
against Death, against the death of the soul, and against the death of the body.

Comfort first against the death of the Soul, 2 Against the death of the soul.
comfort against sin, that is the ill of all ills, and is the death of the
soul. If thou be united to Christ; Christ by his divine power he is able to
free thee from the power and dominion of sin, from the bondage of sin. Do
thou complain that thy understanding is dark and blind? remember Christ is able
to give thee more light, Ephesians. 5.14. Awake thou that sleep, and stand up
from the dead, and Christ shall give thee light. Do thou complain that thy
heart is hard and stony? remember that Christ is able to soften thy hard heart,
and to give thee a heart of flesh, as he has promised, Ezekiel. 36.36. I will
take away their stony heart, and give them an heart of flesh. Do thou
complain that thy affections are unruly, and set upon wrong objects? remember
to thy comfort, that Christ is able to rectify these affections, he is able to
plant in thee the true love, and fear of God, as he has promised, Deuteronomy. 30.6.
I will circumcise thy heart, and the heart of thy seed; that thou shall love me
with all thy heart, and with all thy soul. And in Jer. 32.40. I will put my
fear in their hearts, that they shall never depart from me. Do thou complain
that thou can not bear afflictions patiently? remember that Christ thy head,
he is able to strengthen thee, and he will do it, as he did the Apostle, Phil.
4.13. says he, I am able to do all things through Christ that strengthens me.

But here the weak Christian will be ready to object: Object.
but I have so many strong corruptions in me that I am afraid, that I am not
yet raised out of the grave of sin, that I am not yet raised out of my natural
estate.

To which I answer, Answ.
remember this to thy comfort, that the first Resurrection is unlike to the
second in this regard; in regard of the measure and degree of it: as soon as
ever the soul quickens the dead body, the dead body leaves the Grave, and the
state of corruption wholly, and all at once; but it is not so in the
Resurrection of the soul. When the spirit quickens the soul, the soul begins to
rise again from the grave of sin, but yet the bands and setters of sin, and
corruption still remain upon the soul. Indeed as soon as the Spirit of grace
quickens the soul, the soul presently hates all sins, and begins to shake off
these setters of sin and corruptions, and shakes them off by little and little;
but I say, it shakes them not off all at once. In this spiritual Resurrection,
sin indeed receives a deadly wound, but yet it is not wholly abolished. In the
spiritual Resurrection sin is like a beast, whose throat is cut, that lies
striving and struggling for life: so sin has life in it, but yet it has a
deadly wound: therefore remember to thy comfort, that that will be true here
between the power of grace, and the remainders of sin, that is affirmed of the
house of Saul, and the house of David, 2 Samuel 3.1. there was long war between
them, But the house of David grew stronger, and the house of Saul waxed weaker
and weaker. So it will be between sin and grace, sin will grow weaker, and
weaker, and grace stronger and stronger.

But yet the weak Christian may object further: Object.
but I feel the spirit so weak in me, and the flesh so strong in me, that I am
afraid the flesh will prevail, and so I shall return again to my natural estate.

To this I answer, Answ.
remember that this is contrary to the nature of a true Resurrection to return
to death again: for at the last Resurrection, the bodies that are raised shall
be immortal, never to die again: so here those souls that are quickened to the
life of grace, they are raised to a durable, immutable, immortal estate, never
to die again. That which Christ says of those that shall be accounted worthy
to attain the second Resurrection; the Resurrection of the body, it is true
here also: he says those that shall be accounted worthy of the world to come,
of the Resurrection to life, they shall never die: for they are as the Angels
of Heaven, Luke 20.35, 39. Those that partake of that Resurrection can never
die: so here those that partake of this spiritual Resurrection to the life of
grace, they shall never die: this Resurrection to the life of grace it shall
continue in them. For the spirit of grace when he once comes into the soul,
and quickens it, it continues there, and remains there for ever: it is as a
Well of water springing up to eternal life, as Christ speaks Joh. 4.14.
Whosoever shall drink of the water that I shall give him, shall never thirst,
but the water that I shall give him, shall be in him a well of water springing
up to everlasting life. Now we know a stream of water is of a vanishing nature,
yet if it be nourished with a continual Fountain that can never be dry, the
stream will continually run: so it is with the stream of grace in the soul, it
is nourished with a continual fountain, such a one as can never be dried up.
Thus you see here is comfort against sin, against the death of the soul. Those
that are united to Christ by faith, they may be assured that Christ will be to
them a Fountain of spiritual life.

Secondly, 2 Against the death of the body.
here is comfort against the death of the body, against natural death. If thou
be united to Christ, thou need not to fear temporal death, remember that
though the body be dead because of sin, yet the spirit is life, as it is Romans
8.10. The body, that is dead; that is, it is mortal and subject to death
because of sin, but the spirit, the soul, that lives, it passes from the life
of grace here, to the life of glory. Yea, and the body too that is laid in the
Grave, notwithstanding shall be raised again by the quickening power of Christ.
Remember Christ is thy head, and therefore he being risen from the dead, thou
shall not perish. You know as long as the head of the natural body is above the
water, none of the members of the body can be drowned: so it is here, as long
as Christ is risen, none of his members can be held captive in the Grave.
Remember Christ is the first fruits of the dead, the first fruits of them that
sleep: therefore his Resurrection may be a pledge, and an assurance to thee of
thy resurrection; As we have borne the Image of the earthly, says the Apostle,
so we shall bear the Image of the heavenly 1 Cor. 15.49. As we have borne about
us these corruptible bodies, so when we rise again, we shall rise with
immortal, and incorruptible bodies, and live a glorious life with Christ, and
so be made conformable to Christ our head, therefore fear not the death of the
body. Remember that Death can destroy nothing in thee but sin, therefore fear
not.

This consideration may comfort us, as against our own death, so against the
death of our friends; Let us therefore receive comfort hence, as Martha in this
Chapter; I know that my brother shall rise again in the Resurrection at the
last day, and that did comfort her.

But here this question may be demanded; Quest.
but is not this Resurrection of the body, a benefit common to the wicked? are
not they partakers of this benefit from the resurrection of Christ, as well as
the godly? shall not they be raised, and quickened, as well as the godly, by
Christ his Resurrection?

To this I answer, Answ. Difference in the Resurrection of the godly, and
wicked.
that this Resurrection of the body to life, it is a benefit proper to the
faithful, to the true members of Christ: for though unbeleevers, and wicked
persons shall be raised up again; yet,

By a different cause.

And to a different end.

I say first, 1 In the cause.
by a different cause: the wicked that are out of Christ, cannot have any
benefit from the Resurrection of Christ, because they are out of Christ,
therefore they shall be raised indeed; but not by a quickening power flowing
from the resurrection of Christ: but by the divine power, and command of
Christ, as a just Judge: and they shall be raised by virtue of that curse
pronounced in Paradise, Genesis 2. In the day thou eatest, thou shall die the
death; that includes eternal death: therefore this curse must be executed upon
them, and therefore they must rise out of the Grave again, that body and soul
may die eternally: but the faithful members of Christ shall be raised by the
quickening power of Christ, as their head and Savior.

Again, 2 In the end.
as the wicked shall be raised by a different cause, so to a different end: for
they shall not be raised to life, to speak properly, that state is styled
eternal death, therefore their Resurrection is styled the resurrection of
condemnation, Job. 5.27. they that have done good shall come forth to the
resurrection of life, and they that have done ill to the resurrection of
condemnation; they shall not rise to life, but to eternal death: but the godly
only shall attain this Resurrection of life, and therefore they only are styled
the sons of the resurrection, Luke 20.36. So much may suffice for comfort.

A second Use of the point may be for trial and examination, Use. 2. Trial.
since we profess to be Christians, to be members of Christ, let us here try
the truth, whether we be so in deed or no. Christ is the Resurrection: he is
the Author of the first Resurrection to a spiritual life. The first thing that
Christ does in the soul of a sinner, is to raise the soul to a spiritual life:
therefore examine whether thou have felt this quickening power or no, this first
Resurrection to a spiritual life. When Christ was upon the earth, he had power
to raise up all those to life again that died, but yet he raised but few; there
are but three that we read of, those that we named before. The Widows son,
Jairus Daughter, and Lazarus here. So likewise Christ now has power to quicken
all those that are dead in sin, to raise them to spiritual life, but yet he
quickens but few, in comparison of those that continue still in their sins.
Therefore let us all examine our selves upon this point, whether we have
attained the first Resurrection or no. If we be true members of Christ, we
partake of the first Resurrection: for Christ is a fountain of spiritual life
to all his members: therefore examine this, look to the first resurrection, to
the Life of grace, thou may know it briefly by three signs.

First, Signs of the first Resurrection.
by forsaking of sin.

Secondly, by newness of life.

Thirdly, by thy continual progress in both.

First, 1 Forsaking sin
by thy forsaking of sin, whether have thou left those sins thou formerly
livedst in? As in the Resurrection of the body, as soon as the soul is united
to the body, presently the man leaves the Grave, he leaves the society of the
dead, and comes forth: as Lazarus as soon as he was quickened, and his soul
returned to his body, presently he came forth, Verse. 44. He that was dead came
forth out of his grave. Examine therefore whether thou be come forth of the
grave of sin? whether have thou left the society of sinners, of profane
persons? and whether have thou left the grave of thy sin? Is there not some
lust, some sin that still holds thee captive in this Grave, to which thou
willingly, and wittingly obeyest? If thou live in any one known sin, if thou be
ruled by any one lust, whatsoever it be, be it swearing, or drunkenness, or
uncleanness, or covetousness, or lying, or open and public profaning of the
Sabbath. I say, if thou live in the practice of any of these, or the like known
sins, this is a plain case, thou art still in the noisome grave of thy sins:
thou art not risen out of the grave of thy sins, and therefore thou art not
quickened by the Spirit of Christ; and if thou art not quickened, then thou art
not a member of Christ, thou art not a true Christian.

Again, 2 Newness of life.
Secondly, thou may know it by the newness of thy life: whether do thou
feel a spiritual life wrought in thee? and whether does it appear outwardly?
Do thou feel a spiritual life wrought inwardly? that spiritual life that.
Christ restores to the Soul, is universally spread through the whole Soul. As
when the Soul of a man quickens the body, it quickens the whole body, every
member of it; so here the Spirit of Grace quickens the whole Soul. Therefore
examine whether do thou find spiritual life wrought in thy whole Soul, or no?
whether do thou find this change wrought in thy understanding and judgment?
whether have thou a new judgment, and thoughts, and opinion of God, and of the
ways of God? a new opinion of Christ? a new opinion of the Members of Christ?
Whether do thou find this change in thy heart and affections? whether have
thou new desires, new affections, spiritual inclinations? whether are the
studies, and desires of thy soul set upon heavenly things? If ye be risen with
Christ, seek those things that are above, Collos, 3.1. Whether are thy
affections and meditations heavenly, and spiritual? Do thou feel this change
inwardly in thy Soul?

Again, does this spiritual life appear outwardly also by thy speeches and
actions? Does it appear outwardly in thy speeches, is there a change there?
can thou now speak to men in the language of Canaan, and to God in the voice
of his Spirit, crying Abba, Father?

Again, is there a change in thy outward actions? have thou left the society of
sinners? and do thou converse with living Christians? Do thou love those
that excel in virtue? and do thou manifest the graces of the Spirit in the
conscionable performance of all the duties of thy general, and particular
calling? As soon as Lazarus was quickened, presently as he left the Grave, so
he conversed with living men, and walked in his Calling: so examine if thou
have left the society of the dead, and converse with living Christians, and
delight in them; and whether thou walk on conscionably in the place that God
has set thee in, making the Word of Christ the rule of all thy actions. If it
be thus with thee, if thou feel this spiritual life wrought in thy soul, and it
appear outwardly in all thy speeches and actions; this is a good sign thou
partakest of the first Resurrection to the life of Grace.

In the third place, 3 Progress in both.
thou may know this also by thy progress in both these. First, by the
progress of thy Mortification: Is sin daily more and more mortified in thee?
Do thou daily get ground of thy corruptions? Is sin in thee like the house of
Saul, as that waxed weaker and weaker, so does corruption in thee daily? Is sin
in thee like an old man, as it is in every member of Christ? and therefore it
is styled the old man; an old man grows weaker and weaker, till at the last he
dies: so it is with sin in every Christian, examine if sin be such an old man
in you, that it grows weaker daily.

Again, thou may know it by thy progress in thy vivification: Do thou grow
in grace daily? Is grace in thee, as the house of David, as that grew stronger
and stronger, so does grace in thee? Is grace like a young man, as it is in
every member of Christ? and therefore it is styled the New man; because it is
as a young and lusty man that daily grows stronger, till he come to his full
strength, does grace in thee grow stronger daily? and do thou go forward in
thy Christian course? It is the duty of a Christian to walk on daily in his
Christian course, Romans 6.4. we must walk on in newness of life. If thou find
this progress in thy mortification, and vivification, it is a good sign indeed
that thou have attained to the first Resurrection of the Soul to a spiritual
life. Therefore let me entreat you to set upon this work of examination of your
own hearts diligently, and faithfully. Let not the multitudes of worldly
business: let not the allurement of vain objects, and vain company; let not the
appetite and desire of base pleasures drive these thoughts out of your heads:
but examine your own hearts whether you partake of the first Resurrection, or
no. Deceive not thy own soul: for though Conscience may now sleep, thou may
think thou art in a good estate; yet let me tell thee; the time will come when
thy Conscience will awake, that if thou continue to wallow in any one sin, if
there be no change in thee in thy life, in thy heart; if instead of growing
better, thou grow worse, and be hardened more and more in sinful courses, thy
Conscience will tell thee to thy face, thou art a dead man, thou have no part
in Christ: for Christ is the Resurrection, the Fountain of spiritual life:
thou have not yet attained the first Resurrection to the life of grace, and
therefore if thou go on in this course, thou shall not attain to the second
Resurrection, to the life of glory. So much for that Use.

The third, Use 3. Exhortation direction.
and the last Use of the point is for exhortation; and direction. If now upon
examination, thou find that thou have not yet attained to this spiritual
Resurrection; then let me counsel thee to give no rest to thy soul, till thou
have attained it: for remember that this is the first step to heaven, and if
thou set not the first step to heaven, surely thou shall never come thither. As
the Resurrection of Christ was the first degree of his exaltation: so this
spiritual Resurrection that we have spoken of, it is the first degree of a
Christians exaltation: therefore get this in the first place; yea, get this,
and all will follow. If thou attain this, thou may be assured of the second
Resurrection also, to the life of glory. Remember that Christ by raising
himself from the dead by his own power, declared himself to be the eternal Son
of God: He was declared mightily to be the Son of God by his Resurrection: So
if thou can by a power and virtue drawn from Christ, rise out of the grave of
thy sin, then thou shall declare thy self to be the member of Christ, the Son
of God, the daughter of God: therefore labor to attain this first Resurrection.

But here this question may be demanded: Quest.
but by what means now does Christ convey this spiritual life to his children?
and how shall I get to be partaker of this Resurrection? by what means shall I
attain this first Resurrection to this spiritual life?

To this I answer briefly, that by the same means by which Christ works faith
in the soul, Answ.
by the same means he raises a sinner to life: for he that believes lives,
and he that lives believes; he that believes is raised to life: therefore by
the same means that Christ works faith, by the same means he raises a sinner
to life. Therefore the outward means is the Preaching of the Word; the inward,
the Spirit of grace. By such means as Christ will raise the bodies of the dead
at the last day, by the like means he now raises the souls of those that are
dead in sin. Now Christ will raise the bodies that are now dead in the Grave,
at the last day. First, by his voice, John 5.28.29. and by the sound of the
Trumpet, 1 Cor. 15.52. The Trump shall sound, and the dead shall be raised
incorruptible. And he shall raise them by his quickening Spirit. So by the like
means Christ now raises our souls that are dead in sins: therefore if thou
desire to be raised out of the grave of sin, let me counsel thee;

First, to attend diligently to the word of God, upon the preaching of the
Gospel. The word of Christ, is a quickening word, as Christ says, Joh. 3.63. My
Word is spirit and life. The voice of Christ is a quickening voice: as Christ by
his voice raised Lazarus out of his Grave; when Christ said to Lazarus, Come
forth; presently Lazarus quickened, and came forth: so the voice of Christ in
the ministry of the Word has a quickening power, to raise sinners from the
death of sin: therefore when the Ministers cry aloud, and the Prophets lift up
their voice as a Trumpet, then hearken.

Secondly, be frequent, and fervent in Prayer for the Spirit of grace, and of
Christ: before thou hear, pray; and after thou have heard, pray that the Spirit
of Christ may accompany his Word, that so this may be a means to awaken, and to
quicken thee out of thy natural estate, and to raise thee out of the death of
sin. Thou must pray to God to give thee a hearing ear, and a believing heart:
that so the sound of the Word may not be as the sound of a Trumpet in the ears
of a dead man, but that thou may be quickened by the voice of Christ. And
though thou have continued a long time in thy sins, yet be not altogether
discouraged: remember that Christ is able to raise thee, though thou have
continued never so long in thy sins: for he that was able to raise Lazarus that
was dead and buried, and now stinking in the Grave, he is able to raise up thee
also.

In the last place (in one word) if upon examination, thou find thou have
attained to this spiritual Resurrection, then here is a ground of exhortation.
humility, To thankfulness.


Here is a ground of Exhortation to Humility and Thankfulness, to join them
both together, because they usually go together: the proud person is always
unthankful; and the humble man is always a thankful man. Now if thou have
attained to the Resurrection thou have great cause to be humble, and to be
thankful.

First, thou have great cause to be humbled, because thou have nothing but that
thou have received: thou have great cause to be humbled, because thou put
not any hand to this work, no more than the dead body of Lazarus could help to
the raising of him. No more then a creature being nothing, can help to its own
creation; no more can a sinner help forward this mork of his Resurrection,
therefore thou have cause to be humbled for not putting the least helping hand
to this work, it is wholly supernatural. Therefore let not any one arrogate any
thing to the power of his free will, but remember the work is wholly
supernatural.

Secondly, as we have cause to be humbled, so to be thankful too, do but
consider the desperate, and dangerous estate of sin whence thou art raised, and
then make thy humble confession with the Israelites, when they brought their
first fruits before God, Deuteronomy. 26.5. A Syrian ready to perish was my father; he
went into Egypt with a few; and become a Nation mighty, and populous, and the
Lord brought him out of Egypt with a mighty hand, and an outstretched arm,
with terror and signs, and wonders, and has brought us to this place, and
has given us this Land, even a Land flowing with milk and honey. The like
deliverance the Lord has wrought for thee, therefore be thankful, and make thy
thankful acknowledgment with the Psalmist, Psalm. 115. Not unto us, but to thy
name give the glory. And then desire God, as he has by his mercy brought thee
to the Kingdom of grace, so by his power to preserve thee to the Kingdom of
glory. And desire Christ, as he by his quickening Spirit, has made thee
partakers of the first Resurrection to the life of grace; so to make thee
partaker of the second to the life of glory.

DEATH IN BIRTH: OR, THE FRUIT OF EVES Transgression.
SERMON XXXVI.
GENESIS 35.19. And Rachel died.


IT is a Statute law of God, that all, both Men and Women, must die. All men
must die.
The causes for which it pleased Almighty God to leave the bodies, even of his
dearest Children under the power of Death, to be returned to dust, are many.

First, 1 To manifest Gods truth.
for the manifesting his truth, according to that ancient threatening mentioned,
Genesis 3.19. Dust thou art, and to dust thou shall return.

Secondly, 2 His power.
for the manifestation of his power, that by death, he may translate his chosen
servants to life. Sin it was that brought death into the world: and God will
show his strength in this, that death shall be the utter abolishment, even of
that very thing which brought it first upon us, and made us all liable to it.
If there had not been sin, there should not have been death: and now God will,
that in those that are his, the kingdom and being of sin shall utter ^he
destroyed; the head of Goliath shall be cut off with his own sword, and sin
shall be extinguished by that which it self first procured.

Thirdly, 3 Our benefit by Chrst.
God subjects his children to this course, that by it, they may the better
conceive what inestimable benefit they reap by Jesus Christ. When they do think
(...) they cannot choose but fear it; Nature affecting a con(...) cannot choose
but loath and abhor it. Now then, if (...) fearful; well may we conclude, that
it would have ex^^^^^^ if it continued as at the first it was; that is, a gate
and passage to everlasting torment in hell fire. If the very sight of the
Serpent afright us now the sting is out, what would it have done, if the sting
had still remained? Hereby the Almighty God would have us learn how deeply we
stand engaged to him for his me^cy w(...)o by his Son Jesus Christ h^^h freed
us from so great m^^ery.

Lastly, 4 To conform us to Christ.
the law of Death seizes upon the very elect children of God, that they may he
thereby made conformable to their head Christ: He was as the wheat-corn, which
except it fall into the ground and die, abides alone, Death was his passage,
the same must be ours also. The way of the tree of life is kept with the blade
of a sword shaken, under the stroke whereof, we must first come, before we can
hope for any entran^^ into Paradise, as we see here it is said of Rachel, she
dyed. And Rachel di^d.

I will not stand upon any division of the words, but will (God willing) unite
them together at this time, in this discourse. I conceive it is not altogether
impertinent in the handling of these words of my Text, to show you the occasion
of Rachels death, what the was, and for what she stands recorded in the sacred
Scriptures.

Rachel was one of Labans Daughters, and one of the Wives of Jacob.
Questionless, she was a good woman, though in some things faulty: But the
imperfections of the holy people of those times, are neither to be blazed
abroad (as though we took pleasure in discovering their shame,) nor to be
followed neither; as though by their doing this or that, were a sufficient plea
for us; that were to draw blood, not milk out of the breasts of the
sacred-Scriptures, and is a thing, which for my own particular were the cause
never so just, I do from my soul abhor and detest.

First of all then, Rachel was (...) Fruitful
she is recorded to have been fruitful, by whom Jacob had two sons. Joseph and
Benjamin; and by her, and Leah his other wife, God accomplished his promise
that He made to Abraham, that his seed should be as the stars of Heaven, which
teaches us; that, The fruitfulness of the wife, is to be reckoned as a
blessing, and to be earnestly sought by prayer from Almighty God.

It is that blessing which God promises to the man that fears him, and puts
his trust in him; That his Wife should be as a fruitful Vine, and his Children
they shall stand (...) round about his table. Psalm. 128.3. And in the precedent
Psalm, Lo^, Children are an her stage from the Lord, and the fruit of the womb
are his reward, happy is the man that has his quiver full of them. In former
times, barrenness was accounted for a shame and reproach. When God would punish
Abimelech, about Abraham and Sarah his Wife; it is said, that he closed up all
the wombs in the house of Abimelech, Genesis 20.18. And when God would bless Jobs
last days more than his first, he gave him seven sons, and three daughters, as
an addition to his happiness, and as so many emblems of his grace, and favor
toward him. In there hearsing of the lives of the Fathers before the Flood,
you shall find, especially in Genesis 5. sundry times thus, such, and such a one
lived so many years, and begat sons and daughters. What was the blessing upon
the first couple? was it not this, be fruitful and multiply Genesis 1.28. What
blessing gave the friends of Rebecca at her departure? was it not this, be the
mother of thousands, and millions, Genesis 24.60. What was the manner of Gods
blessing the Jews after their return from the captivity? was it not this, that
their streets should be full of boys, and girls? Zech. 8.5.

This being so, it may serve for a twofold Use;

First, it discovers the wretchedness of their fault, who grudg and repine at
the increase of children as a burden. Some there are that prescrbe to God how
many children he should bestow upon them, and would set him down a stint, that
they would not by any means have him exceed; which argues a most miserable, and
a most faithless mind: For whence is this fear of increase before it come? and
whence is this repining at it when it is come, but from some distrustful
opinion or other, that they conceive either of their inability to maintain
them, etc? Let me say to you, beloved, of your children, as our blessed Savior
said of his Disciples touching themselves; they are of more value then
sparrows, yet the Lord feeds them, together with the young Ravens that cry; how
much more will he give supply to those creatures that are stamped with his own
Image.

Neither is it only a reward and blessing upon the rich that they are fruitful,
but it is even a reward and blessing to the poor, that they have children: for
it is specified in Psalm. 107.41. that God will make them a family like a flock
of sheep; and comfortable it is, that they shall have a family like a flock of
sheep, because this may well be intended; they shall prosper and thrive with a
little maintenance, as sheep will grow fat, albeit the lees are but very short.

Secondly, it serves to direct all that desire this blessing of increase, that
they may know of whom to seek it; it is God that must make thee fruitful like
Rachel; it is he that makes the barren to dwell with the family, and to be a
joyful mother of Children. There are five special keys that God reserves in
his own power.

The first is, the key of the Rain; the Lord shall open his good treasure, and
the Houvens to give Rain to the land, Deuteronomy. 28.12.

Secondly, the key of food; thou openest thy hand, and fillest all things
living with thy plenty, Psalm. 104.28.

Thirdly, the key of the grave; he brings down to the grave, and raises up
again, 1 Samuel 2.6.

Fourthly, the key of the heart; it is said Acts 16.14. the Lord opened the
heart of Lydia.

Fifthly and lastly, the key of the womb; God remembered Rachel and opened her
womb, Genesis 30. Abraham therefore being childless, he makes his moan to God.
Isaac prayed to God for his Wife, because she was barren. Hanna, Samuels
mother, poured out her soul to God in hearty prayer, when she had no child. As
also Zachary, and Elizebeth, the parents of John Baptist. This is the true
course, first to God, and then to the means. Rachel was in a passion, and she
cried to her Husband, give me children or else I die; but nothing of all this
prevailed till she sought it of the Lord, and then she was fruitful, that is
the first.

Secondly, it is recorded of her, that she was not only fruitful; but that with
this fruitfulness of hers, there came an increase of Gods people; she built up
a great part of Israel: and what else were the Isralites, but Gods peculiar
people? A right christian indeed is called a true Israelite; and the elect are
termed by Saint Paul, Gal. 6.16. the Israel of God: So then hence you may
infer; that, The desire of having Children, must aim at the increase, and
ealargement of Gods Church.

This is a blessing indeed, when the wife by her offspring builds up Israel,
not Babel; Bethel, Gods house, not Bethaven, the house of iniquity. This was
the desire of holy people of old, when they prayed that their children might be
as corner-stones, couched into the walls of the Temple; meaning thereby, that
they might grow into the Temple of the Lord, to be a habitation of God by his
Spirit: Blessed is the man says the Psalmist, that has his quiver full of
them: it is of such children, that are as the arrows of a strong man. Whence it
follows, that they must have more in them then nature: for arrows are not
arrows by growth, but by Art: so they must be such children, the knottiness of
whose nature, is refined, and reformed, and made smooth by grace.

Ishmael the son of the bondwoman had twelve sons, and all Princes in their
Nations; but what did all these titles of dignity do them good, as long as they
were out of the promise? Questionless Hanna's drieft in desiring a son of God,
was, that out of her might come one, by whom Gods glory might be advanced among
men, therefore she vowed him to the Lord all the days of his life. The Angel
told Zachary that he should have joy and gladness at the birth of his son, why?
Because he should be great in the sight of the Lord, and silled with the holy
Ghost, and turn many to the Lord, Luke 1.50. He that begets a fool, that is, an
ungodly irreligious son: for that is one of Solomon's fools, he gets himself
sorrow, and the father of such a one shall have no joy; but he shall be his
very calamity, and his mere vexation. It is a rule set down in Scripture, that
whatsoever is done, should be done to the glory of God: therefore our desire of
having children must aim at this, that out of our loins may come such, by whom
Gods glory may be promoted, and the number of the godly increased in the world.

Thirdly, 3 Obedient.
she is recorded to have yielded in all willingness, and readiness to the
desire of her Husband: When Jacob was warned by an Angel from God, to return
from Laban to the Land where he was born; he made his wives acquainted with the
matter, and discovered to them his whole intent and purpose: they forthwith
gave him this yielding, and respective answer; Whatsoever God has said unto
thee, that do, Genesis 31.11. The like is to be seen in Sarah, she was no
hindrance to Abraham in his removal from his own Country to Canaan; no, nor at
such time when she was ignorant whither he went: she was no hindrance to him in
the speedy circumcising of his son; No, nor she did not go about to hinder him,
in the very sacrificing of his son. Out of all doubt, if she had been a clog to
him in any of these respects the Spirit of God would never have concealed it,
because the wrestling with her unwillingness, and gainsaying, had been a
strong evidence of Abraham's faith, that the Scripture is very careful to set
out to the full, for his credit and our instruction.

There are two Women storied in the Scripture above others as examples of Gods
judgment upon the untowardness of Wives, not joining with, and encouraging
their Husbands in good-doing. The one is Lots Wife, whose love no question was
a great delay to Lot in his departure from Sodom, that when she should have
gone on with her Husband in have to the place which was appointed for their
refuge without looking back, she drew behind still, lingering after her wonted
home; but what was the issue? she was turned into a Pillar of salt. The other
was Michal the wife of David, when she looked out, and saw David dance before
the Ark, she despised him in her heart, and was so far from approving his zeal,
that when he returned, she entertained him with a frump, saying to him, What a
fool was the King of Israel this day: but what was the issue of it? a
punishment was inflicted on her for her fault, that she had no child all the
days of her life, 2 Samuel 6.23.

I remember a policy of Saint Paul, in his Epistle he wrote to Philemon: he
writes to him for the re-entertainment of a runnagate servant that he had
begotten to God in his bonds, and for the better effecting of it in his
inscription, he not only writes to Philemon, but joins with him Philemons wife,
To Philemon our dearly beloved, and to our beloved Apphia, Philem. 1, 2.
Wherefore was this? For nothing else I believe, but to warn her of her duty,
that when the receiving of Onesimus was manifested to her Husband, as a needful
duty, and a thing pleasing to Almighty God, she should not put in her spoke to
withstand the motion, but further it by all the means she could. It was to this
end that the woman was created, that she might be a help to her Husband in all
honest offices, to join with him, to encourage him, to provoke him, and assist
him in the performance of them.

Fourthly and lastly, 4 Her death.
to omit many other things recorded of her, that I might here relate to you,
and to come to that that more nearly concerns this present occasion, it is said
of Rachel, she died in travel. God had commanded Jacob to rise, and go up to
Bethel, and dwell there: he obeyed, and erected a Pillar in the place where God
talked with him: thence he journeyed a little further to Ephrath, and there
Rachel traveled, and had hard labor: in the sufferance of which, which might
be some ease, she received a great deal of comfort from her Midwife, who bad
her not fear, for she should have this son also: but it came to pass as her
soul was departing, for she died, that her sons name was called Benoni, that
is, a son of sorrow, as we see verse 18.

Who can express the woe of that day? and the bitterness of that loss to Jacob?
who was now berest of his dearly-beloved Wife, by the fruit of whose womb he
had reaped such increase of blessing? before, the children had the care of two
watching over them; now only of one, and that such a one as was not accustomed
to interest himself in training up young Children, but left it to her, and she
took it from him. O death void of mercy, and respect of persons! that she
should die, it was some grief to him, but that she dyed in travel, that did
most trouble him, and increase his grief. And well might he style their son
Benony, the son of sorrow: for it was indeed a sorrow to them all: to her, to
him, to their issue, to their friends, and acquaintance, to their servants, to
all that knew them, or had any relation to them.

But Jacob will not exceed the bounds of Christianity, he was at the last
comforted: he refers himself, his children, his infinite, and almost
insupportable loss to God Almighties pleasure, from him she was received, and
to him he is content again to return all. The mourning, and lamenting that he
made on her behalf it could not recall her again: all the tears he could shed
for her, were of no force or power at all to make her alive; too much sorrow
might happily endanger his own life, and then he should highly offend against
Almighty God, Patience and Christian fortitude were the only remedies left him,
and these he resolves on.

Let us learn hence as long as the world lasts, to know that worldly comforts
whatsoever they be, and howsoever we may esteem of them, they are subject to
change. Love with unfeignedness what may be so loved, but take heed you love
not too much, for fear the taking of that away from you, that was so dearly
loved of you, make you fall into impatience, and sin against God.

Let us so love that we may think of loss, if it stand with Gods pleasure; but
yet let us so love, that we esteem it no loss if he please. Let his good will,
and pleasure ever-more moderate our affections: so happily we shall enjoy the
thing beloved, a great deal longer. But if we exceed in lamenting, were we as
just, and righteous as Jacob, God will be angry with us for it. Not only thy
dearest Wife, but thy dearest Child, thy dearest friend; whatsoever is most
dear to thee, shall then feel the stroke of mortality, that the heart may be
taught to wish for eternity, crying heavily, and sighing with a mournful voice,
with those words of the Preacher, Vanity of vanities all is but vanity.

There is a threefold punishment inflicted upon all women kind in answer to the
three sins committed by our Granmother Eve.

First, because she gave too much credit to the words of the Serpent, telling
her, that both Adam and she should be as Gods, knowing good and evil; therefore
it was pronounced presently upon her, that her sorrows and conceptions should
be multiplied.

Secondly, because against the express command of Almighty God, she did eat the
forbidden fruit, therefore it was pronounced against her, that in sorrow she
should bring forth Children, every time her hour was at hand she should hardly
escape death. I need not enlarge my self, you all know it to be too true; nay
sometimes, and that oft-times too it costs your lives: an example we have here
in the Text in Rachel, and in our deceased Sister here before us, and many
others.

Thirdly, and lastly, because she was a seducer of her Husband; therefore for a
punishment, all your desires ought to be subject to your Husbands, and by the
warrant of the Scripture they must rule over you. Death is a debt to nature and
must be paid: there is no avoiding of it, no putting it off, when GOD thinks
it fit, it is infallible to all, in respect of the matter, and end: though in
respect of the time and manner, many times it be diverse. Some die when they are
young; some in the middle of their age, and some live till they be very old.
That for the time.

Some die of Convulsions, some of Dropsies, some of Fevers: and to be short,
some in Childbed; as Rachel here did, and our departed sister. But of what
desease soever they die, that is nothing: die they must sooner or later, of
this infirmity; or that, it is no matter which, when it pleases God; Let a man
make what show he can with all his glorious adornations. Let him have rich
apparel, and disguised linen; and searcloth, and balm, and spices, let him be
inwrapped in lead, and let stone immure him when he is dead, yet the earth his
original Mother will again own him for her natural Child, and triumph over him
with these, or the like insultings, he is in my bowels, returned to his earth.

This body returns not immediately to heaven, but to the earth; nor to the earth
neither as a stranger, and altogether unknown to him, but to his earth,
appropriate to him as his own, his familiar friend, and old acquaintance. To
conclude, we are sinful, and therefore we must die, we are full of evil, and
therefore we must go to the grave: we have sins enough to bring us all thither.
God grant they be not so violent, and full of ominous precipitations that they
portend our sudden ruin? portend it they do, but O nullam sit in omnia, etc. I
am loath to be redious. He should not be redious that reads a lecture of
mortality. How many in the world since this Sermon first began, have made an
experimeut, and proof of this truth, of this sentence, that man is mortal; and
those spectacles are but examples of this truth; they come to their period,
before my speech. My speech, my self, and all that hear me, all that breath in
this air must follow. It has been said we live to die; give me leave a little
to invert it, let us live to live, live the life of grace, that we may live the
life of glory, and then though we do die, let us never fear it, we shall rise
from the dead again, and live with our God out of the reach of the dead, for
ever, and ever. So much for the Text at this time.

To declare unto you the cause of this present assembly would be altogether
superfluous, the dumb oratory of that silent object, does give you to
understand in a language sufficiently intelligible, that we are now met to
perform the last rites and duty that we owe to the memory of our dear sister
here before us. And Christian charity has been so powerful in all ages, that
it has been retained as a pious, and laudable custom at Funeral solemnities
to adorn the dead, with the deserved praises of their life: not for any pomp or
vainglorious ostentation, but that Gods glory here may be for ever magnified,
by whose grace they have been enabled to fight a good fight: and that the
surviving may be encouraged to run the same course, when they behold them
discharged of this tedious combat, and crowned with a crown of glory, and
immortality.

This Sister of ours was born in this parish, and has lived in it some thirty
four years, or there-about; eighteen years a single woman, and sixteen years a
married Wife; of whom though upon my own knowledge I can speak but little, yet
having credible information from others, with whom she had long, and private
intimacy of many years acquaintance, I must, and will speak.

That which I told you was recorded of Rachel, that she was fruitful in
procreation of Children, may in a great measure be spoken of her: for if the
Scripture account bearing but of two children fruit: certainly it will make an
extraordinary fruit in bearing of twelve, which she did. It is a certain token
of a true, and faithful servant of God, to frequent his house, to pray unto
him, to praise him in his Church earnestly; to labor to be instructed in his
will out of his Word, then, and there, read and preached to them: all which
evidences of a good Christian were found in this our Sister. For her constant
coming to Church, I my self can now speak upon my own knowledge, I have
seriously, and strictly examined my self, and I profess ingeniously before God
that knows my heart, and you that here me speak, that I cannot call to mind,
that ever she mist coming to Church twice a Sabbath day since I came, which I
would be heartily glad I could speak as well of others of this Parish, as of
her. For some of them have got such a fisking trick up and down, to go to other
Churches, as if there were no rellishable food at their own, that I fear at the
last they will come to none at all, I pray God they amend this fault. It was a
virtue in her that deserved commendation, and it is a vice in them that
deserves reprehension.

When she was in Gods house, she did not as too too many do, employ her time in
sleeping, or some such ill course: but I ever observed her to listen very
diligently, and attentively to what was delivered, for the nourishing of her
soul. I confess I do not remember that ever I saw her take any notes in the
Church of Sermons that were preached: for it seems she did it when she came
home: for since her death, going to her house, accidentally I met with a book
of hers, wherein she had written many texts of Scripture with notes: the day
when they were preached, and the persons by whom, most of those which I have
preached I saw and perused, and others of strangers that I my self have heard:
these qualities are not to be past over in silence, but are worthy of your
serious imitation.

Neither did she think it fit barely to set them down for her own instruction
only: but what she heard upon the Sabbath day that she constantly practiced
upon the week days. She catechized her children in those points; spending some
time in training them up in the knowledge of God, and putting them in mind of
their duty to him in whom we live and move, and have our being, by repeating
Gods word delivered, by hearing them read Gods word printed, and by singing
Psalms, and hymns, and spiritual songs.

That she was a most provident, and careful Wife, and a most indulgent, and
loving Mother, all that knew her can best testify, and some of them have
informed me. And this let me speak, and I have it from the mouth of some, that
prehaps did not think I would have mentioned it at this time, and would have
had it concealed, but for reasons best known to my self, I hold it very fit to
relate: she was ever held to be of a most sweet nature, and of a very loving
disposition; that she was very charitable, and inclined to relieve the poor; It
is likewise testified of her, she was liberal always; but more liberal now then
usually, having had a consideration of the hard and needy times: to which end,
as if she had prognosticated her own death, she laid some money (according to
that ability that God had blessed her with) for the relief of the poor.

Let no man censure me for speaking these things I do: for if I should not have
given her, her just, and deserved praises; some that now hear me, and knew her
from her cradle, might justly have censured me for too much remisness. Thus for
her life.

As for her death, I can say little touching it. It pleased God, not to give
her any long time of sickness, but to take her away; though not unprepared, yet
on a sudden with a short warning. When her bitter pangs first came upon her,
she called to her Husband, and desired him to join with her in hearty prayer to
Almighty God, that he would be graciously pleased to extend his mercy toward
her; that he would be pleased to let her live longer, that she might repent of
her sins, and beg mercy at his hands for them, that she might amend her life.
And if he would not grant this for her, yet for those many poor Children that
were young, that she was to leave behind her; she desired him to be a careful
Father over them all: she prayed to God devoutly to send a blessing both upon
him, and them.

Much she could not then speak, because of her pains, that now began still to
increase upon her. When she was in the extremity of her labor, he being absent
(as it was fitting) she sent down to him, to desire him to pray to God on her
behalf, that he would ease her of those grievons pains, and preserve her in the
great pain, and peril of Child birth. The propitious God it seemed heard him,
and granted his request: for presently to the thinking of the standers by, she
was well delivered. Not satisfied with this, having received so great a
blessing from God, she sent down again to desire him, to give God thanks for
her safe delivery. But God, that had determined to take out of this miserable
life, quickly turned that hope of the standers by into a fear, and suddenly she
changed: which perceiving, as long as she was able to speak, she cried, Lord
Jesus have mercy on my soul, Lord have mercy on me, Lord pity me poor
miserable wretch: and when she could not speak, she held up her hands to
heaven, as desirous to make her peace with that God, whom she knew she had
highly offended. I make no question, but God has translated her from the
valley of tears, to the Mount Sion of blessedness: whither God of his infinite
mercy bring us all.

THE DEATH OF SIN: AND LIFE of GRACE.
SERMON XXXVII.
ROMANS 6.11. Likewise reckon ye also your selves to be dead unto sin, but alive
unto God, through Jesus Christ our Lord.


THe intent of this Chapter, Coherence.
is to take off an abuse of the Doctrine of the Gospel, which publishes the
free Grace of God to great sinners. The Apostle had said in the latter end of
the 20. Verse of the former Chapter, where sin abounded, Grace did much more
abound. From hence some did infer; that therefore under the Gospel they might
take liberty to sin; the more their sins were, and the greater they were, the
more they should occasion God to manifest his abundant Grace upon them. This
the Apostle answers in this Chapter, and he answers it two ways.

First, by way of detestation.

Secondly, by way of confutation.

By way of detestation in the first verse, and part of the second, What shall
we say then, shall we continue in sin that Grace may abound? God forbid.

Secondly, by way of confutation; the argument whereby he confutes it, is by a
necessary consequence of our justification; that is, our sanctification: these
are so inseparably united together, all that are justified, are sanctified. And
upon this ground, the Apostle frames two arguments to confute this error,
taken from the two parts of sanctification.

The first is from our mortification, from the third verse, to the end of the
seventh; and the argument runs thus. Those that are dead to sin, cannot sin
that Grace may abound; but all that are in Christ, are dead to sin; therefore
they cannot sin that Grace may abound. Now that all that are in Christ are dead
to sin; he proves by their union with Christ, testified in Baptism, and by the
effect of that union, which is conformity to Christ; that as Christ was dead
for sin, so they are dead to sin.

The second argument, is taken from the second part of our sanctification,
which is our quickening to a new life; and that he handles in the 8, 9, 10.
verses, and that argument runs thus. Those that are quickened by Christ to
newness of life, cannot sin that Grace may abound: but all that are in Christ,
are quickened by Christ to newness of life; therefore they cannot sin that Grace
may abound. That all that are in Christ are quickened to newness life; he proves
in verse 8. If we be dead with Christ, we believe that we shall live with him
still, by our union with Christ, whereby there comes a conformity to Christ in
his resurrection, as well as in his death.

And from these premises, he infers by way of application, the conclusion that
is here in the words of the Text I have now read to you; likewise reckon ye
also your selves dead unto sin, but alive to God, through Jesus Christ our
Lord. As if he should say, do not rest your selves satisfied in the bare
knowledge of these things, in the discourse of them in general, but bring them
to particular application, make the case your own; what we say of death to sin,
and of newness of life, we speak to you, if ye be in Christ; therefore you must
make account of it to be your case, likewise reckon ye your selves dead to sin,
but alive to God, through Jesus Christ our Lord. We see now the coherence of
the words with those that go before, and the main intent and scope of the
Apostle in the Chapter, Observat. 1.
wherein we might note diverse things.

The first is out of the very connection, that by virtue of the union of
believers with Christ, there is in them a conformity to Christ. They are made
like unto him; he had said before, that Christ died, and rose again; likewise
reckon ye your selves like him in this. Every one that is in Christ, is
conformable to Christ, and made like him.

Then again secondly, we might note hence this also; that, Rectified and
sanctified reason, ever concludes to God, and for God. Observat. 2.


Reckon ye, make account, conclude this, so the word signifies, reason thus,
conclude thus; as it is used Romans 3.28. We conclude (says the Apostle, where
the same word is used) That a man is justified by Faith without the works of
the Law. So, conclude this, rest on this conclusion, do not make it a matter of
conjecture, and opinion only: but when you consider things wisely, when you
weigh things seriously, you shall see great reason to infer those things, from
these premises that God would have you infer. Therefore whatsoever reasoning is
against the Word, whatsoever disputes the minds of men uphold against any truth
in Scripture, it is but the reasoning of corrupt reason; If reason were
sanctified, it would conclude, as 2 Cor. 5. We judge, if one died for all, then
they that live, should not live to themselves, but to him that died for them.
When men come to deal judiciously, and advisedly, when they come to conclude of
things wisely; they will conclude then, that what use the Word and the Gospel
would have them make of any truth, that they will make of it, Likewise reckon
ye, judge thus.

Thirdly, we might note hence thus much also; that, The best and most
profitable knowledge of the Scriptures, is in applying it to a man's own case,
and person, and condition. Observat. 3.


Reckon ye also your selves, says the Apostle; make account of thus much, that
this is a truth concerns you in particular. Judge your selves so far profited
by the Word you hear, as you can make good application of it to your own estate
and condition. Whenever men come to hear the Word, they come to hear,
somewhat that concerns themselves, therefore whatsoever we say befalls them that
are in Christ; apply it to your selves, and make account this is my case, if
(...) in Christ.

Fourthly, hence we might note thus much also; that, When a man is in Christ,
there is a real change. Observat. 4.


There is an evident change from what he was, before he was in Christ. For so
the Apostle reasons; now you are in Christ, there is such a change, as from
death to life, there is a mavelous great change in you. If there be not this
change in you, neither are you in Christ; and all the hopes you build on of
being in Christ, they are without a foundation, they are upon an imaginary
Christ, not upon Christ that is yours indeed. If you be in Christ, let it
appear in a change, let us see how you are changed since you were in Christ,
from that you were before: for this make account of, conclude thus much for
your selves; that all that are in Christ are changed.

But fifthly, Doctr. 5. There is a change in all that are in Christ as from
death to life.
and lastly, he expresses wherein this change confisteth; and he makes choice
of such terms as are most acquisite, and sit for his purpose. He would express
this spiritual change, and mark what expressions he uses to manifest it by; no
less then life, and death. There is such a change when you are once in Christ,
from what you were before; as there is between a man that was dead, and is now
alive; or a man that was alive, and is now dead; and this is that, that I will
infist now upon, wherein note these particulars.

First, the Analogy and proportion, the aptness, and fitness of the terms,
wherein the Apostle expresses the spiritual change of those that are in
Christ; how sitly they may be said to be dead, and alive.

Secondly, it is observable in what order the Apostle expresses these first
dead, and then alive. Make account that the work of Grace in the effectual
change in your hearts, it proceeds in this order. First you are dead, and then
alive; dead to sin first, and then alive to God.

Thirdly, note the certain connection of these two together; so there is not
only a certainty in the object, but a certainty in the subject too; not only a
certainty that those that are in Christ shall live: but it is certain to you,
make account of this, make this conclusion for your selves, build on it, know
it for your selves, as he said to Job; it is certain if you be in Christ, you
are dead with Christ, and you shall live with Christ, make account of this.

Lastly, the efficient cause of this great change expressed in these terms, it is
Jesus Christ our Lord: make account of this, if you be in Christ, there comes a
virtue from Christ, an effectual working of Christ by his spirit in your
hearts; such a powerful work as will conform you to Christ dead, and to Christ
risen; that you shall be dead to sin, and alive to God: not by any sttength in
your selves, or any excellent endowment in your own natures, not by any natural
inclination and ability, but through the virtue and power of Jesus Christ our
Lord working in you. Thus you have the Text opened.

We will speak first of the Analogy and proportion, 1 The analogy between
spiritual, and natucal life and death.
the agreement between the metaphors here used, and the things expressed by them.
That which the Apostle would express, is, that there is a mavelous spiritual
real change, in all those that are in Christ, from what they were before. Now
let us see how sitly it is expressed in these words, that he says, you are dead
to sin, and alive to Ged; that he chooses to express it by life and death. Had
it not been fit to have said thus much; you are changed in your dispositions,
in your inclinations, in your intentions, in your actions; you are changed in
your conversations, you are other kind of men in the inclination of your
hearts; you bring forth other fruit, you lead other lives then you were wont to
do? But he expresses it here yet more fully; that is, by that that includes
all these; and if there be any thing more may be added, it includes that too,
ye are dead and alive. Then we will consider;

First, generally, how death, and life, express the state of them that are in
Christ.

Secondly, consider them in their particular application; how death expresses
the first part of a man's change in sanctification, and life the second part.

First, we take them in general, and let this be the point; that, A man that is
indeed effectually changed by virtue of his union with Christ; he has such a
change wrought in him, as in a dead, and living man; as in life, or in death.

Now, 1 In general. 1 A General change.
first take it in general; you know life, and death, they imply, first a
general change; when a man is alive, or when a man is dead, there is not a
change in some part only, but in the whole: So it is here, when a man is
effectually changed from what he was, by virtue of his union with Christ.

A member may be dead, and yet nevertheless the man alive; but if the man be
dead, there is a general change that goes throughout, it possesses every part,
every member; so that now there is no member of him, but death rules in it,
then he is a dead man. So it is in this, when a man is dead spiritually, there
is not a change in some particular actions only, in some particular opinions
only; there is not an alteration of some of his old customs only; but it is a
general change, so it goes through the whole man. It is a change in the
understanding, he judges things otherwise then he was wont to do. And there is
a change in the will; the inclination of it is to other objects then he was
wont to be inclined to. And thence there is a change in his intentions; he
propounds other ends to himself then he was wont. So there is a change in
respect of the whole; the Word is the rule of all a man's actions. There is a
change from particular evils, from one as well as another; that when any thing
is discovered to him to be a sin, to be a transgression of the rule; he is
turned from it. So likewise, when any thing is discovered to him to be a duty,
agreeable to the rule according to the will of God revealed in his Word; he is
a vessel of honor prepared for it: and that is it the Apostle especially
means, when he compares them to vessels, and he describes them thus; they are
vessels of honor fit for the service of their Master, prepared for every good
work: So that now as the Apostle says, there remains no more conscience of
sin. That is, there remains not now any sin to cleave to the conscience to
defile it, to cleave to the conscience so, as a ruling enemy would do, that
would take away all true and perfect peace; all boldness, and access to the
throne of Grace, there is no such conscience of sin. This making conscience of
every sin, is that that frees conscience from being defiled in that sense with
any sin; so much for the first.

Well, 2 The orderlyness of it.
secondly it is expressed by death, and life, to show the orderliness in the
proceeding of this change. When a man is changed by the efficacy and working of
Christ to whom he is united; it proceeds in such a manner, as the change in
death or life. You know death, or life, begin within first; it begins in the
inward man, in the heart first. And as in natural death, or natural life; there
is a dying first of the root, and a quickening first at the root: So likewise in
spiritual death, or life; it is an orderly proceeding, it begins first within.
Our Savior Christ gives this direction; First make the inside clean, and then
all will be clean; against the hppocrisie of the Scribes, and Pharisees, that
looked more to outward actions. So this change, it is not only a mere
civilizing of a man, a conforming of him to that society he converseth with in
outward actions; but renewing of a man in the spirit of his mind, Romans 12.2. So
the change begins from within.

Hence it is, that first he is good, and then he does good, according to the
speech of Christ, make the tree good, and then the fruit will be good, we will
not stand upon it: you see the Analogy, and agreement holds between these two
in general.

Now we come to take them apart more specially: 2 The Analogy in particular.
First, how this being dead to sin, agrees with that change that is in a man
that is in Christ from sin; Reckon this, says the Apostle, make account of
this, that you are dead to sin: that is, now there is such a change and turning
from your evil courses, from whatsoever it is that is truly and properly called
sin in Scripture, you are changed from it. Now in whatsoever sense a man may be
said to be dead, in that sense a man in Christ is changed from sin, there is
somewhat in his change expressing that death. Now there is a threefold death, A
Civil Death. Death threefold.
A Judicial Death. A Natural Death.


We begin with the judicial first, 1 Judicial.
as Gods great Work begins in the judgment. There is a judicial death; so one
that is alive now in respect of natural life, may yet be said to be judicially
dead, when he is dead in sentence; when by the Judge he is condemned to death,
when he is adjudged to die. So reckon ye your selves dead to sin; make account
of this, that now in your judgment there is a sentence passed out against sin,
that it shall be slain, that it shall be mortified; thus your judgment stands,
and thus you look upon it, as a thing dead in sentence; and that is the first.
It is that in Ezekiel. 36.31. says the Lord, When I shall be pacified to thee,
this shall follow upon it; thou shall judge thy self worthy to be destroyed,
for all thine iniquities and abominations. When God is reconciled to a man,
which is as much as to say, when a man is in Christ: for by Christ we are
reconciled to God, this follows upon it, that man comes now to judge sin to be
a deadly thing, to judge sin to be dead, and to judge himself worthy to be
destroyed for it. He looks on sin as it should be looked upon, his opinion is
right concerning it: he accounts it an iniquity, a thing against that
rectitude, against that equity, and righteousness wherewith man was once
endowed in the Creation; and from which so far as he swarves, so far he is
plunged into death. As you know that curse was denounced against man when he
sinned he should die: so he cannot look upon iniquity, upon that that is
contrary to that righteousness wherein he was made, but he looks upon it, as on
death it self, and a deadly thing; he looks upon it as upon an abomination.
That look as persons that sinned capitally were an abomination to the Land, and
people among whom they sinned; as the Scripture speaks of murderers, and the
like; the land was defiled if the sentence of death were not executed; so it is
here in the opinion and judgment of a man that is in Christ, he accounts this
the greatest defilement, that his soul remains so far polluted and defiled, as
there is any life left in sin. That is the first thing, reckon this then that
sin is dead immediately; that is, that you now come to pass (as Judges do) a
sentence of death against sin: and that howsoever a Malefactor be not
naturally dead, when he is judicially dead; yet he is in an order to it, the
next thing that follows will be to be cut off. So it is with sin, when a man
comes to judge himself for his iniquity, worthy to be destroyed for his
abominations, this is the next thing that follows, he will not rest, till that
be slain and subdued, till that Malefactor be condemned to death, and cut off
and took out of the way. Here is the first thing, herein this change is like
death.

Secondly, there is a civil death too; so one that lives naturally, may be dead
civilly; so one that is under the subjection and power of another, 2 Civil.
such a one is dead civilly. The civil Law accounts any one that is under
subjection to be Civiliter mortuus as they speak; that is, he is in that sense
not accounted among living men, he is one dead, because he is not annimated,
and acted by his own will, but by the will of him that rules him: so reckon ye
your selves dead, says the Apostle. Make account that when you are in Christ,
sin is no more to be ruler, and commander, to act, and animate, and quicken you
to obey its lusts, that you should be acted, and animated by it, that as soon
as sin tempts, you should obey presently: make account in this sense you are
dead to sin, that is, sin is dead in you civilly, it has not a ruling power;
it comes not now as one that has power to sway all before it: that is it the
Apostle says in this Chapter, sin shall not have dominion; You have a new
Master, a new Lord, you are no more under the rule and dominion of sin, that is
the second.

Thirdly, 3 Natural.
there is a natural death, as well as a judicial, and civil death, so things
are said to be dead naturally, two ways, Imperfectly, Inchoate. Perfectly,
Consummate.


Natural death imperfect, 1 Imperfect.
and but begun is this, as when there is a great blow given with an axe to the
root of a tree, whereupon certainly it will wither, and die, and be made
altogether unfruitful for the time to come: though for the present it have
leaves upon it, and though for the present all the fruit that is on it be not
quite shook off, yet now the tree is said to be dead, because there is a blow
given at the root, whereupon it will wither and certainly die. So a man is said
to be dead, when he has a deadly wound given him, though he be not now dead;
though he may stir, and live after, and perhaps do some hurt to him that
wounded him; yet he is dead, because he is irrecoverably wounded, every one
that looks on him will say he is dead. So as soon as a man is in Christ, by
virtue of his union with Christ, there is such a blow given to the root of sin;
not in the judgment only, but in the affections also; so as it never recovers
its strength again, to bring forth fruit in that abundance as before; and it
always withers, and decays more and more, till it be quite removed.

Now, Simile.
as it is in this case with a tree; will you know when it is dead? take it in
the Spring. All the trees in Winter seem to be dead, but come in the Spring,
and in Summer, and then if a man see there are no leaves, if he see no fruit
upon the tree, now he concludes it is dead indeed: because it brings not forth
fruit in the season of fruit. So, take a man, when there is an occasion, an
opportunity, to turn to folly; when upon deliberation and judgment, he may
consider of that opportunity to manage it for the service of sin, it will
appear now if he be dead, he will not in such an occasion yield, but at such a
time especially resist sin, at such a time he will not bring forth the fruit of
sin.

Look what the Spring is to the tree, that is occasion to the sinfulness of
man's heart. Indeed when sin takes a man upon disadvantage, upon unequal terms,
that he deliberates not, and considers not what he is doing: as David says, I
said in my have; then many times sin prevails, and binds him, as a thief does
the master of the house, hand and foot: yet nevertheless when he well weighs,
and considers things, at such a time it will appear that sin is dead. Thus you
see how sitly the terms hold to express the change of a Christian, his judgment
is right, he condemns sin as death, in the purpose and covenant of his heart
whereby he is bound to God, he disposes it from its dominion and rule, that
what it does now is as a thief by stealth, that surprizeth a man in his sleep;
And it has its deadly wound, whereupon it withers, and decays, and at last in
the sight of all men, and at such a time, when if there were any life it would
appear, at such a time it shall appear that sin is dead. Thus you see the first
expression opened, the change from sin by death; you are dead to sin.

Now take the second expression, 2 Newness of life expressed by life in three
respects.
you are alive to God, that expresses the second part of sanctification, that
this, the quickening of a man to newness of life. It is with thee now, as with
one that was dead, and is alive, there is such a change in thee. And how is
this expressed by life? Thus; in three respects this change is fitly expressed
by life.

The first is this, 1 The principle of life.
you know life it consists in the union of a man, with the principle of life?
when there is a union between the body, and the soul, here is life. Now though
there are bodies, and spirits, yet the bodies live not by those spirits, except
they be united with them: therefore when the soul is separated from the body,
the ^ody dies, and the man is said no more to be a live: so here in this fence,
when there is a union between the soul of a man, and the principle of spiritual
life, then there is that change wrought, whence he is said to be alive. Now the
principle of spiritual life is only Christ; so you see here in the Text, you
are alive to God through our Lord Jesus Christ, when there is a union between
Christ and you. And how is that? It is by an influence from Christ into the
soul, and that is the mighty work of the Spirit of God, as you see Joh. 6.63.
It is the Spirit that quickneth, says our Savior. The great work that is
wrought by the Spirit in quickening a man, is the work of Faith. Now I live,
says the Apostle, by faith in the Son of God, that dyed for me, Gal. 2.20. Now
when there is such a union between Christ and a man, then he lives; there is
such a change in him, as there is in life. Therefore beloved, this change is
not in any that profess the knowledge of Christ, and have not yet union with
Christ. It is not enough that a man be called a Christian: it is not enough
that a man prosess that he hopes to be saved by Christ; It is not enough that a
man go on in some external actions as other Christians do, unless that he does,
and that he is in any spiritual a (...) on, it be by virtue of his union with
Christ, that it be by life received from him by a quickening virtue flowing from
him to every member, that is expressed, Joh. 15.9. by the branches in the Vine,
they are quickened by union in the Vine, cut the branches from the Vine, and
they die, and wither. So it is with men; let hem be in the Lords Vineyard, yet
if they be not united with this Vine Christ, they are but dead men, dead in
trespasses and sins, Ephesians. 2.1. that is the first.

Secondly, 2 The actions of life.
this change is expressed by life in another respect: for look as in life there
is not only an union with the principle of life, but besides that, there are
those living actions, and operations that naturally flow from that union in
every living creature: so in spiritual life, there are spiritual actions, and
operations that flow from every man that is thus united to Christ.

As every thing is in being, so it is in working: take a natural man, he does
naturalactions, by virtue of a natural life. Take a worldly man, he does live,
(as a man may say) in worldly actions, by virtue of that worldly principle that
is in him. So take a spiritual man; what is the reason he delights in spiritual
things? His delight is in the Law of the Lord, as David says, and in that Law
be meditates day and night. What is the reason his delight is in the Saints;
and the more spiritual any one is, the more he delights in them? the reason is
this, because he lives a spiritual life, therefore he does actious agreeable to
that principle with which he is united; therefore by this you shall know it.

Thirdly, 3 The properties of life. Appetite.
there are certain properties in life that hold in this too, and we will
instance but in two.

First, wheresoever there is life, there is a natural appetite, and desire
after all means that may preserve that life. Wheresoever God gives life to any
creature, he gives also a desire to that creature to preserve that life it has
which is the best state of being. Now, it is so with a Christian, all his
desires are to preserve spiritual life, and to increase it: he rests not in
what he has, but labors to be more yet, and to do more yet, to know God more,
to love God more, to serve God better; to live more fruitfully, more profitably
among men. He delights in the actions of spiritual life: therefore he would
strengthen those habits by all actions, and industry, and endeavor. As newborn
babes, faith the Apostle, desire the sincere milk of the Word, that ye may grow
thereby. No sooner is there life in a newborn babe, but there is a desire to
^ourish that life. You see there is a natural appetite even in the very trees,
that thrust their roots down into the ground, to draw moisture below from the
earth, by an instinct to preserve that life they have in the stock, and in the
branches. So it is in every man that has a spiritual life, he puts forth with
all industry for all spiritual helps, according to that strength he has for
the preservation of his spiritual life. That is the reason why they are not
content, in the abundance of all outward things, when they want spiritual
helps: and that is the reason that they are not satisfied, nor solace
themselves in dead, worldly, company; that is the reason their hearts rest not
in things below; because these are not the food of their spiritual life; these
are not the things that preserve that life that is in them.

Secondly, 2 Tropagation.
as there is a desire of the preservation of life, so there is a desire of
propagation, and transfusion of it to others, as much as may be. So you see
those things that have but a metaphorical life (as we may say) that are said to
live by way of allusion, and metaphor, as the fire in the coal, when it is said
to live in the coal, it is for this reason, because it is apt to kindle
another. It is so in a Christian, wheresoever there is spiritual life, there is
a desire to communicate it with as many as it can. And this you see in all the
servants of God, Philip calls Nathaniel, Joh. 1.44. when he bad gained the
knowledge of Christ. And the woman of Samaria goes to call in the City when she
had gained the knowledge of Christ. When a man himself is united with the
principle of life, when he lives in Christ, he desires that others may live in
Christ too; and this desire, and endeavor to gain many to Christ, it appears
in their place, and relation. A Christian master that lives a spiritual life,
will labor that his servants under him may live the life of grace with him
too. A Christian Father will labor that his children may live to God, as well
as himself: a Husband will labor to draw his Wife to Christ as himself is
drawn; and every one, father and friend, and acquaintance, as much as in them
lies, by any advantage and opportunity that is put into their hands, they will
draw others to Christ because there is life in them.

And this is not done out of faction, out of a desire to make their party
strong, as many in the world desire to strengthen their party: but as in living
things there is a natural desire to convey that life to others. Parents begat
not children out of faction to increase the party, but out of a natural
affection to convey the natural life they have to others: so Christians, that
they do is out of spiritual affection, out of simple have to the salvation of
others: out of a naturalness in their disposition, to endeavor that all may be
like them. As the Apostle Saint Paul wishes, that all that heard him were like
him except those bonds; So much for that: you see how fitly the Apostle uses
these terms of life, and death, to express the change of one that is in Christ,
when he turns from sin to God.

Now we come to see the order wherein the Apostle expresses them, The order,
make account of this, conclude of this, that you were dead, but are alive.
First, you were dead to sin, and then alive to God. These certainly are knit
together, but they are done in order: so we join both these points in one, and
that is thus much; that, All that are in Christ, he works in them by his spirit
in this order, they first die to sin; and after live to God. Observat. Men
first die to sin, and then live to God.


These two are inseparable, but yet they are joined in order, that first men
die to sin, and secondly live to God. The Scripture expresses this in fit
similitudes. Ephesians. 4.22, 24. faith the Apostle there, Seeing you have put off
the old man, that is corrupt through deceivable lusts, and put on the new man,
that after God is created in righteousness, and true holiness: Here is the
order, there is not only an effectual change, but this is wrought in a method,
first putting off, and then putting on. He seems to allude to apparel there,
that as a man that is clothed with rags, he puts not on ornaments, and robes,
till he have put off his rags, as it is Zach. 3. when Jehoshua came before the
Angel of the Lord with filchy garments, with vile rayments, faith the Lord,
take away those rags, and put upon him change of raiment. Just thus God deals
in the conversion of a man, in the change of a man that is in Christ, he takes
away his filthy rags first, his love to sin, he is no more clothed with them
as he was wont; he accounts them not or naments as they were wont to do, but
filthy clouts, to which he faith, Get ye hence; he detests them, and then he is
clothed with raiment, then he expresses the fruit of holiness and
righteousness. Another expression there is, Ephesians. 5.8. Ye were darkness, but
now ye are light in the Lord, walk as children of light. There is not only a
change of apparel; that is, from rags to robes, but of your state and
condition: you were in darkness, now ye are light. Mark the order, from
darkness to light. That look as it was in the Creation, first darkness covered
the face of the deep, Genesis 1. all was without form, and void, and then God
said, Let there be light: so now, first there is a removing of the darkness the
soul was held in, and now ye are light in the Lord: so they come to walk as
children of light. Well, this is the expression of it in Scripture: let us see
the ground of it in reason. It must be so that in this order God proceeds in
this effectual change: first to turn men from sin, and then to GOD; first to
die to sin, and then to live to God.

The first reason shall be taken from our union with Christ; Reason 1. From our
union with Christ.
We are planted into Christ, faith the Apostle, Romans 6.4, 5, 6. By being
planted with Christ, there grows a similitude between Christ and us. We are
baptized, and buried by baptism, says the Apostle, into his death; and we are
raised and quickened, faith he, by the resurrection of Christ: that like as it
was with Christ, so it is with us; He was dead, and raised, so we are first
dead to sin, and then alive to God.

Secondly, 2 From the cot^ariety of them.
it must be so from the nature of contraries, for these two things are contrary
one to another: there is an immediate opposition between them, so as there must
be a removing of the one, if there be a possession of the other; and there must
be first a removing of the one, before the other can be in the soul. As you see
in sickness, and in health; there must first be a removing of sickness, before
the body be in a right state of health. And as in life and death, this is the
order; they are brought first from death to life, and then one necessarily
follows the other: as life necessarily follows upon the removal of death, and
health, upon the removal of sickness.

Thirdly, it must be so; or else if both these were not, and in this order
wrought: what difficulty were there in the life of a Christian? what singular
thing were there in a Christian, above any man in the world? Every man in the
World does outward actions; if there were not such a change as from death to
life, there were no difference at all, where were the difficulty? The Scripture
says, The way is narrow and strait that leads to life, and few there be that
find it: what narrowness or straitness were there in the way to life? if there
were no more but thus, that a man might settle upon some actions of Religion,
and so be effectually changed? If this were all, what great matter were there
in Religion? what need Agrippa stand out in the midway? what need he be but
half persuaded to be a Christian? he might easily be persuaded to be a
Christian, if he might hold his Heathenisme, and be a christian too. What need
Foelex tremble, to hear Paul dispute of righteousness and judgment to come, if
he might be unrighteous, and a Christian too? What need the young man be sorry,
when Christ bad him sell all and follow him; if he might hold all he had, and
be worldly affected, and be a Christian too? what need any of the labors of a
Christian? to what use were a power of godliness, spoken of in Scripture? What
powerful matter were there in Religion, if a man might hold his sins, and yet
be a Christian, and a believer, and be in Christ too? a drunkard, and yet be
saved? a prophaner of the Sabbath, and yet be in Christ? what great matter were
there? it were nothing to be a Christian; nay who would not be one? What need
Saint Paul expose himself to such watchings, and fastings, and sufferings, if
he might have gone on in the way of the World, and yet be in Christ too? No
beloved, it is another-gates matter to be a Christian, then for a man to hold
his old customs, and ways, and courses, and yet hope to be saved too. Let no
man deceive himself with this, the matter of Christianity, it is a laborious
work, Religion is a very serious thing. A man that indeed will be Religious, he
must follow Christ's rule; first deny himself, and take up his Cross and follow
him: what need a man deny himself, if he might hold his sins, and yet follow
Christ? Well know this, the ground is clear, there must be a turning from sin,
as well as a turning to God, if a man have union with Christ.

Now to conclude, Use 1. Conviction.
with a word of application; First, if it be so, It serves to convince us this
day in the presence of God, the multidude of us now before the Lord to hear the
Word, and profess our union with Christ, and yet there is no such matter. If we
were united with Christ, there would be living to God, by virtue of that union
with Christ. It is living to God in the course of our life, that gives us
comfort of our union with Christ. Deceive not your selves, we may say of many,
as the Lord says of Sardis, Thou have a name to live, but art dead. There are
abundance that have a name to live, but are dead: A man wonld wonder at it,
that we should say to a Congregation of so many people; that there were few
alive among them all: that the most whose eyes are now upon the Minister, and
whose ears are open to the Word; yet they are but dead, they are not alive,
though they walk, and though they speak and do the actions of a natural life;
they live naturally, but are dead spiritually, they have a name to live, but
are dead.

The Lord tells Jeremy, Jerem. 5. That there was such want of good men in
Jerusalem, that he might go up and down the Stteets of Jerusalem, and not find
a man. A man would wonder that the Lord should use such an expression; He might
have said, he should not find a good man, a just man, a godly man; but not find
a man says he, as if he were not worthy the name of a man in the Streets of
Jerusalem, that was not appliable and conformable to Gods will. That a man
should go in the Streets of London, and not find a man; that he should go into
Moore-fields on the Sabbath day, and see a multidude of dead Ghosts walking
there; that he should go in the Streets, and see a multitude of dead persons
sitting at their doors: that he should go up and down to the houses of men, and
see a multitude of dead creatures talk of worldly things on the Lords day: a
man would wonder he should find so many dead men, eating, and drinking, and
talking, and walking, and yet dead still. The Text makes it clear here, If we
be not dead unto sin, we are not alive to God; there is no being alive to God,
except a man be first dead to sin.

Shall we come to the trial? Beloved, there we shall find among the many of you
that hear the Word, many are dead in sin. What means the profanation of the
Sabbath? what means the great neglect of Family Duties? Come to your houses
there be not the prayers of living men there; there be not the meditations, and
conferences of men that are spiritually alive in your Families; and shall we
think you are alive? Come to men in their shops, and dealings, and see them
dead in their worldliness, and covetousness; and shall we say they are alive to
God? Alas beloved, go to the particulars of men's lives, you shall hear them
speak the words of dead men, spiritually dead; in swearing, and cursing, and
reviling, and blaspheming, and bitterness; and yet shall we say that they are
alive? Look upon all the actions of men, it were an endless work; where we find
dead works, we conclude there is a dead man: when men do the things that are
the actions of a man spiritually dead, we conclude they are spiritually dead;
the Holy Ghost says so, for they are dead in trespasses and sins; therefore
now let us come a little closer. There are abundance that persuade themselves
that they are alive; therefore a little try your life, by your death to sin.

What are your opinions, and judgments, concerning your own ways? those things
that the Word of God condemns for evil: those things that out of the Word are
preached to you daily by way of reproof of sin; that are spoken to you by
Christian friends, by way of admonition to bring you out of your sins, how do
you take them, and digest them? are they pleasing to you, because they tend to
the killing of sin? or are they distasteful, because they give you not rest in
your sins? What; do you judge sin worthy to live, and your selves not dead the
while? It is a note of a man that is alive in sin, that hates reproof; that
hates him that reproves in the gate; he that hates him that reproves his ill
works, he is not dead to sin, for he does not judge his sin worthy to die.

Again, come to your assections, what is it you delight in? When a man looks
upon a thing that is dead, if it be indeed dead; the sight of it is terrible,
and ghastly, and troublesome to him. When Sara was dead, though Abraham loved
her dear in her life, remove my dead out of my sight? If sin in thee be as a
dead thing, how do thou look upon it? do thou look upon it as a thing that
thou art afraid of? as a thing that thou art the worse when thou see it. When
the objects and occasion of sin are presented to you, how stand you affected
then? all that are dead in sin, take thought to fulfill the lusts of the flesh,
as the Apostle says, they delight in it, sin is sweet to them, as Job says:
but if on the otherside you look on it with indignation, loathing, and
detesting, and abhorring sin, and your selves for sin; then it is a comfortable
sign of your death to sin.

Again, when you do look on it, do you look upon it as a ruler, or as an enemy?
for there is a great deal of difference. A theif was come into the house, as
well as the master of the house; but they come not with the like authority, nor
with the like acceptance: the thief comes, but you know all the house sets
against him, and never rest till they cast him out; and if they want strength,
they cry for help: but the Master of the house comes in, and then all the
servants are in their places to do him service, all take care to please him,
and give him content. How entertain you the motions of sin? look upon your
former ways, upon your former customs, and vanities; look upon your wonted
course of ill, and consider now whether there be an endeavor to satisfy the
sinful inclination of your hearts? or is there a striving, and using all means
to be rid of it? Do you make this your question to the Ministers you converse
with, to the Christian friends with whom you consult in this case, how to be
rid of such a corruption, how to get such a sin purged out? Is this the matter
of your prayer to God: do you cry to Heaven for help, to get out this theif,
that is stolen into your hearts, this traitor that conspires against the glory
of God, this rebel, that maintains a fight against the kingdom of Christ, do
you so look on it? It is a sign you are dead to sin, or else sin is alive in
you, and you are dead in sin.

Thirdly, and lastly, consider your actions, consider your conversation; does
sin get strength, or is it weakened? For know that this is not the
mortification of sin, that a man be never troubled with it more, that he never
hear more of it, that he be never more troubled with the motions of sin, no? As
a man that has a deadly wound given him, it may be he more fiercely sets on
him that gave him the deadly blow, then ever before; yet he falls dead at his
feet after, so it is with the motions of sin: think not when sin is dead, by
virtue of our union with Christ, that we shall not be tempted any more to sin,
that you shall not have sin any more in you: no, it will be in you, and molest
you; But what fruit do you bring forth? What actions do you? what strength has
sin? all the strife it has, is but to disquiet, and disturb you, not to rule
and command you as it was wont to do. It is a sign that sin is dead naturally,
by way of incoation, it will die in the end, you shall hear no more of it at
the last: and though it a great while disturb you, and disquiet you; yet this
is your comfort you are disturbed, and you maintain Gods quarrel against your
corruptions, and fight against it: it is a sign it has a deadly blow.
Therefore let every one consider his estare, let no man deny himself his own
portion: let him that is dead in sin, know that he is dead, and the
wretchedness of that condition, eternal death begins in that death. And let him
that is dead to sin, know that he is alive to God, and is among those that live
in Christ, and shall be saved.

A word of exhortation, Use 2. Exhortation.
and so I conclude. Does this testify our life in Christ, that we are dead to
sin? Then as you hope for any comfort, or privilege, or advantage by Christ;
labor to make this good to your souls, and labor to secure this evidence more
and more, that you are dead to sin. There are none that hears me this day, but
they profess they hope to be saved by Christ, and they look for no other name
under Heaven to be saved by, but the name of Jesus. It is certain, but who will
Christ save? they are such as whom he sanctisies; and will he sanctisie such as
by union with him are dead to sin, and alive to God? Then I beseech you make
this good to your selves, strive more, and more to kill sin; take this as a
quickening argument, that you are in Christ, and therefore you must be
conformable to Christ. Says the Apostle, He bore our sins in his body on the
Tree, 1 Pet. 2.24. that we might be dead to sin, and live to righteousness: Why
did Christ bear your sins in his body upon the Tree? but for this very end;
that as he died for sin, you might die to sin. Now that we may persuade you, No
loss in dying to sin.
know that it is upon special ground, you lose nothing, but get much by it; the
more you die to sin, the less you lose by it.

First, Not life.
you shall not lose any thing that is comfortable, and good, you shall not lose
life by it; nay indeed the more you sin, the more you die; every sin is deadly
and mortal, every sin tends to your destruction, to the taking away of life,
this is certain. Therefore look as a man when he is in a mortal dangerous
disease, that every man concludes, if the disease prevail he will die; nay, it
has so far prevailed, that it will be the death of him: you need no more to
persuade him to spend all his estate upon Physicians to cure that disease. Now
the sins that you cannot endure should be reproved, that you cannot abide to
reform; they will be death in the end, your eternal death, therefore labor
especially against them: When we diswade you from sin, and persuade you to
purge outsin, we persuade you to your cure, to be free from your disease, to be
free from that that will end in death.

You shall not lose any rest and peace by it: 2 Not peace.
the more you mortisie sin, the more rest and peace you shall have; nay, the
more sin rules, the less rest and peace, There is no peace to the wicked: but
they are as the troubled waves of the Sea, that always foam, and cast up mire
and dirt, as the Prophet speaks, such is the restless agitation of a man that
goes on in sin, he is ever restless, and unquiet. Would you have peace, and
quiet? get out sin that hinders all peace and quiet.

Again, 3 Not esteem.
you shall not lose outward good things, not credit, and name, and esteem. Nay,
what dishonours you, and exposes you to reproach, and shame, and obliquie, is
it not sin? For, what is it that men are evil spoken of, is it not for this,
and that particular evil? Do you love your name? avoid sin, sin will end in
shame, it is the issue, the fruit of it. God will give you honor with his
servants, nay, even in the hearts of the wicked. You know the more men strive
to mortify their sins, the more the world reproacheth them ordinarily: but we
must not judge what men do in their jollity and in their passion; but what
themselves do, when they are upon the wrack of a trouhled conscience, upon
their deathbed, oh then if they might die the death of the righteous, oh then
they would they had lived the life of the righteous, or any thing then, if they
had been like such a one whom they scorned. This gained esteem of John in
Herod's heart.

Again, 4 Not wealth
you shall not lose your wealth, your estate: all losses of estate that are
judgments, and punishments, they are but the fruits of sin, you shall keep your
estate, and keep it with comfort, as far as it is good for you, your sins
provoke God, even to curse your blessings.

You shall not lose your pleasure if you part with sin; 5 Not pleasures.
nay, you shall gain pleasures. All sorrow, and grief of heart, and disquiet of
spirit, that arises from terror of conscience, are they not hence, because of
sin? Would you have joy, and pleasure unspeakable, and glorious? part from sin,
that is the cause of sorrow. When we bid you part with sin, we speak to you to
part with a needless thing, it is a superfluity, as well as hurtful,
superfluity of malice, what need one sin in the world? cannot you live, Sin a
needless thing.
and be happy without it? cannot you live comfortably, and die blessedly
without sin? Nay, is it not that that hinders your blessedness and happiness?
The Angels in heaven they are blessed, because they are without sin: but those
of them that sinned, they are reserved in chains of darkness, to the judgnent
of the great day. Adam in Paradise, in the state of innocence; he was blessed,
he was without sin: but as soon as he sinned, he was cast out of Paradise; and
a Cherubin set with a flaming sword, to keep the way of the Tree of life, that
man should not come at it. You your selves, the best comfort, the best peace,
the best evidences you have, are those that do arise from your hatred of sin.
Therefore do but consider how needless a thing it is. Can you get any thing by
it? can you live a day longer, or an hour more happy? can you be a whit better
by it? If you could enjoy any present good by sin, there were somewhat to be
pleaded: but what is it? you get a little wealth by unrighteousness, is it
gain? Job says, their belly shall be filled with gravel. If a man sill his
belly with gravel, what has he gotten by it? you will get that that you must
cast up again: you get that that one day you will wish you had never known: as
Israel when they turned to God, they should say of their garments of silver and
gold, that they had made for their Idols, Get you hence. So every worldly man
that raises his estate by unrighteous means, the time will come that he shall
wish all the money that he has gotten were in the bottom of the Sea, that he
had never known what a penny, or a house, or apparel had meant, that he has
gotten, or made, or appropriate to himself by any unrighteousness whatsoever.
What Use is there of it? And will you lose your souls for that that is nothing?
and will you lose heaven for that that is needless? and eternal happiness for
that that will not do you a moment of time, not a little present good, not a
little present ease, not a little present comfort?

But lastly, 2 The gain by death to sin.
the great benefit that redounds by it, that is spoken of in the Text, it is
that you shall live, and live to God. The more you die to sin, the more you
shall live to God through Jesus Christ. Now we come upon a strong motive to
persuade you to set more heartily against those evils that are daily reproved,
the more you die to them, the more you shall live to God. Suppose the work of
repentance be a hard task, suppose it should be somewhat painful; suppose it be
something that vex and disquiet the natural spirit of man: as there is pain in
repentance, and mortification of sin, yet nevertheless if you may get eternal
life by it, is it not worth the while? Consider what you do for natural life,
suppose a member of the body be gangrened; that it is in danger to be spread
over the whole body, and the taking away of natural life, the loss of a hand,
and the loss of any member, though it be never so useful, rather then the body
shall be in danger, and a man deprived of life, you will lose a useful member:
and when you have done, you do it but in hope to preserve life: for you are not
sure when you have cut off that member to live a day after: but yet because it
is possible, because it is the way to natural life: and yet if you have that
life granted, suppose for term of years, as Hezekiah had for fifteen years, yet
it is but a natural life, a life full of misery, a life exposed to many
vexations and disquiets, a life that has so many troubles in it, that men in
the best estate of health with sometimes that they were dead, through
disquiets, and troubles, and yet for the preservation of a troublesome life, if
you were sure of that, you would lose a member. I know when we come, and speak
of renouncing your former ways, your cove ousness, and profaneness, and
pride, and vanity, and wickedness in any kind, we speak of cutting off of
hands, of members of the body, they are so dear: therefore Christ says, If thy
hand off end thee cut it off; if thine eye off end thee pull it out; it is
better to go to heaven with one hand, then to hell with both. This I say, I
know you apprehend it a hard lesson, there is no life, no Christ, without such
a death to sin. Yet it is a truth, and a necessary truth for you to know, and
therefore consider it, and that seriously what you lose. If we come and
persuade you to cut off some useful member, yet you yield to that for a natural
life: you will cut off a hand that is as useful as any member of the body: but
we bid you cut off superfluous members, those needless members, the members of
sin that will be your death. We would have you but to be rid of the Ulcer, that
is all we would have you deprived of, to preserve spiritual life, and to live
to God. If I were to speak for a natural life, it were but temporal, it were
but upon conjecture: but we speak for a life upon certainty, When we persuade
you to die to sin, that you may live to God; we assure you that this will
certainly follow on it, you shall live to God, if sin die in you, and we speak
not only upon certainty, but for eternity too, you shall do it for eternity
too, you shall do it for eternity: it is not a life that ends. Nay, we speak
for a life wherein there is true happiness, that has no mixture of misery to
make you weary, but a life that has perfect peace and joy: a life that has
blessedness begun, and shall have blessedness perfected in heaven: this life we
persuade you to live.

Consider now what we say, if there were more, you shall live to God the more
you die to sin, Skin for skin (faith Job) and all that a man has he will give
for his life: but if it be such a life as this, to live to God, a spiritual
life; what? to live as the Angels do, that live with God! to live as the Saints
in Heaven, that live in the fruition and sight of God, wherein they are
blessed! such a life we persuade you to.

A life infinitely above this, if this life had all the contentment the earth
could give it, it were not worthy to be compared, though a man might live a
thousand years in the confluence and abundance of all prosperity, it were not
to be compared with one moment of the happiness of the spiritual life that we
shall life in for all eternity with Christ. Now consider, take things, and
compare them together; here is such a particular sin that I was given to, to
pride, to covetousness, to profaneness, to wickedness of this fort or of that
fort, if I go on in it, I die eternally, I lose God, and heaven, and my soul,
and happiness: what shall I get by this when I have done it? I gratify Satan,
I destroy my soul, I have lost my self and am undone for ever. And what a
madness is this for a man to venture the eternal ruin and destruction of
himself, and that for a thing of nothing, for that that will make him miserable
now, and more miserable eternally.

Consider, and know to whom I speak, I speak to you that have heard the Word,
and many times received the Sacrament. What did you when you received the
Sacrament? was it not a pledge to you of your interest in Christ, and of your
union with him? and that Christ is as truly united with you, as that you eat
and drank? Now let it appear, make you account, whatsoever you were before,
make you account, reckon ye, go not by guess and say, I hope it will be better
with me then it has been; no, but reckon, conclude, made account, I must be
another man, I may not be what I was, I must leave those things that are ill; I
must apply my self to another course; Indeed I walked in a way of enmity to
the ways of God, in estraingement from God, in worldly wicked ways, but it
must not now be so, I must make account now that Christ is mine, I am now dead
to sin, and therefore dead to sin, that I may live to God: if there be any life
of grace in me, it will appear by my death to sin. I must make account of this,
I must do this; and this is the best way of making a right use of the
Sacrament. Why are men as bad after the Sacrament as before? because they
reckon not, they make not account for themselves, that they are dead to sin.
Make account you have received life from Christ, and you must act that life;
and now set your selves to it, reason with your own hearts, why do I thus, and
thus? As Ezra reasons, Ezra. 9.13. Lord since thou have kept us from being
beneath for our iniquities, should we sin more? So consider, has the Lord kept
me from hell, and admitted me to his Table, where he has spoken peace to me, he
has spoken reconciliation in Christ, shall I return to sin against him?
certainly he will be more angry now then ever he was before: the sins that I
commit now, will be greater then all the sins I have committed hitherto; for
now I sin against more grace, and against greater mercy: for God has again
renewed the Covenant of peace, whereas he might have cast me off for my former
breach, and shall I provoke him again? has the Lord washed me, and shall I
defile my self again? God forbid. Reason with your selves, I must not be as I
was: it is not for me to do as others that know not God, and that are not in
Covenant with God, or as I was wont to do before; I know what it is to bind my
self in covenant, to receive the Sacrament, I must be in another fashion, and
course of life, then ever I have been. Therefore when temptations come to sin:
for you must not think to be rid of all motions, and temptations to sin: and
whenever there comes new temptations, not to conclude you have received the
Sacrament in vain, say not so, but rather say, now comes the trial; this is
that whereby God will try what fruit comes, of the cost and pains, and mercies
he has bestowed on me; here is a messenger sent for fruit, If I can withstand
the commands of sin, and resist the motions, and look on it as a hateful thing,
I make it manifest that I am indeed dead to sin, as the Scripture says here,
reckon that you are dead to sin.

Therefore as when a man is delivered from being a Galley-slave under the
Turks, and his ransom is paid: if his old Master come, and command him to the
Galleyes: he says no, my ransom is paid, I am free, and I will not any more
be a slave. So reckon thou art no more to be such as thou were wont to be: for
now reckon your selves says the Apostle, if you be in Christ, that you are
dead to sin, and alive to God, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

HOPES ANCHOR-HOLD OR THE HELMET OF SALVATION.
SERMON XXXVIII.
1 COR. 15.19. If in this life only we have hope in Christ, we are of all men
most miserable.


I Will not detain you with the Argument of this Chapter; nor in the Coherence
of this Scripture. The scope of it (in a word) is thus much. If in this life,
in this World, only, for the present, we have hope and confidence in Christ,
and the aim of our confidence, and the height of our hope reach no further,
then we, we poor Christians; we the faithful in the World, we are of all men
most miserable; yea, we are more miserable than any other men.

The words contain in them two parts of a Hypothetical Proposition; of which
the first is an Antecedent (as we call it,) and the other is the Consequent.
You may call the first, a Condition, and the last, a Conclusion. The Antecedent
or Condition, is this; If in this life only we have hope in Christ; What then?
then the Consequent or Conclusion is this; then are we of all men the most
miserable. But now against the Antecedent, there arises this Assumption to
make up the sense, to make it perfect; But not in this life only have we hope
in Christ (for that is the meaning of the Apostle,) therefore against the
Consequent arises this Conclusion: Therefore we are not of all men the most
miserable, nay, we are not miserable at all.

You see here are terms in the Text of great consequence; here is life, here is
hope, here is Christ, here is men, here is misery, and here is all things
almost that can be said, either concerning Heaven, or earth. Now mark, it is
not said, If in this life we have hope, we are miserable; neither, if we have
hope in Christ in this life then are we miseable; not so: but if our hope be
only in this life, and stick there, and go no further then so, then we are
miserable.

There are two Emphatical terms in the Text we must take notice of, and that is
only in the former part, and most of all in the latter part: only in the
former part, that straitneth, and restratheth our hope; most of all in the
latter part, that inlargeth our misery: and so it may well, for when the hope
is restrained to the present, there the misery may be infinitely enlarged. But
not for the present is our hope; only for the present, ergo, etc. I need say no
more, it is the Text.

I shall raise to you six several Consectaries, or Corrollaries, or
Conclusions, that naturally arise out of this Scripture; and I purpose at this
time to run them all through; it must be roundly, it shall be plainly; do you
hear patiently.

The first Assertion we make out of the Text, it is this; that,

The faithful are hopeful. The godly have hope; we have hope, that is taken for
granted.

The second, concerns the object of this hope; and the Point is this; that,

Christ is the object of the Christians hope. We have hope in Christ.

The third, is touching the time of our hope, and that is for this life; the
Lesson is this; that

The lifetime, it our hope-time. We have hope in this life.

The fourth is; that,

Hope in this life, it is not only of the things of this life. Not only of
this life; for if in this life only we have hope: oh no, take that away, our
hope in this life, is not only set upon the things of this life. If in this
life only; not so.

Fistly, this life, you see how that stands convertible with another term in
the Text, with misery; showing thus much; that,

This life is miserable.

The last is; that,

The faithful, the hopeful, they are not of all the most miserable, they are
not miserable at all. Then were we miserable, but the former being not true,
that cannot be true. These are the six Points.

Of which, to content my self with a touch of them as I pass along, and so
only to present them severally unto you, I begin with the first; that,

The faithful, they are hopeful.

1. Conclusion.
We have hope, so are the words; Faith is the evidence of things hoped for, so
says the Apostle, The faithful are hopeful. Romans 5:
Heb. 11.1. And they that have access through this Grace, they rejoice in hope
of the glory of God: they go joined together.

Hope is a constant expectation of the performance of such promises of God,
Definition of Hope:
as we apprehend out of his Word, by faith. For example.

Faith, does believe Gods promises to be true; Hope, does expect the
performance of them according to that truth.

By Faith, we believe God to be our Father; by Hope, we expect that he should
show himself such a one to us.

By Faith, we do believe eternal life; by Hope, we attend when this life shall
be revealed. Spe, (as one speaks) what is it else, but persever antia sidei,
the perseverance of Faith. Faith is the Mother, Hope is the Daughter; the
Mother is iucouraged and comforted by the daughter, as Naomi was by Ruth.

Hence it is, 1 Pets 1:9.
that the holy Apostle Saint Peter, he ascribes the salvation of our souls to
our faith; Rom: 8:24,
saying, that the end of our faith, is the salvation of our souls: Well and
Saint Paul, he assures the same to belong unto Hope; saying, we are saved by
Hope. So then, Faith says, I believe these blessed promises of God to be true;
and Hope faith, I see them, and I wait for the enjoyment of those things that
are reserved for me: Thus Faith, and Hope, are woven one in another: Thus the
faithful, are the hopeful: We have Hope. That Is the first Point.

The Use of this Point briefly, Use.
it shall be but this; First, to teach us to seek and to find out this Hope in
our selves. And secondly to strive and to fight against some impediments that
oppose themselves, and are hindrances of this Hope.

First, 1 Trial of Hope:
thou must go and seek thy self, and search out and find, whether thou have
this Hope in thee, yea, or no: and thou must be sure, that thou be so far
from being a desperate past-hope, Rom: 4:18:
like Cain; that rather thou believe, and hope above hope, with Abraham; not
presumiug, but believing as he did.

Now then, how a man may know whether he have this Hope in him or no; I think
he may find it out thus, in few words.

There are diverse temptations, and especially three of a man's faith; (not to
enlar ge my self further) in every of which, Hope if it come in and play its
part, then it does appear to be present, to be there. As for example.

The first temptation, that is a kind of battery against the strong hold of a
man's faith; it is the prorogation of Gods promises; He is pleased to put them
off longer, and to dispose of them many times other ways then we look for:
Hereupon, we that are weak in Faith, we stumble at it; and we would hasten them
on apace, though we know what the Prophet says, Isa: 21:16:
He that believes makes not have: But we are such faithless persons, that we
hasten on too much, and would have God to come apace to make good his promises.
Now when God defers these promises, if a man comes in with his hope, and
faith, Hab: 2:3:
The vision is yet for an appointed time, though it tarry, Isa: 8:17:
wait; for that that shall come, will come, and he will not tarry: and though
the Lord does hide himself, 2 Pet: 3:9:
(as it is in the Prophecy of Isaiah) yet he will return again If Hope will
prompt Faith, and tell it that the Lord is not slack as some count slackness,
but he will make sure his promise in the end; then this is a manifest sign to a
man that has his faith thus supported, that Hope is present there. Here is
then one search of it.

Another time, there is another temptation that betideth a faithful man; and
that comes to pass, by Gods appearing in a manner an enemy, by visiting him in
his soul, by wounding his conscience, by setting him in a kind of sight of
Hell, when he is distressed in spirit; Psalm:73:9
as if God were now come out as a man of War against him, and would not have
mercy upon him. Now if Hope can come in and say, that God cannot forget to be
gracious, nor cannot shut up his loving kindness in displeasure; and therefore
I will endure, and I will stay on the Lord, for He will appear, and He will
have mercy upon Zion; Psalm:102:13.
I, when the time, the appointed time comes. I will stay this time. If I say,
Hope thus persuades the faithful man of this goodness of God that shall be
revealed to him, here is a manifest sign, Hope is present.

There is a third temptation that Faith meets withal, and that is concerning
the mockings of men in the World, when they deride the profession of Christians
and faithful men; 2 Pet: 3:3.
and will say as those profane and profuse fellows in the Epistle of Saint
Peter, Where is the promise of his coming? it is so long since his promise was
made, Job: 2:9.
and yet there is none of his coming, Will thou still retain thine integrity?
(right Jobs Wife, as she speaks to him) will thou still retain thy trust? to
what purpose is it? Mal: 3:14:
It is in vain to serve the Lord, (as those wicked ones speak in Malachy.) Now
if Hope will come in and say, 2 Cor: 6:8:
notwithstanding all these things, yet pass by bad report, 2 Samuel: 6:22:
and good report; be of David's mind, I will yet be more vile before the Lord,
that chose me before thee and thy fathers house; and I will stand it out,
notwithstanding all the mockings of men. Here is a manifest sign that there is
Hope.

Thus you may seek to find this grace in your selves; and you shall find it by
many such kind of assaults, as these which Faith meets withal.

Now as you are to find it, Use 2.
so you are to fight against the hindrances of this Hope. And the hindrances of
a man's hope, are sometimes slavish fear; sometimes an impatient spirit, and
sometimes even Death it self, and that is a tedious affront indeed that Hope
meets withal.

First Fear, Hindrances of hope:
a kind of passion and perturbation of the spirit of a man, that makes his
grief begin, 1 John 4.18. Rev: 21: 8.
before his affliction comes upon him: this same Fear has a great deal of
painfulness in it. Where the fearful are, they are shut our with the
unfaithful; and without shall be dogs, with those that are subject to this
fearfulness. Now Hope comes to a man and faith, Though I sometime be afraid,
yet put I my trust in God, and therefore I will not fear what man can do unto
me, I will not be danted with any kind of slavish terror. Hold out thou that
faist thou have faith, and be not afraid of the Arrow that flies by day, Psalm:
118: 6.
nor of the terror by night. Here is the hindrance of this hope taken away.

Then there is an impatient spirit, that many times possesses men. An
impatient spirit, Psalm; 91:5.
and a hopeful heart, they are both as contrary as can be; You shall have many
a man so touchy, that he cannot endure any delay, he must have things come
according to his own mind, or he loses his patience presently. Oh but I will
patiently wait for the Lord, says hope. And here is the opposition that must
be made for the maintenance of this hope against all kind of impatiency: Psalm:
40: 1.
In patience possess your souls.

The last hindrance, Luke: 21: 19.1 Cor: 15: 16
is death. The last enemy that shall be destroyed is death. We have many
enemies in this world, our very life is a warfare, but amongst all the
fightings and combats we meet with in the world, there is none comparable to
this last single combat we must undergo with death it self; this is a terrible
assault that betideth the hopeful, faithful man; to know that notwithstanding
all his faith, and all his hope, and all his love, and all his patience, what
grace or virtue soever he has else, Job 17: 13:
yet not withstanding he must go down to the grave, make his bed in the
darkness, and lie down in the dust; and when he has fought all that he can,
yet not withstanding he must down, he must yield, he must take the foyl, the
fall in the body howsoever the soul escapes. Now here is a kind of dismaidment
of hope. But I will tell you how it is spoken of the faithful, Heb 11: 27:
and so of the hopeful. The faithful are said to endure as seeing him that is
invisible: how do they endure? by the supply of hope: for this hope is it that
makes the faithful against all hindrances to fight it out, so as that they
would not be delivered, Heb 11: 35:
as it is spoken in the Epistle to the Hebrews.

And shall death separate us from that we hope for? No faith the hopeful man,
it shall not. Yea, so far he is from being unwilling to submit himself to this
way, as knowing it to be the way whereby he comes to that he hops for, as
that he is very ready, and greedy of death: it is the way to that I hope for,
says he: therefore it is sweely spoken of an Ancient, Phil: 1: 23:
and you will acknowledge it to be a sweet sentence of that Father Saint
Austin, He that desires to be dissolved (according to that of the Apostle) and
to be with Christ. Non patienter moritur, He does not die patiently. See, here
is a faithful, a hopeful man, and yet does not die patiently: what would the
Father say? He lives (says he) patiently, the very life he lives puts him
to his patience; when he comes to die, he dies pleasantly; he goes away with
his hope, and his hope is full of immortality. And no more for that point.

The next thing I observe, is concerning the Object of this hope, and this is
it; that, Christ is Object of the Christians hope. We have hope in Christ. 2.
Conclusion. Christ the object of Hope.


Hear it in the general; hear it in the special.

In the general, 1. Tim. 1.1. Saint Paul he begins his Epistle with Christ
our hope, Col. 1.27. The riches of the mystery of Gods grace to the Gentiles,
is Christ in you the hope of glory. Here is Christ our hope, and Christ your
hope, in the general. Phil: 1: 21.


In the special: hear it in Saint Paul, hear it in the prophets, and others.
Saint Paul, to me to live is Christ, to die is gain; Christ is to me in life,
and death advantage; living, or dying, I am Christ's. I have hoped in the Lord,
faith the Prophet David. Psalm: 38: 15:
And God is my hope, and has been my help even from my youth. This is the
general song of the whole Church, Psalm: 71: 5:
God is our hope; and therefore the Prophet Jacob made an excellent Ejaculation
in those blessings he gave his sons, when he said, Oh Lord, I have waited for
thy salvation: Here was his waiting, his hope for the salvation of God, Genesis
49.18.
from the God of his salvation. And so, let him slay me if he will (says holy
Job) yet not withstanding I will still trust in him. Job. 13.15.
Thus the faithful have hope, and their hope is in Christ. No more of it for
the enlargement of it.

It shows to us in the first place this Note, Use 1.
that A Christians wings do mount him above all means. What are his wings? his
hope, Whither slyeth his hope? It takes its flight up to heaven, to God, to the
right hand of God, to Christ, there is his hope. So then he that has this hope
being poor, he flies not to riches, for they make themselves wings, Trov, 23.5.
and fly away from him. Being weak he flies not to the arm of flesh, for in
man there is no hope, nor no confidence to be put in Princes, in the Balance
they are lighter then vanity it self, Psalm. 146.3.
faith the Psalmist. Being sick he flies not to the Physician, Psalm. 62.3.
he flees to these as the means, not to rest in them, to make it the main of
his aim, the scope of his hope, he does not fly thus to them, but he goes to
God that commands all, that works above all, against all and without all
means, and sanctifies all these means: Therefore well says the poor man, God
is my help, and the sick man, God is my health; and the weak man, God is my
strength; and the blind man, Christ is my light; and even the dead man, the
distressed man, God is my life, and the good man, Christ is my Hope, and the
happy man, Christ is my love. And so it is to Christ, that the wings of a man's
Hope does lift him up. This is the first. It shows us that the wings of Hope
that is in the faithful soul, lifts him up above all means. No more of that.

Secondly, Use 2.
observe in this object, the very Crown of a Christians comfort, I say the
Crown of all his comfort; and that comes only from this object of his hope.
For what is there in all the World that can comfort a man indeed besides this,
much less compared with this? Phil, 3.8.
Begin where you will, when you have gone round about, you will conclude with
that of the Apostle, I count all things but loss and dung, in comparison of
Christ, and all things to be vanity and vexation of spirit, as the preacher
says. Put the case thou art a sick man, Eccles. 1.
or a sick woman, and I find thee much affected, afflicted, dejected, cast down
in thy self; I would fain give thee some comfort now, I tell thee of the vanity
of this present life; therefore being content, I tell thee of the hope of of a
better life; I tell thee of the joys that are to be revealed; I tell thee of
the promises of God which he will make good to thee, if thou will trust in his
mercy; I tell thee of all the sure mercies of David, Isa. 55.4.
as they are called: and all this while I have told thee nothing at all to
comfort thee, till I come to this, the object of this Hope which I have in
hand, 2 Cor. 1: 20.
and that is Jesus Christ, in whom all Gods promises are Yea and Amen; and till
thou can learn this lesson of life concerning the Lord Jesus, thou have
learned nothing; John 14: 6:
come and learn this, and my life for thine thou art then happy, He is the Way,
the Truth, and the Life, the Way, and Truth, and life it self, and whither
shall I go from thee, Job: 6: 68:
Lord? thou have the words of eternal life. I have done with that point, and so
pass on to the third.

We have Hope; we have Hope in Christ; we have Hope in Christ in this life.

This lifetime then is our hope-time; 3. Conclusion. This lifetime is our
hopetime:
that is it you learn hence.

Here we have the seed of Hope, but the harvest of Hope, that is hereaster:
when we shall have in re, what now we have in spe, as ordinarily we speak: when
we shall have in possession what now we have in expectation: then there will be
no more use of this Grace, there hope shall cease. Now it is indeed in this
life time, that we sow the seeds of Prayer, that we plant the roots of Faith,
that we water all of them with our hope: when our joy shall spring up, when the
end and fruit of our faith shall come, when the possession of our hope shall
appear; then we have done with hope, hope serves no longer then, therefore it
is now in this life. Hope shall end for the action of it (understand that
aright) as Faith shall; but it shall never end for the object of it, that end
shall last still, and rest ever. Now then in the interim, this is the Prophets,
and this is the Princes, and this is the Peoples posse, I wait, and I wait too,
and I trust the Lord over all: Now is your posse time as I may call it; now is
the seed time, wherein we sow the seeds of love, of joy, of hope, wherein we
sow the seeds of sobriety, and innocence, and chastity, and charity, and all
manner of virtues whatsoever, now is the time.

Is this so, Use 1.
then here is the issue of this plea: It is this; that therefore now if ever
now or never, we must seek to see whether we have these seeds of Grace in us
yea or no; We must get them, and we must set them, and we must see to them;
both that they come up, and how they come up, and how they come on. Now is the
time when the special care must be taken concerning these seeds of Grace. If we
will believe, we must believe now, for hereafter there will be no time to
believe any more: If we will be children of Grace we must be it now; for
hereafter there will be no space for Grace: Isa: 55: 6:
therefore faith the Lord, now while he will be found, and he will be found of
those that seek him; and seek him now, for now is the acceptable time, now is
the day of salvation: when the date of this day, when the day of this life of
salvation is down, is past, then there is no more seeking, then there is no
more finding; therefore if thou will be faithful, be it now; if thou will be
fruitful, be it now, 1 John: 3: 2:
now we are the Sons of God; as if he should say, if we be not the Sons of God
now, we shall never be.

Is this so, Use 2.
add a further degree to this duty in the next place, and that is; when you
have gotten these seeds in you, to examine and prove your selves whether they
be there; not only so, but whether they abide there; not only so, but whether
they live there; and not only so, but whether they grow and live there: they
must not only be, but they must continue there and abide; and they must not
only be, and abide, but they must be alive there and not dead; and they must
not only be alive, but they must thrive too, 2 Pet 1: 8.
and not be idle: for if these things be in you, they will make you neither
idle nor unfruitful in the work of the Lord. Have thou Faith? be sure thou have
it, and then show me thy faith by the fruits of it, show me that it is not a
dead faith, that faith cannot save thee, do not think it shall, for Saint James
explodeth it for a Jest, that any Christian should think so. Have thou love?
look thou have it, and let thy love abound; let thy love be love unfeigned, for
as there is a work of faith, so there is a labor of love. 1 These: 1: 3: Heb 6:
19:
Have thou hope? let it be steadfast, entering into that within the vail, as an
Anchor firm and stable, so the Apostle faith. Have thou knowledge? Look it be
saving knowledge, sanctifying knowledge; such as will savor and season all the
rest of thy knowledge: And let not thy knowledge be only so, but let it be
growing too; let it thrive and prosper, get more to it, or else thou do not
husband the business well; thou must go (according to the phrase of the Holy
Ghost in the Psalm) from strength to strength, as a good Soldier and Commander
goes from one watchtower to another to see if all be well; Go from strength
to strength, till thou appear before God in Zion. Psalm: 84: 7:
With this the Apostle Saint Peter concludes his latter Epistle, but grow in
grace; and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ: 2 Per: 3: 18:
this is the duty of a Christian. Will thou have Christ to be the object,
either of thy faith or hope, and will thou not grow then in these? Non progredi
est regredi, Not to go forward is to go backward; and not to grow the better,
is to grow the worse.

The contemplation of these two points should teach Christians, a Christian
fedulity, to kindle, to keep that grace that is in them; and it should kill
carnal security.

1. A Christian sedulity, a care, a strife, an industry, an endeavor to be
Christians indeed, 1 Cor: 7: 20:
to improve their talents; Let every man in that calling whereto he is called,
therein abide; Col: 4: 17:
he must not give it out: Is Archippus called to be a Minister? then say to
Archippus, take heed to the ministry that thou have received, that thou fulfill
it; and so it belongs to every man else to perform the duty and office of his
place, and not to go backwards, but to use diligence, and endeavor for the
increasing of his gifts, that he be not barren, nor unfruitful in Gods Vineyard.

2. It serves on the other side to kill that carnal security that is in men.
It is a strange thing to conceive, that Christians are grown to such security
as they are, that they should be so supine and negligent in their services: I
say it is a lamentable case; and I do wonder the more, that they should be
taken with this kind of transgression, when I consider that saying of a Father,
that there is security in no place: there is no security in heaven, nor in
Paradise, much less in the world; in heaven the Angels fell; in Paradise Adam
fell; in the world Judas fell; Judas, I he fell from the in stitution of the
best School, and Schoolmaster that ever was in the world; there is no manner
of teacher comparable to him. Therefore I say, mix with thy hope a certain
fear, and be so far from a carnal presumption, as that thou maintain in thy
self a holy fear of falling, for it has so come to pass, that Saint Paul
indeed was, what he was not, of a persecutor he became an Apostle; hope lies
there away: but Judas was what he did not appear to be, and of an Apostle
became an Apostate; fear lies thereaway. And thou that hopest that of a
persecutor, thou may turn an Apostle; fear lest by falling away, thou may
of an Apostle become an Apostate, a persecutor. I will not stand upon these
things any longer.

I have passed three, the fourth Conclusion is; that, Hope in this life is not
only for the things of this life. 4. Conclusion. Hope is no: for the things of
this life.


If in this life only we have hope, then are we miserable; as if he should have
said, if in this life only, for the present, we had hope, and that the end of
all our hope, and al our desire, were fixed upon the present world, then were
we poor Christians most miserable: for none in the world are more despised,
contemned, scorned; none more afflicted, troubled, grieved in their souls for
their sins then they; always followed with outward sights, with inward
frights, when other men enjoy the world at will: so that the scope of this
Scripture is to say, that not for this life only have we hope in Christ; that
is the very meaning; that the godly, the faithful, the hopeful, they have not
their portion in this life; We know when this earthly tabernacle is dissolved,
we have a building made with God, 2 Cor. 5.1.
a house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens, whose builder and maker
is the Lord; so speaks the Apostle to the Corinths.

As for this life, if we should lay the foundation of our hope here; alas, they
might rue their miserable case that so do; they might hang down their heads,
that are godly, with shame and grief enough to themselves, but it is here they
set up their hope, here they have hope, but it is hope here for another life;
it is upon other things that their hope is fixed then are here below; it is for
things that they look for, it is not for things that they see, for hope that
sees is no more hope, but if we with patience wait for the things that are
not seen, this is hope, says the Apostle, Romans 8.

So that this is a very plain case, and might be further cleared, and declared
to us from the practice, and common opinion of all the Saints of God in all
Ages, how they have hoped, and how that their hope was in God; that they should
see the Lord, but where? in the Land of the Living: here they have a sight too,
but the chiefest hope is on the Promise, and that is not for the things of this
life only, but for the life to come; Isa: 57.13.
He that puts his trust in me shall possess the land, and shall inherit my
holy mountain; their hope is in the end, that is of those things that they
shall attain in the end of this life.

The consideration of this Point, that hope it is not only for the things of
this life, may teach us to contend against death it self, which is one of the
strongest temptations against hope, as I touched before, and to contemn and
despise all the things of this life.

It teaches a man to strive and wrestle Use 1.
and contend against death? because though a man do die, yet it shall not
hinder his hope, it shall not hinder him from that he hops to attain. Death
is the greatest amazement a man can meet withal in the World, but what can
Death do? well may it take away from a man his life, but it cannot take away
from him his love; well may it take away from him the action of his hope here,
it shall cease, but it shall never take away from him the object of his hope,
that which he hops for, it shall continue; well may it help him to it, but it
can never hinder him from it; here is then comfort and courage in the very
hour, and power of death.

2. A man learneth here to contemn, Use 2.
and to despise the things of this life, specially if they be such manner of
things as will come in comparison with their betters, when baser things will
compare with better things: in this kind of comparison now a man's hope should
take him off, and not so much as suffer him to lean to any kind of reasoning
that is made against his hope. Hope bids him not to trust, not to look to
any thing that is in this life, because it does not at all concern that which
is the aim he has. The very best things that be in this life, they are not
worthy to be hoped for after; insomuch, that even death it self it may be
counted a remedy, and not a penalty. God will have a man's life to be short, and
death to come soon; because he will not have his creature worn out with a
tedious misery, and transitory vanity; a vanity of misery, that is in this vain
miserable life of mortality. I have done with the fourth.

A fifth thing that follows in the Text (that I may have on) we have Hope, we
have Hope in Christ, we have Hope in Christ in this life; our hope in this life
is not upon the things of this life, for if it were in this life only, it were
miserable.

Our life is a misery; 5. Conclusion. Our life is a misery.
There is the fifth.

And this is a certain truth, and it will plainly appear to us in many
passages; if we will believe either the Spirit of God, or the experience of the
godly, I shall not need to stand to proveit: You will ask me, how it will be
raised from this place?

Thus, We are of all men the most miserable, because that we are mentioned
amongst the number of those that are the more miserable; it implies, that all
the rest are miserable more or less: the very comparison that is used, does
manifestly declare unto us that there is a measure of misery to every man
living: so then there is misery.

2. It appears out of the Text, because here and elsewhere, you shall have
man and misery made terms convertible: Man is named Enoch, and Enoch is misery:
Man, and misery so joined together, that there is no pulling them asunder till
death parts them, for then there is no more misery.

3. Because that misery here; our being miserable in this life, is mentioned
even with the very best things of this life: the very best things that are in
this life, and of this life, so long as they look to this life, I say they are
styled miserable; but the best things, even Christ himself, our Hope it self;
say what you can, here is Hope, and here is Christ in the Text, and yet not
withstanding here is misery too. Now then we reason thus; that if the best
things in this life be miserable, then the rest are no better then so; that the
best are no better, it is plain; because let us have what we would have in all
the World, yet so long as we are here it is misery.

If this be so, then we must come to the conclusion we have made, and that is
Jacobs conclusion, Genesis 47.9. Few and evil have the days of the years of my
life been, it is Jobs conclusion too, Job, 14.1.
Man's life is full of misery: It is David's in the Psalms, Man's life is full of
labor and sorrow, it is soon cut off, and we fly away; our days come to an
end as a tale that is told, they pass away as a shadow, and the beauty, the
best of them, withers as grass: It is Solomon's, he was the Preacher, and here
is his Text; all is vain, and vanity, Vanity of vanities, all is vanity, one
thing and other, every thing under the Sun, 1 Cor: 7: 29.
our life it self, our selves, so long as we are here we are under the Sun, he
calls all vanity: And faith the Apostle, This I say Brethren, the time of our
life is short: Iam: 4.14.
And what is our life says Saint James? But a vapor that appears for a
little while, and then vanishes away; it is a vapor that vanishes, a meoter
of misery.

What shall we say of this now? Use.
(to speak it in few words home to our selves,) somewhat may concern our
selves, and somewhat as we respect and reflect upon others,

In regard of our selves, it may have this double Use. First to wean us from
the World, Secondly to win us to the Lord.

1. To wean us from the World: The World considered in it self is so full of
misery, that there is nothing to be delighted in: there is so much bitterness,
that I warrant it will wean any Child from it that is not a worldling, for he
indeed is at his own breasts with his own Mother; But consider the World as it
is in it self, and there is nothing in it, but true bitterness, and false
sweetness, certain pain, and uncertain pleasure; tedious labor, and timerors
rest; nothing in the World but vanity and misery, 1 John 2: 15.
for says Saint John, Love not the World, he that makes himself the friend of
God, makes himself an enemy to the World. O you lovers of the World (says
Saint Austin) I wonder at you! O foolish men! who has bewitched you? for what
wrestle why do you strive and contend so much? what thing is there in the World
that is worthy your labor? there is (says he) nothing in the World but that
which is foolish, and frothy, and frayl, and false, and vain, and full of
danger, full of disaster; suffer your selves therefore to be weaned from the
World.

And yet notwithstanding all that we can say, we know there are some persons
that will not be taken off from the Worlds breasts, they have a better opinion
of it than so. Let such enjoy their own error till they run to ruin, and till
their own overthrow take them off: Yet not withstanding we know that which an
Ancient has, that to whom God is once sweet, the World must needs be bitter.

2. On the other side, the knowledge of this serves to win us to the Lord;
that as the one draws us off, so the other may drive us on. When I consider
the mercies of the Lord, and the goodness of God in the land of the living:
when I consider how infinite he is in his love; I am ravished in spirit, I am
taken up in the mind, and taken off in the flesh; I have set my heart and
affections on Heaven, and on heavenly things. And now when I think on the Lord,
there is my hope, and there is my help; and there where my help is, John 11: 25.
there is my love, and there is my life, and there is my Lord, there is Christ
at the right hand of God: He is the life of them that believe, he is the
resurrection from the dead; he is the right hand where there is pleasure for
evermore, for there shall be no more pain, no more death; for the first things
are past away (says Saint John in the Revelation) and all things are become
new.

Oh he that did but know the joys that are reserved for such as are received
to the Lord, would soon be taken up from all conceits of the things of this
life. Think you but of that great convocation house of Heaven, that high Court
of Parliament, that great place of Majesty and honor, where all the spirits of
just men made perfect are; where all the Saints departed live, where there are
all the blessed Patriarchs, godly Prophets, the glorious Apostles, the blessed
Kings, and the godly fellowship of Martyrs and Confessors; where there are the
holy Angels, and Arch- Angels, Thrones, and Dominions, Seraphims, and Cherubins
in those glorious Orbs; Where there is God, the blessed Trinity, the King of
Glory, whose Glory is more then can be seen, be said, conceived to be; where
the joy of the Saints is such as eye has not seen, (no faith Saint Austin) eye
has not seen, for it is no color; nor ear has not heard, for it is no
sound; nor never entered into the heart of man to conceive, for the heart of man
must enter into it; where all shall be filled with abundance of peace, so the
Prophet: they shall not only taste and see how good the Lord is, but they shall
be filled with abundance, and they shall drink out of the River running over
with infinite and transcendent pleasures; where there gold shall be peace, and
their silver shall be peace, and their land shall be peace, and their life
shall be peace, and their joy shall be peace, and their God shall be peace, and
the God of peace, he shall fill them with the peace of God; and that peace is
it which passes, which is infinitely beyond all understanding. Glorious things
are spoken of thee, thou City of God; where the Kings is verity, and the Law is
charity, and the State is felicity, and the Life is eternity.

The comparing of these two things together, of this life's misery, and that
life's felicity and eternity, would make a man sing and to sigh too. It would
make him sing, I singing is in the Temple, and sighing is in the Tabernacle;
singing in the Temple, Psalm. 8: 4.
Blesled are they that dwell in thy house, they shall be always praising thee;
here is singing: but sighings is in the Tabernacle, for while we are in this
Tabernacle, therefore sigh we, desiring to be dissolved and to be clothed upon
with our house which is from Heaven: for while we are here we cannot be happy,
for this life is misery. This be spoken for our selves.

The second application of this plea is for others: Use 2.
seeing this life is such a life of misery, and that life is such a life of
glory and immortality; our present hap so base, our future hope so excellent:
this should stay us and take us off from mourning for such as are departed, as
if we were without hope of them. Hope is in the Text the principal thing, and
to lament and mourn for those that are departed, we should be so far from it,
as to rejoice in our spirits for the blessed translation of such into eternal
rest from this vail of misery, I say we should rejoice in their very
translation.

What do thou mourn and lament, and hang down the head, and all for loss of
such as are departed and gone to rest with God? Oh but thou will say, thou art
not heavy for their gain, but for thine own loss: but seeing thy loss is the
less, and their gain the greater, why do thon not observe a mean and a
proportion in these things?

I confess, it is very fitting both in Civility, and Divinity, and agreeable
to the laws both of Grace, and Nature, that there should be mourning,
especially in the house of mourning, at times and occasions offered in this
nature, it cannot otherwise be. But for Rachel to mourn for her Children, so as
that she would not be comforted; not but that she could have been comforted,
but she would not, that is not well. But I say here is comfort in abundance,
and here is that which must stay us from being transported with impatient
grief; we must overcome all our grief with patience, with a blessed expectation
of our own dissolution, for we must think we shall go to them, they shall not
return to us; let us desire to be dissolved and to be with Christ, which is
best for them, and for me, I and for thee too. Enough of the fist Point.

The last, (which I will but name, that so I may run through this whole
Scripture at this time) is this; that, The righteous and the hopeful, they are
not miserable; they are not most miserable, not the most miserable of all, nay
they are not miserable at all. 6 Conclusion.The hopeful are not miserable:


How prove you that?

By the force of the argument here that the Apostle uses: for this being a
part of an Argument, and an Hypothetical proposition, he reasons thus: If in
this life only we have hope in Christ, then are we miserable, but now for this
life only we have not hope in Christ: he does not set our rest there,
therefore we are not of all men the most miserable. How prove you that? because
the most wicked, the most wretched; so the less wicked, the least wretched; and
the most righteous, the best blessed, and the least miserable.

Not the most? not at all. Not at all? No, for as the outward prosperity of the
wicked in this World is no true prosperity, so the outward adversity of the
godly is no true misery: it is not such as does destitute and dissolute a man
utterly, but you shall have the faithful come off with hope, I and with
rejoicing rather then grudging and repining at it; yea they joy in their
sufferings, and at last are more then conquerours; and all this shows then,
that that they are far enough from misery.

Well, Use 1.
the knowledge of this life's misery, the knowledge of our not being at all
miserable that are righteous; should teach all of us to be righteous, to be
religious, to strive to be godly, if not for the love of virtue, and piety, and
holiness, and such kind of Graces as all good Christians and godly persons
should be, though there were no Hell to punish, nor no Heaven to cherish a man
in; though there were no reward for the good, nor revenge against the bad: yet
notwithstanding the love of virtue should constrain an ingenious Christian to
strive after holiness and piety: but if not for the love of religion, let us do
it for the fear of the misery that may befall us, which we shall prevent if we
remember now our duties, that is to be godly, and to be righteous, for the
righteous man is not, cannot be miserable.

And then lastly, Use. 2.
this shall serve to show to us, how it ought to keep off the World from
judging rashly: there is a great obliquity, and a perverse judgment in the
World; men censure those that are in any kind of misery to be of all men the
most miserable: whereas we know that this is no true misery on their part, for
it is but outward, it is but temporal misery, it is no true real misery. And
therefore this serves to rectify the obliquity of such men's judgments, as do
determine the godly to be in a miserable condition, whereas the contrary is
most true: for we count them (faith Saint James) blessed that endure. I am 5.11.
Do they endure to the very death? Blessed are they that die in the Lord,
Revle. 14.13.
for they rest from their labors: and who would not die here, that he may
dwell with God there in rest? who that loves, who that hops, would not be
where his love, where his hope is? would not have what he hops for? Exodus: 33:
20.
Does not the Lord say to his servant Moses, No man can see my face and live?
Oh (says a Father) let me die then! for I will die to see thee: who would not
die for the present, to dwell ever where his hope is? If in this life we had
only hope, then were we of all men the most miserable: but our hope is not
only in this life, of the things of this life; therefore we are not of all men
most miserable, no not miserable at all.

I have done with my Text: You see the occasion of our present meeting, to
Inter this little Child in Christian burial, the last service and duty we owe
to deceased Saints: I cannot, and I know you expect not that I should say any
thing of it. It is a Child of the Covenant, sealed in the Covenant, died in the
Covenant, rests according to the Covenant, with the God of the Covenant, of
whom I doubt no more of a happy rest with Christ the mediator of the Covenant,
then I do of the Covenant that Christ has sealed; and so I leave it in that
rest, and return our selves to our own duty and service, to call upon God for a
blessing.

THE PLATFORM OF CHARITY: OR THE LIBERAL MAN'S GUIDE.
SERMON XXXIX.
GAL. 6.10. As we have therefore opportunity, let us do good to all, especially
to them who are of the household of Faith.


IN the sixth verse of this Chapter, the Apostle begins to persuade these
Galatians, (to whom he wrote) to Beneficence: and having in the ninth verse;
the verse before the Text; given them great encouragement in this course. Be
not weary (says he) of well-doing: for in due season we shall reap, if we
faint not. The words I have now read to you, are an inference upon that which
went before, seeing if we hold out, we shall reap in due time: then (says the
Apostle) As we have opportunity, let us do good to all, etc.

To speak something for the opening of the words, and then to observe the main
things the Apostle intends in this place.

As we have opportunity. Explication.


Cairos, signifies more than time, As we have time, so the old Translation
reads it; but the word signifies more, there is a Chronos, and a Cairos, a
time, and an opportunity of time. There is a time taken in the largest sense,
there is an opportunity of time restrained to those advantages of times, that a
man by wisdom may make unto himself for the performing of any duty that God
(...) of him. This must be understood with a reference to what was spoken of
before, We shall reap if we faint not. He shows there is a time of sowing,
and a time of reaping: and so in Eccles. 3. There is a time for all things,
there is a time to sow, and a time to reap. Now while the sowing time lasts
(for that is the opportunity that he now speaks of) while the time of sowing
lasts; let us embrace those times and opportunites for the doing of good.

Let us (as we have opportunity) do good to all.

Do good, Romans 12.2.
is of a large extent, it is of as large an extent, as the law. All is good
that is agreeable to Gods will revealed. Be renewed in the spirit of your
minds, that you may know what the good and acceptable will of God is. But in
this place it is restrained to some particular acts of Beneficence toward men,
toward the servants of God: which are the^ said to be good deeds, and good
acts, when there is a concurrence between the action, and the affection, with
conformity to the Rule.

First, the^ must be actions. It is not speaking good, nor meaning good only,
but it is doing good. I am. 2.15: 16.
Says the Apostle, If a brother be naked, or hungry, or cold, and you say to
him, go in peace, warm thee, but you give him no fire: and go and cloth thee,
but you give him no apparel: and go and feed thee, but you give him no meat.
Here are good words now: but the deeds are not answerable; here are no good
deeds at all. Solomon compares such complemental charity, that is only vernal,
and in outward expression, to Clouds and winds without rain. Not much unlike
the boxes of Apothecaries, that are adorned with glorious titles without, but
open them, and examine their in-sides, you shall find nothing but emptiness.
Well, that is the first thing: there must be good actions.

Again secondly, these must have a good rise, they must proceed from a good
affection too (...) else they lose the name of good actions. Make the tree
good, and the fruit shall be of the same condition: the actions are not good,
if the affections be naught, and therefore the same God, that requires
beneficence, he commands benevolence also, and would have men become
tenderhearted, and put on the bowels of compassion: that they should
Sympathize with others, and be like affectioned to them; Heb: 13:31
to mourn with those that mourn, and to be with those that are bound, as being
bound with them. Rom: 12:15.
This is that which our Savior called being merciful. Be merciful, as your
heavenly Father is merciful. Mat: 5.
He says not only do works of mercy; but be merciful, do them from a merciful
heart, from bowels of compassion, that yearn toward those that are in
necessity. That is the second thing.

But then thirdly, these actions, and these affections whence they rise, they
must hold conformitiy with the Law. There is no good, but what is conformable
to the rule of goodness: that is the written word of God: and therefore all
those will worships and idle ceremonies made according to the inventions of
man; as a thousand devicies in Popery (wherein they intimate a show of great
Liberality) they are not good deeds, because they want that good rule that
should uphold and make them so. So much shall serve for the opening of it. Good
deeds then are such actions as rise from a sanctified affection; and receive
ground and warrant from Gods will revealed in his Word to men.

Again, there is a third term yet. Do good to all men; What does the Apostle
mean, that every man should receive the fruits of our Beneficence? There are
some men notorionsly wicked, and rather to be punished than relieved: The
Apostle means not such, 2 These: 3: 10:
for he gives you a Caution; If any man work not, let him not eat. Relieve
him not that has ability to get, and will live idly, and unprofitably; But do
good to all men; that is, to all men so far as you see them in extreme want,
unable to help themselves, if their lawful necessities call upon your charity,
in this respect all men must be looked unto, but especially To the household of
Faith.

By household of faith, here he means the multitude of believers and not only
those that dwell near us, and about us, but those that are deispersed
throughout the whole earth, the Churches of God: The dispersion spoken of
through all the parts of the world, 1 Pe^ 1:
are this household of faith: all the Saints of God, in what difference or
distance soever one from another, yet they are of the same household together;
of the same Church of God. So the Church of God is called, the house of God;
and sometime it is understood of the Church militant, and sometime of the
Church triumphant. Of the Church triumphant: In my Fathers house are many
mansions. There it is heaven, the place of the blessed. Then for the Church
militant: Moses was faithful in all his house, faith the Text. And Paul exhorts
Timothy how he should carry himself in the house of God: that is in the Church
militant. As for those that live above us, they need not our good works and
actions, therefore it is intended of those that are here in the Church
militant; that is called Gods household, because there is such a communion
amongst believers, as amongst those that live in the same house, that abide
under the same roof, that live under the same government, that eat at the same
Table, and c. So then you have the meaning of all, which is no more but this;
Take those advantages of times, which you can obtain (or else many will slip
unprofitably to be conversant in such actions of mercy, which tend to the
relief of those that want them. If there be extreme necessity, do good to all;
but if you may make choice of persons to whom you may do good: choose the
household of faith. Thus you have the substance, and the meaning of the words.
In them you may observe briefly these three parts.

The first is a determination, Division.
or limitation of time, to which the Saints are tied in the performance of the
duties that are in joined them: as you have opportunity, and while you have
time.

Secondly, there is a declaration of duty, do good.

Thirdly, there is a description of the persons to whom this good must be done;
first more generally: Do good to all: and then more particularly, and with an
especial note; Especially to those of the household of Faith. Of these in order.

First, for the determination of time (to take the words as they lie) while you
have time therefore, or as you have opportunity, the words themselves do render
the main point. It is the duty of Christians to take their advantages of times:
to take the best opportunities of their life to do good. Doctr. 1. It is the
duty of Christians to take the best opportunities of their life to do good:


I will speak somewhat by way of Explication of the point; and something by way
of Application, and so proceed to what follows.

First for the Explication: what is intended, or meant in it, when we incite
you to embrace times and opportunities. Briefly these two things are meant in
it.

First, A twofold opportunlty to be taken of doing good:
that you should be sure not to lose the time of life. And,

Secondly, that you should not forego the advantages, and opportunities of
estates.

You shall not always have life to do good: and it may be (if you have life)
you shall not always enjoy means, and ability to do good. While you have life
therefore, and time, do good; or while you enjoy means: and so power to do
good: embrace these opportunites. That is the meaning of the Apostle in this
place.

First, 1 The time of life:
then there must be a doing good while you have life; let your good works go
before you, do things while you live, and defer not the performance of them
till your death. Luke 16:9:
Make you friends of the unrighteous Mammon, that when you want, they may
receive you into everlasting habitations. He calls that unrighteous Mammon, not
that it is unrighteously gotten only (though that may be meant) but that which
is unrighteously kept, is unrighteous Mammon to you; if you procured it never
so justly, unless you do rightly dispose of it; and if you be desirous to do
right in disposing of your Mammon, of your wealth, do it now; That when you
want that power, and those times, you may enjoy the comfortable fruit of the
wellredeeming of the time of your life, to receive you into everlasting
habitations. In the 25. verse of the 16. Luke, it is the challenge of Abraham
to Dives; Son remember that thou in thy lifetime had thy goods, (for so
the word signifies) thou had thy opportunities of life, and of goods too,
but now thou have neither life nor goods left thee, to do good with; and
therefore he is blessed and thou art tormented. It was the folly of those five
Virgins, Mat. 25.10.
they took not the opportunity of life (for that is the thing meant there) but
they posted over all to the last, and hoped that all might be effected in a
trice or miniute of their life, which would have held them employment enough
all the days of their lives: And therefore they came short of heaven; the
gates were shut against them, as you see, when the Bridegroom came.

If any man imagine, Objection.
because it is said, Blessed are they that die in the Lord, for they rest from
their labors, and their works follow them; That therefore it matters not, so
long as a man does good at his death, though he have neglected the ways of
goodness all his life.

Let them know that by works there, Answ.
is not meant the actions of men, but the fruits of their actions. Their works
follow them; not the works they have deferred until death, but the fruits of
those works, they did while they were living, and received not the benefit of
them until death. Their works follow them, that is the fruits of their works.
It is more good and pleasant by far, to have the actions go before, and the
fruits, and comfortable effects to succeed, and follow after.

But if any man yet suppose that he may make that up in his Will, Objection.
which he has neglected, all his life long: and though he have lived
miserably, covetously, and unprofitably, all the days of his life; yet his
thoughts may tell him, that by the Charitable Requests of his last Testament;
as bequeathing largely to the Church and Commonwealth, and to all sorts of
people, be may at the last make fit compensation and satisfaction, for neglect
of former duties.

Let no man deceive himself with such a bad resolution, Answ.
for first it argues a sign of infidelity, that a man will not trust God, for
fear he should want in his lifetime; what is the reason else that he defers
the doing good in health, unless it be for fear of wanting himself? such
distrust he has in the providence of God. Besides, the same God which bids
thee do good when thou have opportunity, and while thou enjoyest the advantage
of life, he expects it now. And it may be truly said of many that neglect those
times of doing good while they lived, and have now supplied that defect in
their death, by the large benevolence of their Wills; Their will is good, but
their deed is naught.

So much for the first point, I proceed unto the second; that is, thou must not
only take the time of thy life, 2 Of outward estates.
but also the opportunity of thy means, and thy estate; while there is yet a
price in thine hand: while thou have opportunity, and enjoyest wealth to do
good with: redeem the advantages and opportunities by employing them in that
way, for which thou did receive them. The time may come wherein you may
desire to do good, but cannot; wanting an estate, and opportunities whereby to
do it. Trov: 23.5.
Mark what Solomon faith, Will thou trust in a thing of nothing? for Riches
have wings as an Eagle, and fly away toward heaven. It is the vanity of men,
that they still forbear, and stay, while their estates increase; pretending
that then they shall be better able to do good, and extend themselves more
largely: or that they may keep their wealth, and wait for a better opportunity.
But why with thou trust in a thing of nothing? Thou see a fowl in her flight,
and now (it may be) thou perceivest it, but instantly it vanishes out of thy
sight. Why riches have wings (faith Solomon.) Thou have them now in thy
possession, and retainest them fast in hold, Eccles: 11: 8.
but presently they are departed; they fly as an Eagle out of thy sight. And
the same wise man when he exhorts men to cast their bread upon the waters; He
gives them this reason: Thou know not what evils; thou know not what
judgments and calamities God intends to bring upon that Nation where thou
live, upon the City, upon the Family where thou dwell; upon thy person or
estate: Thou know not what evils, 1 Timothy: 6: 17.
God will bring upon the earth. And so likewise, charge rich men in this world,
that they be not high-minded; and that they trust not in uncertain riches, but
in the living God; that they be ready to distribute, and to communicate, and to
do good works. What is it that hinders men from distributing, and
communicating? Because they trust in uncertain Riches. For if they would now
learn not to trust in uncertain Riches, but account them uncertain as they are;
and put confidence in the living God, who can provide for them, when those
outward means (which they so much rely on) fail their expectations, they would
then be more liberal, and bountiful, and ready to do good, and to communicate.
So then here is the meaning of the point.

Take the opportunities of life. That is, first take the time of life, while
you may do good; and then take the means, the wealth, and estate, which is the
time of your means. Job 13: 15, 16, 17, 18.
For this observe Jobs case, he goes on discoursing of this very point, he was
now a man stripped of all he had, but the other day the Richest man in the East;
the Sabeans and Caldeans had carried away his goods, his cattle, and his
children, and all things were taken from him. Yet there was one thing that
administered comfort, in the day of his adversity and his affliction; And it was
this, faith he; If I have made the eyes of the poor to fail; or if I eat my
morsels alone; or if I have not relieved the fatherless, etc. If I have not
done thus and thus; then let the Lords fiercest judgment fall upon me; But
herein consists my comfort, my conscience bears me witness, that when I had
wealth, and estate, and enjoyed the goods of this life, I did good. I was
father to the fatherless; a foot to the lame, and eyes to the blind, I did all
the good that lay within the compass of my power to do, when I had means to do
it. I say, little do you know (beloved) whatsoever thou art, whatsoever estate
thou have, though thou be as a nail fastened in a sure place, and think thou
shall never be moved from this condition: Thou know not how soon God may
turn his hand upon thee, when thou may be as Job was on the dunghill deprived
of all comforts. What will be thy consolation then? that when thou had
wealth, thou did good with it. It will add to thy affliction, that thou had
great possessions, and did neither glorify God, nor do good to men. So much
for the opening of the point; I come to apply it.

First then, Use 1.
it serves for the reproof of many to whom God has given the price in their
hands: But they want hearts to embrace the opportunities of doing good. They
pretend to do good, and have a mind inclining to good: But they have no heart
to take the opportunities, and advantages of times, and means, which God has
bestowed on them for the same purpose; Prove: 3: 28:
they want hearts to embrace those. Remember what Solomon faith: Say not to thy
neighbor, go, and come again to morrow, If it be now in thine hands to give
him. The Lord will not only have a man not deny to do good, but besides that,
he would not have him delay to do good; put him not from thee till to morrow,
if his help remain in thine hands to day; yea, though thou have a purpose to do
it to morrow; if it be in thy power to day, do it; and defer it not till to
morrow.

But what shall we say to those, who do not only delay their purposes, but by
protracting lose their purposes. There is nothing more ordinary, then in some
cases for men: not only to purpose truly, but to promise heartily to God, that
they will perform these, and these acts of mercy, if God will deliver them from
such fears and dangers, as they (at such times) are incompast with. A man that
endures extremity of weather, in a tempestuous Sea, if happily he may attain
the land in safety: a man that is diseased with sickness, if now he may recover
his health again, or one that suffers imprisonment, if he may procure his
liberty: or a man that is in fear of the loss of his estate, Psalm: 78.
by the means of some unhappy casualty; if now he may escape that loss: he will
bestow a great deal on God, and on the servants of God; nay, he promises, and
vows unto God in his extremity. But how many of those promises, as well as
those other purposes, come to nothing? they have liberty, they receive health;
they enjoy safety, and have the full fruition of all their desires: but alas,
how short come their vows of performance? not one of many of them, but turns
God away without his bargain. Remember how the Lord taxes the people of
Israel; In the day of their distress (and the Lord reckons up diverse and sundry
troubles they were in) then they speak good words to God: they would cleave to
him, and promised to do thus and thus. But (thus faith the Text) They flattered
the Lord with their lips, and were false in the Covenant with God. Is it not it
so (beloved) with many of us? Oh that your hearts might smite you this day,
before the Lord, for many purposes, and promises that you have made of doing
this or that, for the glorifying of God, and the discharge of your duty! One
man has promised restitution of unjust gain: another, to become more liberal,
and bountiful toward others. And the Lord has waited week after week, month
after month, and year after year; and yet nevertheless you continue the same
men, either unsensible, or careless to accomplish your promise to God, or
rendering unto him his due. That is the first Use.

Secondly, Use 2.
let it stir up every one of us to a care of his duty of embracing
opportunities. And when we persuade you to take opportunities, we would draw
you a degree higher: not only to take them, but to seek them; for how shall a
man obtain the advantage of taking opportunities, if he first seek them not?
and therefore we persuade you to that. We see Abraham sitting in the door of
his Tent, that he might observe opportunities of doing good; he stayed not till
the men knocked at his door for relief, Genesis 18.19.
but took notice of their passing by, that he might call them. We see a good
old man in Judges 19. As he perceives a stranger passing the streets, first
takes occasion to question his wants, and forbears not till the man complain;
so willing was he to administer to his necessities, and to embrace a fit
opportunity of doing him good. We see David expressing his thankfulness to God,
and to Jonathan. He enquires if there were any of the house of Saul, that he
might show him kindness for Jonathans sake. So should we do. Is there any of
the household of Faith (as the Text faith, 2 Samuel: 9.1.
and as the Scripture calls them) unto whom I may show kindness for the Lords
sake? He has been better to us then Jonathan was to David, and yet we are much
more backward to Retribution, and expressions of thankfulness then David was to
Jonathan. But the Scriptures are plentiful in this, we need not stand on it; I
say this is a duty, that every one should discharge this task: not to stay and
forbear till the reports of men's wants are brought to them, but to be
circumspect and seek for all accasions that may deserve the extent of their
goodness. If you live in a Parish wherein (happily) there remains not many
poor, yet you live in a City, there are many there; if there be not many in the
City; you live in a Country, in a Kingdom, doubtless where there are many; if
there be none there, yet thou have further means to extend thy charity: Thou
live in a Church, is there any member of the Church in all the World
dispersed in Bohemia, in the Palatinate, in any place of the earth where the
poor abide? enquire after them, that you may know their wants, and relieve
their necessities.

I come now to the second, from the determination of time, to the declaration
of duty, while we have time.

Let us do good.

It is the duty of Gods servants (as to make advantage of their times so) to
employ themselves in releeving of others. Doctr. 2. It is the duty of Gods
servants to relieve others.
Take it more briesly. It is a doing good, to releeve others, that is the duty
of Gods servants; and it well becomes them, to be employed in this work, while
we have time on earth and means to do it, to employ our selves in doing good,
and relieving others. And there is familiar appearance of this in Scripture,
and by reasons also.

By Scripture it is commanded in precept, and commended in practice of the
Saints. If any of thy brethren among thee be poor (faith God) thou shall not
harden thy heart, Deuteronomy 15.7:
thou shall not shut up thy hand against thy poor brother. The not opening of
the hands to relieve him, God accounts that, as proceeding from the hardness of
the heart. Thou shall not harden thy heart against thy brother, etc. Cast thy
bread upon the Waters, Eccles. 11.4. Isa. 58.7:
for after many days thou shall find it. Is not this the fast that I have
chosen, for a man to give his bread to the hungry; and that a man should
release those that are in Captivity, 2 Cor. 8:9.
and to let the oppressed go free? The Apostle wishes that as they abounded in
knowledge, and in virtue, and in faith, and goodness; so they might abound also
in this Grace of God. The Grace of God that he there speaks of, is the willing
readiness to the doing of good. To do good, and to distribute forget not; for
with such sacrifices God is well pleased. Heb: 13: 16.
You see thereby doing good, he means distribution: the latter word does prove
the former, and both explain this Text.

You have it likewise commended in the practice of the Saints. I need not be
large in discoursing to you the carriage of Abraham, of Lot, of David, of Job,
the practice of Cornelius, John 15: 19.
yea of Christ himself. The Scripture is plentiful in this, I and that which
is more to be observed, that although Christ himself were relieved by others;
yet out of that he gave a share to the poor.

It will appear likewise in reason, that this is a necessary duty, and these may
be taken.

First, Reason 1.
from the equity of it; for it is equal you should thus employ your time and
estate, and those advantages of life which God has made you doner of, partly
to that purpose; and a man commits an injury in neglecting these holy duties:
and is not only become an unmerciful, but an unjust man, and so in the plainest
phrase a dishonest man: he is not just that does not thus. Therefore, withold
not the good from the owner thereof, Pro: 3: 26: 27.
(faith God) when it is in thy power to give. The poor is owner of the estate
of the rich so far as his necessity requires it; and it proves but a matter of
justice and equity, to bestow his riches where it ought to be bestowed: and a
man is unjust in that respect if he do it not. Luke 16: 9.
Riches are called unrighteous mammon (as has been expressed before) when they
are unrighteously withheld from them to whom they should be given, as well as
when they are unrighteously gotten. So that detaining it from those unto whom
it is appointed by Gods direction, converts that riches (perchance honestly
procured) into the mammon of unrighteousness.

Secondly, Reason 2.
as it becomes a matter of justice, so it proves likewise a matter of wisdom:
a man makes wise provision for the present, and the future also by this course,
And therefore it makes way for the felicity of the servants of God, to employ
their endeavors in the execution of this duty, and to lay fast hold on the
forehead of opportunity.

First, it proves a consequent of wisdom for themselves in procuring their
own good. Blessed is the man that judges wisely of the poor, why so? The Lord
will consider him in the day of evil, Psalm: 41: 1.
and he will not give him over to the will of his enemies, What is the thing
that a man is most subject to fear in this World? but that which David faith
concerning Saul: I shall fall sometime or other by the hands of some enemy, of
some mischievous person, or malicious person or other. You see the Lord has
here promised a large assurance of safety and protection from the malice of his
adversaries in the day of evil, Tsal: 37: 6.
if he wisely consider the poor. Again it makes much for the good of his
posterity. The good man is merciful, etc. and his seed inherits the blessing.
It may be he perceives not such sensible and apparent fruits, or outward
success in his own life upon this course, yet his seed inherits the blessing:
and the less he enjoyes, the more shall they receive of Gods goodness toward
them, as a recompense for his benevolent kindness toward the people of God.
And what greater legacy can man bestow upon his posterity then to leave them
(by his particular means) in the loving favor of the Almighty.

And as it is so for the present, 1 Timothy 6: 19.
so it becomes a course of wisdom for the future also. Charge the rich men of
the World that they be ready to do good, etc. laying up a good foundation for
the time to come. And by this means a man may provide well for eternity. Make
you friends (faith Christ) of your unrighteous Mammon, that when you fail, they
may receive you into everlasting habitations. The way for a man to provide for
eternal good, is to use his talent of wealth and estate (for the present) to
the good of many. Thus we see the Reasons plainly verified: to make use of it
briefly and hasten to that which remains.

Is it so then, Use.
that it is writ down to be the duty of Gods servants to manage the
opportunities of this life for this end, and in this course of doing good; that
is, of distribution and relief.

Then it serves to reprove those that neglect this duty, and account it not a
business of their life; only they conceive of it as a matter of praise and
commendations, a thing that they do well in performing, and not very ill in
omitting. They conceive it to be of no absolute necessity, but voluntary
charity, as a matter arbitrary, but not as a duty necessary, and for this cause
they appear but slack and indifferent; they conceive this as a duty to lay up
wealth, but never remember the necessity of laying out wealth to be commanded
for a greater duty then the former: they take it for their duty to get all they
can, but forget the following precept, to do all the good with that they get,
as they can. And here is the reason why there are such lavish expenses bestowed
upon every vanity, that the portion of the poor, and such as ought to be
relieved with our estates in point of equity; and by virtue of Gods Commandment
is swallowed up by every vanity. It is spent in excessive apparel, for the
satisfaction of the vain fashion-monger: in superfluity of diet for the
Glutton, and the Epicure: in Hawks, and Hounds, and Dogs, to please the humor
of the voluptuous person: it is consumed in raising up vain and unnecessary
Buildings by earthworms, that make their habitations below, and lay a
foundation for themselves on earth; neglecting that goodly building given of
God, to the re-edisying of their souls in the kingdom of Grace. And thus is
the portion of the poor consumed, and themselves (for want of the same) exposed
to all the misery that this World can inflict. Some cry they cannot do it, we
have not an estate to undergo it; in the mean time they run to excess of Riot,
and make such voluptuous and superfluous feasts, that the Phoenix hardly escapes
the bounds of their desires. If you can be thus excessive in your diet, in your
apparel, in your sports; if you can cast away in presents, and in gifts, in
bribes, and in gratuities, superfluously upon rich friends: there must (of
necessity) be a defect in your will to the command of God, when you neglect the
miserable condition of the poor, and lend no hand to help them. What is the
reason of it? but because of the natural rebellion and Athisme that is in the
heart of every man against God; that they will employ their estates any way,
rather then bestow them to that purpose for which they are appointed by God. Oh
what account shall such be able to make at the day of Judgment; do but suppose
when the Books shall come to be opened, wherein the particulars, Diaries and
passages of your life shall be thus examined: Item, so much for a feast; Item,
on such a day, for such another great feast; and many a hundred days, for as
many hundred feasts, wherein hundreds of the servants of God have endured
extreme want, and enforced into banishment into other places, to persecution,
to misery and distress, when thou could not find one of them in a corner of
thy purse. Item, so much for such apparel, for such entertainment, for such
building of Walks and Galleries; What nothing for the servants of God? are they
so empty, when your houses appear so full? live they so poor, and you so richly
glad? what can you spare nothing for Christ, and the distressed members of the
Church all this while? Oh my beloved, remember what James faith; James: 5.
Go to now you rich men, weep and howl, for your garments are Moth eaten,
whereon you have bestowed so much cost, and your gold and silver is rusty and
cankered, and the rest of them shall eat up your flesh as it were fire, at
that day.

Let it teach therefore the servants of God to bestow their Alms most
willingly, Use 2.
to be free and in continual readiness, in extending their contribution toward
the necessities of those that want them; and not only so, but to do good in so
doing, for that is the principal duty unto which the Text does invite you.
While you have opportunity, do good.

But how shall a man in such actions of mercy, Quest. How to give so as to do
good: Answ. 1 Give justly
and bounty, and liberality, make it appear that he does good? Therefore
briefly, take some helps in this.

A man that will contribute out of his estate to releeve others, and intends to
do good. First, he must do what he does justly, he must not out of mercy
extended to one, injure another, but must always level his charity by his own
ability. And this is that which the holy Ghost calls, the giving of a man's own.
Cast [thy] bread upon the waters: Eccles. 11.1.
thy own bread, not another man's. To give that which is a man's own by right, by
lawful procuring; his own by right of possession, the gifts bestowed out of
that, makes acceptance before God, and provides a double recompense for the
giver. You see how Zachens gives; If I have wronged any man, I will restore it,
and half my goods I give to the poor. That is, I will first make restitution of
what I have unjustly gotten, and then of the remainder, I will give half to the
poor.

It is no giving for a man, to employ all his lifetime in the procurement of
unjust gain: By Usury, deceit in trading, and other indirect and forbidden
courses, to heap up abundance of red clay; and then to sum up a large Bill of
the particular goods he intends to Religion; for Churches, and for Hospitals,
and the poor, with other such like benevolences, makes but a simple
satisfaction for thy unjust courses, in procuring such wealth to the prejudice,
and detriment of others: this is nothing to thy advantage; all this while thou
art a thief, and give stolen goods. Nay, thou may further assure thy self,
that Hell shall be the greatest recompense of thy charity, because thou
bestowest that which is not thine. Thou ought first to have made thy estate
clear, and have restored the things that belonged unto others, and reserved
thine own by it self, and then to give free scope to thy charity to the doing
of any good action, which time and occasion could propound. This is the first
duty of any man that will do good in giving, he must give justly.

Secondly, 2 Give wisely Psalm: 1: 2:
he must give wisely too, it is made the mark of a man fearing God; He
considers wisely of the poor, and he orders his affairs with judgment. What is
that? Judgment has a twofold respect; it has respect to the quantity of a
man's gift; and to the quality of the person to whom he gives.

There must be a judgment, In respect of the quantity:
a wise ordering of things in respect of the quantity which a man bestows,
according to that expression of the holy Ghost, in Acts 11.29. They gave
according to their abilities, they kept within the limits of their estates, and
exceeded not. So must thou, or else another man may (perchance) lose by thy
liberality.

Again, In respect of the quality:
there must be respect had to the quality of the person to whom he gives; My
goodness extends to the Saints that are on earth, to the faithful ones; as the
Text faith here, to the household of faith. It is not necessary to give to every
one that comes next to hand. There be some persons, I told you before, that are
not to be releeved, except in case of extreme necessity. We must extend our
Benevolence to those of the household of Faith. Give unto Christ, and to the
naked and hungry members, that belong unto him, and thou shall not want a sweet
and comfortable return of thy charity.

Again, 3 Give in simplicity: Rom: 11: 8:
as it must be done justly and wisely, so (if we desire to do good in
releeving) we must do it simply. In the simplicity and plainness of our hearts;
Let him that distributes, do it in simplicity, faith the Apostle. What is that
simplicity? when a man looks up to God with a single eye (as the eye may be
said to be single, when it viewes but one object at once so) the heart is small
when it respects God only in this action of charity, and makes no other
reckoning of any outward object. A double-minded man he looks up to God, and
yet carries some respect to the outward honor which he expects of the World;
and more (often times) to the World then to God, at least he joins them
together. But if a man be desirous to bestow his benevolence with a purpose to
receive recompense from above, let him do it for his sake that commands it, and
reflect upon God in all things. This is the testimony of our Conscience (faith
the Apostle) that in simplicity and sincerity we have had our conversation
among you: Mat: 6:
not affecting the praise of men, but aiming to approve our selves to God in
that we do. This is that which Christ advised the Pharisees, that they should
not admit their right hand to know what their left hand did.

Lastly, 4 Cive cheerfully: 2 Gor: 8.6:
as it must be simple, so it must be cheerful: God loves a cheerful giver. And
this is a perfect sign of cheerfulness, when a man does not only give without
grudging, upon all opportunities: but when he will be careful to prevent them
in his willingness to seek them, as I said before. So much for the second
point, the duty it self.

Now I proceed to the last thing; The persons to whom good must be done:
that is, the description of the persons to whom this must be done. First
generally: All, and then particularly, The household of faith.

First generally: Do good to all.

It is as I have told you, 1 Generally to all:
to all that endure such wants and necessities, as that it may be a work of
mercy, and no transgression of the rule to releeve them: for those that live
unprofitably, and become burdens to the Commonwealth (except in case of
extreme necessity) it loses the name of mercy to relieve them, Luke 10:
and deserves neither reward nor commendations. Yet, if they live in extreme
necessity, then take the Rule of the Apostle; Do good to all, even to them
also. We have the Parable of our Savior to direct us in this path, where the
good Samaritan lends his assistance to the Jew that fell among thieves: We
cannot but know of the opposition and enmity, between the Samaritans and the
Jews: yet we see that in case of extremity, the Samaritan helps the Jew.
Therein our Savior teaches us, that every man (in this case) is a man's
neighbor, and therefore the same law that commands, to love thy neighbor as
thy self; intends we should do good to all, if necessity require.

The Reason is, Reason 1.
in regard there is the same maker of one, as of another; We have all one
Father (says the Prophet) and has not one God created us? Mala: 2: 10:
Then by Creation we are all alike Children, though not by Adoption, and
especial Grace: and as they are the Creatures of God and bear the Image of
their Maker; there ought to be some consideration extended toward them, in case
of extreme necessity.

Again, Reason 2.
there dwells a part of Gods Image in all mankind, and that resemblance makes
us alied to each other by the bonds of Nature: 1 John 4: 20:
then if we love not our brother whom we see daily, how shall we love him whom
we never saw? faith the Apostle.

To make some use briefly of this. Use.
Is it so, that doing of good is to be extended to all when necessity requires
it: Then let it teach us (without all evasion and protraction of those duties
commanded) to embrace every object and occasion that may invite us to do good,
and to be merciful.

But some man may reply in this fashion, Object.
my intent is very pliable: that away of goodness, I could willingly extend it
toward such a man; but he is a stranger unto me, and one with whom I was never
acquainted.

What is this, Answ.
but the churlish reply of Nabal to the servants of David? there are diverse men
abroad whom I know not; there are some servants that are run from their
masters, 1 Samuel: 25:
shall I give my bread and that I have provided for my shearers unto them?
Nabal was his name, and folly was with him. Abigai! did truly interpret his
nature to be answerable to his name, which signified a man of folly; for if his
conditions had been otherwise, he would not have sent them empty to their
Master, knowing their absolute necessity, in which case a stranger ought to be
relieved, and we cannot thrust him back from our charity.

Secondly, Object.
such a one (I confess) is not a stranger, but an enemy; and when it lay in his
power, he procured me all the mischief he could, and should I now relieve him?

Mark the rule of the Apostle; Answ. Rom 12:
If thine enemy hunger, feed him; if he be naked, cloth him; if he thirst,
give him drink: for in so doing thou shall heap coals of fire upon his head.

But some man will say, Object.
there remains so much unthankfulness in the World, that one is soon
discouraged (by peoples ingratitude) in the office of doing dood.

But what says the Lord, Answ. Eccles. 11.1.
Cast thy bread upon the waters, for after many days thou shall find it.
Though it seem no more to thee but as a stone sunck down into the deep, or as a
morsel of bread in the water, that floates from the sight of him that cast it
in, without possibility of recovering it again, or receiving any fruit or
benefit from the same; yet cease not to cast it there, for after many days
thou shall find it.

But some man replies, Objection.
I do good to some already; I give something to the maintaining of a Scholar
in the University; somewhat I do for the binding of a poor Child to an
Apprentiship, and I have bestowed my good will toward the setting up of a
young beginner in his trade, what is there no end of doing good?

Mark again, Answ.
the advice of Solomon for that; Give a portion to seven, and to eight. If thou
have done good to one, extend it to a second, to a third, and again to a
fourth, and a sift, and sixth, and a seventh, and to eight, and so long as there
remains an object of mercy, and power in thine hands to do it, though thou have
extended the like bounty to seven, and to eight already.

Some man will answer again, Objection.
that by this course (if every man bestow his benevolence so largely) no man
could become rich in this life; and God appoints some rich men in this World as
well as poor.

Solomon answers that objection thus. Answ.
If the Clouds be full they pour down rain. As if he should have argued thus.
God has bestowed riches on men, as he has given rain to the Clouds, he gave
them that superfluity of waters to pour down on the earth for the benefit of
the same; and not that they shall still detain it to no purpose at all: So God
has given riches to men, that when they arive at a fullness of estate, they
should then pour down and distill the fruits of that blessing on them that are
poor and live in necessity, as the rain descends upon dry clods of earth.

But some man will say, Objection.
a man might pour down comfort, but the ill success it meets with, and the
little good it begets in them on whom it is bestowed (for they oftentimes
become worse, by the receipt of such benefits,) disheartens the giver from the
extending of his charity according to Gods command, and his own good nature.

Says Solomon for that; Answ.
As the Tree falls so it lies, whether to the East, or West, to North, or
South; his meaning is this, As the Tree being hewn down (lie which way it
will) falls to the profit and advantage of the owner: so it proves with all
things thou performest with intent to please God, and glorify him, though they
fall more prosperous, or less prosperous in the event; yet the conclusion
converts them all to the glory of God, his pleasure, and the advantage of the
owner; and there they lie, and their recompense also.

But some man may say, Objection.
I have continued a great while in the exercise of doing of good; I am now old,
and have lived thus long at my trade, and thus long I have been a Housekeeper,
and thus long have had an estate in my hands; all which time I have ever
employed my self in the performance of good offices for others, and did not
intermit any occasion that might invite me to the doing of good. And is it not
yet time to cease?

No (says Solomon) in the morning sowthy seed, Answ.
and in the evening let not thy hands rest. (For all those words are but
several answers, to several objections;) Sow thy seed in the morning of thy
life, when they estate begins to be improved, and then even in the evening of
thy life, when thou have left off gaining, cease not to persist in giving,

Says another man; Objection.
You must not lop the twig too soon, that is but beginning to grow. I am but
now in the way to thrive, and when I am further entered into that course, I will
not fail to extend my goodness to others.

Sow thy seed in the morning of thy life.

Answ.
But says another man, Objection.
I have done that already, and now it cease to be with me as before, by
reason I follow not my trade, and have no more possibility of getting.

But let not thy hand cease in the evening, Answ.
says God. When thy shop windows are shut up, thy compassion must still
continue open, when thou have bid gain adue, and taken thy leave of all the
ways of getting: even then, if thou enjoy an estate in thine hands, and
ability to do good, there is no excuse for thee to cease from bestowing it,
though it be in the evening. Thus we see there is no time excepted, nor person
to be refused if necessity require; but a man must do good to all men at all
times. So much for that.

But the matter chiefly intended is these two;

That there are some poor of the household of faith. Doct. 1.
That is the first. God has (in the household of faith) some that stand in need
of relief.

Secondly, that all that are in the household, should especially look unto them.

First (I say) there are some of the household of faith: Doct. 2.
true believers, whose wants call for relief.

So we see Christ's speaks as it were for himself, 1 There are some poor of the
household of faith. Mat. 15.
when he speaks of them; I was hungry, and you did not feed me; I was naked and
you did not cloth me. Those that Christ owns as his, and accounts them a part
of himself, even those are hungry and naked. James 1.
And so likewise, God has chosen the poor of this world rich in faith. They be
rich in faith, and so of Gods household of faith, and yet nevertheless poor in
this world. You shall see an example of this. A Widow comes to Elisha the
Prophet, and tells him; 1 King: 4: 1.
Thy servant, my husband, was a man fearing God: and yet notwithstanding the
creditor is coming upon me, and will have my sons to be bondslaves. The man
feared God, and yet nevertheless the poor Widow wanted means, and her sons
must be exposed to extremity of bondage for discharge of his fathers
engagements. A hard case, and yet the case of a man fearing God.

You see there are those of Macedonia, Rom: 5: 16.
that send help to the poor Saints of Achaia; they were Saints, and yet poor;
receiving help from a company of poor people at Macedonia, being so poor, that
the Apostle bears witness of them, they gave above their ability. Luke 16.
We see a poor man, and yet an heir of heaven, lying full of sores, and in
want, at the gate of Dives, that was after thrown into hell: An heir of heaven,
and yet on earth a Beggar.

You see then (beloved) the point is true: now we will descend, and see how it
appears to be so, and for what respect it comes to pass, by Gods providence.

First, Reason 1.
it becomes so, that there may be a conformity between the head and the
members; for Christ that was rich, for our sakes became poor, says the
Scripture, even Christ that was rich, 1 Cor: 8: 9.
and Lord over all, became poor, and in the form of a servant unto all, for our
sakes; so poor that we see, the foxes had holes, and the fowls of the air had
nests; Mat: 8: 10.
but our Redeemer had no shelter, no not so much room, as to rest his head. Now
there must be a conformity between Christ and his members: if the head be poor,
necessity makes the other members partake of the same Cup.

Again secondly, Reason 2.
if you observe, and look on the condition of Gods Saints, of the household of
faith on earth here, you shall find small occasion to marvel at their simple
estates, considering they are a company of travelers and Pilgrims, in this
world; I beseech you, 1 Pet: 2: 11.
as Pilgrims and strangers, etc. They are not only strangers, which may have
riches conveyed unto them, after some certain stay in a place. But they are
Pilgrims, and time will not permit their abode in one place, upon any condition
of advantage; for their profession compels them from one place to another: On
whom our Proverb may truly be verified; that a rouling stone gathers nothing.
They are Pilgrims, and Pilgrims desires extend no further (in this life) then a
staff and a scrip; This is the brood of travelers (says David) that seek thy
face.

Thirdly, Reas. 3.
there follows another reason, and that proceeds from the opposition they find
in the world against their course; the world labors to make them poor, and
having prevailed (like an imperious Jailer, to a distressed prisoner)
endeavors to keep them under. And it comes so to pass, in regard of the
natural enmity, and division that is in the world, Luk 9: 53.
in opposition of the ways of God. You shall find that our Savior intending
to go to Jerusalem, made his way through Samaria, and dispatched some before to
provide him lodging. But the Samaritans understanding, or suspecting that he
was minded to go thither, refused to entertain him. They would not receive him,
says the Text; Why? Because he was going unto Jerusalem. Beloved, thus deals
the world with the members of Christ: if they would rely on the world, and make
that their end, as they do, then riches should flow in in abundance, and their
estates might arive to be as eminent and mighty as others. But if their minds
be resolved for Jerusalem, and their eyes reflect that way; Let them seek their
own entertainment; for they shall receive no benefit, nor enjoy any
contentment, by their permission.

Lastly, Reason 4.
God disposes it to be so by his wondrous providence, that his glory may be so
much the more conspicuous and open; in providing that they of the household of
faith should endure the scourge of poverty on earth, that so the work of his
grace may appear the more in them, by the means of their poverty; for when does
grace make it self more manifest in the heart, then in the midst of such
extremities? The stars make the brightest reflection, in the obscurest night:
and grace appears most glorious, James 5.
chiefly in distress; You have heard of the patience of Job; had not Job
endured much sorrow, and been exercised in many afflictions, the world had been
ignorant of his virtues: he was first deprived of his substance, and suffered
the torments of his body, before he expressed his patience. You have heard of
the faith of those people, Heb 11.
which wandered in sheeps-skins, and goats-skins. But how could you have been
acquainted with their faith, if you had not heard of their clothing? you see
them in sheeps-skins, and goats-skins, enduring contempt of the world, to
preserve faith and a good conscience; and so you became acquainted with their
faith also.

Is it so then, Use 1.
that Gods servants are thus, then let the world wonder their fill at it, and
let not us account it a strange thing, (says Saint James) for it befalls
others of the Saints. So say I, when we see of the household of faith in
poverty, account it no strange matter, that God bestows not riches in this
world, to one that is rich in grace. You see a multitude of believers stripped of
all they had, Heb 10.
and yet they were holy and religious.

Secondly, Use 2.
condemn not their ways, for the entertainment they meet within the world.
Like not the worse of the ways of God, because he afflicts his servants; you
should then judge evil of the generation of the just. You know Job was a man
beloved of God: from heaven he witnesses his goodness; He was an upright, and
a just man, Job 1.
one that feared God, and eschewed evil. Notwithstanding you see how he was
environed with troubles, and made destitute of means, and the society of his
friends; insomuch, that his three familiar acquaintance did conclude, that
therefore he was an hypocrite, and that God had found him out in some sin. But
the ensuing displeasure of God toward these men (though it took no effect
because of the righteous invocation of his servant Job,) will tell us there
belongs a Judgment to those that censure the Children of God by their
afflictions, weighing their sins and their sufferings both in one scale
together. But beware of incurring Gods displeasure, by accusing the generation
of the just, in respect of their unprosperous events in this World. Thou see
one man disgraced, in much trouble, it may be in extreme necessity for want of
these outward blestings; presently thou concludest something is amiss in his
life. Thou perceivest another grows rich, having riches, and honor, and
applause in the World, notwithstanding he goes on in a profane course; yet
thou concludest certainly God loves this man: these are dangerous conclusie^s:
Cain and Esau were beloved of God, if this be a sign of love, now God himself
said, that He hated Esau. Esau whom God hated, had twelve Dukes to his Sons,
enjoying abundance and superfluity of all things: and therefore forbear to
reprove the just man, or call his integrity into question, because of his
outward poverty.

Thirdly, Use 3.
take heed you despise not the Household of Faith for outward poverty; think not
meanly of them, nor the worse of Grace, because of their simple outside; for
this is to have the Faith of God in respect of men's persons: James 2.
when a man comes in gay clothing, you say sit here in a goodly place; but a
man in meaner apparel, stand thou there, etc. The meaning is this; the Apostle
stands not so much upon the placing of men, but rather inveighs against the
unseemly disposition of men's hearts, that slighted Grace in the poor members of
the body, because they were not adorned with those outward ornaments that
beautify the body. This thing the Lord calls a despising of the poor; ye have
despised the poor; so that they did not walk as believers, nor honor God in
sincerity, because instead of honoring God by a familiar society with the
faithful, they despised him in contemning his Graces for their outward poverty,
unto whom he had bestowed them; not unlike to a fantastical offender, whose
pardon being sealed and sent him by an unworthy person, chose rather to die for
his offense, then accept of his pardon from the hands of an inferior person,

Secondly, Doctr. 2. The household of faith especially to be regarded: Psalm.
^6.1. Phil. 1.
the last Point is this, that These servants of God, of the Household of Faith
being poor, should especially be looked unto by those of the same house that
are rich^ above all other persons they are to respect those of the Household of
Faith. So David, My goodness extends not to thee, but to the Saints on earth.
The Apostle witnesses of Philemon, That he had refreshed the bowels of the
Saints, and had done good to them, taking most especial notice of him, because
of his goodness extended toward them. This is the duty.

And the Reason of it is, Reason.
because that for this intent has God given riches unto some that have grace,
that so they might especially administer the confort that wealth brings with
it, unto those that are poor of the same household and profession of grace: I
say, for this very reason, God has furnished some of his Elect with wealth and
opportunities; that above all other they might reserve a diligent care and
respect toward others that share with them in the same Grace; if they do not,
I am certain the world will not; for of all other people, those that fear God
are the persons to whom they wish most unhappiness, and shortest continuance of
life in this World. Therefore has God given wealth to those that have Grace,
that they might minister a seasonable relief to others, whose wants do call
for it. Let the brother of low degree, rejoice in that he is exalted; and let
the brother of high degree, rejoice in that he is made low: what is the low
bringing of the brother in high degree, but that he becomes servant to him of
low degree; his wealth and revenews, nay all that he enjoyes, he confesses to
be for the service of the poorest Christian. Then has the brother of low
degree occasion enough to rejoice, because the brother of high degree receives
both exaltation, wealth, and preferment, and all that he possesses for his
good. And therefore beloved, do not slightly pass by this necessary duty, for
it will require your serious consideration, and your best ability to perform it.

Secondly, Reas. 2.
the near union and relation between one and another, should be a strong
obligation upon those that are rich especially, to extend their care and estate
to those of low degree, having grace: for they are brethren, and there is a
strong bond that combines them together, having all the same Father to beget
them, they are begotten by the same Word of Truth, they enjoy the same Mother
the Church: Jerusalem that is above is free, and is the Mother of us all; they
are brethren together of the same Family. And therefore (beloved) let men see
and acknowledge this, that whatsoever difference there is of Nation, Mat 15.
yet they are all of the same Household in this respect. You see the Jews
notwithstanding they were distinguished by Tribes, yet they are all nominated
together, the House of Israel. So all the people of God let their distinctions
be never so distant in respect of wealth, of natural birth, of descent or
outward ornament; they are brethren of the same Family notwithstanding.
Beloved, let us look to this Point, we are all brethren, and all of the same
House.

Is it not a shame then when one brother is full, Use.
to suffer another to die with famine and hunger; for one of the same House to
let his brother sinck under reproach and disgrace, not offering his assistance,
or his hand to help him, and prevent his extremity. If this be the task and
duty of Christians, that they should especially look to them of the Household of
Faith; let the instruction stir up our endeavors to the performance of this
duty; and above all the affection we bear to others, let the respect we bear to
the people of God be advanced. Says our Savior Christ, when you come to a
place, ask who is worthy: and I could heartily wish that you (who intend any
work of mercy, out of the estate which the providence of God has enabled you
withal, according to the command of this duty) would propound the same rule
unto your selves, enquiring first who are worthy. Bestow not your charity at
random, as it is the manner of many; such are in want; and they look no
further: but enquire where you may be furnished with better directions, who are
worthy, and who are of the household of Faith, and inhabitants of the Family;
such you are to labor to find, and having found them, look to them.

And the more to incite you to this duty, know that Christ calls for it, and
does continually expect it; He would have you (especially) to have an eye to
his members: I was hungry, and you did not feed me; he calls for it that gave
you your wealth.

Neither does he demand any thing that is not his own, 1 Chronicles 29.
as David confesses in his Provision for the Temple, of thine own have I given
thee: so you may account of whatsoever Christ calls for, if it be to your
estate; it came by his donation, and he gave it you first. If you bestow any
gift on your Children, you think you may reserve that power unto your selves,
to take it again at your pleasure and give it unto whom you list; and shall not
God be allowed that privilege, he that confers many liberal blessings on thee?
Sure thou art much in his debt, and it argues too foul an ingratitude if he
lend thee a Million, and thou refusest to pay him a Mite.

Again, if he call for it, it is not for thy loss that he requires it, but will
give thee better riches, Ask of him, and he will give you the holy Ghost; nay,
the kingdom of Heaven: and those are riches far above the value of any
substance thou enjoyest; Ask of him and he will forgive your sins, 10000.
Talents, whereas hedemands but one penny of thee. I dare say he does greater
things for thee already, then he desires for others.

Again, consider what want you have of him that demands this. He gives you
daily bread, ( give us this day our daily bread;) if you did nor receive daily
bread, and a blessing on it from him, you neither could have bread, nor enjoy
life by it.

Again, mark on what terms he requires it, it is but to belent; and to be lent
upon Usury too. Many covetous earthworms, would be glad to hear of the most
advantage by Interest of money, yet no Usury is lawful except this and this is
spoken (in this phrase) to no other purpose, but to convince the world of sin,
that seek gain to their own loss, and procure their profit a wrong way. He that
gives to the poor, he lends to the Lord upon Usury. Prove 19.17.
It is the confession of the Usurer, that to receive ten in the hundred, is
great gain; and he concludes, that much advantage does acrue to his Coffers,
and accounts it a prosperous profession. Miserable trading, when we exchange
our Souls, and expose them to eternal destruction; for the procurement of a
little wealth of this world, which has not a minutes subsistence. But This is
the trade of advantage, not ten in the hundred, but a hundred for ten, nay a
hundred for one. To enjoy a hundred for one here, and (in the world to come)
eternal life, is advantage far above the comparison of any gain the earth can
afford us.

Further, mark who it is that asks this at thy hands, even he whose favor thou
must one day seek; for whose countenance thou would, give all the world; it
is he before whose seat thou must appear, that calls for this duty of doing
good with thy estate while thou enjoyest it: deny not this small courtesy to
him, lest his favors (being abused) turn into anger, and thou become a
miserable instance of his heavy displeasure. No man desiring the favor of a
Prince or Judge in some business of importance, but would gladly embrace an
occasion of doing him a pleasure, before the trial of his cause, that so the
Judge may take notice of his good will, and gratify his kindness. Beloved, we
have, special use for the favor of Christ, and must all appear before his
Judgment seat. Now we have opportunity sufficient, Christ in his poor members
of the household of faith comes to you, expecting favor at your hands; he wills
you to do good to them, and to him in them; What you bestow on them, he
accounts as a courtesy to himself. In as much as you have done it to these, it
extends unto him; and what is denied them, he takes it as an injury to himself,
Inasmuch as you have not done it to those, you have not done it to him.
Therefore, look how you extend mercy here, to enjoy it hereafter; and as you
expect the favor of the Judge, make way for his kindness, by the performance
of his will, in a seasonable contribution during this life; he that uses not
mercy here, shall find none hereafter; and Judgment shall be merciless (says
the Apostle) to them that show not mency, Nay, look that such mercy be shown as
God expects; you that are wealthy, according to the wealth, and riches you
possess. God will accept of no beggarly present from a wealthy man, neither
will he receive a poor reward from the Coffers of him that has hoarded up much
red clay: where he has sown liberally, he will reap leberally. Look to it, for
Christ looks for it. Would thou reap liberally in that day? then sow
liberally in the mean time. Do according to your several abilities, and
opportunities: and when you meet with advantage to do good, take it cheerfully,
and make use of it willingly; it will much commend thy love to Religion, and
improve thine own good in the conclusion. So much shall serve now for this
point; You see in a word the meaning and intent of the Apostle is this, that
every man according to his estate and ability, while he has time and means,
should bestir himself to do good.

A word for the occasion in Hand.
Funeral Sermons (faith Saint Austin) are not comforts to the dead, but helps
to the living. It is for their sakes that survive, that God has given us these
occasions; and for your sakes that are yet living, that I have chosen this
Text; where you have the rule and the example concurring together.

The life of our deceased Sister, was but a commentary upon this Text; She has
been (amongst those that knew her, in her life) a lively pattern, and example,
of the performance of every duty, that we have now spoken of. It pleased God to
translate her as a choice Plant from a far Country) a Nurcery amongst the
Churches in other parts) into his Vineyard, into his Garden, into his Orchard:
his Church here in England. Since she came hither, and has been planted here;
She became no fruitless, nor dead tree, but according to the blessing promised
to that man which meditates in the law of God, Psalm: 1.
day and night: She brought forth fruit, and had a green lease among us. She
brought forth abundance of good fruit, and is laid in the earth with the green
lease of a good name, and flourishes now, as a good example to those that
live, even being dead.

After, it pleased God when she came to England, to reveal to her, the way of
salvation more fully then she knew before, to make her understand more clearly
of the power of godliness, and what the practice of Christianity meant, which
she before had received only in the Theory, in forms of doctrines, but not so
heartily, and serously looking into them. She grew very covetous of good
company, and (the benefit that comes by that) good conference and example.

She made great advantage of her time, in the large sense of doing good. She
took her opportunities to do good to her self and her soul, by the obtaining of
the knowledge of God in Christ; and yet nevertheless, even toward her latter
end (not being persuaded that she had done enough that way) she promised to act
Mary's part more lively, if God would spare her longer time on earth, and
exceed her former virtues, by her latter endeavors, and to refrain from
Martha's troubles.

Those opportunities she embraced in health (by the providence and goodness of
God) were managed by her, with such care and respect, that success followed
their conclusions with much advantage. She increased in love (that radical
grace) as the sap does increase in the root, extending that love to Christ and
to the servants of God: ever delighting in their company; prizing them at a
high rate, as the only excellent ones, and some very poor and weak Christians;
naming them according to the phrase of our Savior, worthy persons; and such a
one was a worthy man, or a worthy woman, being the terms wherewith she
expressed her honorable esteem of those that seared the Lord.

Besides, in the whole course of her life she exercised the Scriptures, I have
seen notes of her own gathering out of the Scripture: wherein it seemed she
desired to become a profitable reader, in making use of such particular places
as struck against such corruptions, which she was more especially desirous to
take notice of: and such directions to duties, and encouragements by promise
were likewise inserted therein, that (I am persuaded) I cannot do better then
to commend this duty to the practice of all the servants of God, that when they
come to peruse the Scriptures, they would furnish themselves with pen and ink,
and then upon all occasions they may be noting down somewhat for their own
advantage: that they may have a manual, or little book of observations, for
their guide and direction in the course of their lives.

She was a hearty hater of sin, and of all evil, and the appearance thereof,
being careful to do good so far as she was convinced in any thing to her
revealed, and willing to receive instructions, and to be informed in those
things that were not revealed. Those that knew her may well witness with me,
that she never neglected the smallest occasion conducing to the improvement of
her soul in the ways of goodness.

But for the second, the main intent of this Text, and the reason for which I
took it, in this particular duty, I may resolve you, as it is said of the
virtuous woman (and may speak truly, Prove. 3.11.
in the simplicity of an honest heart) Many daughters have done excellently,
but thou surmountest them all. I never knew any woman in my life more active
and ready to do the works of charity: according as opportunity and her ability
made way for the same. Not only of her own, wherein she took her Husbands
consent with her; But where she proved unable of her self to supply the
necessities of others: her labors and endeavors to incite, and stir up
others, made full satisfaction in the room of her benevolence, and she became
an industrious Christian in that kind. That I have observed, herein she was
ever large and boundless: sowing her seed in the morning, and her hands ceased
not in the evening: she gave a portion to seven, and also to eight: and as any
came in her way that were in extreme necessity, she became a present helper of
every of them, according to their several necessities.

She was very tender hearted, and that which she bestowed to relieve others;
was done in compassion of heart toward those that endured misery. But as she
saw any of the household of Faith, and the servants of God which she took notice
of by some infallible sign: she did not only relieve them with her Purse, but
receive them into her heart, which was still open and enlarged to give them
entertainment. She was not straightened in her bowels toward them, but was large
hearted, and large handed, full of Alms, when that might help; and when it
could not, she provoked others to exercise the like charity. Besides, she had
other ways to succor them, in speaking for them, and stirring up others to
speak for them, when words might avail them and do them good; relieving them
with money, and provoking others thereunto, when such contributions were
needful; and therein she would not let slip the least opportunity, but would
take the advantage of great and solemn meetings; seasoning those feasts which
she frequented with some acts of mercy before they parted, that the company and
society she conversed with, might savor of this sweetness of mercy as a
precious ointment, and become good examples unto others; and improve the gifts
and abilites which God had given them to the same purpose.

She was not only mindful of those at home, but her goodness extended to the
Saints abroad. And not in respect of Nature only, because they were come into
the Country where she was born, (I speak now of those that live in distress
and exile, of the Palatinate, and Germany,) but in respect of Grace. She was
wondrous industrious and laborious, to procure all the means that might be to
send over to help them, and even refreshed the bowels of the Saints; that I may
truly say, the loins of the poor, blessed God for her in many places. In what
place has she lived, and has not left a savor behind her? nay, (almost) in
what company has she conversed, but this particular duty has been as a
precious ointment to sweeten the conversations of all that were about her; and
to work in their minds a virtuous intention and propenseness to this duty?
Beloved, here you have her in her carriage and example.

What she was in her behavior toward her Husband, and her Children, I need
not speak, there are enough can witness it; she carried her self as became a
Wife to him, and a helper of the servants of God with prayers and desires, and
often provocations and incitings that way. But for her Children, she seemed to
undergo a second travail with them, till Christ were formed in them; being
full of earnest desires and petitions for the working of Grace, where it was
not begun, and for the persecting thereof, where it was newly entered. She
rejoiced exceedingly in any expression of good, and more for that of Grace,
then any other inclination or respect.

Beloved, this was obvious and common to all, and any man might take special
notice thereof daily, and observe it constantly. In her servants, as there
appeared the more grace in any; so much the more respect she extended toward
them. In the poor, as she perceived the more grace in any; the more reliese
they received from her, etc. I say nothing what (in all this) she suffered;
those that were acquainted with her disease, know what pains she under-went in
respect of her body, and with what patience she submitted to the hand of God in
all things; And many know the wrong she endured from the World, for her desire
and care to do good when she obtained opportunity. Some thought her over-bold,
some too busy; others thought her proud and vainglorious, because of her
often frequenting of company, and speaking openly, for the provoking of others
to the exercise of goodness. The Lord smite their hearts that are guilty of
mis-judging; that which we are to suppose in respect of her forward disposition
is this. She was naturally of a free spirit, which being sanctified with Grace,
and sharpened with love and zeal for the glory of God; made her the more
resolute and familiar in frequenting good company; not to magnisie her self by
their society, but that her continual conversation with them, might give her
the better occasion to incite and stir them to goodness. Let those that are
guilty of misprision, leave to censure her Virtues, and convert them into an
example for themselves to walk in, if they do not, the neglect will load their
souls with more woe for such contempt, then she has received joy for her
labor.

What concerned her in her sickness, briefly I have not much to say; in that
they which were about her daily, know more then I can relate: She did not only
express a satisfaction and assurance of heart, that her reconciliation was made
with God in Christ: but besides that, a willingness and desire to be dissolved,
(for that reason) that she might be with Christ. A Minister that was with her,
asking how she that had a Husband and Children, enjoying an estate and many
other comforts, could be willing to forgo so many blessings, and exchange them
all for death? She from that inward sense and persuasion of Gods love to her in
Christ, concluded; my Husband is dear, and my Children are dear to me, but
Christ is dearer. Therefore I am willing to forgo Husband and Children, and all
the contents you can number in this life, that I might live with Christ, to
partake of greater felicity then this world can afford me.

And now the Lord Jesus has received her into his own protection, and
satisfied her expectation with the performance of his love.

But wherefore have we spoken all this? what, that we might add any praise unto
the dead? no: But to quicken those that are living, and incite them to the like
duty. Some may think it impossible there should be such activeness in doing of
good; and such unwearedness in performing of the acts of mercy, and where (say
they) shall we find such an example? you have it before your eyes; and know
that examples will rise in judgment against you, and condemn you, as well as
precepts: If you follow them not, while they invite you. The Text says; Do
good to all, especially to the household of faith. And here is an example before
our eyes, of one who took her time, and opportunity to do good to all,
especially to them of the household of Faith. Go thou, and do likewise.

DEATH PREVENTED: OR, MORTALITY CHANGED.
SERMON XL.
JOB 14.14. All the days of my appointed time will I wait to my change come.


THis Book of Job comprehends the History of a good man, and of his many
trials. Though goodness deliver from Hell, yet it priviledgeth not from
temptatious, or crosses; yea, the more eminent Holiness is, many times the more
it is exposed to sharp and manifold assaults.

Job is set upon on all sides, he found the Devil a fore enemy, and his great
estate a sudden shipwreck; his Children in a moment crushed to pieces. He had
but three Points of Land to look at in this troublesome sea, and every one of
them seemed rather to augment, than to lessen the storm. His Wife, whose breath
should have sweetened and eased his grief, was an impatient vexation. His
friends, whose counsels and compassions should have been an easy harbor, and
tender relief, they became his bitter and censorious judges. Yea, his God, who
by his own testimony he served, and feared with singular uprightness; and whose
bowels are ever tender and compassionate to such, and upon whose gracious
acceptance he thought to quiet and anchor his troubled spirit; yet anon he
seemed not only a stranger, but an enemy; and this went deep, that even Mercy
it self seemed cruel, and Kindness so unkind and harsh.

But what was his behavior under all these? For the general, sweet and
heavenly; For some particulars, sad and weak; when says did work he was above
all his storms. In the deepest calamity, says can settle and compose the soul,
and fill it with the sweetest comforts. When sense and nature did work, then he
was much impatient, and the wind had the better over him: In the one be shows
himself a Christian, In the other a man: In the one Job is beyond himself, in
the other below himself. According to the time and manner of these several
workings, he is like or unlike himself. Thus it is with the best, whose outward
change does not more vary; but their inward carriage does as much change. At
length Job after many disputes with his friends, and conflicts with himself,
concenterates his thoughts in two main Points.

1. One was still to trust in God, let him be what he will, and let him do what
he will, though he should continue his present trials, yea and exceed them;
though he should kill me, yet says he (Chap. 13.15.) though he stay me, I will
trust in him, and there he disposes of his soul.

2. Another was to prepare for death; all the days of my appointed time I will
wait till my change come, and there he disposes of his body. Many arguments he
lays down in this Chapter which did occasion him to these thoughts and
resolutions.

The first is the brevity of man's life: Verse. 1, 2. Man that is born of a Woman
is of few days, he comes forth like a Flower, and is cut down; he flees also
as a shadow, and continues not; He says not years, nor months, nor weeks,
but days, and these days not many but few, and these few days, not long, but
short, as quickly set as the shadow, as quickly cropped as the flower.

Secondly, the misery of that short life, in the same place, and full of
trouble; as if every Article of life were replenished with sorrow, even as
every vein of the body is with blood: this his own experience could tell him.

Thirdly, the certainty of Death, The Sun has his appointed race, which in the
Winter is short, in the Summer long, but in both it has a certain time of
setting; so the race of man's life, to some it may be shorter, to some longer,
but the night will come, and all must be closed up in Death, verse. 5. His days
are determined, the number of them, they are with thee, thou have appointed his
bounds which be cannot pass; and if so, then high time for Job to think of it,
and prepare for it.

Death began in a manner to seize on him already in several parts; in his feet,
for his wealth was gone; in his loins, having lost his children; in his heart,
his friends leaving him; in his bosom, for his wife was a discomforter; nay,
in his very life it self, so much as was wrapped up in the outward part of his
body, for that was diseased; in his speech and spirits, they grow hoarse and
faint, all these were the harbingers of a future dissolution. Well therefore
might Job conclude, ever I must not live, and long I cannot live; therefore
though in much misery, and in had days. I will think of Death, and fit my self
for a good end, and apply my self seriously, and wisely for a good work; All
the days of my appointed time will I wait till my change come.

Which words contain in them two parts.

Parts of the Text.
First, his future dissolution, which he calls a change, and a change that is
coming upon him, as if he had been the next man, till my change come.

Secondly, his present disposition, I will wait, he thinks of death, before
death, and prepares to die, while yet he lives. Neither was this a death pang,
a sit, a humor which began quickly, and expired suddenly. Nay, he will make it
a serious business, as if this should be his every days work; All the days of
my appointed time will I wait. Some read it of my appointed warfare, and others
of my appointed labor; they all intimate that he means by his appointed time,
his appointed life; the lease or term of breathing, which God had allotted,
allowed, and decreed.

There are two propositions which naturally issue from the words, and
comprehend the juice and marrow of the Text.

First, that there is a change, which will befall the sons of men.

Secondly, we should always wait till it come; I begin with the first; that,
There is a change which will befall the sons of men. Doct. 1. A change will
befall all the sons of men.


Be we poor, or be we rich; be we noble, or be we ignoble; be we prosperous, or
be we afflicted; be we strong, or be we weak; be we old, or be we young; be we
good, or be we bad; be we male, or be we female; whatsoever our natures be,
whatsoever our parrs be, whatsoever our places be, whatsoever our ages be,
whatsoever our courses be, whatsoever our ways be; how fair and how durable
our estates may appear, yet at length there is a change which will befall us.
That which Jacob spoke in a pathetical way, Joseph is not, and Simeon is not;
may truly be said of all the sons of men; once they were, now they are not:
though once we reckoned them upon our account, yet at length they are shut out,
and stand aside as ciphers.

But that you may the better understand what change it is that is here meant,
you are to know, that there is a fourfold change.

First, a change of the condition, this I call a temporal change, wherein some,
or more, or all, of our outward comforts, are shrivelled, and seared up by some
present misery. When poverty breaks in upon us, as the hunter does upon his
game; and causes our riches as so many birds (to which Solomon compares them,)
to take to themselves wings and fly away. When sickness stays our health in
the bed, and imprisoneth us to the chamber. When our friends glide away from
us, like a river through their Apostasy, or start aside like a broken bow
through their falsehood or treachery. When the near relation of Husband and
Wife. Parents and Children is cut asunder, and the many sad tears for their
loss, imbitter all our former comforts. But this is not the change intended in
the Text.

Secondly, there is a change of the Body, and this I call a corporal change,
for even these vild bodies of ours shall be changed. Look as the spring is a
refreshing change to the season of the year, so shall the Resurrection be an
exceeding change to our bodies; or as the morning is a change to the night, so
at the Resurrection shall our bodies awake, and their corruption shall put on
incorruption; neither is this the change which Job here intends immediately,
though some expound his aim to be at this, from whom I cannot absolutely
dissent, yet I think they hit not the right scope.

Thirdly, there is a change of the Soul, that I call a Spiritual change,
wrought in the soul by the spirit of God: nothing makes in this life such a
change as true grace. We all with open face, beholding as in a glass the glory
of the Lord, are changed into the same image from glory to glory, even as by
the spirit of the Lord, 2 Cor. 3.18. This change is like the turning of a
disordered instrument, or like the refining of corrupt metal, or like the
clearing of the dark air; or like the quickening of a dead Lazarus; but neither
is this change that the text intends.

Fourthly, there is a change of the life, and this I call a mortal change, we
shall all be changed, faith the Apostle, 1 Cor. 15.5. life has the first
course, but death will have the second. As in a Comedy several persons, have
several parts to act, which when they have dispatched; they all draw off of the
stage; so though in life we all present our selves on the stage of this world,
and act several Scenes and parts, yet at length we must all retire and pass
away through one and the same door of mortality. This is the change which Job
speaks of, to wit, a change of this life by Death.

Here then are two things to be demonstrated, and proved, for the making good
of the point in hand, viz. 1. That death is a change. 2. That this change of
death will befall all the sons of men.

First, Death a change, and why so termed.
that Death is a change, not an anihilation. A change is a different, and a
diverse order, or manner of being. Anihilation is one thing, and mutation is
another thing: there the thing cease utterly to be; here the thing only
cease to be as once it was; so it is with Death, it does not reduce us to
nothing, but alter our former something, it changes our manner, or order of
being, not our being absolute^y.

Now observe, Death is a change in five respects;

First, it changes that near union of the Soul and the body, and makes of one
two severals; they that were as the hands mutually clasped, or as two persons
conjugally tied together, when Death comes it plucks them asunder, and divides
one from the other, as far as heaven is from the earth.

Secondly, it changes our actions or work. Whiles life remained here in our
bodies, while our day lasted, we might have sed the hungry, clothed the naked,
visited the sick, relieved the distressed, frequented the ordinances, bewailed
our sins; but when death once enters, the night is come, in which no man can
work, thou art then turned, changed into an insensible, rotten, and loathsome
carcass.

Thirdly, it changes our country. Whiles we live here, we are as children put
abroad to school in a strange place; hence it is we are so often in the
Scripture called Pilgrims and strangers. This earth, this lower world is not
the proper home of the Soul. But when Death comes we change our country, we go
home to our own place, to our own City; the wicked shall go to their own place,
as it is said of Judas; and the godly to their own Mountain, to their own
Kingdom.

Fourthly, it changes our company. In this life we converse with sinful men,
empty creatures, infinite miseries, innumerable conflicts; but when Death
comes, all this shall be changed, we shall go to our God, and Father, to our
Christ and Savior, and to the innumerable company of blessed Angels and
Saints, and the spirits of just men made perfect.

Fifthly, it changes our outward condition. When Death comes thou shall never
see the wedge of gold again, thou shall never find thy delights in sin any
more, all the excellency of the creature, and the contentments of them, and the
sensual rejoicing in them, shall go out with life: Death shall shut and close
them up in an eternal night, which shall never rise to another day. So much for
the first thing, that Death is a change.

I come now to speak briefly of the second, The change by death must befall all
men.
that this change of Death will besal all the sons of men, Psalm. 89.48. What
man is he that lives, and shall not see death, shall be delive^ his soul from
the hand of the grave? We love to see most things, the eye is never satisfied
with seeing, and yet many things there are which we shall never see. Every man
cannot see that which one man does, but there is one thing which every man
shall see, he must see death. There are many enemies from whom we can deliver
our selves, and many more from whom we may be delivered; but yet there is one
enemy from which we cannot desend our selves, nor be defended by others, he
will be too strong for every man; let him strive, repine, order his diet,
entreat, do what he will or can; No (faith the Psalmist) none shall deliver his
soul from the hand of the grave. And he puts a Selah, a note of observation at
the end of the verse.

That all the sons of men are subject to this change by death, will appear to
you by these familiar Arguments. The

First may be taken from the quality of our lives, Reason 1.
which is sweetly set out in the Scripture under the terms of changeable
things, all which point out unto us the certainty of death; Sometime our life
is compared to a show, Psalm. 39.6. Surely every man walks in a vain show. In
a show you know there is some devise or other opened, carried awhile about,
but at length it is shut up; so it is with our lives. Sometime again it is
compared to a shade or a shadow, Job 8.9. Our days upon earth are a shadow; a
shadow is but an imitation of a substance, a kind of nimble picture which is
still going and coming, and will set at last, perhaps it is suddenly ecclipsed,
so is our life. Sometimes again it is compared to a vapor, James 4.14. What is
your life, it is even a vapor that vanishes away. like a poor cloud,
sometimes looking white, sometimes black; sometimes quiet and settled,
sometimes again tossed up and down with every wind, and at last consumed and
brought to nothing, so it is with our lives. Sometimes also compared to a Tale,
Psalm. 90.9. We spend our years as a tale: hat is told, a mere discourse of this
thing, and that thing, and indeed but a very parenthesis of a more tedious
discourse, and many times it is broken off in the very telling, so it is with
our lives. Sometime again, it is as grass, as in Isa. 46. The voice said cry
aloud; what shall I cry, all flesh is grass, and the goodliness thereof as the
flower of the grass. And verse 7. The grass withers, and the flower fades,
because the Spirit of the Lord blows upon it. And Job in this chapter calls
it a Flower, He comes forth (faith he) like a flower, and is cut down. A
flower is a sweet thing, but of an earthly breed, sed with showers, at its
best, when it is in all its glory, it is but to day, and to morrow, it
withers, and is fit for nothing but the Oven; so it is with our lives.

Many expressions of the like nature might be added, the Scripture is plentiful
in these comparisons, comparing our life to the Spiders web, to a Weavers
shuttle, to the breath of a candle, to a pilgrimage, to a journey, to the days
of an hireling, etc. all of them things of a changeable and variable nature.

The second argument may be taken from the quality of our Natures, Reason 2.
and there in there are two things considerable, both which imply a certainty
of death.

First, our composition, and matter whereof we are made, we are reared out of a
mouldering and wasting principle, our bodies are therefore styled an earthly
house, 2 Cor. 5.1. A house though of Iron will in time be cankered; but a house
of earth, as it is most impotent against assaults, so it is of its own nature
most apt, and subject to dissolution. And in this respect also they are termed
Tabernacles. Now a Tabernacle you know is a thing of no perpetuity, made only
to be soon set up, and that in a man's passage; and then as soon taken down
again.

Secondly, beside this there is in our nature, sin and corruption, and this is
it that does put us to the sword, and cause this deadly change: this tears our
lives with a continual consumption. The tree breeds the worm, which will
destroy the life of the tree; we in Adam gave leave to sin, and now it is that
sin gives leave to death; In the day that thou shall eat there of, thou shall
surely die, Genesis 2.17. and Romans 5.12. By one man sin entered into the world, and
death by sin, and so death passed over all men, in that all have sinned. The
shadow does not so nearly attend the body of man as Death does the body of sin.
And Romans 6.23. the very wages of sin is death. God should do that man wrong
that has hired out his soul all his days to sin, if he did not at night pay
him with the wages of death.

The third Argument may be drawn from the certainty of the Resurrection, Reas.
3.
we all believe the resurrection of our bodies, and therefore we must needs
conclude a change of our bodies, for what is the Resurrection but life from
death, for the dead to hear the voice of Christ and live? What is it but a
breathing in of the soul again, the lighting of the candle again? the body
could never be raised if it were not first changed; Thou fool, faith Saint
Paul, 1 Cor. 15. that which thou sowest is not quickened, except it die.

The fourth Argument is from the infalibility of Gods decree, Reason 4.
it is appointed unto men once to die, and after death to come to Judgment,
Heb. 9.27. Thou may sooner expect, that the course of the heavens shall be
altered, and the Center of the earth be dislocated, then that the purpose of
God concerning man's mortality should be reversed; any, that may be, for heaven
and earth shall pass away, but this shall never be, not one jot of the word of
God shall fall to the ground. God has purposed it; and none shall dissanul it;
nay, he has established his purpose with a word of confirmation, Genesis 2. in
the day thou eatest therefore thou shall [ surely] die. As if he should have
said, Do not deceive thy self, but build upon it, I have spoken it, and will
not alter the thing that is gone out of my mouth; as sure as thou live, if
thou eatest, thou shall die.

Thus you see the first assertion cleared unto you, I will address my self now
to the second, of which brieffy too, and then make Application of them both
together. As there is a certainty of our change, Doctr. 2.
so we should always wait till it does come.

There are two things which I will here inquire of, for the fuller illustration
of this point.

First, what this continual waiting may import.

Secondly, why there should be such a constant waiting for the day of our
mortal change.

First, 1 What it is to wait for death.
this continual waiting mainly imports two things; one a certain axpectation of
death: for waiting is an act of Hope expecting something. If we do hope for
that we see not, then do we with patience wait for it, says the Apostle. Romans
8.15. a man is then said to wait for death, when he is looking for it at every
turn, as a Steward waits for his Master when he continually expects his return,
when upon every voice he hears, or upon every knock at the door, he says, oh
my Master is come, this is he that knocks. So a man is said to wait for death,
when in every action of his life, in every motion of his estate, in every
passage of his courses, says; well I must die, when though his bones are full
of marrow, yet I must die; when though riches come in like a flood, yet I must
die; when changes appear upon himself, or others, yet I must die, I have no
abiding here; I am but a sojourner, and a stranger, as all my fathers were. I
must not enjoy my Wife for ever, Children for ever, Friends for ever, Lands for
ever, these comforts for ever, my life for ever, it is but a lease which may
soon expire; I am but a steward, and I must be called to an account, such a one
is gone before, and I must follow after; the writ of Habeas Corpus has seized
on him. and for ought I know the next may be for me, so when death comes, I am
ready to answer it as Abraham did his Son Isaac, here I am; it comes not upon
me as a thief in the night, when I am asleep and think not of him; but as
Jonathans arrow to David, who stayed in the field and expected when it should
be shot, and then he rose up and embraced him: Ye brethren (faith Paul in 1
These. 5.4.) are not in darkness, that that day should overtake you as a theif,
ye are all the children of the light, therefore let us not sleep as do others,
but let us watch and be sober. This is the first thing that waiting imports.
Another thing it imports, is a serious preparation for the day of our change;
for it is not a naked expectation of a change, arising from the certainty of
death; but it is also a religious preparation, improving the intrim of time for
the best advantage for a man's soul before the day of change does come, which is
here employed in waiting. Solomon calls it a remembering, Eccles. 12.1. Remember
thy Creator in the days of thy youth, whiles the evil days come not, and the
years draw nigh, when thou shall say, I have no pleasure in them: what is this
remembering of the Creator? but a care to know him, a fear to offend him, a
study to obey him: and when is that to be done? Now, now remember: there must
be a present acting of this; Moses calls it a numbering of our days, Psalm.
90.12. and more then that, such a numbering as is joined with an applying of our
hearts to wisdom: and the reason is, because wisdom it directs to the
choice of such particular actions and works, as tend to happiness, so should a
man (after his serious consideration of death) apply himself to such ways and
such actions, by which he may comfortably close up his life with death; it is a
great point of wisdom to suit actions with their ends, to sit and square the
wood before we build the house, to learn and discipline a troop before they go
to battle; to rig and trim, and furnish the ship, before we launch to sea; this
is preparation indeed.

Now this preparation for death consists in two things. Wherein the preparation
for death consists.
First, in an undoing of that which unsits us to die: Brethren, he who is not
fit to live, he is not yet fit to die, and that which ever masters the life,
will be of greatest force in death. The Father spoke it boldly on good grounds,
I am not ashamed to live, nor afraid to die: now that which unfits a man to die
is sin, 1 In freeing our selves from sin ^u our lifetime.
it makes him find a bitter enemy of death. Oh when this Kng of terrors shall
present himself by thy bed side with his arrows in his hands, I mean thy sins;
he will wound thee with infinite amazement and horror; the sting of death is
sin, faith the Apostle, 1 Cor. 15. Thou do not prepare thy self for death, if
thou do not undo thy sins which thou have done in thy life: the which
consists.

First, How that is done.
in a narrow search of thy sinfulness, both of nature, and practice.

Secondly, in a secret humbling of thy soul for them.

Thirdly, in an unfeigned repentance and forsaking of them.

Fourthly, in a constant imploring and obtaining of mercy for them, in the
blood of Christ. If thy soul does give sin its discharge now, death shall give
thy soul a discharge hereafter.

Secondly, 2 In having our persons qualified.
in the qualifying our persons for the conquest of death; there are three
things by which we shall be able cheerfully to meet, and assuredly to conquer
death.

First by having interest in the Lord Jesus, How that is done.
the sting of death is sin, and the strength of sin is the Law; but thanks be
to God who has given us victory through our Lord Jesus Christ. If thou have
gotten Christ into thy arms by faith, thou carriest thy peace, strength, and
advantage both through life and death. For we are love then conquerors through
him that loved us, says the Apostle, Romans 8.37. And to me to live is Christ,
and to die is gain, faith the same Apostle, Phil. 11 21. If thou have a good
Christ, thou may be consident of a good death.

Secondly, renewedness of our nature. What Saint John spoke of he Martyes (as
some conjecture) Blessed and happy is he that has part in the first (...), on
such the second death has no power; that say I of a person renewed by the
sanctifying quality of Gods Spirit; I happy is he, he shall have power even
over the first death. The Spirit and the Bride says come, if a man has gotten
the heavenly Spirit which beautifies the soul with the ornaments of Grace, as
the Bride is with her ornaments; he is a fitted person, he may well say to
Death come, and to Christ, come Lord Jesus, come quickly.

Thirdly, uprightness of conversation, Righteousness delivers form death, says
Solomon, and the righteous has hope in his death; if a man's work be Christ's
service, if he have a heart inclined to keep a good conscience in all things,
to keep himself exact to the rule, and to walk with God; Blessed is that
servant, which his Master when be comes shall find so doing: that man that
has looked to Gods Word to guide his life, may confidently look up to Gods
mercy, to comfort him in death. Remember O Lord, (says Hezekiah, Isa. 39.) how
I have walked before thee intru^h, and with a perfect beart.

Now all this does the waiting for our change import in the Text, to wit, a
serious expectation of it; Why we must wait and be prepared for death.
first by undoing those sins of ours, which else for eyer will undo us, and by
interesting our persons into Christ, from whom we must likewise receive the
Spirit to change our hearts, and uprightness to form a new our conversation.
But then you will say, Why must there be such a waiting for this ^ these grave
cloths are too sad for the freshness of our life, and would you have us be like
the madman in the Gospel, who lived among the Sepulchers? Nay, I beseech you
let us consider, and settle our thoughts a little, and you shall be stayed with
reason; there are many strong Arguments and reasons why we should thus wait,
both by expectation (...) preparation.

First, Reas. 1.
it is the main errand of our life; God did not send us into the world to sin,
and to adorn our selves with the creature, but to bring him some honor, and
then to die: the factor is not employed to take his pleasure abroad, but to do
his Masters work, and then to return home. Tortullien confesses he was a great
finner, and therefore born to repentance; therefore does God give us life, and
the Master allows the servant a candle to work by, that we may repent of our
sins, and get our hold in Christ, and work out our salvation, and do the great
business of believing, to be good and to do good, and so by Death to go up to
heaven.

Secondly, Reas. 2.
death is but once, and that needs to be well done which can be but once done;
if there might be another space after death, a second edition to correct the
faults and escapes of the former, then a present and speedy preparation were
not altogether so necessary; but faith the Apostle, It is appointed for all men
[ once] to die, and after death to come to Judgment, Heb. 9.27. no more but
once. We usually shadow out Death with an hourglass; A fit emblem, but that
when an hourglass is run out, it may be turned again; but this once out, can
be set up no more, thou shall never live to amend thy errors in dying; O then
how needful is it beforehand to prepare for Death!

Thirdly, Reas. 3.
when death has done with thee, then God will begin with thee; thou must once
die, and after this come to judgment, Heb. 9.27. To judgment, what is that?
thou must be presented before the holy, and just, and great God, who is the
Judge of the quick and the dead, and with all that thou art, and with all that
thou have done, there must appear then before him all the courses of thy life;
all the bent of thy affections, all the secrets of thy heart shall then be
pulled in pieces, and opened, and all thy works, and all thy words shall be
exhibited, scanned, and surveyed, and that with severity and righteousness; how
say you then, is it not fit to be preparing for Death, to sit thy soul, to
reform thy heart and life? will thou be presented before Gods severe
Judgment Seat with Usury in thy bags, with bribes and oppression in thy hands,
with a scum of holiness in thy mind, with uncleanness in thy members, with
drnnkenness in thy mouth, with swearing in thy tongue? O Lord, I tremble to
think of it.

Fourthly, Reason 4.
the soul when it is once gone by Death, can never be recovered any more, the
tree may be cut, and that may grow again, the ship may be lost, and the wealth
labored up again, but if the glass be broken in pieces, it cannot be made
whole again; the soul of man is but one, and the loss of that one, is the loss
of it for ever; when death has closed up thy eyes, thou shall never have
opportunity to pray more, to weep more, to humble thy self more, to fast more.
Never any Prophet or Apostle shall come unto thee in the name of God more;
after death all the Ordinances cease unto thee for ever, and all the space of
returning shall cease unto thee for ever; thou shall not lie a few years in
flames of wrath, and then get leave to come out and take a better course; O no,
if once there, then for ever there; this life is the time of mercy and space of
repentance, but when Death shall deliver thee up to be judged by the Lord, thou
must stand for ever to his sentence; therefore as Christ spoke, Agree with
thine adversary while thou art in the way, lest the Judge deliver thee to the
officer, and he cast thee into prison; I tell thee thou shall not depart
thence, till thou have paid the last mite, Luke. 12.58. And get oil into your
lamps before the door be shut.

Fifthly, consider it will be as much as thou can do, to do the work of
Death, when Death does come; therefore prepare and get all thy other work done
before.

For, my Beloved, consider three things;

First, Conscience usually is most active at the time of death; a man that
could withstand, and silence it in his life, yet when he comes to die, he shall
here his voice, and perhaps not be able to stand under the bitter indictments,
and manifold accusations of it; then it will spread the book of thy life before
thee, and then, and there thou shall see thy sins as ghastly presented, as if
they were so many wounds newly made.

Secondly, thy patience will be tried with variety of pain, interruption of
sleep, every place will be a thorn to thee, and every action a burden.

Thirdly, thy faith may be tried to the utmost, if thou look to thy Wise,
her tears may trouble thee; if to thy Children, their cries may perplex thee;
if to thy friends, they may be discomforters to thee; and will Satan let the
alone all this while, will he let him lie down in comfort, who would not scarce
let him live an hour in peace? oh what a victory would it be, if he could at
the last make thee cast away thy considence! it is true the cannot attain it,
but he may desperately attempt it. Why brethren, who knows the power of these
sharp temptations which may then beset him? Verily, all the holiness which we
have attained already, all the duties we have performed already; we may then
look on them with tears, and cry out, O why no sooner? why no better? why no
more? then all the strength of thy faith will be little enough to support thee.

Will there then be a change befall even all the sons of men. Use 1.
Then (to make some Use and Application of what has been said to our selves.)
First, build no Tabernacles here; We have here no abiding City. And, brethren,
(says the Apostle) 1. Cor. 7.29, 30, 31. The time is short, it remains that
they that have wives, be as if they had none; and they that weep, as though
they wept not; and they that rejoice, as though they rejoiced not, etc. Why
this thirst for riches? there will be a change; why this unwearied seeking
after the things of this life, as if thy soul were to go into a barn, or a bag,
and there tumble it self for ever? Thou fool, this night may thy soul be taken
away, and whose possessions shall then thy careful and only gettings be? the
glass will be broken, and all the wine will fly abroad: though thou have with
much eagerness grasped the world in this life, yet in death thy hands must open
^emselves, and let it go; thou must not hold the world above thy life, nor thy
life beyond the day of death; no we cannot always have that which we desire, we
must certainly part with what we most esteem of.

Secondly, Use 2.
what comfort is this to a good soul! If we had hope only in this life (faith
Saint Paul) we of all men are most miserable, 1 Cor. 15. Death is a happy
change to a holy person.

First, it is a change which shall put a period to all his changes in this
life: his outward condition, how often does it change? sometime by joy and
sorrow, sometime by comfort and misery, by health and sickness, by abundance
and want, but when Death comes, all sorrow shall fly away for ever; thou shall
never be more troubled with a sick body, with a sad estate, with common losses;
but the change of a temporal life, shall set thee in a full and settled
possession of an heavenly. His inward condition how often does it change?
sometime free, anon distressed; now a sweet view of heaven, anon darkened with
fear; now rejoicing in Christ, anon buffeted with Satan; now blessing God for
grace, anon distracted with the insolent workings of remaining corruptions: but
when death comes, then comes a change of all this, it will release thee for
ever of sin and Satan; after death sin shall be a burden no more, and Satan
shall be a tempter no longer, but thou shall be as happy as thou can desire,
and shall enjoy thy God, and thy Christ, without fear of trouble, in glory, in
felicity, in eternity; all the cruel insolences of tyrants, shall come short
of thy soul, thou shall be above their malice, and beyond thy self.

Secondly, Use 2.
it is a change, and no worse then a change, just as Joseph changed his
garments, and went into Pharaoh; so thou shall put off thy body, and go into
glory; put off thy mortality, and go into immortality.

Oh what terror to wicked men! Use 3.
a day of change will befall them! Why did thou say Oh David there is no bands
in their death, and they are not in changes like other men? Verily I should
have checked thee, had thou not recanted it presently thy self. Psalm.
73.4,17,18,19. and reported it to us, that they are set in slippery places, and
are brought into desolation, and cast down into destruction in a moment, and
utterly consumed with terror; Good Lord, what a change is that to them they
judged with insolent and unrighteous judgment the Children of God now, but
death will change this; the unjust steward shall be called to a an account, and
he that beat his fellow servant, shall be eternally judged by a righteous God,
and their honor shall sinck in the dust, neither shall their riches deliver
them from wrath, but they shall see him whom they have peirced and persecuted,
and shall not be able to escape his presence. A dismal thing will this be, that
a man shall have his honor die, and the great God put disgrace upon him; a
dismal change indeed, when a man shall see all his power changed into
impotency, his pleasures into torment, and wrath put upon his soul; when God
shall separate thee from his presence, thou shall not have a drop of ease, nor
any friend to assist thee, nor any hope of comfort, thou shall be stripped of
them all, and in a monent shall a change of all this be. O consider this (if
there be any here) that forget God, least he tear you in pieces and there be
none to help; remember and consider your latter end, and apply your hearts to
wisdom.

Last of all, Use 4.
shall there be a change that shall befall every son of man? then, Oh that this
people were wise as Moses faith, that they would remember their latter end, all
the days of our appointed time, to wait till our change come. What do you
think of servants to whom you had committed servile employments till you came
home; and if when you come home they were absent, and you found one in the
street drunk, another in a chamber with a strumpet, how would you take this?
Brethren think upon it; we are Gods servants, or should be; two things are
imposed upon us, one to honor God, another to save our own souls: if he find
us doing the works of the Devil, and the flesh, and find us in the works of the
world, how will he take this? Come faith God, I have lent you a life thus many
years, I told you what you should be, and what you should do, and what have you
been doing all this life? what have your works been? what courses have you
taken? are these the fraits of your ways, to have a life run over with
ignorance, with profaneness, etc. Alus! when a man at that time shall have
nothing to say but, Lo^d, I have lived in such a sin all my days, I have
fulfilled my own desires; thou have for me in this World, and I have labored
to get a great estate all my days: Another may say, I have spent my time in
(...) society, etc. What will God say to these men? are these the endings of
thy life, the fruits of thy opportunities? where is the repentante I called for
at thy hands? where is that godly sorrow that I called for, for the sins of thy
life? did not I send thee into the world for this end, to get Grace, to get
Faith, to make up thy accounts with me thy God, and have thou no regand to it?
Well thou have been foolish, inconsiderate for the time that is past; yet now
understand that a day of change will besal thee. O let us be persuaded, I
beseech you be persuaded to it, in this our day, to know the things that
concern our peace, whilst it is called to day, not to hearden our hearts;
whilst it is called to day not to deser our repentance, thou art not assured
of any more time then present; Death may meet with thee as thou sit in thy
feat, as thou go out of the Church doer, and thou know thy heart has
been wicked; oh why will thou set thy eternal estate upon so small a point, as
it were the cast of a Die. Remember what Daniel said to Nabuohadnezzar, let it
have acceptance with thee, break off thy sine by repentance, etc. Seeing we
must die, and appear before the judgment feat of God, what manner of persons
ought we to be in all holiness of life and conversation? as soon as we are we
begin to sin, and as soon as we are we begin to die, let us look upon our
account and be faithful to our souls; perhaps thy accounts are yet to make, oh
be sure to let it be the first thing thou do, and give thy self no rest till
thou have done it; and when thou have done this, labor to clear it with the
blood of Christ, labor by humble confession, and hearty repentance to turn
unto the Lord; go on in a holy course, and then assuredly we shall live with
joy, and die with peace; when we can get grace in our fouls, sorrow for our
sins, new ness in our natures, reformation in our lives, uprightness in our
ways, faith in Christ, a discharge from God, peace of conscience; oh what a
happy day, the day of death will be to our Souls.

ITER NOVISSIMUM. OR, MAN HIS LAST PROGRESS. A SERMON
Preached at the Funeral of the Right Worshipful, Sir THOMAS THIN, Knight.
SERMON XLI.
ECCLES. 12.5. Man goes to his long home, and the Mourners go about the
Streets.


ALthough I might in the Kings (King Solomon) name command, yet I will rather
in the Preachers (his other style) humbly entreat your religious attention to
the last Scene, and Catastrophe of man's life, consisting of two Acts, and those
very short.

1. The dead his pass, he goes, etc.

2. The Mourners march, they go about, etc.

Where as the whole Scripture is a Volumn of divine Sermons, (...)
and the Author of every Book a Preacher, and every Chapter a lesson; and every
verse, and piece of a verse a Text. Gregory Nysscen reasonably demands, why
this Book which treats throughout of the vanity of the world, and misery of
man, is entitled, The Book of the Preacher? To pass by other answers rendered
by him and others, not so pertinent to our present purpose, Prol, in Eccless.
I conceive this title of the Preacher is in special set over this Book, to
intimate unto us, that (according to the Argument thereof) there is no Doctrine
so fit for all Preachers to teach, and all hearers to learn, as the vanity of
the creature, and the emptiness of all earthly delights and comforts. And in
very deed there is no meditation more serious, then upon the vanity of the
world, no consideration more seasonable, then of the brevity and uncertainty of
time it self; no knowledge more wholesome then of the diseases of the mind; no
contemplation more divine, then of humane misery and frailty. Which though we
read in the inscription of every stone, see in the fall of every leaf, hear in
the knel of every bell, taste in the garnishing and sauce of every dish,
Agnescere nolumus, quod ignorare non possumus. Cypr, de Mortal.
smell in the stench of every dead corpses; feel in the beating of every pulse:
yet we are not sensible of it, we will not take knowledge of it, though we
cannot be ignorant of it. In which consideration the Wise man, whose words are
as goads and nails, verse. 11. pricks us deep with the remembrance hereof, so
deep that he draws blood sanguinem anim^e, the blood of the soul; as Saint
Austin terms our tears, lachryme sanguis anim^e. For who can read with dry
eyes, that those that look out of the windows shall be darkened. Who can hear
without horror, that the keepers of the house shall tremble, or consider
without sorrow, that the daughters of music shall be brought low; or comment
without deep setched sighs upon man's going to his long home, and the mourners
going about the streets, to wash them with tears, and sweep them with Rosemary.

Origin, Vid. Vit. Orig. pr^efix.operib.
after he had chosen, rather facere periculose quam perpeti turpiter, to burn
Incense to the Heathen gods, then to suffer his body to be defiled by a
Blackamore, and the flower of his chastity which he had so long time preserved
to be some way blasted, at a Church in Jerusalem, goes into the Pulpit,
opens the Bible at all adventures, intending to preach upon that Text which
he should first light upon, but falling upon that verse. in Psalm. 50. But to the
wicked, says God, what have thou to do, to declare my statutes, or that thou
should take my covenants in thy mouth? (which contained his suspension)
shuts his book, speaks not a word more, but comments upon it with his
tears: some thinks having read this Text, in which I find all our capital dooms
written, I cannot do better, then follow that Fathers president, and shut up
not only my book, but my mouth also, and seal up my lips, and comment upon the
coherence with distraction, the parts with passion, the notes with sighs, the
periods with groans, and the words with tears; for alas, as soon as a man
comes into his short booth in this world, which he saluteth with tears, he
goes to his long home, in the next, And the mourners go about the streets.

It is lamentable to hear the poor infant which cannot speak, Infans nondum
loquitur, and tamen prophetat. Sermon. de bono pas.
yet, to boad his own misery, and to prophecy of his future condition, and what
are the contents of his Prophecy, but lamentations, mournings and woes? Saint
Cyprian accords with Saint Austin in his doleful note, Vit^e mortalis
anxietates, and dolores, and procellas mundi quas ingreditur in exordio statim
suo ploratu, vel gemitu rudes animae testatur; Little Children newly born, take
in their first breath with a sigh, and come crying into the world, as soon as
they open their eyes they shed tears, to help fill up the Vale of tears, into
which they were then brought, and shall be after a short time carried out with
a stream of them, running from the eyes of all their friends. And if the
Prologue and Epilogue be no better, what shall we judge of the Scenes and Acts
of the life of man, they yield so deep springs of tears, and such store of
arguments against our abode in this world, that many reading them in the books
of Hegesias the Platonic, Cic.primo, tusc.
presently brake the prison of their body, and leaped out of the world into the
grave; others concluded with Silenus, Optimum non nasci, proximum quam primum
mori; That it was simply best never to be born, the next to it to die out of
hand, and give the world our salve, and take our vale at once.

How-be-it though this might pass for a sage Essay, and a strong line amongst
Philosophers, yet we Christians, who know that this present life to all that
live godly in Christ Jesus, how full of troubles, cares, and persecutions so
ever it be, is but a sad and short Preface to endless Volumnes of joy, an Eves
fast on earth to an everlasting feast in Heaven, ought thus to correct the
former Apophthegme, Optimum renasci, proximum quam primum mori; That it is best
to be new born, and then (if it so please God) after our new birth to be
translated with all speed into the new Heaven.

But soft we cannot take our degrees in Christ's school per saltem, we must keep
our Terms, and preform our exercises, both of faith, obedience, and patience:
we must not look from the Font, to be presently put into the rivers of
pleasures, springing at Gods right hand for evermore. We must take a toylsome
journey, and in it often drink of the waters of Marah. We must suffer with
Christ, before we reign with him: We must taste of the bitter cup of his
Passion, before we drink new Wine with him in his Kingdom: we must sow in
tears here, that we may reap in joy hereafter. Every man goes, though some set
out sooner, some later, and shall arive at his home, but let him look to his
way, as the way is he takes, so shall the home be into which he is received,
if he take the way on the right hand, and keep within the paths of Gods
commandments, his home shall be the New Jerusalem descending from God, most
gloriously shining with streets of gold, gates of pearl, and foundatious of
precious stones, where all tears shall be wiped from his eyes; but if he take
the broad way on the left hand and follow it, his home shall be a dungeon or
vault in Hell, where he shall be eternally both mourner and Crops.

But to shoot somewhat nearer to the mark: Marriages and Funerals though most
different actions, and of a seeming contrary nature, yet are set forth and as
it were apparelled with parallel rites, and ceremonies; our rayments are
changed in both, because in both our estate is changed; Bells are rung, flowers
are strowed, and feasts kept in both, and anciently both were celebrated in the
night by Torch-light: He that has but half an eye, may see in the Rituals, of
the Ancients, the blazing and sparkling as well of the funeral, as the unptial
lights; and no marvail the shodows meet when the substance concur; the pictures
resemble one the other, when the faces match; the accessaries are
corresponding, where the principals are suitable as here they are; for in
marriage single life dies, and in death the soul is married to Christ: The
couple to be married in ancienter times, first met, and after an enterview and
liking of each other, and a contract signed between them, presently departed,
the Bride to her Mother, the Bridegroom to his Fathers house till the wedding
day, on which the Bridegroom late in the night was brought to his Spouse, and
then he took her and inseparably linked himself unto her: Here the couple to be
married in man are the body and the soul; at our birth the contract is made,
but after a short enterview and small abode together, the parties are parted,
and the body the Bride returns to her Mothers house the earth, but the soul
the Bridegroom to his Fathers house, the Father of spirits in Heaven, as both
their guests are set forth in this chapter, verse 7. the dust returns to the
earth as it was, and the spirit to God that gave it. But in the evening of the
World at that dreadful night, after which the Angel swore there should be no
more day or time here: the soul is given by God to the body again, and then the
marriage is consummated; and both for ever fast coupled and wedded for better,
for worse, to run an everlasting fortune, and to participate either eternal
joys or torments together. Thus man is brought to his long home; or as the
Seventy and Saint Jerome renders the Hebrew, his house of eternity, and the
mourners go about the streets: here is a short reckoning of all mankind, like
to that of the Psalmist, who alluding to the name of the two Patriarchs faith,
Coll, ADAM ABEL, In Eccles. chap. 12.
All men are altogether vanity; so here upon the foot of the account in
Bonaventures casting, all appear wretched and miserable, describitur miseria
mortis in morientibus and compatientibus, all are either dead corpses, or sad
mourners; corpses already dead, or mourners for the dead, and their courses,
and motions are two. 1 Straight, man goes, etc. 2 Circular, mourners go about.


The dead go directly to the long home, the living fetch a compass and round
about: the termini of which their motions shall be the bounds of my discourse
at this present. Wherein that you may the better discern my passage from point
to point, I will set up six Posts or standings. 1 The Scope. 2 Coherence. 3
Sense. 4 Parts. 5 Doctrine. 6 Use.


The scope will give light to the Coherence, the Coherence to the Sense, the
Sense to the Parts, the Parts to the Doctrine, the Doctrine to the Use.
Wherefore I humbly entreat the assistance of Gods Spirit, with the intention of
yours; whilst in unfolding this rich piece of Arras, I shall point with the
finger to. 1 The main Scope. 2 The right Coherence, 3 The litteral Sense. 4 The
natural Division. 5 The general Doctrine. 6 The special application of this
parcel of holy Scripture.


First the Scope. 1 The Scope.


Although all other Canonical books of this old and new Testament were read in
the Church; (...)
yet as Gregory Nysscen acutely observes, this book alone is entitled
Ecclesiastes, the Preacher, or Churchman; because this alone in a manner
tends wholly Ecclesiastical policy, or such a kind of life or conversation as
becomes a Preacher, or Churchman. For the prime scope of this book, is to
stir up all religious minds to set forth toward Heaven betimes in the morning
of our days, Chap. 12. verse 1. Remember thy Creator in the days of thy
youth; to enter speedily into a strict course of holiness, which will bring us
to eternal happiness, to dedicate to God and his service, the prime in both
senses, that is the first and best part of our time. For as in a glass of
distilled water the purest and thinnest first runs out, and nothing but lees
and mouther at the last, so it is in our time and age.

Optima queque dies miseris mortalibus avi, prima fluit. storem at at is
diabolo consecrare, f^ecem Deo reserv are, to consecrate the top to the Devil,
and the bottom to God; feed the flesh with the flower, and the spirit with the
bran; serve the world with our strength, and our Creator with our weakness;
give up our lusty and able members as weapons to sin, and our feeble and weak
to righteousness. Will God accept the blind, and the lame; the lean, and the
withered for a sacrifice? How can we remember our Creator in the days of our
age, when our memory and all other faculties of the soul are decayed; How shall
we bear Christ's yoke, when the Grasshoppers is a burden unto us? when we are
not able to bear our selves, but bow under the sole weight of age? What delight
can we take in Gods service, when care, and fear, and sorrow, and pain, and
manifold infirmities and diseases wholly possess the heart, and dead all the
vital motions and lively affections thereof? Old men are a kind of Antipodes to
young men; it is evening with them, when it is morning with these; it is
Autumn in their bodies, when it is Spring in these: the Spring of the year to
decrepit old men, is as the Fall; Summer is winter to them, and Winter death;
it is no pleasure to them to see the Almond-tree flourish, which is the
Prognosticatour of the Spring, Cupressin funeria.
or the Grasshopper leap and sing, the Preludium of Summer; for they now mind
not the Almond-tree, but the Cypress; nor think of the Grasshopper, but of the
worm, because they are far on in their way to their long home, and the mourners
are already in the streets, marshalling as it were their troops, and setting
all in equipage for their funeral; no dilectable objects affect their dull and
dying senses, but are rather grievous unto them, as the Sun and Rain are to old
stumps of trees, which make them not spring again, but rot them rather, and
dispose them to putrefaction.

And so I have past the first, and am come to the second Post or standing.

The right Coherence. The Coherence.


When they shall be afraid of that which is high, and fear shall be in the way,
and the Almond trce shall flourish, and the Grasshopper shall be a burden, and
desire shall fail, because man goes to his long home. If this Consequence be
firth, the Coherence must needs be good; but if this be infirm and lame, that
must needs be out of joint, let us then Consider of the Consequence.

Surely Aristotle seems to be of another mind, Senes in limine mortis vih^
(...) avidissiml. Arist(...) and breu. vita.
whose observation it is, old men that have their foot on Deaths threshold,
would then draw back then leg if they could, and at the very instant of their
dissolution are most desirous of the continuance of their life, and seeing the
pleasures of sin like the Apples of Tuntales running away from them, they catch
at them the more greedily, for wants is the whestone of desire, and experience
offers us many instances of old men, in whom Saint Paul's old man grows young
again; who according to the corruption of nature which Saint Austin bewaileth
with tears, malunt libidinem explers quam extingai, they are so far from having
no lust or desire of pleasures, as being cloyed therewith, that they are more
insatiable in them then in youth; the flesh in them like the Peacocks, (...)
coct a recrudescit, which after it is sod, in time will grow raw again, so in
them after mortification by diseases and age, it reviveth. Sophocles the
Heathen Poet might pass for a Saint in comparison of them, for he thanked God,
that in his old age he was free from his most Imperious Mistress, Cic. de
se^ctu^.
lust: these men on the contrary, desir (...) inthral themselves again in
youthly pleasures, and concupiscence in them is kindled even by the defect of
fuel; it vexes them that their sins for sake them; that through the impotency
of their limbs and faculties, they cannot run into the like excess as in former
times: their few days before death; are like Shrovetide Before Lent, they take
their fill of flesh and fleshly desires, because they suppose that for ever
after, they must fast from them. Thus they spur on their jadish flesh now
unable to ran her for met Stages, saying; let us crown our selves with
Rose-buds, for they will presently wither, let us eat and drink, for to morrow
we shall die.

To reconcile the seeming difference between the miracle of humane wisdom,
Aristotle; and the Oracle of divine, Solomon, two distinctions may be made use
of. Of old Age.
1 In the entry, when it is vigorous. 2 In the exit, when it is decrepit, et ne
ad mala quidem bona.
Of old Men.
1 As they ought to be. 2 As they are.


When Euripides was taxed as too great a favourer of the semale Sex, because in
all his Tragedies he brought in virtuous women, and fitted them with good parts
to Act; whereas Sophocles, and other Poets of that Age, brought lewd and
immodest women upon the Stage, and put odious parts upon them; he made this
Apology for himself: others faith he, in their Poems set forth women as they
are, but I, such as they should be: Solomom words are capable of a like
construction, desire fails because man goes to his long home: that is, it
does in the best, and should in all; for what a preposterous thing were it, for
a man that has one foot already in the grave, and is drawing the other after,
to desire to cut a cross caper, and dance the morice? or for him that is near
his eternal Mansion house, to hanker by the way, and feast and revel it in an
Inn. Moreover, Solomon here speaks of a B^rzillai, who has no taste of his
meat, no sense of delight; no use, in a manner, of sense, to whom dainties are
no dainties, because he cannot taste them; music is no music, because he
cannot hear it; sweet odours are no sweet odours; because he cannot small them;
precious stones are no precious stones, because he cannot value them; the
fairest becaues are no beauties, because he cannot discern them: In a word, he
speaks of an old man in whom all carnal lusts are either quite extinct, or
happily exchanged into spiritual, or swallowed up with sorrow and fear of
death, and a horrible apprension of judgment.

And so I come to the third Stage, The sense.
which is the litteral sense and genuine interpretation of the words.

As in Origin his Hexapla, every word almost had an Asterisk, or star upon it;
so there needs a star or some other light to be put upon every word of this
Text, for there is a mist of obscurity upon each of them, and a man may well
miss his way, if he know not exactly, who is here the man? what is meant by his
going, or gate? where is his long home? and whence are these Mourners?

First, Que. 1.
whether man be taken Collective, for the whole kind, or Species, as the
Logicians speak; or Distributive for every man in particular, we shall seem to
be at a loss. Man taken Collective, stirs not a foot to his long home; for
Philosophy reprieveth universal natures from death, or dissolution: and true it
is, though single men every day die, yet mankind dies not: If man be taken
Distributive, for all particular men of what rank or quality soever, we shall
have much to do to distinguish the men in the former part of the Text, from the
mourners in the latter. If all are attended with mourners to their funeral,
then mourners themselves must have mourners; and so either the train will be
infinite, or the lag will be destitute of mourners.

Secondly, Que. 2.
why uses he this phrase of going, if it import death, since some expect death
and move not at all toward it; some run to it, to some it is sent; some leap
into it, as Cleombrotus; some ride to it in state, as Antioches Epiphanes; some
are tumbled down into it, as S. Purius, Melicus, some are dragged to it, as
Seinus? In a word, when death surprizeth most men, and that in all postures of
the body; why is dying here called going? man goes.

Thirdly, Que. 3.
where is this long home? in Heaven, or in earth, Purgatory, or Hell? If we
speak of Heaven, or Hell, the Epithet long falls short, for they are eternal
habitations: of Purgatory, or the grave (suppose there were any Purgatory) yet
neither of them may be properly termed a long home, fith neither the body
stays long in the one, nor the soul in the other.

Fourthly, Que. 4.
whence are these mourners? if they are mercenary and bired from home, they are
no true mourners; if they are true mourners, they keep their Closets, they gad
not about the streets, they shut themselves long at home for their friends that
are gone to their long home.

To dispel all this mist of obscurity, and set a light upon each of the
material words of the Text. I answer,

To the first Qnerie, Sol. 1.
that a man is here to be taken, neither Collective, for all mankind in a lump,
nor Distributive for ever particular man without exception, but indefinite, or
communiter; for man in the ordinary course or tract; for you shall hardly find
a man that has no friend to drop a tear into his Grave. As for the last men
that shall stand upon the earth, and shall be alive at Christ's coming; they
shall indeed pass by death properly, yet they shall die after a sort, by
passing from a mortal estate, to an immortal; and if their long home be Heaven,
they shall need no mourners; If hell, they shall want none to bear them
company; for at Christ second coming, all kindreds of the earth shall mourn
before him. I answer,

To the second, Sol. 2.
that going here is not taken pro motu progressive, in special, as walking, or
running, but in general, for passing to another world which way soever, whether
we make our way, or it be made for us; whether we go to death, or death come to
us; nay whether we stir, or lie still; whether we are found of foot, or lame;
never had feet, or have lost them, we go this way of all flesh, as I shall show
hereafter. I answer,

To the third, Sol. 3.
that by long home, according to the Chaldee Paraphrase, is here meant the
grave, or the place where our bodies, or (to speak more properly) our remains
are bestowed and abide till the time of the restitution of all things; the
Original is Beth gnolemo, which S. Jerome renders domum et ern it at is sue,
because from thence (as Lyra notes) he never returns to live here; or the
house of his hidden time, to wit, where he lies hid in his Coffin, and no eye
sees him: whereunto holy Job alluding faith, Chap. 14.10. Man dies and
wastes away, and gives up the ghost, and where is he? or domus mundi sui, (as
Caietan will have it) the house of his world, meaning the world of the dead; or
domus seculi sui, the house of his generation (as Pagnine, Montanus and
Tremelius will express it) the place where all meet who lived together, the
randevouze of all our deceased friends, allies and kindred even as far as Adam:
this home may be called a long gome, in comparison of our short homes from
which we remove daily, these houses we change at pleasure, that we cannot;
there our flesh, or our bones, or at least our ashes or dust shall be kept in
some place of the earth or sea, till the Heavens shall be no more, Job 14.12. I
answer,

To the fourth, that by mourners are here meant all that attend the corpses to
the funeral, whether they mourn in truth, or for fashion; and they are said
here to go about the streets, either for the reason alleged by Bonaventure,
quia predolore quiescere nequiunt, because they cannot rest for hearts grief
and sorrow, or they go about the streets to call campany to the funeral; or
because they fetch their compass, that they might make a more solemn procession
to the Church, or Sepulcher. Among the Romans, the friends of the deceased
hired certain women whom they called preficas, to lament over their dead: for
the most part among the Jews this sad task was put upon widows, or they took
it upon themselves, as the words of the Prophet imply, and there were no
widows to make lamentation; and of the Evangelist also, Acts 9.39. and the
widows stood by weeping for Dorcas; and indeed widows are very proper for
this employment: When a Pot of water is full to the brim, a little motion makes
it run over. Widows, that are widows indeed, and have lost in their Husbands
all the joy and comfort of their life, have their eyes brim full of tears, and
therefore most easily they overflow, viduae optime deflent viduas, Widows are
the fittestto bemoan widows; and what is the body void of the soul, but a
widow deprived of her loving mate? these widows went about the streets
weeping and howling, to awake the living out of their dead sleep of security
and to ring in their ears that lesson of the Prophet; Et strepitus iste
perduras quousque; pondus id est ponderosum corpus ad terram pervenerit sed
corpore in terram projecto statim cessat tumulius Destructor.
all flesh is grass, and the glory of it as the flower of the field. As in a
great Clock, when the Index points to the hour, the wheels move, the Clock
strikes, and there is a great noise, till the plummets or weights touch the
earth, so says Filius Fabri in the same, when the Index points to the last
hour of a rich man; the Bell rings, and there is a hideous and fearful noise of
singers and mourners, and this continues till the weight, to wit, the weighty
corpses of the dead touches the ground, and is put into the earth; after which
the tumult cease, and the loud music is turned into soft and solemn, the
Lidian, into Dorrick, and the shallow channels of tears, which made such a
noise, shall run into the depth of silent sorrow, or Mare mortuum. vit. par 4.
c. 2.
And so I come to the fourth Stage.

The natural division of the Text. The division.


There are but there things appertaining to man here. 1 Life. 2 Death. 3 Burial.
And see they are all three in the Text. 1. Man goes, there is his life. 2. To
his long home, there is his Death. 3. And the Mourners go about the streets,
there is his burial, described by pariphrasis.


And so I am upon the fifth stage.

The Doctrine, The Doctr.
his death the term or period of this voyage, his Grave his home, and Mourners
his attendance; you may observe a kind of sequence in these observations in the
Concatination of them; the first linck draws the second, the second the third,
the the third the fourth; if our life be a pilgrimage, our death must needs be
the term and our arival at our Country, if Death be our arival, the Grave must
needs be the house for our bodies, if the Grave be our house, what fit
attendance there but mourners? Our life is a pilgrimage, so it is termed by
Jacob, Genesis 47.9. the days of the years of my pilgrimage are 130. years; And
by David. Psalm. 119.54. Thy statutes have been my songs in the house of my
pilgrimage; and we are all pilgrims and strangers, 1 Pet. 2.11. and our fathers
were no better; Psalm. 39.10. I am a stranger, and sojourner, as all my fathers
were, Vita est via, and omnes Christianus viator. Our life is a way, and every
man living in this world a passenger. A direct motion, and that continuate, and
uninterrupted from the cradle to the coffin, from the womb to the tomb, is the
way of all flesh, away in which children walk, before they can go, and old men
crawl, when they cannot now go; Infants who never had the use of their limbs,
and impotent old who have lost them, yet run this race, where in though some
make a longer line, and others a shorter, yet all finish their course: a
strange race, wherein though a man stand still or sleep, yet he advances
forward, and gains ground; and he goes so much the faster, by how much he is
the weaker, for the less vigorous, the more speedily he tends to his long and
last home: the hourglass is running, whether the preacher proceeds, or marks a
pawse; and the ship is sailing whither it is bound, when we sleep in our
cabine: so whether we wake or sleep, move or rest, be busy or idle, mind it,
or mind it not, we walk on toward our long home.

That which Saint Paul spoke in a moral, Quotidie morimur quotidie enim demitur
aliqua pars vita.
or divine sense, Seneca makes good in a natural; We die daily, for every day,
nay every hour, we lose some part of our life; as our years increase, so our
time decreaseth; for the more years, months, days, or hours that we have
lived, the less we have to live: the glass is running, not only when the last
sand drops out, but all the while: so we are expiring and dying, from the
running of the first sand in the hourglass of our life, to the last, from the
moment we receive breath, to the moment that we breath out our last gasp.

Thus the man in my text goes, or rather runs still in his natural course,
that is, every man, for the word in the original is Adam, in whom we all die,
who is so termed from Adama, the earth, not that more solid part of the earth,
but the brittlest of all, red earth, sand, or dust, Pulvis es in pulverem ivis,
Of dust thou art made, and dust shall be made of thee. Now if there be any
living upon earth, who has none of this earth in him, let him balk the way of
all flesh; but if the earth be an ingredient, nay, a predominant in his
composition, then assure himself his resolution shall be into it, for the Dust
will return to the earth as it was ver. 7.

Plato conceived the celestial bodies to be made, Bern. in sermon. Senibus meri
and in januit juvenibus in insidiis.
as it were, of the flower and purest of the elements, but the sublunary, and
terrestial of the bran and lees. (Beloved) we are made of dregs, and our
mother, is muther, consin-germain to corruption once removed, all men are
either young or old; the difference between them is no more, then we find in
the translations of my Text; the old man, it, the young man, ibit, the one is
now going, the other shall go to his long home; the one may die soon, the other
cannot live long; If he die naturally, he keeps his own pace, and goes of
himself; if he die by violence, he is driven forward, and mending his pace,
sooner ariveth at his long home.

But as there is a natural body, and a spiritual body; an earthly Adam, and a
heavenly; so there is a natural course of man, of which I have finished my
discourse; and a spiritual, of which I am yet to begin: As the natural life, so
the Christian is a progress in which we ought not to stay, but to advance,
still proceeding from grace to grace, and virtue to virtue; If we ever look to
shine as the Sun in the kingdom of the Father, we must not be like Joshus his
Sun that stood still; or Hezekia's that went back ten degrees; but like David's,
which like a giant runs his course, and never cease; I need not direct any
man in his natural course from life to death, every man knows it, and whether
he knows it or no, he shall accomplish it, the spiritual course is more
considerable, which is, it inner arium ad deum, a Journal to eternity, a
progress from earth to heaven; this progress a man begins at his regeneration,
and in part ends in his dissolution by Death, but wholly and fully after his
Resurrection; the way here is Christ; the viaticum, the blessed Sacraments; the
light the Scriptures; the guides, the ministers of the Word; the thieves that
lie in wait to rob us of our spiritual treasure, the devils; our convoy the
Angels; our stages seseveral virtues and degrees of perfection, the City to
which we bend our course, Jerusalem that is above, wherein are many Mansions,
or eternal houses.

And thus as before the old man, so now the new man goes to his long and
eternal home, without any resting place between, at which all the ordinary sort
of the Romanists must bait, though little for their ease, cooling or
refreshing, for it is in a hot-house; nay, a house all on fire; nay all of
fire, and that as hot as hell; I mean Purgatory, wherewith if Solomon had been
acquainted, he would have changed this motto of mortality, and not have said,
man goes to his eternal home; but to his purging bath, and the Friars go about
the streets singing Masses and Dirges for his soul; assuredly if the souls of
those that die under the Gospel need a sacrifice to deliver them from the
torment of a temporary hell, or Purgatory fire, the souls of them that died
under the Law much more needed it; why then did Moses appoint none for them?
why did none of the inspired Prophets pray for the release of their souls?
Solomon if there had been such a stop in the midway, would have made a pause
in his speech, and not said immediately man goes, In domum eternit at is su^e,
into his everlasting home, as the Seventy, and the vulgar Latin, (which no
Papist upon pain of a curse, can reject, render the Hebrew Beth gnolomo.
Purgatory is no such home; therefore Gregory of Neocesarca, and Cyprian so
expound this Text, that they quite leave out this imaginary fire kindled in the
paper walls of Purgatory. AE vi temporalis sine completo ad eterna velmortis
vel immortalitatis hospitia dividimur.
Gregory faith, the good man marches out joyfully toward his eternal house,
but the wicked draws back and bedews the threshold with tears, and fills all
with lamentations: and that we may know when a man takes possession of his
eternal home, Saint Cyprian tells us it is upon the expiring of our lease in the
poor tenement of our body.

If there be a Purgatory for Souls after this life, why not for bodies also
which need as much purging as souls? if such a place be to be found, we are
certainly like to hear of it from Philosophy or Divinity, and may discover it
either in the map of the World, or in the type of Heaven, the holy Scripture.
Nature gives us no notice of any such place; Scelus aut exuritur igue.
in Scripture we find indeed a Purgatory, but it is either in the laver of our
regeneration, or in the blood of our redemption, for so we read, 1 John 1.7.
The blood of Jesus Christ cleanses, or purges us from all sins; if from all
sins, then none are left to be burned out with Purgatory fire. The Philosophers
indeed describe a fire in the night, which they call ignis fatuus, or the fools
fire, because it leads fools out of their way, whereby they often fall into
boggs, or thieves hands; is not this Romish Purgatory, that ignis fatuus, that
leads fools in the night of error out of their right way, whereby they truly
fall into thieves hands? I mean the Monks and Friars, Priests, and Jesuits, who
though they can purge neither the bodies, nor the souls of the deceased, yet
they can the purses of the living, by these fireworks of their wit. But I list
not to dwell any longer in Purgatory, because there is no such real place,
either in the world, or out of it. I am now come, though long first, to man's
long home, which cannot be described in a short time, and therefore I leap into
my last stage, which as you may remember was;

The Application of the Text to this sad occasion. Application
As a contrary order is used in a compositive method, to that which is taken in
a resolutive, so I must now use in the Application of my Text, a method direct
contrary to that which I followed in my Explication: for therein first I showed
you how the natural man goes to his long, and the Spiritual to his eternal
home; and after how, and why, and what sort of Mourners went about the streets
lamenitng the deceased; but now I am first to speak of the Mourners, who have
already finished their circular motion, and then of the direct motion of the
Man, the man of quality, the man of worth, the man of estate and credit, who is
already arived at his long Let, and now entering into his long home.

Touching the Mourners I cannot but take notice of their number and quality;
the number is great we see, yet we see not all who yet are the true Mourners,
pouring out their souls to God with tears in their private closets. Illa dolet
vere, quae sine test dolet.

Her portion of sorrow like Benjamins, is five times more than any others,
whose loss of a Husband, and such a Husband is invaluable. Secondly, the
quality of the Mourners is not slightly to be passed by, debetur iis religiosa
mora; for, not only great store of the Gentry and Commons, but some also of the
Nobility, the chief Officers of the Crown, and Peers of the Realm; not
Religion only and learning, but Honor and Justice also has put on Blacks for
him, thereby testifying to all men their joynt-respect to him, and miss of him.
And if any prompted by Judas shall object against this Solemnity and prolixe
ceremony, ut quid perdetio ista? To what serves this wast? might not the money
have been better expended in charitable Alms, to the relief of very many poor.
I answer in the words of our Savior, Hac oportet facere, and illa non
omittere; Those works of charity they spoke of, ought to be done: and these of
decent Rites and ceremonies not to be left undone: the rule of the Apostle, Let
all things be done decently and in order, is a warrant as well for the due
Exequies of the dead, as Obsequies of the living: if all things must be done
decently, and in order, in the State and Commonwealth, much more in the
Church, whose emblem is, Acies ordinata, an Army marshalled in excellent order,
with Banners displayed; and if all things in the Church must be so carried,
then Funerals as well as Nuptials, Burials as well as Christnings; and if so,
then ought they to be celebrated not after the preposterous manner of some in
the night as works of darkness: but in the day as works of Piety, in honor of
them who have received the inheritance of Saints in light, not penuriously and
basely, but nobly and liberally; where the quality of the dead requires it,
and the estate will bear it. Howbeit I confess, that as Magnificence is always
a virtue, so prodigallity is a vice; and one of those master-vices which has
gotten a great head in his Kingdom, and a Garland upon it. Yet to do the dead
right, though luxury be guilty of the death of many: yet the dead are no way
guilty of this superfluity, they neither order it, nor are sensible of it;
neither is the prodigallity (under the weighty burden whereof the Land
groaneth) so much seen in black clothes, as in Silks and Velvets, cloth of Gold
and Tissue; not in Jet as in Pearl, and precious stones; not in building Marble
Sepulchers for the dead, as Marble houses for the living; not in armory, as in
luxury; not in pendants, as in attendants; not in Funerals, as in Nuptials,
Masks and Pageants, Court entertainments, and City feasts, at which if
Vitellius or Apicius were bidden, they would condemn themselves for too much
frugality. What Seneca spoke of time, solus temporis prodigi sumus, cujus unius
honest a est avaritia, we arelavish of our time, of which covetousness is only
commendable; we may invert, and with truth confess, we are frugal for the most
part in those things (I mean the service of the living God, and offices of
piety to the dead) wherein not only bounty, but magnificence also is most
commendable. If any be otherwise minded, and repine and grudge at this last
honor to the dead, and comfort to the living; I shall use no other reproof of
him at this present, then a like to that of Constantine recorded in Eusebius,
Go to Acesias who art so precise, and hold none worthy to keep pace with
thee, fac scalam, and ascend solus in coelum, Make a ladder, and climb up
alone upon it to Heaven. So let these men make them a Bear like the newfound
Chariots in the Low Countries, that run of themselves without a driver, and let
them be carried alone in it to their long home; Let no Mourners follow them,
nor eye pity them, or shed tear for them. Nec enim lex justior ulla est.

But let them who have lived in credit die in honor; let them who in their
life time did many good offices to the dead, after they are dead receive the
like offices from the living. Out of which number, envy it self cannot exempt
our deceased brother. Of whose natural parts perfected by Art and learning, and
his Morral much improved by grace. I shall say nothing by way of amplification
but this, that nothing can be said of them by way of amplification. All
rhetorical exaggeration will prove a (...) diminution of them. in sum, he was a
most provident houshoulder, loving husband, indulgent father, kind landlord,
and liberal patron. so kind a landlord, that when his tennants were behind with
him, he was so far from suing them, or putting them to trouble to extort his
due from them; that instead of receiving from them, he lent great sums unto
them; by the good employment whereof they were enabled to recover themselves
and pay him. So liberal a Patron he was, that he not only freely bestowed all
the Benefices that fell in his gift, but was also at all the charge of
institution, induction, composition, first fruits, and whatsoever burden fell
upon the Incumbent: Such patterns of Patrons, we may rather wish then hope for
after him; what shall I need to add more concerning him, whose birth was
illustrious, his education liberal, his Patromony great, his Matches suitable,
his life exemplary, and his death comfortable? Single virtues we meet with in
many, but such combinations as were in him, such affability in such gravity,
such humility in such eminency, such patience in such trials, such temperance
and moderation in such abundance, as we have just cause to bless God for in
him, so we have great cause to pray for in others of his Rank. In his tender
years he was set as a choice Plant in the famous Nursey of good learning and
Religion, the University of Oxford, where living as a Commoner in Corpus
Christi College, under the care and tuition of Doctor Sebastian Wenfield; he
very much thrived and grew above his equals both in grace and in knowledge,
gaining to himself as much love, as learning. After he was removed from thence,
he fell into very great troubles, as well before as after the death of his
Father, but the Lord delivered him out of all: These crosses and afflictions
served but as Files to brighten those gifts and graces in him, which shined
afterward most brightly in his more settled estate, and eminent employments,
being chosen Deputy Lieutenant in Wiltshire; Commissioner in three Shires,
Four times HighSheriff, and often Knight for the Shire in Parliament; in all
which places of important negotiations and great trust, he so carried himself,
that all men might see in all his actions, he had a special eye to the Motto in
his Escouchion, Jeay bonne cause, for with Mary he always chose the good part,
and stood up for the truth, which he confirmed with his last breath. You have
heard what he was in public, but what was he in private? we have seen him in
the Sun, how demeaned he himself in the shade? True, Religion is like the
precious stone Garamantites, which casts no great luster outwardly, but
semper intus habeat aureas guttus: but we may discern as it were golden drops
within. Three of these after I have presented to your view, I will then set
free your patience, and give your sorrow full scope to vent it self in tears.
The first of these was tenderness of conscience, which is one of the most
infallible tokens and marks of the Child of God; so tender was he, that he
would undertake no business before he was fully persuaded of the lawfulness
thereof, both by clear texts of Scripture, and the approbation of most learned
and conscientious Divines; he made scruple, not only of committing the least
known sin, but of imbarking into any action which was questionable among those
that love the truth in sincerity. And therefore, although God blessed him with
great wealth, and store of coin, yet he never put it to Usury or Intrest
thereby to increase it, for he held the tolleration of the Law in this Kingdom
to be no sufficient warrant for any violation of the divine Law, the
destinctions lately coined, of toothless and biting Usury he no way allowed,
judging truly, that all Usury according to the Hebrew Etymology, is biting, and
has not only teeth, but Adders teeth envenomed; for all Usury if it bite not
our Brother as per accidens sometimes it may not, yet it biteth the conscience
of all such who have any remorse of sin. The second aurea gutta, was Christian
compassion, whereby he took to heart the afflictious of Joseph, and misery of
Lazarus, whose fores he cured with the most precious balsamum he could buy for
his money. What Pliny writes (lib. 32. c. 8. Attalus usus est Thynni
recentiores adipe ad ulcera) on the Fish in Latin Thynuus, that it is a
sovereign remedy against many diseases, and cures all kind of ulcers, was
truly verified in him; for he furnished himself with the best cordials and the
rarest medicinal receipts; and when he heard of any poor, sick, or hurt; he not
only sent them money, but Bezar, and balsamum, thinking nothing could cost him
too dear, whereby he might save the life, or recover the health of the poorest
member of Christ Jesus. In the years of death and sickness, he sent provision
to all the Parishes about him, and thrice a week relieved a hundred at least at
his gate: neither did his compassion die with him, for in his Will and
Testament confirmed by him the day before his Death, he bequeathed diverse
Legacies to the poor, whereof these following came to my notice. To Saint
Margarets in Westminster, 10. pound. To Kempsford, 60. pound. To Cosley, 60.
pound. To Froome, and the Woodlands, 100. pound. To Warmester, 100. pound. To
Deverill, and Mounten, 100. pound. The last aurea gutta, which I shall present
to your view at this time, was his servency of zeal for the truth of the
Gospel; in all the Benefices which he bestowed, he took special care to make
choice of men sound in the Faith, no way warping either to Popish superstition,
or schismatical separation: as he made greatest account of those Ministers of
the Gospel, who were servent in spirit, zealous for the truth; so he hated none
more then temporizers, and lukewarm Loadiceans: he seldom spoke of any
Romanist without expressing a great detestation of their idolatry, and
superstition: the night before he changed this life for a better, after an
humble confession of his sins in general, and a particular profession of the
Articles of his belief, in which he had lived, and now was resolved to die, he
added, I renounce all Popish superstition, all man's merits, trusting only upon
the merits of the Death and passion of my Savior; and whosoever trusts on
any other, shall find when he is dying, if not before, that he leans upon
broken reeds. Here after the benediction of his Wife and Children, being
required by me to ease his mind; and declare, if any thing lay heavy upon his
conscience; he answered, nothing he thanked God; yet like an obedient child of
his Mother, the Church of England, both heartily desired, and received her
absolution: and now professing that he was most willing to leave the world; he
besought all to pray for him; and himself prayed most fervently, that God would
enable him patiently to abide his good will and pleasure, and to go through
this last and greatest work of faith and patience: and the pangs of Death soon
after coming upon him, he fixed his eyes on Heaven from whence came his help,
and to the last gasp, lifted up his hand, as it were, to lay hold on that Crown
of righteousness, which Christ reaches out to all his children, who hold out
the good fight of Faith to the end, and conquer in the end; Which crown of
righteousness, the Lord who has purchased with his blood, after we have
finished likewise our courses, of his infinite bounty bestow upon us all. Cui,
etc.

TEMPVS PVTATIONIS: OR THE RIPE ALMOND GATHERED. ASERMON
Appointed to be Preached at the Funerals of the Right Honorable, the Earl of
EXETER, in the Abbie Church at Westminster.
SERMON XLII.
GENESIS 15.15. And thou shall go to thy Fathers in peace, thou shall be buried in
a good old Age.


IT was the manner of the Egyptians and Greeks to embalm the dead bodies of
great Personages, and anoint them all over with Honey, which kept them a long
time from corrupting and putrefying in their Sepulchers. Thus the Macedonians
preserved the Corpse of Alexander (as some Historians report) above a hundred
years from rotting in his Coffin. But Gemistus Phleton being to perform a like
Rite to Agesilaus, for want of Honey laid his Corpse in Wax made of Honey-combs.
I am sorry I am at this time to give the Motto to this Emblem. A person of
quality, a person of wealth, a person of noble birth, a person of Honor, a
person of fame and renown, whose soul is already bound up in the bundle of
life, is now to be brought with Honor to his long home; and though not his
Body, yet his Name to be Embalmed, and preserved as it were in Honey, in the
sweet Commemoration of his Virtues: and the first Standard Bearer of Religion
under his Majesty, and the great Master of these sacred Rites and Ceremonies
was designed to do this office, and he richly provided for it; of whom I may
truly say as Homer of Nestor. (...)
. Cujus ex ore melle dulcior fluebat oration.


But since it has pleased the Divine Providence, whose footsteps are not known,
to take away for a time the use of his feet, who should at this time have stood
on this holy Mount. Bounden duty and service has laid upon me Genistus
Phletons task; and I am constrained as he was in-opia mellis cera mortuum
circum linere, to use Wax for want of Honey, and vulgar oil in stead of
precious balm: my best Apology is, that I prayed heartily with Moses, that God
would send the message (I am to deliver) by him by whom he should send: But he
will make choice of his own instruments, and sometimes of set purpose he will
make use of the weak and ignoble, the more to show his power through the
infirmity, and glory through the ignobleness of the means. The walls of Jericho
shall fall with a noise only, and this noise shall not be the shril and sweet
sound of silver Trumpets, but the harsh and hollow sound of Rams horns; and
even from this disappointing of the chief actor in this mournful Scene, and
taking a Novice in his room, you may gather this flower as it were by the way,
and strew it with others upon the Hearse, that we cannot resolve, or certainly
build upon any thing in this World; we are sure of nothing, not so much as of
the Tomb, we shall be laid in, not of our winding sheet, not of our
grave-cloaths, not of our Mourners, not of our Preacher: We are not sure of our
Tombe-stone, for when Joseph of Arimathea hewed out a Tombe-stone out of the
Rock, he intended it for himself; yet was he not laid there, but our Savior in
it: We are not sure of our gravecloaths, and winding sheet; for Heliogobalus
the Emperor provided himself of rich furniture in this kind; and moreover, in
case he should come to a violent end, to be forced to make away himself, he
kept by him golden setters, and silken ropes, and made a Bath of Rose Water to
drown himself in, yet none of all these were made use of at his miserable death
and ignominious burial in a laystal. Nay, a man is not sure that his skin shall
cover his flesh, for Zisca his skin was plucked off after his death, and a Drum
made of it. Coclcus bist.
Lastly, a man is not sure of his Bearers or Mourners, nor the Preacher who
shall make his Funeral Sermon, as you learn to your costs this day. I may add.
Oravitatis eloquentia, and eruditiona vestigia egocinis and velisima pars luti,
and scintilla dum vertor, satis habe^ sis^plendorem illius imbecillitas
occulerum f^rre possit.
For that excessive speech of Saint Jerome, abusing himself in comparison of
Roffinus will prove defective, in expressing the difference between him whom
you hear, and whom you should hear. I shall think my self happy if I can but
tread in any of his steps, or imprint, but one of his notes in your heart.
Which that I may do the better, I have borrowed his characters, I mean the
words of that Text which he chose, as best befitting this occasion, wherein we
see that performed to one of the sons of Abraham, which was long ago promised
to the Father of the faithful, that he should go to his Fathers in peace, and
be buried in a good old age.

The hand of a dead man stroaking the part, cures the Tympany, and certainly
the consideration of death, is a present means to cure the swelling of pride in
any; for in this life many things make odds between men and women; as birth,
education, wealth, Aug. l. de Not. and great. respice sepulchra, et vide quis
servi quis Dominus, quis dives and quis pauper, descerne si potes vinctum a
rege, sertem a debili; pulchrum a deformi.
alliance and honor: but Death makes all even, respice Sepulchra, faith Saint
Austin, Survey men's graves, and tell me then who is beautiful, and who is
deformed: all there have hollow eyes, flat noses, and ghastly looks; Nireus and
The sirtes cannot be there distinguished: tell me who is rich, and who is poor;
all there wear the same weed, their winding sheet: Tell me, who is noble, and
who is base and ignoble, the worms claim kindred of all: tell me, who is well
housed, and who ill, all there are bestowed in dark and dankish rooms under
ground. If this will not satisfy you take a sive and sift the dust and ashes
of all men, and show me which is which. I grant there is some difference in
dust: there is powder of Diamonds, there is gold dust, and brass pin-dust, and
saw-dust, and common dust; the powder of Diamonds resembles the remains of
Princes; gold dust, the remains of Noblemen; pin-dust, the remains of the
Tradesman; saw-dust, the remains of the day-laybourer, and common dust, the
reremains of the vulgar, which have no quality or profession to distinguish
them; yet all is but dust. At a game of Chesse, we see Kings and Queens, and
Bishops, and Knights upon the board, and they have their several walks, and
contest one with the other in points of State and honor: but when the game is
done all together with the Pawns are shuffled in one bag; in like manner in
this life men appear in different garbes, and take diverse courses, some are
Kings, some are Officers, some Bishops, some Knights, some of other ranks and
orders. But when this life like a game is done, which is sometimes sooner,
sometimes later, all are shuffled together with the many or vulgar sort of
people, and lie in darkness and obscurity till the last man is born upon the
earth, but after that, Erunt ipsis quoque fata sepulchers. the Grave which has
swallowed up all the sons of Adam, Sophocl. in Antig.
shall be swallowed up it self into victory. Till then we shall all go (...),
in our several rank and order, take our last walk, the way of all flesh; and it
is happy if we go it as Abraham did here in peace, and a special blessing, if
we be gathered as he was to his Fathers in the Autumn of a good old age.

In which words we have two Acts of a Tragedy, the former acted upon his Stage,
thou shall go to thy Fathers, the latter under the scaffold, and be buried in a
good old age. None die better then they, who have life in their hope: and none
live better than they, who have death in their mind and thought; especially if
it be in the time of their health, and bloom of their beauty, and pride of
their youth, and top of their earthly happiness. For this cause Joseph of
Arimathes, is supposed by many, to have set his Sepulcher in his Garden, as it
were to sauce his sweetest pleasures, with the sad thoughts of his Funeral: and
John surnamed the Almoner began his Sepulcher, on the day he was Consecrated
Patriark of Alexandria: and it was the manner of the ancient Emperors at their
Coronation feast, to have several sorts of Marble showed them, to the end, that
they might choose one of them for their Tombstone; and agreeable hereunto the
interlineary gloss yields a reason why God commanded that the oil wherewith
the Kings were anointed, should be compounded with Cinnamon, and other spices,
quod sit cinericii coloris, because it is of the color of Ashes, or rather
such mould as is dug out of Graves, to put them in mind that very day in
which they were made Gods upon earth, that they should die like men. In which
regard we have great cause to Bless the providence of our heavenly Father, who
in the midst of our Marriage feasts, and many occasions of mirth and joy,
presents us with such sad spectacles, as here we see; to the end we should not
exceed in our mirth, or too far set our heart upon the pleasures and comforts
of this life, which like sticks under a pot after a blaze fall suddenly into
ashes. Let us learn from all the changes and chances of this mortal life, not
to sing a requiem to our souls here, with the fool in the Gospel, because we
have wealth laid up for us, for many years, for if our riches take not their
wings, and fly away from us, we shall be taken away from them, we shall be
arrested by Gods Bailiff, Death, and then we must go.

But thou shall go. 1. The manner. 2. The matter.


The former divides it self into two Rivelets, the latter into three: In the
former, to wit, the manner I observe,

1. That these words were spoken to Abraham in a Dream, (when the Sun was going
down a heavy sleep fell upon him.)

2. That they were spoken by way of Gracious promise.

In the latter, to wit, the matter I observe three blessings bestowed upon
Abraham.

1. A comfortable death, Thou shall go in peace.

2. An honorable burial, and be buried with thy Fathers.

3. A seasonable time for both, in a good old age.

First, of the manner. When the Sun was setting, a deep sleep and dreadful
darkness fell upon Abraham, and God showed him in a dream, the misery and
thraldom of his postetity in Egypt: Know of a surety, that thy seed shall be a
stranger in a land that is not theirs, and shall serve them, and they shall
afflict them 400. years, verse 13. and lest at the sight hereof his heart should
utterly have failed him, and his bowels dried up within him like a pot-sheard;
God clears the sky which was clouded with a smoke of a fiery furnass, verse.
17. and cheareth his heart, reviving him with a promise of safety, and peace
for himself, and of deliverance of his posterity also out of their grievous
servitude, after a certain period of years allotted for the promise of the
growth and ripeness of the Amorites sins.

For dreams in general, Arist. Eth.
the great Secretary of Nature discovers unto us, that the Dreams of good
men, are better than the Dreams of bad; and he will have his foelix or happy
man, to have a singular privilege above other men, even in his sleep. And
doubtless, as a good conscience is a full feast in the day, so it is a light
banquet in the night; for better thoughts, and phantesies in the day, beget
better dreams in the night: as the brighter colors in the Window, when the Sun
shines cast clearer species intentionales, or reflections from them on the
Wall. God is with his children, as well in the night, as in the day, and he
imparts his counsels, and discloseth his secrets, as well by dreams in the one,
as by visions in the other. That prophecy of Joel, I will pour out my spirit
upon all flesh, and your young men shall see visions, and your old men shall
dream dreams, though it were fulfilled in the day of Penticost, (as Saint Peter
instructs us) yet ought it not to be restrained to that day, or the Apostles
time only. For it has been verified in all after-ages, and holds still for
profitable, and comfortable irradiations of Gods Spirit upon the soul, by day
and night, though not for supernatural and prophetical revelations, or not so
frequent: Dreams therefore as they are not with the Eastern people
supertitiously to be observed; so neither are they utterly to be neglected, as
idle and vain nocturnal fantasies; The Poet could say: (...).
Homer Hae.


Jupiter sends Dreams, Aristot. phy.
and Ariflotle dreamed not, when he wrote his exact discourse of Divination by
dreams; nor Artemidorus when he published his curious tract, entitled (...),
judgment of Dreams, for the experience of all times proves, that the Dreams of
many men, especially a little before their death, have been very considerable:
When the window, of the senses are shut, the soul has best leisure to look
into her self: and after sickness has battered down the walls of the dark
prison of the body, in which she was close kept, more light breaks in upon her,
and she sees farther off then she could before; and this is the meaning of the
Platonicks, in that their Apophthegme, anima promonet in morte, the soul looks
out, as it were near death: For this particular in my Text, God is gracious to
many of his children now adays by Dreams, or otherwise to give them notice of
their departure hence. To some he makes known the year, to some the month, to
some the very day and hour, when they shall go the way of all flesh. And as
here he fore-shewed Abraham his departure from hence, per viam lecteum, by the
milky way, as it were, that is by a sweet and pleasant passage of a natural
death in the autumn of his life: Acts and mon. p. 1.
so also in a Dream he represented to Saint Polycarpe, and Saint Cyprian, their
passage, per viam sanguineam, Poncius Diacoa in vit Cyp.
The bloody way of martyrdom. Policrape not many months before he was
sacrificed for a whole burnt-offering to God, dreamed that his bed was all on
fire under him: and Saint Cyprian saw in a Dream the Proconsul-give order to
the Clerk of the Assizes, to write down his sentence (which was to have his
head cut off with a Sword) which when the Clerk by signs made known to Saint
Cyprian, the godly Bishop earnestly desired a little delay of the execution,
that he might set his house in order; and the Clerk answered him in his dream,
that his petition was granted, and so it sell out accordingly, that that day
(...) Dream) this Saint of God closing first his own eyes, (...) ceived a
glorious crown of martyrdom in heaven.

The second thing I observed in the manner was, that these (...) way of promise
to Abraham, whence Galvin rightly (...) life, was a favor of God unto him, not
the purchase of his own merits, (...) the fruit of his own care, for although
speaking in ordine (...) a man may be said by the observation of physic rules,
to prolong his days upon (...) did who was otherwise a man of a very crazie
body, and could not (...) have held out half so long: yet if we speak simply
(...) that as no man can by his care add a cubit to his stature, nor an hour
(...) the period set by God before all time; Psalm. 31.15.
for my times are in thy hands, (...) David, and our days are determined,
faith Job, the number of our months is with (...) thou bast appointed man his
bounds, which he cannot pass. Job 14.5. and (...) appointed time to man, are
not his days, as the day (...) tree grows not upon the head of any, without
(...) bloomed in a seasonable time. If life be a blessing, long life is a (...)
specially if it be crowned with a happy death; for the last Act makes (...)
medy, or a Tragedy; and as the evening proves the day, so a man (...) and
after, overrun the verdict of his life, Dicique beatus,
Ante obitum nemo supremaque funera debet.
and so I fall into the road of my Text, and begin to treat of the peaceable
end of those who die in the faith, and lie in the bosom of Abraham.

Go to thy fathers in peace. Abraham, and the (...) thereof in the Sepulchers
of his Fathers; this Exposition complieth not with the truth of the story; for
none but Sarah lay in this cave, Abraham's Fathers were (...) where bestowed. If
we refer them to the soul of Abraham, and illustrate them with this gloss, Thou
shall go on in thy soul, to the glorious troup of thy (...) then will grow,
what that place is whither his Fathers went before him, (...) Heaven? but some
of Abraham's Fathers were Idolatours, and we have no warrant to place any
Idolatour there. Is it Hell? thither no man goes in peace, neither did ever yet
any Jew, Tertul, devesurrect. in candida exp (...), ut (...) gistratum
ambientes expectabant suffragia. Encharid (...) Laurant. (...) tempus quod
inter bomines^ mortem, and ultimaresurrectionis interposition est animas ab^
(...) recepta^ la contiment, sicut (...) dign^ est, (...) requi^, vel (...) pro
eo (...) est in car^e (...) viveret.
or Christian so rub his forehead, or rather arm it with brass; as to affirm
that the soul of Abraham in whom all generations of the earth were blessed, was
in Hell; shall we then send him to the Rabbis Limbus, or the Popish purgatory,
or the ancient Fathers, occulta recepta^ula, hidden receptacles, or unknown
places; wherein Tertullian conceives, that the souls of the faithful departed,
resemble those among the Romans, who stood for offices, and the day of the
election, while the voices were in calculation, expected in a white gown,
whether they were chosen (...) Saint Austin, also is very express for these
hidden Cells; from the death of (...) the last Resurrection, the souls are
bestowed in hidden, (...) as every (...) worthy either rest or pain. To dispel
this mist which has (...) many to miss their way, first by the light of the
Scripture, I will clear the (...) question, and then interpret the phrase.

First then for the souls of the faithfuls flight (...) is free from this clog
of flesh; I answer, that it is straight to Heaven (...) of the first born
there, and the spirits of just men made perfect: for of (...) who (...) that he
might (...) with God, and of Elias, who was carried up into Heaven in a fiery
Chariot; there is little doubt can be made; and less of Abraham, to whose
besome in Heaven Lazarus was carried: and least of all on the Thief, to whom
Christ promised on the Cross, this day thou shall be with me in Paradise. Why
should Saint Paul so earnestly desire to be dissolved and to be with Christ; if
after his dissolution till the day of judgment, he should not come near him nor
see his face? Why should all godly Christians be so willing to be absent from
the body, that they might be present with the Lord, if after they were absent
from the body they should not come into the Lords presence? who dare question
that which the Apostle so expressly and so considently delivers, we know that if
the house of our earthly tabernacle be dissolved, we have an eternal in the
Heavens.

As for the phrase, thou shall go to thy Fathers, it is but an elegant
circumlocution of the period of our life; a quaver upon the close thereof, for
the meaning is, thou shall die, or go the way of all flesh. Quo pius AEneas quo
dives Tullus, and Ancus.


Whither all thy Fathers went before thee, good and bad, rich and poor; for
Deaths sickle like the Italian Captains sword, which could not distinguish
between a Guelf and Gibelive, slaies all, and makes a prey of all. The
righteous soul must for a time be divorced from the body as well as the soul of
the wicked, and in the graves the Worms claim kindred of the elect, as well as
of the reprobate: the consideration whereof, put the Preacher into a passion,
how does the righteous man die as well as the wicked? as it is said of Abraham,
that he is gathered to dis Fathers; so it is said also of Ishmael, and may be
of the wickedest man that breaths. And herein the language of Canaan, and the
lauguage of Ashdod, do not much differ: for what the Romans mean by that their
phrase, abijt ad plures, he is gone to the many. The Hebrews in a sanctified
phrase express by abiit ad patres, he is gone to his Fathers, or gathered to
his people, whereof some interpreters give this acute reason. It cannot be said
of us here whilst we live, that we are gathered to our own people in a
spiritual sense, because here good and bad are gathered together, Elect and
Reprobate sojourn together, all are as it were joint Comminers upon the earth,
the City of God, and the City of the world sail in the same ship to the Haven
of death. The Drawnet of the Gospel catches sweet and stinking fish, in Gods
field, Tares grow with Wheat, in his floar, there is much Chaff with good
grain. But after death, God takes his Fan in his hand, and purges his Floar.
After we depart hence, God places and sorteth his Children by themselves, and
the Children of the World and the wicked are by themselves; and so every man is
exactly gathered to his own people; every star is set in his own constellation,
every grain is put in his own heap, every person and family is joined to his
own tribe, we all pass by the same gate of death, but presently after we are
out of it; some take the right hand, and are ranked with sheep; others, the
left hand, and are ranked among his goats. We are all like Plate worn out of
fashion, and we must all be altered, and therefore of necessity must be melted,
that is dissolved by death; but after we have run in the fire of the judgment
of God, of that which was pure metal God will make Vessels of honor, but of
the drossy and alcumy stuff, that is the profane or impure person or
hypocrite, vessels of dishonor, and these shall shine like the sun in the
Firmament, those shall glo like coals in the fire of hell for evermore. By this
it should seem may some object, that the righteous have no prerogative in death
above the wicked, but only after death; and consequently that God promised
Abraham no blessing in these words, thou shall go to the fathers; it had been
rather a singular favor to have kept him out of the common track with Enoch,
and have translated him, that he might not see death: this objection is
answered in the next words.

In peace, it is no special blessing or favor to bring us to our fathers by
death, for statutum est omnibus haminibus semel mori, the Statute provideth
sufficiently to send us to the place where we were born, but to send us thither
in peace, is a singular favor which God vouchsafes his dear Children,
especially in such a peace as Abraham went in, wherein a threefold peace
concurred. 1 Peace of estate. 2 Peace of body. 3 Peace of conscience.


First, thou shall go to thy fathers in peace, that is in a peaceable time, or
the days of peace; the storms I foreshewed the hanging over thy Posterity,
shall not fall in thy time, but thou shall die in a blessed calm; thy house
being set in order, and thy friends about thee, thy children shall close thine
eyes, and they whom thou broughtest into the World, shall carry thee with
honor out of the World.

Secondly, thou shall go to thy fathers in peace, that is, thou shall have an
easy and a quiet pass (...) there shall be no great struggling at thy
departure, but a kind parting of soul and body; thy soul shall earnestly desire
to return to the Father of spirits, and though thy body shall contend in
courtesy to stay it a while, yet it shall without much ado yield: thou shall
like a ripe Apple fall from the Tree without plucking, or a violent blast of
Wind, thou shall go out of thy self as a golden Taper when the wax is spent,
and thou shall leave a sweet smell, a good name like a precious perfume after
thee.

Thirdly, thou shall go to thy fathers in peace; that is, in peace of
conscience, and peace with God, which passes all understanding; thou shall
have no trouble in thy mind at the hour of death, no terrors of conscience, no
fearful conflict with despare, no dangerous assault of Satan, or flashes of
hell fire, all thy sins shall be blown away like a cloud, and the beams of Gods
countenance shall shine brightly upon thee, and dry up all thy tears, non sic
impij, non sic, it shall not be so with the wicked, it shall not be so with
them, Esaias 48.22.
for there is no peace to the wicked faith my God, neither in life nor death;
but as a ruff sea is ruffest of all, and most foaming and raging of all at the
shore; so the life of a wicked man is always unquiet, but most troublesome at
all near the end. If he die not in some garboil, as Sylla; or in the act of
uncleanness with John the Twelf; or voyding his entrals with Arrius; or rending
his bowels with Julian; or falling upon his own sword, with Nero; or railing
and raging, with Latomus; if he be not punished in body with some violent fit
of sickness, or unsufferable pang of torment, yet he goes not to his fathers
in peace; for there is sent a hue and cry after him to apprehend him, and lay
him in chains of darkness till the general Assizes at the dreadful day of Doom,
when he shall not be found of God in peace, but in wrath, Apcc. 6.16.
and reading in the look of the Judge of quick and dead his dreadful sentence;
he shall cry to the hills to fall upon him, and to the mountains to cover him
from the presence of God, and wrath of the Lamb. thou shall be buried in a good
old age.

Although the heathen Philosophers made little account of Burial, Eraz. Apoph.
Theodoro parum interest bumine an insublime putrescat. Tertal, de reJurect.
as appeared by that speech of Theodorus to the Tyrant, who threatened to hang
him; I little pass by it whether my carcass putrify above the earth, or on it;
and the Poet seems to be of his mind, whose strong line it was, Caelo tegitur
qui non habet urnam.
which was Pompeys case, and had like to have been Alexanders, and William the
Conquerours. Yet all Christians who conceive more divinely on the soul, deal
moreh umanly with the body, which they acknowledge to be membrum Christi, and
Templum Dei, a member of Christ, and Temple of God. If charity commands thee to
cover the naked, says Saint Ambrose, how much more to bury the dead? when a
friend is taking a long journey, it is civility for his friends to bring him on
part of the way; when our friends are departed and now going to their grave,
they are taking their last journey, from which they shall never return till
time shall be no more; and can we do less then by accompaning the Corpse to the
grave, bring them as it were part on their way, and shed some few tears for
them, whom we shall see no more with mortal eyes? The Prophet calls the grave
Miscabin, a sleeping chamber, or resting place, and when we read Scriptures to
them that are departing, and give them godly instructions to die; we light them
as it were to their bed; and when we send a deserved testimony after them, we
persume the room. Indeed if our bodies (which like garments we cast off at our
death) were never to be worn again, we need little care where they were thrown,
or what became of them; but seeing they must serve us again, their fashion
being only altered, it is fit we carefully lay them up in deaths Wardrope the
grave: though a man after he have lost the jewel, does less set by the casket,
yet he who loves much, and highly esteems of the soul of his friend, as
Alexander did of Homer, cannot but make some reckoning of the Desk or Cabinet
in which it always lay; we have a care of placing the picture of our friend,
and should we not much more of bestowing his body? Ierrem. 22.19.
If burial were nothing to the dead, God would never have threatened Coniah that
he should have the burial of an Ass; nor the Psalmist so quavered upon this
doleful note, Psalm. 7 9.1.2.
dederunt cadaver servorum tuorum coeli volucribus, O God the heathen are come
into thine inheritance, thy holy Temple have they desiled, and made Jerusalem
an heap of stones the dead bodies of thy servants have they given to the fowls
of Heaven. thou shall be buried in a good old age.

Procopius observes it in Miriam, Aaron, and Moses, that as they exceeded one
the other in holiness, so in days; for Aaron out lived Miriam, and Moses,
Aaron, long life is a crown, when it is found in the ways of righteousness,
cum senectute bona: and albeit it is almost the burden of every man's song,
that age is a burden, and a perpetual disease, or rather a continual tract of
diseases, and a sequence of maladies; yot none for ought I see goes about to
lay down this burden, or to be cured of this disease; even they who most
eloquently declaim upon the vanity, and exclaim against the miseries of this
life, and wish a thousand times that they were dead, would be loath to be taken
at their word. (...) in greek signifies praemium a reward, as senectum old
age, and doubtless old age in general is so to be accounted; for it is reckoned
among the blessings which God bestowed upon Job, Isaac, David, and Jehoida, who
are all said to have dyed in a good old age, or full of days, riches and
honor. For howsoever to some men in some case, contraction of their days has
proved an advantage, by abridging their present, and preventing their future
forrows; as it was to good King Josiah, who was timely taken away, that he
might not see the evil which after his death fell upon his people, Dossid. in
witExod. 20.12. Psalm, 55.23. The blood thirsty and deceitful mau shall not live
out half his days. 1 Samuel 2.32.
and to Saint Austin, who dyed immediately before Hippo was taken. Yet length of
days ordinarily is a blessing, and promised to such as obey their Parents;
honor thy father and thy mother, that thy days may be long: as on the
contrary, shortning the days of life is threatened by the Psalmist as a curse
to the blood-thirsty and deceitful man; and Eli took it for such, when Samuel
from God told him, there should not be an old man in his family. Howsoever if
old age be not perpetually and simply a blessing in it self, yet as it is here
qualified with bona, I am sure it is. The Almond-tree is beautiful of it self,
how much more when it is hung with jewels and precious stones, as Xerxes his
Platihas was, and crowned with health, riches, honor, and the comfort of a
good conscience. These make old age such a burden, as bladders are to him that
swimmeth which bear him up; or feathers to a bird, which though they have some
weight, yet by them she raises her self up and flies.

By this time you expect I know, the application of this Scripture, but it is
made already, not in word, but in deed; not by me but by him whose empty Casket
we behold with tears; yet rejoicing that God has taken out the jewel to adorn
his Spouse the triumphant Church in Heaven. Hiro. epitaph Paul. sentimus quid
bab^emus, postquam habere decivimus.
He is already gone in soul to his Fathers, and is now going in body to them to
be buried in their Sepulcher; his body and soul are now distracted, and we for
his distraction; his soul is gone, and our hearts are gone. I ever held sighs
the best figures, and tears the fluentest rhetoric in a Funeral speech; if I
had better known this honorable Personage, I could have spoken more in his
praise, yet no more then the City and Conntrey will prove to be true, by the
miss of him.

Desiderantur reliqua.

(...).

10 PAEAN: OR, CHRIST'S TRIUMPH OVER DEATH.
A FUNERAL SERMON Preached at Lambeth, August 3.1639.
SERMON XLIII.
1 COR. 15.55. O Death, where is thy sting? O Grave, where is thy victory?


I Fear lest some here present, that are of a more melting disposition, stung
with the sense of their present loss, and overcome with grief and sorrow for
it, may frame an answer with a deep sigh to the Interrogations in my Text,
saying, here is Deaths sting, here is the Graves victory: here is Deaths sting,
for it has stung him to death, who was the stay of my comfort, and joy of my
life: here is the Graves victory, for it holds the Corpse of my dearest Friend
captive, and close prisoner in his Coffin. If any thus troubled in mind, hear
me this day, let them stop the flood-gate of their tears, and lengthen their
patience but to an hour, and by Gods assistance in the Explication, and
Application of this parcel of Scripture, I will make it appear to them that
their Friend is not dead, but sleeps; and that death has not swallowed up
him, but he has swallowed up death into victory: and that already in soul he
insulteth over Death in the words of my Text, O Death where is thy sting? and
shall hereafter in body, when this corruptible shall put on incorruption,
insult in like manner over the grave saying, O grave where is thy victory?

This sentence is like a Ring of Gold enamelled, or cloth of Tissue
imbroidered, or a piece of rich plate curiously wrought and engraved, materiam
superavit opus; the workmanship seems to go beyond, or at least equal the
metal, for this sentence consists of three figures at least.

First, Jer 22.29.
an Apostrophe which by a kind of miracle of art gives life to dead things,
and ears to the deaf, like to that, O earth, earth, earth, hear the voice of
the Lord.

Secondly, Esa. 37.1 3.
an insultation like to that in the Prophet Esaias, Where are the Gods of Hamar,
and the gods of Arphad, or the gods of the City of Sepharvaim.

Thirdly, a double Metaphor, the former taken from a Serpent, Be, Wasp, or
Hornet: the latter taken from a Conqueror: for Death is here compared to a
Be, Wasp, Hornet or Serpent without a sting: the Grave to a Conqueror that
has lost his booty, or prisoner, O death, etc. Such Drawn-works wrought about
with diverse coulors of Art, we find often in the Sacred coutext, especially in
the Prophesies of the old Testament, and the Epistles of Saint Paul in the new.
If we look up to the heavens, we find in some part of the sky single stars by
themselves; in others a Constellation or conjunction of many stars: so in some
passages of holy Writ you may observe one figure or trope, Matthew. 25.35.36.
as namely a membrum or similiter cadence, as, I was hungry and you gave me
meat; I was thirsty, and you gave me drink; I was naked, and you clothed me; I
was sick, and in prison, and you visited me; or an Allegory, as, Where the body
is, there the Eagles will be gathered; or an Apostrophe, as, Hear O heavens,
and hearken, O earth; or an Exclamation, Oh that they were wise, then they
would understand this! Matthew. 24.28. Esaias. 1.2. Deuteronomy. 32.29. Psalm 81.13. Jerem.
8.22.
Oh that my people would have hearkened io my voice and that Israel would have
walked in my ways! In other passages, a conjunction and combination of many
figures, and ornaments of speech, as in that Text of the Prophet Jeremy, Is
there no balm in Gilead, no Physician there? Why then is not the health of my
people restored? In which one verse you may note four figures. First an
interrogation for more emphatical conviction. Secondly, a communication, for
more familiar instruction. Thirdly, an Allegory for more lively expression.
Fourthly, an Aposiopesis for safer reprehension: and the like we observe in our
Saviors exprobration, O that thou knew in this thy day, the things that
belong to thy peace! O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Luke. 19.41, 42 Matthew. 23.27.
which killest the Prophets, and stonest those that are sent unto thee; how
often would I have gathered thy children, as a hen does her chickens, and thou
would not! Here is a posie of rhetorical flowers, an Exclamation, O si
c^gnovisses, a reticentia; at least in this thy day, saltem in hoc die tuo; A
repetition, Jerusalem, Jerusalem; an interrogation; how often would I? quoties
volui? And lastly, an Icon or lively expression to the eye; sicut galina
congregat pullos suos; As the hen gathers her chickens under her wings.

Where are now our Anabaptists, and plain pack-staff methodists, who esteem of
all flowers of Rhetoric in Sermons no better then stinking weeds, and of all
elegancies of speech then of profane spells? For against their wills, at
unawares they censure the holy Oracles of God in the first place, which excel
all other writings; as well in eloquence, as in Science; doubtless as the
breath of a man has more force in a Trunk, and the wind a louder, and sweeter
sound in the Organ-pipe, then in the open air, so the matter of our speech, and
the theme of our discourse, which is conveyed through figures, and forms of
Art, both sound sweeter to the ear, and pierce deeper into the heart, there is
in them plus (...) and (...), more evidence, and more efficacy, they make a
fuller expression, and take a deeper impression. secondly, where are our
profane critics, who delight in the fleshpots of Egypt, and loath Manna,
admire carnal eloquence in Poets, Divin. institut. l 1. ut nec ipsam decent
alia, nec alios ipsa.
and heathen Orators, and task the Scriptures for rude simplicity, and want of
all Art and eloquence? It is true, the Scripture is written in a style peculiar
to it self, the elocution in it is such (as Lactantius observes) that it
befitted no other books, as neither does that we find in other books befit it.
As the matter in Scripture, so the form is divine ( nec vox heminum sonat,)
which consists not in the words of man's wisdom, but in the evidence of the
Spirit. Yet is there admirable eloquence in it, and far surpassing which, we
find in all other writings; Wherefore Politian the Grammarian, who pretended he
durst not touch any lease in the Bible, for fear of defiling the purity of his
language, or slurring the gloss of his style, is condemned, as well by learned
humanists, as Divines: And Theopompus who went about to cloth Gods word with
gay and trim phrases of heathen Orators, Beller. l. 1. de Verb. Dei. c. 2.
and Poets, was punished by God with loss of his wits. Thus have we viewed the
form, let us now have an eye to the matter, our Lords conquest over Death, and
the Grave. There are two things most dreadful to the nature of man, Death and
the Grave, the one severeth the soul, the other consumes the body, and
resolves it into dust: the valiantest conquerours that with their bloody flags
and coulors, have struck a terror unto all Nations; yet have been afrighted
themselves at the displaying of the pale and wan colors of Death: the most
retired Philosophers, and Monks, who have lived in Cells, and Caves under the
ground: yet have been startled at the sight of their Grave. How much then are
we indebted to our Christian says, that not only overcomes the world, but
also conquereth the fear of Death, and the grave, and dares both in the words
of my Text; O death, sting me if thou can; O grave conquer me if thou be
able; O death, where is thy sting; O grave, where is thy victory.

In which words the Apostle like a Crier, calls Death and the Grave into the
Court, and examineth them upon two Articles, first concerning the sting of the
one, secondly concerning the victory of the other: Will it please you then to
fix the eye of your observation upon the parts of this Text, as they are laid
before you in terms of Law. 1 A Citation. 2 An Examination,


In the Citation upon 1 the manner of it, 2 the parties cited
1 Death 2 Grave.


In the Examination 1 Upon the first Interrogatory put to Death, touching the
ledging of his sting. 2 Upon the second Interrogatory put to the Grave,
touching the field of his victory.


First, for the manner of Citing, it is by an Apostrophe, a figure often
accurring in holy Scripture, as in the book of Kings, O Altar, Altar, O ye
mount ains of Gilboa, and of the Psalms; lift up ye gates, and be ye lift up
you everlasting doors: and of the Canticles, Arise O North, and blow O South;
and in the Prophets, O earth, earth, earth. In imitation of which strings of
rhetoric the Ancient Fathers in their funeral Orations, many times turned to
the dead, and used such compellations as these, audi Constantine vale Paula,
hear O Constantine, farewell O Paula. From which passages our advesaries very
weakly, if not ridiculously infers the invocation of Saints departed, making
weapons of plumes of feathers, and arguments of ornaments; and which is far
worse, Divinity of rhetoric, and articles of faith, of tropes of sentences. By
a like consequence, they might conclude that hills and trees, and the earth,
and gates, and death, and hell have eyes to look upon us, or ears to hear us,
or that we ought to invocate them; because the holy Ghost makes such
Apostrophes to them, as the Fathers do to the souls of Saints newly departed
out of their bodies.

Secondly, for the parties here cited and called in their order, first Death,
and then the Grave: Death goes before the Grave, because men die before they
are buried, and the Grave is properly no Grave, till it be possessed by a dead
body, before it is but a hole or pit; O Death, In Hebrew Maveth, from Muth,
whence mutus in Latin is derived; and mute in English, because Death bereaveth
us of speech; and for a like reason the Grave is termed, Domus silentii, a
house of silence. In Greek, (...), either quasi (...) from (...) or quasi (...)
supple (...), either from a word signifying to stretch, because death
stretches out the body; or from words signifying to tend upwards, because by
death the soul is carried upwards, returning to God that gave it. In Latin
Mors either quasi (...), our fatal portion, or as Saint Austin will have it a
morsu, because the biting of the Serpent caused it. The letter or word, is but
like the bark or rind, the sense is the juice; yet here we may suck some
sweetness from the bark or rind: From the hebrew Muth we learn that our tongues
must be bound to their good behavior concerning the dead, we must not make
them our ordinary table talk, or break jeasts upon them; much less vent our
spleen, or wreak our malice on them; we must never speak of them but in a
serious and regardful manner, de mortuis nil nisi been; Nazianz. orot. 38.
mortem ut peccati precisionem homo lucratur, ne malum sit immortale ita pana in
misericordia ced it.
From the Greek (...) as it is derived from (...) mutando (...) tenuem in (...)
aspiratam, we must learn to extend our hands to the poor, especially near
death, which stretches out our bodies, and to send our thoughts (...), to the
things that are above, whether if we die well the Angels shall immediately
carry our souls. From the Latin mors so termed quasi (...) or (...) a (...)
divido, we are to learn to be contented with our lot and bear it patiently;
considering first, that we brought it upon our selves; secondly, that we gain
this singular benefit by it, that our misery shall not be immortal.

O Death! Amb. in Luke. mors triplex est 2. nature de qua dicitur querent
mortem, and inveniunt secunda culpoe, de qua dicitur anima qua peecat morietur,
tertia gratioe in qua non naturased delicta moriuntur.
to which Death speaks the Apostle? for the Scripture makes mention of the
first and second death, and Saint Ambrose also of a third. The first Death with
him is the death of nature, of which it is said, they shall seek death and not
find it: The second of sin, of which it is said, the soul that sins shall
die the death: The third, of grace, which sets a period not to nature but to
sin. The Death here meant, is the first death, or the Death of nature, which
the Philosophers diversely define according to their diverse opinions of the
soul. Aristoxemis who held the soul to be an harmony, consequently defined
Death to be a discord. Galen, who held the soul to be Crasis, or a temper;
Death to be a distemper. Zeno, who held the soul to be a fire; Death to be an
extinction. Those Philosophers who held the soul to be (...), that is, as Tully
interprets it continuam motionem, Death to be a cessation. The vulgar of the
Heathen who held the soul to be a breath; Death to be an expiration. Lastly,
the Platonicks who held the soul to be an immortal spirit; Death to be a
dissolution, or separation of the soul from the body, and this is twofold. 1
Natural. 2 Violent.


1 Natural, when of it self the natural heat is extinguished or radical
moisture consumed; for our life in Scripture is compared, and in sculpture
resembled to a burning lamp: the fire which kindles the flame in this light,
is natural heat; and the oil which feeds it, is radical moisture. Without
flame there is no light, without oil to maintain it no flame; in like manner,
if either natural heat or radical moisture fail, life cannot last.

2 Violent, Sen. ep. 70. nibil melius oeterna lex secit quam quod unum intro
itum ad vitam nobis dedit, exitus multos.
when the soul is forced untimely out of the body; of this Death there are so
many shapes, that no Painter could ever yet draw them. We come but one way into
the World, but we go a thousand out of it: as we see in a Garden-pot, the the
water is poured in but at one place, to wit the narrow mouth, but it runs
out at 100 holes.

Die Some 1 By fire as the Sodomites. 2 By water, as the old World. 3 By the
infection of the Air, as threescore and ten thousand in David's time. 4 By the
opening of the earth, as Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, Amphiraus, and two Cities,
Buris, and Helice.
Some meet with Death 1 Their Coach, as Anteochus. 2 Their chamber, as
Domitian. 3 Their bed, as John the Twelf. 4 The Theater, as Caligula. 5 The
Senate, us Caesar. 6 The Temple, as Zenacherib. 7 Their Table, as Claudius. 8
At the Lords-Table, as Pope Victor, and Henry of Luxenburge.


Death wounds and strikes some 1 A penknife, as Seneca. 2 A stilletto, as
Henry the Fourth. 3 A sword, as Paul. 4 A Fullers beam, as James the Lords
Brother. 5 A Saw, as Isaiah. 6 A stone, as Pyrrhus. 7 A thunderbolt, as
Anustatius.


What should I speak of Felones de se, such as have thrown away their souls.
Sardanapalus made a great fire and leaped into it. Lucretia stabbed her self.
Cleopatra put an Aspe to her breast, and stung therewith died presently. Saul
fell upon his own sword. Judas hanged himself. Peronius cut his own veins.
Heremius beat out his own brains. Licinius choked himself with a napkin.
Portia died by swallowing hot burning coals. Hannibal sucked poison out of his
ring. Demosthenes out of his Pen, etc.


What seems so loose as the soul and the body, which is plucked out with a
hair, driven out with a smell, fraied out with a fancy? verily that seems to
be but a breath in the nostrils which is taken away with a scent; a shadow
which is driven away with a scarecrow; a dream which is frayed away with a
fancy; a vapor which is driven away with a puff; a conceit which goes away
with a passion; a toy that leaves us with a laughter: yet grief killed Homer,
laughter Philemon, a hair in his milk Fabius, a fly in his throat Adrian, a
smell of lime in his nostrils Jovian, the snuff of a candle a Child in Pliny, a
kernil of a Raison Anacyeon, and a Icesickle one in Martial, which causes the
Poet to melt into tears, saying, O ubi mors non est, si jugulatis aquae?
what cannot make an end of us, if a small drop of water congealed can do it?

In these regards we may turn the affirmative in my Text into a negative, and
say truly, though not in the Apostles sense, O Death where is not thy sting?
for we see it thrust out in our meats, in our drinks, in our apparel, in our
breath, in the Court, in the Country, in the City, in the Field, in the Land,
in the Sea, in the chamber, in the Church and in the Churchyard, where we meet
with the second party to be examined, to wit the Grave.

O Grave, (...), In the language of Ashdod it signfied one thing, but in the
language of Canaan, another.

The Heathen writers understand by it.

First, Hippoc. Aph. (...). Luke 16.23.
the first matter out of which all things are drawn, and into which they are
last of all resolved. So Hippocrates takes the word in his Aph.

Secondly, the rule of the Region of darkness, or prince of Hell, so Hesiod.
takes it, (...). Hes. op. and dies.

Thirdly, the state and condition of the dead, or death it self, so Homer
takes it. Il. (...).

In the Language of Canaan, it is either taken for the place of torment of the
damned; And in hell he lift his eyes being in torments, and sees Abraham afar
off, and Lazarus in his bosom.

Secondly, for the Grave, and that most frequently in the Seventy Interpreters,
as namely, Genesis 37.35.1 Kings 2.6. Psalm. 89.43. Palm. 6 5. Isa. 38.18.
I will go down into Hades to my son; that is, the Grave: and let not his hoary
head go down into Hades, that is the grave, in peace; and in death there is no
remembrance of thee, and who will give thee thanks in Hades, that is the Grave;
and what man is he that lives and shall not see death, and shall he deliver
his soul from the hands of Hades? that is the Grave, and Hades that is the
Grave cannot praise thee, Death cannot celebrate thee; and so it must be here
taken. For though Hell in regard of the Elect be conquered, yet it eternally
possesses the reprobate men and Devils; neither shall it be destroyed at the
day of judgment, or emptied, but enlarged rather, and replenished with the
bodies of all the damned, whose fouls are there already. But Hades that is the
Grave, Apoc. 20: 13.
shall lose all her captives and prisoners, for the earth and sea shall cast up
all their dead.

We have the parties to be examined, let us now hear the Articles upon which
they are to be examined. First Death is to answer to this Interrogatory, where
is thy sting? these words may be understood two manner of ways. 1 Actively. 2
Passively.


1 Passively, where is thy sting? that is the sting thrust out by Death; in
which sense the sting of Death is no other then the present sense of the desert
of death, and guilt of conscience, and a dreadful expectation of damnation and
hell to ensue upon it: take away this sting from the death of the body, that it
is a punishment for sin, and an earnest as it were of eternal death, and it can
hurt no man. This sting Christ has plucked out of the death of all his Saints,
and of a curse, made it a blessing; of a torment, an ease; of a punishment of
sin, a remedy against all sin; of a short and fearful cut to eternal death, a
fair and safe drawbridge to eternal life.

2 Actively, where is thy sting? that is the sting which causes and brings
Death: In this sense the sting of death is sin, non quem mors fecit sed quo,
mors facta est peccato enim morimur, non morte peccamus, as Saint Austin most
accutely and eloquently; Sin is said to be the sting of Death, as a cup of
poison is said to be a potion of death, that is, a potion bringing death, for
we die by sin; we sin not by death, sin is not the offspring of death, but
death the offspring of sin; or as the Apostle terms it the wages of sin. And
it is just with God to pay the sinner this wages, by rendering death to sin, and
punishing sin with death: because sin severeth the soul from God, and not only
grieveth and despightfully entreats, but without repentance, in the end
thrusts the spirit out of doors: And what more agreeable to Divine justice,
then that the soul which willingly severeth her self from God, should be
unwillingly severed from the body? and that the spirit should be expelled of
his residence in the flesh, which expels Gods grace, and excludes his
Spirit from a residence in the soul? This sting of death is like the Adders,
two forked or double; for it is either original or actual sin; original sin is
the sting of death, Genesis 3.17. Rom: 5.12. Ezekiel: 18: 20.
in the day thon eatest of the Tree of knowledge, thou shall surely die: and as
by one man sin came into the World, and death by sin, and so death passes upon
all men, for that all had sinned. Secondly, actual sin is the sting of death;
the soul that sins, it shall die; the son shall not bear the iniquity of the
father, nor the father the iniquity of the son, the righteousness of the
righteous shall be upon him, and the wickedness of the wicked shall be upon
him. Howbeit, if we speak properly, original sin as it is a proness to all sin,
so it makes us rather obnoxious to death, then dead men: but actual sin
without repentance, slayes outright. Adam did not die the day he eat the
fruit, but that day became mortalis, or morti obnoxious, guilty of death, or
liable to it; original sin alone makes us mortes, but actual mortuos, dead
men. The Devil like to a Hornet, sometimes pricks us only, but leaves not his
sting in us, sometime he leaves his sting in us, and that's far the more
dangerous. He is pricked only with this sting, who sins suddenly and
presently repents: but he who the Devil brings to a habit or custom in
sin, in him he leaves his sting.

Now we know what the sting is, let us enquire where it is? The answer is, if
we speak of the reprobate men, or Devils, it remains in their consciences; if
we speak of the Elect, it is plucked out of their souls, and it was put in our
Saviors body, and there deaded and lost, for he that knew no sin, was made sin
for us, to wit, by imputing our sin to him, 2 Cor. 5.11. (...) ^5: 5.
and inflicting the punishment thereof upon him, That we might be made the
righteousness of God in him, for the chastisement of our peace was upon him,
and by his stripes were we healed, 1 Pet. 2.24.
who his own self bare our sins in his own body on the tree. Athanasius
represents the manner of it, by the similitude of a Wasp losing her sting in
a Rock. Vespa acculeo fodiens petram, etc. as an angry Wasp thrusts her sting
into a rock, cannot pierce or enter far into it, but either breaks her sting,
or loses it all: so Death assaulting the Lord of life, and striving with all
her might to sting him, hurt not him, but disarmed her self of her sting for
ever.

The first interrogatory is answered, we know where Deaths sting is; let us now
consider of the second interrogatory, concerning the victory of the Grave; O
grave! where is thy victory? If the Grave, as she opens her mouth wide. so
she could speak, she would answer: My victories are to be seen in Macpelah,
Golgotha; in all the gulphs of the Sea, and Caves and pits of the Earth, where
the dead have been bestowed since the beginning of the world. My victory is in
the fire, in the water, in the earth, in all Churnels and Caemitaties, or
dormitories, in the bellies of fish, in the maws of beasts, in holy shrines,
Tombs and sepulchers, wheresoever corpses have been put, and are yet reserved.
Of all that ever Death arrested, and they by order of divine Justice have been
committed to my custody, never any but one escaped, whom the heaven of heavens
could not contain, much less any earthly prison, he might truly say, and none
but he; O grave! where is thy victory? all save him I keep in safe custody,
that were ever sent to me.

Yet may all that die in Jesus, Musculus in Genesis sides in id quod suturum est
prospicit, ac de co nou secus, ac si jam factum esset gloriatur.
and expect a glorious Resurrection by him, even now by faith insult over the
Grave, for Faith calls those things that are not, as if they were, it looks
backward as far as the Creation, which produced all things at the first of
nothing: and as far forward to the resurrection which shall restore all things
from nothing, or that which is as much as nothing; Faith with an eye anointed
with the eye salve of the spirit sees death swallowed up into victory, and the
earth and sea casting up all their dead, and upon this evidence of things not
seen triumphs over Death and Hell, saying, O Death, where is thy sting? O
Hell, where is thy victory?

We have spoken hitherto of Death and the Grave, let us now hear what they have
to say to us. Death says, fear not me; the Grave, Weep not immorderately for
the dead: Death bids us die to sin: the Grave, Bury all thy injuries and wrongs
in the pit of oblivion; both say to us, sly sin, and neither of us can hurt
you; both say to us, Give thanks to him, who has given you victory over us
both, the sting of death pricks you not, but if you die in the bosom of
Christ, rather delights and rickles you. Death is no more Death, but a sleep;
the Grave is no more a grave, but a bed. Death is but the putting off of our
old rags, the Grave is the Vestry; and the Resurrection, the new dressing, and
richly embroydering them.

Enough has been said to convince us, that Death which before was like a
Serpent armed with a deadly sting, is now but like a silly fly that buzzeth
about us, but cannot sting. Yet as long as there is sin in us, we cannot but in
some degree fear Death: and as long as natural affection remains in us, take on
for them that are taken away. Neither does Christian religion pluck out these
affections by the root, but only prune them. All that my exhortation drives
unto, is but to moderate passion by reason; fear by hope, grief by faith, and
nature by grace: Let love express it self, yet so that in affection to the
dead, we hurt not the living: Let the natural springs of tears swell, but not
too much overflow their banks: let not our eyes be all upon our loss on earth,
but our brothers gain also in heaven, and let the one counter-ballance at
least, the other. The parish has lost a great stay, his company in London a
special ornament, his Wife a careful Husband, her Children a most tender
Father, the poor a good friend; for besides that which his right hand gave in
his lifetime, which his left hand knew not of; by his Will he bequeathed
certain sums of money, for a stock to those Parishes wherein he formerly lived,
and to the poor of this, twenty pounds to be distributed at his Funeral. Many
shall find loss of him, but he has gained God, and is found of him (no doubt)
in peace, Cic. consolat. Periclem narrant historia intra quadridum duobus
filiis orbatum, quiusque eop fortis and constans fuit, ut nihil prorsus
depristino habitu cultuque diminurit, nec unquam coronam de capite deposuerit.
Horatius Pulvillus dum edem Jovi dedicabit inter solemnem verborum
nuncupationem postem tenens ut filium mortuum audivit, nequae manum a post
removit, neque sacra diremit.
for there were many tokens of a true child of God, very conspicuous in his
life and death. He loved the habitation of Gods house, and the place where his
honor dwells: He was just in his dealings, and sought peace all his life,
and ensued it; he forgot nothing so easily as wrongs, and though he enjoyed the
blessings of this world in abundant measure, yet he joyed not in them, his
heart was where his chief treasure lay, in heaven: he foretold his own death,
and the manner thereof, that it should be sudden; and sudden it was, yet not
unexpected, nor unprepared for; for three days before, he set his house in
order, and desired to converse with Divines, and all his discourses was of the
kingdom of God, and the powers of the life to come. When the pangs of death
came upon him, he prayed most earnestly, and desired if it so stood with Gods
good pleasure to be eased, yet uttered no speech of impatiency, but being asked
how he did, answered that he was in Gods hands, to whom he committed his soul
as his faithful Creator, and so died as quietly as he lived; wherefore since he
lived in Gods fear, and died in his favor, and shall rise again in his power:
though the loss of him be a great cut unto us, as the loss of their children
were to Pericles and Horatius Pulvillus; yet as the one hearing of their death
as he was at a solemn sacrifice kept on his Crown; the other as he was at a
dedication, held still the pillar of the temple in his hand, till the whole
Ceremony was performed. So let us continue our devotion notwithstanding this
Parenthesis of sorrow, and make an end of our evening sacrifice concluding with
the words of the Apostle immediately following my Text; Thanks be unto God, who
has given unto our brother and will give unto us all, victory over Death and
the Grave; yea, and Hell to, through Jesus Christ, etc.

FATO FATVM. OR THE KING OF FEARS FRIGHTED AND VANQUISHED.
SERMON XLIV.
HOSEA 13.14. O Death I will be thy plagues.


THe Rose is fenced with pricks, Plin. l. 21.6.4. Rosa nascitur spina verius
quam frutice.
and the sweetest Flowers of Paradise (as this in my Text) are beset with
thorns or difficulties, which after I have plucked away, the Holy Spirit
assisting me, I will open the leaves, and blow the flowers in the Explication
of this Scripture, and in the Application thereof smell to them, and draw from
thence a savor of life unto life.

The Thorn grows upon the diversity of Translations, Hieron: comment, in
Proph. Hosea c. 13 cromers tua o mors ideo m^rtum sum, ut tu mea morte
moriaris, ero morsus tua inferne qui omnia tuis faucibus devorasti.
for Rabbi Shelamo larchi reads the words, Ego ero verba tua o mors, I will be
thy words O Death. Aben Ezra, ero causatuoe mortis, I will be the cause of thy
death: Saint Jerome, Ero mors tua o mors, O Death I will be thy death, O Hell I
will bite thee: and he conceives, that when our Savior descended into Hell,
and his flesh in the Grave saw no corruption, he spoke these words to Death and
Hell. morsus tua inferne qui omnis tuis faucibus devorasti.
O death, I will be thy death, for therefore I dyed that thou might be slain
by my death! O hell, I will bite and devour thee, which devourest all things in
thy chops. The Septuagint render the Hebrew ubi causa tua o mors. (...) where
is thy plea or thy indictment? what have thou now to say against the chosen of
god? Saint Paul ubi stimulus tuus (...), Aug. l.3. de remit. peccat c 11. ubi
est peccatum quo puncti and venati sumus.
O death where is thy sting? that is faith Saint Austin, where is sin wherewith
we are stung and poisoned? Is not this Ghius ad Choum? do not these
Translations as well agree as harp and harrow? neither can it be answered, (to
salve the repugnancy, and solve the difficulty) that Saint Paul (1 Cor. 15.55.)
his words have no reference to this Text in the Prophet, for the last
Translation approved by our Church in the marginal note upon the 1 Cor. 15.55.
sends us to this verse in Hosea; Calv. in Hossatis constat Paulum 1 Cor. 15.
non citasse Propheta testimonum ad confirmandam ullam doctrinam de que disserit.
and we find no other place in all the Scriptures of the old Testament, to
which the Apostle should allude but this. And although Calvin endeavoring to
untie this Gordean knot, says peremptorily, that it is evident that the
Apostle 1 Cor 15. does not alledg the testimony of the Prophet to confirm any
Point of Doctrine delivered by him; yet Calvin hi^ evidence, for it seems to me
obscure and inevident, his satis constat, minime liquet, for the express words
of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 15.53, 54, 55. are, for this corruptible must put on
incorruption, and this mortal must put on immortality; so when this corruptible
shall have put on incorruption, and this mortal shall have put on immortality;
then shall be brought to pass the saying that is written, Death is swallowed up
in victory, O Death where is thy sting? O Grave where is thy victory?

What shall we say then hereunto? With submission to those who out of better
skill in the original, and upon more exact examination of all Translations, may
bring them to a better accord for the present, I thus resolve.

First, that Rabbi Iarchi his translation is utterly be to rejected; for it is
like the white of an egg that has no taste: what sense can any man pick out of
these words ero verbo tua o mors, I will be thy words O Death, unless we help
them with our English phrase, I will do thine errand.

Secondly, Aben-Ezra is to go packing with his fellow Rabbin, for his
interpretation is a manifest contradiction to the former words of the Prophet;
I will ransom them from the power of the grave, I will redeem them from death;
he that will redeem them from death, can in no sense be said to be the cause
why they die, but why they die not. Besides both he and Iarchi stumble at the
same stone, to wit the word Deborica, which they derive from dabar, signifying
verbum or causa; whereas they should have derived it from Dever signifying
pestem, or a plague.

Thirdly, for Saint Jerome his translation, though it differ somewhat from the
original, yet it is no Antithesis to the Text, but an elegant Antanaclasis, or
at least a Metonymie, generis pro specie mors pro peste, I will be thy death,
for I will be thy plague.

Fourthly, for the translation of the Septuagint, (which Saint Paul most
seems to follow, because writing to the Gentiles who made use of that
translation, and understood not the original, he would not give them any
offense, nor derrogate from it, which was in great esteem among all, in regard
of the antiquity thereof; and it stood the Christians in those days in great
stead to convince the unbelieving Jews.) It well agrees with the Analogy of
faith, and the meaning of the holy Spirit, and the Hebrew letter also will bear
it; for Ehi (as Buxtorphius the great Master of the holy tongue, out of David
Kimchi observes) signifies ubi where, as well as ero I will be; and a
venomous sting, and pestis the plague differ but little: so that although the
words in the original seem to be spoken by an affirmation, but in Saint Paul,
and the Septuagint, by an interrogation; in the one by a commination, in the
other by an insultation; yet both come to one sense, and contain an evident
prophecy of Christ his conquest over Death and Hell.

I have pluked away the thorn, and now I am come to blow the flower, and open
the leaves of the words; O death I will be thy plauges, that is, I will take
away from Death the power of destroying utterly; and from the Grave, the power
of keeping the dead in it perpetually. If we take the words as spoken by way of
insultation, o mors ubi est aculeus tuus? Calv. in hunc loc. ero pestes tuae o
mors, id est ego ero interitus mortis, ut mors ipsa non possit nos amplius
perdere.
O death where is thy sting? thus we are to construe them; as a hornet or
serpent when his sting is plucked out can do no hurt to any other, but soon
after dies it self; so Death is disarmed by Christ and left as good as dead:
for as David cut off Goliahs head with his own sword, and Brasidas ran through
his enemy with his own spear; so Christ conquers over Death by death; in as
much as by his temporal death he satisfied both for the temporal and the
eternal death of them that believe in him. And as he conquered Death by his
death, so he destroyed the Grave by his burial; for suffering his body to be
imprisoned, and afterward breaking the gates and bars of the prison, he left
the passage open to all his members to come out after him their head. These
sacred and heavenly mysteries are shrined in the letter of this Text; for
although the Prophet speaks to the Israelites, and makes a kind of tender
unto them of redemption from temporal death, Calv. in Hoses quanuis mors
absorbeat omnia quanvis sepulchrum aboleat omnias, Deus tamen est superior
morte and sepulchro, ergo si quando de speratio nos ita dejiciat, ut non
gustemus omnes Dei promissiones, veniat nobis in mentem hic lo^us quod scilicet
Deus sic exitio mortis. Chrysostom. in 1 Cor. 15. (...). Bernard. sermon. 26. in
Cant. jam tibi frater in nocte adhuc media diescebat nox sicut dies
illumenabatur accitus sum ego, ut id miraculi viderem, hominem exultantem in
morte insultantem morti, ubi est mors stimulus tuus? jam non est stimulus sed
jubilus, jam cantando, moritur homo, and moriendo cantat
and deliverance from corporal captivity; yet to confirm their faith therein he
brings in the promise of eternal redemption, from whence they were to infer,
if God will redeem us from eternal, how much more from temporal death; if he
will deliver us out of the prison of the grave, how much more out of common
Goals? what though our enemies have never so great a hand over us, what though
they exceed in their cruelty, and put us to all exttemity, and do their worst
against us; their cruelty cannot extend beyond death, nor their malice beyond
the Grave: but Gods power and mercy reaches farther. For he can, and he
promises that he will revive us after we are dead, and raise us after we are
buried; he will pluck deaths sting out of us, and us out of the bowels of the
Grave. Death has not such power over the living, nor the grave over the dead,
as God has over both, to destroy the one, and swallow up the other into
victory. For therefore the Son of God vouchsafes to taste death, that Death
might be swallowed up by him into victory. Although Death swallow up all
things, and the Grave shut up all in darkness, yet God is above them both;
therefore when we are brought to the greatest exigent, when nothing but death
and torments are before us, when we are ready to yield up the buckler of our
faith, and breath out the last gasp of hope, let us call this Text to mind; O
death I will be thy plagues! neither Death nor the Grave shall be my peoples
bane, because I will be both their bane, and change their nature, which
destroys all nature. For to all them that believe in me, Death shall not be a
postern, but a street-door, not so much an outlet, of temporal, as an inlet
of eternal life: and though the grave swallow the bodies of my Saints, yet it
shall cast them up again at the last day.

Thus the words yield us singular comfort, if we take them as a commination,
and they afford us much or more, if we take them as Saint Paul, and S.
Chrysostom do, by an insultation. As a man offering sacrifice for victory, and
full of mirth and jollity, he leaps and tramples upon Death, lying as it were
at his mercy, and sings an Io Poean, a triumphant song; wherewith Gerardus a
great friend of Saint Bernards, breathed out his last gasp, of whom he thus
writes; In the dead time of the night my brother Gerard strangely revived, at
midnight the day began to break, I sent for to see this great miracle found a
man in the very Jaws of death, insulting upon death and exulting with joy,
saying, O death, where is thy sting? Death is not now a sting, but a song, for
now the faithful man dies singing, and sings dying.

And so having plucked away the prickles, and opened the leaves by the
Explication of the letter, I come now to smell to them, and draw from thence
the savor of life unto life, Ero pestes tuae o mors. As Saint Jerome writes
of Tertullian his Polemmical Treatises against heretics, Quot verba tot
fulmina, Every word is a thunderbolt: so I may truly say of this verse, quot
verba tot fulmina; So many words, so many thunderbolts striking Death dead; by
the light whereof we may discern three parts. 1. The menaced, or party
threatened, Death. 2. The menacer or party threatening, I. 3. The judgment
menaced, plagues.
1. The menaced, impotent mors, Death. 2. The menacer Omnipotent Ego, I. 4. The
judgment, most dreadful, pestes, plagues.


1. First of the party menaced, Death. Christ threatens destruction to none,
but to his, or his Churches enemies: But here he threatens Death: Death
therefore must needs be an enemy, and so the Apostle terms it; the last enemy
that shall be destroyed is Death. For albeit Death by accident is an advantage,
as oftentimes an enemy does a man a good turn, Plut^ moral: tract. de
utilitat. ex inimicis capienda.
which occasioned that excellent Treatise of Plutarch, wherein he shows us
how to make an Antidote of poison, and a good use of other men's malice: yet is
it in it self an enemy always to Nature, and to grace also; it sets upon the
elect, and the reprobate; the believer, and the Infidel; the penitent, and the
obstinate, but with this difference; it flies at the one with a deadly sting,
but at the other without a sting: the one it wounds to death, the other it
terrifieth and paineth, but cannot hurt.

But there being diverse kinds of death, which of them is here meant? Death is a
privation, and privations cannot be defined, but by their habits; that is such
positive qualities, as they bereave us of; for instance, sickness cannot be
perfectly defined, but by health which it impaireth: nor blindness, but by
sight which it destroys: nor darkness, but by light which it excludes: nor
death, but by life which it depriveth us of. Now if there be a four-sold life
spoken of in Scripture, viz. 1. Of nature. 2. Of sin. 3. Of grace. 4. Of glory.


There must needs be a fourfold death answerable thereunto.

1. The death of Nature, is the privition of the life of nature, by parting
soul and body.

2. The death of sin, is the privation of the life of sin by mortifying grace.

3. The death of Grace, is the privation of the life of grace, by reigning sin.

4. The death of Glory, is the privation of the life of Glory, by a total and
final exclusion from the glorious presence of God, and the kingdom of heaven,
and a casting into the lake of fire and brimstone, prepared for the devil and
his angels. Of Death in the first sense, David demands who is he that lives,
and shall not see death, and shall he deliver his soul from the hand of hell?
Psalm 89.47
of Death in the second sense, Saint Paul enquireth, how shall we that are dead
to sin live any longer therein? Of Death in the third sense, Rom: 6.2 1 Timothy
5.6. Rev: 20.6 Morsuus est morti qui moritur crimini.
Saint Paul must be meant, where he rebukes wanton Widows, She that lives
in pleasure, is dead while she lives. Of Death in the fourth sense, Saint
John is to be understood; blessed is he that has part in the first
resurrection, for on such the second death has no power. Saint Austin joyneth
all these significations, and makes one sentence of diverse senses; he is dead
to death; that is, Death cannot kill, burt, or affright him who is dead to sin.
And another of the Ancients makes a sweet cord of them like so many strings
struck at once, Qui moritur ^te quam moritur, (...) moritur.
he that dies before he dies, shall never die; he that dies to sin before he
dies to nature, shall never die to God, neither in this world by final
deprivation of grace, neither in the world to come of glory.

Of these four significations of Death, the first and last sort with this Text,
for that the first is to be meant, it is evident by the consequence here; O
grave, I will be thy destruction: And by the antecedents in Saint Paul, When
this corruptible, shall put on incorruption, Apoc: 20: 14
etc, And that the second is included, may be gathered both from the words of
Saint John, And Death and Hell were cast into the lake of fire; and of our
Savior, I was dead, and I am alive, and have the keys of Hell, and of Death.

And so I fall upon my second Observation, viz. the person menacing, J, the
second person in Trinity, our blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. The word
here used Ehi, is the same with that we read, Exodus 3: 14
Exodus 3. Ehi Ashur Ehi, I am that I am; and if the observation of the Ancients
be current, that wheresoever God speaks unto man in the old Testament in the
shape of man of Angel, we are to understand Christ, for that all those
apparitions were but a kind of preludia of his incarnation; then the Person
here threatening can be no other then he; besides, the word Egilam in the former
part of this verse. being derived from Gaal, signifying propinquus fuit, or
redemit jure propinquitatis; Levit. 25.25.
points to our Savior, who by assuming our nature, became our Alie by blood,
and performed this office of a kins-man, by redeeming the inheritance which we
had lost.

But we have stronger arguments then Grammatical observations, that he who here
promised life to the dead, and threatens plagues to Death, was the Son of God,
the Lord of quick and dead; for the same who promises to redeem from the
Grave, threatens to plague Death: but we all know that Redeemer is the
peculiar style of the Son, Apoc. 5.9.
as Creator is of the Father, and Sanctifier of the Holy Ghost, tu redemisti
nos, thou have redeemed us to GOD by thy blood, out of every kindred, and
tongue, and people, and Nation.

To the redemption of a slave that is not able to ransom himself, three at
least concur; the Scrivener who writes the Conditions, and sealed the Bonds:
the party who soliciteth the business, and mediateth for the captive, and
lays down the sum agreed upon for his ransom; and the person in whose power
the captive is, and who accepts of the ransom; Which of these is the
Redeemer? you will all say, he that is at the cost of all; so it is in our
redemption from spiritual thraldom, the holy Spirit draws the condition, and
seals the Bonds, the Father receives the ransom, the Son both mediateth for
the ransoming, and lays down the sum; For we were not redeemed with
corruptible things, 1 Pet. 1.18.
as silver and gold, but the precious blood of Christ, as of a Lamb without
blemish, he took part of our nature, that through death he might destroy him
that had tthe power of death, that is the devil, and deliver them who through
the fear of death, were all there lifetime subject to bondage. Hence we gather
that he that destroyed death must die: but to affirm that the immortal and
eternal Spirit of God expired, is blasphemy, and to say that the Father
suffered, is heresy, long ago condemned in the Patro-passions; we conclude
therefore with the Apostle, that the second person Christ Jesus, 1 Timothy 1.10.
has abolished death, and has brought life and immortality to light by the
Gospel. And so I fall upon my last Observation, the judgment here mentioned
Davorica.

3. Thy plagues, there is no tittle or iota in holy Scripture superfluous, some
mystery therefore lies in the number, plagues in the plural, not plague in the
singular, which I conceive to be this, that Christ put Death to many deaths,
and foiled, and conquered it many ways; first in himself; secondly in his
members. First, in himself by destroying sin, the sting of Death. Secondly, by
breaking the bonds thereof in his powerful Resurrection, wherewith it was
impossible that he should be held. Secondly, in his members by changing the
nature of it to them, and making it of a curse a blessing; of a loss, a gain;
of a punishment, either a great honor, or a special favor, or a singular
advantage: a great honor as to the Martyrs, who thereby acquired so many
Rubies to their crown of glory, as they shed drops of blood for their Savior:
A special favor, as to Abraham, Josiah, and Saint Austin, who were taken away,
that they might not see, and feel the misery, that after their death fell on
the posterity of the one, the subjects of the other, and the diocese of the
third. A singular advantage to all the faithful, who thereby are discharged
from all cares, fears, sorrows, and temptations, and presently enter into their
Masters joy; Apoc. 14.13.
For blessed are the dead that die in the Lord, for they rest from their
labors, and their works follow them. Now the means whereby Christ conquered
death, and utterly destroyed it, are diversely set down by the learned; some
argue a contrariis, contraries say they are to be destroyed by their
contraries; as heat by cold, moisture by drought, sickness by health: Death
therefore must needs be destroyed by life as the contrary, but Christ, is the
resurrection and the life, in him was life, Vita moriens conflixit cum vivente
morte.
and life was the light of men. Saint Austin declares it after this manner:
Life dying contended with Death living, and got a glorious and signal victory.
Nysscen thus, the Devil catching at the flesh of Christ's humane nature, as a
bate was cought by the hook of his divine. Saint Leo, and Chrysologus thus, if
a Bailiff or Sergeant arrest the Kings son, or a privileged person, and lay
him up in a close prison without commission, he deserves to be turned out of
his place for it. So Death Gods Sergeant, seizing upon his Son (in whom there
was no fault) without warrant or commission was justly discharged of his office.

Is Death thus discharged, has Christ changed the nature of Death, and freed
all his Members from the sting of the temporal and fear of eternal death? has
he of a postern made it a street-door, of an outlet of mortal life, an inlet
of immortality? why then are we so much afraid of death, which can no more hurt
us then a hornet or wasp after her sting is plucked out? Christ fought with a
living death, we with a dead death; which does not so much sever our souls from
our bodies, as join them to Christ; not so much end our life as our mortality;
not so much exclude us out of the Militant, as render us to the Triumphant
Church. Nothing is more dreadful I confess to the natural man, then Death which
dissolveth the soul and body, and the Grave which resolves the body into dust
and ashes. To cure this malady of the mind, there is no virtue in any Drug of
nature; the Philosophers in this case are Physicians of no value, they tell us,
that sickness and death are, tributa vivendi, and the Grave the common house of
the dead. But what of this? what comfort is here? does this speculation
discharge us from the tribute, or make the payment thereof the easier? does it
inlighten the darkness of these prisons of nature? or take away the stench from
these underground houses? no whit. Yet (God be thanked) there is a magazine in
Scripture to pay these tributes; there is light in Goshen to enlighten these
houses, there is Specknard to perfume these dankish rooms; there are Cordials
in holy Scripture to strengthen the heart, Apoc. 14.13.
not only against deadly maladies, but also against death it self: for there we
hear of a voice from heaven, 2 Cor. 5.1.8.
not only affirming the happiness of the dead, but confirming it with a strong
reason, for they rest from their labors, and their works follow them: ^ohn
11.25.
we hear of Tabernacles not made with hands, but eternal in the Heavens: we
hear that when we are absent from the body, we are present with the Lord: we
hear the Lord of life opening the ears and chearing the heart of the dead; and
saying, I am the resurrection and the life, whosoevor believes in me though he
were dead, yet shall he live. There we hear death not only disarmed of his
sting, but also slain down right; O death I will be thy death, O grave I will
be thy destruction.

Secondly, Apoc. 1.28.
has Christ destroyed Death, and has he both the keys of Death and of Hell?
then beloved, when we lie on our deathbed, let us not have recourse after the
Popish manner to any Saint or Angel, no not to the blessed Virgin her self, but
to her Son who is the Lord of life; Apoc. 22.16.
who satisfying for our sins at his death, thereby plucked out the sting of
death, and after his resurrection quite destroyed this serpent. In which regard
he is styled, John 3.14. As Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, even
so must the Sun of man be lifted up.
stella matutina, the Morning star, because he ushereth in the day of eternity,
and primitiae dormientum, the first fruis of them that slept, because in him
the whole lump is sanctified: When therefore the fiery Serpent hovereth over us
to sting us to eternal death, let us look upon the Brazen Serpent, and the
other shall not hurt us.

Lastly, has Christ conquered Death and Hell and that for us? let us then give
him the honor of the greatest Worthy and noblest Conqueror that ever the
World saw. Cyrus, and Alexander, and Caesar, were no way to be compared to him;
for they subdued but mortal enemies, O mors devorasti and devorata es, illius
morte tu mortua es illius morte nos vivimus, gratias tibi agimus Christ
salvator quod tam potentem adversarium dum occideris occidisti. Hier. epitaph.
Nepotiam. Herodotus in Thalia, (...)-Ethiopes postquam mortuum aresecere gypse
he immortal; they bodily, he ghostly; they with great Armies and power of men,
but he alone; they when they were alive, and in their full strength and vigor,
but he at the hour of his death, and afterward. I conclude therefore with Saint
Jerome his insultation over Death, and thanksgiving to the Lord of life. O
death thou did bite and were bitten, thou did devour, and art now devoured
by him whom for a time thou did devour; by his death thou art ssain, by his
death we live everlastingly: thanks be rendered unto thee O Savior, who have
subdued so powerful an adversary, and put him to death by thy death and passion.

The Ethiopians as Herodotus relates, made Sepulchers of glass; for after they
have dried the corpse, they artificially paint it, and set it in a glazed
Coffin, that all that pass by may see the lineaments of the dead body: but
surely they deserve better of the dead and more benefit the living, who draw
the lineaments of their mind, and represent their virtues and graces in a
Mirror of Art: (for I am not of their judgment among us, who properly and
deservedly are called Precisians, because out of the purity of their precise
zeal, obl^^unt picturaque. exhortantes representant, deinde ei Cippum cavum e
vitro circumdant in cujus medio mortuus interlucet.
it a praecidunt they so near pair the nails of Romish superstition, that they
make the fingers bleed; who out of fear of praying forsooth for the dead, or
invocating them, are shie of speaking any word of them, or sending after them
their deserved commendations,) for it is piety to honor God in his Saints; it
is justice suum cuique tribure, to give every one his due: it is charity to
propose eminent examples of heavenly graces and virtues shining in the dead,
for the imitation of the living. Such jewels ought not to be locked up in a
Coffin, as in a Casket, but to be set out to the view of all; and surely they
deserve better of the dead, who set a garland of deserved praises on their
life, then they who stick their Hearse full with flowers. Tapers made of pure
wax burn clearly, and after they are blown out, leave a sweet savor behind
them, so the servants of Christ, who have caused their light so to shine before
men, that they may see their works, and glorisie their Father which is in
Heaven: leave a good name like a sweet smell behind them, and why may we not
blow it abroad by our breath, Deo Patri, etc.

The rest concerning the life and death of the party is lost.

Vox Coeli. OR THE DEADS HERALD.
SERMON XLV.
APOC. 14.13. And I heard a voice from Heaven, saying unto me, write, blessed
are the dead which die in the Lord, from henceforth, etc.


VBi Vulnus, ibi manus; From whence we took our Wound, from thence we receive
the Cure: a voice from Heaven struck all the living dead, saying, All flesh is
grass, Esaias 40.6
and the glory or goodliness of it, is as the flower of the field, The grass
withers, etc. But here a voice from Heaven makes all whole again, and
represents all the dead in the Lord living; yea, and flourishing too, saying,
Blessed are the dead that dye in the Lord. To give a touch at the Wound, that
the smart thereof may make the sense of the cure more delightful: Nazianz de
ob. Causar. (...).
Omnis caro foenum, and omnis homo flos, All flesh is grass, and every man is a
flower. There is difference in grass, some is longer, and some is shorter; so
some men are longer lived, some shorter; some grass shoots up with one leaf,
some with three, some with five, or more: so some men have more in their
Retinue, some fewer, some none at all. Some grass withers before it is cut,
as the grass on the housetop; some is cut before it withers, as the grass of
the field: so some men decay before the Sithe of Death cuts them; all other
after.

Likewise, there is a great difference among flowers.

1. Some are for sight only, not for the smell, or any virtue in medicines; as
Tulips, Emims, and Crown Emperials.

2. Some for sight and smell, but of no use in Medicines; as Sweet-williams,
the painted Lady, and July-flowers generally.

3. Some are both for sight and smell, and of singular use in Medicines, as
Roses and Violets. So some men are of better parts, and greater use in the
Church and Commonwealth, others of less. Some flowers grow in the field, some
in the garden: so some men's lives and employments are public, others private.
Some flowers are put in Posies, some in Garlands, some are cast into the Still:
so some men are better preferred them others, and some live and die in
obscurity.

Lastly, some flowers presently lose their color and scent, as the Narcissus;
some keep them both long, as the red Rose: So some men continue longer in their
bloom, grace and favor; others for a short time, but all-fade, and within a
while are either gathered, cut down, or withered of themselves and die. And for
this reason it is as I conceived, that we stick herbs and flowers on the
Hearse of the dead, to signify, that as we commit earth to earth, and ashes to
ashes; so we put grass to grass and flowers to flowers. For, omnis caro foenum,
All flesh is grass, and all the goodliness, thereof as the flower of the field,
the grass withers, and the flower fades away; But the comfort is in that
which follows; But the word of the Lord endures for ever, and this is the
word which by the Gospel is preached unto you; Whereof this verse which I have
read unto you for my Text, is part.

Which Saint John infers as a conclusion or corrolary upon the conclusion of
the Saints and Martyrs lives, this conclusion is inferred upon two premises. 1
The end of their labors. 2 The reward of their work.


The Syllogism may be thus formed. All they who are come to an end of their
labor, and have received liberally for their work, or are paid well for their
pains, are happy: But all the dead that die in the Lord, are come to an end of
their labor, for they rests rom their labors, and receive liberally, for
their works follow them. Ergo, all the dead that die in the Lord are happy.


As in other Texts, so in this we may borrow much light from the occasion of
the speech which here was this; Saint John having related in a vision a fearful
persecution to falt in the latter times, Psalm: 16: 11.
whereby the earth should be reaped, and the Saints mowen like grass, and true
believers like grapes pressed in such sort, that their blood should come out of
the wine press, Porheus in bunc loc adversus bestiam spiritus sanctus
consolatur pios, si ab ill a prius propter testimenium Iefu trucidantus qnam de
ed supplirium sumptum sit, nam vel sic morientes beati sunt, qui temporariam
vitam amittentes in hoc seculo, oe ernam adipiscuntur in altro.
even to the horse bellies, breaks into an Epiphonema, verse. 12. here is the
patience of the Saints; that is, here is matter for their patience, and faith
to work upon: Here is their patience, to endure for Gods cause, whatsoever man
or devil can inflict upon them: to part with any limb for their head Christ
Jesus, gladly to forfeit their estates on earth for a crown in heaven:
cheerfully to lose their lives in this vail of tears, that they may find them
in the rivers of pleasures that spring at Gods right hand for evermore. Here is
work for their faith also, to see heaven, as it were, through hell; eternal
life in present death, to believe that God numbreth every hair of their head,
and that every tear they shed for his sake shall be turned into a pearl, every
drop of blood into a Ruby to be set in their crown of glory. To confirm both
their faith, and patience Christ proclaims from heaven, that howsoever in
their life they seemed miserable; yet in their death they shall be most
blessed, and that the worst their enemies can do, is to put them in present
possession of their happiness; Blessed are the dead, etc. So says the spirit,
whatsoever the flesh says to the contrary.

Here we have 1. A proposition, De fide, of faith. 2. A Deposition, or
testimony of the spirit.
A Proposition of the happy estate of the dead. A deposition of the holy Ghost
to confirm our faith therein.
1. Saint John sets down his relation. 2. A most comfortable assertion. 3. A
most strong confirmation.


The relation strange, Gen: 42: 36. of a voice from heaven, without any speaker.


The assertion as strange, Joseph is not, and Simeon is not.
of a possession without an owner; a blessed estate of them, who according to
the Scripture phrase, are said not to be.

The Confirmation as strange as either, Math: 2: 18.
by an audible testimony of an invisible witness; So says the spirit.

Rachel mourning for her children, and would not be comforted because they are
not.
Or because this asseveration concerning the condition of the Saints departed,
is propositio necessaria (as the Schools speak) we will cloth the members of
the division with terms apodictical, and in this verse observe, 1. A conclusion
sientifical, whereof the parts are. 1. The subject indefinite, mortui, the
dead. 2. The attribute absolute, beati, blessed. 3. The cause, propter quam,
the Lord, or dying in the Lord.
2. The proof demonstrative, and that twofold.
1. A priori. 1. By a heavenly oracle, I heard a voice, etc. 2. A divine
testimony, So says the spirit.
2. A Posteriori, by arguments drawn.
1. From their cessation from their work, They rest from their labors. 2.
Their remuneration for their works, Their works follow them.


Where the matter is precious, a decision of the least quantity is a great
loss: and therefore (as the spy of nature observes) the Jewellers will not
rub out a small clowd, or speck, in an orient Ruby, because the lessening the
substance will more disadvantage them, then the fetching out of the spot
advance them in the sale; Neither will the Alcumists lose a drop of
quintessence; Isocr. ad Demonicum. (...)
nor the Apothecaries a grain of Bezar, nor an exact Commentatour upon holy
Scriptures any syllables of a voice from heaven, the echo whereof is more
melodious to the soul, then any consort of most tuneable voices upon earth can
be. In which regard I hold it fit to relinquish my former divisions, and insist
upon each word of this verse (as a Be sits upon each particular flower)
that we may not lose any drop of doctrins sweeter then the honey, and the honey
comb, any lease of the tree of life, any dust of the gold of Ophir.

1. J: there were three men in holy Scripture termed Jedidiah, that is, Beloved
of God; Solomon, Daniel, and Saint John the Evangelist: and to all these God
made known the secrets of his Kingdom by special revelation, and their
prophecies are for the most part of a mystical interpretation. This Revelation
was given to John, when he was in the spirit upon the Lords day; and if we
religiously observe the Lords day, and then be in the spirit as he was, giving
our selves wholly to the contemplation of Divine mysteries: we shall also hear
voices from heaven in our souls and consciences.

Heard, with what ears could Saint John hear this voice, since he was in a
spiritual rapture, which usually shuts up all the doors of the senses? I
answer, that as spirits have tongues to speak withal, whereof we read 1 Cor.
13.1. Though I speak with the tongues of men and Angels: so they have ears to
hear one another, that is a spiritual faculty answerable to our bodily sense of
hearing. The Apostle says of himself, Ambrosius Ausbers, in Apoc. c. 14. ille
nunc in spiritu raptus spirituali aure bonc vocem percipiens invit eodem
spiritu ceelesism replendam esse at eundem vecem andire posset in sua persona
that he was in the spirit; and as he was in the spirit, so he saw in the
spirit, and heard in the spirit, and spoke in the spirit, and moved in the
spirit, and did all those things which are recorded in this Book. When Saint
Paul was wrapped up into the third Heaven, and heard there words that cannot be
uttered, and saw things which cannot be represented with the eye; he truly and
really apprehended those objects, yet not with carnal, but spiritual senses,
wherewith Saint John heard this voice.

A voice from Heaven. The Pythagoreans taught, that the Celestial spears by
the regular motions, produced harmonious sounds: and the Psalmist teaches us,
that the Heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament shows his handy
work, and that there is no speech nor language where their voice is not heard;
but that was the voice of Heaven it self, demonstrately proving, and after a
sort proclaiming the Majesty of the Creator. But this is vox de coelo, a voice
from Heaven pronounced by God himself, Psalm. 19: 1, 3.
or formed by an Angel; so Gasper Melo expressly teaches us. Melo in Apee. c.
14. audive vocem non corporalem neque a foris sirepentom, sed rut us firmatam
per Angelum gui tot am ti Apccalypsin Christo jubente revelavit.
Saint John heard a voice, not sounding out wardly, but inwardly framed by that
Angel, who revealed unto him the whole Apocalypse.

Saint John here heard a voice from Heaven commanding him to Write; and Saint
Austin heard a voice from Heaven commanding him to Read, Toll lege; and most
requisite it is, that where Heaven speaks, the earth should hear, and where God
writes, that man should read. There never yet came any voice from Heaven, (...)
did not much import and concern the earth to hear. The first voice that came
from Heaven, was heard on Mount Sinai; and it was to confirm the Law to be of
divine authority, and establish our faith in God the Creator. A second voice
from Heaven we hear of in Saint Peter on the holy Mount, when the Apostles were
there with Christ, and it was to confirm the Gospel, and to establish our faith
in Christ the Redeemer. A third voice, (or sound) was heard from Heaven in the
upper room, 2 Pet. 2.18.
where Christ's Apostles were assembled in the day of Pentecost, and it was to
confirm our faith in the holy Ghost the Comforter. Acts 2.2.
A fourth voice that came from Heaven, was heard by Saint Peter in a vision,
and it was to confirm our faith in the Catholic Church, and the Communion of
Saints, Acts. 10.13.
and the incorporating both Jews, and Gentiles in one mystical body. Lastly, a
voice was heard from Heaven by Saint John in this place, to establish our faith
in the last Article of the Creed, concerning the happiness of the dead, and the
glorious estate of the Tryumphant Church, and the life of the World to come. If
we desire to be informed concerning the affairs of the Abissens, Amb. Ausber.
quia maximum est quod nuncsolus audis, stilo exprime ut ad ejus aures perveniat
cujus figuram geris, Gasper Melo scyibene transvolet quod ad electorum solatium
ad finem usq perseverare debet.
or those of China, Sumatra, or Japan; we confer with those that are of the
same Country, or have traveled into those parts: and for the like reason, if
we desire to be instructed concerning the state and condition of the Citizens
of the Heavenly Jerusalem; their insinite number, their excellent order, their
singular privileges, their everlasting joys, their feasts, their robes, their
palms, their thrones, their crowns; we must enquire of them who either are
inhabitants there, or have brought us news from thence; nothing but a voice
from Heaven can enforce our assent to these heavenly mysteries.

Now as all words of Kings are of great authority, but specially their Edicts
and Proclamations; so all voices from Heaven are highly to be regarded and
religiously obeyed, but especially Decrees and Statutes which are commanded by
the authority of the high Court of Heaven, to be written for perpetuity; such
as this is, in my Text, I heard a voice from Heaven, saying

Write, Bellar. l. 4. de verb. Dei non scrip. c. 3. Si Chrivto and Apostoles
suisset propositum ver bum Dei coarctandi ad scripturam inprimis rem
with a Pen of Diamond, in letters never to be oblitrated, write it so that it
may be read of men in all succeeding Ages, even to the last man that shall
stand upon the earth. Here I cannot sufficiently admire the boldness of
Cardinal Bellarmine, who to disparage the necessity of holy Scripture, and cry
up unwritten traditions, which are the best evidence he can produce for his new
Trent Creed; blusheth not to publish it to the World in print, that the
Apostles and Evangelists had no command from God to write their Gospels or
Epistles, but that they wrote upon the entreaty of some friends, tauti momenti
Christus prae. cepisset, and Apostoli alicubi testarent, se ex Domini mandato
soribere, of id nusquam legimus.
or some emergent occasious. Were there no other Text in all the holy
Scriptures but this, nor word in this Text but this one, Write, it were alone
sufficient to convince him of gross ignorance, if not rather giving the lie to
his own knowledge. But yet farther, rather to confound him with shame, then
convince him with evidence; does not the Apostle affirm in general of the
whole Scripture, that it is given by Divine inspiration? and what is inspiring
but a kind of dictating to all the Penmen of the holy Ghost? and does not he
that dictateth to another, both tell him what he shall write, and bid him write
it? Besidesin the 1 of the Apocalypse, Eusch 1.2. hist. ad Matthaeum ca
occasion scripsisse, etc.
verse. 10, 11. Saint John heard a great voice as of a trumpet, saying; I am
Alpha, and Omega, the first and the last, and what thou see write in a Book.
Thirdly, besides the general command of committing the whole Word of God to
writing, and a special mandate for the writing the Apocolypse, we have a
singular precept for the writing the precise words of this Text; 2 Timothy 3.16.
The Hebrews who say of one that is dead, that he is not, mean not simply that
he is not at all, but he is not in the world, or appears not among the living,
or is to us as if he were not.
and must not that needs be thrice worthy our observation, which is written by
a threefold command? and what is that?

Blessed are the dead, If the dead are blessed, the dead are, for an argument a
terito adjacente ad secundum, ever holds if the terms be taken in the proper
sense. The Metaphisicks demonstrate, non ent is nullus esse affectiones, that
such things as have no existence, have no qualities nor real attributes: but
blessedness is here attributed to the dead, the dead therefore are. And the
Philosopher who being demanded whether the living or the dead were more in
number? answered, that doubtless the living, quia mortui ne sunt quiedm,
because the dead were not to be reckoned upon, in regard now they are not at
all, spoke without book, and uttered that which is most false, as we learn from
the mouth of Truth himself; who not only affirms that the dead are, but that
they are also living, though dead to this World, yet not to the World, yet not
to the World to come; Luke. 20.38.
dead to men, but not dead to God, have ye not read says our Savior, what is
spoken unto you by God, saying; I am the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac,
and the God of Jacob, God is not the God of the dead, but of the living, for
all live to him? Ambros. loc supr. cit. quis mortuns mori potest; Resp pii
moriantur mun. do priusquam moriantur corpori.
but are all the dead blessed? the Text answers, all the dead that die in the
Lord; That die in the Lord? Yea, but you will say, those that are already dead,
cannot die, what then is the meaning of this phrase, the dead that die in the
Lord? Saint Ambrose answers, he that is dead already cannot die in the same
sense that he is dead, but he that is already dead in one sense, may be said to
die in another; he that is dead to the World, as all the regenerated who have
mortified the deeds of the flesh, may afterward die to the body, and so die in
the Lord, that is, breath out his soul into the hands of the Lord. This is
sound Divinity, and a true proposition, Psalm. 145.18.
but no true exposition of this place; in which the latter seems to be a
limitation of the former: as God is near to all that call upon him, yea, all
that call upon him faithfully; so here, blessed are the dead, what all dead
howsoever they die? no, but all that die in the Lord.

There is much variety, among the interpreters about the interpretation of this
phrase, to die in the Lord. Some will have the meaning thereof, to be those
that die for the Christian faith, and seal the truth thereof with their blood.
And they allege for themselves, first parallel texts of Scripture, wherein the
preposition in, is put for pro: for as Genesis 18.13. Omnes in te benedicentur,
all Nations shall be blessed in thee, that is for thee, and in thy seed, that
is, for thy seed; and Genesis 28.18. servivi Berachel, word for word, I served in
Rachel, that is for Rachel. Next they allege the antecedents, together with
the occasion of these words verse 12. here is the patience of the Saints, here
are they that keep the commandments of God, and the faith of Jesus Christ: and
truly the main scope of the Text seems to be, to arm the godly with patience,
and to encourage them to fight against the Beast, upon whom before God execute
vengeance, if it so fall out that many of Gods faithful servants loose their
lives: Yet that none should be dismayed therewith, because all that so die are
blessed, for they exchange a temporal life in this World, for an eternal in
another. Thirdly say they, it cannot be well conceived how any can die, in
Domino, in the Lord, who is the Lord of life, if we take the preposition in the
proper sense: for though in the natural body a member may be cut off and die,
the head being alive; yet it is not so in the mystical body of Christ, no true
Member thereof can be cut off, much less die, while it continues in that body,
by dying in the Lord, therefore we must understand dying for the Lord, so they.

Others will have the words not to be restrained to Martyrs only, but to belong
to all that die in the fear of God, and the faith of Christ. And they alledg
for themselves also a parallel Text; 1 Cor: 15.18.
1 Cor. 15.18. where to fall a sleep in the Lord, is spoken generally of all
true believers departing this life. Besides Saint Bernard and other of the
Ancients apparently distinguish these phrases, mori in Domino, and mori propter
Dominum, to die in the Lord, and to die for the Lord: mori pro Domino martyrum
est, mori in Domino omnium confessorum, si beati qui in Domino moriuntur,
quanto magis qui pro Domino moriuntur? to die for the Lord is the glory of
martyrs, but to die in the Lord, the glory of all Confessors: if they are happy
who die in the Lord, how much more they that die for the Lord? Thirdly, the
reward here promised is common to all believers, and not peculiar to the
Martyrs: for all true believers when they die rest from their labors, But e
contra, all that die for the Lord, die in the Lord, So Martyrs, are not
excluded though they are not included alone, but all true confessors with them.
and their works follow them. If the Spirit had meant Martyrs only, he would
rather have said, they have ease from their torments, then rest from their
labors, and their trophies and victories follow them. All that die for the
Lord, die also in the Lord; but all that die in the Lord, do not necessarily
die for the Lord: we deny not that the Martyrs have the greatest share in this
blessedness, but all Confessors have their parts also: the Martyrs Crown is
beset with a Rubie or some richer jewel then ordinary, their Garland has a
flower or two more in it, to wit some red flower as well as white; yet the
Crown and Garland of all Confessors are complete. And therefore not only Beda,
and Bernard, and Richardus, and Andreus, and Primasius, and Haymo, and
Ansbertus, and Ioachimus, but also the Greek, and the Roman, Vid. Alcazarum in
Apoc. c. 14.
Church; yea, and the reformed also understand these words, of all that die in
Gods favor: for they read these words at the Funerals of all the dead, and not
only at the Funerals of Martyrs. Yea, but how can any be said to die in the
Lord, that is continuing his Member, since Christ has no dead Members? I answer
that the faithful die not in the Lord in that sense in which they live in him;
but (...)there, they die not spiritually, nor cease to be his mystical Members;
but naturally, that is, they continuing in Christ's faith and love, breath out
their souls, and so fall asleep in his bosom, or die in his love, laying hold
of him by faith, and relying on him by hope, and embracing him by charity. All
they die in the Lord, who die in the act of contrition, as Saint Austin, who
reading the penetential Psalms with many tears, breathed out his last gasp,
sighing for his sins. Or in the act of charity as Saint Jerome, who in a most
fervent, or vehement exhortation to the love of God, gave up the Ghost. Or in
the act of Religion, as Saint Ambrose, who after he had received the blessed
Sacrament, in a heavenly rapture, and a holy parley with Christ, left the body.
Or in the act of Devotion as Aquinas, who lifting up his eyes and hands to
heaven, pronouncing with a loud voice those words of the Spouse in the
Canticles, Come my beloved, let us go forth, went out of this world. Or in the
Act of gratulation, and thanksgiving, as Petrus Celestinus, who repeating that
last verse of the last Psalm, Omnis spiritus laudet Dominum, Let every breath,
or every one that has breath, praise the Lord, breathed out his soul. Or in an
Act of divine contemplation, as Gerson that famous Chancellor of Paris, who
having explicated fifty properties of divine love, concluded both his Treatise,
and his life with fortis ut mors dilectio, Love is strong as death. To kint up
all, six sorts of men may lay just claim to the blessedness in my Text.

First Martyrs, for they die in the Lord, because they die in his quarrel.

Secondly, Confessors, for they die in the Lord, because they die in his faith,
and in the confession of his name.

Thirdly, all they that love Christ, and are beloved of him, for they die in
the Lord, because they die in his bosom, and embracings.

Fourthly, all truly penitent sinners, for they die in the Lord, because they
die in his peace.

Fifthly, all they who are engrafted into Christ by a special faith, and
persevere in him to the end, for they die in the Lord, because they die in his
communion, as being members of his mystical body.

Lastly, Math. 24.46. Beza in hunc loc. quid si legatur perfect quia tum
optans piratam beatitudinem.
all they that die, calling upon the Lord, or otherwise make a godly end, for
they die in the Lord, because they die in the works of the Lord, and happy is
that servant whom his Master when he comes shall find so doing.

From henceforth (...). Beza and some other render the word in the original
perfectly, because the dead obtain the blessedness they hoped for; but this
Exposition cannot stand, unless we restrain this blessedness to the soul. For
the persect and consummate happiness of all that die in the Lord, consists in
the glorisication of their bodies and souls, Paraus in Apoc.
when they shall see God face to face, and the beams of his countenance
directly falling upon the soul, shall reflect also upon the body: and most true
it is which Paraus observes, Hic primitie, in coelo ipsa massa beatitudinis,
bic sitimus justitiam, illic satiamer.
the deads blessedness, far exceeds the blessedness of the living; for here we
have but the first fruits of happiness, but in heaven we shall have the whole
lump: here we hunger and thirst for righteousness, there we shall be satisfied.
To this we all willingly assent, but it will not hence follow, that they have
their whole lump of happiness till the day of judgment: blessed they are from
the hour of their death, but not perfectly; blessed, but not consummately:
blessed intensive, as blessed as the soul by it self can be for that state in
which it now is: not blessed extensive, not so blessed as the whole person
shall be, when the soul shall be the second time given to the body, and both
bid to an everlasting feast at the marriage of the Lamb. Others therefore more
agreeable to the Analogy of faith, render the original (...), from
henceforth, and refer the henceforth, not to the time of the uttering this
Prophecy; as if before it none were blessed (for before this prophecy all the
Apostles (Saint John only excepted) and thousands of Saints and Martyrs had
dyed in the Lord, and were at rest from their labors) but to the instant of
their dying in the Lord, Luke 16. 22.
they no sooner lost their lives for Christ, then they found happiness in him.
Orat. 24. in laudem Coesar credo generosum omnem caramq Deo auimam postquam
vinculis corporis hinc soluta excesserit excussis compedibus quibus animi
perinzdeprimi solebas hilarem ad Dominum suum convolare. Cyp. de mortal. mors
non est exitus sed transitus and temporalis itinere decurso ad eierna
transgressus. Bern. c. 15. de amore Dei Insideles mortem appellant fideles
palch 1, qui moritur mundo, ut perfecta vivet Deo.
So soon as Lazarus dyed, his soul was carried by Angels into Abraham's bosom.
So soon as the Thief expired on the Cross, he aspired to paradise, and was with
Christ; So Nazianzen teaches concerning every religious soul; I believe, faith
he, that every noble soul which is in grace and favor with God, presently as
soon as she has shaken off the body, which kept down her wings, flies
joyfully straight up to her Lord; and Saint Cyprian, Death to the godly is not
a departure, but a pass from a temporal to an eternal life, and no stay by the
way, as soon as we have finished our course here, we may arrive at the goal
there; And S. Bernard, The infidels call the parting of the soul from the body,
Death, but the believers call it the Passover, because it is a pass from death
to life. For they die to the world, that they may perfectly live to God.

To strike sail and make toward the shore, if all that die in the Lord are
blesfed, from the very moment of their death, and this blessedness is confirmed
by a voice from heaven: let us give more heed to such a voice, then to any
whisper of the flesh or devil. Whatsoever Philosophy argues, or Reason
objecteth, or sense excepteth against it: let us give more heed to God then
man, to the spirit then the flesh, to faith then to reason, to heaven then to
earth; although they who suffer for the testimony of the Gospel seem to be most
miserable, their skins being fleyed off, their joints racked, their whole body
torn in pieces, or burned to ashes; their goods confiscate, their arms defaced,
and all manner of disgraces put upon them: yet they are most happy in heaven,
by the testimony of heaven it self, the malice of their enemies cannot reach so
high as heaven, it cannot touch them there, much less awake them out of their
sweet sleep in Jesus.

Secondly, if the dead are blessed in comparison of the living: let us not so
glue our thoughts, and affections to the world, and the comforts thereof, but
that they may be easily severed, for there is no comparison between the estate
of the godly in this life, and in the life to come; for here they labor for
rest, there they rest from their labor: here they expect what they are to
receive, there they receive what they expected: here they hunger and thirst for
righteousness, there they are satisfied; Apoc. 7.17.
here they are continually afflicted, either for their sins, or with their
sins, and they have continual cause to shed tears, either for the calamities of
Gods people, or the strokes they themselves receive from God, or the wounds
they give themselves; there all tears are wiped from their eyes. Here they are
always troubled, Herod Hist.l. 1. beaius est nemo nisi cusus prosperitatem
Deus foelici exitu, and morte confirmavit ut Cleobis, and Bitonis ac viventis,
and periculis obonxi beatitudo ut currentis pramium, and coronaflaxa and vana
est. Cornel. a Lapid. comment in A pcc. c. 14, ut Romoe mori non potest, qui
Romoe non vixit, it a qui in Domino non vixit in eo non moritur. Joh 15.1, 2, 4.
either with the evils they fear, or the fear of evil: but when they go hence,
Death sets a period to all fear, cares, sorrows, and dangers. And therefore
Solon spoke divinely, when he taught Crasus, that he ought to suspend his
verdict of any man's happiness till he saw his end.

Thirdly, if those dead are blessed, that die in the Lord, let us strive to be
of that number, camus and nos moriamur cumeo, Let us go and die with him, and
in him: And that we may do so, we must first endeavor to live in him; For
Cornelius a Lapida, his collection is most true; As a man cannot die at Rome,
who never lived at Rome: so none can die in Christ, who never lived in him, and
none can live in him, who is not in him; first then we must labor to be in
him; and how may we compass this? Christ himself teaches us: I am the Vine,
and my Father is the Husbandman, every branch that bears not fruit in me; he
takes away, and every branch that breareth fruit, he purges, that it may
bring forth more fruit; as the branch cannot bear fruit of it self, except it
abide in the Vine, no more can ye except ye abide in me. Hence we learn that we
cannot bear fruit in Christ, unless as branches we be ingrasted into him; now
that a graft maybe inoculated. 1. There must be made an incision in the tree. 2.
The graffe or syence most be imped in. 3. After it is put in, it must be joined
fast to the tree.


The incision is already made, by the wounds given Christ at his death many
incisions were made in the true Vine: that which puts us in, or inoculateth
us, is a special faith, and that which binds us fast to the tree, is love and
the grace of perseverance. If then we be engrafted by faith into Christ, and
bound fast unto him by love, we shall partake of the Juice of the stock, and
grow in grace, and bear fruit also more and more, and so living in the true
Vine, we shall die in him, and so dying in him, we shall reflourish with him in
everlasting glory.

Fourthly, if we are assured by a voice from heaven, that none but they are
blessed, who die in the Lord: all Infidels, Jews, and Turks; yea and such
heretics too as deny all special faith in Christ are in a wretched and
lamentable case; for it is clear that unbeleevers cannot live in Christ, for
the just lives by faith, and though heretics, and among them our Adversaries
of Rome have a general faith, yet because they want a special faith in Christ
whereby they are to be ingrafted into him, and made members of his mystical
body, they can make no proof to themselves or others, (at least unless they
renounce some of the Trent Articles) that they live, or die in the Lord.

Lastly, if all that die in Christ are blessed, as a voice from heaven assures
us, Apoc. 7.13.
we do wrong to heaven, if we account them miserable: we do wrong to Christ, if
we count them as lost whom he has found; if we shed immoderate tears for them
from whose eyes He has wiped away all tears; to wear perpetual blacks for
them, upon whom he has put long white robes. Whatsoever our losses may be by
them, it comes far short of their gain: our cross is light, in comparison of
their super-excellent weight of glory; therefore let us not sorrow for them, as
those that have no hope: Let us not show our selves Infidels by too much
lamenting the death of believers. Weep we may for them, or rather for our loss
by them, but moderately, as knowing that our loss is their gain, and if we
truly love them, we cannot but exceedingly congratulate their feasts of joy,
their rivers of pleasures, their Palms of victory, their robes of majesty,
their crowns of glory. Water therefore your plants at the departure of your
dearest friends, but drown them not. For whatsoever we complain of here, they
are freed from there, and whatsoever we desire here, they enjoy there: they
hunger not, but feast with the Lamb; they sigh not, but sing with Moses, having
safely passed over the glassy sea; they lie not in darkness, but possess
inheritance of Saints in light. They have immunity from sin, freedom from all
temptations, and security from danger: they have rest for their labors here,
comfort for their troubles, glory for their disgrace, joys for their sorrows,
life for their death in Christ, and Christ for all, Cui, etc.

VICTORIS BRABAEUM: OR, THE CONQUERORS PRIZE. A SERMON
Preached at Rotheriffe, at the Funeral of Mris. Dorothy Gataker, Wife to the
Worthy and Reverend Divine, Master Thomas Gataker, B. D.
SERMON XLVI.
Apoc. 14.13. So faith the Spirit, that they may rest from their labors, and
their works follow them.


THe longer a man enjoys the benefit of life, the more cause he has to
desire death; for cares grow with years, and sins with cares, and sorrows with
sins, and fears with sorrows; which trouble the quiet, and confound the music,
and blend the mirth, and damp the whole joy of our life: so that he who
spinneth the thread of his life to the greatest length, gains nothing thereby
but this, that he can give a fuller and clearer evidence of the vanity of the
world, and yield a more ample testimony to the misery of man during his abode
in the flesh: whom if we take at the best advantage of his Worldly happiness,
he must needs confess that he has nothing of all that is past, but a sad
remembrance; nor of that which is to come, but a solicitous fear. As after a
great feast at which a man has glutted his appetite, nothing remains but
loathsome and stinking fumes- ascending from the stomach to the head, and
offending the brain; so of all the pleasures of sin past, nothing remains but
a bitter taste in the conscience, or rather to use Saint Bernards Metaphor, amar
a and foeda vestigia, foul and stinking prints left in the floar where he
danced after the Devils pipe; sorrow and shame for what he has been, and fear
for what he shall be, mingles and sours all the joy and delight in that he is.
And what is he at the best? a poor tennent at will of a ruinous cottage of
loam, or house of clay ready to fall about his ears, with a Grasshoppers leap in
a spot of ground. His apparel is but stolen rags, his wealth the excrements of
the earth, his diet, bread of carefulness, got with the sweat of his brows, and
all his comforts and recreations, rather as Saint Austin terms them, solatia
miserorum quam gaudia beatorum, sauces of misery then dishes of happiness. For
albeit a good conscience be a continual feast, and the testimony of the Spirit
an everlasting Jubilee in the soul, yet the most righteous man that breaths
mortal air, either by frailty, or negligence, or diffidence, or impatience, or
love of this present life, or suttlety of persuasions, or violence of
temptations so wounds his conscience, and grieveth the Spirit of grace; that
this feast is turned for a time into a fast, and the Jubilee into an ejulate or
howling. All things therefore laid together, the scorns of the World, assaults
from the flesh, temptations from the Devil, rebukes from God, checks from
conscience, sensible failing of Grace, spiritual dissertions, with many a
bitter agony and conflict with despair; I cannot but perfectly accord with the
Poet in his doleful note Foelices nimium quibus est fortuna peracta
jam sua.
they are but too hapyy whose glass is well run out, and with the Evangelist in
my Text beati mortui, blessed are the dead for they rest from their labors,
and their works follow them; they rest from those labors, which tie us that
live, and the works which we are to follow, follow them. A threefold cable
faith the wise man is not easily broken; Eccles. 4.12.
and such is this here in my Text, on which the anchour of our hope hangs.

1 The testimony of Saint John, Yea.

2 The testimony of the Spirit, so says the Spirit.

3 A strong reason drawn from their rest and recompense, they rest from their
labors, and they receive the reward of their labors, they are discharged of
their work and for their work.

If they were discharged for their work, and not discharged of their work, they
could not be said blessed, because their tedious and painful works were to
return. And much less happy could they be termed, if they were discharged of
their work; but not for it, for then they should lose all their labor under
the Sun, they should have done and suffered all in vain: but now because they
are both discharged of their work, for they rest from their labor, and
discharged for their work, for their works follow them, they are most blessed.

The Spirit here takes the ground of this heavenly music ravishing the souls
of the living, and able to revive the very dead either from the laborers pay,
or the racers prize. If the ground be the laborers joy for their rest and pay,
the descant must be this; our life is a day, our calling a labor, the evening
when we give over, our death, the pay our penny. If the ground be the racers
joy for their prize, the descant may be this, the Church is the field,
Christianity is the race, death is the last post, and a garland of glory the
wager, 1 Cor. 9.14.
let us all so run that we may obtain.

Yea, faith the Spirit. We read in the Law and the Prophets, Thus faith
Jehovah, the Lord: 1 Timothy 4.1:
in the Gospel, Thus spoke Jesus: But in the Epistles, and especially in the
Revelation thus faith the Spirit, Apoc. 2.7.17.
now the Spirit speaks evidently, hear what the Spirit faith unto the
Churches, he that has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit faith unto the
Churches; Apoc. 22, 17.
and the Spirit and the Bride faith come. While Christ abode in the flesh, he
taught with his own mouth the Word of life; but now since his Ascension, and
sitting in state at the right hand of his Father, he speaks and does all by
his Spirit. By the Spirit he ordains Pastors, furnishes them with gifts,
enlightneth the understanding of the hearers, and enclineth their wills and
affections, and so leads the Church into all truth. In which regard
Tertullian elegantly terms the Spirit, Christi Vicarium, Christ his Vicar,
preaching in his stead, and discharging the Cure of the whole World.

Secondly, so faith the Spirit, not the flesh, the earth denies it, but Heaven
avereth it: when a man removes out of this World, the flesh beholds nothing
but a corpse brought to the Church, and a Coffin laid in the Grave; but the
spirit discerns an Angel carrying the soul up to Heaven, and leaving it in
Abraham's bosom, till the Father of spirits shall give her again to the body,
arrayed in glorious apparel. There is no Doctrine the Devil, the flesh, and the
World more oppose then this here delivered by the Spirit, concerning the
blessedness of the dead; for all Atheists, all Heathen, all carnal men, all
Saduces, and sundry sorts of Heretics deny the Resurrection of the body; and
the greater part of them also, the immortality of the soul: A wicked and
ungodly person believes not his soul to be immortal, because he would not have
it so, Cic. consolas. animorum oeternitatem proprius intaeutes cruciausun mirum
in modum quasi flaginose. actum vitam pena etiam sit immortalis consecutura.
he would not that their should be another World, because he can have hope of
no good there, having carried himself so ill in this, fain he would stisle the
light in his conscience; which if he would open his eyes would clearly discover
unto him a future tribunal; yet sometimes he cannot smother it, and therefore
as Tully, who saw a glimering of this truth, observes, he is wonderfully
tormented out of a fear, that endless pains attend him after this life. Well
let the flesh, and fleshly minded men, deem or speak what they list concerning
the state of the dead; the Spirit of truth faith, that all that die in the Lord
are blessed.

But where faith the Spirtt so? In the Scriptures of the old, and new
Testament, and in this vision, and in the heart and conscience of every true
believer.

First in the Scriptures, Numb. 23.10.
let me die the death of the righteous, and let my last end be like unto his,
refrain thy voice from weeping, and thine eyes from tears, for thy works shall
be rewarded, Jere. 31.16.17.
and there is hope in thine end, faith the Lord; precious in the sight of the
Lord, Psalm. 116.11.
is the death of his Saints: the Righteous shall wash his foot in the blood of
the wicked, Psalm. 58.11.
so that a man shall say, verily there is a reward for the righteous, Phil:
1.21.23.
Christ is in life and death advantage; for I am in a straight between two,
having a desire to depart and to be with Christ, which is far better.

Secondly, in this vision; for Saint John heard a voice from Heaven saying,
Write it as it were with a Pen of Iron, upon the Tomb of all that are departed
in the Lord, for so faith the Spirit.

Lastly, the Spirit speaks it in the heart and soul of every true believer
lying on his death bed, or on the Gridiron, or in the dungeon, or on the
gibber, or on the saggot; did not the Spirit seal this truth above all other at
such times to his servants, were not then their hope full of immortaility, they
could never have welcomed death, embraced the flames, sung in their torments,
and triumphed over death, even when they were in the jaws of it. Job. 19, 2^,
26, 27.
When Job was in the depth of all his misery, the Spirit spoke in his heart, I
know that my redeemer lives, and that he shall stand in the latter day upon
the earth, and though after my skin worms destroy this body, yet in my flesh
shall I see God, whom I shall see for my self, and mine eyes shall behold, and
not another, though my rains be consumed within me. offered, 2 Timothy 4, 6, 7, 8.
and the time of his departure was at hand, the Spirit spoke in him; I have
fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith;
henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, which the Lord the
righteous judge shall give me at that day, and not to me only, but to them also
that love his appearing. Likewise when Gerardus was giving up the ghost, the
Spirit spoke in him, O death where is thy sting? Mors nonest stimulus fed
jubilus: And though Robert Glover the Martyr all the night before his
Martyrdom, (...)
prayed for strength and courage, but could feel none, yet when he came to the
sight of the stake, he was mightily replenished with Gods holy comfort, and
heavenly joys, and clapping his hands to Austin, the Spirit the Comforter
himself spoke in him, He is come, he is come.

You have heard where the spirit faith so, give ear now to a voice from heaven,
de claring why the Spirit says so, for they rest from their labors, (...),
signifies as well pain, as pains, broyls as toyls, as (...) and (...) in
greek: so pain and pains in english, are of kin, for labor is pain to the
body, and pain is labor to the spirit; and therefore what we say to be
punished and tormented with a diseafe, the latin say, laborare mor^o, and the
throngs and throes which women endure in Childbearing, we call their
laboring. Here then the dead have a double immortality granted them. 1 From
the labors of their calling. 2 From the troubles of their condition, freedom
from pain, and pains taking.


What then (may some object) do the dead sleep out all their time from the
breathing out their last gasp, to the blowing the last trump? as they suffer
nothing, so do they nothing? but are like Consul Bibulus, who held only a
room, and filled up a blank in the Roman fasti, Nam bibulo factum consule nil
memini.
mare mortuam, Vid. vitem Amerbach and L^d Vr^es lib. 1. de (...).
without any motion or operation at all? that cannot be, the soul is (...) or
(...), a most perfect act; or as Tullie renders the word, a continual motion,
as the word is taken in that old proverbial verse; (...).
rest from all kind of motion or working; but (...) and (...), but from
toilsome labors, sore travels; and again from their own labors or works, not
the Lords. They keep an everlasting Sabbath in not doing of their own works but
Gods, they rest from sinful and painful travels, but not from the works of a
sanctified rest, for they rest not day and night saying, holy, holy, holy,
Apoc. 4.8.
Lord God Almighty, which was, which is, and is to come. The rest of the soul
is not a ceasing from all motion or opperation, that cannot stand with the
nature of a spirit, but a settling it self with delight upon an all-satisfying
and never satiating object, such was the rest, the sweet singer of Israel
called his soul unto, return unto thy rest, Pfal. 116.7.
O my soul, for the Lord has dealt bountifully with thee. Bodies rest in their
proper places, Apoc: 4: 10: 11. Vid. Molin. tract Eau.de Silo^m. Eccles. 11.13.
but spirits in their proper object, in the contemplation, fruition,
admiration, and adoration whereof, consists their everlasting content. This
object is God, whom they contemplate in their mind, enjoy in their will, adore
in both, and this is their continual work, and their work is their life, and
their life is their happiness, which the Divines fitly express in one word
glorification, which must be taken both actually, and passively, for they
glorify God, and God glorifyeth them; God glorifieth them bycasting the full
light of his countenance upon them: and they glorify him, by reflecting some
light back again, and casting their crowns before him, saying, Thou art worthy,
O Lord, to receive glory and honor, and power, for thou have created all
things, and for thy pleasure they are, and were created.

They rest from their labors. the waters of Siloah not so much to refresh
those that are tired with their former labors, having born the heat of the
whole day, as to lave out the false fire of Purgatory, for blessedness cannot
stand with misery, nor rest with trouble, nor reward with punishment, but all
that die in the Lord are blessed, (...), that is, a tempore mortis, from the
time of their death (as venerable Beda, and other expound the words) and so
blessed are they, that they rest from all pain and pains; and so rest that
their works follow them; that is as I shall declare hereafter, the reward of
their works. If this lave not out the Romish fire, which scareth the living
more then the dead, and purges their purses, and not their soul, we may draw
store of water to quench it out of diverse other Texts of holy Scripture, as
namely, First, If the tree fall toward the South, or toward the north, in the
place where the tree falls, there it shall be. Which Text Olymp. in eccles.
in quocu^ igitur loco five illustri, five tenebrosus, five inturpi scelerum
statione, five in honest^ virt^tum depre^e^dit^r, homa cum moriatur in co
gradu, at^, (...) ordine permanet in aeternum nam velrequiescit in lumine
felicitatis aeternae cum justis and Christo Domino: vel in te uebris cruciatur
cum impuris, and principe bujus mnndi diabolo. Cyp.ad Demet. quand. buic
excessum fuerit nullus jam penitemie locus est, nullus sat is factionis
effectus, hic vita, aut amittitur, aut tenetur, and infra ad immortalitem sub
ipsa m^rte transitur. Me aphrin eccces. (...) cyp. ad demet, oevi temporalis
fine completo ad aterna mortis vel immortalitatis hospitia dividimur. hom. 22
(...) jerome ep. 25. lugeatur mort^us sed ille quem gehenn^ suscepit quem
tartarus devorat in cuius poenam aeternus iguis estuat, non quorum exitum
angelorum turbe commitatur, quibus obviam christum occurrit gravemur magis si
diutius in tabernaculo isto mortis habitemus. hillar. in psalm. 2. nibil ilic
dilationis, aut more est tempus mortis babet unum quem^; suis legibus, dum ad
judicium unumquem^ aut abraboe sinus reservat aut poenoe. tustine mart. lib qu.
and resp. (...), etc. tertul l. de pai. ergo boc votum si illis consecutos imp
tientur dolemus ipsi consequi (...).
Olympiodorus thus illustrateth, in whatsoever place therefore, whether of
light or of darkness; whether in the work of wickedness, or of virtue, a man is
taken at his death, in that degree and rank does he remain either in light with
the just, and Christ the King of all, or in darkness with the wicked, and
Prince of the world. To little purpose therefore is all that is, or can be done
for the dead, after they have taken their farewell of us, after we are gone from
hence, there remains no place for repentauce or penance, no effect or benefit
of satisfaction, here life is either lost or obtained, but if thou O Demetrian
says Saint Cyprian, even at the very end, and setting of thy temporal life
do pray for thy sins, and call upon the only true God with confession and
says, pardon is given unto the confessing thy sins, and saving grace is
granted to thee by the divine piety (or mercy) and at the very moment of death,
thou have a passage to immortality.

Secondly, Eccles. 12.5. Man goes to his long home, and the Mourners go about
the streets; Which words Gregorius of Neocesarea, thus paraphraseth, The good
man shall go to his everlasting house rejoicing, but the wicked shall sill all
with lamentations. And S. Cyprian alluding to this passage resolves, that
after this temporal life is ended, we are diversely bestowed at the Innes of
death, or immortality; at neither of which hangs any sign of Purgatory, as
any man may see.

Thirdly, Luke 16.22. The beggar died, and was carried by Angels into Abraham's
bosom; This beggars case Machareus a learned Monk of Egypt makes a president
for all the servants of God, who when they remove out of the body the quires of
Angels receive their souls into their own side, into the pure world, and so
brings them unto the Lord. And Saint Jerome raises a strong fort of comfort
upon the ground of this parrable; Let the dead be lamented, but such a one whom
he does receive for whose pain everlasting fire does burn, but let us whose
departure a troup of Angels does accompany, whom Christ comes forth to meet,
account it a grievance, if we do longer dwell in this tabernacle of death. And
as Machareus and Saint Jerome, so Saint Hillary also draws a general rule
from their example, that as soon as this life is ended, every one without delay
is sent over, either to Abraham's bosom, or to the place of torment, and in
that state are reserved till the day of Judgment.

Fourthly, Luke 23.43. This day thon shall be with me in Paradise; and Philip.
1.23. I desire to be dessolved, and to be with Christ; and 2 Cor. 5.18. If our
earthly tabernacle be dissolved, we shall have an eternal in the Heavens, and
when we are ab. sent from the body, we are present with the Lord; From whence
Justine Martyr infers, After the departure of the soul our of the body,
there is presently made a distinction betwixt the just and unjust, for the
souls of the righteous are carried by Angets into Paradise, where they have
commerce, and sight of Angels and Archangels, but the souls of the unjust to
hell; and Tertullian colletcteth that it is an injury to Christ, to hold that
such as be called from hence by him, are in a state that should be pitied,
whereas they have obtained the chief aim of their desires, If we repine at
this, that others have obtained this their desire, by this our grudging at it
we seem to be unwilling to obtain the like, Cyp. de mortal. ejus est mortem
timere qui ad christuu^ nollet tree eius est ad christum nolle ire qui se non
credit cum christo incipe re regnare.
and his scholar S. Cypriam censureth them yet more severely, who either fear
death or leave this world in dis-content: it is for him to fear death who is
not willing to go to Christ; it is for him to be unwilling to go to Christ, who
does not believe that he begins to reign with Christ; if thou do truly
believe in God, and art secure of his promise, why doft thou not embrace the
message that thou art called to Christ? why dest thou not rejoice that thou
shall be rid of the devil?

Fifthly, 1 John 1.7. the blood of Christ purges us from all sin, no sin is
therefore left for Purgatory fire to burn out. Naz anz. o^ac 42. (...).
Were there sins to be purged yet after the night of this present life, there
is no place left (says Gregory Nazianzen) for purging, it is better to be
corrected and purged now (says he) then to be sent to torments there where the
time of punishing is, and not of purging.

But to leave other springs, this in my Text affords store of water to
extinguish Purgatory sire; and therefore our adversaries seek to dam it up two
manner of ways: First by restraining this Text to Martyrs only, who die in
the Lords quarrel, though their souls fly to heaven, their wings being not
singed with this fire: yet others (say they) are not saved, but after some time
of abode in it.

Secondly, by cooling the heat of this fire, and making it not only tolerable,
but also comfortable, bearing us in hand that they that are in Purgatot may be
said to be blessed, because they rest from the labors of this life, and they
are secure of their eternal estate, they are sure to feel no other hell. From
the first starting-hole I have beaten them already, by demonstrating, that all
that believe in Christ are ingrafted by faith into his mystical body, and
consequently, that as they live in him, so they die in him; in which regard the
Apostle speaking of all that depart in the faith of Christ says, they sleep in
the Lord, and die in Christ. Their second starting-hole is less safe then the
former, for to say that this blessedness and Purgatory pains may subsist in the
same soul, is an affertion neither politic nor reasonable. First it is not
politic; for if they cool Purgatory fire in such sort, they will stop the
Popes Mint from going; persuade the vulgar that the souls in Purgatory are in a
tolerable, nay (in some sort) in a blessed estate, because they rest from
their labors and their works follow them; and the Priests may set their heart
at rest for gaining any remarkable sums for Dirges, and the Popes
tole-gatherers also for sucking any great advantage out of pardons to ransom
souls out of Purgatory.

And as this answer stands not with their profit: so neither agrees it well
with their own tenants; for they teach that Purgatory fire is as hot as Hell
for the time, surpassing the smartest torment that can be devised, or ever was
endured on earth and call they those happy who lie soultring in this fire? yea,
but when they are there they receive singular comfort in this, that they are
sure they shall never go to hell. Surely small comfort to one who is in hellish
torments and shall continue there he knows not how long, to tell him that he is
sure he shall go to no other Hell: and how prove they that Purgatory is a
supersedeas to Hell? What security have they for it? Gods Word? but in all Gods
Word there is no syllable of purgatory, neither let they the people to know
Gods Word; for in Spain, and generally where the inquisition is in force, the
proverb is, that he smells of a Faggot, who is found with a Bible about him in
the mother tongue.

These things being so I wonder that any ordinary Papist be willing to die,
seeing the best he can hope for is to be cast presently into the flames of
Purgatory, and there to fry he knows not how long, perhaps a hundred, perhaps a
thousand years.

But (God be blessed for it) we have otherwise learned of Christ and his
blessed Apostles. We know that if our earthly tabernacle be dissolved, we shall
presently have not a temporary habitation in Purgatory, but an eternal in
Heaven: we know, that those who believe in Christ come into no condemnation,
but pass from death to life. Wherefore let us not take on too much for those
whom God has taken away from us; Cyp. de mortal. amplectamur diem quius sig^at
singul^s domi filio suo and laque is secu laribus ex^lutos paradise restituis
and regno c^lest o.
let us not trouble our selves for them that are at rest; let us not shed
overmany tears for them who can now shed no more tears; let us not too much
grieve for them who are free from all pain and grief. And for our selves, let
us not be as some are, stricken dead with the very name of death; let us not
draw back when God calls for us, when we draw on and our Sun is setting, when
the pangs of death give us warning again and again to go out from hence out of
our houses of clay; let us embrace the day which brings us to our everlasting
home, which having taken us away from hence, and losed us from the snares of
this world, returns us to Paradise and the Kingdom of Heaven.

It follows; And their Works follow them.

In the handling of this branch before we taste of the sweet juice we must pill
the root, wherein we shall find a fourfold difficulty. 1. How works are here
distinguished from labors, 2. How works may be said to follow them, 3. Whither
they follow them, 4. When they overtake them.


The first difficulty is thus expedited: the works of the dead are here
distinguished from their labors, as the fruit from the branches that bear
them, the hire from the day labor, the prize from the race. As those who taste
the fruit of a tree, are said by an Hebraisme to eat of the tree, to him that
overcomes, (says the Spirit) I will give to eat of the Tree of Life which is
in the midst of the Paradise of God. So here in this Text works are taken for
the fruit of works, or their recompense of reward.

But how are works in this sense said to follow the dead? The second difficulty.
For all the works of the dead are either transient, as meditations, prayers,
pious ejaculations, present relieving the poor, and the like; or, they are
permanent as their writings, their building Colleges, Hospitals, Churches and
other Monuments of Piety: the former cannot follow the dead because they remain
not now, nor the latter, because they stay behind them here on earth. I answer,
the speech is figurative, and signifies no motion of the deads works, but
rather promotion of their persons, and plentiful remuneration for their works;
the phrase imports no more then that all their works, whether they be actions
of Saints, or passions of Martyrs, shall not come short of their guerdon, but
shall be most certainly and undoubtedly rewarded. If we follow this
interpretation of the verb, (...), (may some say) will not Popish merit follow
thereupon? is not Heaven compared to servants wages? to the soldiers crown? to
the racers garland? and here to the laborers pay? and does not a true labourer
merit his pay? a faithful servant his wages? a valiant soldier his crown? a
speedy racer his prize? this doubt may be cleared, and the question resolved by
these Assertions following.

Heb: 11.6. Marh. 10.43. Whosoever shall give drink to one of those little
ones, a cup of could water only in the name of a Disciple; verily I say unto
you, he shall not lose his reward.
1 That our good works shall undoubledly be rewarded; for it is the very
dictate of nature, that he that sows should reap; and it is one of the first
principles of Divinity, that there is a God, and that he is the rewarder of
them that diligently seek him: yea, so exact a rewarder is he, that not a
widows Mite, not a cup of could water, but shall have an allowance for it. Did
Abraham, did Isaac, did Jacob, did Joseph, did Job, did Solomon, did
Constantine, did Theodosius and other prime servants of God serve him for
naught? did he not open the treasure of his bounty in such sort to them all,
that they could not but in thankfulness subscribe to that protestation of the
Prophetical King, verily there is a reward for the righteous, even in this
life, and much more in the life to come, for Ecce venio, behold I come quickly,
and my reward is with me, to give to every man according as his works shall be,
to them who by patient continuance in well doing seek for glory, Apoc. 22.12.
and honor, and immortality, eternal life; whence Saint Bernard draws this
corollary, though charity is not mercenary, yet she never goes from God
emptyhanded.

Romans 2.7. Ber in Cant. charitas vacua non est nec tamen est mercenara.
2 That this reward is some way due unto our works, for the labourer says
Christ is worthy his hire; and the Apostle is bold to say, it is just with God
to recompense them that trouble you, tribulation, but to your rest; and he
seems to claim a crown to himself as his due, 2 These. 1.^.
I have fought a good fight, henceforth is laid up for me a crown of
righteousness, which the Lord the righteous judge shall give unto me; it is
said to be given indeed, but given by a righteous judge, and as a crown of
righteousness, and therefore some way due.

3 Our good works concur actively to the attainment of this reward: 2 Timothy 4.8.
the words of our Savior, seek ye first the kingdom of God, and the
righteousness thereof: labor for the meat that perishes not, and strive to
enter in at the narrow gate, and of the Apostle, work out your salvation with
fear and trembling, and this momentry affliction works unto us a
superexcellent weight of glory, import no desire.

4 Notwithstanding all this, our good works no way merit at Gods hand their
reward, neither absolutely, neither by the contract of the Law, nor by the
covenant of grace: Not absolutely.

1 Because no creature can simply merit any thing of the Creator, L. 13.
confess. c. 12. explenitudine bonitatis tuoe creatura tua subsistit ut bonnm
quod tibi nibil prodesset nec de se quale tibi esset tamen quia ex te fieri
potuit non deesset quid enim te promeruit coelum and terra, etc.
as Saint Austin proves by many invincible arguments.

2 Because our works are no way advantageous or beneficial to God; we indeed
gain by them, but he gains nothing.

3 Because there is no proportion between our work which is finite, and the
reward which is infinite.

Neither can we be said to merit by the contract of the Law, as our Romish
adversaries would bear us in hand.

1 Because what God requires by the written Law, we are bound to perform even
by the Law of nature; and when we do but that which we ought to do, our Savior
teaches us not to term our selves arrogantly meritours at Gods hands, or such
as he is engaged to recompense, but unprofitable servants.

2 Because we do not our work sufficiently, and therefore cannot challenge as
due by contract our reward, our best works are scanty and defective.

3 Because we loyter many days, and though at sometimes we do a days work
such as it is, yet many times we do not half a days work, nay for one thing
wherein we do well, we fail in a thousand.

Lastly, neither can we be truly said to merit, no not by the covenant of Grace.

1 Because the Grace which works in us all in all, is no ways due to us, but
most freely given us of God; De great. and lib. arbit c. 9. cum posset Apo^tolus
recte dicere stipendium justitioe, est vita cterna, maluit dicere gratia au^
tem Dei est vita eterna. Vt intelligeremus Deum non pro merit is uostris, nos
ad vitam ^ternam, sed pro su^ miseratione perducere, Bafil. in Psalm. 114. Manet
sempitern^r^quies illos, qui in b^c vit a legit^me certarunt, non ob little
merita factorum sed de munificentissin^ 'Dei gratia ulgent. de predest^inat. p.
18. ad Mouimum. ossidete Regum paratum vobis, sed and hoc ipsum opus est
gratiae, ex gratiae, enim datur nonsolum justificati vita bona, sed and
glorificatis vita (...), Ambrose in Psalm ^18. Nonsunt condigna, non ergo
secunda merit a nostra, sed secundam misericordi^m 'Dei coelestium decretornim
in homines formaprocedit. Marcus ^remita de op. justif. (...). Greg l. 19. in
Job c 17. Eleazar in praelio Elephantem stravit, s^d sub ipso quem exti^xi^
occub it, fic qui vitia superantes sub ipsaqu^e subj^ciuns superbiendo
succumbunt.
our works as they are good, they are not ours, as they are ours they are not
good.

2 Because whatsoever we do in fulfilling the Covenant of Grace, we are bound
to do for the inestimable benefits which we receive by our Redeemer.

3 Because we employ not our Talent to our Masters best advantage; no man
walks so exactly, as he might do by the power of grace; which would not be
wanting to us, if we were not wanting to our selves.

But because we may seem partial in our own cause, and take these reasons for
demonstrations, our Adversaries will not acknowledge to be so much as probable
arguments: let the ancient Fathers give in the verdict; Saint Austin, When the
Apostle might truly have said, the wages of righteousness is eternal life, he
chose rather to say, but the gift of God is eternal life, that we might
understand, that he brings us to eternal life, not for our merits, but for his
mercy sake. And Saint Basil, There remains an everlasting rest to those who
fight lawfully, not for the merits of their works, or verbatim, according to
the Greek original, (...) (supple) (...), not according to the due debt of
their works, but of the grace, or by the favor of our most munificent god. And
Fulgentius, To possess the kingdom prepared for us, is a work of grace, for
of mere grace there is given, not ouly a good life to those that are justified,
but eternal life to those that are glorified. And Saint Ambrose, our momentary
afflictions are not worthy the glory that shall be revealed, therefore the form
or tenor of the heavenly decrees upon men, proceed not according to merits,
but the mercy of God. And Mark the holy Hermit, The kingdom of heaven is not
a reward of works, but a gift of God prepared for his fruitful servants. And
let Pope Gregory conclude all, As Eleazar who killed the Elephant, yet was
killed by the Elephant in his fall upon him, so those who subdue vices, if they
grow proud of their victory (as all do who conceive they merit heaven by it)
are subdued by, and lie under those vices, which they before subdued, for he
dies under the enemy whom he has discomfited, who is extolled in pride for the
vice which he conquered.

The third difficulcy was, The third difficulty.
whither the works follow the dead? which may thus be expedited: their good
works follow them not to the grave; for there the soul is not, nor to
Purgatory, for I have already proved there is no such place; nor to Hell, for
none are blessed that come there. The works of the damned indeed follow them
thither; there they mere with them, and with the Devil who seduced them, to
torment them for them; there the swearers and blasphemers gnaw their tongues;
there the lascivious wantons are cast into a bed of fire; there they who swum
here in pleasures, are thrown into a river of brimstone. But the works of the
godly follow them to the place where they receive their recompense for them.

The fourth difficulty was, The fourth difficulty.
when the works follow the dead? which may be thus expedited; some of their
works follow them immediately after their death, others at the day of Judgment.
Those works which they have done by, and in the soul only without the help or
use of the body, follow them immediately after death, when the soul receives
her reward for them; but those which were performed partly by the soul, Math.
25.34.35.
and partly by the body follow them at the day of Judgment. When the King shall
say, Come ye blessed of my Father, possess the king dome prepared for you; for
I was hungry, and ye gave me meat; I was thirsty, and ye gave me drink; I was
naked, and ye clothed me; I was sick and in prison, and ye visited me.

We have peeled off the rhine, Heb. 10.35.
let us now taste of the sweet juice: if our works shall most certainly, and
plentifully be rewarded: Let us be Zealous of good works, let us be filled with
the fruits of righteousness; let us in no case be weary of well-doing; let us
not cast away our confidence which has great recompense of reward: if a cup of
cold water shall be reckoned for; what think ye of a glass of hot water to
revive many a fainting soul? If two mites cast into the treasury shall be taken
notice of, what think ye of ten talents? If Christ has a bottle for every tear
shed for him, how much more for every drop of blood?

There are infinite motives in holy Scriptures to incite us to good works, I
will touch at this time only upon three. 1. Our great Obligation to them. 2.
Our exceeding comfort in them. 3. Our singular benefit by them.


First our Obligation to them is twofold. 1. As men. 2. As Christians.


As men, we are bound to serve him with our hands who gave us them.

As Christians, we are to employ them in his service, who loosened them after
they were manacled, and restored unto us the free use of them.

2. Our comfort in them is exceeding great, they assure us of our spiritual
life; for as the natural life is discerned by three things especially.

1. The beating of the pulse.

2. The letting out of breath.

3. The stiring of the joints or limbs: so also is the spiritual; if the pulse
of devotion beat strong at the heart, if we breath to God in our fervent
prayers; and lastly, if we stir our joints in walking in all holy duties, and
performing such good works as are required at our hands, we may be sure, that
we have spiritual life in us, we may build upon it that Christ dwells in our
hearts by faith; and that we live in him by grace.

3. Our benefit by them is manifold in this life, Psalm. 25: 13. Psalm: 1: 13:
Rom: ^: 28:
and the life to come. In this life peace of conscience, their soul shall dwell
at ease; 2. Good success in all we undertake, what soever we do it shall
prosper. 3. The service of the creatures, for all things work for the best to
them that love God. Lastly, a comfortable pass out of this world, we are sure
our end shall be peace. In the life to come, the benefits are such as never eye
has seen, 1 Cor. 2.9.
nor ear has heard, nor ever entered into the heart of man, God grant therefore
our heart may enter into them: quia Aristoteles non capit Eurispum, Eurispus
capiat Arist otalum, because we cannot comprehend the joys of heaven, let them
comprehend us.

You expect something to be spoken of our dear Sister deceased, and much might
be said, and should by me in her praise, but that one of her chiefest
commendations was that she could not endure praise; Lauds quia merebatur
contempsit, and quia contempsit mag is merebatur, becanse she deserved praise,
she desp ised it, and because she despised it, she the more deserved it. Silent
modesty in her was her crown in her life, and modest silence of her, was the
charge at her death. Her life was well known to most of this place, and her
death was every way answerable to her life: all that visited her in her
sickness might behold with sorrow a pitiful anatomy of frail mortality, and
yet with joy a perfect pattern of Christian patience, and a heavenly
conversation: and though she were full of divine conceptions, and she had a
spring by her of the waters of life, in the devotion of her dearest helper,
especially in the best things: yet when I came to her, she desired she might be
partaker of some of my meditations (they were her own words) and when I prayed
with her, and for her; she joined not so much with me, with her tongue, as her
affections, and answered more in sighs and tears, then in words: often she
complained of her tuff heart that would not yield to her dissolution, and long,
long she thought it, till she should come to appear before the God of Gods in
Sion. Her last words were, sweet Father help me, and she had her request, for
presently he helped her both by the zealous, and most feeling prayers of her
Husband, and by the holy spirit assisting her in her own prayers with sighs and
groans that cannot be expressed, and immediately her sweet Father released her
of her pangs, and received her to himself on his own day: On the Lords day
morning, before the morning watch, I say, before the morning watch she entered
into her rest, and began to keep her everlasting Sabbath in heaven, where she
reapeth what she sowed, and sees what shebelieved, and enjoys what she hoped
for, and is now entered into those joys, which never entered fully into the
heart of any living on earth, nor shall into ours, till we with her be made
perfect, and all of us come to Mount Sion, and the heavenly Jerusalem, and
innumerable company of Angels, and to the Congregation of the firstborn, Heb.
11.22.23.
whose names are written in heaven, and to the spirits of just men and women
made perfect. Whither the God of peace bring us in our appointed time, who
brought again from the dead the great shepherd through the blood of the
everlasting Covenant. Heb. 13.20.
To whom with the holy Spirit, etc.

FAITHS ECHO: OR, THE SOULS AMEN.
SERMON XLVI.
REVEL. 22.20 Amen, Even so come Lord Jesus.


THese words they afford to us a comfortable and sweet argument to be
conversant in. From the sixth verse of this Chapter is set down to us the
confirmation of the whole Prophecy and Book of the Revelation; partly by the
affirmation of God, as likewise of Jesus Christ, and of John himself, that
heard and saw all these things; and likewise of the Church of God in verse 17.
It is likewise confirmed by the promise of Blessing and Happiness, pronounced
upon them that shall do all these things, and shall faithfully expect the
accomplishment of them. This Verse (a part of which I have read to you) is the
Repetition in few words of all that matter that goes before, from verse 6. to
it; and has in it:

First, an attestation of our Lord and Savior Christ, in the former part of
the Verse; Behold I come quickly.

Secondly, an acclamation of the Church, in the latter part, these words I have
read to ye; Amen, even so come Lord Jesus.

In the attestation of Christ, he promises he will come to his Church, he will
come shortly, both for the accomplishment of all his promises, and likewise for
their safety and deliverance from all enemies, and all miseries, and
molestations whatsoever. To this the Church makes an acclamation, and says,
Amen, even so come Lord Jesus.

In this acclamation of the Church (to which we must now come) we are to
consider.

First, the person of the Speaker, whose words they be.

Secondly, what is the matter or substance contained in them.

Ye shall see whose words they be, if ye look back but to the 17. verse of this
Chapter, there ye shall find, that first it is said, the Spirit says, Come. By
the Spirit is not meant the third Person in Trinity the holy Ghost, because he
is not subject to these passions, to these desires, but he rests himself in
the execution and present disposing and dispensing of things, according to his
own will and pleasure. Neither by Spirit here is meant any wicked spirit or
Angel, for they do with fear and horror expect the same coming of our Lord and
Savior Christ; because his coming shall be the accomplishment of their misery
and eternal infelicity. But by Spirit here is meant, the spirit in all the
Elect and holy people of God; in whomsoever the Spirit of God is, that Spirit
does say, come, and does wish the accomplishment of all these most gracious
promises, For this is not the desire of the flesh, or of nature; but an earnest
and vehement desire of the Spirit of God in the Elect, that says, come.

Again secondly, the same verse tells us, that the Bride says, come. That
is, the Church of God in general, the Catholic Church, the whole Church of
God, being now hand-fasted to Christ, and entered into a spiritual contract with
him; She desires the consumation of the Marriage, the solemniation of the
Marriage which is already begun in the contract of it; and not only every
particular member of the Church in whom the Spirit of God is, says come; but
the Church of God in general, the Bride says come, the whole Church says
come; wishing and desiring the accomplishment of the Marriage which is already
begun.

In the third place, the same verse tells us, that as the Spirit and the
Bride say, come, so he that hears says, come; that is, not only the Church
of God that is now present here upon the face of the earth, but the successive
parts of the Church in all future Ages; they are all of the same mind, having
received the same Spirit, they all say come. Whosoever hears this Prophecy,
whosoever hears of these promises in any Age or Country of the World, all
they having the same spirit, they must needs say come, he that hears, says
come, he that is acquainted with the promises, that comes to the knowledge of
them, and does mingle them with the faith of his soul, this man must needs say,
come, to the accomplishment of them.

And lastly, He that is a thirst says, come too; that is, whosoever has
tasted of the sweetness of Christ in any measure whatsoever, and thereby has
wrought in him a vehement thirst after more, this man will say, come. Whosoever
has such a sense of Christ in his promises, as to taste of the sweetness of
these never so little; as he that has tasted a drop of honey wishes for more,
so he that has tasted of the sweetness of Christ, a drop of his grace and
mercy, this sets upon his spirit a heavenly thirst, he says come, he would
have more, he is never quiet till he have the promise accomplished to him.
These are the persons, every particular member of the Church that has the
Spirit; the whole Church in general, not only the particular part of the Church
now in the World or in any Age, but the several parts of the Church in several
Ages; whosoever is a thirst, that has tasted of Christ, must needs say, come.
Even so come Lord Jesus. These are the persons.

The second thing, is the matter of this acclamation of the Church. First the
matter contained in it, it is a vehement and earnest desire of the people of
God after Christ's most happy return, in these words, Amen, even so come Lord
Jesus. The matter of it therefore is either infolded and implicit in the word
Amen, even so, or unfolded and explicit in the latter words, Come Lord Jesus.

It is infolded I say in the word Amen. Rev. 3.14.
This word signifies in the Scripture, either the Author of the truth himself,
or else it is an affirmation of the truth.

In the Revelation, thus says the Amen, the faithful and true witness; here
Christ himself is called Amen, because he is the Author of all truth and
verity, the faithful and true witness.

Sometime this word is used, and most frequently in Scripture, for the
affirmation of the truth, either witnessing of the truth, or wishing the truth.

For the witnessing of the truth, as in all those vehement speeches of our Lord
and Savior Christ, Amen, Amen, I say unto ye; or verily, verily, I say unto
ye: this is a vehement asseveration and a witnessing to the truth, which a man
ought to believe, or would have to be believed.

Or otherwise for a wishing and earnest desiring of the truth to be
accomplished. So in the conclusion of the Lords prayer, and all our prayers, we
add this word, Amen, that is, so be it, or Let it be so: we wish it with
earnestness of affection and desire; and with a confidence and faith of our
hearts, we hope and believe that this shall be so. This is that we profess when
we say Amen.

In this place, this word is used both for affirmation, and witnessing of the
truth; and likewise it is a vehement wish and desire of the accomplishment of
these promises, with an earnest and certain hope and expectation of faith, that
all these promises and good things shall be accomplished to the soul of a
Christian.

Again, the matter of this Acclamation is unfolded, and explained in the latter
words, Come Lord Jesus. Where there is both the Action, and the person to be
considered.

The Action, Come. Christ comes to his Church many ways. He comes in his
Word; He comes in his Spirit; He comes in his mercies. He comes in his
Judgments and Justice. None of these are here meant.

But he comes to his Church in person and appearance, even in the appearance
of his body and humane nature. Thus Christ comes two ways to his Church in
person. First in his Incarnation, he appears to the world in the similitude
of sinful flesh, he came in humility, he came to suffer, to die. That is not
here meant, for that was past, when as the Evangelist Saint John wrote this
prophecy.

But the Second coming in person of our Lord and Savior Christ, is his coming
in the flesh in glory, in exaltation to judge the quick and the dead, to show
himself a mighty God from heaven. This is the coming which is here meant,
Christ's second coming to Judgment in glory. That is the Action.

The person, is described by these two Titles; Lord: Jesus. Wherein the Church
desires that he may come both as a Lord, and as a Jesus. That he may come as a
Lord to vindicate the Church, and revenge him upon his enemies, to destroy the
kingdom of darkness, the kingdom of the Devil, the kingdom of Antichrist,
which has been a great argument in this book of the Revelation.

And not only come thus as a Lord, but as a Jesus to save his Church, to
vouchsafe to her, comfort and peace, and joy; that he would come to cloth her
with immortality and glory, which she cannot expect on earth in a mortal state.
This is the sum and substance of this Petition and request, that the Lord would
come in majesty and glory, both as a Lord, against the enemies of the Church to
destroy them utterly: and as a Savior, to bestow upon the Church, even all
saving mercies, especially that great mercy of everlasting blessedness, that is
not mixed with sin and corruption, that is not mixed with any infirmity and
defect whatsoever. This is the sum and substance of the Text which I have in
few words shortly explained to ye.

Whence the point I observe (wherein we will insist by the grace of God at this
time) is this. That it is the nature and property of every true member of the
Church of God, earnestly, and longingly to desire the second coming of Christ
for the full redemption of his Church.

The Spirit says, Come, and the Bride says, Come; and whosoever hears
says, Come; whosoever is a thirst says, Come: therefore every godly man that
has the Spirit of God, that is a part of this Bride, that is partaker of those
promises, that has a cast of Jesus Christ, every one of these must
necessarily say, Come; Even so, Come Lord Jesus.

This is so proper to believers, and to every one of them, as they are all of
them described by this property in Scripture.

2 Timothy 4.8. The Crown which the righteous Judge shall give me at that day, and
not only to me, but to all them that love his appearing. The Apostle he might
have said to all saints, and godly whatsoever; and to all faithful believers,
but he makes choice of this Epithet, he describes them by this, that they are
such as love his appearance.

Heb. 9.28. Unto them that wait for him shall he appear the second time for
salvation. The godly are there described by this very property, they wait, and
long, and desire after his appearance the second time.

In the 24. of Saint Mathews Gospel; it is made the property of a good and
faithful servant there, that he waits for his Masters coming, and prepares
all things in a readiness, it is opposed to the sloathful servant that does
clean otherwise.

Ye see the truth of it in Scripture.

But ye will say; Is this the property of the Elect and faithful? Do not
ungodly men and sinners believe the coming of Christ, and that he shall come to
judge the quick and the dead? Does not every man make this profession of his
faith; I believe that Jesus Christ shall come to Judge the quick and the dead?
Why then do ye make it the property of Believers, since every man believes and
looks for it?

To this I answer. There is a twofold expectation of Christ his return to
Judgment.

The one; An expectation with desire, and with an earnest longing, the
expectation of the faithful, of a Lord, of a gracious Redeemer, nay, of a
loving Husband. Therefore every faithful soul cannot but wait upon him; As a
faithful servant that has done his work longs for his Masters coming home,
that he may give an account of his faithfulness, and may be acceptable to his
Master for his faithful service that he has done in his absence, that he may
expect his Masters remuneration.

But there is another expectation of Christ to come, that is not with desire,
but with horror, and dread, and fear, out of guiltiness of Conscience. This is
the expectation of a Malefactor in the Jayl, he waits and looks for the
coming of the Judge to pass sentence on him, and so to be dragged to execution;
thus wicked men expect Christ; thus wicked Angels expect him. But the
expectation of the godly is an expectation with love and desire, an expectation
not of a severe Judge, but of a loving husband, of a faithful Master that has
promised a recompense to the service of believers, even the least and lowest;
if it be the gift of a cup of cold water in his name. Therefore ye must take
knowledge of the expectation here meant; this I say is proper to believers.

Let us see the truth of the Doctrine, in the Reason of it; why every faithful
soul must needs long and desire the second coming of Christ.

First, because it is a part of Christ's gracious promise, which the faith of
the soul leans on. The proper object of faith is the promise of the Gospel,
this ye may see in the Text, Christ had promised to come, Amen, even so; here
is the reason of this desire, because his promise goes before it. The faithful
soul apprehends every other inferior promise, and every less promise, much
more this main promise, the very knot of all, the very complement of all: faith
must needs expect and clasp fast hold upon this promise, and give assent and
acclamation to it, as in the word Amen, even so come as thou have said and
promised.

Many promises to this purpose, has our Lord and Savior Christ pronounced,
for the stirring up of our faith and affection; as namely that in the 14 of
Saint John's Gospel toward the beginning, where he comfort his Disciples in
his absence; If I go, I will come again. And so in Acts 1.11. As ye see him
ascend with your bodily eyes in his Person and flesh, so ye shall see him
descend.

But we need not go far for promises, for immediately before the words, and two
verses besides in this Chapter, the 7. and 12, Behold, I come shortly.

This is the property of every godly man having the promise of the coming, to
lean upon it, and to desire the accomplishment of the promise. In the old
Testament they had the promise of the first coming of Christ, that they
earnestly desired; as Jacob Genesis 49.18 Lord I have waited for thy salvation,
and Abraham saw Christ's day afar off, and rejoiced. And in the New Testament we
read of Anna, and Zacharias and Elizabeth, and the faithful that wait for the
consolation of Israel: they waited for the accomplishment of this promise, the
coming of Christ in the flesh, his first coming. Shall they wait, and earnestly
desire the first coming of the Son of God in humility, and humanity and
baseness? and shall not we earnestly expect his second coming in glory, to
manifest not only his glory, but our glory? shall not we expect that coming of
his, wherein we shall be married to himself, and whereby we shall be took up to
himself? Thus ye see the promise of Christ is one ground, yea, and a principal
ground of this expectation of the faithful.

The second Reason is drawn from the Union and conjunction between Christ and
the faithful soul. That is in the Text too, the Bride says, Come. Now there is
a near union and conjunction, in this same conjunction of Marriage among men
wherein the love must needs be imperfect, and but a drop of that Ocean, and
wherein the love of the parties must needs be sinful, yet notwithstanding we
see how vehement it is, in the absence of one another; the one longs and
pineth after the other, and one party enjoys not himself without the other.
Much more ought it to be so here in this heavenly contract between Christ and
his faithful Spouse: should not hear the Spouse be sick of love? as the Spouse
professes of her self in the second of Canticles. This vehement desire must
needs arise out of the neerness and undevidedness of that conjunction that is
between Christ and a Christian. There is little love, where there is little
desire of the thing beloved, when it is absent. Why does the member of the
Body, desire immediate conjunction with the head, but because it knows that the
separation from the head, is the death of the member? So it is in this near
conjunction between Christ the head, and his members the Church, they must
needs desire immediate, and inseparable conjunction with the head, because the
separation from the head, must be the death of the members. That is the second
Reason.

The third Reason of the Point is this, because the Saints of God they know
that the accomplishment of the full happiness of the Church of God, and
likewise of themselves that are members of the Church, it consists in this,
in Christ his second coming again to judgment, therefore they do earnestly
desire it, and effect it, and say, Amen, even so, Come: because (I say) they
know this is the coming that perfects the Church of God, perfects their glory
in the state of happiness, which the Church and every member thereof does
expect: they know that that is the time which shall be the Revelation of the
sons of God, who are here obscure, and shall be till that day come. They know
well that all the graces and perfections that the child of God can attain to in
this imperfection; all is but the first fruits, all is but a taste, and
therefore they cannot possibly but lift up their heads, and raise up their
hearts to the expectation of that day wherein these first fruits shall be
perfected, with full measure shaken together, and running over; whereas there
shall be an absolute freedom from all sin, and from all the appurtenances of
it: an absolute perfection not of grace only, but of glory, which is the
highest grace. They shall be one with the head, this is that which makes them
look for it. Heb. 9.28. (the place I named before) it is said, Christ shall
appear to save them that wait for him. He shall bring a full horn of salvation,
he shall perfect the salvation of the Saints; till that day there is no
perfection in the salvation of the Saints; No, though they go to heaven, yet
before that day there is no perfect salvation, because their bodies are not
joined to their souls. This is a third Reason, even the expectation of the full
accomplishment of all the promises. The Lord has dealt with us as he dealt
with his own Israel in their wilderness, he gave them a taste of the fruit of
the good land; he caused the searchers to carry some clusters and bunches of
the fruit to the Israelites in the Wilderness, that they tasting of it might
hie themselves to that rich and goodly, and fat country: so the Lord gives us
some drops of grace, and only gives us a taste of that happiness that we wait
for, that we may hie our selves so much the faster through this wilderness, to
enjoy it. This therefore is a strong reason wherefore the people of God must
needs say, Come, Even so, Amen; let it be so, because (I say) they know till
Christ come the second time, they must not expect the accomplishment of their
hope, and the perfection of their happiness.

The fourth and last Reason of this Point may be this, because we are taught by
our Lord and Savior Christ to pray, Thy kingdom come. That is, not only that
the kingdom of grace may come into our hearts while we are here, but that the
kingdom of glory may hasten upon us: and we are sure that this Petition shall
never be granted to us, till Christ his return again to judgment, till he come
to accomplish this main promise of all: for then only Christ comes as our Lord
and Jesus. Then he comes as a Lord, and makes an end of all the wars of the
Church, then he shall throw down all enemies before him, treading Satan, and
all his instruments under his feet, then he shall manifest to the world that he
has the Keys of hell, and of death, then he shall destroy the kingdom of
Antichrist, that must be abolished by the brightness of his coming. And then,
and not till then, he shall come as a Savior to perform perfect salvation for
his Church, to deliver his Church, not only from condemnation, but from the
molestation of sin, not only from tyranny and oppression of enemies, but even
from all the presence of enemies, that at that day a separation being made, it
may be said to the Saints of god, as Moses said to the Israelities when they
were afraid of the Egyptians, stand still, fear nothing the enemies that your
eyes have seen to day, ye shall never see them more, they shall be so far from
oppressing the Church, that they shall never molest the Church not so much as
by their presence, then he shall dispose the kingdom to his members, as the
Father has disposed the kingdom to him.

These are strong and effectual reasons to prove this point to us, that the
members of the Church, true believers cannot possibly but wait and expect, and
vehemently desire the coming of Christ the second time, for the salvation of
his Body, the final salvation of his people.

Here one objection may be made by the way, and so we will descend to the Use
and Application of it.

Here it may be said; But why do the people of God thus expect and wait for the
coming of Christ, in all the Ages of the New Testament for the space of 1600
years, and yet he comes not? What reason have they to be commanded to expect
and wish, and wait for the coming of Christ, when he comes not in so long a
time? Have not all been frustrate of their expectation? And may not we as well
as they that lived in the Ages before us, for we see no appearance of his
coming, no more then was many hundred years since?

To this we answer; That the patient abiding, and waiting of the just never
miscarrieth: the Saints of God never lost nor shall lose for their expecting,
and waiting for Christ's second coming to Judgment. The Saints of God in former
ages 1600. years ago waited for Christ's coming; but were they losers by it
though he came not? This expectation of his coming, it kept them in the
exercise of their faith, of their hope, of their patience, of their
watchfulness, it kept all their graces a working, therefore they were no losers
by it, though they had not the accomplishment of the main promise: in expecting
the promise, they were savers and no losers, because all their graces were kept
in exercise.

Besides this, in the second place, the very expectation of Christ in the Ages
of the New Testament, though he came not, it is fruitful and useful to draw up
the hearts and minds of the godly to heavenly thoughts, and to a heavenly
conversation: and so in the very first Ages of the New Testament, the Apostle
tells us that this is the use of their expectation: Phil. 3.19. Our
conversation is in heaven, from whence we look for a Savior: they looked for a
Savior then, when he was but newly ascended: was it fruitless because he came
not of 1600. years after? No, but Our conversation is therefore in heaven,
because we wait for his coming. In all ages since, this expectation has been a
means to raise the heavy mold of earth, the heart of man to heaven and
heavenly-mindedness: therefore this expectation does not fail, because it is of
use to help them to the full fruition of it in the time of it.

Besides, the Saints of God never murmr, because Christ comes not, they
never murmr as those that shall lose their hopes and expectation, because
they are taught to frame their minds and wills, to the will of God, and of
Jesus Christ their head: Now, the will of God is that we should still wait,
though Christ come not, because hereby the Lord does glorify himself in the
gathering in together, the number of the faithful. The number of the Saints
must be gathered in, and none must be neglected: Now, is there any Saint of
God, and believer in the world that desires not that every Saint should be
gathered in, and the whole body of Christ perfected in the whole members of it,
before Christ come to judgment? None must be neglected, and every believer must
frame his will to the will of God; God has revealed that the number must be
gathered in, and when it is so, Christ will come and gather all together under
his wing. Now the Saints of God think not much that the number should be
gathered in, they are well contented with it. So likewise God has revealed his
will, that though he be exceeding patient to wicked men, yet he is not
forgetful of his promise; God will be contented though he be provoked every day
infinitely by the highest sins of the world, patiently to endure all this, and
to offer conditions of peace and mercy, even to the worst, to show himself rich
in mercy, and so full of goodness, that he makes offer even of goodness to the
worst. Now the Saints of God here frame their will to Gods, and are content
still to wait, because God still puts forth his patience, and still offers
Conditions of mercy and peace to those that are wicked, and out of the way,
whereby some are converted, and others convinced, and prepared for the work of
Gods justice. So this question need not trouble men, or hold them off from a
cheerful, and fruitful expectation of Christ, though he come not in our age,
as he has not in others before.

The use of the Point is this, First, if this be the property of the godly to
wait and earnestly to expect the coming of Christ, then we may observe the
general ungodliness of the World, by the general want of this expectation.

And if ye say; but who is there that does not expect the second coming of
Christ? and who does not believe that he shall come to judge the quick and the
dead?

I answer, notwithstanding that every man confess this Article of faith with
his mouth, yet every man believes it not with his heart; for every man frames
not himself according to the faith of it. Very few are those faithful servants
that wait and prepare for their Masters coming; Christ when he comes he shall
scarce find faith on the earth. What a number of Men and Women are there,
though they hear these things, and they are beaten upon them upon many
occasions, and they are in their judgments convinced that it must be so; yet
notwithstanding the faith of their hearts apprehend it not, they do not believe
it, they do not listen and frame to it. We (like Caleb) tell them of the good
Land, and the fat of the Land, and the fruit of the Land, and the fullness of
the Land of Canaan, but generally men (like the unthankful Israelites) murmr,
and repine, and rebel, and scarce hear us; or if they do, they do not believe
it: For if men did believe it, it could not be that men should live like
Saduces as they do, that neither believe the soul, nor immortality, neither
that there are spirits, nor Devils, nor resurrection, nor nothing: the lives
and conversations of men plainly bewray that they believe not this Doctrine,
though they can profess with the mouth, that Jesus Christ shall come again to
judge the quick and the dead, but like the Cardinal of whom we read; that
professed he would not give his part in Paris, for his part in Paradise; so men
live as if they would not give their part here on earth, for a Child's part in
Heaven. Like that wicked Pope that we read of when he was about to die, now
(says he) I shall know that which I never believed, whether there be a Heaven
or Hell, an immoatality of the soul or no. So men live as if they never meant
to know those things or believe them, till they come to the trial and
experience of them.

And besides, what a number of men and women are there that can profess these
things with their mouth, but they cast themselves into a fast sleep in sin and
security, and sleep on both sides, Gods Messengers and Ministers cannot awake
them, but as though their souls were to sleep everlastingly; so they sleep on
in their lusts and sins, and will not be awakened.

And (my brethren) who does not observe that it is not the fashion of men even
of those that profess themselves Christians, to say, come Lord Jesus, till they
be on their deathbeds, and till they be scarce able to speak or breath out a
word; they never say come Lord Jesus, till they know not what to do with
themselves, till they can enjoy their lusts, and the World, and their sins no
longer; they cannot tell how to bequeath themselves longer to the service of
sin and unrighteousness, till then they never call after the Lord Jesus to come
to them: and when they do, it is not out of love and affection to Christ, but
out of self-love to help them out of the hands of death, that is too strong for
them; and to fetch them out of that misery, they are too weak to sustain.
Therefore they call Lord Jesus, but (as I said) it is far from the love of him
in their hearts; for were these men to live over their lives again, and to be
restored to health again, it would be the last breath of their lives still to
call the Lord Jesus.

My brethren, where these things are (and we find them too general, every man
that looks into his own heart, may find himself in some measure touched
therein) certainly it cannot be that this same lively desire of a Christian can
be there, and these persons can have little comfort in themselves, they have
few arguments to prove themselves Elect of God, having the Spirit of God, or to
be those that hear the promises with faith, or those that thirst after Christ;
there is no argument in them that they are Christ's, because they long not and
desire after him.

But therefore in the second place, since this desire is so rare; let us try
our selves a little, even those that profess better things, and hope well that
they are indeed the Spouse of Christ. Let us try and search our selves whether
this expectation be with us or no, that we may find comfort in our estate, and
in our union and conjunction with Christ.

For trial of this Point, first we must know that a necessary attendant and
companion of this expectation of Christ, and waiting for him; is sighing, and
longing, and a vehement desire after him. It is no slight, no superficial
desire, but an inward vehement desire, a sighing and panting after Christ, as
those that see the need of him. And therefore as the Wise man says, hope
deferred, pains the heart: the godly desires of the soul, bring pains to the
soul for want of Christ in the absence of Christ. And as the Apostle expresses
it in Romans ^rov. 13.12.
the 8. We sigh in our selves (says he) waiting for the redemption of our
bodies. We sigh in our selves, as men that are sick, or in pain, or oppressed
with a heavy burden, sigh out their sorrows and griefs; so the godly soul
must labor to find this expectation, in the sighing, longing, earnest desiring
after Christ; we sigh in our selves, says the Apostle; this is an argument of
true love to Christ indeed, when we earnestly desire him in his absence. As a
true faithful Spouse enjoys not her self when she enjoys not her Husband;
so it is with the Spouse of Christ, therefore the Apostle in the 2 Thessalonians. 3.5.
joyneth them together, The Lord direct your hearts into the love of God and
into the patient waiting for of Christ. As if he should say, there can be no
love of Christ, if there be no waiting for Christ, and according to the
vehemence of your love, will be the vehemence of your sighing and longing after
him. That Is the first attendant of this expectation whereby we may examine our
selves.

A second attendant is, a comfortable sweet joy in the soul, a fruit of the
spirit, not a fruit of presumption, or of the flesh, but a fruit of the spirit,
as the Apostle says, Romans 5.1. Being justified by faith, we rejoice under the
hope of the glory of God: where there is an earnest and certain expectation of
Christ (faith giving assurance to the soul of Christ's return for the happiness
of it) it rejoices under the hope, the (...) resolves it self into joy,
because it shall enjoy Christ. That which the Apostle Saint Peter says,
confirms this notably, whom (says he) having not seen, and yet we love him,
and rejoice with joy unspeakeable and glorious.

Do we find this joy in our hearts? 1 Pet. 18.
this heavenly joy? that which shall be perfected in the presence and full
fruition of Christ? But alas! where shall we find this joy in the World? Men
joy in Corn, and Wine, and oil, in the increasing of their Money, and Stocks,
and Estates; where is the joy the heart is resolved into, to consider and
remember the return of Christ to the full and perfect happiness of the soul?
Certainly (my brethren) this is a rare grace upon the earth; and yet where it
is not, that man can have no sound argument in his own heart, that he has this
expectation of the coming of Christ, for with it there is a sound joy in the
heart that the world breeds not, nor cannot take away.

A third companion to try the truth of this expectation is, an endeavor after
purity of heart and life, this must needs go with this expectation; 1 John 3.3.
Hethat has this hope purges himself, and is pure as he is pure: He that has
this hope that expects Christ hopefully and joyfully, he purges himself: he
that waits for Christ, waits for him that he may be like him, that he may
be holy as Christ is holy, (still reserving the proportion of a member) and be
pure as Christ is pure.

What a number be there, that profess they look for Christ's return for their
final salvation, and yet this expectation does not purge their hearts, does not
cleanse those nasty and filthy corners that are there. It purges not their
mouth from falsehood, and lying, and deceitful and cursed speeches, nor their
hands from injustice, and oppression and the like; they are no whit like Christ
in their conversation, and yet they hope for and expect Christ, no, he that
has this hope purges himself.

What shall we think of them that oppose, that seek to oppress purity of heart
and life? that cast scorns upon purity and holiness? what shall we think of
those persons? Shall we think that they have this expectation? They will tell
ye I, and justify it before any man, and boldly stand, upon the expectation of
their Savior as well as others; but if thou hate purity in others, then thon
hate it in thy self, and he that purges not himself has not this hope, for
he that has this hope, purges himself as he is pure.

A fourth companion and attendant of this expectation, is Christian fortitude
and valor, and unweariedness in laboring and suffering for Christ. Where this
expectation is, the soul is invinsible in laboring and sufferings; He cares
not what he endures, what he sets on for the name of Christ. This we shall see
in the Apostle Saint Paul, when he had the white in his eye, when he had this
aim set before him, the high price of the high calling of GOD in Christ, I
forget the things (says he) that are behind, and press hard to the things that
are before. Though his labor and pains, and sufferings were mavelous great,
he forgets all them, and still pressed hard to the mark, the price of the
high calling of God in Christ Jesus. So holy Moses, because he looked for the
recompense of the reward, he chose to suffer affliction with the people of GOD,
rather then to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season. Besides, those faithful
servants of GOD, many other instances might be added, to show that when a man
has this expectation that Christ will come, and give him the end and
recompense of his labor, and eternal joy and glory for his short sufferings,
which are not worthy of the glory that shall be revealed, he refuses no pains,
no labor, no passion, no sufferings for Christ and a good conscience. But what
need we go further then the example of Christ himself, the example of all
examples, who for the joy that was set before him, endured the Cross, and
despised the shame? and why was this? but for our example, that we should
despise the crosses that are before us, and go on unweariedly, and unfaintingly
through all crosses and persecutions; if we meet with never so many
oppositions, with never so many Devils, yet to go cheerfully on in the ways of
God, why? because we have a hope, and an expectation before us of Christ
appearing.

Further, another attendant of this expectation is this; It bluntteh and
abateth the siery edge of our affections to the things of this world. He that
has this expectation is weaned from the world, it looseneth the soul from the
world every day more then other; Whereas naturally we are rivitted to earthly
things, fastened to (...) world; this expectation wrought in the heart; causes
us to walk more loosely and unjoynted, it blunteth and abateth those eager
desires that are in us to earthly things. See it in the example of that worthy
servant of God Moses, because he looked for a City, and for the recompense of
reward that was set before him; he scorned the treasures of Egypt, he despised
them, he cared not for honor or treasures, or all that Egypt could afford, he
had rather suffer afflictions with Gods people, why? because he looked for
therecompence of reward.

Be there not a number of persons that profess they expect Christ his return
for their final salvation, and yet notwithstanding they are so fixed to the
world; they gather the world as greedily, grapling the things of this life
together so earnestly, with such vehement affections, as if they were to live
their age over a hundred times? be there not a number of politicians that
profess this hope too, that hold it most unwise and foolish thing in the world
to lose any thing for conscience sake, and for Christ? Alas! these things will
not stand with this expectation. When a man has a good title to heaven he is
content to part with the broken title to the things of this life: as long
indeed as a man has not a better title, he will hold to that worse: but when
he has a blessed title to the inheritance of the Saints in light, he cares
not for this broken Tenor and title, he will not hold them, because they
cannot hold him.

In the last place, another note that attends this expectation is, where this
is, there will be an answerable affection, there will be a promoting of all the
means to further it, their will be a grief and sorrow for all things that come
against it to hinder it. Thus we do in other expectations. When we expect this
or that reversion, when anything comes between our hope, we grieve for it, any
thing that comes, or falls out to further our hope, we rejoice in it. And
thus it will be likewise in this expectation of Christ, if it be true,
whatsoever it is that may further our hope, and further Christ his coming, that
we desire and pray for, that we rejoice in, that we promote and put on with all
our power and strength; and because a powerful ministry of the Word, promoteth
the kingdom of Christ, and setcheth in the company that shall be saved, and
hasteneth his coming; therefore we will withal our power and strength, hold up
the ministry of the Word of GOD, (that Scepter of Jesus Christ) for the
gathering in of people to God, for the perfecting of the number of the Elect,
that so Christ may come and finish our salvations. And whatsoever it is that
may hasten this his coming and appearing, we are glad to see it in the means of
it, when the Word is preached, when the Sacraments are administered, when people
are gathered to God, when grace appears in the hearts and lives of men, when
we see the power of godliness manifest it self any where, when we see godly men
encouraged and entertained, when we see the fear of God to prevail in Families
and the like, we rejoice at this. Why so? because this increases and
confirms our hope, it gathers in the number that must be accomplished,
before our final deliverance. And contrarily, when we see things to impair, and
hinder the coming of the kingdom of Christ, that hinders the salvations of
men, when we see the Church of God left without able teachers, and in stead of
them, to come in unprofitable and unsufficient ignorant men, when we see the
free passage of the Gospel hindered, many excellent lights shut under a bushel,
and their light hid from the people of God, and the Gospel from the Church of
God, when we see faction prevail, and both Civil and Ecclesiastical government
despised, when Heresies are countenanced, and the people of God discouraged and
disheartened, when we see the state of the Church of God abroad, that many sad
blows are given by the enemies, and the sword of the enemy is sharp upon the
Church, when we see these things, these dazzle our hopes, they come between us
and the kingdom, and second coming of Christ, the hastening of it: therefore
there must be grief for it.

Thus it will be; We pray for every thing that may hasten it, and pray against
every thing that stands between, and hinders the conversion of men, and the
glory of God, and the proceedings of Christ's kingdom: thus (I say) it will be
with us.

But where is the man that takes these things to heart? who sets himself on
these holy and conscionable courses? If this be so, it appears manifestly,
that this expectation, though it be every where expressed, is hard to be found
any where; there be very few that believe our report, few there be that set
themselves to sift and examine the soundness of their expectation, and desire
after Christ, yet where it is not (these attendants) it is not sound and
sincere.

In a word, to stir us up to this, as the Church and the Spirit, and the Bride,
and he that is athirst here, says Come, to stir up (I say) our desires to
this, we will use a Motive or two.

Do we not see by all this discourse a plain difference between godly men and
unbelievers? A godly man that has the Spirit of God in him, says come. A
wicked man has no such spirit in him; with his tongue he may say come
sometime, when he is forced, but he has not the spirit to say come. Here is
the difference in their present estate, but afterward the differences is
greater; when the evil servant will not wait for his Masters coming, but sits
with the drunken, and Libertines, he shall be made a spectacle of his masters
fury; The Lord of that servant will come in a day when he looks not for him,
and at an hour when he is not aware, and will cut him in sunder, and will
appoint him his portion with unbeleevers. There Is then another difference.

Again, consider though the coming of our Lord Christ be certain, yet the
particular time to our knowledge is uncertain; but though the particular time
be uncertain, yet it is hastening, it is not far off. In the time of the
Apostle, there was but an hour, says Saint John, Mat. 12.45, 46
now is the last hour: if it were the last hour in the Apostles time; certainly
it is the last minute now, the very last minute of an hour now.

And I beseech you, let us consider the promise that is made to persons that
expect the coming of Christ, Blessed is that servaut, whom his Master when he
comes shall find so doing: how doing? watching, and preparing for, and
expecting of his Masters coming; Blessed is the servant that his Master shall
find so doing: he speaks there in the singular number, there are not many that
he shall find so doing; therefore he speaks of one that is blessed, one of many
that shall be found so doing. Blessed are they that watch and keep their
garments clean, that purge themselves as he is pure, that labor to be holy as
he is holy; blessed is he that does so.

If it were not for these promises, how were it able for Christians to get over
the rubbs and hindrances that lie in the way of this expectation? how were it
possible for a Christian to leap over the brunt of reproaches, the execution of
sentences, and persecutions that the Saints of God go under? only because they
have an eye upon the White, the expectation of the coming of Christ.

The faithful Martyrs in this Kingdom, and in other Countries; what did drive
them to embrace the flames, and the cruelest death and torments that
Persecutors could devise? but only this was in their eye, this bore them out
against all the threatenings, and sufferings of the World, this was that that
did give them encouragement and comfort above all discouragements.

And to conclude, above all let us encourage our selves, by the fruit and
recompense of all this expectation; what is that? the Apostle Saint John says,
that when this hope shall come into our hand, when our faith shall meet with
fruition, then we shall see Christ so as to be like him: here is such a sight
of Christ, as never the eye of flesh saw, nor can see; to see Christ and to be
like him, to see him as he is; here is such a sight as would ravish us if we
knew what it was, and we cannot know while we are on earth; eye has not seen
that which we shall see in Christ: but when we shall enjoy this expectation, we
shall see him as he is, and see him so as to be like him. Father (says he,
John 17.24.) I will that where I am they may be, that they may see my glory.
Wicked men see his glory, what privilege then between them and the godly? It
is true indeed wicked men see the glory of Christ's person, and they shall see
and feel the glory of his justice; but the godly see the glory not only of his
person, not only of his justice, but the glory that no wicked man ever shall
see, the glory of his Mercy, and goodness, and grace; here is the difference.
God gets himself glory upon Pharaoh in drowning of him; but God gets
himself the glory of his Mercy in Israel, in saving them in the bottom of the
Sea: so the godly, they see the glory not only of the person of Christ (and
that is infinite and surpasses apprehension) but they see the glory of his
Mercy, of his eternal goodness, and they see it so as to be like him, to be
translated into that glory, to get a part and share of it (as much as they are
capable of) they make themselves all glorious with his glory, and shine with
his brightness and beauty.

Alas brethren, all the sight we can get of Christ in this world, it is like
the sight of the blind man that Christ cured, he bad him look up, and lift up
his eyes, and he saw men walking as trees, an imperfect sight; so we have here
but an imperfect glimpse of Christ, we see him through a glass, through the
Word and Sacraments, and these means that he has appointed, an imperfect
sight, till Christ give us a clear sight, and makes us see perfectly, and this
is in the day of his return. All the sight and vision of Christ in this life,
it is but to see him in a glass (faith the Apostle) as in a looking glass, but
then we shall see him face to face, we shall see him as he is. What difference
there is between the shadow in a glass, and the face it self, so much
difference there is between the sight of Christ here, and hereafter, when we
shall see him as he is, when we shall see him with open face, and not in a
mirror. Therefore let this encourage us, and stir up our hearts, to expect and
wait for the coming of Christ with vehement and daily prayers, with fervency of
spirit, with the Church, and the Bride, and the Spirit to say, Even so, Amen,

Come Lord Jesus.

FINIS
DEATHS PREROGATIVE
SERMON XXXXVIII.
GENESIS 3.19. For dust thou art, and unto dust thou shall return.


AS the tender mercies of the wicked are cruel, Pro. 12 10. or the seeming
cruelties (at the highest but severities) of the God of Heaven have much of
mercy in them. Witness this carriage in this Chapter, toward our first
Parents: not to speak of his mercy of mercies, ( obvious to every eye) Christ
the Second Adam, promised before the first Adam was punished. the woman is
sentenced in sorrow to bring forth Children. It might have been better and
better; whereas it is Bitter-sweet, though sorrow, yet she shall bring forth
Chrildren.

Travelers will assure us, that there is a small Island nigh Nombre de dios in
America, where no woman as yet, could be delivered of a child, and therefore,
when near their time, are conveyed over to the neighboring continent, whether
this proceeds from the Astringency in the Air, Earth, or Water; or any other
occult Quality, let the privy Counselors of Nature discuss and deside.

God might have extended the Malignity of this Island, all over the World.
Caine might have been the Ben-nony to Eve, but his goodness was so merciful,
that her comfortable pain was for the time abated with the hope, for future
forgotten with the fruition, John 16.21. That a man was born into the Word.

Secondly, for Adam, he is censured verse. 17. In sorrow to eat of the ground
all the days of his life. In sorrow there is Justice, shall eat, there is
mercy: God might have made the Earth Deaf, and Dumb to the desires of the
Husbandman, ut non parerent arva colono, Man might have Fallowed, and Stirred,
and Plowed, and Sown, and Harrowed, and Rouled, and Weeded, and Mown, and yet
not have brought home to the Barn; or not have eat of what he brought home. How
easily can God make an ill conditioned and unseasonable autumn, defeat the
promises of the most pragnant Spring, and Summer? How may a Snowy January,
Frosty February, Dusty March, Showry April, Windy May, Warm June, Hott July,
(all very kindly in their kinds) be married with a constant and continued reign
in August, even to the famishing of all mankind, had not God graciously
promised that man should, though in sorrow, verse. 17. and in the sweat of his
face, verse. 19. eat bread from the ground.

A Second favor is herein conferred on Adam, that God in his due time would
put a period to his painful life, his toil, trouble, and turmoil, occasioned by
his tilling the earth, and other interveining afflictions should not last
always, but end and expire with his life, for dust thou art, and unto dust
thou shall return.

This text I may term the GRAND LEVELLER, as which equalleth Showels and
Scepters, Penknives and Swords, Scholars and Soldiers, Captains and Captives,
Princes and Peasants, high and low, rich and poor, one with another.

Saint Paul, 2 Timothy 4. compares man's life to a race, I have finished my
course, and Heb. 12.1. Let us run with patience, the race that is set before
us, let us improve his Metaphor into an Alegory, and it will serve us very
conveniently for the deviding of our text, wherein we may observe. 1. Carcer,
the Bar, from whence we do start, for dust thou art. 2. Meta, the mark, to
which we run, and unto dust thou shall return.


Be it here remembered, that this Metaphor is confined to the Terrestial and
earthly part of man, without the least reference to his best moity, I mean his
Soul; man consists of two parts, (...) and (...), Soul and dust, the former
not coming within the compass of the Text, fall not under the notion of dust,
apropriated to the body alone.

I cannot with comfort and conscience proceed, to the collecting of
observations out of a Text, whilst conscious to my self, that the same is
encumbered with difficulties, and we meet with two main ones in the Text which
must first be remooved.

First Question.
This being, (as I may say) the first day of Judgment, when God in the text
legally proceeded to the sentencing of Adam (cast by the confession of his own
conscience) how comes it to pass that only Temporal punishment is inflicted
upon him. One might justly have expected, that God rather would have said, from
Hell came thy sin, and to Hell let thy sin return, and thy soul go a long with
is. Or you shall go from the place wherein you stand, to the place of eternal
Damnation, where the worm dies not, and the fire is not quenched, there shall
be weeping and gnashing of teeth. Whereas now the mention only of Temporal
death, has given the hint to Profane persons in this licentious age (greedy
to snatch at all shaddows of advantage) no less boldly then falsely to maintain,
that sin in its own nature, does only diserve, and shall only receive Temporal
Death.

I answer, first Negatively, It was not because sin in its own nature,
deserves only Temporal Death seeing, (were it the work of the day, and the
time as proper as the place for that purpose) Legions of Scriptures, might be
produed to prove that et ernal (as well as temporal) death is due to the
demerit of sin, yet none can wonder at profane persons, if willing to kindle
comfort to themselves at every Gloworm they meet with, it being for the intrest
of thieves and murderers to believe (if they can so persuade themselves) that
there never will be Goales, Judge, Sizes, Sessions, Sheriffs, or Executioners.
But for most weighty reasons, Obvius and open to our apprehension, (besides
others no doubt concealed in his own bosom) Divine wisdom adjudged it not
convenient to besentence our first Parents with eternal Damnation, though
according to his justice and their deserts, it might have been inflicted upon
them.

First ingeneral I answer, Why should any man's eye be evil because Gods is
good? What if he were pleased to abate of legal extremity, and mercifully to
remit much thereof who shall say unto him, why do thou so? Indeed Itinerant
Judges bound to observe the letter of the Law, may not, but a King by his
Prerogative may commute the Gallows into the Brand, qualify the Brand into the
Whip, underpunish offenses without wrong to any, because therein he does only,
uti imperio suo.

Descend we now to more particular answers, and before we go further; the
Audience will grant this unto me (which if denied me I shall be bold to take,
as an undoubted truth) that had the sentence of eternal condemnation, been once
pronounced by God, and passed on Adam; It, like the Laws of the Medes and
Persians, Dan. 6.8. could not ever after be reversed, or repealed. This being
premised I tender to your consideration, how inconsistent it was with Gods
goodness, to curse Adam and Eve to the Pit of Hell, beheld either in their
Personal Notion, as single souls, or in their collective capacity, as the
Representatives of all mankind.

For the former, God would not curse Adam or Eve, as private persons, because
foreseeing, that both of them would repent, and lay hold on the Promised seed,
and so eternally be saved; indeed there were in the primitive time a sort of
Heretics, no less uncharitable then Erroneous, who maintained that both Adam
and Eve were damned, (base birds thus to defile their own nest) whose Doctrine
was exploded by conscientious Christians, and the contrary avowed and asserted
by the Church of God.

Secondly, consider Adam and Eve as the representatives of all mankind, and so
all the ELECTS lay hid in the Loins of the one, and Womb of the other; I have
blessed him (said Isaac of Jacob, Genesis 27.33.) yea and he shall be blessed; by
the same proportion it followed more firmly, that if God had cursed the elect
in Adam and Eve, they should have been cursed, which was diametrically opposite
to Gods gracious intent, yea, would have proyed destructive to his design,
having fore-appointed from all eternity, in due time to say unto them, Matt.
25.34. Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you,
from the Foundation of the World. Yea which is most material, Christ himself,
of whom it was said, Gal. 3.8. In thee shall all Nations be blessed, according
to his humanity, and as concealed in his causes, had even then a Seminal
existence in our first Parents. What said Balaam, Numb. 23.8. How shall I curse
whom God has not cursed, or how shall I defy, whom the Lord has not defied?
But it follows, a fortiori, that God could not, that is would not, issue out
an eternal malediction on them, who had him in them, who was the fountain of
all blessedness, and that by Gods own foreappointment, an Act as much
precedanious to my Text, and which by due seniority took place of Adams
punishment, as eternity is before time, 2 Timothy 19. Who has saved us, and
called us with an holy calling, not according to our works, but according to
his own purpose and grace, which was given us in Christ Jesus, before the world
began.

In further illustration of this our answer, it is very observable, that God in
this Chapter, twice discharged the terrible word Cursed, and yet both times
designedly no doubt, (he can best, if so pleased miss the mark, who if so
pleased, can best hit it) misseth both Adam and Eve.

Once verse 14. Thou art cursed above all Cattle, and this Cursed he bestowed
on the Serpent.

The other on the earth, verse 17. Cursed be the ground for thy sake.

When Sons of Princes committed faults, it was usual for the servants of those
sons to be beaten. As here the earth, is punished for the fault of man his
Master, and the curse is on it inflicted which by him was deserved.

Second Question.
Seeing God threatened Adam, Genesis 2.17. In the day that thou eatest thereof,
thou shall surely die; how came he to live so long after that fault committed.
The Barbarians, Act. 28.6. looked when Saint Paul, (Stung with the Viper)
should have Swolu, or fallen down dead suddenly. And it might rationally been
expected that Adam, invenomed with sin and the guilt thereof, should in the
same minute, and moment have sunk down into Death. Whereas the words in the
Text are still, de futuro, To dust thou shall return, yea, we read Genesis 5.5.
And all the days that Adam lived, were nine hundred and thirty years, and he
dyed. Joshua's was a long day, made up of two cuppled together, without any
night interposed, whilst the Sun stood still; but here was an extensive day,
indeed lasting well nigh a thousand years.

Answer.
Some please themselves in returning this answer, which to me seems a witty
foolish one, though by some highly approved; it is said, say they, Psalm. 90.4.
For a thousand years in thy sight, are but as yesterday when it is past, and as
a watch in the night. Thus taking one thousand years for one day, (according to
the computation, Stilo Dei) Adam, dyed in the same day he sinned, as whose life
though exceeding the ninth century, never attained to a full thousand. But this
by some is justly censured not for expounding, but abusing the word of God.

First Answer.
Waving therefore this mock-answer, I present two sollid ones to the readers
choice, to prefer which he pleases, or, (if so disposed) to twist them both
together; the first is, that sentence of God, Genesis 2.17. is not desinitive, but
comminatory parallel to that, Jonah 3.4. Yet forty days and Nineveh shall be
destroyed; such comminatory sentences always run with a clause of revocation,
(concealed though not expressed) in case God conceives the contrary more
conducing to his glory; I say these comminatory sentences, done adterrorem, are
not so conclusive, but that they are still coinclusive, admitting of a
revocation at Gods pleasure and man's repentance, as our first parents no doubt
were true Penitents for their offense.

Second Answer.
Adam became mortal from that very instant, that he eat the forbidden fruit.
Sickness then arested him, though he was not imprisoned in the grave till many
years after, before his full natural heat and radical moisture, knew and kept
their respective bounds in his body, without the least mutual encroachment,
since his fall they are turned fierce foes, lying at the catch and waiting
advantages to invade one another: since the very minute of his preverication,
his body sickness-proof before, was subject to be drowned with the dropsy,
burnt by the seaver, swelled by the Gout, shrivelled by the Consumption; in a
word, he carried in his Soul the seeds of all sins, in his body of all diseases.

In common discourse we date a Malefactor dead (though not naturally legally)
form the sentence of condemnation passed upon him; It is but a dead life which
he leads after that time, such being the Chancery, as I may say of Common Law,
to allow him a few days to dispose himself for death; in the same sense we
behold Adam, as no man of this World, as Dead and defunct, (though respited and
reprieved for some years) from the time that he eat the forbidden fruit.

We must not forget that Saint Jerome, in whose mouthing languages (departing
confusedly from Babel) met methodically then in any other Father, highly
commends the translation of Simacus, reading these words, Genesis 2.17.
Morieris, thou shall die; Mortalis eris, thou shall be mortal; herein if he
rendered not the letter like an exact Translator thereof, he has given in the
true sense of the word, as a judicious commentator thereon.

And now we may march on with becoming confidence, to collect some Doctrines
from the words being secured from any ambush to surprise us on our backs. We
may say with Isaac, Genesis 26.22, Rehoboth, now the Lord has made room for us.
These two grand objections thus satisfied, come we now to the place, whence all
mankind starteth, Dust thou art.

Doctrine.
All mankind derive their original from dust. Adam immediately, Genesis 2.7. And
the Lord God formed man of the Dust of the ground, and breathed into his
nostrils the breath of life, and man became a living Soul. Eve, mediately made
of flesh, made of dust, and so all mankind since, being one remove further
from dust in their composition, but at the same degree of distance from dust,
at their Desolution, Dust thou art, etc.

First Use, to retrench our Pride, at the serious consideration of our mean
original; Virgil tells us, Georgicks the fourth, that when Bees fiercely fight
in the Air, the speediest way to part them, is by casting dust upon them. Hi
motus animorum, atque hac certamina tanta,
Pulveris exigui jactu compost a quiescunt.


But when Swarms of lusts in our proud Souls fight one against another; and all
against the word and will of God, the quickest means to compose them, is by
throwing some dust, pouring meditations of mortality upon them.

Second Use, to confute the curiosity of such, who expend so much precious
time, care and cost, in pargoting, painting, pouldering, patching, and
perfumeing of their bodies, which came from, and go to the dust. Here first, I
allow a necessary neatness due to our bodies, least otherwise we antedate our
own stench, least otherwise before our time, this our dust turn dirt, and
become offensive to our selves and others.

Secondly, I allow (for God allows) an ornamental decency, proportionable to
the condition and estates of persons, and I find, Genesis 24.22. Eare-rings in the
ears, and bracelets in the hand of Rebeckah, though to any judicious eye, those
hands seemed more beautiful for the Buckets she did bear, then for the
Bracelets she did wear. But blameworthy their pride, and vanity, who spend
about their bodies time and cost, to the neglect of their Souls.

It is reported of Queen Katherine Dowager, Sand. de scismate Anglicano.
first Wife to King Henry the eighth, that she accounted no time worse spent
then what was wasted in dressing of her; indeed seeing nature, was not over
bountiful of beauty unto her, and having a humorous Husband to content, art
might the more excusably be indulged unto her; but how many are there who
esteem no time well laid out, but what is spent in tricking, trimming, decking
and adorning themselves. The Commoedian could complain, dum moliuntur, dum
comuntur unus est; but the Divine may complain, dum precantur, vix semihorula
est. To tell that Sex of their faults in that language they best understand,
too much time is lost by them in their dressing, to little in their devotions.

Here let me humbly tender a motion to the Gallants of our time, and may it but
meet reception, and entertainment suitable to the seasonableness thereof, when
they do curiously powder their Hair, (how welcome is the meal of old age of
man's, unwelcome of Gods besprinkling) let them even then call to mind, this is
but anticipating the work and words formerly used at men's burials, Dust to
dust, for dust thou art, and unto dust thou shall return.

Third Use of comfort. Of comfort (may some say) that is impossible to arise
naturally from this Text, can meat come from the devourers, can any good come
out of a Gallilee? Behold the Text is hung about on all sides with mourning,
and therefore little cheerfulness, and less comfort, can thence rationally be
expected, however most clarified, and distilled consolation may be extracted
from the Text, and it is pity to express it in any other than in David's words,
Psalm. 103.14. For he knows our frame, he remembers that we are but dust, and
therefore of his gracious goodness will not expect, Golden performances, from
dusty Performers. He will be pleased to accept, dusty Prayers, and dusty
Preaching, dusty Reading, and dusty Almsgiving, from us, as proportionable to
our extraction.

God knows that the Angels are not Dust, and therefore he may justly expect
from them, and require of them, to serve him, in altitudinibus, in height of
performance, having a fourfold advantage above men, by their very origination.

First, the Angels are incorporeal, who can act quicker then I can think? My
sluggish imagination cannot keep pace with their performances. It was but a
Poetic fiction, that the Spanish gennets were conceived of the Wind. But it is
a Theological truth, Heb. 1.7. He makes his Angels Spirits, and his Ministers
a flaming fire. Whereas we poor men, do drale and drag a cumbersome corpse about
us, which much hinders us in all our devotions.

Secondly, Angels have no flesh, and we have flesh, this will some say
interferreth with the former: Oh no. Our Savior had a body, and that a real
one, but no flesh in this sense, that is no relic and remnant of original
corruption, whereas we have both body, and flesh too, in the worst acception of
the latter; This Esquire of our body (as I may call it) is over officious in
his daily attendance, so that whilst the Wind of Gods Spirit blows us one
way, the tide of our corruption hurrieth us another way, a mischief from which
Angels are secured by their nature.

Thirdly, Angels have no World to tempt them. We live (...), in the middle of
Snares, so bad that we should not look upon them, but so common that we can
hardly look beside them.

Fourthly, and lastly; Angels are free from any Devil, effectually to tempt
them, should Satan endeavor, he could not accomplish it. The match cannot be
lighted where there is no tinder to take fire; Whereas such our corruption, it
is quickly enflamed with Satan's temptations.

Angels having thus a fourfold advantage above men, and seeing they, Psalm.
103.20. Excel in strength, whilst we poor mortals exceed in weakness, God will
expect from us service suitable to the mean matter we are made of, and in his
accounting with us, will give us grains of allowance, make favorable
abatements, and accept of proportionable defalcations, remembering that we are
but Dust.

Let me hear make a supposition, not only seasable in it self, but which de
facto, we see daily performed; suppose a man had two Sons, the one grown to the
full strength and stature of a man, the other (which usually happens by the
same venture) an infant which has newly learned the method of going alone.
Suppose further, that the Father at the same time, commands them both to come
to him, and bring with them somewhat proportionable to their strength, in
obedience whereunto, the man-son, brings a Beam or Log on his shoulders.

The Child-son comes also, and what does he bring with him? It is very well if
he brings himself, for every step he stirs he ventureth a stumbling if not
a falling, but what if also over and above himself; he brings a straw or reed
in his hand.

I appeal to you who are Parents of Children (others being but incompetent
judges of the case in hand,) to you I say, who have paternal affection resident
in your breasts, and maternal legure in your bosoms, whether you would not
take it in as good part, a reed of your Child-son, (as a Beam of your Man-sons
bringing; I trough you would. Have earthly Fathers, who are but
parcel-pittiful, such a Court of Chancery in their hearts, and shall not God,
whose mercy is over all his works, exceed us in all bowels of compassion? God I
say, who may be said to have two forts of Sons, Angels, already arrived at
their full strength and perfection. In the laws of England, the Kings eldest
Son, as Duke of Cornwel was presumed to be to all legal intents and purposes of
full Age, on the first day of his Nativity; sure I am that Angels at the very
instant of their creation were out of their nonage, and in full maturity,
whilst men during their living in this life, are still in their minority; Until
Ephesians. 4.13. we all come in the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the
Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fullness
of Christ; and therefore God will dispense with our dusty performance,
remembering that we are but Dust.

However none can without manifest usurpation entitle themselves to the least
share in this Use of comfort, if the connection of David's words (whereon they
are founded) be seriously considered, Psalm. 103.13, 14. Like as a Father
pittieth his Children: so the Lord pittieth them that fear him. For be knows
our frame; he remembers that we are dust. See here God only reflecteth with
favors on the dusty extraction of those that fear him, and no others.

Therefore let no profane person, suck poison out of the sweet flower of our
comfortable use, and dispose himself to leudness, or (at the best) laziness in
Gods service, presuming that God, knowing his Original of Dust, will therefore
accept of his, as of but dusty performance. Here let me distinguish betwixt
dusty, and Dung-hil serving of God.

Dusty serving of him is, when men endeavors to the utmost strength, of their
weakness to serve him, when they present him (as Jacob did unknown Joseph, Genesis
43.11.) with the best, (and those God knows but had) fruit of our Land in our
vessels, doing all in sincerity (which is Gospel perfection) and the mean time
confessing of, groaning for, and fighting against those many corruptions, and
more imperfections which cleave unto their most perfect performances. This is
Dusty serving of God, Dung-hil serving of him is, which proceeds from persons
Dead in Trespasses and sins, Ephesians. 2.1. sending forth the same savor in the
nostrills of the God of Heaven, with Lazarus when he had been three days
buried, John the 11.39. And although such actions may appear spetious to the
beholders, yea, and breath forth no bad sent at all, to wicked men in the same
condition (one rotten corpse is not offensive to an other) yet as dead flies
cause, Eccles. 10.1. Ointment of Apothecary, to send forth an ill savor, so
Hypochricy appendant to such actions, rendereth them noisome to that infinite
being, who is Emunclissiminaris, most exact and critical in his smelling. This
is Dunghill serving of God, most odious unto him, and therefore the Godly do
detest and abhor it, whilst they only grieve and bemoan at their dusty service
of God, which notwithstanding if, (qualified as formerly stated, is acceptable
in Jesus Christ.

Come we now to the Mark, to which we all run, and unto dust shall thou return.
Whence we observe this Doctrine, All humane art cannot preserve a corpse from
final returning to dust. I say, final, although for a time it may repreive the
same from being pulverized.

Far be it from me, dispitefully to decoy the ingenious endeavors, (and they
be but endeavors) of any in Chyrurgery, I will not add any to my ignorance in
that mystery, yet I say. Art must cry craven, in this experiment, and cannot
secure a corpse, from mouldering into it first matter, Dust.

For proof hereof let us suppose, first that which I may call an healthful
corpse, viz. of one not weakened and wasted with a long lingering and languishing
disease, but of one cut off suddenly in the prime of his youth.

Secondly, Suppose an Artist expert in his profession of Embalming, no whit
inferior to them, who made the last bed for the repose of King Asa's corpse, 2.
Chron. 16.14. of sweet oders by the art of the Apothecary.

Thirdly, allow him the most and best of spices, not only a mixture of Myrrh
and alloes, about an hundred pound weight (the proportion assigned by Nicodemus
for our Saviors body, John 19.39.) but as many as India and Arabia does
produce the Embalmer being stinted to no number but his own pleasure.

Lastly, because moist Countries be accused to invite corruption, let us lay
the scene of this experiment in Egypt it self, where the dryness of the
clymates may contribute something to the affecting of the work.

The premises thus provided in matter and manner, in kind and degree, to the
Chyrurgions full desire, let him not begin his opperation, and fall on working,
according to the rule of art. Here I suppose he will with his instruments first
take out the brains and bowels, of both which conclamatum est, it is granted on
all sides that they cannot be preserved from putrefaction, and juditious art
will not adventure on a labor in vain.

Next I conceive he will curiously incorporate his spices, into those,
vacuities, and concavities, out of which the brains and bowels (those hags of
corruptions) were taken out.

Thirdly, after the using of much art in order to his design, he will build the
body many stories high in perfumed Sear-cloaths.

Lastly, he will deposite it in some dry place, perchance where no earth shall
touch it, lest as ill company often solicit good natures to badness, the corpse
may be tempted by contiguity to the earth, the sooner to return to dust.

Now when all this is done, all in effect is still undone, as to the thing
undertaken, I deny not but that a corpse may thus be preserved some hundreds, or
perhaps for some thousands of years. And yet give me leave to say of such a
body, minima est pars, sui ipsius, there is the least of flesh and body, in
that flesh or body, the matter thereof insensibly resolving into dust, and that
dust vanishing into nothing, that does appear; so that the most of what
remains is the substance of spice and flesh, and that at last passes to dust
as its general matter.

Yea such prodigious cost of Embalming bestowed on bodies, has accedentally
occasioned their speedier corruption. Many a poor man's body has slept quietly
in his grave without any disturbance, whilst the corpse of some Egyptian Princes
might justly complain with [seeming] Samuel to Saul, 1 Samuel 28.15. Why have
thou disquieted me, to bring me up, their Fingers, and Hands, and Arms, Toes,
Feet, and Legs, and Thighs, and all their body, tug'd and torn out of their
tombs, tumbled and tossed many hundred miles by Sea and Land, bought and
brought by Drugists for Mummy, and buried in the bellies of other men, they it
seems being canibals, who feed on man's flesh for food, though not for Physic,
all which may seem a just judgment of God, on the imoderate cost and curiosity
in their embalming, as if endeavoring thereby to defeat and frustrate Gods
sentence, and to consure the truth in my Text. Dust thou art, and unto dust
thou shall return.

In a word, as a loving child; which is violently kept from his tender Mother,
will wait and watch his first and best opportunity to return to his Mother
again. So every man's body is a child of the Mother Earth and though the
vigilant eye, and powerful hand of art, endeavors its utmost to detain this
child from the arms of its Mother; maugre all obstruction, it will make its way
unto her; for dust thou art and unto dust thou shall return.

First Use, this teaches us what to think of Popish Relics, their Priest
pretending many of their Saints bodies to remain in their shrines at this day
uncorrupted, thus they fabulously report, that the hand of Saints King Oswald.
Nullo verme perit, nulla putredine tabet Dextra viri, etc.

That no worm or putrefaction tainted his right hand, which had been so
abundantly bountiful to the poor, If so, he had far better success, then he who
was a better Kind and Saint, even David himself, Acts 13.36. Who after he had
served his Generation, was laid to his fathers, and saw corruption. But most of
these Popish forgeries, were discovered at the desolution, and such bodies
found as rotten as their superstition who adored them.

Second Use, Seeing it is impossible to preserve our bodies from returning to
dust, let us labor to keep our souls from being turned to damnation.

Eccles. 12.7. Then shall the dust return to the earth, as it was, and the
Spirit shall return to God that gave it. Wherein observe all Spirits both good
and bad, after death return to; as to the Father of Spirits, to do their homage
unto him; I say, they all instantly return unto him: from him alone to recerve
new orders: and instructions how, and where he will have them for the future
disposed of, in an eternity of weal, and woe, God grant that our souls may so
return to God: as never to return from him; but abide with him in endless
happiness. O consider the worth of your soul and value them accordingly.

Saint Matthew says, 16.26. What is a man profited if he shall gain the whole
World, and loose his own Soul? But Saint Luke Chap. 9.25. has it, if he gain
the whole World, and loose himself. His body is without him, only an appendant,
and that seperable, but his Soul is his very self, loose that loose all.

There lived lately in the City of Exeter, a person well known; generally
remitted by all a right religious man, though in my mind more to be commended
for his devotion then discretion; his custom was to apply himself to strangers
in all companies, and sequestring persons by themselves demanded of them; If
you die at this instant what assurance have you of the eternal salvation of
your Soul. A question which has posed many a great Scholar, to give a good
answer, with truth and comfort thereunto.

I confess his Christianity was better then his civility, in surprising people
with so sudden an Interrogatory. However it is a question, if not fit for him
to ask of others, fit for every man to demand of himself, the Preacher in the
Pulpit, the People in their Pewes, the Taveller on his Horse, the decumbent in
his bed, every one at all times, in all places.

Now it is not the least part of Gods mercy unto us, that before our bodies
after our deaths, finally return to dust, they even whilst we are living, begin
for to ungive, and to dispose themselves, for their dusty dissolution; David
says, Psalm. 19.7. I will bless the Lord who has given me warning, my reins
also instruct me in the night season. He speaks this in relation to his
mortality, it following soon after, my flesh also shall rest in hope.

God gave David warning, that death should not surprise him of his mortal
condition, his reins, that is some inward wastings, and secret weakness of
nature, minded him that he must return to his first original; God in like
manner gives us warning, and may we have wisdom to take it, some years before
our eye-strings break, our eyes are blind as to small prints, our ears deaf as
to love sounds, evident monitors that our bodies are ungiving to return to dust.

God of his goodness sanctify unto us, all decays in nature, that they may
effectually mind us of our mortality; it is said of Sampson, when his hair was
cut off, Jud. 1.6.20. He awoke out of his sleep and said, I will go out as at
other times before, and shake my self, but he quickly found the case was
altered with him. Thus we in our declining age think to rise as early, go as
late, run as fast, travel as far, do all things as actively as twenty years
ago, when we were young; but it will not be, age has clipped our strength; God
make us sensible thereof, that we may remember our end, and apply our hearts
unto wisdom, AMEN.

THE PATRIARCHAL FUNERAL.
GENESIS L. 10. And he made a mourning for his Father seven days.


THere are two great names concealed in this Text, but expressed by the Prophet
David in a peculiar and eminent manner: Thou have with thine arm redeemed thy
people, Psalm. 77.15.
the Sons of Jacob and Joseph. Great was the name of Abraham, but all his Sons
were not accepted; only Isaac was in the Cevenant. Great was the name of Isaac,
but his Son Esau was rejected. Great then must the name of Jacob be, who had
twelve Sons, and all accepted. The whole people of God descended from him, and
were called Israelites, and the Sons of Jacob, as his by generation from his
loins. One of these twelve was Joseph, and the rest did equally descend from
him, and might be called his Sons by preservation, from his care and power.
Howsoever, he is exempted from the number of his Brethren; and that he might be
styled a Father, two Sons of his are numbered with his Fathers Sons, and ranked
with the Patriarchs. Thus were all the people of God the Sons of Jacob and
Joseph; and Joseph, while the Son of Jacob, the Father of the Sons of Jacob.
These are the two concealed in the Text; Jacob the Father, and that Father
dead; Joseph the Son, and that a mourning Son: for he made a mourning for his
Father seven days.

These words contain a brief relation of a Patriarchal Funeral; in which two
general parts are presented to our view; The Solemnization of the Obsequies;
and, The Continuation of the Solemnities. In the description of the
Solemnization there are four particulars observable; The Connection; The Person;
The Action; The Occasion. The Connection, in the conjunctive particle And; the
Person understood in the following pronoun He: the Action represented, what He,
that is, Joseph did, he made a mourning: The Occasion expressed, for whom he
mourned, for his Father. The Connection of the Text is double, in reference to
the Person, and in relation to the Action. The Connection of the Person, And he;
the Connection of the Action with the precedent actions of that person, And he
made a mourning. I shall begin with the Connection of the Person, and in my
whole discourse exactly prosecute the method of the Text.

When aged Jacob yielded up the Ghost, Genesis 49.33.50.2.3.
and was gathered unto his people, the Physicians embalmed Israel, and the
Egyptians mourned for him threescore and ten days. They were not as yet the
apparent enemies of God; they had their tears for Jacob, who afterward would
have drowned all his Sons; they preserved and prolonged the days of his life;
and when those were cut off, they continued the days of his weeping. But there
is a difference between a formal and a real sorrow, between a solemn and a
serious grief, between a popular and a filial sadness. Wherefore Joseph is not
contented with the Egyptian mourning; he has a nearer relation then those
strangers had, and therefore more of affection is expected from him; his filial
sympathy must go beyond their accustomed civility; the Egyptians mournned, and
he made a mourning for his Father. This is the Connection in respect of the
Person; that of the action follows.

When Jacob was near the time of his dissolution, Joseph put his hand under his
thigh, and swear unto him that he would deal kindly and truly with him, that he
would bury him in the burying place of his Fathers. Genesis 50: 1.
When he gathered up his feet into the bed and dyed, Joseph fell on his Fathers
face, and wept upon him, and kissed him, and so paid the first fruits of a
Funeral with his eyes and with his lips. After this be commanded the Physicians
to follow with Spices and embalm him, desirous to preserve that body to the
utmost possibility from corruption, from which he had received his generation.
Then he entreated and obtained leave of Pharaoh to perform his Oath which he
swear unto Jacob: he went up to the Land of Canaan to take possession with his
Fathers body, Gen: 49: 31.
and laid him in the field which Abraham bought. There they buried Abraham and
Sarah his wife, there they buried I saac and Rebekah his wife, there Jacob
buried Leah, and there Joseph buried Jacob. And having thus fulfilled all the
duties belonging to a Son, there remaining but this one, fitter to be performed
then required, he made a mourning for his Father. This is the Connection of the
Action.

The Person or chief mourner then is Joseph; he which once was dead in the
thoughts of Jacob and desires of his brethren, survives his Father to attend
his Funeral, and to preserve his Brethren alive. His coming into Egypt cost
aged Jacob many a tear; and he must pass into Canaan to demonstrate his
gratitude, and pay that debt unto his Father there. This eminent Person is
proposed for an example unto all ages of the world: what he here performed, was
no legal Ceremony; he was a Patriarch, and long before the Law: he was a
singular and signal type of Christ, and has done nothing which may misbecome
the most retired and sublimed Christian.

And this will readily appear, if we join the Action to the Person. He made a
mourning. I called an Action, which may as well be termed a Passion: as a
mourning, so a Passion; as he made it, so an Action: a passionate Action, or an
active passion. The internal grief of his mind and sorrow of his heart, as an
inward passion of his Soul, was voluntarily raised within him by resolved and
continued thoughts of his Fathers death; and at the same time the expression of
that grief was willingly poured Forth, as what he understood did well become
him. We are not only to bewail our sins, but all those miseries which proceed
from them: and therefore tears were not only lent us to declare Compunction,
but also to express Commiseration. We read our blessed Savior twice did weep,
once for the sins of Jerusalem, once for the death of Lazarus whom he loved.
Two eyes Nature bestowed upon us, though perfectly and distinctly we can see
but with one at once, and both are equally made the fountains of tears, as we
are sinners for Contrition, as we are Brethren for Compassion. When the first
Martyrs blood was shed for the Christian faith, devout men carried Steven to
his burial, and made great lamentation over him; Act. 8.2.
such were the tears of the Infant Church. When Peter found Dorcas, a woman
full of good works and Almsdeeds, dead, all the Widows stood by him weeping.
Thus the first which dyed in Christianity, were followed with solemn tears: and
it was a wise observation made by the Apostate Julian, Act, 9.39.
that one of the means to convert so many Heathens to our Religion, was the
care of the bodies, and the solemnities always used at the Funerals of the
dead. Thus far of the Action, He made a mourning.

The occasion of this sadness is expressed in a word, but must be considered in
many more, as being the principal concernment both of the Text and Time. The
mover of his passion, the object of his grief, the cause of his tears was his
Father, And he made a mourning for his Father. This was so truly the occasion,
that it was the only cause, that there can be no reason imaginable assigned why
Joseph should mourn, but only because he had lost a Father. Though he was aged
to extremity, though he was holy unto eminency, though he was happy to
eternity, though no way disadvantageous by his death to any, yet because dead,
and that a Father dead, he made a mourning for him.

We usually say of ancient Persons, that they have already one foot in the
grave, and the rest of their life is nothing else but the bringing of these
feet together. Why then should we weep for the death of aged persons, when it
can be but the second part of their Funeral? That sorrow seems to be but
useless which is spent upon necessities, Psalm. 90.20.
and that grief irrational which would create impossibilities. The days of our
years are threescore years and ten, and if by reason of strength they be
fourscore years, yet is their strength labor and sorrow. What reason then can
we produce, that the life of a man whom we esteem, should be sorrow to himself,
and his death be grief to us? Now Jacob gave this account of his age to Pharaoh
when he came down to Egypt, The days of the years of my pilgrimage are an
hundred and thirty years; and he lived in the land seventeen years; Genesis
47.9.28.
so the whole age of Jacob, was an hundred forty and seven years. This
extremity of his age had fastened him to his bed, the perfect emblem and short
forerunnner of his grave. Genesis 48: 10.
The eyes of Israel were dim, so that he could not see; he was already in the
shades of darkness. Nay, the time drem nigh faith Moses, Genesis 47.29.
that Israel must die; there was a natural necessity of his death, an apparent
impossibility of longer life; and yet this consideration is no excuse to
Joseph, but he made a mourning for his aged Father.

Secondly, the death of the righteous is to be desired rather then lamented:
and it were a dishonor put upon Religion to think a pious man less happy dead,
Lake 23, 28.
then when he lived. Weep not for me, was the language of the immaculate Lamb
when he went to a shameful and a painful death: and why should he, which yields
up his soul with comfort, leave his body to be covered with so must forrow?
Those which live in impiety, and depart in their iniquity, they which have here
provoked the wrath of God, and go hence with that wrath abiding on them, as
they could create nothing to their relations but sorrow in their life, so must
they necessarily increase it at their death. But Jacob was a Patriarch, of
eminent and constant piety, particularly and remarkably beloved of God, highly
blessed by him, and powerfully blessing in his name; and yet when Jacob dies,
Joseph weepeth: And be made a mourning for his pious Father.

Thirdly, Death is nothing else but a change of a short and temporary, for an
unalterable and eternal condition. From whence it follows, that those which
die in their sins, from thence begin to feel those torments which shall never
cease: and therefore they leave behind them a sad occasion of grief and sorrow
to such as are apprehensive of the pains they feel. If the Rich man in the
Gospel were so careful of his surviving brethren, and so concerned in their
welfare; if they had as well understood his sad and irreversible condition,
what floods of tears would they have shed for him who called so earnestly for a
drop of water to cool his tongue! But as for such as pass from hence into a
place of rest and joy, who change the miseries of this sinful world for the
blessed presence of a good and gracious God; weeping at their departure, may
seem improper and unkind officiousness, as 'twere a sorrow for their happiness,
and envy at their felicity. Now the soul of Jacob was certainly at rest, and
Joseph sufficiently assured of his happiness. He knew that his Father was heir
of the same promise with Abraham: Heb. 11.10, 13, 16.
for he looked for a City which has foundations, whose builder and maker is
God; he dyed in faith, and embraced the promises; he confessed that he was a
stranger on the earth, and that he sought a better country, that is, an
heavenly; and therefore God had prepared for him a City, and he was in the
bosom of Abraham, the place of felicity. But the happiness of his soul is no
excuse to Joseph for the Funeral tears due at the interment of his body. And he
made a mourning for his happy Father.

Fourthly, many persons expiring give too sad occasions of sorrow to their
relations left behind: they which depend upon them, whose subsistence lives
and dies, and whose hopes are buried with them, may go to their graves with
unfeigned tears, lamenting not so much the departure of their friend, as their
own loss; something they may weep for them, and more for themselves. But the
death of Jacob was not of any such condition; there could no disadvantage arise
from that to Joseph, no interest of his could suffer by it. He had already
blessed all his Sons, and Joseph principally; there could be no more of
heavenly favors expected from his prayers or prophesies. Had he dyed before he
laid his hands upon Ephraim and Manasseth, had Joseph and his Sons been absent
when he blessed the rest, he might have sadly mourned for the loss of his
Father, and of the Benediction. If Esau lift up his voice and wept, because he
was defeated of the blessing while Isaac lived, Joseph might well have made a
mourning, had he been prevented of the Benediction by an unexpected or a
distant death. But Jacob blessed them, and with his blessing gave order for his
burial, and with that blessing and that order dyed. And as his death was no way
prejudicial to the spiritual, so was it not at all disadvantageous to the
temporal condition of his Son. He suffered loss of no enjoyments by his Fathers
death; Jacob had lived long by the favor and the care of Joseph, his filial
gratitude alone preserved his life; but no such narrow thoughts abated the
freeness of Joseph's forrow. And he made a mourning for his Father.

If none of these considerations, which work so powerfully on other persons,
did move this Mourner to express such sorrow, what were the Motives then which
caused so deep a sense, what meditations wrought so powerfully on the heart of
Joseph? I answer, they were but two, Mortality, and Paternity; the one
supposed, the other expressed in the text: Jacob was the Father of Joseph, and
that Father dead, and therefore Joseph mourned for him.

Mortality is a proper object to invite our pity, and privation of life alone
sufficient to move compassion in the living. Eccl. 22. If.
Weep for the dead, faith the Son of Sirach, for he has lost the light. If for
no other reason, yet because a man is dead, and by death deprived of those
comforts which those that live enjoy, they which survive may providently bewail
their future privation in his present loss. Thus every Gravestone bespeaks or
expects a tear; as if all those eyes which had not yet lost their light, were
to pay the tribute of their waters to the dead Sea. This Fountain Nature never
made in vain, nor to be always sealed up; that heart is rock which suffers it
never to break forth; and be it so, yet if the rod of Moses strike, an
affliction sent from God shall force it. Let us therefore be ready with our
sorrowful expressions when we are invited by sad occasions; especially when a
Father, who may command them, calls for them, as that Wise man did, My Son, let
tears fall down over the dead. Eccl. 38.16.
And if paternal authority demands them at the death of others, it is no filial
duty which denies them to attend upon a Fathers Funeral. Joseph a man of a
gracious and a tender heart, moved with common objects of compassion, had a
vulgar forrow arising from the consideration of mortality; Joseph a Son full of
high affection and of filial duty and respect, was touched with a far more
lively sense by the accession of paternity: And he made a mourning for his
Father: he made a mourning for his Father, which begat him; for his Father,
which loved him; for his Father, which blessed him; for his Father, which had
mourned for him; for his Father, which came down to die with him.

First, he made a mourning for his Father who begat him: had there been no
other but that naked relation, it had carried with it a sufficient obligation.
There is so great an union between the Parent and the Child, that it cannot
break without a deep sensation. He which has any grateful apprehension of his
own life received, cannot choose but sadly resent the loss of that life which
gave it. If the fear of the death of Croesus, by a natural miracle could unty
the tongue of his Son who never spoke before; that man must be miraculously
unnatural, the floodgates of whose eyes are not opened at his Fathers
Funerals, though he never wept before. The gifts of grace do not obliterate,
but improve nature; and it is a false persuasion of Adoption, which teaches us
so far to become the sons of God, as to forget that we are the sons of men.
Joseph a person high in the esteem of Pharaoh, higher in the favor of God,
great in the power of Egypt, greater in the power of the Spirit, yet he forgets
not his filial relation, yet he cannot deny his natural obligation, but as a
pious Son, he pays the last tribute of his duty to Jacob; And he made a
mourning for his Father, who begat him.

Secondly, he made a mourning for his Father, who loved him. Love, when in an
equal, commands love; and this is so just, that fire does not more naturally
create a flame. In this the similitude is so great, that there is no difference
in the nature of the love produced, and that which did produce it. But when it
first begins in a superior person, the proper effect which it creates in an
inferior, is not of a single nature, but such a love as is mingled with duty
and respect. The love of God to man challenges love from us, but that of such
a nature as cannot be demonstrated but by obedience; and that of a Father to
his Son is of the same condition, though not in the same proportion. The Father
loves, first with care and tenderness, with a proper and a single love; the
Son returns it with another color mingled with duty, blended with respect. Now
Jacob had many children, and as an eminent example he loved them all: but among
the rest, there was one clearer and warmer flame; for be loved Joseph more then
all his children: Genesis 37.3.
the offspring of Rachel, the Son of his old age, the Heir of his Virtues, the
Corrector of his Brethren, the Beloved of God, had a greater share in Jacobs
affection then the rest of his issue. He did not so much prefer his wives
before his hand maids, he did not so highly value Rachel before Leah, as he did
esteem Joseph before the offspring of them all. This was the paternal love of
Jacob, and this was answered with as high a filial respect in Joseph; which
after death could not otherwise be expressed then in tears; And therefore he
made a mourning for his Father, who loved him.

Thirdly, he made a mourning for his Father, who had blessed him. Blessing is
the sovereign act of God, and the power of benediction like the power of God.
He delegateth this power unto his Priests, who stand between God and Man, and
bless the Sons of men in the name of God. He derives the same upon our natural
Parents, that children honoring them may expect his blessing upon their desires
and prayers. And what greater favor could we ask of God, then that those
persons who have the most natural affection toward us, should also have the
greatest power to bless us? Now when the time drew nigh that Israel must die,
when his body drew nearer to the Earth, and his soul to Heaven, when his
desires were highest, and his words of the greatest efficacy, he called unto
his Sons, and blessed them, Genesis 49.1, 48.
every one according to his blessing he blessed them. But as he loved Joseph
more then all his Brethren, so he blessed him above them all: he made one Tribe
of every Son, and two of him: his affection showed it self Rhetorical in his
Benediction, saying, The blessings of thy Father have prevailed above the
blessings of my Progenitors: unto the utmost bounds of the everlasting hills
they shall be on the head of Joseph, Genesis 49.26.
and on the crown of the head of him that was separate from his Brethren.
Giving this Benediction, Jacob dies; receiving this Blessing, Joseph survives,
who can render no other Retribution after his death, but care of his Burial,
and tears at his Funeral. And therefore he made a mourning for his Father, who
had blessed him.

Fourthly, he made a mourning for his Father, who had mourned for him. The
Parents cares and fears are equal, and when any infelicity betides their
children, their griess are great; Genesis 37.34.
and all these bear a proportion with their love. Now the love of Jacob to
Joseph was transcendent, and being so, it raised as high an hatred in the
hearts of his Brethren; by which he was, in their intention, and in his Fathers
opinion, dead. And now the Funeral is Joseph's, let us see how Jacob does
appear. Genesis 37.35.
He rent his clothes, and put sackcloth upon his loins, and mourned for his Son
many days. Here is a real demonstration upon a supposed death, and a serious
mourning at a feigned Funeral. Had his dearest Son been dead, yet he might well
take comfort in his numerous offspring, but he did not; for all his Sons and
all his daughters rose up to comfort him; but he refused to be comforted: and
he said, for I will go down into the grave unto my Son mourning; thus his
Father wept for him. Thus it pleases God to permit this happy deceit of
envious Brethren, this pious mistake of an affectionate Father, not only for a
great example of Paternal love, but also to teach all Sons to measure their
griefs at their Fathers death, by a consideration of those sorrows which their
Parents would have expressed, had they dyed before them. Howsoever Joseph was
but just in this: he made a mourning for his Father, who had mourned for him.

Lastly, he made a mourning for his Father, who came down to die with him. It
was the old expression of Parents comfort, that at their deaths they might have
their children to close their eyes; and it has been equally the desire of
children to be made happy by that occasion, in showing the last testimony of
their duty at their Parents Death. Now Jacob who upon the supposed death of
Joseph, had said, Genesis 37.35.
I will go down into the Grave unto my Son; upon the certain intelligence of
his life and safety, resolves to go down and die with him. For when he saw the
Wagons which Joseph sent, and his spirit revived, Israel said, it is enough:
Joseph my Son is yet alive, Genesis 45.27.28.
I will go and see him before I die: and when Joseph first presented himself
unto him in the land of Egypt, the first words he spoke were these, Now let me
die, since I have seen thy face, because thou art yet alive. Now he which said
at first, Genesis 46.30.
I will go and see him before I die, and when he saw him, said, Now let me die,
resolved nothing in that journey but to die with Joseph. And he made a mourning
for his Father, who came down to die with him.

For all these reasons Joseph mourned; for his Father, who begat him,
remembering his natural generation; for his Father, who loved him, not
forgetting his singular affection; for his Father, who had blessed him,
considering his double Benediction; for his Father, who had mourned for him,
meditating a pious retaliation; for his Father, who came down to die with him,
embracing the opportunity of a dutiful expression. And thus I close up the
first general part of the Text, or the Solemnization of the Obsequies.

The Second general Part of the same, presents us with the Continuation of the
Solemnity. Which ministers a double Consideration, one as consisting of not
many days, the other as determining how many days. And he made a mourning for
his Father seven days.

Immediately after Jacobs death in Egypt, forty days were fulfilled for his
embalming, and the Egyptians mourned for him threescore and ten days. They
which have no hope of a life to come, may extend their griefs for the loss of
this, and equal the days of their mourning with the years of the life of man.
But so tedious a Funeral Solemnity is a tacit profession of Insidelity. Deuteronomy.
34:8.
When Moses went up into the Mountain of Nebo, and dyed there, the children of
Israel wept for him in the plains of Moab thirty days. The plains of Moab were
nearer to the Land of promise then Egypt was, and some light of the joys of
the life to come was discovered under the Law, and therefore more then half of
the Egyptian Solemnity was cut off by the Faith of the Israelites. But this
Patriarchal Funeral was made in Canaan, the Land of promise, the Type of
Heaven; it was appointed by Joseph a blessed Patriarch, and a Type of Christ:
it continued some days, to declare his natural affection, but those not many,
to express his religious expectation. Had it been extended longer, it had
demonstrated more of duty, but less of faith, he had showed himself more a Son,
but less a Patriarch. But now he is become a great Example, in mourning some
days, of filial duty; in mourning few days, of Divinity. Which is our first
Consideration.

The Second leads us to the determinate number of the days, which are
expressly. Seven. And he made a mourning for his Father seven days. The Jews
took special notice of this act of Joseph, and in the land of Canaan observed
the number of these days, Eccl. 22.12.
Seven days do men mourn for him that is dead, faith the Son of Sirach; and
though it be not unto us a law, yet it is a proper subject of our Observation.

It was afterward one of the laws of Moses, He that touches the dead body of
any man, Numb. 19.11.
shall be unclean seven days. And therefore well did Joseph teach the
Israelites to mourn the same number of days, that with their tears of natural
affection, they might mingle some thoughts of their natural pollution.

Again, Exodus 20.11. Genesis 2.2.
the number of Seven is the number of rest, In six days the Lord made Heaven
and Earth, the Sea, and all that in them is: and he rested on the Seventh day
from all his works which he had made. Now Joseph knew that there remains a
rest to the people of God, he was fully assured that as the days of the years
of his Fathers pilgrimage were evil, so they ended in rest and happiness: that
as sure as his body was past all weariness and pain, so his soul was placed
above all possibility of grief or sorrow. A Dove brought Noah word into the Ark
that waters were on the face of the Earth, and he stayed seven days, and then
the Dove sent forth returned, Genesis 3.9. Il.
and lo, in her mouth was an Olive leaf plucked off, so Noah knew that the
waters were abated from off the earth. If we mourn for the death of any person
departed, and the waters appear upon the face of man, yet after the seventh
day, when the Olive leaf is plucked, when we have considered the peace, and
rest, and joys of the souls departed in the fear of God, it is time for the
waters to abate, for mourning to cease.

Thirdly, the number of Seven is the number of holiness: as God rested the
seventh day, Genesis 2.3.
so blessed, and hallowed it. Seven days Aaron and his Sons the Priests were
consecrated; seven days an Atonement was made, and the Altar was sanctified.
Seven days has Joseph set apart for his Fathers Funeral, to show that
mourning for the dead is something sacred, the tenth of the Egyptian mourning,
an act of Piety, a part of Religion. The Jews observed that the Circumcision
was deserred till the eighth day, that a Sabbath might pass upon the child, and
so sanctify it before it was circumcised; and Joseph appoints seven days
for mourning, one of which must necessarily be that day which God blessed and
sanctified in the beginning, to procure a blessing upon that duty, and to
sanctify his sorrow.

Upon which seasonable Consideration I shall take leave to conclude my
meditations on the Text, and apply my self to the present Solemnity, which gave
the occasion to consider it: that I may make such use of the work of this holy
day, as may sanctify the sorrow of it.

And now, most Honorable Sir, the Joseph of this time, the chief Mourner of
this day, be pleased to endeavor the Sanctification of your mourning, by these
reflexive Meditations.

First, learn from hence to meditate upon your own Mortality, and be now
assured, by this near and home example, that your self shall die. This may seem
but a cold monition, but a dull reflection; every Grave preaches that
Doctrime, and every Skeleton reads as good a Lecture: when we come into the
House of God, our feet will learn thus much, and the ground we tread upon will
thus far instruct us. It Is true, the examples of our mortality are numerous,
but they are not equally efficacious; the nearer our relations are to those
which die, the more we are concerned in their death, 2 Samuel 12, 7.
and there is none so near in his concernment as that of the Father and Son.
There is a difference between the language of the Scriptures, and such a
Prophet as Nathan was; one tells us that all men are sinners, the other says,
thou art the man. So common Funerals tell us all men are mortal, but that of a
Father speaks not only plainly, but particularly, thou art so. From his
vivacity the Son receives life, and in his death must read his own departure.
It Is possible to imagine an immortal family, and then the deaths of others
concerned that not: but where the Father's dead, there can be no pretense or
thought of immortality. Beside there is something more then propinquity of
nature in a Father: Religion teaches us that our days are otherwise bound up
in our Parents lives. Remember the first Commandment with Promise, Ephesians. 6.2.
Honorthy Father and thy Mother, that thy days may be long in the land:
consider that you have lost in his death all further opportunity of improving
the hopes of that promise; and that you stand now only, as to him, upon what
comfort you have in your former duty, and in your past obedience. Thus learn to
fix a more immediate and more concerning meditation of your own mortality, upon
the death of him, in whose life yours was involved both by a natural and
spiritual dependence.

Secondly, reflect upon that love and entire affection which you have lost; and
could no otherwise be lost, but by losing him, in whom it lived. Love is of
that excellent nature, that it is esteemed by the best of men, and accepted
from the meanest persons; what then is the affection of a Father! what is the
purity of that fire which God and Nature kindles in the breast of man! what were
the flames which ever burnt upon the Altar of your Fathers heart, who never
hated any man! See but the nature of Paternal love in David; who, when Absalom,
his Son, but a most rebellious Son, 2 Samuel 18.22.
openly sought his life and Crown, and dyed in that unnatural attempt, went up
into his chamber and wept, and as he went, thus he said, O my Son Absalom, my
Son, my Son Absalom; would God I had dyed for thee, O Absalom my Son, my Son:
Measure by this example the affection you have so lately lost, who never gave
any offense as Absalom did, and yet had in your Fathers eye all the reasons of
love which Absalom could have. Know then you make a mourning, as Joseph did,
for a Father that loved you: remember that the love of Jacob was divided
between twelve Sons, and therefore, though it was high, it could not be whole
and entire to Joseph, as for many years your Fathers has been unto you.

Thirdly, I speak not this out of design to renew or advance your grief, to
tell you what you have lost alone; but I propound this privation, that I may
contrive it for your imitation, endeavoring to stir up the same fire, and to
kindle the same affection in your self, who now are wholly to be considered in
the same relation. What you were to him, others are now to you; and what he was
to you, you are now wholly unto them. Before your natural affection was partly
taken up with duty, respect, honor and obedience, due to a Father from a Son;
it is now taken off from those expressions, as to him, that it may descend the
more entire upon those which come from you, as you from him. Thus far you have
been the Joseph of the Text, be now the Jacob; that those two great names may
be concealed not only in the Text, but in your breast. Thus far you have been
the better part of Absalom, learn now to be the David: that we may truly say,
that tender affection, that Paternal love, dyed not with your Father, but
survives in you to your and his posterity.

Fourthly, I desire you to look not only upon that which you have lost, but
also upon that which he has left behind him. Vulgar and common persons, as
they carry nothing out of this world, so they leave nothing in it: they receive
no eminency in their birth, they acquire none in their life, they have none
when they die, they leave none a^ their death. But honorable persons, as they
die like common men, so that only dies with them which was common unto all
degrees of men; their singular respects, the privileges of their greatness,
their honors survive them, and descend unto their Heirs with their Inheritance.
Give me leave then yet to speak unto you as to the Heir of your Fathers Honors;
consider what the nature and design of honors are; remember they were first
graciously conferred as a reward of the virtues of your Ancestors, and were as
wisely continued upon a presumption, and as an encouragement, of the same
vertures in their Successors. Your Honor knows how long the greatness of your
Family has been preserved: acknowledge first the vigilant providence and
infinite goodness of God in the preservation of it, while so many glorious
Titles have been lost, so many Noble Families cut off. Next, study to preserve
and advance it further by the exercise of those virtues upon which it was first
built, and has been since continued: endeavor to uphold not only your own,
but the very name of Honor in this Age, in which partly the want of such
virtues as are necessary to support it, partly the weakness of that power which
first gave life unto it, partly the unreasonableness of foolish men who
endeavor to cast a dis-esteem upon it, have too much eclipsed the glory of it.

Lastly, Eccles. 38.16.17^
as I have advised you, with the Son of Sirach, to let tears fall upon the
dead, and to use lamentation as he is worthy; so I shall conclude with his
following advice, when that is done, then comfort thy self for thy heaviness;
that is, not only be comforted after sorrow, that consolation may succeed your
griefs, this is the common revolution of the world: not only be comforted in
lieu of your sorrow, that consolation may recompense your griefs, that were but
a vulgar compensation; but take comfort in your sorrow, and rejoice in your
self that you have been so happy as to be truly sad. There is so much
deceitfulness in the heart of man, so much hypocrisy in Funeral mourning, that
you may bless God for your own assurance of the sincerity of your natural
affection, and religious respect to your Parents, and take delight in a just
expectation, that it will be rewarded by the future respect of your children.
So having performed the duty of Joseph, who made a mourning for his Father,
Genesis 49.22.
you may expect the blessing of Joseph given by the mouth of Jacob for whom he
mourned, Joseph is a fruitful bough, even a fruitful bough by a Well, whose
branches run over the Wall. That this Benediction may be your Honors portion,
shall be my constant prayer, By the God of thy Father who shall help thee, and
by the Almighty, who shall bless thee with blessings of heaven above, blessings
of the deep that lies under, blessings of the breasts and of the womb. Amen,
Amen.

THE TRUE ACCOUNTANT.
SERMON L.
PSALM. 90.12. So teach us to number our days, that we may apply our hearts
unto wisdom.


SUch is the pravity of our natures, ever since the first fall of Adam, as that
we prove very apt Scholars to learn that which is ill, but we are very dull and
backward to mind any thing that is good. We want no teaching to set us forwards
in the ways of wickedness, but in the performance of the least good, we are
not able to move one step, without the guidance and direction of the holy
Spirit of God. Therefore it is a good prayer of David for every one of us,
Psalm. 143.10. Teach me to do thy will, for thou art my God; thy Spirit is good,
lead meinte the land of uprightness. There are many Teachers abroad in the
world, and more than know how to teach aright; and there are many Doctrines
which are daily pressed and intruded upon the weak and simple, and more than are
useful and saving: But there is but Unum necessarium, one thing that is
needful, one thing in special to be minded and looked after, even so to live,
as that we may become wise for Eternity, so to walk on earth, as that we may be
fitted for Heaven. This is the main Doctrine we are to learn, and our
Instructor is God. We have none to teach us but God, and we have no other way
to implore this favor of God, but by our prayers in the words of Moses; So
teach us, etc.

You know the Penman of this Psalm by the Inscription, A Prayer of Moses the
man of God; and I think it is safer to keep to the letter of the Text, than to
busy your thoughts with the various and doubtful conjectures we meet with in
ancient and modern Expositors.

The Text is a Prayer to God to teach us the true Art of Arithmetic, to make
us true Accountants for Heaven, how we may know to number our days aright. In
this Prayer we meet with two things:

First, what he begs of God; 1. To number his days. 2. To be taught this duty.
3. To be taught it in such a manner; So teach us.

Secondly, the end wherefore he begs this of God, That we may apply, etc.

The end is the gain of true wisdom, to make us wise for Heaven. And here we
have,

1. The kind and nature of this wisdom, what this wisdom is, of which Moses
here speaks, and that is in making the best provision we can for the eternal
welfare of our Souls.

2. The subject of it, our Hearts.

3. The means of obtaining this wisdom, and that is by the consideration and
thought of Death. By the careful numbering of our days we attain this wisdom.
The meditation of Death makes us truly wise.

Before we fasten upon the Text, we will take a survey of the Context, which
stands thus:

1. Observe, Moses having spoken of the wrath of God in the foregoing verse,
Who knows the power of thine anger? even according to thy fear, so is thy
wrath; of the sudden he betakes himself to prayer. The thought and
consideration of Gods anger makes us to pray.

2. Observe here, after that Moses had given us a description of the wrath of
God, presently his thoughts are taken up with the meditation of Death. The
wrath of God thought on, makes us to think of Death.

First, Observe. 1.
of the first: the anger of God meditated upon, makes us to fly to our prayers.
The fear of this quickened the devotion of Jehoshaphat, 2 Chronicles. 20.3. And
Jehoshaphat feared, and set himself to seek the Lord. He feared, therefore he
prayed. The thought of Gods anger may well bring us upon our knees, and when
danger approaches, Pauorem Hosliliue coluit Cybr. de Idol. vanicat.
it is high time to seek the Lord. The Romans made Fear a god, and worshipped it
for a god; the Indians worship the Devil, for fear he should hurt them; and all
this shows us, what a command fear has over the hearts of men to make them to
pray. They that never think of God in the day of prosperity, will hasten to
call upon him in the day of trouble. The text says, When the ship was ready to
sink, the mariners were afraid, and every man cried unto his God, Joh. 1.5. A
man will never sooner acknowledge a Deity, then in the midst of his fears. Such
is the base spirit of man, as that the long-sufferance and patience of God
makes some men turn mere Atheists. Tertul. de patieut. c. 2.
Therefore it is that so many believe there is no God, says Tertullian, quia
seculo iratum, tam diu nesciunt, because they do not see that God is angry with
the World; they feel not the wrath of God, therefore they conclude he is no
God; and as long as God holds off from punishing, they hold off from praying.
His Judgments prove him a God, when his Mercies cannot persuade the world so
much. Every man hastens to seek the Lord when he is angry; his Justice
terrifies us, his Mercy hardens us; his Goodness makes us to rebel, his Anger
teaches us to pray; we forget God when he is gracious, and fly amain to him
when he threatens.

Let us often think of the wrath of God, Use.
and let the thought of it so far work upon us, as to keep us in a constant awe
and fear of God; and let this fear drive us to God by prayer, that fearing as
we ought, we may pray as we are commanded, and praying, we may prevent the
wrath of God. If our present sorrows do not move us, God will send greater; and
when our sorrows are grown too great for us, we shall have little heart or
comfort to pray. Let our fears then quicken our prayers, and let our prayers be
such as are able to avercome our fears: so both ways shall we be happy, in
that our fears have taught us to pray, and our prayers have made us to fear no
more. Now is the time for us to pray, before grief wax too strong for us; for
the time may come, when we shall not be able to pray, by reason of the sense
and feeling of the wrath of God upon us. Now our prayers in the time of health
may be as Incense before the Lord, as a sweet odor in the nostrils of God: but
if we neglect to offer up this Incense, we must look for the Incense of
Vengeance to fall down upon us, Apoc. 8.5. If God take the Cenfer in his hand,
and fill it with the fire of his wrath, then follows nothing but thundrings,
lightnings, and terrible commotions in the Soul. Anselm. de. Boods. Symb.
Princ. to 3.
Vespasian Gonzaga, gave for his Symbol three Flashes of Lightning, the first
did touch, the second did burn, the third did rend and tear in pieces.

The first affliction happily may lightly touch and affect us, the second may
scare us, and stir up the fire of devotion in us, but the third will prove so
terrible, as that it will tear asunder all our prayers, and so terrify our
spirits, as that we shall not be able to pour out our complaints before the
Lord, or acquaint him with our troubles. The anger of God at the first may be
but (...), 1 King. 8.44.
as a little Cloud, as big as a Man's hand, but if we neglect it, it may break
out upon us with that fierceness and violence, as that it may interrupt our
prayers, and hinder the ascent of them to the Throne of Grace. Therefore before
the wrath of God break forth upon us, let us seriously think of it, and prevent
it by our prayers: Let a timely fear incite our prayers, and quicken our
devotion. This holy fear will kindle an holy devotion in our hearts, and as a
watchful keeper of the heart, shall suffer no thoughts to break forth, but such
as shall amount alost to Heaven. As cold water makes the fire more fierce and
vehement; so does this fear make our prayers more earnest and servent. And this
is our first Observation, The fear of Gods wrath drives us to our prayers, and
makes us the more importunate with God for mercy.

The second Conclusion now follows, which arises, from the Context, after the
prophet had given us a description of the wrath of God, he pitcheth his next
thoughts upon Death; And this brings in our next Observation.

The wrath of God thought upon, Observe. 2.
makes us to think of Death.

He that ruminates upon the wrath of God which he has incurred by sin, must
needs think of Death, the sad effect of sin. When I remember how far I have
provoked the anger of a just God by Sin, I cannot choose but think of Death.
This was Jobs case, who while he was under the wrath of God, and felt not the
comfort of the pardon of his Sins, he did imagine there was no other way but
death with him, Job 7.21. Why do thou not pardon my transgression, and take
away mine iniquities? for now shall I sleep in the dust, and thou shall seek me
in the morning, but I shall not be: As if he had said, Deliver me, O Lord, from
thy wrath, and grant me the pardon of my sins, otherwise I am but as a dead man
before thee. Solomon speaks of the wrath of a King, Pro. 16.14. that it is as
messengers of death; Surely then the wrath of God may very well be a Messenger
sent from God to put us in mind of Death. If the Wrath of man be so fierce,
what is the wrath of God? if the frown of a King strike a man dead, what power
is there in the looks of an angry God to bring us to nothing? If the smoke of
man's anger can do this, what cannot the flame of Gods wrath do, even consume us
to very ashes?

Does the fear of Gods Wrath put us in mind of Death? Use. 1.
1. This discovers our own guilt, what a weight of sin lies upon our Souls;
otherwise, what reason had we to tremble at the denunciation of Gods wrath
against us, if we were not conscious to our selves of a world of wickedness
which harbors in our breasts? Were we not privy to a mass of Corruption
lurking within us, the fear of death would never affright us. A strong wind is
able to shake and bend the strongest tree, and the wrath of God will make the
most godly man alive to quake and tremble, Imagine the easiest death that is,
it cannot be but that Nature will have some struglings with it. It is
impossible to die such a death, as shall have no pangs to attend upon it. Thus
it is even in the death of the greatest Saints, there must needs be some
strivings and wrestlings in the Conscience with the wrath of God. The heart of
no Christian is so far quieted and appeased at the hour of death, as that all
fear is banished out of it, and a man has not the least remembrance of sin,
and of the wrath of God due to sin, lodging in his breast. This holy fear is in
the best of Gods children, and proves as an excellent preparative for death. He
is best fitted for Death, that meditates of tenof the wrath of God due to sin.

We see we have many occasions presented to us, Use. 2.
to put us in mind of Death; we are never without some Watchword or other to
beat the remembrance of Death into our thoughts. David had Death ever in his
eye, Psalm. 119.109. My soul is continually in my hand; Judge. 12.3. Exodus 9.10.
Dan. 5.5.
like a Soldier he carried his life in his hand, and was prepared for the next
encounter, and made ready for it. In all the Judgments of God, Death, like the
ashes which Moses sprinkled, is scattered and cast over all our heads. Death
like the Handwriting upon the wall, appears in all our families, and shows it
self in our houses, and in all places we come into: whithersoever we go,
wheresoever we abide, we want not many representations of Death before our
eyes. Let us therefore at all times and in all places think of the wrath of
God, and let the consideration and thought of this make us to consider and
remember our latter end, that come it never so soon, this day before the next,
we may not be unprovided for it.

We have done with the Context: Now let us take a view of the Text it self.

The first thing that presents it self before us, is the matter of Moses his
Prayer, and that is to teach us the true Art of Arithmetic, and make us good
Accountants in the numbering of our days. 1. The days that are past must be
numbered. 2. The days that are yet to come. As God commanded the several
mansions and places of abode, where the Israelites did make any stay, to be all
numbered in a peculiar book entitled for that purpose, The Book of Numbers: So
God would have us to take a special account of all our days, and to reckon up
those that are past, and those that are to come; to consider how long we have
lived, and how long we have yet to live.

1. Observe. 3.
Our days that are past must be numbered. David recounted the number of his
days, and found them to be wasted to nothing, vanished away like smoke, Psalm.
102.3. My days are consumed like smoke. Our years consume and wear away, and
every day we rise, we draw nearer and nearer to Corruption.

1. We must reckon with our selves what is spent of our years, how many are
past and gone; like a man that runs a race, he looks back and considers how far
he has run already. A good Christian calls to mind the whole course of his
life, and counts with himself, how many years are gone over his head, how much
time he has lost, and cannot be recovered again.

2. We must recount with our selves, what is over-past of the goodness of our
years, what good we have omitted, how many precious opportunities we have lost,
which we might have employed to Gods Glory, and the furtherance of our own
Salvation. A good Christian reckons up every sin that is past, wherein he
failed, and came short of the good he might have done, how he might have
amended what was amiss, if he had not been negligent and careless; like an
exact Limner, that looks over the Table to spy out what errors have escaped
him, and if he find any, he presently corrects them, before he draw off his
hand from the Table. The like ought we to do, and take a view of the several
actions of our lives, and consider where we have been peccant, and seek to
amend what is defective, before we pass out of this world, when it will be too
late to cast up our Accounts, and instead of numbering a few years in this life,
we shall be forced to number up innumerable years of sorrow and grief in
another world.

This serves for the just Reproof of those that promise to themselves many and
Use.
many years to come, and yet never remember the years that are past; they
presume they have time enough to spare, and yet never consider how much time
they have spent already. The fool in the Gospel befools himself with the hope
of longer life, but never makes reckoning of the years that are past, Luke
12.19. Soul, thou have much goods laid up for many years. We are good
Accountants for the world, but not for ourselves in what concerns the good of
our Souls. We can count our Money, our Goods, our Lands, but not our Years,
which we have misspent in vain: we can reckon up the years of others, but not
our own; we can easily sum up the frailties of our brethren, but we cannot cast
up our own; we know the frailties of other men, but we are ignorant of our own.
Where Is the man that brings to his remembrance the sins of his years that are
past? who is there among us that reckons how many Sabbaths he has profaned,
how many vain Oaths he has uttered, how many Lies he has told, how often he
has wronged his Neighbor by Deceit, Fraud, Injustice and Oppression, how
often he has abused the good Creatures of God through Riot, Excess and
Intemperance? How many soever our sins are that we have committed, they are all
forgotten; what is past, it is to us as if it were never done.

It is not so with such as truly fear God; they make account of the least sin,
and call to mind day by day the many errors of their lives. Holy men of God
never have their sins out of their sight: David had them ever in his eye, Psalm.
51.3. My sin is ever before me; it was never out of his thoughts, but
continually before him, as matter of sorrow and grief to him. A true penitent
cannot easily forget his sins, but thinks of them often, and is daily and
hourly troubled for them; but the careless sinner never makes any reckoning of
his sins as soon as they are past, and the sweetness of the pleasure is once
over. He numbers his sins indeed, but it is by Addition, and Multiplication,
not by Substraction; he continually adds to the old score, but never takes
ought from it; or if he do number them at any time, he makes but Ciphers of
them, he slights and makes light of them, and thinks they stand for mere
blanks. Let us make more reckoning of our sins, and take a strict account of
them, and compute the sins of our youth, the sins of our grown years, the sins
of our old age; let us labor to know the full number of tale of them;
otherwise, if we do not take account of our sins, and daily number them, and
sum them up as many as we can remember, God will number them for us, and one
day bring them to our remembrance whether we will or no. God will return the
like answer from heaven to us, as he did to Belshazzar the King, Dan. 5.26.
Mean, God has numbered thy Kingdom, and finished it: Mean, God has numbered
thy days, and finished them. Better it is for us to number our own days, than
leave them to God to number, and take such an exact account of them, as to
inflict the severity of his wrath upon us for them: It is better for us to
trouble our thoughts a little with the remembrance of sin, than to be tormented
hereafter with the punishment of sin. Think then betimes of numbering thy sins,
that thou may prevent God numbering of them to thy endless shame and grief.

2. Observe. 4.
Our days that are to come must be numbered: we must reckon with our selves
what days we have yet to spend, and labor to give a good account of the years
that are yet behind. It was the prayer of David Psalm. 39.4. Lord, make me to
know mine end, and the measure of my days what it is, that I may know how
frail I am. As if he had said, Lord, Give me grace to consider how little a
time thou have allotted me here, that I may learn to die well. As the Seaman
numbers the degrees of the Sun, that he may the better provide himself to pass
the AEquinoctial Line; So ought we to number our days, that we may the better
prepare our selves to pass the last Line of Death. God takes account of our
very Hairs, they are all numbered by God. Mat. 10.30.
If God number our hairs for the discovery of his Providence toward us, then
the argument holds a pari, that we should remember to number our days for the
promotion of his glory, and the furthering of our own eternal welfare.

Especially as many of us as are well stricken in yearts, it concerns us most
to account with our selves what days we have yet to run out. A Traveller that
is somewhat near the end of his journey, is the most curious and exact in
counting the miles which he is yet to go: Even so the older we are, the more
careful ought we to be of the days that are yet behind, and watchful of our
time which yet remains to be spent in this Tabernacle of the flesh.

Are our days to come to be numbered? Use. 1.
Surely then the last day is to be thought upon, even the last day of life
which we shall see in this world. We spend all the rest of our days the
better, when this last day is remembered by us. David had this day ever in his
thoughts to provide for it, and he desired only to live to fit himself for that
day, Psalm. 39.13. O spare me that I may recover strength, before I go hence and
be no more. All days wait on this last Day, and the spending of all the days
of our lives, tends only to the wise ordering of this last day. All our days
are well spent, if we have made provision for this day. Thou have lived well
all thy days, if thy last day of life prove comfortable unto thee. Let us live
so, as that we may have always this day in our eye; and the longer we live,
let us strive the more to fit and dispose our selves for death by the serious
consideration and meditation of this last Day. As a stone moves the faster to
its Center, so let us the nearer we are to Death, make the most have to bid it
welcome.

Are we commanded to have an eye to the time that is yet to come? Use. 2.
Why then, this points out unto us the preciousness of our time, what an high
esteem and value we are to set upon the days that are to come; and seeing we
have made so light of the time that is past, we must count the time that
remains to be the more precious. There is not an hour in the day, not a minute
of that hour, but ought to be highly prized and valued by us. (...), Luc.
Dialog. adv. indoct. In vita Epictetiante Enchirid.
Epictet us the Philosopher was of that esteem and account with all men, as
that a Candle which he had made of Earth only, was sold for 3000 drachms.
Whatsoever value or price men set upon other thngs, sure I am there is nothing
we ought to prize at an higher rate, than our time. As we use to prize our Gold
by grains, so ought we to value our time by minutes; every minute of our time
ought to be as precious in our account, as every grain of Gold. We will not
lose the least dram of Gold, neither ought we to ravel out the least
scantling of time. Nay the very drops of our blood ought not to be more
precious unto us, than the least scruples and particles of our time: Every
minute of our time well improved, is an helping us forward to Eternity.
Therefore we ought to prize every moment of our time, because Eternity bangs
upon it.

The second Request which Moses makes to God, is this, That he would vouchsafe
to teach him this one lesson, to number his days: An hard lesson indeed, as
hard as Pambo's was, Socr. Hist. Eccles. l. 4 c. 18.
who was fifteen years a learning that one verse of David, of guiding his
Tongue. Psalm. 39.1. I said, I will take heed to my ways, that I sin not with
my tongue. But all the days of our lives will not be sufficient to learn this
one lesson of numbering our days aright; therefore we must fly to God to teach
us to know our time: It is from God that we learn how to compute our time; the
wise ordering and managing of our time is taught us by God. David desired to
know this of God, Psalm. 119.84. How many are the days of thy servant?

1. Observe. 5.
It is a piece of Art, which none can teach us but God. A man may know how to
number his days, but not how to guide his days: A Fool knows not how to make
use of a Clock, nor an ignorant Christian how to spend his time aright, unless
God teach him. Every man can tell how to count an Army, and reckon what men
there are in it, but few know how to guide it, and to rank the Souldery in
right File and Order: So it is easy for us to number our days, to count how
old we are, how many years are gone over our heads, but to order our days
aright, to know how to improve them to Gods glory, and our own benefit, this is
beyond our Art and Skill, and God only is able to instruct us, and lead us in
the right way, wherein we ought to walk.

2. It is from God that we are taught how to fit our selves for death. We are
unwilling to hear of the approach of Death, and it is God that prepares us for
the stroke of Death, and makes us willing to die.

It is very unwelcome news to most of us, to hear that we must die, and be
brought before God to give an account of our ways and actions. When the
Apostle Paul reasoned with Felix of Death and Judgment, he would fain have put
off that unpleasing discourse till some other time, Act. 24.25. Go thy way for
this time, when I have a convenient season I will call for thee. We count no
discourse so unseasonable and distastful to us, as for our Minister to put us
in mind of Death; there is time enough, we think, to consider of our latter end
many years hence. It is a lesson soon learnt, and when we are fit for nothing
else, then it is soon enough to think of Death.

As slight as others make of this duty, Use.
let us pray to God to teach us the right knowledge of our time, that we may
order our steps aright, and so lead our lives, as that we may provide for
death, and be ready to give up our account to God, when he is pleased to summon
us from hence. It was a good prayer of David, Psalm. 13.3. Lighten mine eyes,
lest I sleep the sleep of Death. We have need of Gods direction and guidance in
all our ways, that he would teach us how to live, and how to die: while we
live let us desire of God so to steer our course, as that we may lead the lives
of holy and devout Christians. We desire to live, and have we no desire to live
well? what is this life without godliness? what is it to live, and to have our
hearts all the days of our lives void of grace and piety? Life without grace,
is like beauty in a woman without discretion, Pro. 11.22. Non est vivere, sed
valere vita: It is no life, but a living death always to live, and to want
health and strength, which sweetens life, and makes it comfortable. So it is no
life a Christian leads, where there is a want of piety in the heart. What is
this to live, unless we know how to live well, and to make a right use of our
time? We must consider wherefore we live, even to improve our time to the best
advantage for the saving of our Souls; otherwise, we live like Beasts, not like
Men, not like Christians: These silly brutes live in time, but know not the
time in which they live: so careless Christians run out their time, but know
not how to make use of their time; they consume their time, but they do not
increase it: Like Bankrupts that waste their stock, but never seek to improve
it. We make a decoction of our time, as water is boiled away from a fourth part
to a third, and from a third to half: so we waste and consume our time, till we
have no time left, even till we come to the last minute of life: why then while
we have time, let us pray to God to teach us to use it aright, to give us grace
to consider the time we spend, that we may make the best improvement of it, and
as Esan did Jacob, hold time by the heel, and not suffer it to slip from us,
without giving a good account to God, that we have employed that time and space
of life, which is allotted us here for the advancement of Gods glory and the
purchasing of our own Salvation.

We proceed to the third particular, Observe. 6.
that we go to God by prayer to teach us the right use of our time in a right
manner, So teach us; that is, Teach us so efficaciously, so powerfully, so
constantly, as that we may attain to the true wisdom and knowledge of saving of
our Souls. We must pray to God to teach us effectually Psalm. 119.33. Teach me,
O Lord, the way of thy statutes, and I shall keep it unto the end. We can know
nothing of heaven, unless the Spirit of God instruct us. There is a great Light
in us, the Light of Nature, and this light is enough to condemn us, if we walk
not according to this Light, this Light of Knowledge imprinted by God in our
hearts; and by this Light all Heathens are condemned: but this Light is not
able to carry us half way to heaven. The Light of Nature cannot save us, Esth.
5.2.
but the light of Grace must bring us to the light of Glory. Esther was fain to
stand a loof off in the Court, till the King reached forth his Golden Scepter
to invite her nearer to him: Nature only leads us to the outward Court of
Heaven, but Grace holds forth the Scepter to bring us into Heaven: Nature, like
the faint heat of the Sun, draws up the vapors but a little way, it has not
strength enough to master our Corruptions; but the heat and power of Gods grace
is only able to dispel and vanquish them. It is only the work of Gods Spirit to
show us the right way to Heaven, and to guide us in that way. All lies in the
Grace of God, and unless we are continually assisted, and carried on by his
gracious Spirit, we are never likely to come near the sight of Heaven. We have
indeed many helps and furtherances to carry us to heaven, but none of these
will avail us without God. The word of God is constantly preached in our ears,
the Ministers of God are daily pressing us forward to heaven; but what can the
frail voice of man work upon the heart without the powerful influence of Gods
holy Spirit. We Ministers, without God, are but as Gehazi's staff laid upon the
dead Child; 2 King. 4.31.
we are no ways able to raise the Soul from the death of sin to the life of
righteousness, unless God first breath upon it, and infuse the life of Grace
into the dead heart of the sinner.

Let this teach us not to rest in our selves, Use. 1.
or any outward means for the purchasing of the joys of heaven, but place our
whole trust and confidence in the living God. What Is all the Light of Reason
but darkness it self, to bring us to the Light Everlasting? All humane wisdom
is but a false Light, which will lead us in the end to the pit of destruction.
It is a good caution the Apostle gives us, Col. 2.8. Beware lest any man spoil
you through Philosophy and vain deceit. If we follow the false Light of Reason,
it will deceive us and misguide us in our way to Heaven. Natural Reason happily
may see the heavenly Canaan afar off, and have some straggling thoughts of the
happiness of another world, but it shall never be able to get possession of
heaven. The horns of this Altar shall never save any man that flies unto them.
As the light is hid under a bushel, so nature is clouded and darkened with many
mists of error, and cannot reach the sight of heaven.

In the second place, Use. 2.
let us fly to God by prayer, that he would teach us effectually, and show us
the right way to heaven. Before we hear the Word of God, let us fall upon our
knees, and beg of God to make it profitable and useful to our Souls. What makes
the word of God so ineffectual? how come we to gain so little comfort by the
preaching of the Word? Is it not because we do not pray to God to open our
hearts, and make it useful to us, that we may attend to the word of Truth, and
obtain Salvation by it? The people, before the Law was published to them, were
cleansed and sanctified by Moses to receive it, Exodus 19.14. So ought we to
Sanctify our hearts by prayer, and desire of God to purge our Souls of the
many pollutions of our sins, that we may gain a blessing by the Word of God,
and return with joy and comfort from the house of God.

It is prayer that makes the word of God profitable to our Souls; 2 King. 2.21.
it is like the Salt which Elisha threw into the waters to heal them: So does
prayer make the word of God beneficial to us, and causes us to relish the
sweetness and comfort of it.

The heart is like that Book sealed with seven Seals, Apoc. 5.3.
which no man can open but God himself: Therefore let us pray to God to open
our hearts, that we may receive instruction from the Word of God. There is no
man can teach us effectually but God alone; no man can show us the right way to
heaven but God. Therefore let us pray, So teach us, etc.

We now come to the end, wherefore Moses begs of God to teach us to number our
days; That we may apply, etc.

In which we meet with three particulars:

1. The kind and nature of this wisdom, wherein it consists; and it is in
making the best provision we can for the eternal welfare of our Souls.

2. The Subject of it, our Hearts.

3. The means of obtaining this wisdom, and that is by the meditation of Death.

1. Of the kind and nature of this wisdom, wherein it chiefly consists; that
is, in having an eye to heaven, in looking after the eternal welfare of our
Souls.

Our next Conclusion is this, Observe. 7.
It is the only true wisdom of a Christian to provide for his Soul. Then are
we wise indeed, when we are wise unto Salvation, when we know how to provide
for Eternity. True wisdom consists not in gathering riches, but in living in
the fear of God, and ordering our steps so, as that we may make sure of heaven
another day. It is our obedience to Gods Commandments, which cries us up for
wise Christians in the repute of God and man, Deuteronomy. 4.6. Keep therefore and do
them; for this is your wisdom and your understanding in the sight of the
Nations, which shall hear all these statutes, and say, Surely this great Nation
is a wise and understanding people. What is it for a man to be wise for the
world and a fool for heaven? what is the wealth and honor of the world, to the
happiness of the Soul? what is a man the better for being rich and honorable in
this world, if in the end his Soul be lost? Mat. 16.26. What is a man profited,
if he shall gain the whole world, and lose his own Soul? What the people said
of David, 2 Samuel 18.3. Thou art worth ten thousand of us; the like I say of the
Soul, It is more worth than a thousand worlds; and the Salvation of thy Soul is
more to thee than the gaining of many worlds. What the man pleaded to Joab for
not slaying of Absalom, 2 Samuel 18.12. Though I should receive a thousand
shekles of Silver in my hand, yet would I not put forth my hand against the
Kings Son: The like may thou reason within thy own breast, Though I might
purchase the riches of a thousand worlds, yet would I not seek the destruction
of my Soul: whatsoever thou do, still have an eye to thy Soul, that that
perish not in another world: what if all other things go amiss with thee in
this life, ^f thy Soul be in safety? It is wisdom, I confess, to provide for
the world, for the body, but the main wisdom is to provide for the Soul. Be
careful of the outward man, but be sure thou do not neglect the inward man.
Provide for both, the body and Soul, but let thy chief care be for the Soul,
which is thy better part.

It was the Symbol of Rodolphus the second, J1. Typotius Symb. Princ. tom. 1.
Emperor of Rome, who gave an Eagle with a double Head, with the one he looked
upwards to the Sun, and with the other downwards upon the Earth, with this
Motto, Utrumque, I have an eye to both. Thus it is Lawful for a Christian to
look downwards to the Earth, and provide for the body; Non potest esse sapiens,
qui aut unde proficise^tur, aut quo perveniendum sit, nesci^t. Cic. Acad. q.
1.2.
but he must have one eye chiefly sixth upon the Soul, and in the first place
provide for it: we must look directly to heaven, obliquely upon the earth; fix
our eyes upon the one, cast a glance upon the other. It becomes a Christian to
consider what may become of him hereafter, and whither he is going. Consider
thy beginning, from whence thou came, and consider thy end, what will befall
thee hereafter. He cannot be a wiser man, faith the Healthen, woe does not know
either from whence he came, or whither he must go. Sure enough he cannot be a
wise Christian, that knows not what will become of his Soul.

It is by way of just Reproof of such as are wise for the world, Use. 1.
but mere fools for heaven. The wisdom of the flesh is mere folly in the sight
of God. Some men would be reputed wise in the world, and yet know not which way
to take for the gaining of heaven: Such a man passes in the world for a crafty
subtle worldling, that knows how to manage his affairs with the best
advantage to himself, and yet he knows not a step of the way to heaven. It is a
Maxim amongst the Jesuits, Uti scientia, to live by their shifts: so do many
in the world, who have only a little wit to carry them out in secular affairs,
and their brains serve them to gather a little wealth and muck, but they are
mere Idiots in all that concerns heaven and salvation, and the purchasing of
the true riches of the Soul.

And yet see the fondness of these men, that though they know not which way to
take to get heaven, yet they make themselves sure of it, as if Salvation and
eternal life were within their reach and power to command it when they please.
De Romans Pontific in vit. Pauli. 4. l. 6.
Papyrius Massonus writes of the Jesuits, that count themselves so wise, ut se
putant soelo vel ipsi quandoque imperaturos, as that they think they shall one
day have the command of heaven it self. The like presumption is in many
Christians at this day, that they believe heaven is at their command, and they
shall easily obtain it, though they do nothing for it. Oh shake off this folly;
make what provision thou will for other things, thou art but a fool if thou
do neglect thy Soul. As provident as the rich man was in the Gospel, Luke
12.20.
God gave him the title of a Fool; and Cajetan gives the reason of it, because
he did not provide for himself in such things as were needful for the Salvation
of his Soul. He is a fool that prefers and Apple before a piece of Gold, who
keeps those things that are to be cast away, and neglects such things as are to
be preserved; who heeds not his house where he must abide for ever, and
beautifies that place where he is to lodge but for a night. Such an one is he,
that forgets his Soul, and is careful for all other things.

Give me leave to speak the truth, and not always to drop oil into your ears,
and speak unto you smooth things: Where shall we find the man that desires to
save his soul, that would willingly part with this world to gain a better? We
daily hear the word of God, we talk much of Religion, we boast of our interest
in heaven; but when the matter comes to decision, when we are put to our
choice, whether Heaven or Earth, 2 Kin. 2.11.
whether we will forego the profits of this world for the love of heaven, this
is the fiery Chariot which divides between Elijah and Elisha, which parts us
and God, and makes us to cast away our hope of heaven for the love of earth.

Let us labor for this main piece of wisdom, Use. 2.
even to provide for the eternal wellbeing of our Souls. This is the only
wisdom which will stand us in stead, when we grow wise for a better life. And
that we may provide for the life to come, let us learn this point of wisdom,
even to remember our latter end, and know how to die well; Deuteronomy. 32.29. Oh that
they were wise, that they understood this, that they would consider their
latter end. This is the wisdom of a Christian, to prepare himself for death,
to be ever in a readiness to die, that when his change shall come, he may have
this to comfort him, that whatsoever becomes of his body for the present, he
has made good provision for his Soul. He is the only wise Christian that
provides for Eternity, and minds this only above all other things, how he may
enjoy his God, and live with him for evermore. The Greeks have but one word to
express a wise man and an happy man, (...), signifies both, as if that were
only to be accounted for true wisdom, which leads to Eternal Bliss and
happiness. Herein is the wisdom of a Christian, in laboring to attain true
Blessedness, even the sight and enjoyment of God for evermore. Oh blessed is
the man that is so wise as to provide for Eternity, who dies with this comfort,
that though his body moulder into dust and ashes for a time, yet his Soul shall
rest in the arms of his Redeemer.

The second particular now follows, and that is the subject of this wisdom,
where it is seated, even in the heart and affection.

This in brief is our next Conclusion, Observe. 8.
True wisdom is to be beloved and embraced; Prove. 2.2. If thou incline thine
ear unto wisdom, and apply thine heart to understanding. Wisdom is the Mother
of us all: Mat. 11.19. Wisdom is justified of her children; and it is fit the
Mother should be loved of her children.

The Urim was to be laid upon Aarons heart, Exodus 2.8, 30. to note, that
wisdom must be seated in the heart, there she must lodge and be entertained:
the heart is only a fit Receptacle of wisdom, and there she must live and
abide. The Queen of Sheba was so in love with the wisdom of Solomon, as that
she took a tedious journey to give that wise King a visit, Mat. 12.42. And
behold, a greater than Solomon is here. What is Solomon to Christ? what is the
wisdom of man to the wisdom of God? It is but as a Cloud to the brightness of
the Sun, as the shadow to the substance; and he that loves the wisdom of the
World, and forsakes the wisdom of God, embraces a shadow, and forgoes the
substance. What can we love, if our hearts be not enamoured with wisdom? There
is nothing amiable but wisdom, and if we despise ber, what is there of this
worlds good, whereon we many set our love and affection? The learned men of old
would only be called Philosophers, Lovers of Wisdom, not wise men, as if this
were the highest perfection of wisdom, and no man was so wise, as he whose
heart was enflamed with the love of wisdom. It is not enough to know that
which is good, but we must be in love with that good which we do know.

Let us be in love with true wisdom, Use.
and embrace her as our only delight and joy. David bore an hearty affection to
the commandments of God; he made them his only delight and comfort, Psalm.
119.24. Thy Testimonies are my delight, and my counselors. Let us not so much
affect the things of this life, as to forgo all love of God and heaven: Let us
not be slaves to the world, and despise the freedom which wisdom promises to
them that love her: Let us not say as the servant of his Master, Exodus 21.5. I
love my Master, I will not go out free; I love the world so well, as that I am
content to be a Slave for ever, so I may have the wages which the world can
give me. I value not the joys of the life to come, so I may have the good
things of this life for my portion.

Oh for shame shake off the love of these vanities, and be in love with heaven,
esteem nothing amiable but what is reserved for thee in another world. Let thy
heart be set upon true wisdom, and do not suffer the fooleries and vanities of
this world to steal away thy heart from God. Let wisdom be precious in thine
eyes, and do not seem to love her, but love her in truth, and in heart. Let us
not content our selves with a bare sight of heaven, with an outward view and
speculation of the glory of heaven, but let us fasten our deepest thoughts and
meditations upon it. Let us not speak of heaven, but let our hearts be ravished
with the love of heaven. Our tongues are but the Suburbs of wisdom, but the
heart is the City. Let not wisdom remain without the gate, in the mouth and
outward profession of piety; but let her be received into the City, and
entertained with joy and gladness into the heart, and there rest and repose her
self as in the bosom of her best beloved.

And now that I may not have (...), Sudias in v. (...)
a tongue without a door, that cannot be governed, and kept within the compass
of time. I hasten to the third particular, and that is the means were by we may
attain this wisdom, and that is by numbering of our days. Our last observation
is this, the consideration and meditation of death makes us wise, the
remembrance of death makes us truly wise.

The wise man shows us, Obser v. 9.
who is wise, and who is a fool: Eccles. 7.4. The heart of the wise is in the
house of mourning, but the heart of fools is in the house of mirth. A wise man's
heart is bent to sadness, and the serious meditation of his end, and makes
choice of such mournful thoughts as will present death before his eyes; the
desires of a fool are carried after unseasonable mirth and jollity, and he
minds nothing less then the sad remembrance of his death. The thought of death
casts a man into a melancholy fit, therefore he cannot away with it. What
says he? Shall I think of that which torments and afflicts my Spirit, and
causes sadness and pensiveness of mind? The remembrance of death it is (...),
a daily death, and the medication of our latter end is (...), a continual
sorrow and vexation of the heart. Clims. Scal. Paradil. grad. 6. in princ.
But let careless Christians imagine what they please; that which is a grief to
them will prove no little joy and comfort to those, whose thoughts are taken up
with the meditation of their latter end. When the hour of death approaches, we
shall account it the only wisdom to have fitted and disposed our hearts aright
for the last day of our dissolution and departure out of this world. Heathens
themselves were wont to say, Ib. in sine.
that the chiefest wisdom, and the main study of Philosophy was only this,
(...), even a careful and serious thought of death. The memory of a Christian
is never better employed, then when the thought of death is presented before
it. This is our wisdom to consider and study how to die well. He is a wise
man, whose memory serves him to think of death. The soundness of the stomach is
the strengthening of all the rest of the parts of the body, so the vigor and
strength of the memory in thought of death, is the chief support of the soul,
and if the remembrance of death decay not in us, there is no want of wisdom in
the soul.

Is it the meditation of death that makes us wise? Use.
Judge ye then how many fools there are in the world, that never entertain the
least thought of death into their hearts, that live and run on in sin, and
never think of the hour of death. It is the folly which the Prophet charge
Jerusalem with, that she did not consider her latter end; Lam. 1.8. She
remembers not her last end, therefore she came down wonderfully. In the height
of her pride she never thought of death. It is strange to see, that we should
neither think of our own departure, nor heed the death of others, who are
constant Monitors, and Remembrancers to us of our own frailty. If the Sun
chance to be eclipsed, we stand amazed at the sight of that darkness, which
over-spreads the face of that glorious body; but we never regard the declining
and eclipse of man, who is the more noble and glorious creature. If the Sun be
darkened we wonder at it; if man die, we never heed it. Why then let me stir up
your thoughts to the meditation of death, that ye may be so wise; as to have
ever in mind the approach of death.

1. Let us think of others, that are daily going to their long homes. Do we not
see some continually coming into the world, and others making as much speed out
of the world, some entering upon the stage, others going off: As it is in the
constant revolution of the heavens, some Stars rise, and others set and fall:
so it is with the Sons of men, some live, others die, some daily come forth out
of their Mothers wombs, others daily return to the womb of their common mother,
even the earth, from whence they were taken.

2. Let us look upon our selves, and consider how near death is approaching to
us, and what have it makes toward us. We know not how soon death may surprise
us, therefore let us be so wise, as to provide for his coming. Death for all
that we know is now digging of our graves; even now he thinks of us, when we
little think of him; let us then be as watchful for death, as he is for us; let
us think of sickness in the time of health, and in the day of prosperity
remember the hour of death. Even in the midst and height of all the glory and
happiness of this world, let us bring into our remembrance the time of our
change and dissolution. It is observeable, that at the very time of Christ's
glorions transfiguration, the conference which past between Christ and Moses,
and Elias, was concerning the death of Christ, Luke 9.31. They speak of his
decease, which he should accomplish at Jerusalem; to show unto us, that when we
are in the height of our glory and honor, our thoughts should be busied with
the remembrance of our death and departure out of this world. I do not like the
proverb which is too frequent in your mouths, I thought of such a thing, no
more then of my dying day. Let us remember the old Canon in another sense,
Finis primus sit in intention; Let our end be first in our thoughts and
intention; let the time of our death be the first thing we think of either
morning or evening, that so the constant thought of death may take away the
terror of death, and being so well acquainted with death before hand, we may
never he terrified with the approach of it, but being guarded with faith and a
good Conscience, we may boldly look death in the face, and triumph in the
conquest of the Conqueror through Christ our Savior, by whom we obtain
victory over death, and the fruit and benefit of our conquest, even the
Salvation of our souls in Jesus Christ.

I have done with the text, (...) Athen. 1. 5.^.211.
now I fall upon the more careful part of this duty. We Ministers at such
solemn times as these have an hard Province put upon us, in these occasions
commonly the wind stands in our faces, and we have a crabbed Dilemma cast in
our way, even that of Agathon in Athenaeus, (...), (...). If we seek the truth;
we shall not please; if we please, we shall hardly speak the truth. We walk
between two fires, the displeasure of God, and the frown of man. We value not
the latter, so we may not run the hazard of the former. Our chief care is in
respect of God, that while we seek to give to breathless man a little breath
of praise, we do not dare to dishonor the living God. And if this we aim at,
we need not be afraid to give some satisfaction to the world, and right the
honor of the dead, provide that while we seek to keep up the Fame of another,
we do not lay to pawn our own reputations; or which is far worse, make
shipwreck of a good conscience. On the one hand charity binds me to speak all
the good I can of my Neighbor, on the other hand conscience in joins me to
utter nothing but the truth. Therefore while charity guides me, and conscience
awes me, I hope I may promise to my self a favorable construction from you of
all that I now speak.

I shall not fly out into any empty schemes of Rhetoric concerning the birth
of this Worthy Knight, Sir William Armyne, well known and beloved in these
parts, ye all know his descent and extraction, he was cut out of no mean
quarry. Here his bones now rest, where he once lived with honor, and many of
his Ancestors before him. Do you think I lay any great weight upon all this? It
is not Birth, but Breeding; Nazianz^ Carm. 52. In divite m male mo^tion.
not Breeding, but Geace that ennobles a Family. Blood without Manners is base
Blood; Manners without Grace, like a glorious Shadow without the Substance. I
remember what a good man, mean of birth, answered one that was Noble in Blood,
and base in Manners, (...). As my Birth and Parentage is a shame to me, so art
thou a shame to thy Birth. Grace in the heart, not Gold in the Purse, is the
best Inheritance of a Christian. There are some stains in the best in the
Purse, is the best Inheritance of a Christian. There are some stains in the
best Coats, there are spots in the best Ermine. It is nothing to be born a
Gentleman, it is all in all to live and die a good Christian. This was the
sweet expression of this your honorable Neighbor, feeling a want of Grace in
his heart, wherewith he desired to be satisfied, Oh, says he to me, one drop of
grace in the heart, is more worth than all the wealth and honor in the world.

I shall not commend to you the goodness of his Nature, the sweetness of his
Disposition, because he bewailed it as a Snare, and an occasion of sin to him.
A man's good Nature leads him many times into sin, and the loving temper of his
spirit temps him, and puts him forward to sin. Where Grace does not command,
there a good disposition is soon marred and drawn aside. This likewise was
matter of grief to him, that his frail Nature was soon wrought upon, and
carried aside to that which his own heart soon after told him was sinful and
displeasing to God.

What need I tell you, that he was an affable, friendly, and obliging
Gentleman, winning and gaining upon all that came near him. He that looked but
upon his Face, might have seen goodness and courtesy looking out of his Eyes.
And what is all this, when he did acknowledge with tears, that this pleasantness
of his countenance was suddenly clouded with a violent and overruling storm of
passion, which carried him beyond himself. But it is strange to see what a
command grace has over the Soul, which speaks to these unruly passions, as
Christ did to the boisterous billows of the Sea, Peace, be still, Mar. 4.39. as
easily as the Nurse charms the crying Infant in the Cradle. As prevalent as
these passions were in the time of his health, they were so allayed by God in
his sickness, as that all his friends about him did rejoice to see the patience
and calmness of his Spirit, all the while the hand of God was upon him.

And that I may give you a clear proof of the mortified Spirit and happy
change, which God wrought in his Soul. When I took the boldness to mind him of
a late difference between himself and the Reverend Pastor of this place, he
burst out with tears, and laid this charge upon me, That I would right him so
far, as to acquaint him, that he did heartily desire him in particular to
forgive him, and all other good Christians that he had wronged in the heat of
his passion, either rich or poor.

Judge ye now, what could I have spoken more for his honor, than I have done
in this discovery of his frailty, and his happy conquest of it. Therefore I
thought good to make this publication of it to the world, that ye may know ye
never honor you selves more, than when ye glorify God by shaming of your
selves: when we are most vile in our own eyes, we are most honorable in the
repute of God and good men.

But all this that I have spoken, is nothing to that which is yet behind.
Therefore go along with me a little further, and I shall in brief relate unto
you such comfortable passages as fell from him in the time of his sickness, and
then leave him to your Christian Charity to judge, how well he acted the latter
part of his life, and with what earnestness of spirit he strove to gain the
love and favor of God in Christ.

At my first coming to him I found him deeply touched with a serious
apprehension of the former errors of his life, how far he had provoked a good
God by the many sins, which his Conscience then charged him with: Then d^d he
break forth into (...) free and voluntary confession of all his sins, and
expressed with many tears his loathing and detestation of them. I was glad to see
those Limbecks of his eyes distilling, and dropping down in such a plentiful
manner, to find his heart thus smitten, and bruis ed with the remembrance of
his sins, and pressed him to a greater measure of sorrow as knowing such clouds
of grief would make way for the beams of joy and comfort to shine in his Soul.
The truth is, I have not come near a man that has reckoned up his fins wi^h
greater abhorrency and detestation, than he did. I asked him, whether if God
should be pleased to grant him a further respite in this world, he would become
a new man, and take off his heart from his former vanities. He answered. I
would not for the gain of the whole world live such a life as I have done, and
I desire next to Gods glory to live for this very end, that I might testifi^
the truth of my repentance to the world. I asked him, whether his heart did
witness the truth of all this. Oh, says he, my heart is deceitful and
treacherous, but if I know my own heart, all that I speak is in truth and
sincerity; I should be the most cursed Hypocrite alive, if I should either
dissemble with God or man at such a time as this.

Oh remember to deal faithfully with your own hearts, if you speak otherwise
than ye find it to be in your own breasts, you turn Imposters to your selves,
and deludes your own Souls, not us. It is the integrity of the heart which God
looks at; if there be no rottenness there, there is a good foundation of joy
and comfort laid in the Soul: 1 Job. 3.21. Beloved; if our heart condemn us
not, then have we confidence toward God.

And now from the example of this good Knight, let me press this one thing upon
you, That when ye find your hearts oppressed with the weight of your sins, ye
would give them a speedy vent, and seek to ease your hearts of so mighty a
clog, by a serious confession of them. He that smothers sin in his breast, will
in the end be choked with the noisome scent of it. What is a man the better
for hiding and locking up his sin in his bosom? Let me advise you to open a
vein in your own hearts, and let out the corrupt blood that lies there: The
longer we hide sin in our bosoms, the more it festers, and what man will not do
his best to get rid of a bruise, before it rots and putrisies? Confession is a
sovereign Remedy to procure the pardon of our sins; Prove. 28.13. Who so
confesses and for saketh his sins shall have mercy. He is most likely to find
mercy, that is most ready to acknowledge that he deserves none.

We see what David gained by an humble confession of his sins: He no sooner
cried Peccavi, 2 Samuel 12.13. I have sinned against the Lord; then the Prophet
returned him a comfortable answer from the Lord, The Lord also has put away
thy sin, thou shall not die. Quantum valent tres syllabae, Peccavi? How
prevalent are three syllables pronounced by a penitent heart, Ambros. ad
paenit. agend. exhor. tom-
I have sinned, to move the God of mercy to mercy?

And here I hope I shall seasonably cast in a word of advice to my Brethren of
the Clergy, that dejected sinners may with safety lodge their grievances in
their breasts; let me desire them, (...).
That as the Lawyer and the Physician are true to their Profession, so they
would be faithful in their Ministry, that poor souls may fly to them with
confidence for comfort in their sad conflicts for sin and with sin. This makes
so many Christians to carry their sin with them to their graves, rather than
they will disclose it, because they dare not repose any trust in those that
ought to be as true to them as there own hearts. Hippocrates in Juramento
Strigel, in in Phil. 1.16.
If we find a man truly penitent for his sins, let us cover them with the vail
of Charity, and only declare his repentance to the world, that God may be
glorified, and good Christians on Earth, as the Angels in Heaven, rejoice in
the conversion of a sinner.

I have much to speak, but am willing to contract my self, as knowing you are
fully satisfied in that faithful Testimony I have already given you. Be not so
uncharitable, as to think I might be mistaken in this good Gentleman; I was
often with him, and had frequent converse with him, and the freedom to speak,
and I found him always in the same humble frame and temper of spirit; and I
must profess this, I have not often received more satisfaction from any man in
respect of the fruit and comfort of my endeavors, than from him. I met with an
humble and tractable spirit, willing to hear of the wrath of God due to
sinners; and careful and solicitous how he might avoid it; truly sensible of
the weight of his sins, much dejected with the thought of them; and so far the
sense of his sins had humbled him, as that I may say, Malice it self could not
judge worse of him, than he did of himself. And that which made me believe the
truth of his humiliation for sin, was this, That I found no presumptious
thoughts arising in his heart of Gods mercy: but when I sought to cheer him
with the hope of Gods mercy to penitent sinners, he told me, He was not yet
humbled enough to partake of it. I was much satisfied in this answer, as
knowing the deeper the foundation is laid, the surer is the building; the more
humble we are, the firmer will our confidence be in Christ. And from that time
I strove to comfort him with the precious Promises of the Gospel, Mat. tl. 28.
and told him he might upon the word of Christ challenge an interest in them,
Come unto me all ye that labor, and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest.
Such as are truly penitent, and only such, might claim a special Title to the
Promises of Christ. This did revive his fainting spirit, and the thought of
Gods mercy in Christ did as much cheer him, as ever the sense of sin had
dejected him. Then he began to feel the comfort of Gods love glowing in his
breast; soon after he felt the heat of it, and his affections were so enflamed
with the love of God, as that his thoughts were restless, till he enjoyed him
whom his Soul loved; and this made him to count every minute too long to be
parted from Christ his Savior. Therefore being now fit for heaven, and weary
of the world, and desirous to enjoy God in a better place, the last words I
heard him utter were these, Even so, come Lord Jesus, come quickly. Christ
cannot come too soon for that heart that is ready to receive him. The Lord
makes us fit for his coming, and we shall be happy whenever he comes.

And now after all this that I have spoken, you will say, I have said nothing
for the honor of this good Knight, I have not buried him like himself; I have
strewn no flowers of Commendation upon his Hearse, befitting his quality and
Degree, and the House he came from. I confess all this. As he desired all vain
pomp and oftentation should be laid aside at his funerals; ( For what have I
done, said he, that I should deserve it?) so have I declined all pomp and
vanity of words in the Pulpit, which is no place to show our quaint and lofty
strains of Oratory, but our zeal to Gods glory, and the edification of his
people. I came not so far to sawn and flatter, but to testify my pious
respects to the memory of the Dead, and my unfeigned affection to the Souls of
the Living.

But what? Is not this, that he dyed a good Christian; that he loathed his
former Vanities; that he was truly humbled for his sins, and rested upon the
Mercy of God in Christ for the free pardon of them? If you value not these
things, pardon me, if I think there is nothing to be valued in you but vanity;
and what the value of that will be, you will know at the hour of Death. God
grant you may know it sooner and then you are happy, when you will find that
piety in the heart is more to be accounted of, then all the wealth and honor
in the world.

I think I have said enough to honor this Noble Knight at his Funerals, that
he dyed a true Child of God, and left a goodly Inheritnance on Earth, to be
possessed of a better in Heaven. There have I a good ground to believe he rests
in peace and joy, and there I hope we shall all meet at the last.

And thus in an holy intention to Gods glory, a zealous desire of your good,
and an honorable respect to my Friend, I have now run through the duty of this
day, not aiming (God knows my heart) at the least applause from you, nor yet
valuing the censure of malevolent spirits, who shake off all Charity to the
Dead, and to the Living. I have endeavored to approve my self faithful to God,
in speaking nothing but the Truth; faithful to my self, in the discharge of a
good Conscience; and faithful to my Friend, in publishing the truth of his
Conversion, to the world. Thus have I sought to honor God, to right your
worthy Neighbor, and in so doing I hope I have not wronged my self.

And now it is my earnest prayer to God for you, (not that I may injure the
Dead, but in love to your Souls) that all of you may have the grace to live
better than he did; And this I wish again from my heart, hoping the best of
him, and fearing the worst of some of you, that ye may obtain the like Faith
and Repentance to die no worse than he did. His Soul now rests in Bliss and
joy; do ye that survive, labor to enter into that rest which remains for the
people of God, Heb. 4.9.11.
in the glorious Mansions of God the Father. Now bestir your selves, and do
your best for heaven; while ye have time and opportunity, Phil. 2.12.2 Pet 1.10.
work out your own Salvation with fear and trembling, show all diligence by
Faith, Repentance and Obedience, (the old and sure tract and road to Heaven) to
make your calling and election sure; live holily, that ye may die comfortably.
Learn to number your days, to spend your time aright to Gods glory, and in his
service: Count it your honor to honor God; your only freedom, to serve your
Maker. Be wise for Eternity, and desire of God to keep your hearts upright in
his fear, to give you fixed Spirits in tottering Times, and in the end to guide
you all the right way to Heaven and happiness; to make you true Accountants for
Heaven, and to value the least minute of your time: and in this I will join
with you in Prayer, both for my self and you, in the words of my Text, Lord, so
teach us, etc. Amen. Amen.

THE JUST MAN'S FUNERAL.
SERMON LI.
ECCLES. 7. verse 15. All things have I seen in the days of my vanity; there
is a just man that perishes in his righteousness; and there is a wicked man
that prolongeth his life in his wickedness.


THe World is a volumne of Gods works, 1.
which all good people ought studiously to peruse. Three sorts of men are too
blame herein. First, such as observe nothing at all; seeing, but neither
marking nor minding the daily accidents that happen, with * Gallio the secure
deputy of Achaia, They care for none of these things. Jer. 40.16.
Secondly, Such as observe nothing observable, these may be said to weed the
world; If any passage happens which deserves to be forgotten, their jet
memories (only attracting straws and chaff unto them) registreth and retains
them: sond fashions and foolish speeches is all that they charge on their
account, and only empty ciphers swell the vote-books of their discoveries.
Lastly, such who make good observations, but no applications. With Mary they do
not ponder things in their heart, but only brew them in their heads, and
presently breath them out of their mouth, having only a rational understanding
thereof, 2.
(which renders them acceptable in company for their discourse) but never
suffering them to sink into their souls, or make any effectual impression of
their lives.

But Solomon's observations were every way complete; he marked what happened:
and well he might, who advantaged with matchless wealth, might make matchless
discoveries, and could afford to dig out important Truths with mattocks of Gold
and Silver; what he marked was remarkable, and what was remarkable, he not only
applied to the good of his private person, but endeavoring it might be
propagated to all posterity in the words of my text, All things have I seen in
the days of my vanity; there is a just man that perishes in his
righteousness; and there is a wicked man that prolongeth his life in his
wickedness.

In the handling of Solomon's observation herein, 3.
we will insist upon these four p^rts, to show, 1. That it is so. 2. Why it is
so. 3. What abuses wicked men do make because it is so. 4. What uses good men
should make because it is so.


First, that it is so; believe Solomon's eyes, who professed that he saw it. But
here it will be demanded, how came he to behold a righteous man? with what rare
and new eye salve had he anointed his eyes, to see that which his father David
(having a more holy, Psalm. 143.2,
though not so large a heart) could never discern? Enter not into judgment with
thy servant O Lord: for no flesh is righteous in thy sight.

It is answered, 4.
though such an one whose righteousness is Gods justice-proof, never was, is,
nor shall be in this life, (Christ alone excepted, being God and man) yet in a
Gospel, or qualified sense, he is accounted righteous, who juxt a propositum
just vivendi, is so intentionally; desiring and endeavoring after
righteousness with all the might of his Sonl. Secondly, who is so
comparatively, in reference to wicked men, appearing righteous in regard of
those, who have no goodness at all in their hearts. Thirdly, righteous
imputatively, having the righteousness of God in Christ imputed unto him.
Lastly, righteous inhesively, having many heavenly graces, and holy endowments,
sincere, though not perfect, or evangelically perfect, pro hoc statu, bestowed
upon, and remaining within him. Such a righteous man as this Solomon saw
perishing in his righteousness.

But in the second place, it will be inquired, How could Solomon patiently
behold a righteous man perish in his righteousness, and not rescue him out of
the paws of oppression? Could he see it, and could he suffer it, and be only an
idle spectator at so sad a tragedy? Did his hand sway the Scepter, and was his
head invested with the Crown, 1 King. 3.
contentedly to look on so sorrowful a sight? Could he only as in the case of
the harlots, call for a sword to kill a child, and not call for it to defend a
righteous man? He that is not with us (faith our Savior) is against us. If it
hold in private persons, much more in public Officers. They persecute, who do
not protect; destroy, who do not defend; slay, who do not save the righteous
man, who have power and place to do it.

It is answered in the first place; 6.
Solomon's observations were not all confined to his own country and kingdom;
though staying at home in his person, his mind traveled into foreign parts,
and in the neighboring countries of Egypt, Edom, Syria, Assyria, etc. might
behold the perisning of the righteous, and long flourishing of the wicked.
Secondly his expression, I have seen, relates not only to his ocular, but
experimental discoveries; What Solomon got hy the help of History, Study, and
perusal of Chronicles. He that was skilled in natural Philosophy from the Cedar
to the Shrub, was (no doubt) well versed in all civil occurrences from the
Prince to the Peasant, from Adam to the present age wherein he lived, so much
as by any extant records could be collected. To set humane writers aside, the
Scripture alone afforded him plentiful presidents herein. Open the Bible, and
we shall find (almost in the first leaf) just Abel perishing in his
righteousness, and wicked Cain prolonging his life in his iniquity. To omit
other instances, Solomon, by relation from his father, might sadly remember,
how Abimelech the High Priest, perished in his righteousness, with all the
Priests, inhabitants of the city of Nob, whilst Saul who condemned, and Doeg
who executed them, flourished long in their iniquity. So much for the proof,
that it is so. Come we now to the reasons, why it is so. These reasons are of a
double nature, some fetched from nature, others from religion. For the present
we insist only upon the former, reserving the rest till we shall encounter the
Atheists in the sequel of our discourse.

First, 7.
Because good men, of all others, are most envied and maligned, having the
fiercest adversaries to oppose them. With the most in the world, it is quarrel
enough to hate a good man, because he is a good man. Saint Paul faith of
himself, I press toward the mark. Phil. 3.14.
And the same is the endeavor of every good man. Now as in a race the foremost
man who is nearest the mark, is envied of all those which come after him, who
commonly use all foul play toward him, (justling him on the side, seeking to
trip up his heels; yea, sometimes thrusting him forward on the back, that so he
might fall headlong by his own weight and their violence) so often comes it to
pass betwixt rivals in the race of honor and virtue. Ill-minded men perceiving
themselves quite out strips by some eminent person who has got the speed of
them, and despairing fairly to overtake him, resolve foully to overturn him, by
all means possible contriving his destruction.

Hence come those many millions of divices and stratagems contrived for his
ruin, endeavoring either to, Divert him from his righteousness. or Destroy him
in his righteousness.


If the first takes no effect, and if his constancy appears such as without
regret he will persist in piety, leaving them no hope to bias him to base
ends, then dispairing to how him from, they contrive to break him in his
righteousness. Thus whilst he has many enemies which conspire his destruction,
seeking with power to suppress, or policy to supplant him; The wicked man on
the other side, has the generality of men (the most being bad as himself) to
befriend him; a main cause of his prolonging himself successful in his
wickedness.

Secondly, 9.
Righteous men perish in their righteousness, because not so wary, and watchful
to defend themselves in danger, being deaf to all jealousies and snspitions,
over-confident of other men, measuring all others by the integrity of their own
intentions. This makes them lie at an open guard, not fencing and fortifying
themselves against any sudden surprisal, but presuming, that deserving no hurt,
none shall be done unto them. Thus Gedaliah, Governor of the remnant of the
Jews after the captivity, twice received the express intelligence of a
conspiracy to kill him, yet was so far from giving credit, that he gave a sharp
reproof to the first discoverer thereof: Act. 18.16.
Yea, when Johanan the son of Kareah, tendered his service to kill Ishmael,
(sent as he said, from Baalis King of Ammon to slay Gedaliah) Gedaliah
rejoyned, Thou shall not do this thing, for thou speak falsely of Ishmael.
His noble nature gave no entertainment to the report, till he found it too late
to prevent it. Whilst wicked men, partly out of policy, more out of guiltiness,
sleep like Hercules with their club in their haud, stand always on their
guard, are jealous of their very shadows, and appearances of danger, a great
cause of their safety and success, prolonging themselves in their wickedness.

Thirdly, 10.
They perish because of a lazy principle which has possessed the heads and
hearts even of the best men, (who are unexcusable herein) namely, that God in
due time will defend their innocence, which makes them more negligent and
remiss in defending themselves; as the Prophet makes mention of a stone cut out
without hands, Dan. 2.34.
they conceive their cause will without manshelp hew its own way through the
rocks of all resistance; as if their cause would stand Centinal for them,
though they slept themselves; as if their cause would (fix their Muskets)
though they did it not themselves. Thus the Christians in their battles against
the Turks, having won the day by their valor, have lost the night by their
negligence, which principally proceeded from their confidence, that God
interested as a Second in every just cause, was in that quarrel concerned as a
Principle, and it could not stand in his justice to suffer it to miscarry.

Whereas on the other side wicked men use double diligence in promoting their
designs. 11.
If their lame cause lack legs of its own, they will give it wings from their
signs. If their lame cause lack legs of its own, they will give it wings from
their careful soliciting thereof, and will soulder up their cracked title with
their own industry. They watch for all tides, and wait for all times, and work
by all ways, and sail by all winds; each golden opportunity they cunningly
court, and greedily catch: and carefully keep, and thristily use: in a word,
they are wiser in their generations then the children of light.

This may be perceived by the parallel betwixt the wife and the harlot: 12.
many wives (though herein they cannot be defended) knowing their husbands
obliged in conscience to love them by verture of their solemn promise made
before God and the congregation at their marriage, are therefore the less
careful to study compliance to their husbands desires; they know their
husbands, if wronging them, wrong themselves therein; and presuming themselves
to deserve love as due unto them for their honesty and loyalty of affections,
are the less sollicitous to gain that which they count their own already.
Whilst the harlot conscious to her self of her usurpation, that she has no
lawful right to the embraces of her paramour, tunes her self to the
criticalness of all complacency to humor him in all his desires. And thus
always those men whose cause have the weakest foundation in piety, gets the
strongest buttress in policy to support it.

Lastly, 13.
the righteous man, by the principles of his profession, is tied up, and
confined only to the use of such means for his preservation, as are consonant
to Gods will, conformable to his word; preferring rather to die many times,
then to save himself once by unwarrantable ways. Propounded unto him a project
for his safety, and as Solomon promised favor to Adonijah, 1 King, 52.
so long as he showed himself worthy, otherwise if wickedness were found in
him, he should surely die; So our righteous man only accepts and embraces
such plots to secure himself thereby, as acquit themselves honest and
honorable: such as appear otherwise, he presently dispatches with detestation,
destroying the very motion and mention thereof, from entering into his hearts.
On the other side, the wicked man is left at large, allowing himself liberty
and latitude, to do any thing in his own defense, making a constant practice of
doing evil, that good may come thereof.

Yea we may observe in all ages, 14.
that wicked men make bold with Religion; and those who count the practice of
plety a burden, find the pretending thereof an advantage, and therefore be the
matter they manage never so bad (if possible) they will entitle it to be Gods
cause. Much was the substance in the very shadow of Saint Peter, which made the
people so desirous thereof as he passed by the streets. And the very umbrage of
Religion has a sovereign virtue in it. No better cordial for a dying cause,
then to over-shadow it with the pretense that it is Gods cause; for first, this
is the way to make and keep a good and strong party: No sooner the watchword
is given out, For Gods cause, but instantly GAD, Behold a troop comes of many
honest, but ignorant men, who press to be listed in so pious an employment.
These may be killed, but cannot be conquered: for till their judgments be
otherwise informed, they will triumph in being overcome, as confident, the
deeper their wounds got in Gods cause gape in their bodies; the wider the gates
of heaven stand open to receive their souls. Besides, the pretending their
cause is Gods cause, will in a manner, legitimate the barest means, in
pursuance and prosecution thereof; for, though it be against Gods word, to do
evil that good may come thereof, yet this old error will hardly be beaten out
of the heads and hearts of many men, that crooked ways are made direct, by
being directed to a straight end; and the luster of a bright cause will reflect
a seeming light on very deeds of darkness, used in tendency thereunto.

This has been an ancient stratagem of the worst men (great Politicians) to
take piety in their way, 15.
to the advancing of their desences. Thus Rabshakeh pretended a Commission from
God, for all the wickedness he committed, and complements blasphemy, 2 King.
18.25.
Am I now come up without the Lord, against this place to destroy it? the Lord
said to me, Go up against this place to destrey it. The Priests of Bell were
but bunglers, which could not steal the meat of their Idol, but they must be
discovered by the print of their footsteps. Men are grown more cunning thieves
now adays; first they will put on the shoes of him they intend to rob, and
then steal, that so their treadings may tell no tales to their disadvantage;
They will not stride a pace, nor go a step, nor stir a foot, but all for Gods
cause, all for the good and glory of God. Thus Christ himself was served from
his cradle to his cross; Herod who sought to kill him, pretended to worship
him, and Judas kissed him who betrayed him.

By these arts and divices, 16.1 King. 26.15.2 King. 24.8.2 King. 2.19.1 King.
19.29.
it comes to pass, that wicked men prolong themselves into heir wickedness.
Traitorous Zimri indeed continued but seven days, that was not long: wicked
Jehojachin reigned but three months in Jerusalem, that was not long: ungodly
Amon reigned two years in Jerusalem, that was not long: idolatrous Ahab reigned
in Samaria twenty and two years, that was indifferent long: cruel Herod the
King, who sought to kill Christ, reigned in Judea well nigh forty years, that
was long indeed; he prolonged himself to purpose in his iniquity.

Seeing therefore (to recollect what has been said) the righteous has most
foes, 17.
the wicked many friends; the righteous free from; the wicked full of
jealousies; the righteous too often over-careless, the wicked over-careful in
his defense; the righteous limited only to lawful, the wicked left loose to
any means for his own advantage; No wonder if it often comes to pass, that the
righteous man perishes in his righteousness, and the wicked prolongeth his
life in his wickedness.

Come we now to the abuses which wicked men make of the righteous man's
perishing in his righteousness. 18.
And here the whole kennel of Atheists come in with a full cry, (oh that there
were no more of them on earth, then there are in hell, where torture makes them
all speak truth) spending their wicked breath against God and his attributes.
Some bark at his Provedence, as if he perceived not these things; How does God
know, Psalm. 73.11.
and is there knowledge in the most high? Others cavil at his justice, that he
has no mind; others carp at his strength, that he has no power to rectify and
redress these enormities. This world (say they) is a ship without a pilot,
steered only with the winds and ways of casualty; it is a mere lottery,
wherein the best man daily draw the blanks, 2 Samuel 15.4.
and the worst run away with the prizes. And, as Absalom boasted, if he were
king of Israel, how far he would outdo David in right managing of all matters:
so these impudent wretches conceive with themselves, the Plat form of the world
has been more persect, might they have been admitted to the making thereof.
The Moon would have shined without any spots, Roses grow without any Prickles,
fair weather should never have done harm, because rain should only fall in the
night, neither to hinder the pleasure of the rich, or hurt the profit of the
poor. Merit should be made the only standard of preferment; no perishing of
the righteous man in his righteousness, when success should only be entailed
on desert. In a word, such Atheists presume all things by them should be so
prudently disposed, that nothing, no doubt, in the whole world should be out of
order, save themselves.

More might be spoken to heighten and prove the objection, but I am afraid to
persist further therein. It is not only dangerous to be, but even to act an
Atheist, though with intent to confute their error, for fear that our poisons
pierce further then our antidotes. But in answer to this objection; know, that
God, without the least prejudice to his justice, may suffer the righteous man
to perish in his righteousness, because allow him righteous justicia cause, he
is not so justicia person, the best man standing guilty of many faults and
failings in his sight. God needs not pick a quarrel with any man, having at all
times matter of a just controversy against him. And seeing God has oftentimes
connived at him being faulty, he may condemn him being faultless; for, mullum
tempus occurrit Regi, the King of heaven is not limited to any time, but at his
own pleasure and leisure may take an opportunity to punish an offender.

Secondly, grant that the cause of the righteous man was just in the primitive
constitution thereof, yet if it branch it self forth into numerous
circumstances appendant thereunto, (many whereof may be intricate and perplexed)
if it be of so spacious and ponderous a nature, that it requires many heads and
hands as subordinate instruments in several places for the managing thereof.
Lastly, if the cause be so prolix and tedious, that many years must be spent in
the prosecution thereof, the original righteousness of the cause may be already
with the handling of it, and much injustice annexed thereunto, for which God
may justly cause it finally to miscarry. For it is possible that a cause
consisting of such variety of limbs retaining thereunto, should be carried on
without many grand errors and mistakes committed therein; and the
righteousness of the best men will not spread so broad without shrinking,
stretch so long without tyring, apply it self so exactly to each circumstance
without some swerving therein. Especially when all the faults of the inferior
officers employed under him, are chargeable on the righteous man's account, the
matter of whose cause may justly perish, by Gods just anger on the unjust
managery thereof.

Yea God, 21.
without the least blemish to his Justice, may suffer the righteous temporally
to perish in his righteousness, because in the midst of their sufferings his
mercy supports them with the inward comfort of a clear conscience. In the time
of persecution, a woman being big with child, was imprisoned and condemned to
die, which the night before her execution, was (I cannot say brought to bed)
delivered of a child, when her pain (wanting the help of a midwife) must be
presumed exceeding great; The Jailor hearing her cry out in her pangs: If you
cry (said he) to day, I will make you shreek worse to morrow, when you are to
be burnt at a stake. The woman replied; Not so, to morrow my pain will be
abated: for to day I suffer as an offender, for the punishment justly imposed
by God on our sex, for our disobedience and breach of his law; but to morrow I
shall die for the testimony of the truth, in the defense of Gods glory and his
true Religion. Thus it is strange to see, what alacrity a good cause insuseth
into arighteous man, deriving comfort into his heart by insensible conveyances,
so that he imbraceth even death in self with a smiling countenance, seeding his
soul on the continual feast of a clear conscience.

Besides this, 22.
it clears divine Justice, and comforts the righteous man perishing temporally
in his righteousness, that his cause shall be heard over again, and rejudged in
another world. If one conceive himself wronged in the Hundred, or any inferior
Court, he may by a cretiorari, or an accedas ad curiam, remove it to the Kings
Bench or Common Pleas, as he is advised best for his own advantage. If he
apprehends himself injured in these Courts, he may with a Writ of Error
remove it, to have it argued by all the Judges, in the Exchequer chamber. If
here also he conceives himself to find no justice, he may with an Injunction,
out of the Chancery stop their proceedings. But if in the Chancery he reputeth
himself agrieved, he may thence appeal to the God of heaven and earth, who in
another world, will vindicate his right, and severely punish such as have
wilfully offered wrong unto him. And so much to assert Gods justice in
suffering the righteous man to perish in his righteousness.

Now on the other side, 23. Revel. 2.21. Psalm. 140.^1.
God may without any prejudice to his justice, suffer wicked men for a time to
thrive in this world, and not suddenly surprise them with punishment, so giving
them a space to repent, if they would but make use thereof. Indeed David says,
Evil shall hunt the violent man to overthrow him; But God is a fair hunter; he
might in the rigor of his justice knock wicked men down as he finds them
sitting in their forms: But God will give them fair law, they shall for a time
run; yea sport themselves before his judgments, ere they are pleased to
overtake them.

Know also, 24.
to the farther clearing of his justice, that wicked men, notwithstanding their
thriving in badness for a time, are partly punished in this world, with a
constant corrosive of a guilty conscience, which they carry about them. The
Probationer-Disciple said to our Savior, Mat. 8.19.
Master, I will follow thee whithersoever thou go; what is promised by him,
is preformed by a guilty conscience, that Squire of the body, always officious
to attend a malefactor. Fast, and I will follow thee, and thy empty body shall
not be so full of wind, as thy mind of dismal apprehensions: feast, and I will
follow thee; and as the hand on the wall, bring in the sad reckoning, Dan. 5.5.
Numb. 22 23.
for thy large bill of fare: stay at home, and I will follow thee; or else meet
thee in the way with my naked sword, as the Angel did Balaam: Wake, and I will
follow thee: sleep, and I will follow thee, and affright thee with hideous
fancies, and terrible dreams, as I did King Richard the third, the night before
his death.

I have read of one, 25.
who undertook in few days to make a fat sheep lean; and yet was to allow him
a daily and large provision of meat, soft and easy lodging, with security from
all danger, that nothing should hurt him. This he effected, by putting him into
an Iron-grate, and placing a ravenous wolf hard by in another, always howling,
fighting, scenting, scratching at the poor sheep; which affrighted with this
sad sound, and worse sight, had little joy to eat, less to sleep; whereby his
flesh was suddenly abated. But wicked men have the terrors of an affrighted
conscience constantly, not only barking at them, but biting of them; which
dissweetens their most delicious mirth, with the sad consideration of the sins
they have committed, and punishment they must undergo, when in another world
they shall be called to account. This thought alone makes their souls lean, how
fat soever their bodies may appear. And as sores and wounds commonly smart,
ache, and throb most, the nearer it is to night; so the anguish and torture of a
guilty conscience increases, the nearer men apprehend themselves to the day of
their death.

Now not only wicked men, 26.
but even the children of God, because of the corruption of their hearts, too
often make bad uses to themselves, of the righteous man's perishing in his
righteousness. These may be divided into three ranks: 1. Such as fret at Gods
proceedings herein. 2. Such as droop under Gods proceedings herein. 3. Such as
argue with Gods proceedings herein.


The first are the Fretters: for if the perishing of the righteous comes to
the serious observation of a high-spirited man, one of a stout and valiant
heart, he will scarce brook it without some anger and indignation, fuming and
chasing thereat. Thus David, we know, was a man of valor, of a martial and
warlike spirit, and he confesses of himself, Psalm. 73.21.
that, beholding the prosperity of the wicked, his heart was grieved, and he
was pricked in his reins; Nor was it mere grief possessed him, but a mixture of
much impatience, as appears by that counsel which in like case, in one Psalm,
Psalm. 37.1, 7, 8.
he gave himself three several times, Fret not thy self because of evil doers;
and again, fret not thy self because of him who porspereth in his way; and the
third time, fret not thy self in any wise.

Our Savior observes, that there are a sturdy kind of Devils, that will not
be cast out, 27. Matthew. ^7: 21.
save by fasting and prayer. But this humor of fretting and repining at Gods
proceedings herein, which he understood not, could not be ejected out of David,
but by prayer no doubt, and that very solemnly; not at home, but in Gods
temple, When I thought to know all this; Psalm: 73: 16.
it was too painful for me, until I went into the Sanctuary of God, there
understood I their end. O let them of high spirits and stout hearts not lavish
their valor, and mis-spend their courage, to chase and fume at such accidents,
venting good spirits the wrong way; but rather reserve their magnanimous
resolutions for better services, and (besides their private devotions) address
themselves with David, to Gods public worship in his house, who in his due
time will unriddle unto them the equity of his proceedings.

But if men be of low and mean spirits, 28.
pusillanimousand heartless natures, and if these narrow souls in them meet
with melancholy and heavy tempers, such fall a drooping, yea despairing at the
perishing of the righteous; they give all over for lost, concluding there is no
hope; they rather languish then live, walking up and down disconsolate with
soft paces, sad looks, and sorrowful hearts: all their children they are ready
to call and christen Ichobods, the glory is departed from Israel, being
affected like the Citizens of Jerusalem, 1 Samuel: 4 21.
besieged by Sennacherib, their hearts are like the trees of the wood, moved
with the wind. But let such droopers know, that herein they offend God, Isa: 7:
2.
and wrong themselves; and let them gird up their loins, and tie up their
spirits, at the serious consideration that God in due time, will raise them out
of the dust, maintain his own cause, and confound his enemies.

The third sort of people, 29.
are the Arguers or Disputers, who being of a middle temper, neither haughty
nor stomackful, neither low nor dejected, and withal being good men, embrace a
middle course, neither to fret nor dispute, but calmly to reason out the matter
with God himself. Of this later sort, was the Prophet Jeremiah, who thus
addresseth himself unto the Lord: Ier: 22 ^
Righteous art thou, O Lord, when I plead with thee; yet let me talk with thee
of thy judgments: Wherefore does the way of the wicked prosper? wherefore are
they happy that deal very treacherously? The good man could not conceive Gods
proceedings: and although he kept to the conclusion, Righteous are thou, O
Lord, yet his heart was hot within him, and he would fain be exchanging an
argument with God, that all was not right, according to his humane capacity.
Job. 16.21.
Job also was one of these Arguers in the agony of his passion, Oh that one
might plead for a man with God, as a man pleads for his neighbor.

But let flesh and blood take heed of entering the lists by way of challenge
with God himself. 30. Act. 6.9.10
If the synagogue of the Libertines, and Cyrenians, and Alexandrians, and of
them of Silicia, and of Asia, disputing with Stephen, were not able to resist
the wisdom and the spirit by which he spoke; much less can frail flesh hope to
make good a bad cause, by way of opposition against God, the best and wisest
answerer. Remember the Apostles question, 1 Cor. 1.20.
Where is the disputer? But if we should be so bold, in humility, to examine
Gods proceedings, let us take heed lest whilst we dispute with God, Satan
insensibly prompts us such reasons as are seemingly unanswerable in our
apprehensions, so that instead of being too hard for God (which is impossible)
men become too hard for themselves, raising such spirits which they cannot
quell, and starting such doubts which they cannot satisfy. Wherefore let not
our ignorance be counted Gods injustice, let not the dimness of our eyes be
esteemed the durtiness of his actions, being all purity and cleanness in
themselves: Let us, if beaten from our outworks, make a safe retreat to this
impregnable castle, Jeremiah his conclusion, Righteous art thou O Lord, etc.

Come we now to the good Uses that the godly ought to make of a righteous man's
perishing in his righteousness. 31.
And first, when he finds such a one in a swoun, he ought with all speed to
bring him a cordial, and with the good Samaritane, to pour Oil and Wine into
his wounds, Luke 10.34.
endeavoring his recovery to his utmost power, whilst there is any hope
thereof. Psalm. 79.11.
I must confess it is only Gods prerogative, according to the greatness of his
power, to preserve those that are appointed to die. However, it is also the
boundant duty of all pious people, in their several distances and degrees, to
improve their utmost for the preservation of dying innocence, from the cruelty
of such as would murder it.

But if it be impossible to save it from death, 32.
so that it does expire, notwithstanding all their care to the contrary; they
must then turn lamenters at the funerals thereof. And if the iniquity of the
times will not safely afford them to be open, they must be close Mourners at so
sorrowful an accident. O let the most cunning Chyrurgeons not begrutch their
skill to unbowel, the richest Merchants not think much of their choicest spices
to embalm, the most exquisite Joyner make the coffin, most reverend Divine, the
Funeral Sermon, the most accurate Marbler erect the Monument, and most renowned
Poet invent the Epitaph, to be inscribed on the tomb of Perishing
Righteousness. Whilst all others, well-wishers to goodness in their several
places, contribute to their sorrow at the solemn Obsequies thereof; yea as in
the case of Josiah his death, let their be an Anniversary of Mourning kept in
remembrance thereof. However, let them not mourn like men without hope, but let
them behave themselves at the interment of his righteousness, as confident of
the resurrection thereof, which God in his due time shall raise out of the
ashes: It is sown in weakness, it shall be raised in power; it is sown in
disgrace, it shall be raised in glory.

Lastly, 33.
the temporal perishing of the righteous man in this world, minds us of the
necessity of the day of Judgment, and ought to edge and quicken our prayers,
that God would shortly accomplish the number of his elect, consummate this
miserable world, put a period to the dark night of his proceedings, that so
that day, that welcome day, may begin to dawn, which is termed by the Apostle,
The day of the revelation of the righteous judgment of God. Romans 2.5.
Five things there are (besides many others) in the primitive part of Gods
justice, which are very hard for men to conceive.

First, How the sin of Adam, to which we did never personally consent, can
justly be imputed to us his posterity.

Secondly, How infants, who never committed actual sin, are subject to death;
and which is more, to damnation it self?

Thirdly, Exodus 14.4.
How God can actually harden the hearts of some, as he did Pharaohs, and yet
not be in the least degree accessory to sin, and the author thereof.

Fourthly, How the Americans can justly be condemned, to whom the sound of the
Gospel was never trumpetted forth, and they by their invincible ignorance
incapable of Gods will in his word?

Lastly, 37.
How God, as it in the Text, can suffer righteous men to perish in their
righteousness, and wicked men to flowrish in their iniquity?

In all these, a thin vail may seem to hang before them, so that we have not a
full and free view of the reasons of Gods proceedings herein; yet so, as that
under and through this vail, we discover enough in modesty and sobriety to
satisfy our selves, though (perchange unable to utter what in part we
apprehend) we cannot effectually remove all the scruples which the pious, nor
all the cavils which the profane man brings against us. But at the day of
judgment, at the revelation of the righteous judgment of God, this vail shall
be turned back, or rather totally taken away, so that all shall plainly and
perspicuously perceive the justice of Gods dealing in the cases aforesaid. Not
that then or there, any new essential addition or accession shall accrue to
Gods justice, to mend or make up, any former desault or defect therein; but his
proceedings (which before wanted not clearness in themselves, but clearing to
our eyes) shall then be pronounced, declared, and adjudged just, in the
presence of Devils, men and Angels; so that ignorance shall not doubt, nor
impudence dare to deny the truth thereof.

But before we take our final farewell of the words in our Text, 38.
know they are also capable of another sense, I have seen the righteous man
perish in his righteousness; that is, I have seen a good man, continuing in
goodness, and snatched away in the prime of his years, whilst wicked men,
persisting in their profaness, have prolonged their lives to the utmost
possibility of nature. I confess Saint Paul will in no case allow the word
perishing, to be applied to the death of the Godly, but startles at the
expression, as containing some Pagan impiety therein, pointing at it, as an
Atheistical position: 1 Cor. 15.18.
Then they also which are fallen asleep in Christ, are perished. However, in a
qualified sense, (not for a total extinction, but temporal suspension of them
in this world) the Prophet pronounces it of a just man's death, Isa. 57.1.
The righteous perish, and no man lays it to his heart; Yet, as if suspecting
some ill use might be made of that term perishing, in the next words he
mollifieth the harshness thereof, and (who best might) expounds his own
meaning: The righteous man is taken away from the evil to come.

Indeed, 39. Genesis 25.8.
when a just man dies, with Abraham, in a good old age, he is not properly
said to be taken away, but, in Scripture Phrase, to tarry till God comes. Thus
when Peter was very inquisitive to know how John should be disposed of, Christ
answered him, Ioh. 21.22.
If I will that he tarry till I come, what is that to thee? John, of all the
Jury of the Apostles, dyed in his bed, a through old man, of temper and
temperance, of a strong and healthful natural constitution, moderate in diet,
passions and recreations, ( Ahijah and Josiah may be instances) are cut off by
an untimely death; Kings. 14.13.
such are properly said to be taken away.

Now even such men, 40.
God (not only without the least stain to his Justice, but in great
manifestation of his mercy) may cause to perish; or if that be too harsh a
term, may take them away from the evil to come: And that in three several
acceptions.

First to keep him from that evil of sin which God in his wisdom foresees the
good man would commit, if living longer, and left to those manifold temptations
which future times (growing daily worse and worse) would present to, and press
on him. True it is, God could by his restraining and effectual Grace keep him,
though surviving in sinful times, from being polluted therewith: but being a
free Agent, he will vary the ways of his working, sometimes keeping men in the
hour of temptation, sometimes from the hour of temptation. Rev. 3.10.
The later he does, sometimes by keeping the hour from coming to them, or
rather, from coming to the hour; making them to fall short thereof, and
preventing their approach thereunto, by taking them away in a speedy death.
Thus mothers and Nurses suspecting their children would too much play the
wantons, disgrace them, and wrong themselves; when much company is expected at
their houses, haste them to bed betimes, even before their ordinary hour.

Secondly, From the evil of sin which other men would commit, and he beheld, to
the great grief and anguish of his heart, 2 Pet. 2.2.
Lot-like: for that righteous man dwelling among them, in seeing and hearing,
vexed his righteous soul from day to day, with their unlawful deeds.

Manifold Uses might be made of the Just man's thus perishing in his
righteousness. 41.
First, men ought to be affected with true sorrow: yet the Prophet says, The
righteous perishes, and no man lays it to his heart. Surely his wife or
children will (or else the more unworthy) happily he has none when dying. His
kindred will, except (which is impossible) with Melchisedech, Heb: 7.3.
he be without father, without mother, without descent. His friends will,
though rather the rich than the righteous have friends whilst living, and
leave them when dying. But to satisfy all objections at once. By none, are
meant very few, inconsiderable in respect of those multitudes that pass the
righteous man's death unrespected. Parallel to that place in the Proverbs, Prove:
2: 19.
None that go to her return again, neither take they hold of the path of life.
Not that adultery is the sin against the holy Ghost, unpardonable; but vestigia
pauca retrorsum. Be thou, by an holy Riddle, One among that None; I mean a
mourner in Sion for the righteous man's death, amongst these very few, who lay
it to their hearts.

Secondly, Men from hence are seriously to recollect and apply to themselves
the doctrine of their mortallities, when thee see the righteous man perish in
his righteousness. There is a bird peculiar to Ireland, called the Cock of the
Wood, remarkable for the fine flesh and folly thereof: All the difficulty to
kill them, is to find them out, otherwise a mean marksman may easily kill them.
They fly in woods in flocks, and if one of them be shot, the rest remove not
but to the next bow or tree at the furthest, and there stand staring at the
shooter, till the whole covy be destroyed. As foolish as the bird is, it is
wise enough to be the emblem of the wisest men in point of mortallity. Death
sweeps away one, and one, and one, and the rest remain no whit moved at, or
minding of it, till at last a whole generation is consumed.

It fares with the most men's lives, as with the sand in this hypocritical
hourglass: behold it in outward appearance, and it seems far more then it
is, because rising upon the sides, whilst the sand is empty and hollow in the
midst thereof; so that when it sinks down in and instant, a quarter of an hour
is gone in a moment. Thus many men are mistaken in their own account, reckoning
upon threescore and ten years, the age of a man, because their bodies appear
outwardly strong and lusty. Alas! their health may be hollow, there may be some
inward infirmity and imperfection unknown unto them, so that death may surprise
them on a sudden.

Thirdly, They are to take notice of Gods anger, with that place from which the
righteous man is taken away. Eccles. 7.2.
Solomon, speaking of the death of an ordinary man, says, The living will lay
it to heart: But when a righteous man is taken away, the living ought to lay it
to the very Heart of their hearts, especially if he be a Magistrate or Minister
of eminent note. When the eye-strings break, the heart strings hold not out
long after: and when the seers are taken away, it is a sad symptom of a
languishing Church or Commonwealth.

Lastly, Men ought to imitate the virtuous examples of such as are dead. The
cloud and pillar at the Red Sea, Exodus 14.20.
was bright toward the Israelites, to guide and direct them with the light
thereof: but the reverse or back part thereof, was dark toward the Egyptians.
In the best men there is such a mixture of light and darkness, who with their
virtues have may fanlts, failings and infirmities. Well let the Egyptian walk
by his dark side, follow his faults, whilst the Israel of God, all pious
people, endeavor to imitate his virtues, directed in their conversations, by
the luster of his godly examples. Mat. 14.2,
That so as Herod hearing of the same of Christ, conceived that John Baptist
was risen again from the dead: so let us labor that our virtuous lives may
give just cause for others to conceive, that those righteous men which have
perished in their righteousness, those champions of Christianity, and worthy
Heroes of holiness long since deceased, are revived again, and have in us a
miraculous resurrection.

THE RIGHTEOUS MAN'S SERVICE TO HIS GENERATION.
SERMON LII.
ACTS. 13.36. For David after he had served his own generation after the will
of God, fell asleep, etc.


IN this Chapter Saint Paul does demonstrate the Resurrection of our blessed
Savior by three several places of Scripture, 1
foretold and now fulfilled. The Law says, in the mouth of two or three
witnesses the truth shall be established. Two may, Three must do the d^ed; Two
make full measure, Three make measure pressed down and running over. And such
does the Apostle give us in the proof of this point.

2
The first place he cites Psalm 2.7. Thou art my son, this day have I begotten
thee: The second, Isaiah 55.3. I will give you the sure mercies of David: The
last, Psalm 16.11. Thou shall not suffer thy holy one to see corruption.

It is observable, 3
That the same Text, Acts 2.31. is also alleged, expounded, applied and
pressed by Saint Paul to prove the Resurrection of Christ's body uncorrupted.
See here the holy Harmony betwixt the two Apostles. Though Peter and Paul had a
short and sharp contest at Antioch, Galat. 2.11. where Paul withstood him to
his face; yet here their hearts, and hands, and tongues, meet lovingly together
in the improving of the same portion of Scripture: Both of them show first
negatively, how it could not literally be meant of David, (whose body was
corrupted and his Sepulcher remained amongst them unto that day) and therefore
positively must be meant mystically and prophetically of Christ.

Now as I am charitably confident that all who hear me this day, 4
are satisfied and assured herein, That our Saviors body saw no corruption, so
give me leave to be jealous over you with a godly jealousy, for fear some
mistake the cause of this his incorruptibility, and bottom it on a false
foundation. Some perchance may impute it to the shortness of the time he lay in
his grave, being but a day and two pieces of a day, numero rotundo, though
currente stilo they commonly be called and counted three days. These do ponere
non causam pro causa; for the time was long enough in that hot Country, to
cause putrefaction, considering that our Saviors body was much bruised and
broken with the whips, nails, and spears, (besides the effusion of much blood)
which would the sooner have invited corruption.

Others perchance put the untaintedness of his body upon the account of the
great quantity of Myrrh and Aloes (about an hundred pound weight) and other
precious spices, 5
wherewith Joseph and Nicodemus, John 19.39. imbalmed it. This also is an
unfound opinion; for all the spices of Arabia cannot secure a corpse from
putrefying, though they may preserve it that such putrefaction shall not be
noisome to others in the ill savor thereof, not keeping it from corrupting,
but from offending.

The true reason is this: 6
Though Christ's soul was parted from his body, (and where disposed of, God only
knows, during his remainder in the grave) yet the union with the Deity was
never dissolved, which privileged his corpse from corruption. So that had it
been possible (which was impossible, as is inconsistant with Gods promise and
pleasure) for his corpse to have lien in the grave till this instant, they had
been perpetuated in an entire estate, whilst it is true of David as it is in
the Text, after he had served his own generation by the will of God, he fell on
sleep, and was laid unto his Fathers, and saw corruption.

Observe in the words four principal parts; 7
1. What a generation is. 2. What it is to serve ones generation. 3. How David
served his own generation. 4. How we after his example are to serve ours.


Of these in order, and first we will consider what a generation is.

A generation is a company of men and women, 8
born, living and dying, much about the same time: I say, much about the same
time; for seven years, under or over, sooner or later, breaks no squares
herein, but that the said persons are reducible to the same generation. Thus,
Mat. 1.17. All the generations from Abraham to David, are fourteen generations:
and from David, until the carrying away into Babylon, are fourteen generations:
and from the carrying away into Babylon, unto Christ, are fourteen Generations:
Now all generations are not of equal extent; so admirable the Longevity of
those before the Flood, compared to our short lives, since God for our sins
has contracted the cloth of our life to threescore and ten years, and all is
but a course List, which is more then that measure, Psalm 90.10. And if by
reason of strength they be fourscore years, yet is their strength, labor and
sorrow, for it is soon cut off, and we^ie away.

It is remarkable, 9
that Three Generations are always at the same time on foot in the world;
namely, 1. The Generation rising. 2. The Generation shining. 3. The Generation
setting.


For should God clear the earth of all men at once, mankind could not be
recruted but by miracle; besides, neither humane Arts nor Sciences; nor could
the Scripture handsomely be handed and delivered from one generation to another.
God therefore of his goodness does so order it, that rather then any empty
Interval should happen betwixt them, one Generation should fold and lap over
another. These three degrees were most visibly conspicuous in the Levites,
which till five and twenty years of age, were learning Levites, thence till
fifty, acting Levites, as being then in the strength of their age) employed in
the portage of the Tabernacle, and after fifty, had a Writ of ease from bodily
labor, though they may be presumed to be busied in the teaching of others.

Pass we now to explain what it is to serve our Generation. 10.
To serve it, is to discharge our consciences according to Gods will in his
word, to our superiors, equals, inferiors, all persons to whom we stand
related in our generation. And the more eminent the person is in Church and
State, the more are his references multiplied, and the more public and
ponderous the service is which he is to perform. Nor must it be forgotten, that
David was a King, in which respect it was proper for him to rule and command
his own Generation; and yet it is said, he served the same. Princes are not
privileged by their greatness, only to tyrannize over others, but are
accountable to God, how well they discharge their duty to all such to whom they
are respected.

Proceed we to see how David served his generation, 11.
which he did in an eight-fold capacity. First, as a dutiful son to his Father
and Mother, 1 Samuel 22.3. And David went thence to Nizpeh of Moab, and he said
unto the King of Moab, Let my Father and Mother, I pray thee come forth, and be
with you, till I know what God will do for me. And be brought them before the
King of Moab, and they dwelt with him all the while that David was in the hold.
The case was thus, David foresaw that the tempest of Saul's fury would fall full
heavy on his Fathers family; he foresaw also that though he himself might be
always on the wing, hunted from place to place as a Partridge on the Mountain,
yet his aged Parents could not keep pace with his sudden, uncertain,
unseasonable, late and long removeance, and therefore as a dutiful son, he
provided for them a private place of peaceable repose.

Secondly, 12.
he served his generation as a very loving Brother, witness the dangerous visit
(whith at his Fathers command) he gave his Brethren in the Camp, (when Goliath
was in the field) victualling them with all necessary provision, on the same
token that he received nothing for his pains save a jeer from Eliab his eldest
brother. 1 Samuel 17.28. Why came thou down hither? and with whom have thou
left those few sheep in the wilderness? I know thy pride and the naughtiness of
thine heart; for thou art come down, that thou might see the battle.

Thirdly, 13.
he served his ganeration as a kind and careful Husband. I will not excuse his
Polygamy, having many wives at once, nor dare I flatly condemn it, God
conniving thereat in the ancient Patriarchs. However David cannot be charged
with want of love amongst his store of wives. Once I confess he made a tart and
sharp return to Miehal, 2 Samuel 6.21. mocking him for dancing before the Ark.
But was there not a cause, when through the sides of David she struck at all
true devotion? and smartness on such occasion is zeal, and no trespass against
Marital affection.

Fourthly, 14.
he served his generation as a tender Father indeed; he faulty, it was in the
excess, being over-indulgent to Absalom and Adoniah, whom he never took to task
nor called to account, (1 Kings. 1.6.) Why have you done so? (and seeing he
would not use the rod on them, God therefore used them as a rod on him) such
cockerings we confess is a catching disease amongst us parents; but to give
David his due, for the main, he behaved himself no doubt as a discreet and
tender Father to his numerous issue.

Fifthly, 15.
he was a fast and faithful Friend; witness the exchange of hearts as well as
clothes, which passed betwixt him and Jonathan: yea David made a tripartite
expression of his affection. 1. He loved Jonathan in his life. 2. Lamented him
at, 3. Showed mercy to him, after his death, 2 Samuel 6.3. in restoring
Nephiboseth to all his lands, and making him Fellow-Commoner at his own Table;
So that we may truly say and justify the expression, There was two men,
Jonathan and David; and it will be made good by the Rules of Amity, if any
question the phrase in the Rule of Grammar.

Sixthly, 16.
he was a loyal Subject, whereof he gave two signal testimonies, like to find
more to admire then to imitate them amongst posterity, if any should chance to
be estated in his condition with the same advantage: For being Reversion'd to
the Crown, he twice had an opportunity (if so pleased) to put himself into the
present possession thereof. Once when he had Saul in the Cave, 1 Samuel 24.5. and
his heart smote him for being over-bold with Gods anointed, though he did but
cut off a skirt of his Garment. Again, 1 Samuel 26.12. When he found Saul a
sleeping, and (if so disposed) might have left him a sleeping, till the sound
of the last Trumpet should summon him to awake. A surly General walking the
Round, and finding one of his Sentinels asleep, nailed him with his spear to
the earth, and excused his act with this jest, (whether witty or cruel, let
others judge) Dormientem inveni, Dormientem reliqui; Sleeping I found him, and
sleeping I left him. David might have done the like, especially seeing Abisha
(not to say Providence) impelled him thereunto, but would not (as having a
principle of piety within him, which remonstrated against such proceedings.)

Seventhly, 17.
he was a prudent Sovereign both in peace and war, in Court and Camp, for the
space of full forty years, going in and out before the people of Israel, whom
he ruled prudently with all his might. I confess his son Absalom taxed him with
neglect of the affairs of State, 2 Samuel 15.3. that no man was deputed by him to
hear the causes and redress the grievances of his oppressed subjects. But what
says our plain proverb, Ill will never speaks well. And therefore I listen to
Absoloms words as to a loud Libell; and we should be no less injurious to our
own judgments then to David's innocence, in giving credit to a proud ambitions
son, against an holy and humble Father.

Eighthly and lastly, 18.
David served his generation as a gracious Saint; this was the Diamond of the
Ring, and I have kept the best wine for the last, to close and conclude David's
character therewith. He is termed in this Chapter, ver. 22. a man after Gods
own heart, being the best transcript or copy of the best Original.

Objection. 19.
But you wittingly, and willingly, and wilfully, will some say, have suppressed
and concealed a necessary truth, because tending to David's disparagement. Saint
Paul says, Titus 3.3. that some men serve diverse lusts and pleasures, and so
did David himself. He did not serve his generation, but his own wicked
wantonness, when he imbroydered his Adultery with Bathsheba, with the Murder of
Uriah.

Answer. 20.
O not a word, not a syllable, not a letter, not a tittle hereof. God has
forgotten it, why should man remember it? God has cast it behind his back, why
should we cast it in the teeth of David's memory? let us never mention it to his
disgrace, but for our own direction; Partly to teach us not to trust in our
selves, lest we fall into sin; partly to comfort us, that after sin committed,
pardon is obtainable on our unfeigned repentance.

Yea this is a very comfortable consideration, 21.
That though there be many faults, failings and defects in our performances,
yet if there be sincerity (Gospel perfection) therein, if our hearts be set to
seek the Lord God of our Fathers, God will be merciful unto us, though we be
not purified according to the purification of the Sanctuary.

Thus Lot (not withstanding the soul fact of Incest committed by him) is called
a righteous man, 22.
2 Pet. 2.8. Men opprobriously taint and term people by the obliquity of one
irregular act, which with uncharitable tongues is enough to eclipse, yea
extinguish the credit of all other graces in him; but God does Denominate and
Epithet persons from the rectitude of the general habit of their lives; yea,
by him such shall be reputed, accepted, received to serve our generation.

To conclude the point, 23.
he was a witty man who first taught stones to speak by engraving of Epitaphs
upon them: But he was a wicked man who first taught stones to lie, abusing
posterity with notorious untruths in flattering Inscriptions on many Monuments;
but I call malice it self to witness, whether the ensuing Epitaph might not
with modest truth being raved on David's Sepulcher;

Here lies interred the Corpse of him who when living, was a dutiful Son, a
loving Brother, a kind Husband, a tender Father, a faithful Friend, a loyal
Subject, a provident Sovereign, a gracious Saint; in a word, one who served his
own Generation after the will of God.

But should I stop here, 24.
I should not do right to David's deserts. Be it known, that besides the serving
his own Generation, David did and does serve all Generations in the world as
long as time shall last, as being the instrumental Author of the Psalms. Far be
it from me to make odious comparisons between either persons or things that are
eminent, or to set difference betwixt Gods Word (as once the Disciples fell out
amongst themselves which should be the greatest) which is the most heavenly
part thereof; but surely the Psalms are inferior to no part of the Old
Testament.

The Rabins have a fond conceit, 25.
that Manna did relish in the mouths of men as the Eaters thereof did fancy to
themselves, having the Gust of flesh, fish or fowl, roast, boiled, or baked, as
the eater thereof did wish or desire: I call this a fond conceit, as contrary
to an express in Scripture, Exodus 16.31. wherein the taste thereof is confined
to wafers made with honey. But this I will boldly say and maintain, that the
Psalms of David shall relish to an hungry soul, as he shall (not out of humor
and causeless fancy, but) judiciously desire it. Would thou have it taste
bitter? it shall taste bitter and reprove thee; taste sweet? it shall taste
sweet and comfort thee; taste betwixt both, bitter-sweet? it shall bitter-sweet
counsel and advise thee.

Proceed we now to application: 26.
It serves to confute three forts of people; First, the covetous, who are so
far from serving their Generation, that they will scarce serve themselves, and
allow necessaries for their own comfortable subsistence. Secondly, the
voluptuous man, who only serves himself and is good to no other. These instead
of saying, Let us fast and pray; say, Let us eat and drink for to morrow we
shall die. Thirdly the superstitious man, who immureth himself in a Cloister,
crying his life up for an high piece of holiness, burying both his parts and
person therein. Surely the Church and State he lives in, may justly commence a
suit, and have an action of debt against him, for not repaying them
proportionably to his abilities, who by his laziness will not serve his
Generation.

Others there are, 27.
who are so far from serving their Generation, That they disserve it, and do
much mischief thereunto, either by their bad writings or vicious examples. Bad
writings, either scurrilous against modesty, or scandalous against charity, or
blasphemous against piety, as either in maintaining erroneous opinions, or
defending vicious practices; such black broods are bad whilst in their nests,
concealed in the studies of their Authors, but well worse when fledged and
flown abroad into the world, so that it is not in the power of the Hen to clock
in her own Chickens again, and recall what they have composed.

Secondly, 28.
they are not only unprofitable, but destructive servants to posterity, who
leave the Copies of bad examples behind them, so that they know not when they
have done sinning; yea it is to be seared, that whilst their souls are
suffering in a woeful place, Lib. nono
they still may be sinning here on earth. If it be true what Symmachus faith,
Ep. 70.
Author est bonorum sequentium qui bonum relinquit exemplum; By the same
proportion, he that lives an ill Precedent, is the Father and Founder of all
the evil which may ensue thereupon; like Jeroboam seldom mentioned in Scripture
but with his train sweeping after him, the son of Nebat which made Israel to
sin.

God grant that when we die, 29.
our sins may be buried in our Graves, or rather (which is a more Christian
expression, and more conformable to the proportion of Faith) that before we
die, our sins may be buried in Christ's grave, pardoned and forgiven unto us,
especially that we leave not behind us ill examples for the poisoning and
perverting of such as shall survive us. For as it is said of Abel, Heb. 11.4.
He being dead yet speaks: so it is sadly true of many who are dead and
rotten, that they still lie, curse, swear, here on earth, occasioning the same
in others by their wicked patterns and practices they have left behind them.

Objection. 30.
But some will plead themselves privileged and exempted from serving their
Generation, because of the badness thereof. David (say they) had some comfort
in, and credit by serving his Generation, having for his Time-fellows so many
Worthies in all professions. Worthy Priests, Abimelech, Abiathar, Zadock;
worthy Captains, Joab, Abishar, Benaiah, the son of Jehojedah; worthy
Statesmen, Husha, Adoniram; worthy Prophets, Nathan, Gad, etc. Whereas I live
in such a Generation, that all the bad Epethites in the old and new Testament
may truly be applied thereunto. A stubborn generation, a froward generation,
Psalm. 78.8. A rebellious generation, a generation that set not their heart
aright, and whose Spirit is not steadfast with God. A generation of vipers, Mat.
3.7. A faithless generation, Mat. 17.17. Whether you take it in Divinity for
lack of belief toward God, or in morality for want of truth and trust toward
man; and who can find in his heart to serve so wicked a generation?

Some will say, 31
(further to improve this Objection) O that I had been born some years after
the persecution in the Reign of Queen Mary, that so my threescore and ten
years, the age of man, might have run parallel with the prosperous times of
Queen Elizabeth, King James, and King Charles, and have determined and expired
some years before the beginning of our late civil wars: Had my nativity been
fixed in that peaceable position, O then I would willingly, and readily, and
cheerfully, and joyfully, and thankfully have served my own generation; whereas
now I have no list, and less comfort to do it, being condemned to live in so
wicked an age, made up of the dregs of time, the badness whereof is more
dangerous then difficult to describe, and may with more safety be confessed by
the hearers, then expressed by the Preacher in his place.

Answ. I have three things to return in answer hereunto.

First, 32
grant the Objector speaks very much of truth herein, yet if the times be so
bad as he complains, their badness will serve for a toil to set off his
goodness, and render it the more conspicuous, making him, Phil. 2.15. to shine
the brighter, as a light in the World, in the midst of a crooked and perverse
Nation. Alas, thy little faith would have made no show, had thou lived in the
age of Abraham; thy Patience would have seemed but a dwarf to the Giant
patience of Job, had thou been his contemporary; thy meekness had appeared as
nothing, if measured with the meekness of Moses, had you been partners in the
same generation. Whereas now a little Faith, Patience, Meekness, and so of
other graces, will make a very good presence in the public, if the Age thou
live in be so bad as thou do complain, and others perchance do believe.

Secondly, 33
I suspect this to be nothing else but a device of thy deceitful heart, thereby
to cozen thine own self. The Objection speaks the state of thy soul to be much
like the temper of the Scribes and Pharisees, Mat. 23.30. If we (say they) had
been in the days of our Fathers, we would not have been partaker with the
blood of the Prophets. Yet these pretended pitiful persons were indeed more
cruel then their Ancestors. Their Fathers killed the Men, they the Master;
their Fathers the Servant, they the Son; their Fathers murdered the Prophets of
God, they the God of those Prophets, so far forth as he was murderable in his
humane nature; and it is vehemently to be suspected, that if thou be bad
now, thou would not have been good, had the time of thy Nativity answered
thine own desire. It is a shrewd presumption, that he who behaved himself as a
Woolf in his own generation, would not have been a Lamb in what Age soever he
had lived.

Lastly, 34
Beggars must be no choosers; thou art not to serve the generation before thee,
nor the generation after thee, nor any other of thy own election, but thy own
generation, wherein Divine Providence has been pleased to place thee, Saint
Paul says, Ephesians 5.22. Wives submit your selves unto your own Husbands.
Some will say, had I such an one to my Husband, I could willingly obey him, he
is of so meek, mild and sweet a disposition, but mine is of so morose and
froward a nature, it goes against my nature to be dutiful unto him. However,
though she has not the same comfort, she has the same cause of submission,
obliging in conscience to Gods command; husbands must love their own wives,
wives obey their own husbands; husbands and wives with David, must serve their
own generation.

But now that my sword may cut on both sides, 35
as hitherto we have confuted such who are faulty in their defect, and will not
serve their generation; so others offend in the excess, not being only
servants, but slaves and vassals to the age they live in, prostituting their
consciences to do any thing (how unjust soever) to be a Favorite to the Times:
Surely a cautious concealment is lawful, and wary silence is commendable in
perilous times. Amos 5.13. It is an evil time, therefore the wise shall hold
their peace. And I confess that a prudential compliance in Religion in things
indifferent, is justifiable, as also in all civil concernments, wherein the
conscience is not violated: but wherein the will of the times crosses the will
of God, our Indentures are cancelled from serving them, and God only is to be
obeyed.

There is some difference in reading the precept, 36
Romans 12.11. occasioned from the similitude of the words in the original,
(though utterly unlike in our English tongue) some reading it serving the Lord,
others serving the time. I will not dispute which in the Greek is the truer
Copy, but do observe that David's precedent in my Text, is a perfect expedient,
to demonstrate that both Lections may and ought to be reconciled in our
practice: He served his generation, there is serving the times; but what
follows? by the will of God, there is serving the Lord; this by him was, by
us must be performed.

Saint Stephen, 37
Acts 7.2. began his Sermon to the people with these words, Men, Brethren, and
Fathers; which words I thus expound and apply. By Men, he meant young folk,
which had attained to the strength and stature of men, and were much younger
then himself. By Brethren, those of his own standing and seniority in the world
(probably forty years old or thereabouts) and therefore he saluted such with a
familiar Appellation as a badge of equallity. Thirdly Fathers, being aged
people, more ancient then himself, as appears by his term of respect
addressed to persons distanced above him. This distinction will serve me, first
perfectly to comprise, then methodically to distinguish all my Auditors in this
Congregation.

I begin with you men, 38
which are of the Generation rising, it being bootless for me to address my
self to children not arrived at their understanding, concerning whom I turn my
preaching to them into praying for them, and wish them good success in the name
of the Lord.

It is your bounden duty to omit no opportunity to inform your selves both in 39
Learning and Religion, from those that living with you are of more age and
experience, and demean your selves unto them with all reverence and respect. O
let them go fairly their own pace and path to their graves. Do not thrust them
into the pit with your preposterous wishes. Filius ante diem, O when will he
die and his name perish! rather endeavor to prolong the days of your Parents
by your dutiful deportment unto them, stay but a while, and they will willingly
resign their room unto you, in earnest whereof those superannated Bazzilbaes do
contentedly surrender the lawful pleasures of this life, 2 Samuel 20.37. to you
their Chimchams, their sons and successors, to be by you with sobriety and
moderation peaceably possessed, and comfortably enjoyed.

You Brethren, 40
who are pew-fellows in the same Age with my self, who are past our vertical
point, and are now entered into the Autumn of our life, give me leave to bespeak
you with becoming boldness, familiarity beseeming those of the same form
together; there is a new Generation come upon, let us therefore think of going
off the Stage, endeavoring so to Act our parts, that we may come off, not so
much with applause from man, as approbation from God. If we live long, we shall
be looked upon as the barren fig tree that combereth the ground; we must make
room for succession, as our fathers have done for us. And set this be our
greatest care, to derive and deliver Religion in all the foundamentals thereof,
in as good a plight and condition to our sons, as we received it from our
Fathers. O let us leave Gods house as tenantable as we found it, let it not be
said, that we willingly let the fair Fabric of Faith and good life to run to
ruin in our, so that the next Age may justly sue us for Dilapidations.

When our Savior said unto his Disciples, 41
Mat. 26.21. Verily I say unto you, that one of you shall betray me, they were
exceeding sorrowful, and began every one of them to say unto him, Lord is it I?
yea Judas himself lagging at last with his, Is it I Lord! and was returned
with, Thou say it.

Thus at the last day of judgment shall all generations be arraigned before
God. 42
But to confine our Application only to those three within the last sixscore
years; if God should say unto them, One of you have betrayed my truth, how
would it put them all upon their particular purgation! Is it I Lord? says the
first generation in the reign of King Edward the sixth; surely they shall be
acquitted who in the Marian days sealed the truth with their blood. Is it I
Lord? says the second generation, lasting all the Reign of Queen Elizabeth to
the middle of King James. That also will be cleared as publicly preserving the
purity of true Doctrine in the thirty nine Articles.

What a shame shall it be, 43
if when our age shall ask with Judas, Is it I? we shall be returned, thou hust
said it. Yours is the Age that has betrayed my Truth to Error, Unity to
Faction, Piety to Profaneness; sad, when such a Fact shall be so clear that it
cannot be denied, and yet so foul that it cannot be defended. However this my
too just fear may consist with hope of better things of you, and such as
accompany salvation.

I must conclude with you Reverend Fathers, 44
whom my loyalty cannot pass by without doing my due homage to the Crown of
your Age, especially if it be found in the way of truth. Give me leave to tell,
you belong to that generation which is passed out of this world: not only the
Van or Front, and also the main body and battle of your Army are marched to
their graves (and their souls I hope to heaven) whilst Divine Providence for
reasons best known to himself, has reserved you to bring up (as I may say) the
very rear of the rear of your generation. O do not mistake this Reprieve for a
Pardon; and here give me leave to use a plain but expressive Similitude.

Have you never seen a wanton child run a firebrand against the Hearth or back
of 45
the Chymney, and so on a sudden make a sky of sparks? of which sparks some
instantly expire, others continue a pretty time and then go out, others last a
little longer, whilst one or two (as having a greater stock of soot to feed
them) hold out a good while, but at last are extinguished. Man is born to
labor, as sparks do fly upward, some presently go out wasted from the womb to
the winding sheet; others live to ripe men, others to be old men; some whose
temper and temperance are more signal then in others, to be counted wondrous
old, but all at last die and fall to the earth.

We read, 46
Rev. 10.2. of an Angel who had his right foot on the Sea, and his left on the
earth. This may seem a strange stride, save that it abateth the wonder, because
Angels when pleased to assume bodies, may extend themselves to a vast (though
finite) proportion. But you, though mere men, and weak men, must stride a
greater distance; having your left foot already in the Grave, endeavor to have
your right foot in Heaven, and waving all love of this world, set your minds
and meditations alone on God and godliness. In a word, whatever our Age be,
rising, shining, or setting, Men, Brethren or Fathers, let us endeavor with
David in my Text, according to the will of God to serve our own Generation.

Come we now to the sad occasion of our present meeting, 47
to perform the last Christian Office to our Deceased Brother, well known to
many of you, and to none better then to my self. A child is like a man in the
similitude of parts, though not of degrees, and in some measure he did
sincerely with David serve his Generation. He was a dutiful Son unto his aged
Mother, as she cannot but confess, and will I hope (as occasion is offered)
remember and reward it to his wife and children. A loving Brother, a kind
Husband, and I doubt not but his widow will discharge her mutual affection to
him in his relations.

Bathsheha thus describes a good wife, 48
Pro. 31.12. She will do her Husband good and not evil all the days of her
life. It is not said, all the days of his life, but of her life. What if he
should chance to die, and she to survive him, yea after to marry again, (as God
forbid any should be debarred marrying in the Lord, especially for their own
and childrens advantage) yet still she would do good unto him all the days of
her life. To him, that is to his memory, mentioning with respect: to him, that
is to his children and friends, careful over the one, and courteous over the
other.

He was a tender Father and faithful Friend, witness the many volunteer
mourners, (an unusual proportion for a person of his quality) who at their own
charge have habited themselves, that the outward sadness of their clothes might
express the inward sorrow of their hearts: He was an excellent Master, having
bred many good workmen in his Vocation, and I hope they will prove good
husbands too. Let me add, he was an excellent subject; for according to that
which his conscience (with many others) conceived to be loyalty: he lost much
of, and hazarded all his estate.

Lastly and chiefly, he was a good Saint, having more piety then he showed, and
as daily he consumed in his body, he was strengthened in his soul in Faith
through Christ, whereof he gave many testimonies before, toward, and at his
death. What shall I speak of his parts of Nature, so far above his education
and profession, that he might have past for a Scholar amongst Scholars, for his
wit and pleasant expressions: But God now has made him his freeman, and paid
him his wages for so well serving his Generation.

THE CROWN OF RIGHTEOUSNESS: OR, The glorious Reward of FIDELITY In the
Discharge of our DUTY.
SERMON. LIII.
2 TIMOTHY 4.7, 8. I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have
kept the Faith: Henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness,
which the Lord, the Righteous Judge, shall give me at that Day: and not to me
only, but unto them also who love his Appearing.


I Shall not detain you by any impertinent Preface, since the shortness of time
for this Service, together with the indulgence of this so Learned an Auditory,
anticipates an Apology, and gives hope of much Candor, under so manifold
Impr^parations.

And so I address my self to the serious business of my Text; The scope whereof
amounts to this sum; Namely, to comfort Timothy about the night approach of
Saint Paul's Martyrdeme, mentioned, ver. 6. The arguments of consolation are
two, each depending on the other. 1 These. 2.1 ^.
The first taken from his Holy course of life, constantly continued,
comfortably finished, ver. 7.2. The second; from the certainty of his Blessed
estate, assured to him after this Life, ver. 8. And indeed, the Apostle seems
to put on him the effection of a dying Father, willing to inhibit, or at least
to a 1 These. 4.13.
moderate the passions (which like Ambergreese may do well in a compound of
grace) of his indeared children, encompassing, as b Genesis 49.1, 2.
Jacobs Sons, his Deathbed; as if he had thus c Deuteronomy. 32.2.
drropt his words upon them: What do yethus d Act. 21.13.
weeping and breaking my Heart? e 1 These. ^. 10.
God, my own f Rom 9 1.
Conscience, your selves are witnesses, how holily, and without crime, I have g
1 P^t. 1 17.
passed the time of my sojourning here, God, by his grace has (according to
his promise) h 2 Timothy 4.18.
preserved me i 1 Cor. 1.8.
blameless unto the end: You know what happy things he has k 1 Cor. 2.9.
prepared for them that love him, in the l Heb. 11.40.
Beginnings whereof my Soul shall enter, at my m Phil. 1.23.
Dissolution; the n Psalm. 16.11.
fullness, and consummation I expect at that great and o Act. 2.20.
notable day of the general Resurrection, and Retribution: Right so the Apostle
here, to the same effect, to comfort Timothy, whom (having p 2 Timothy and 2.1.
begotten him spiritually through the Gospel, to the Faith of Christ) he found
even as a Natural q Phil. 2.22.
Son, with his Father most affectionately tender, obedient and observant, unto
his very last expiration: I am now ready to be offered, and the time of my
departure is at hand; (yet nevertheless be comforted, for) I have fought a good
fight, etc. and henceforth, there is laid up for me a Crown of righteousness,
etc. This for the Context, and scope of this Scripture.

I have fought a good fight. (...) the expression is borrowed from those who
strive for r 1 Cor. 9.25.2 Tim. 2.5.
masteryes, and after a sharp encounter, or heat of Contention, do at last
prove s Romans 8.37.
Conquerors.

I have finished my Course, (...) t 2 Cor. 10.14, 16.
id est. Cursum certaminis, qualis est eorum, qui in stadio currunt, as Estius
expounds it; The speech being taken from such as run in a race, who give not
out till the prize be obtained, see 1 Cor. 6.24, 25, 26. I have kept the
Faith.] Gal. 1.16.
That is, That Fidelity, or trust, and faithfulness, which he had constantly
made good in the discharge of his Apostleship, and Ministry, in preaching the
Gospel far and near, throughout many Regions, from the time of the first
Commission of the same, unto his u 1 Cor. 9.17.
Dispensation: The Apostle in his own practice, accomplishing that, which he
required in all other the Stewards of like sacred Mysteries, 1 Cor. 4.2. for
this also, he gave God thanks, for counting him faithful, in putting him into
the Ministry, committing the glorious Gospel unto his w 1 These. 2.4.
trust, 1 Timothy 1.11, 12. upon which he was assured of his, Euge, Bone serve,
and fidelis. Well done, good and x Mat. 25.21.
faithful Servant, enter into thy Masters joy. Ere I come to the more
particular elucidation of the parts, I may not omit to mention those quaeries,
and resolutions, which some of the ancient Fathers have not unprofitably
raised, and given upon these words.

The first whereof is this; Quaer. 1.
Whether Saint Paul did not, under this profession, boast in a kind of vaunting
ostentation?

Answ. Answ.
To this St. y S. Chrysostom. in Loc.
Chrysostom makes answer thus; (...), He does not magnify himself, or boast
in any way of vainglorious z Non haec jactantiae verb^ sunt, sed bonae
Conscientia, Estius ad Loc.
Ostentation, (a sin which, else where, he extremely cautions against, Phil.
2.3. Gal. 2.16) but they are the words of a Saint, uttered in a modest, meek,
and humble protestation, whereby he owneth the graces of God within him, and
gives all the glory in their vigorous exercise, to God the Original Fountain,
1 Cor. 10.31.
and bestower of them.

Quaest. Quaer: 2.
Whether Saint Paul did well to Commemorate, and make mention of his gracious
Actions, and good Deeds?

Answ. Answ.
To which Saint Gregory makes answer thus; Fas est viris fanctis in morte
recordari, imo and recolere virtutes vitae actae, etc. It is lawful for Holy
men, and Saints of God, in Death to recollect, and to recount the virtuous
deeds of their former lives past; Not indeed, as an occasion of exaltation in
themselves for the same; But, Ut fiduciam pr^beant, and desporantem timorem
premant, for the suppression of fear, and Desperation, in the last Hour; in as
much as good works are the a Jam: 2.18.
fruit of a saving Faith; that, as Faith justifies the person in a Correlation
to Christ's merits, (it as an hand b Romans 5.17. (...).
receiving, apprehending, and applying them as all-sufficient to the soul;) so
good works (being the way to eternal life, Ephesians. 2.10.) Declaratively, and
Praesentially justify the Faith, showing it not to be Counterfeit or dead, but
Real, and living; It being the innate property of such a Faith to be c Vera
fides viva est, Nec potest esse otiosa Juell. in Apolog.
vivacious, manifesting it self in its godly d Call. 5.6.
Operations: Hence was the saying of the School Divines, that Charitas was
forma virtutum, Charity (which is the e Romans 13.8.
sum of the Law) confisting in love toward God, for his own sake, and toward
our f 1 Ioh. 3.14.
Neighbor, for Gods sake, it was the Form of the Theological Virtues: Not but
that Faith, and Hope, and other graces of the Spirit, have their own several
and particular Forms, which do specifically form them to their own Identical
Natures, and diversifie them from others, so that Faith is not Hope, nor Hope
is not Charity; but for that love, does as it were, form them to acceptability
before God, to this purpose may be applicable that practice of zealous
Nehemiah, Chap. 13.14. Remember me, O my God, (says he) concerning this, and
wipenot out my good Deeds, that I have done for the House of my God, and for
the Offices thereof: and the like is that we also read of good King Hezekiah,
upon a Summons to Death, Isa 38.3. And he said, Remember now, O Lord, I beseech
thee, how I have walked before thee in Truth, and with a perfect heart, and
have done that which is good in thy sight.

A third Quaerie is, Quaer. 3.
Whether Saint Paul spoke all this, as out of a self-confidence, without having
an eye to Gods Divine assistance therein?

Answ. Answ.
To which, says venerable Bede, Absit ut tantus Doctor ignoraverit legem Dei,
Deuteronomy. 8.17. God forbid that so great a Doctor should be unacquainted with the
word of God, which teaches utterly to declaim all self-power, though it were
but to become wealthy, or potent, even in things Temporal; yea, himself
seriously acknowledges all spiritual sufficiency to be of God, 2 Cor. 3.5.
evermore ascribing the total of his supernaturals to the free grace of Christ,
1 Cor. 15.10. through whose strength alone it was that he discharged his Trust
in the Gospel, and went through with all other gracious performances, Phil.
4.13.

The fourth, Quae; 4.
and last Querie is, How Saint Paul came to know so assuredly, that there was a
Crown of Righteousness laid up for him in Heaven?

Answ. Answ.
To which some answer, that he had it by Revelation extroardinary, as an
Apostolical privilege daigned to him from God, the better to cheer him on in
the course of the Gospel, and to steel his resolutions against all opposers of
the glorious truth therein revealed: or, as Anselme thus, He had that
assurance, Non re plenissima, sed spe firmissima: grounded upon a firm hope,
and expectation: But of this more anon.

Having thus pointed at the Quaeries: I come now to the more particular
handling of the words, out of which I observe two general parts,

1. A solemn profession of the discharge of his Office, verse 7.

2. A large Remuneration, and Reward of that Discharge, ver. 8.

In the former, we have; 1. The Person, I. 2. His Act, fought. 3. The object of
that Act, A fight. 4. The quality of that fight, A [good] fight. 5. The time of
all this noted from the expression in the Proeter tense, I [have] fought, (...)
I have fought a good fight: the rest of the words in this verse I take to be
upon the matter, but as the exegesis, and exposition of the former.

In the second main part, the reward; We have it amplified. 1. By the Donor, or
bestower of it, The Lord, described here by a Periphrasis, and styled, (...)
The Righteous Judge. 2. By the Title given to it, A Crown of Righteousness. 3.
By the manner of it, it is laid up. 4. By the time of Donation, In that Day. 5.
By the persons to whom bestowed, To Paul himself; and that, not by any
restrictive enclosure, as if only to himself, and to none other besides; but by
a farther expansion, it reaches unto others with himself; provided they be
found under due qualification of loving the appearance of the Judge; Not unto
me only, but unto them also that love his appearing.

These, at least, as to my observation, are the parts of this Scripture; which
being so many, I must be constrained, as the Disciples passing through the
Cornfields upon the Sabbath day, (...), to pluck but an ear, g Mat. 2.23.
or two of the choysest notice; or as some Lapidaries of rich Jewels are wont,
show them only in a short cursory view, and so lay them up again,

The first words, I have fought a good fight, admit of a diverse
Interpretations, yet each of them suitable to the Analogy, and proportion of
Faith.

They may then be taken, Romans 12.6.
either as the expression of Sain Paul himself, quatenus Apostolus, as under
the notion of an Apostle: or else as a Christian, in the condition with other
Members of the Church of Christ with himself, for that we read in the close of
the eighth verse, The Crown of Righteousness was laid up for all that loved the
appearing of the Lord.

If we take them in the former sense, then from the first particular, The
Person; The note of h Magalianus, ad Loc.
Magalian is opposite, Stus Paulus Dux fuit, and antesignamus earum quoe
proecipiebat; That we look at Saint Paul as an exemplary leader to all his
successors, (though indeed not in an Apostolical Latitude, yet) in the office,
and work it self of the Ministry, practically first doing what he would have
others to observe in, and about the dispensation of the Gospel: see Phil. 4.9.
And this was our Saviors own Course, Act. 1.1. He began to do and Teach, first
to do, and then to Teach; its noted by Barradius upon that Prophecy, Isa 9.6.
which had relation to our Savior, it was said, The Government should be upon
his shoulders; intimating, that himself would first bear in his own person,
what he intended to impose upon others, to wit, in things capable of Imitation;
even as he said unto John Baptist, when he tendered himself to be Baptized of
him, and he in an humble renuence grew shy, as deeming himself unworthy of so
great an Honor, Mat. 3.15. Suffer it to be so now, says he, for thus it
becomes us to fulfill all Righteousness; Hac est enim Justitia, ut quod alterum
facere velis, prior ipse incipias, and tuo alios horteris exemplo, as Saint i
S. Ambrose in Luc.
Ambrose expounds the words; This was righteousness, that is, an equal, and
just thing, that what thou would have another to observe, and do, thou thy
self should first exemplisie in thine own actions suitably; whereunto was
that serious advise of Saint Paul unto his Son Timothy, 2 Timothy 4.16. Take heed
unto thy self, and unto thy Doctrine, for so thou shall both save thy self, and
those that hear thee; Where the chiefest heed was to be given to himself: Truly
spoke k Saint Gregogry in Job 23.
Saint Gregory, cum Imperio docetur, quod prius agitur, quam dicatur, Then
shall we with Authority speak what we do, when we do what we speak: But this is
a Discourse fitter for a Visitation, then a Funeral; were it not, that it is at
the obsequies of such a worthy Divine, (for whom we now perform this last
Christian good office) whose practice herein was an accurate Comment upon the
whole speech.

From the second and third particular, (in this acception of the words) its
obvious to every apprehension, that the work of the Ministry is a Fighting,
yea, a continual Warfare: so Bruno, and with him l Espencoeus ad Loc.
Espencoeus observes, that where the Verb and Substantive run in the same
terms, one conducing to, the other to perfect the Emphesis of the expression,
there is evermore a [Frequency] of that Act employed: I should but cast drops
into the Ocean, to endeavor a large proof of so clear a Truth: Whilst Noah,
both by his Lips and by his Hands (in m Heb. 11.7.
building the Arc) was a n 2 Pet. 2.5.
Preacher of Righteousness, in the old world, was it not thus? whilst the
spirit of God (in his Ministry) o Genesis 6.3.
strove with the obstinate corruptions of that wicked world, what aspersions,
what oppositions, what misusages, and abasures had the Prophets in their days,
being p Jer. 20.7.
derided, traduced, q 2 Chronicles. 36.16. Mat. 23.37.
misufed, insulted on, even for the Conscientious discharge of their Function?
the precious Sons of Sion comparable to fine Gold, how were they esteemed as
earthen Pitchers, the work of the hand of the Potter? Lam. 4.2. And, who knows
not the exact accomplishment of old Simeons Propecy of our Savior himself,
Luke 2.34. How he was set for a sign, which was and should be r In signum
contradicibile. Tert de Carne Chr^i, cap. 28. Isa. 8.13:
spoken against, (...), for a sign of contradiction, he should be as a common
mark, whereat the arrows of reproach shall be fully shot: s 1 (...) Bishop Hall
in Paraphr: Piscator and Fransiscus Lucas.
Of all the Holy Apostles its noted, 1 Cor. 4.13. They were made as the filth
of the world, and the t Confer:
offscouring of all things continually; (...), signifies that rejectament,
which is escaped from the dirty pavement from whence the shoes gather
defilement; Lam. 3.35.
and (...), it being a word in a Composition, carries with it the greater
Emphesis, and denotes the polluted rakings of the streets, fit for nothing but
the common Dunghill; In so low a state of abjection, and in so vile an esteem
were those very u 2 Cor. 5.20.
Ambassadors of Heaven, among an Atheistical and w Act. 2.40. Phil. 2.15.
crooked generation: our very Apostle here professes, 1 Cor 15.32. That he
fought with beasts at Ephesus, (...), which some would have meant Literally, of
his being dilaniated, and rent in his body (as many Primitive Christians were
in the first Cruel times of raging persecution) by wild Beasts; to which Nero,
that Dedicator Damnationis, x Yert in Apoleget.
as Tertullian slyles him, being himself a Lion, y 2 Timothy 4.17.
was wont Tyrannically to cast the bodies of the Christians: But others better,
in my poor understanding, expound it of those Ethical or Moral Beasts, who with
Demetrius, and the rabble that cried up the great Diana of the Idolatours
Ephesians, so violently withstood and opposed Saint Paul, who cried down that
their abominable superstition at Ephesus; Act. 19. in which place a great
door, and effectual was opened unto him, but there were many z 1 Cor. 16.9.
Adversaries, 1 Cor. 16.8, 9. those Apostles indeed experimenting the proof of
what their Lord and Master foretold them, that they must be sent forth even as
sheep among a Mat. 10.16.
Wolves, who would attempt to tear them in pieces: and which of us in
particular, encounters not his discouragements? Yea, woe is me! We seem to be
fallen into those times, wherein many men (as if directly b Isa. 6.10.
infatuated from Heaven) out of a gross misprision apprehend the Ministry it
self the greatest inconvenience; and (that great cheat, that grand Pantomime of
Christendom, the cunning Jesuit) now almost barefaced has instilled (as is
feared) so pernicious a principle into such as are (for ought we can see)
willing to be deceived, as to question the c 1 Timothy 3.1. Romans 11.13.
office it self, and to dispute the Institution; as if they would have men
scorn the Physician when sickest, and shun the Surgeon when forest; And
(which must be forgotten) there not wanting some, who are apt to charge on that
secret Calling, the occasion, if not the cause of all the Calamities of this
latter Age: Just as those of whom Suidas reports, that they were wont to write
with Ink or blood on a glass, and so set it against the Moon, making all those
spots or blurres that were in the glass, to be in the Moon, and not at all in
the glass, upon which alone they were written: mean while, never at all
anatomizing their own Ulcerous, Corrupt insides, or repenting for their d Prove
13, 5: Ezekiel. 36: 31.
loathsome self-abhominations (and among them as principle, for the contempt of
Gods faithful Ministers.) Which sins becoming so Epidemical, and National, as
they are, call for Wrath and Indignation from the Lord, who is here styled in
my Text, the Righteous Judge. And yet, though this be a Fight, nevertheless it
is, for the quality, a [good] Fight, and that for these reasons;

First of all, because its undertaken for the e 1 Timothy 6.12.
Faith of Christ, and for the Salvaof Souls, whereof even one single one is
more worth than a f Mat. 16.26.
whole World; O what comfort will it be, in the day of retribution, when a g 1
Cor. 4.2. Act. 2.40.
faithful Minister, after all his sharp conflicts with the wayward oppositions
of corrupt men, shall say; Lo me, and the h Isa. 8.18. Heb. 2.13.
people, which thou have given me, as the fruit of all my labor in thy Gospel,
being able thus to give up an i Heb. 13.17.
account with joy, and not with grief.

Secondly, Because its undertaken for a good reward, which is no less, than a
Crown of Kighscousness; What Saint Gregory said of afflictions for a good
Conscience, will hold here alone, Consideratio proemii minuit vim flagelli, The
consideration of the Reward, abates of the Difficulty of the Fight; even so its
noted of Moses, that having respect unto the recompense of the reward, he
preferred the reproach of Christ to all the richest treasures in Egypt, Heb.
11.26. the same was it likewise that animated that noble Prophet under all his
discouragements, and fruitless endeavors among men, Isa. 49.4. I have labored
in vain, and spent my time for naught, yet surely my Judgment is with the Lord,
and my work, that is the reward of my work is with the Lord; who rewards his
Ministers; secundum laborem, though not secundum proventum, as Saint Bernard
speaks according to their Labor, and pious endeavors, which themselves
undergo in the Gospel, though not according to the success of their Labors,
which is k 1 Cor. 3.6.
Gods alone to bestow.

And thus far of the words, in their first acception, uttered by Saint Paul as
an Apostle.

I might next consider them also, as spoken in the name of all other Christians
at large, even of all such as, who love the appearing of the Lord. Christ Jesus
at his coming.

And under that notion of them, we may observe, That the Life of a Christian is
a continual warfare upon the Earth, so Chrysologus, Christiano militars est, id
quod vivit in seculo, suitable unto that of Job, Chap. 7.1. Where the word
rendered an appointed time, is by many translated a Warfare, which was hinted
to us in the first l Genesis 3.15.
enmity between the two seeds; after again, in Esau and Jacob m Genesis 25 22.
struggling together in the same womb; and to this effect is that speech of our
Savior, I came not to send Peace on the Earth, but War, Division n Mat. 10.34,
35.
and variance, namely, between Grace and Corruption; which was experimented
mightily in the breast of this our Apostle, when the Law in his Members
rebelled against the Law of his Mind, Romans 7.23. it was (...), a warring Law;
and elsewhere he faith, The flesh lusts against the spirit, as the spirit
lusts against the flesh, Gal. 5.17. and to the same purpose also Saint James,
Chap. 4.1. From whence come Wars, and Fightings among you? Come they not
hence, even of your Lusts, that War in your Members? Surely Contention comes
from Corruption; see likewise, 1 Pet. 2.11.

Now, I might here take occasion to treat of the Doctrine of the spiritual
Warfare, and pursuing the Metaphor, present you with those several things that
concur to make up a complete Battle; as 1. A Bickering, and encounter it
self, Nisi proecesserit pugna non potest esse Victoria, as Saint o S. Cypr.
lib. de Mortal. c. 9.
Cyprian, there cannot properly be said to be a Victory, where never was a
fighting, delicata jactatio est, vbi periculum non est, its but a fond, or
effeminate kind of boasting of a Conquest, where never was danger. 2. In a
War there must be Enemies, with whom to encounter, quis enim oertat nisi
inimicum habet? says Prosper, there cannot be a Contention, where there is not
an Adversary: Now in this Warfare, the great and the grand Adversary is the
Devil, who, with an (...), is styled (...), The Adversary, 1 Pet. 5.8. Jam.
4.7. He is as the chief Champion, the World also and the Flesh as under him.

Sunt tria quoe tent ant Hominem, Mundus, Caro, Doemon.

And in relation to the several Temptations of each of these, Schoolmen have
given them distinct names, or Titles, being called by them, either Obrepentes,
or Ascendentes, or Immissoe: Those which are from the World seem full of
flattery, and creep one after a sort, insensibly, and deceive us; Those from
the flesh ascend, as it were out of our selves, therefore the more dangerous,
because the less preceptible, they being so pleasing to Corrupt Nature, and a
self-snare: Those from the Devil are sent from without, with more vehemence,
therefore called (...), Darts, (...), Ephesians. 6.16. because cast into a man; for
in very deed the Devil p (...). Macar. Homil.
knows no man's Heart. only deals, at first, (till after further experience)
by Conjecture; all which (if I had time) it were easy to enlarge upon. 3. In a
War, there must be Arms, and Weapons; and to furnish our selves with these,
we have a full Armoury, or panoply in the Holy Scriptures; The whole armor of
God we have for all sorts of Weapons, whether Offensive or Defensive, in Ephesians.
6.13, 14. etc. 4. There must be policies, or stratagems in War; means to
Circumvent, disappoint, overreach, overthrow the Enemy, etc. These and many
the like, are the parts to make up this spiritual warfare: all which must of
necessity, (if, as it ought to be spoken to fully) willingross more time, than
I have left to go through with my other business.

Wherefore, waving that so copious a Theme, at this present; I proceed on now
to the second general part of my Division, which is the Remuneration, or reward
of Saint Paul's fidelity in the discharge of his trust. in the Dispensation of
the Gospel; Henceforth is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness, etc.

Much (but that I study Brevity) might be said of the Dignity of this reward,
it being styled, a Crown; and largely also I might discourse of the certainty
thereof proved, and assuredly to be made good, partily from the promise of God,
of that q 2 These. 3.3.
faithful God, who is ever r Psalm. 111. (...). Heb. 10:20.
mindful of it, and never disappointeth a true believer of performance, namely,
so as he promises, Esau 40.10. Behold, the Lord God will come with a strong
hand, and his arm shall rule for him, behold his reward is with him. See also
Isa. 62.11. and Psalm, 31.19. The Psalmist seems, after a sort, ravished, and
in a kind of ecstasy, transported out of himself, in wonder at the meditation,
O how great is thy goodness, which thou have laid up for them that fear thee,
which thou have wrought for them that trust in thee, before the sons of men!
And elsewhere, Psalm. 58.11. Verily there is a reward for the righteous,
doubtless he is a God that judges in the earth. And Heb. 6.10 God is not
unrighteous to forget, etc. nor was ever any man's labor (maugre the blasphemy
of all those Infidels, Mal. 3.14.) in vain in the Lord, 1 Cor. 15.58. See also
Romans 2.7. And this is partly also to be made good from the meritorious
expiation of the Lord Christ, the virtue whereof extended not only to a
deliverance from all pain and misery, which he purchased by his Passion; but
also to the opening a way to everlasting happiness, by his all-glorious
Resurrection, and Ascension, Romans 8.32.2 Pet. 1.11. Joh. 14.2. And lastly, this
may be collected likewise from the present afflictions of Gods servants, 2
These. 1.5. for else, as the present case now stands with them, they are in this
life of all men else most miserable, 1 Cor. 15.19.

Now, the Schoolmen have reduced the sum of all the future Blessedness, and
Reward, unto two main heads, which they style, Dotes animoe, and Corporis; as
it were, the Dowries of the Soul and Body, both which, as they have been
sharers in obedience, so shall they also be in the Compensation of the just
reward. Those of the Soul are these.

1. The clear s 1 Jo. 3.2.
Vision of God, which they say is, tota merces, beholding him t 1 Cor. 13.12.
face to face, namely, so far as a finite Being (for so our Humane Nature
continues still, though glorified) may be capable to apprehend of that Majesty,
which is Infinite; in this advanced condition, the Soul (which is here clogged,
and drossy, and much praegravated by the Body, subject to corruption) shall
beatifically see God, as he is, in the full splendour of his immortal glory;
whereas beneath, it sees only in part, and knows but in part, nor can the
greatest part of our sublunary knowledge, make up the least part of our
Ignorance; the discovery that we have now of Heaven, is but (...), as by
reflection from a glass Darkly, being changed into the Image of God, by degrees,
from one glory to another, 2 Cor. 3.18. but then, all clouds shall be
dispelled, the Intellectual eyes fully cleared up into a perfect and bright
serenity, and withal enjoy a sweet oblectation, Contentation and Delight
accompanying that inexpressible and blisseful Vision.

2. In the will, perfect fruition of the Divine glory, tention, and (for the
measure of the Creature) Comprehension, a complete assimilation, and likeness
to that glorious Majesty, in Holiness and Righteousness; In those new Heavens
dwells nothing but righteousness, 2 Pet. 3.13.

3. In the whole Soul, Joy unspeakable and full of glory, 1 Pet. 1.8. In the
Body, 1. Impassibility, it is not, nor can be subject there to any Ach, Ague,
or Pain, no discontenting or agonizing vexations whatsoever, All Tears shall
be wiped away from our eyes, Rev. 7.17.2. Agility, expedite quickness, free
from all manner of Lumpish ponderosity, or defatigration whatsoever; Yea
moreove perfect Charity, and glorious splendour, such as the Sun it self, in its
full Brightness partakes not of: Here below the Beauty of the Saints is
shadowed, and much clouded, partly by the interposition of Hypocrifie (Copper
often passing before weak eyes for Gold, Formality for Reality) eclipsing that
u 2 Cor. 1: 12.
(...), and simplicity which would both w Tit. 2.10.
adorn the Gospel, and grace the purity of profession: partly also by
afflictions, to which the godly are x Act. 14: 22.
appointed in this life, where Christianus, is quasi Crucianus, and that y Mat.
20.22.
Baptism of blood, and Suffering is made the character of a true Believer, as
that of Water is of an outward visible Member of the Church: And partly also by
Corruption, which like spriggs, or suckers sprouting forth even under the
choycest grass, will sometimes be showing of it self in the defection of our
best actions, yea, in some particulars of z Jam. 3.2. Gal. 6: 1.
Exorbltancy; so that whereas, in these several regards, the Beauty of the
Saints is much obtenebrized, and obscured, yet then shall they a Mat. 13.42.
shine forth, (...), even as the Sun from out of a Clowd, in full clarity, and
refulgent Phil. 3.21.
glory; which was praefigured, after a sort, in that shining transfiguration of
our Savior upon the Mount, Mat. 17. When the vision was so glistering, and
resplendant, that Peter could have been contented, (though but from that
glimpse of glory) to have erected a b Mat. 17. 4.
Tabernacle, for a farther sight and Contemplation, he found it so sweet, that
it was good to be there longer. 3. Lastly, To all this may be added
Immortality, as the Diamond set in the ring of all the rest, their Mortality
has put on Immortality, the Body never more, after it is clothed upon
therewith, being subject unto Corruption, Death it self is then struck dead,
and swallowed up in a final Victory unto all Eternity: Ioh. 14 2. (...)
. To which purpose ye may do well to meditate at leisure those very apposite
and pertinent Scriptures, 1 Pet. 5.4.2 Cor. 5.1. Rev. 2.11.1 Cor. 15.54.55.
compared with Hos. 13.14. and to this purpose the places of bliss are styled c
mansions, or abiding and resting places, John 14.2.

And this is the reward, couched under this Metaphor of a Crown, the Bliss
whereof, indeed, transcends the skill, and tongue even of Angels themselves to
express: Saint Paul speaking of the excellent goodness was treasured up, but in
the gifts and graces of Regeneration in this life, says even of them, that the
natural eye has not Seen, nor the ear Heard, nor has it entered into the Heart
of an unspiritualized man, to conceive the things which God has prepared for
them that love him, 1 Cor. 2.9. Much less surely can this be done, d 2 Pet.
1.17.
Excellent glory above in Heaven; Wherefore the joy thereof being so
incomprehensible, as it is, when it could not enter into the faithful servant
mentioned in the Gospel, then he was bid to enter into it, even into that joy
of his Master, Mat. 25.21. And thus far of the remuneration it self at large,
both in the Certainty and the Dignity thereof, It is a Crown of Rightiousness.

I come next to consider the Donor, or the Bestower of the same, the Lord, set
forth unto us here, under the periphrasis of being (...), The Righteous Judge.

Where note, says the Roman Catholic, that the Reward is a Reward of
Justice, not of favor, rende^ed as a due debt, not given as a gratuitous
benevolence, so Cajetan on the Text, Dicendo, reddet Justus Judex, debitum jus
significate; and, so by consequent, the good works, to which its rendered, are
properly meritorious, and God shall be unjust if he deny them his due reward,
even due of debt: But whilst these overweening spiders suck poison, the Humble
Bees draw honey from these fragrant and sweet flowers: To Cajetan (though none
of the meanest Schoolmen) we may oppose Primasius, who has this more solid
expression, quomodo ^st ac^rona bebita redderetur, nisi prius illa gratuita
donaretur? e Tanqu^m filius gratiae Bradwardin de S. Paulo.
How can that Crown be said to be rendered as due, unless first it was bestowed
as free? and again, oper a Bona sunt Dei bona, The Lord in crowning our good
deeds, does but reward us with his own gifts; in this case we must be all
constrained to say as David, on another occasion, 1 Chronicles. 26.14. All things
come of thee, and of thine own have we given thee; Wherefore, Saint Paul (the
great Assertor of free grace) has styled most fitly life eternal it self,
(wherein consists the absolute consummation of all graces) (...), a free
gift, Romans 6.23. a word not used in any Heathen Author, but peculiarized to the
f 2 Timothy 31, 6.2 Pet. 1.21.
inspired penmen of Holy Writ; besides, the manner of the Apostles expression
is very remarkable, even in this very Text, where the word (...), [is laid up]
and the other of (...) [shall give] both these expressions imply a free
donation, no meritorious purchase at all; elsewhere, our reward in heaven is
called an inheritance, Ephesians. 1.14. Act. 26.18. which is a thing coming freely
by descent unto the rightful Heir: Moreover, works meritorious, according to
the determination of the Patrons of merit themselves; They must be, 1. Nostra,
our own works, wrought out of our own strength, and done by our own power,
whereas the Evangelical Prophet has otherwise assured us, Isa. 26.12. Thou O
Lord, faith he, have wrought all our works in us, He means, gracious works:
Alas, we are not such Silkworms as to spin a thread of Felicity out of our own
bowels; we must remember that the highest style, which the Scripture gives the
Saints, is but to be g Act. 9.15.2 Tim. 2 20.
Vessels of Salvation, to h Romans 5 17.
receive the graces of God distilled into them from above; Not i Our heart is
as barren of any good, as they report the Isle of Patmos is, wheren ^ thing
will grow, but on earth that is brought from other places. D. Stoughton.
Springs or Fountains to derive them to our selves; and by the very Schoolmen
themselves, the graces of the Spirit are called, Habitus infusi, Habits, not
acquisite by frequent Acts, as moral virtues are, but infused by God into the
Heart, Every good and perfect gift descending from above, as Saint James says,
Jam. 1.17. Yea, it was the positive assertion of our Savior himself, John
15.5. Without me ye can do nothing, He means k 1 Pet. 2.5.
Acceptably; He does not say, as Saint Austin observes, sine me difficulter
potestis, or, non potestis persicere, without me ye can hardly do any thing,
or, ye are not able to bring any act unto perfection, but simply, and
expressly thus, Without me, that is, without l Cant. 8.5:
leaning upon me, having my special and gracious assistance, Ye can do nothing
at all that is good and gracious; and our Apostle also, elsewhere, professes,
that all our sufficiency, namely, in things supernatural, is merely and solely
of God alone; 2 Cor. 3.5. Therefore we may well conclude, that whatsoever good
works there are in us, they be none of our own.

Secondly, As they must be our own, so likewise are they, (in the sense of
those grand Impostors of the Christian world) to be perfect, as in which
nothing is to be found defective, nothing redundant; whereas all our
righteousness, as it is inhaerent in us, Alas! it is but as a defiled, nasty,
and polluted menstruosity, Isa. 64.6. the highest pitch, or (...) of
perfection, that (whilst we are clad with the rags of our m Phil. 3.21.
vile flesh) we, the very best of us all, can attain to in this life, is (as I
have shown n See my Sermon, styled, The remedy of Schism, preached at Paul's
Land. 1640. p. 18. 19,
elsewhere) but to see, and to acknowledge our imperfections; as in the
clearest serenity of the Firmament, some speckling cloud may be discovered, so
in our most accurate and exact performances, either in the Matter, or in the
Manner, or in the Degree, measure or end of doing, we all prove some way
defective; even the very best things that we do, have enough in them to be
pardoned, if the Lord should discuss them without mercy in a rigorous
severity, and be so extreme as to o Psalm. f 30.3.
mark what in them is done amiss: To this effect the forementioned School
Divines have styled the greatest Saints, as they are yet Members but of the
Church militant on earth, but Viatores, walkers in the way, whose motion is but
only progressive, not Comprehensors, till actually instated Members of the
Church Triumphant above in glory, in the mean while, that maxim in Divinity is
Orthodox and solid, Successiv^rum non simul est esse, and perficere; Those
things which admit of a succession in their motion, or degrees of growth, their
being and perfection is not all at once, nor altogether; wherefore our very
Apostle elsewhere, Phil. 3.12, 15. professes, though he were perfect, in
regard of sincerity and uprightness, yet not so, in regard of the full measure:
He was so in respect of Parts, he was not so in respect of Degrees, therefore
he said, that he had not as yet fully apprehended, Fuit perfectus, spe future
glorificationis, Fuit Imperfectus, ^nere Corruptionis; Fuit perfectus,
expectatione muneris; Fuit Imperfectus, fatigatione Certaminis, as most
appositely to our present purpose, p. Fulgent. lib. 1. ad Monim.
p Fulgentius: perfect he was, in the Hope of future Glorification: he was
imperfect, under the burden of present corruption; He was perfect in the
expectation of his reward, but yet imperfect being tired under the great
conflict, and encounter that he had with the opposers of the Gospel of Truth;
complete perfection he professed not, much less may others, so far inferior
unto so great, and most illustrious a Saint, as Saint Paul was.

3. Works meritorious, as they must be our own and perfect, so also (in their
sense) Indebita, more than due, super-erogatory transcending the Command;
whereas (proud Catharists and brittle pot-sherds as they are) they might
observe what the great Lawgiver has declared in that Case, Luke 17.10. When
we have done all that we are able to do, we remain still most defective, and
most unprofitable servants, and have at the utmost (if we could reach to that)
done but duty.

4. Lastly, Works meritorious must be proportionata ad mercedem, exactly
proportionable unto the just Reward; but surely if (as they cannot) our
Passions, and q Romans 8.18.
Sufferings cannot equal the Reward, much less can our Actions, or our
imperfect doings; sweetly sings the Psalmist. God Crowns indeed, but it is
in his own mere mercy, and loving kindness, not for any possible desert in the
primest Creature; Meritum meum miseratio Domini. Bern.
yea, it is a maxim in the very Schoolmen themselves, That Principium meriti
prius est merito, and that principlum is Gods free Grace, Mercy, favor.

So, then, ^naer.
yield all this: But, How then is it free, and yet a Reward of justice.

Answ. Answ.
Some answer thus, namely, by understanding Justice, in this Text, of Gods
Fidelity, and faithfulness in keeping promise, as in that Text, 1 John. 1.9.
where (...), are joined together, if we confess our sins, God is faithful and
Just to forgive us our sins: And in this sense, (rightly apprehended) its
true indeed, to say that its Debita merces, A reward of Debt, because God has,
after a sort, bound himself by his own promise to give it unto us; Promittendo
se fecit Debitorem, faith r S Aug. de verb. Apost. Sermon. 16. Debtor Deus
factus est, No^ aliquid a nobis accipiendo, sed quod ^ipl^cuit promittendo illo
ergo modo possumus exigere Dominum nostrum ut dicamus, Read quod promifi^ti,
quia fccimus quod Jussi^ti, and hoc to fecisti, qui labor^ntes juvistiNan
dicimus Deo, Read, ^uia accepisti; sed read quia promisisti, Cron. Die^eric
Dn 9 post. Trin. in Fine.
Augustine, he has made himself a Debtor to his Church by promise, in which
only regard it is, that we may exigere Dominum, as he speaks, urge and press
the Lord upon his word, so we read the Church under affliction did, Jer. 14.21.
Remember, break not thy Covenants with us; (...) are herewith, Neh. 1.8. Deuteronomy.
9.5. Others more directly give us this answer; AEternal life, is in respect of
us, (...), a mere Gratuity, or free gift; But in respect of the personal merit
of Christ, its a reward of Justice; The Lord Christ Jesus having purchased unto
all his true Believers, by his Humiliation and Obedience, this Crown of their
Imputative righteousness, how imperfect soever their own personal Righteousness
was: And from this title of the Lord, his being a righteous Judge, all his
faithful Servants may assuredly rest upon the Infallibility of the reward of
their Service and Fidelity, since the Lords own word, Equity and faithfulness is
engaged for it; surely he is faithful who has promised, Heb. 10.23. nor can he
fail or deny himself, 2 Timothy 2.13. Yea, he himself is our shield and our
exceeding great reward; Genesis 15.1. and indeed in enjoying God, we enjoy all
happiness, and soul-satisfying Contentation; wherefore its not impertinently
observed by the Hebrews, that in the Essential Name of God (...) all the
letters are Liter^e quiescentes, Letters of Rest, to denote, and without God
there can be no solid joy, or quietness of Soul, which will still be tossed in
a kind of restless inconsistency, till it do indeed terminate at last in him;
which made that man, so much after Gods own heart (as in a flame of servent
zeal) experimentally to put the question, Psalm. 73.25. Whom have I in Heaven
but thee? and there is none upon earth that I desire besides thee.

The next particular that falls under my consideration is the time of donation,
when this Reward is to be actually conferred, expressed to be [in that day, and
at the Lords appearing.]

These s 1 Timothy 4.1. and 2 Timothy 3.1.
latter times, into which the t 1 Cor: 10.11.
ends of the world are fallen, abounding (as men in old age) with variety of u
Mundus senescens patitur pha^tasias, Gerson.
phancies, have given us occasion to enquire, what day of the Lords appearance
it is, which is here meant? whether it be the great and w Act 2: 20.2 Tit. 4: ^.
notable day of the x Ioh: 6, 39, 40, 44.
last general Judgment; or else of some other manifestation of the Lord Christ
upon earth, before that last day of all does come?

There are some (otherwise abundantly knowing) whose wits have herein proved
more wanton, than their Judgment sollid, whose apprehensions have led them to
conjecture, if not to believe an appearance of the Lord Christ personally, in a
way of reign and triumph, to be manifested upon earth a thousand years before
the last day of the General Judgment: such, in the Greek expression, are called
Chiliasts, and by the Latins, y Vid. Aug. lib. 20. De Civ. Dei c. 7 and
Philastr, c 59. De Here Is. and Aug. De Here Is. c 8.
Millenaryes: some have fetched the name, and conceit so high as from z Eusebius.
1: 3: c: 25. Histor. Ecclesiast.
Cerinthus, a Blasphemous Heretic; even in the days of the Apostles
themselves, who daringly avouching the Lord Christ to be no more than a mere
man, and born after the common way of humane generation (which gave occasion to
Saint John, that soaring a Ezekiel. 1.10,
Eagle, to write that his so sublime Gospel, wherein, in the very b Ioh. 1.1,
2. etc.
entrance of it (He proves his Divine Nature) He gave out that after the
resurrection, there should be in the great City Jerusalem, an outward way of
pomp, and a kind of voluptuous indulgence to corporal vanities, and delights
during the term of a thousand years; which opinion he was thought to have
sucked from the breasts of the Jewish Synagogue, that people mistaking the
nature and quality of Christ's c Mat. 20.21: Act. 1.6.
Kingdom, thinking it to be after an external glory, and not (as it is indeed)
consisting d Luke 17.21.
within, in the soul, after a e Rom, 14: 17:
spiritual manner, ruling and reigning over the spiritual part of man: but this
Blasphemer being exploded, and cried down by all the Primitively-Orthodox
Fathers, and Christians, as the Histories of those Times inform us.

The next, who most clearly speak of it, or was, indeed, supposed the first who
more directly vented the opinion, was one Papias Bishop of Hieropolis, as f
Eusc^. 1.3. c. 36. Eccl. Hist.
Eusebius acquaints us, a man of a weak and slender judgment, who if not
utterly neglecting, yet but slightly valuing the Authority of the Holy
Scriptures, pretended for his conceit, Apostolical Traditions; and by reason of
the venerable name of Antiquity, it is not to be denied, but that some of the
ancient Fathers received some tang of the same opinion from him, as may be
seen, or collected of g Justin: Martyr, Dialog. Gum Triphon Jud. page 239.
Justin Martyr, and in the end of Trajans time h Baron. in Annal: Ann. 128.
sect 2. and Hieron. in Cataleg illustr. cap. de Papia.
Apollinarius, i Tertal. ill 3 advers. Marc. c. 24.
Tertullian (too much misled by Montane and k Lactant. 1.7 c. 24. Institut.
Lactantius) who were in part spiced with this Millenarisme; so perilou a
thing, it proves to the Supine, and out of a secure or careless disregard, to
suffer Humane Tradition to become a Diotrephes, and to have the l 3 Epist. John
9.
pre-eminence above the infallibity of the undoubted Scriptures; which sacred,
and unerring written Word of God does hold forth (as of certain credibility
inspired by the Divine, and first verity that can never deceive) no such clear
truth, that the Lord Christ shall in Person before the General Resurrection,
come visibly, and corporally upon the earth, and as by a m Re: 20.6.
first resurrection cause all those who died n Re. 14.13.
in, and for him, to arise, and with him in a peaceful tranquillity, and glory
to reign, and to bear sway over the wicked, as Vassals, for a thousand years;
which date of time being expired, immediately shall ensue the General
Resurrection, and the day of the last Judgment. No such evidential verity is
demonstrated in Holy Writ, as of Absolute Necessity to be believed unto
salvation: But whatsoever is alleged out of the propherick Scriptures for the
stablishing of that opinion, is to be understood, either of the first coming of
Christ in the flesh, or of the state of the N.T. in general; or else, of the
glorious estate of the Church triumphant to be expected hereaster in the
eternal Kingdom for ever in Heaven, as o Ioh. Gerard. loc com. To. 9. c 7
sect. 80.
Gerard judiciously: I have not time to allege, or you patience to hear, on
this occasion, the several Texts cited by the Chiliasts, or of the Orthodox;
many p See Bish. Hall in his Revealtion. unrevealed, edi t 1650, D. Pride. sermon.
on 2 Pet. 3.13. and sermon. on Joh. 6.14. Per. Them. of Probl. vid. Dieter. In
die. fest. Bar. Ap. p 7.14 etc. vol. 4. Bull. 1.2. c. 11. contr. Anapaht. and
sixth Senens. 1.6. Annot. 347.
reverend, and renowned Divines have eased us all of that labor; let it
suffice, at the present, to take notice, from our Saviors own lips, that his
Kingdom is not of this world, John 18.36. but within us, Luke. 17.21. and from
Heaven; and besides, we find, in our Creed (which is founded on the Scriptures,
and may in every article thereof be q Art. 6. of the Chapter of England
proved by them) we find, I say, in our Creed, mention made but of two visible
comings of Christ, the first in r Phsl. 1: 8. Mat. 21.5.
Humility to suffer, and to be judged; the other, at the end of the world (but
not before) in the s 2 Pet. 1.17.
glory of his Father, to t Acts 17.31: 2 Timothy 4: 1.1 Pet. 4.5.
judge the world, both quick and dead in righteousness; and unto them that look
for him, faith the great Apostle, shall he appear, the [ u See my Sermon,
styled The Grand Assizes, page 37. ed it. 16 53. preached at Winchester.
second] time, without sin, that is, without suffering any more as a sacrifice
for sin unto salvation, Heb. 8.28.

Leaving then those Millenarian conjectures to such as abound with leisure;
rest we in the solid determination of Orthodox, and stable judgments, who
resolve by the day, and by the appearing here mentioned in this text, to be
meant the last great day of the general Judgment, according to that Scripture,
Acts. 17.31. and the Lord Christ his second w 2 Timothy 4: 1.
coming upon that day, in Mat. 25: 31.
glorious Majesty, unto the judgment of all the world: so that however; those
who x 1 Timothy 5.17.
labor in the Word and Doctrine, meet often with so great discouragements,
that they seem to labor all in vain, and spend their strength for naught, as
the Prophet speaks, Isa. 46.4. yet surely their Judgment is with the Lord, and
their work; that is, the reward of their work is with the Lord; his goodness is
laid up for them; O how great! Psalm. 31.19. In the mean time, let it be our
delight and contentment that we y Mat. 24: 46.
do our Masters work, not as by constraint, but z Pet. 5.2.
willingly; since indeed such a virtuous service ever carries its own reward
with it, as being a thing to be desired, and embraced for its own worth; and
certainly that sweet comfort, and complacency that a righteous soul finds in
the sincere discharge of this duty (within its proper station) in conscience of
God, is infinitely more valuable than all the a Heb. 11.25.
treasures the earth can afford without it; only, as the Husbandman, we may not
anticipate the season of the Harvest, but we must b Iam. 5.7.
wait, and then in due time, we shall reap, if we fant not, Gal. 6.9. Heb.
10.36.37. and when the reward actually comes, it (being so large) will
abundantly recompense all our work, yea, end all our patience too; since the
manner of it will be the more manifest, and conspicuous before all in that
great day, when c Rev. 20.12.
all, of all sorts, both great and small, shall, upon the general summons,
stand before the last Tribunal, and then upon the appearance of the Chief
Shepherd, we shall raceive a Crown of Glory that fades not away, 1 Pet. 5.4.

Hereof S. Paul had a particular assurance in his own person, when he faith,
Henceforth is laid up for [me] a Crown of Righteousness, and if for him, why
may it not be also possible for others to be in like manner assured of the
same, especially provided, that we are such as do love his appearing?

This question, I confess, is solid, yet such, as wants not its intricacies:
The Roman Catholics in this controversy are wont to resolve thus, that indeed
for so great a Saint, as S. Paul was, this assurance might be possible, yea,
was attained to by Revelation extraordinary; by means of his sides
privilegiata, his special and privileged faith, which as an Apostle, and a d
Act. 9.15.
chosen vessel of honor, he was endowed and adorned withal from Heaven; for
that God had a great e 2 Timothy 4.17.
service for him to do, who was selected, as it were, to take up the Gauntlet
in the quarrel of the Gospel; against the manifold, fierce, and potent f 1 Cor.
16.9.
Adversaries of the same; so that (as I said in the beginning) to steel his
resolution with the greater courage, he was fortifyed beforehand, and armed
with an extraordinary assurance of a glorious reward, after his work and
warfaring therein was over: Quer.
But now, whether this assurance be possible for an ordinary Christian, by the
use of ordinary lawful means to attain, is the next disquisition? To which the
resolution is affirmative; the thing is possible, Answer.
though confessedly very difficult: and this possiblity is both Certitudine
Objecti, and also Certitudine Subjecti; both, as it is sure in its self, as it
is determined by God; and likewise, in the particular evident, and special
experience of the same in the soul of a true believer: and this is proved,
partly from those Scriptures, which exhort unto a diligent endeavor after it,
2 Pet. 1.10.2 Cor. 13.5. Now, the nature of Evangelicall precepts, and
exhortations, in a contradistinction to those of the Law, is, that they carry a
spirit, a secert energy, virtue, and power with them, inabling, through grace,
unto observation, therefore the Gospel is called g John 6.63.
life and spirit, 2 Cor. 3.6. and I can do all things through Christ that
strengthens me, Phil. 4.13. partly also, this is proved from one principal end
of the spirits Donation; his being given us, namely, That we may know the
things that are freely given unto us of God, and to co-witness with our
spirits, that we are his Sons and Daughters, 1 Cor. 2.12. Romans 8.16. 1 John
5.13. Thirdly, from the duties required of us, upon this account, as, Thank
fullness, Ephesians. 1.3. Col. 1.12, 13. What wise man will give thanks for that,
which he has no certainty that he does enjoy? this were for a man to boast of
a h Prove. 25: 14.
false gift, as of a i Iud. v. 12.
cloud without water: so likewise of Love, we love God, because he first loved
us, 1 John 4.19. in so freely giving his Son to us, John. 3.16. and together
with him all things that do accompany salvation, Romans 8.32. even to the Author
of life and salvation unto all that obey him, Heb. 5.9. And how come we to know
of all this love, but by that experimental proof thereof, that is shed abroad
in our hearts by the Holy Ghost, which is given unto us? Romans 5.5. And lastly,
by the examples of Saints that have had this assurance in themselves, as Job
19.25. (...) and here, in my Text, Saint Paul, which eminent Saints were not
set forth in Holy Writ, as Wonders, merely to be gazed at, but as Patterns of
imitation; and though ordinary Christians and Saints cannot reach to the same
steps, yet they may walk in the same path, and may possibly attain, though not
to the same measures, yet to the same soundness of persuasion; and indeed, as a
reverened k B. King, lect. 38. on Joan.
Divine observes its firmness, rather than fullness of assurance, (namely, in
respect of adherence, or of recumbency) that the Saints in this life arrive
unto, but to this firmness they may come by the use of the ordinary, and of the
right means, as here St. Paul did, by fighting the good fight, by finishing his
course, and by keeping the faith; hereby, as by the ordinary means, be
concluded (therein likewise showing us an example) that from henceforth there
was a Crown of Righteousness laid up in Heaven for him, yea, and for all others
with himself, who loved the appearing of the Lord Jesus.

But, though it be (cautionately understood) thus possible; notwithstanding it
is very difficult, and hard to be attained, and that for many weighty, and
important reasons. As,

First in regard of the difficulty to put a distinction between seeming
Virtues, and real Graces, which are the signs, and fruits of Election, and
which give the best evidence of glory; so that there needs much discussion, and
an exact Spirit of l Phil. 1.9, 10.
Discerning, to put a Difference, and to discriminate the one from the other;
yea, we are to take notice, that there are many Vices near of Fallit. enim
vitium pronimitate, boni.
kin to many Virtues, and carry in semblance, a near affinity, as it were, with
them; There is, faith devout Bernard a a minium vertutis, a certain kind of
Vermilion, wherewith Satan paints over the outside of Vices, and makes them
show like Virtues, and but by an E^ and an Heart m Heb. 5.14.
exercised in piety hardly discernable each from the other; thus ^ttery
sometimes carries the style of affability; Covetousness of Frugality; Rashness
of Fortitude; a Divellish Matchiavelisme of a lawful policy; excess and riot,
of good fellowship; and under this mistake of judgment, that is taken for
zeal, which is nothing but an impetuous n 2 Timothy 3.4.
headiness, or a fiery kind of vehemence, that instead of heating the house, is
apt to burn it; Thus in short, presumption passes often for Faith, this being
the o Ier. 17 9.2 Cor. 11.3.
guile of our hearts, and Satan complying with it, (who can tansform himself
into an p 2 Cor. 11.14.
Angel of Light) and set a fair gloss upon naughty wars, making the tinsel of
Hypocrisy to pass for the Silver of sincerity, we must not too much ^ely upon
our q Prove. 1.5.
own Judgments in this matter, but bring things to the r 1 These. 5.21.
beam of the Sanctuary, and there s Rom 12.2.
prove and weigh them; the Word of God ever gives a right Judgment, and the
searching hereinto, John. 5.39. t Act. 17.11.
and examining of these matters, hereby requiring great deliberation, this
makes the assurance difficult, when the Evidence is perplexed, and not
presently cleared.

Secondly, its hard, in regard of the plenty of Lusts, and of the u Gal. 5.19.
works of the flesh, which too much over-grow, and abound in every man's Heart;
but graces are but rare, and come up thin, much chaff and little solid grain;
our graces are like Gid^ons Army, but a handful in comparison, but our fins are
like Midianites, w Judge. 7.21.
Innumerable as Grasshoppers; Hipps and Hawes (faith one) grow in every hedge,
when choycer fruits are but in some few Gardens; and every soil almost yields
stone, and rubbish, but Gold and precious stones are found in very few places;
now Saint Peter, who exhorts to give diligence to make Election sure, exhorts
also, 2 Pet. 1.5, 6. to add to Faith, Virtue, to Virtue Knowledge, etc. a large
enumeration, induction of graces is required to clear up this assurance, and
certainly that is a matter of no ease.

Thirdly, (that I may hasten) this is difficult, in regard of the great
progress, that an Hypocrite, or a Castaway, may make in the ways of
Christianity, and yet never attain to this assurance; He may have some degrees
of Illumination, Heb. 6.4. much like a Coruscation, that a sudden flash of
Lighting makes in the Air; He may have good wishes as Balaam, Numbers 23.10.
A sight of sin as Cain had, Genesis 4.13. Confess sin as Judas did, Mat. 27.4.
have zeal as Jebu had, 2 Kings 10.16. in these, and in like other gifts may a
very Castaway make a great progress; But no child of God can have any real
comfort in any thing, wherein he cannot say, he has (yet) therein gone beyond
a Castaway; and yet, but in the ground, or rule, or end of doing, these things
are hardly discernable each from other: All which, and much more that might be
added to the same purpose, show, though not the utter impossibility, yet surely
the very great difficulty of attaining unto the assurance, that a man can say,
as S. Paul does here, in a particular application unto his soul, Christ loved
[me] and gave himself for [me,] and henceforth is laid up for x Gal. 2.10.
[ me] a Crown of Righteousness.

There yet remains but one Pearl more in the Cabinet of this Text, which I
shall only offer to your short notice, and so conclude; it is that due
qualification which renders other Christians, as well as it did S. Paul,
capable of the Crown of Righteousness; they must be such, as who do love the
Lord Christ's second appearing in the day of Judgment. And, indeed, it is the
property of none but Saints, to love it, and long for it. See Phil. 1.23. Rev.
22.20. Amen even so come Lord Jesus.

Some cautions, notwithstanding, must be here remembered, since it is possible
that times may fall out, when we tremble at the thought, or mention of it; as
when conscience is wounded afresh with some gross act of sin: this made David
afraid, yea, to roar out, and to make a noise through the disquietness of his
spirit, Psalm. 38.8. Psalm. 55.2. and, under that state of soul, to beg
earnestly to be spared, that he might recover strength (in Gods favor) before
he went hence, and was no more, Psalm. 39.13. or else, when the Lord shall, for
diverse ends and reasons, surcharge the soul and conscience with the sins of
youth, for which, perhaps, men have not, as became them, been sufficiently
humbled; thus, dealt he even with his servant Job, writing bitter things
against him, Job 13.26. see also Job 16.4.

But, out of those cases, it is proprium quarto medo, only the Saints love it,
all such love it, and always: and no marvel, since by this second coming, and
appearance of Christ in the day of the last Judement, they receive very great
and inestimable benefits, such as are final Redemption of the Body from
corruption, Romans 8.23. Freedom from the society of the wicked, which here y
Psalm. 119.136.
afflict the godly by their violation of Gods Law and Precepts; Deliverance,
not only from the z Rom 6 12.
reign, and a Psalm. 19.13.
dominion, but even from the inhabitation and being of sin, which here they
find as a clogg, and a b Psalm. 38 4.
burden too c Mat. 11.28.
heavy for them; and so long to be rid of it, Romans 7.24. and lastly, the
beatifical d 1 Ioh. 3.2.
vision, and perfect fruition of the ever-blessed, and all-glorious Trinity, in
the e Heb. 12.2, 23, 14.
Heavenly Hieru salem, among the innumerable company of Angels, being admitted
to the general Assembly, and Church of the firstborn, which are enrolled and
written in Heaven, and to God the Judge of all, and to the spirits of just men
made perfect, and to Jesus the Mediator of the New Covenant; in whose presence
there is fullness of joy, and at whose right hand are pleasures for evermore.

And thus, my brethren, after my measure, as I could (upon so short notice of
about a day) though not so full after my desires, as I would, in so great, so
learned, and serious an Auditory, have I dispatched my discourse upon the
Scripture; your candor will, I hope, connive at the want of polishing, and
entertain it as it is, according to the weight, and importance off the matter
of it: And may the g 1 Pet. 5 10.
God of grace reap the Total h 1 Timothy 1.17.
glory. Amen.

FINIS.

