A FOUNTAIN OF TEARS Emptying it self into three Rivelets, viz of 1
Compunction. 2 Compassion. 3 Devotion.
Or Sobs of nature sanctified by grace. Languaged in several Soliloquies, and
Prayers, upon various Subjects, for the benefit of all that are in affliction;
and particularly in these distressed times of war.

By John Featley Chaplain to his Majesty and sometimes preacher in the Island
St. Christophers.

Ier: 9.1. O that mine head were waters, and mine eyes a Fountains of tears,
that I might weep day and night for the slain of the daughter of my people.

AMSTERDAM. Printed for JOHN CROSS English Bookseller i^ the Calver-streete,
ne^re the English Church, 1646.

To the ROYAL MAJESTY of Our DREAD SOVEREIGN CHARLES By the grace of God KING
of GREAT BRITTAIGNE FRANCE and YRELAND, etc.

And To the RIGHT HONORABLE the LORDS and COMMONS assembled in PARLIAMENT, the
unworthy Author humbly dedicateth these his weak Endeavors.

To the Reader.
Christian.
THou art here invited to thy punishment; yet such as is intended for thy
profit. Blame me not for the former, lest thou partakest not of the latter.
Noe chastening for the present seems to be joyous, but grievous: Heb: 12 11.
never-the-lesse afterward it yields the peaceable fruit of righteousness,
unto them which are exercised thereby. I have labored to accompany thee in
all thy sadness; Cant. 2 5.
and therein to Stay thee with flagons, yea with flagons full of that re-viving
wine which comes from the true Vine: Io: 15.1. Prove. (...) 25.11.
and to comfort thee with apples, even with words fitly spoken, which
(according to King Solomon) are like apples of gold in pictures of silver. True
it is that in this little book (as in the roll of the book sent to Ezekiel)
are written Lamentations, and Mourning, and Woe: Eze: 2.9.
but it is not my fault. All these words seemed to be pronounced unto me by
the mourners in Zion, Ier. 3^ 18.
and I wrote them with ink in the book. So long as we are sinful, we must
be sorrowful: I have but languaged thy sighs, and lent a tongue to thy Sobs
(if thou art such as I aim at) and endeavored to rectify thy Tears. Thou
art here entertained at David's Ordinary: Ps. 42.3
His tears were his meat day and night. I hope thou will not think that I
dishonor thee, when I seat thee with a King.

I was first invited to this task by the moanes of a gracious and virtuous
gentlewoman, Mris: Elizabeth Keate, wife of Mr. Gilbert Keate, a grave and
eminent Citizen of London.
who much complained that her sex was so much neglected by Divines, that they
had not penned devotions for all their several sufferances that are common to
many: only here and there she found a few small gleanings proper for some
occasions of grief. It is about five years since I took her complaint to be
a kind of command, and settled my self to the work: yet (although I hastened
it with what speed I could (considering my constant course of preaching) the
same day that I finished my book, 2. Tim. ^.7.
she finished her course. Noe sooner had I ended mourning out this Fountain
of Tears in my study, then I was sent for to her sad house of mourning: where,
(having given her a relish of many of these Soliloquies and Prayers,
especially of those which are fitted for the dying) she thanked me for them as
long as she lived: for even after that her tongue was ensnared in the jaws of
death, what she could not by language she expressed by signs. From her father
she brought a name with her into the world, which could not choose but put her
in mind of the power of the All-mighty, Bra^fort or Armestrong, an ancient and
noble family in Nottinghamshire; in which Countle her worthy father did live
at Rem stone. 1. Cor. 15.25. 1. Pet: 3.7. 1. Ki^ 18
who in Psalm: 89.10. is said to have scattered his enemies with his
Strong-Arme: and by the same power which the mosthigh vouchsafed her, she
overcame the last enemy which was to be destroyed. For her dear sake these
Soliloquies and Prayers were fitted for Females, and taught to speak in the
persons of the Weaker vessels. I hope noe Man will blame me for it: for it is
but changing the gender according to the sex, and the book may be useful
unto both. When first I began to pen it, there arose but a little cloud, like
a man's hand; this Devout mourner then grieving chiefly out of jealousy that
either her Tears were not enough for her sins; or not seasoned enough with
the sanctifying grace of the blessed Spirit. Then her Heart was complained of:
next, her lost time was bemoaned. But afterward by degrees the whole heaven was
black with clouds and wind (her eyes were full laden with tears, verse 45
and her heart with sighs) and there was a great rain. For her house was
visited with the pestilence, and shut up by her own appointment: One of her
sweet and tender children, and a gracious Matron Cosyn unto her, dyed of that
uncomfortable disease: And her weak self all this while was moulting and
crumbling away in a Consumption. At length upon her white, thinn, and sinking
cheeks the characters of her tears (which were firm evidences of her
unfeigned repentance) not being fully dry; a little dust was thrown upon them,
and then she was laid up in the Cabinet of her grave.

To that work then finished I have added nothing but those tears which are
shed in these distracted times of an Unnatural War: and I hope that addition
will not be unfruitful; I am sure (and I grieve not a little that I am so sure)
it is not unseasonable. For mine own part, I have not been without my portion
of sufferances in these stormy times; Number. 27.14. Ps. 106 32. Ex: 15.23. Ps:
104 3.
and drinking a deep draught of these waters of Meribah, these waters of
strife, by my taste they relish like the waters of Marah. I could here call to
mind how upon the wings of the wind fleeing from one danger, I have been
involved in thousands. The boisterous and churlish swelling of a rough and
troublesome Severne, full of un-expected turnings and windings, carrying us
far to sea, was the cause of embalning two of my dear children in the salt
ocean: and was like to have proved the ruin of four more of them, besides the
beloved wife of my bosom; but it pleased God at last that all (except those
two) came safe to land. Ps: 74.20.
The dark and remote places of the earth, which are full of the habitations of
cruelty, entertained me with vexatious troubles, and pining sickness. In mine
absence from my divided country one of the brightest burning and shining
lights of our Church, went out in a dampe. D.D.F.
A man dear to me not only because an uncle by alliance, but also because
my chiefest and safest Oracle among men whilst he lived; and a friend, Deuteronomy:
13.
which was as mine own soul; the sad loss of whom still does, and still
will sit cold and heavy upon my wounded heart. Some comfort indeed I have in
that sweet odor he left behind him, from whence every. Christian may receave
an Aromatic perfume of learned profit and content; yea even those who too
unkindly were the cause of putting salt water upon that sweet wax, whereby
the Tapour was extinguished. To these losses and afflictions I might add many,
many more; beside my present condition among strangers and forrainers; and my
continual heartquakes at the strickt menaces of the ruin and Desolation of my
poor, bleeding, gasping country. Yet while there is life there is hope; even
that he who has made our land to tremble, Ps. 60.2
and has broaken it, will in his own due time heal the breaches thereof, for
it shakes.

In this Manual thou shall find noe Author quoted, but the Best of all; and
noe language but English. The whole book is in thy mother tongue; and all the
proofs (excepting a very few) are Scripture. Luc: 23 ^8.
The weeping daughters of Jerusalem love best to be comforted in the language
of Canaan, Is. 19.18.
Here I ^ould an Ewer, nay a Fountain of ^ater to those that need it for the
re^eshing of their souls: yet I hinder ^ne from turning their own Cocks, ^d
letting them run. If any con^emne the work as needless in these rightest
times (for so they are ^ought to be) set forms of prayers be^g by many dashed
quite out of coun^mance: let them know that these are ^t intended for them, but
for those ^ho do need, and will use them. I ^nfine not any to these Forms:
nor ^e I deny them to any who shall wil^ngly accept them, In them thou have ^e
helpe^ ^f many choice places of ^cripture (...) for thy several occasi^s;
which ^eradventure otherwise would not be so ready at hand when ^ou should
stand in need of them. Whatsoever throughout the whole ^ooke thou find
good, know that (...) is Gods; and now made thine as well as mine: bless him
for it. What thou ^ndest here amiss (except the faults of the press) I
confess it mine; yet neither wittingly, nor willingly is it mine: howsoever
charge it to mine account. Do thou friendly reckon with me, and I will
thankfully satisfy thee: and be sure to remember that as it is thy duty to be
thankful for the best, so thou ought to be charitable in thy censure of the
rest. Consider what I say, 2. Tim. 2.7.
and the Lord give thee understanding in all things.

Thy servant in him Phil: 2.7.
who took upon him the form of a servant for us, JOHN FEATLEY.
From my house in Flushing: April 17. 1646.
A Table of the particular contents.
THe First subject. Tears of Godly sorrow, or devout Melancholy wherein a
flexible disposition apt to weep employeth those Tears in a Sorrow for sin.
The Soliloquie. p. 1 The Prayer. p. 7
Tears from the Heart The Soliloquie confistnig of 3 parts, viz: 1 The
wickedness of a corrupted heart. p. 11 2 Alamentation for the loss of an
honest heart. p. 23 3 Grief for an old and sinful heart; and an earnest
desire of a righteous new one. p. 35
The Prayer. p. 45
Tears of Time. The Soliloquie consisting of 3 parts viz: 1 A Revieuw of the
time past. p. 48 2 A Consideration of the time present. p. 64 3 A Resolution
for the time to come. p. 75
The Prayer. p. 83
Tears in the night. The Soliloquie Divided into 3 parts, fitted for the time.
1 Immediately before going to bed, p. 85 Evening Prayer. p. 98 2 Of lying down
in the bed. p. 100 3 Of awaking in the night. p. 111

Tears in the Day, Divided into 3 parts, and fitted for the time. 1 Of awakng
early in the morning. p. 123 2 Of being newly risen. p; 136 The morning
Prayer. p. 146 3 Of preparing to go to dinner. p. 149

Tears of Compassion in time of prosperity. The Soliloquie, treating of
earthly riches and the rewar^ of Charity. p. 161 The Prayer. p. 18^
7 Tears in time of adversity in 4 Soliloquies, treating of 1 A decayed estate
or plenty turned into poverty. p. 18^ 2 The prayer. p. 204. 2. Hunger both
corporal, and sp^rituall. p. 208 The prayer. p. 23^ 3 Thirst both bodily and
ghostly. p. 23^ The Prayer p. 24^ 4 Nakedness both of the Outward and Inwar^
man. p. 249 The Prayer. p. 260
8 A Virgin's Tears. The Soliloquie. p. 26^ The Prayer. p. 27^
9 Tears of a Married woman, Soliloquie treating of the duties of a wife to
her husband. p. 275 the prayer. p. 29^
10 Tears of an Aged woman p. 293 The prayer. p. 307
11 Tears of a Barren woman. p. 311 The prayer. p. 321
12 Tears of a Childbearing woman. 1 At the time when thee begins to fall
in travel 2 After her delivery.
The soliloquie consisting of 3 parts 1 The Cause of the forrow, and the
confidence of the sorrowing. p. 324 2 The greatenesse of the pangs, hazards,
and fears of a Traveling woman. p. 332 3 Consolation, and comfort for a woman
in the bitterness of her Travel. p. 340
The prayer. p. 343
2 Tears of a woman after her delivery from the pains of childbearing. p. 346
The Prayer p. 351
13 Tears in time of Pestilence, The Soliloquy consesting of 6 several parts
-- treating of. 1 Mourning by example, in a public calamity. p. 354 2 Several
causes of gods visitations. p. 368 3 Sin especially the cause of the
pestilence. p. 381 4 Several examples of dreadful Pestilences. p. 388 5 Gods
threatening before his visitation. p. 395 6 The duty of a Christian decreeing to
whom and for whom we ought to pray in time of Pestilence. p. 403
The Prayer. p. 413
^4 Tears of her whose house is shutt up for the Pestilence, The Soliloquy. p.
420 The Prayer. p. 431
^5 Tears of her who is visited with the Pestilence, being. 1 Either wounded
with a Sore. p. 437 2 Or marked with the tokens. p. 445 The prayer. p. 455
^6 Tears of a Mother for the sickness of her child, the Soliloquie. p. 461
The Prayer. p. 469
^7 Tears of a Mother for the death of her child, The Soliloquie. p. 473 The
Prayer. p. 480
^8 Tears of a Wife for the sickness of her husband, The Soliloquie. p. 484
The Prayer. p. 492
^9 Tears of a woman lamenting the death of her beloved husband, the
Soliloquie. p. 495 the prayer. p. 506
^0 A woman's Tears at the Funeral of her husband, the Soliloquie. p. 510 The
Prayer. p. 528
^1 Tears of a woman in the state of Widdow-hood, the Soliloquie. p. 531 The
Prayer. p. 543
^2 Tears of an Orphan at the death of her father, The Soliloquie. p. 545 The
Prayer. p. 561
^3 Tears for the death of a beloved Friend or Brother, The Soliloquie. p. 563
the Prayer. p. 573
^4 Tears in a Cousumption or any languishing sickness, the Soliloquie
consisting of 3 parts. 1 a complaint and description of the manner of the
sease. p. 575 2 The cause of the Malady. p. 581 3 The hope of recovery. p. 592
The Prayer. p. 605
25 Tears of a Mother on her deathbed blessing her children. The Soliloquie
Consisting of two parts viz: 1 Her preparation to bless them. p. 609 2 The
blessing it self, ending in a Prayer. p. 616

26 Tears of a dying Woman, wherein is set down her Religious exercises. 1 a
Soliloquie in which is set forth 1 a desire of life. p. 627 2 Certainty of
death. p. 637
2 A godly preparation against the minuit of death. p. 644 3 A Prayer of the
Sick. p. 654 4 The Consolation of the godly in the hour of death. p. 658 5
The Resignation of the foul into the hands of God. p. 664
27 Tears in the distressed time of Civil Wars. The Soliloquie, Containing a
Patheticall, and grievous Lamentation for the present distractions both in our
Church and Commonwealth by reason of these cruel and most bloody wars. p. 669
The First prayer wherein is set down. 1. Gods Justice in punishing his own
people in former times. 2 His Justice also in the present punishing us for our
offenses. 3 An earnest supplication for our repentance and his forgiveness. p.
701
The second Prayer consisting of. 1 A doleful complaint of our grievous
Calamities. 2 An humble desire of the Remission of our sins. 3 A fervent
supplication for righteousness and peace. p. 713
The third Prayer, wherein the Lord is humbly implored that our bloody battles
may be turned into a spiritual war fare. p. 722

FINIS.
THE FIRST SVBJECT Tears of godly sorrow, or Devout Melancholy: wherein, a
flexible disposition apt to weep, imployeth those Tears in a sorrow for sin.
The sanctified Ejaculation to precede each several meditation, and prayer.
Psalm. 5. verse. 1. Give ear to my words, o Lord; consider my meditation.

verse. 2. Hearken unto the voice of my cry, my king, and my God; for unto thee
will I pray.

THE MEDITATION.
WHy art thou so full of heaviness, Ps: 42.6
o my soul; and why art thou so disquieted within me? What, nothing but
tears? Nothing ^ut sighs, and throbs of a trembling soul? Grief without
cause is madness; and without moderation it is hopeless. I must ^herfore
look into the cause, and hope it is Religion that raises this tempest. But
let me not err in my judgment. Is my sin the cause of my sorrow? Or, do not
I rather add to my sin by the pretense of my ground? That tear of a
faithful soul which flows from the conscience of evil, purifieth the
conscience, and freeth from punishment. If the weight of my transgressions
depresseth my soul, the comforts of the Crucified shall restore me to joy, Oh,
the first cause of my blubbered eye, was that which made our parents strive to
hide them selves from the sight of our Creator. Gen 3.8.
Since that very offense, it has been a sin not to weep: and yet too much
weeping may be turned into sin. Tears are the effect of sin; and tears may be
the actours of sin. Thus even our best actions have their pollutions: and our
grief for our offenses may as well displease, as pacify the offended Deity.
But surely I grieve for mine iniquities which have incensed my Creator; and I
sorrow because I can express noe more sorrow for my faults. Thus far my
passion, then, is religion: Ps. 56.8 Lu: 7.38.
and my God shall put these tears into his bottell. Thus Mary Maydalene stood
at the feet of my Savior behind him weeping, washing his feet with her
tears, and wiping them with the hairs of her head. My sin is the ground of my
shame; and my shame enforces me to come behind that Jesus, Ier: 9 1
whom Mary thus embalmed. O that my head were waters, and mine eyes a fountain
of tears that I might thus weep day and night for the offenses which I have
committed! But do not I slander my tears? Am I not mis-taken in the cause?
God forbid. Noe cause can be so great as the greatness of my sins; and yet
even these may multiply when I most lament them. O my God, accept of the tears
which I shed for my sins: and sanctify my sorrows, that they turn not into
offenses.

Yet I find in the Scripture, other causes of laments. 2. King 20.5. Ier: 9.17.
Thus the All-mighty not only heard the prayers of Hezekiah, but saw his
tears too, when he pleaded for life. The Jews were commanded to call for the
mourning women; to make have, and take up a wayling for them, that their eyes
might run down with tears, and their eyelids gush out with water, because
the voice of wayling was heard out of Zion: the destruction of the jews was
hard at hand. Thus the Prophets eyes did fail with tears; Lam: 2.11.
his bowels were troubled; his liver was powered upon the earth for tae
destruction of Jerusalem. This grief arose from the sense of their sorrow,
That the most high was provoked by the sin of the prople. What the Jews
deser^ed may be my r^ward; and what Jerusalem expected, may be my heavy doom:
for the fame God is offended with me; and my sins have merited the height of
his vengeance. Yet the more I sin, the more he spare's, expecting some measure
of my sorrow for my boundless offenses. O let my tears be his, by a gracious
acceptance, as my sin is made his by his fathers imputation: for he alone who
wept in the garden can plead my atonement, and by the power of his passion,
restore me to comfort. Incredulity in part did trouble the man in the Gospel,
Mar: 9.14.
whose son was Possessed with a devil both deaf and dumb: yet he cried
out; and said with tears, Lord I believe, help my un-beliefe. Deafness, I
find, does hang in mine ear too, even in the house of my God; for when mine
attention is required to the words which distill from the mouth of the preacher,
even then the poison of the serpent makes me imitate the adder, refusing to
hear the voice of the charmer; Ps. 58.4 5.
When I should counsel my brethren; when I should publish the truth; when I
should confess my sins; woe is me, the string of my tongue is knitt, Iam.
3.5.
the doors of my lips are sealed up; and though mine unruly little member is
active in the language of all impiety, yet it is stricken dumb with silence
when it should publish mine enormities. Whence growe's this dumbness? whence
this deafness? Lord, should thou be so deaf to my cries, or dumb to my
heart; I should never hope for the mercies of my Redeemer. But some faith thou
have given me in the merits of his passion; do thou increase it. The seed is
thine; the planting is thine: Lord, let it flourish, that the advantage may be
mine. Mar: 13 32.
It is, as yet the least of all seeds; let it grow into a tree, that the
birds, the birds of Paradise may nest in the branches. Thou have planted it; 1.
Cor: 3.6.
my tears shall water it; do thou give the increase to it. Something I
apprehend; but it is but in a mist: Some thing I believe; but it is but dully,
it is but imperfectly, it is but weakly; Lord I believe, help my unbelief.
Mar: 9.24.
O that my tears might be so sanctified, that my grief might be a delight. I
must, I will search, enquire, find out my secret crimes those snakes that lie
hid under the green leaves of my best, my glorious actions. I know that I am
all sin, all corruption: and yet though I say that I know it, though I know
that I know it; yet enough I do not, I cannot know it. The more I prye into
it, the nearer is mine cye drawn to a narrowness: the more I pore upon it,
the sooner is mine eye tired into a dullness. Each part, each member is either
an abettour, or an actour of sin. What then shall I do? Tears I can shed; but
it is rather through the disposition of nature, then the operation of grace. I
will weep therefore, because I am so apt to grieve, when my corruption is not
truly the ground of my grief. I will punish mine eyes with tears for
shedding so many tears not grounded on a sorrow for my wickedness. Now the
spunges are full, my sins shall squeeze them. Now my windows shall be
brightened with the brine, with the lie of my tears. Come, I must mourn, for
I have found the cause, the ground of all religious grief, which I am ashamed
to own. Ps: 6.6.
Now, with David I will cry until I am weary of my groaning: every vight will
I wash my bed, and water my couch with my tears. 1. Sam: 30.4.
With David again, and the prople that were with him, pondering upon their
loss at the spoiling of Ziklag, I will lift up my voice and weep untull I
have noe more power to weep. Job 30.31.
Now, with the man of miseries, the patient Job, my harp shall be turned into
mourning, and my Organe into the voice of them that weep. C: 16.16.
My face shall be foul with weeping; and on mine eye lids shall sit the shadow
of death. Now with David again, 2. Sam. 12.22.
While the child is yet alive, the child of corruption, the monstrous,
spurious, abortive bratt of sin is alive with in me, I will fast and weep,
but in a contrary hope to that indulgent father, I will cry, who can tell
whether God will be gracious to me, verse. 22
that the child may not live; or if it live, it may but linger, but languish,
but despair of strength, or health, or life? Thus I pine: thus I grieve; and
yet, me think's I am ashamed that I do so: I am troubled that I am thus
troubled. Well; if mine eye be offended with the motes, with the dusts of sin
that fly into it, I will wash it with it is own water. If my face blush at the
punishment of the eyes, because it is childish thus to cry, I will confess it,
I will acknowledge it: thus every child, every child of my God does cry, must
cry. And if all this force not shame into my bashful cheek, for blushing at
my tears, then (with that good king Hezekiah) I will turn my face to the
wall; but I will still weep, and weeping (that my tears be not spilt, be not
lost, be not shed in vain) as that King, 2. King 20.3.
so my self (though the meanest, though the worst of subjects, of slaves) will
pray, and praying I will say.

The Prayer.
GReat God, who on the second day of thine own labor did create a firmament
in the midst of the waters, Gen: 1.6.
so now, in thy mercy, put a distinction in the waters that flow from my
troubled eyes. O let heaven divide between them, that those which dwell in the
clouds for the sins I have committed, may be distinguished from those that
arise from sin. By thy servant Ezekiel thou complainest of Jerusalem, that she
was not salted at all. Lord, Eze: 16 4.
I am salted in the brine of my tears: o let me be preserved in the love of
thee my Creator. The causes of my grief, are the offenses I have committed:
that a God so great, should be incensed by a worm; that a God so good, should
be dishonored by a miscreant. Thou art my God, though offended: thou shall
even be my God, though thou art now displeased. I have hope of pardon while I
continue thine, although I cannot choose but sin against thee, who art so
lovingly mine. The heathens themselves did sacrifice to their Gods. They had
many; I have but one. To thee that one, that holy one do I offer what thou
do require, a heart; as thou doe^ require it, broken; but not so sanctified
not so cleansed as it ought to be: Lev: 2.13.
Yet it is offered with salt, as thou requirest; even with the salt of my
tears. Dan. 9.19.
O Lord hear; o Lord have mercy; o Lord in mercy receave the cries, the
groans, the tears that flow from this burnt, this broken offering. These
tears are the blood of a penitent soul: for the blood of thy Son receave in
mercy. Number. 20.11.
The rock of my heart has been smitten with thyrod, from whence do issue
these springs of waters. Lord do thou even water my tears with the deaw of
thy grace, and mollify my heart by the strength of thy power, that both heart,
and eyes, Io: 17.6
and tears may be thine. Thine they were; and thou gave them me. Thine they
are; I give them thee. O let this rock, this heart be an altar; these eyes the
priests; and these tears the sacrifices acceptable unto thee, my Lord, and my
God. My heart is the censour and my sighs and groans the incense: Io: 20.28.
do thou buth add a sweetness thereto, and so shall it allay the
stricktnesse of thy fury. My sins, o God, have dwelt in mine eyes; but now I
have made them drunk with my tears. Thus let me ever weep: thus let me
ever grieve. It is a joy, to be thus sorrow full: it is a comfort, to be thus
distressed. Lord in every part, in every crumb of this broken heart, I find thy
merciful, thine in dulgent self. In every sigh, 1. King 9.12.
in every groan I perceave that thou my Lord art in it a soft wind. In every
tear that trickleth from mine eyes thou have a luster, thou have an
habitation. O let me ever thus live in thy favor. Let all my grief be for
offending thee; Ps. 42.3 Ps. 6.6. Ps. 80.5 Ps. 104.9.
and all my sorrow be for thy displeasure: So shall my tears (with David) be
my meat, my drink, my bread, my bath, my only joy and delight, because thou
take a delight there in. But o thou who have prescribed bounds to the seas,
which they cannot pass, neither turn again to cover the earth; so limit
these brackish seas by the power of thy grace, that they may neither sin by
excess, nor offend in the cause. Put them into thy bottle, Ps. 56.8
note them in thy book. In thy mercy, Mat. 26.38.
finish soon these days of sin, that by the merits of him that was
sorrowful in the garden, Rev. 7.17.
all tears may one day be wiped from mine eyes; all sorrows expelled, and
driven from my heart; and my soul may be received into the quire of Saints;
there to live, and reign with thee, world without end, Amen.

Tears from the heart. THE SECOND SVBJECT.
The Soliloquie consisting of three parts: viz. 1 The wickedness of a
corrupted heart. 2 A Lamentation for the loss of an honest heart. 3 Grief for
an old and sinful heart and an earnest desire of a righteous new one.

The first part. The wickedness of a corrupted Heart.
THE EjACULATION.
Ps: 5. 1. Give ear to my words, O Lord consider my meditation.

2. Hearken unto the voice of my cry, my king, and my God; for unto thee will I
pray.

THe heart is deceitful above al things, and desperately wicked; Ier: 17.9.
who can know it? says God by his Prophet. What is here? A heart? Adeceit full
heart? A heart deceitful above all things? A wicked heart? Desperately wicked?
A heart inscrutable? Lord, surely this is the just description of my heart, if
yet I have any; if I have any at all: for 't is a doubt whether I have one or
not. It is said of Ephraim, Hos: 7.11.
that she was like a silly Dove, without heart: Surely so am I too; not for
the innocence, but the simple folly of the Dove; for (like Ephraim too) I have
fled from my God. verse. 13
But why should I be so simple, as to think that I have noe heart? Do not I
feel one with in me? Yes sure; for my meat comfort's it, Gen: 18.5. Pro:
14.30. Ps: 38.19.
as Abraham desired the Angels to do by theirs. I have a sound heart which is
the life of the flesh. I know I have one; for (like David's) it pants; I can
feel it beat; and that is a good sign that I have one. I know too, by the
passions which I have in it; for I am subject to joy, and sorrow; to love, and
batred; to fear, and courage, to hope and despair: I have the seede's of all
the virtues, and vices in me: I have an understanding too, a will, and
imagination, and what not which others are endued with? Why then do I
complain that I have noe heart, when as this very complaint arises from my
heart? Alas I have a heart indeed, the heart of a woman: But I want a heart
yet, a better heart, the heart of a Christian, What Is this heart to me; this
poor, inconsiderable heart, which nature lend's me? It Is but a morsel of
thick, solid flesh, placed in the middle belly; the seat indeed of the vital
faculties; the heart that preserves the heat of the body; the spring head of
the arteries, the chief author of breathing, and working of the pulse: a poor
thing, which nature was feint to take such compassion of, as to wrap it in
clowtes, in a caul, that it might lie quiet in it 's place, and be kept from
the violence, and pressures of the neighboring members. Yea, she is feint to
dip this caul too in a kind of waterish humor, and wrap it about this heart,
least the little trifle should be so hot, or dry, that it should fall into a
swoone. What s' all this to me, as I am a Christian? This poor thing shall
have but a little time to lie panting in my breast, and then, though it be the
eldest enlivened member, and shall linger, and outlive all the rest; yet at
length it shall faint, depart, away it shall go and make a pleasant collation
for the worms in the withdrawing chamber, in the cool vault of my silent
grave; and so, even fare them well. But what then? Is this all? The very beasts
have such a dispatch; and when they are gone, there is noe more expectation of
sense, or any thing else. Surely I who am placed upon earth, as a kind of
mistress over the inferior creatures, must one day render some account to my
Lord who has thus entrusted me. When I die, I must go to another place:
Either I must be doomed to eternal misery; or else received and admitted to
unspeakeable, and everlasting content. I am not all flesh: I am some spirit.
God has not confined me to those narrow bounds of vegetation, and sense. Noe;
he has added reason to them, and made me a woman, so that, although I have a
heart common with the beast, according to sense, yet I should have another
heart too; a heart a bove either them or that; 1. Pet. 3 4. Deuteronomy. 11.16. Romans
10.10. c. 2.15. Deuteronomy: 29.4. 1. These 3.13. 2. Sam. 24.10. Deuteronomy: 29.4.
I have a reasonable soul, a mind, an understanding, a conscience; and each of
these in the scripture is termed a heart: but this, o this is that heart which
I fear I want: Want it? Yes I so want it, that either I have it not at all, or
if I have it, it is such a one, as it is worse for me, far worse then if I had
none at all. But I have none indeed. The Lord has not given me an heart to
perceave, nor eyes to ser, nor ears to hear unto thit day. When I pray, I
have none: when I read the sacred oracles of the most high, I have none: when
I go to the temple, and should attend to the instructions of the ambassadors
of Christ, I have none: when I should put in practice, what has arrived at my
knowledge, I have none: when I should confer, and discourse of God and goodness,
I have none: none at all: none in the church; none in my closet, nor in the
society of the godly: at noe time; in noe place; upon noe good occasion can I
find that I have any. Or if I have one I had as good be without it; for 't is a
dry one: for want of watering it with my tears, I find that 't is smitten
down, and withered like grass. Or 't is dead or at lest, Ps: 102 4.
just dying; at the last gasp. I have been drunk with wickedness, very
drunk, as Nabal was with wine at his kingly feast: but now I begin to grow a
little more sober, and recollect my self, 1. Sam: 25.36. verse 37 Mat: 13 15.
Ps: 119.70. Iam: 5.5. Io: 3.19 c: 9.39.
I find that my heart (like his, upon the news which his wife told him) even
dies within me, and I am become as a stone. Or if it be yet alive, 't is a
fatt one; 't is waxed gross, 't is as fatt as grease it is nourished as in the
day of slaughter; so that through the unweildines of it, and through the
destruction approaching it, I had better be without it. Or else 't is a blind
one, for it loves darkness rather then light, because the deedos there of are
evil: so that, if it could have seen, it is now stark blind. Or if it be not
blind I am sure that I am blind; I can see none of it. Hos: 13 8.
'T is true, the reason of it is, because there is a caul growe's over it, and
I have nobody to help me, as Ephraim had, to rend the caul off it, that so
I might see. 1 King. 8.38.
Or else it is an infected one; 't is visited with the sickness, with the
plague, and yet I do not know the plague of mine own heart, or else it is
wicked, and so wicked, that (like unto Shimei) I cannot learn, c: 2.44.
I do not know all the wickedness that mine heart is privy to: and if it be
thus wicked, Pro: 10.20.
I have but small comfort from King Solomon; for he tell's me, that the heart
of the wicked is little worth. So that whether my heart be dry or dead, or fatt,
or blind, or hidden, or infected with the plague, or wicked, what am I the
better for it? Nay, am I not far worse, infinitely worse rather? And yet now
I think upon it, now I examine my self a little better, I have just none at
all. True it is that once I had one; but may I not say as the Prophet did, that
whoredom, Hos: 4.11.
and wine, and new wine have taken it away? 'T is stolen away; sin has
stolen it quite away unawares of me, just as Jacob stole away un awares to
Laban or as Absalom stole away the hearts of the men of Israel from his father,
Genesis 31.20. 2. Sam. 15.6.
when they came to the King for judgment. Alas, I should have kept it in
deed, I should have kept it with all diligence, if I had taken the advice of
the wise King Solomon, Prove. 4.23. 1 These. 3.13. 2 These. 2.17. Heb: 13 9. Deuteronomy:
20.3.
for out of it are the issues of life. I should have established it; or have
begged of God, that he would have established it unblameable in holiness; that
he would have established it in every good word, and work; for it is a good
thing that the heart be established with grace. I felt it fainting when I
feared, and trembled, and was terrified: and then I should have had a David to
comfort me, and to say unto me, Ps: 31.24.
Be of good courage, and God shall strengthen thine heart, thou that hopest in
the Lord. I should have spoken kindly to it, as Shechem did to Dinah, Gen: 34 3.
when his soul clave unto her, and he loved the damosel, and spoke kindly to
her, to her heart. Prove. 27.9.
I should have rejoiced it (as Solomon says) with ointment, and perfume, with
the ointment of my tears, Rev. 5.8. Iud: 19 5.
and a golden violl full of such odours as St. John speaks of, which are the
prayers of the saints. I should have comforted it, not with a morsel of bread,
as the Levite was advised by the father of his concubine; not of, or from, or
by my self: but I should have prayed unto God, 2. Cor. 1.3.
even the father of our Lord Jesus Christ (as S. Paul did thank him for the
Corinthians) the father of mercies, and the God of all comfort, verse. 4.
to comfort it in tribulations; that I might have been able to comfort them
which are in any trouble, by the comfort wherewith I my self had been comforted
of God. It was grieved with in me, Ps: 73.24.
and I was pricked in my reins. But I should have made it like Aaron at the
sight of Moses, who was glad in his heart: Exodus: 4.14. Ps: 4.7.
or else I should have prayed to the Lord to have put gladness into it, as he
did into David's, more then in the time when the corn and wine increased. But
now, alas, 't is too late: my poor heart is gone, 't is stolen away from
me: what shall I do to recover it again? I will arise now, Cant: 3 2.
and go about the city; in the streets, and in the broad ways I will seek
it: verse. 3.
I will say to the watchmen that go about the city, Saw ye a heart, a poor
distressed heart pass by this way, that is run a stray from me, and I,
poor I, know not where to find it? Alas 't is not worth any one's taking up:
't is not worth the keepinge, I Will describe it unto you, that if ye hear of
it, of such a heart, or happen to meet it, ye may send it me home again,
and I may give it due correction for playing the vagrant, the run-agate.

That heart which once did dwell in my breast, is the most unthankful guest
that ever was harbored in the bosom of a woman. It is the great accuser of
my self, for mine offenses: and not content with that, having arraigued me
for my sins, it has condemned me as guilty. Ier: 17.9.
It is a cozening, deceitful heart; it is deceit full above all things, and
desperately wicked, even more then I can know: and full it is of tricks, full
of delusions; there are many devices in it. Prove: 19.21. Ps: 38.8 Ps: 64.6 Ps:
101.4.
It is a troublsome heart, in so much as many times I have roared by reason of
the disquietnesse of it. 'T is a deep heart, and not easily pryed into: both
my inward thoughts, and my heartit self have been very deep. It is a fro^ard
heart, so froward that now it is run away from me, Zech: 8.17. Mar: 15 19.
it is departed. It is an evil heart, a heart that was always imagining evil,
and so great evil, that out of it have proceeded evil thoughts, murders
adulteries, fornications, thefts, false witness, and blasphemies. Gen
8.21.6.5. Job 27.6.
It has been evil even from my youth: every imagination of the thoughts of
it were only evil continually. It is a reproaching heart, not like unto
Job's, who said His heart should not smite him, so long as he lived. It is a
troubled heart: Ps: 25.17. Ier: 4.19.
the troubles there of have been enlarged, in so much as I have been enforced
to cry out, My bowels, my bowels; I have been pained at it, it made a noise in
me, that I could not hold my peace: Lam: 1.20.
my bowels have been troubled, for my heart has been turned in me. 'T is a
cowardly, trembling heart; Deuteronomy. 28.65.
I had an extreme trembling at it, when it was at home; and failing of eyes,
and sorrow of mind: it would tremble like Elies for the ark of God. 1. Sam.
4.13. Deuteronomy: 28.28. c: 11.16. 2. Sam: 24.10. 1. Chr. 12.33. Ps: 12.2 Iam: 4.8.
Dan: 5.21. Exo. 4.21. Heb: 3.8. Romans 2 5. Pro: 28 14. Mar: 16 14. Ephesians: 4.1^.
It would so grievously tremble, that I have been smitten with madness and
blindness, and astonishment of it. It is an idolatrous heart, a heart apt to
be deceaved, and to turn aside, and serve other Gods then the great Lord of
heaven, and Earth, and to worship them. It is a quarrellsome, a fighting heart;
a heart that (like David's) has often struck, often smitten me. It is a double
heart, a dissembling heart, a double minded heart. It is a heart like a beasts,
like Nebuchadnezars, when he was driven from the sons of men, and his heart
was made like the beasts. It is a hard heart, hardened like Pharao's; like the
Israelites in the day of provocation: a hard, and impenitent heart, that
treasured up unto it self wrath against the day of wrath, and revelation of
the righteous judgment of God: a heart that was hardened, and fell into
mischief: a hard, and unbelieving heart: a heart alienated from the life of
God through ignorance, by reason of the hardness there of: and like that of
the Israelites, it is both a hard, Eze. 3.7. Job 41 24. Ier. 5.3 Ez: 3.9.
and an impudent heart. It is a heart harder then the nether millstone; as
firm as a stone, as hard as a rock; yea 't is as hard as an adamant even
harder then the flint. Oh what a heart was this, and yet 't is run away from
me, 't is gone: what shall I do? I feign would weep for the loss of it; but
I cannot weep without it. c: 24.23.
The curse which was threatened to the Jews, is fallen upon me; I cannot
mourn, nor weep; I do only pine away for the loss thereof. But why should
I grieve for the departure of a heart so dry, so dead, so fatt and so blind? Of
a heart so hidden, so plagued, so wicked, and so condemning? Of a heart so
deceitful, so deluding, so trouble some, and so deep? Of a heart so froward,
so evil, so reproaching, and so troubled? Of a heart so trembling, so
idolatrous, so smiting, and so double? Of a heart so beast-like, so hard, so
unbelieving, and so inpudent? I consider, and acknowledge how wicked it is, and
yet I am sorry me think's, that 't is gone. But am I sure that this sinful
heart is gone indeed? Or do I but seem to go heart-lesse up and down,
seeking for that which has bred this disturbance; Ah, I fear that I have it
still with in my bosom; and yet I am fondly possessed with a fear that I have
lost it. I may find it again, too soon, to my sorrow; and upon a strickt
enquiry, woe is me, I shall find it a bout me at every turn. I may find it at
my table, in every dish; and there 't is gluttonous: in a glass of wine; and
there 't is drunken, in filthy muck, and there 't is coveteous: in my bed; and
there 't is lascivious: in mine apparel; and there 't is proud: in the
welfare of my neighbors; and there 't is envious: in a quarrel; and there 't
is contentious: in the synagogues of Satan; and there 't is idolatrous. Where
can I look; what can I behold that is naught, that is wicked; and not find my
heart there? And why then all this complaining? All this seeking, and searching
for it? Alas, Alas it is too bad to leave me: 't is too wicked to run from
me. From hence, shall grow my tears; even because I understand not my heart.
It is with me; but I know it not: it is within me; but I understand it not:
it torment's me; and yet I am so stupid, that I feel it not: it is ready to
bring me to ruin; and yet I seek not to prevent the danger. Lord how mad am
I, thus to possess, and yet not to believe that I possess, a heart thus
wicked, and yet not to believe that it is so wicked? What shall I do? Nay,
what will thou do with such a heart as this? It dishonors thee: it
corrupts me. From goodness it drive's me; to wickedness it leads me.
Whither soever I go, whatsoever I do, it induces me to sin, and by
consequence (without thine infinite mercies) to eternal damnation. In this
desperate condition what shall I do? Amend it I cannot; correct it I cannot;
and yet be quit of it, be rid of it, I cannot. But why do I give over the hope
of its amendment, as if noe means were left to prevent my ruin? I must not
distrust of the goodness of my God. My heart is dry; but by his assistance I
will water it with my tears: It is dead; I will re-vive it with my tears: it
is fatt I will make it pine with my tears: it is blind; I will open it is eyes
with my tears: it is hidden; I will reveal it in my tears: it is infected; I
will cure it with my tears: it is wicked; I will correct it with my tears: it
is deceitful; I will punish it with my tears: it is troublesome; I will quiet
it with my tears: it is froward; I will still it with my tears: it is evil;
I will better it with my tears: it trembles; I will comfort it with my
tears: it is idolatrous; I will rectify it with my tears: it is quarelsome;
I will tame it with my tears; it is double; I will single it again with my
tears: it is beast-like; I will new baptize it in my tears, it is hard; I
will mollify it with my tears: it is incredulous; I will make it faithful by
my tears: and it is impudent; I will make it blush with my tears. Or if these
eyes be dry; or these tears but sew; or these few tears of too little vallew
to effect my desires; O thou who once in the fervency of thy devotion, in the
depth of thine agouy did seat as it were great drops of blood, Luc: 22.44.
which fell from thy body for the sins of he world: o thou who in thy tender
compassion seeing Mary at thy feet weeping and the Jews about thee weeping
for the deoeased Lazarus, did groan in spirit, Io: 11.33.
and weep with the mourners; increase thou the tears of mine eyes for the
sins of my heart, and give them virtue by those tears which fell from thine;
that I may weep, and lament, and be sorrowful for my corrupted heart; Io:
16.20.
that so my sorrow may be turned into joy, Amen.

The second part Of the Soliloquie. A lamentation for the loss of an honest
heart.
NOe pain can be compared to the pain of the heart: and cerrainly noe loss
can be so great as the loss of the heart. What comfort then can I expect, can
I find in any thing, who have lost my first, my best, my dearest heart? Once I
had one; and w^e is to this time, where in I must say, I bad. Yes; I had,
indeed I had, a heart, such a heart, so pliable a heart to all goodness, that
I am enforced now, to my cost, to vallew it only by the loss thereof. I was
the^ a field, Ps: 107 37. Io: 15.1 Luc: 8.21.
a pleasant field, that yielded my fruit with increase. Yea I was manured,
ploughed, sowed, and harrowed by the best of husbandmen, by God him self. The
seed was the word of God: verse. 15
that seed fell on this ground, this good ground (for so I then was) and with
an honest, verse. 15
and good heart, having heard the word, I kept it, and brought forth fruit with
patience: Sure I did; I brought forth fruit, good fruit; or else I am much
deceaved. But why then, Gen: 3.18.
do I now lie fallow? Why do I produce nothing but thorns and thistles, the
curse of the earth? Heb: 6.8. 1. Cor. 3.9.
Why nothing but thorns and briers, whose end is to be burned? I was in those
days, ah I was Gods husbandry: but since that time he has left me off, and
my ground is grown out of heart, quite out of heart; for he would dig me
noe more; he would plough me noe more; he would soil me noe more. But what
is the cause of his anger? Wherefore did he thus leave me; thus forsake me?
Alas, the reason is too manifest: I would needs take the plough out of his
hands. I would not suffer him willingly any longer to break up the fallow
ground of my heart: Ier: 4.3
but I my self would plough. And what is the effect? What is the event
thereof? Nothing but misery; nothing but woe: for I have ploughed wickedness,
Hos: 10 13.
and I have reaped iniquity, and eaten the fruit of lies. I would needs follow
mine own ways, Deu: 22 10.
and plough with an ox, and an ass; with thoughts clean, and unclean; pure,
and impure; joining them together; and therefore to my woe I find the words of
King Solomon in me most sadly ve rified, Prove. 21.4. Job 4.8
that the ploughing of the wicked is sin. And yet I, ahwretched I, do still
follow the plough: I plough iniquity, and sow wickedness; and yet, for all
that, I look not to reap the Same; but I expect, fondly I expect, a harvest
of goodness; a croppe of blessings. Ps: 129.6.
But now I find that those blessings do wither even before they grow up. The
mower, I find, verse. 7.
cannot fill his hand with them; nor he that binds up sheaves, his bosom.
Neither do they which go by, say. verse. 8.
The blessing of the Lord be upon you: we bless you in the name of the Lord.
Oh, if God would but once again take me into his care, and husbandry, Ps:
1.3.
I might bring forth good fruit in due season, Then though I should go on my
way weeping, Ps: 126.6.
yet I might bear precious seed, and come again with rejoicing bringing my
sheaves with me. This I might do, if he would manure me; if he would dung
me, Lord, 1. Cor. 4.13.
let me rather be made as the filth of the world, and the off-scowring of all
things, then not be manured by thee. Make me to account all things but dung,
Phil. 3.8.
that I may win thee; and that so winning thee, I may once again be in
heart; that I may have a heart; Deu: 5.29.
even such a heart may be in me that I may fear thee and keep all thy
commandments illway, that it may be well with me for ever.

I had once a soft heart, like Job; Job 23.16. Ephesians. 4.32. 2. Chr. 34.27.
for God made it soft; and the Allmighty troubled me, I had a tender heart,
apt to forgive: a heart that was tender, for I humbled my self before my God,
like Josiah, and rent my clothes, and wept before him. He did mollify it, and
made it fleshie: he took the stony heart out of my flesh, Eze: 11.19.
and gave me an heart of flesh; not give^ to the flesh, to the fowlenesse, the
filthiness of the flesh; but such a heart of flesh as was flexible, soft,
easy to be pierced: I could weep, and lament for every sin for every
transgression which I had committed against my good God. It was a melting
heart; it would melt like the hearts of the Babilonians, Is: 13.7. Ps. 22.14.
when their destruction was threatened to be effected by the Medes: it would
melt like wax in the midst of my bowels. And well it might melt, for it would
burn: it would burn within me, like the hearts of the two disciples goeing
to Emaus: Luc: 24 32.
and yet this heart-burning was noe disease neither; but (as it was with David)
when mine heart was hott within me, then in my meditation the fire burned. Ps:
39.3
And well again might it melt, into tears, for it was a mourning heart; Eccl:
7.4. Io: 16.6
it delighted to be in the house of mourning: it was full of sorrow as were the
hearts of the disciples, when Christ had told them of the persecutions, which
they should suffer. I had great thoughts of heart, Iud: 5.15. Ps: 119.161.
such as were for the divisions of Reuben: a heart very awful; for it stood in
a we of the word of my God. This heart of flesh so soft, and tender; so
mollified, and melting; so burning; so mourning; this sorrowful, and
thoughtfull heart, was so apt for any impression of goodness, that (like unto
Solomon) I could find in it, 2: Sam. 7.27.
I could find an aptnes in it to pray unto the Lord. Prove: 3.3.
It was a writing table: God had written mercy, and truth upon the table there
of; and in more perfect characters too, then the Gentiles had, Rom: 2 15.
I could show the work of the law written in my heart. It was a loving heart;
Mat: 5.43.
it would love my neighbor, and not hate mine enemies. It was a broken heart;
and allthough 't was broken, yet was it whole; I could seek the Lord, like
Iehosaphat, 2 Chr: 22.9.
with my whole heart. Yea this I could do (as Abimelech said of himself,
concerning his taking of Sarah, Gen: 20.5. Ps: 119.10.
Abraham's wife) I could do it in the integrity of my heart; and innocence of
my hands, With this whole heart I could seek the Lord; I could love him, I
could believe, I could praise him. Deu: 4.29. c: 6.5.
I could seek him with all my heart, and with all my soul: I could love him;
yea I could love the Lord my God with all my heart and with all my soul, and
with all my might. I could believe (as Philip said to the Eunuch) I could
believe, Act: 8.37. Ps: 9.1.
even with all my heart. I could praise him all so: even with David, I could
praise the Lord, with my whole heart. Ps: 119.80.
This whole heart was sound too, as David prayed; even sound in the statutes of
my God, that I might not be ashamed. This sound heart was single too; single
even like those good servants, whom Saint Paul commands to be obedient unto
them that are their masters according to the flesh, with fear and trembling,
Ep: 6.5.
in singlnesse of heart as unto Christ. Act: 2.46.
I could eat my meat with gladness, Act: 2.46. Ps: 12.2
and singlnesse of heart. It was not then my custom to speak vanity unto my
neighbor: to speak with flattering lips, or with a double heart. And though
thus single was my heart, 1 King 4.29.
yet was it noe small one: it was large: God had given unto me, as unto
Solomon, both wisdom, Ps: 119.32. Ps: 17.3
and understanding, and largnesse of heart: and (like David) I did run the
way of his commandments, when he had thus enlarged it, This large heart was a
proved one too; for God had proved it, and Visited me, and tried me, when I
was purposed, that my mouth should not transgress. Ps: 7.9. 1. Chr: 29.17. Ps:
26.2
It was tried; tried by my God, by my righteous God, which tries the hearts,
and reins: even by him who tries the heart, and has pleasure in
uprightness: the very self same God did examine me, and prove me; he tried
my reins, and my heart? And this loving heart; this broken, yet whole heart;
this sound, and single heart; Ps: 101.2. 1. King 8.61. Act: 16.14.
this large, and tried heart was found perfect. I did walk with in my house
with a perfect heart: it was perfect with the Lord my God, to walk in his
statutes, and to keep his commandments. It was an open heart; it was opened
lke Lydia's, that I could attend to the things that were spoken by our Paul's.
It opened so wide; or at least with sorrow it was so filled, that at length it
broke. Ier: 23.9.
Mine heart within me (like unto Ieremiah's) was broken; all my bones did
shake; I was like a drunken man; and like a man whom wine has overcome. O full
well too, it the^ was with me, even when my heart was broken; for it had been
stone, nothing but stone before; when neither promises, nor mercies; neither
menaces, nor judgments could work upon it. It had been a stone, a
three-cornerd stone, until it pleased him, to break it, who is the head-stone
in the corner: the head-stone, Mat: 21 42.
because the strongest in the whole building, sustaining the fabric: The
head-stone in the corner knitting, cimenting, and uniting together both the
Jews, and the Gentiles: 1. Pet: 2 8.
The head-stone in the corner who is a stone of stumbling unto many, and a rock
of offense; at which the Jews took such offense, that they hurt them selves
against this stone in the corner. Yet he that was rejected by the Jews, and
scornfully under-vallewed, was unto me a most skillfull, and excellent
lapidarie: he knew the stone of my heart; and at mine entreaty he broke it,
he broke it in pieces. Yea he wrought so powerfully in me, that through the
help of him I had learned to rent it; to rent my heart, Joel: 2.13.
and not my garments, and turn to the Lord my God. It was made an acceptable
sacrifice to my God; for I had a broken spirit; a broken, Ps: 51.17.
and a contrite heart, which he will noe despise. He, he is that great
Jehovah, who is high, Ies: 57.15.
and excellent, who inhabiteth eternity, whose name is holy; who dwells in
the high, and holy place; and yet with him all so that is of a contrite, and
humble spirit, to revive the spirit of the humble, and to revive the heart of
the contrite ones. He it is, who has promised that he will not break a
bruised reed, Is: 42.3.
nor quench the smoking flax: but on the contrary, Ps: 147 3.
will heal the broken in heart, and bind up their wounds. By him who is thus
high and excellent; by him who is thus full of compassion, as not to bruise the
reed, nor quench the flax; by him who is thus infinite in mercy, that he
heals those that are broken in heart; even by the same God, in testimony of
his love, was my stony heart broken. O it had been an uncircumcised heart;
Deuteronomy. 30.6.
but afterward the Lord my God did circumcise it, to love himself with all my
heart, and with all my soul, that I might live. So open, so broken, so rent,
so contrite, so circumcised it was, Act: 7.51.
that I resisted not the Holy Ghost. Lord, what happy days did I then enjoy,
when my heart was thus qualified with goodness! When it was thus acceptable to
my God! But now, alas, 't is quite otherwise. That heart, that good heart of
mine is gone, is lost, is polluted. Peradventure some anger had been seated in
my gall; but I labored that it should not increase into a sin. Peradventure
some joy was placed in my spleen; but that joy howsoever was chiefly in the
Lord; and in my heart was carefully preserved the fear of his name. That heart
was then the cabinet, the store house, the treasury of wisdom, wherein were
two withdrawing chambers, divided but by a partition, in which were placed the
fountains of lively blood; of life it self; even the life of grace, given by
the liberal hand of the God of my life. But now (oh my poor heart) it has
forsaken this breast; this breast of a distressed forlorn woman; and in the
room thereof is crept into my bosom a heart so hard, that when I sinite my
breast in my deepest sorrow, my very hand re-bound's by reason of the hardness
of this rockie heart. Often have I heard people complain of the stone in the
kidneys, or the bladder: but I am enforced to a new complaint; even of the
stone in the heart. O that my God would cut it, and take this stone out of it:
or else give me such a potion of sorrow and contrition, that it might prove
the most sovereign saxafrage, to break this stone! A stone here is which I can
feel both by the weight, and the hardness there of; but what kind of stone I
cannot determine. Surely it can be noe pomoise none of that stone which in some
sort may be said to be even heavier then it self; because though when it is
whole, it is full of pores, full of holes, very hollow, even as hollow as my
heart; yet when it is broken in pieces, when it is stamped, and beaten to
powder, it seems to be more ponderous, then when it was whole. If such a one
be in my heart, o that my God would break this heart: o that he would grind
it, or beat it to powder; then peradventure it would be heavy for my sins,
and ponder mine iniquities. Or it may be that such a stone is in it, as those
were which the Lord did promise that the Israelites should find in the land of
Canaan; Deuteronomy. 8 9.
even stones that were iron: for surely my heart is as hard as iron. And yet,
though it be so, the patient Job assures me that even waters wear the
stones. Job 14.19.
O that my God would cause the trickling of my tears to wear away the stone
of my heart! Or if it be iron, o that he would cause it to swim in the
Iordane of my sorrows as once Elisha caused the iron and steel to do, 2.
King 6.6.
which were tempered together in the head of the are! When I feel for my good
heart, oh, I cannot find it: but in the room thereof is laid such a perverse
one, that the edge of compunction cannot pieres it; piety cannot mollify it,
entreaties cannot move it; threatmings cannot stir it; and stripes cannot
wound it. It is ungrateful, though never so much benefitted: it is
unsaithfull, though never so much entrusted; it is refractorie, though never so
much counseled. It is severe, when it judges; shameless, when it thinks;
and dreadlesse, when danger nearest approaches it. It is churlish to the
courteous, and loving only to those that are wicked. It forgets what is
past; neglects what is present; and provideth not for the time to come: and
(to speak the truth) it neither fears God, Lu: 18.2.
nor reverenceth man. Oh now had I but my good heart once again, how would I
cherish it; how would I preserve it! But, alas, I fear that I wish too late;
for it is fled, and I doubt that it will never be called back, never be sent
me home again. For this loss, o for this unspeakeable, this dreadful loss.
I will weep, and weep, and nothing but weep, until my tears be multiplied
into a river: Who knows but that my little Moses may be put into an arc,
though but of bulrushes; Ex: 2.3
and be laid in the flags by the brinke of my river; and be found again; and
once more be delivered into my carefuller custody? If so it should happen, how
would I cherish it, o how tenderly would I nurse it up in my bosom! Lu: 2.48.
I must weep for it, before I shall find it; and like unto Joseph and Marie
seeking my redeemer, I must seek it sorrowing. I will seek it in the night,
in the night of my sorrow; and each tear upon mine eyelids shall twinkle like
a star, and light me to discover it. It is noe shame to grieve for soch a
loss. A very Stoic would forget his stupiditie, and bemoane the loss of such
a heart. This heart, which I have is none of mine. 1. King 3.20.
The devil has used me as one harlot had done the other; he has risen at
midnight, and stolen away my live child, and laid his own dead child in my
bosom. But what now shall I do? Where is Solomon to administer justice? I
know that Satan would be contented to have the child divided, that he might
have half; and then he knows my Creator will disdain the other. But my
God is the right owner of the living child, o that he would but entrust me to
nurse it, that this dead child might be cast out of doors. I would be contented
the living should be divided even with a sword; Ephesians: 6.17.
but that sword shall be the sword of the spirit, which is the word of God: and
by this division the tempter shall be divided from me. Act: 20 19.
Saint Paul served God with all humility of mind, and with many tears. If I
could but entreat this heart which I have, to be a little humbled, it might
peradventure dissolve into tears for the loss of my best. Why should not I
endeavor in my mourning to follow the stepps of that blessed Apostle?
Doubtless that sorrowful convert did oftener write with his tears then his
ink; and taught his paper to swell with those pearly dropps which fell from
his eyes. When that Doctor of the Gentiles was bound upon a voyage, and
intended to steer his course t^ ^erusalem, Act: 20 37. verse. 38
all the elders did sorely weep, and fell on his neck, and kissed him,
sorrowing most of all for those words which he spoke, that they, should see
his face noe more. But when my Paul; my heart departed, I had noe such warning
given me: otherwise certainly we should have had a very solemn farewell: we
should have had one shewer of tears; or, at least, have kissed at parting. But
since with dry eyes we forsook each other, it shall not now be too late for
me to weep. Mat: 26 49.
O that I could be admitted but to give it one kiss! It should not be like to
that of Judas to Christ: I would not seek the betraying, but the preserving of
it. But I w^sh in vain for it heare's me not. I sigh in vain, for it
approaches not. Howsoever weep I must; and sorrow. I must; and most of all
for fear I see it noe more.

The third part Of the Soliloquie. Grief for an old and sinful heart; and an
earnest desire of a righteous new one.
When Delilah was inquisitive to know where the strength of Samson lay, and
he had thrice deceaved her; Iud: 16.16.
she so pressed him with her words, and urged him that at length (as the text
says) he told her all his heart. verse. 17
Surely he was either violently enamoured with her beauty, or wonderfuly
transported with the love of his ease, that would tell all his heart to his
enemy. What if my best friend that I have in the would; what if God should
require the like at my hands? Should I do it? Nay, could I do it: Certainly I
am afraid that, either I have noe heart; or (if I have one) that I do not
rightly know it; or (if I do rightly know it) I suspect that I should be
ashamed to confess all the evil that is in it. When Solomon begged a gift of
his son, that gift was noe more then what was truly a debt; and yet it was
noe slight one; Prove. 23.26.
it was a heart; My Son give me thine heart. I would to God that my father, my
creator, my God would say unto me, as Solomon did to his son; that he
would call me his child. But what if he should? What if he should all so
call for my heart? As indeed he does. What should I answer him? In the old
law, if an Israelite had but touched an unclean thing, Luc: 5.2.
though it were hidden from him, yet he was all so decreed unclean. Certainly
he who would not suffer his people to touch what was unclean, cannot himself
accept of that which is unclean. King Solomon speake's in general, and send's
the challenge to the whole world, in these words, Prove: 20.9.
who can say, I have made my heart clean, I am pure from sin? When I compare
these places together, what can I think of my self? What can I imagine that
God will say unto me, when I bring him this heart? Assuredly I must needs
expect that he will cry out, as the people did by the garments, yea by the
owners of the garments, the Priests of Sion, Depart it is unclean; depart,
depart. True it is that this heart which I have, Lam: 4.15.
is full of wickedness; full of iniquity: yea so full, that it sends back my
prayers fruitless into my bosom; for the Lord has assured me by the mouth
of his prophet, Ps: 66.18.
that If I regard iniquity in my heart, he will not hear me. What now shall
become of me? If he be not my God, where is my protection? Where are my
hopes? If he be my God, and I deny him what he requires, where then is my
duty? Or how performed? If he be my God, and I render him what he requires,
and yet he accepts not what I render, what then shall become of me? This
heart is too had for him to accept of, who is goodness it self: It is too
unclean for him, who is purity it self: It is too base for him, who is
excellency it self. Lord, how I do waver in my thoughts; and what staggering
doubts do arise in my graoelesse heart! What course can I take; what means
must I use to get a heast for him, which may be any way acceptable? Mine own
is too bad; and if I think to mend it of my self, I shall but botch it; I
shall but make it worse. There is noe other way, but a new one I must have; and
where, or how to get it, I know not. Nay, I have noe heart at all to seek it.
If the old one would be good for any thing, I would willingly give that in
part of payment; in exchange for a new one. But alas, that will never be
worth any thing, while it is a heart. Surely if I would have a new one, and a
good one that is worth having, I must go unto God for it; for he alone is the
creator there of. To him therefore will I repair? and humbly I will beseech
him to create in me, a new heart, Ps: 51.10.
a clean heart; and renew a right spirit within me. If he requires a pledge
for it, seeing that I have formerly falsified my promise what shall I do? I
have nothing worth it, to leave in the place of it: but I will howsoever
faithfully promise him that he shall have it again: and with that very heart
I will promise, which he shall spare me. I will desire only to borrow it;
and but for a little time; even for noe longer time then he of his own accord,
shall be willingly pleased to spare it. Nay I will not so much as desire to
call it mine: it shall be his still: I will beg that it may go under his
name: and if yet he will not believe me, I will put him in security; the
best security that ever was, or is, or shall be; even his only beloved Son.
Why then should I not s^ to him to grant my desires, since neither my request
is unreasonable, nor my security questionable? It is noe new thing, to sue to
him for a new heart. He has been pleased to vouchsafe it to others. Thus he
promised to Israel, by the mouth of his prophet, Ez. 11.19. C. 36.
saying I will put a new spirit within you. And in another place; A new heart
also will I give you, and a new spirit will I put within you; and I will take
away the stony heart out of your flesh, and I will give you an heart of flesh.
Such o such a heart, do I beg of thee, o my God. Such a new heart, such a
fire new one I beseech thee to grant unto me, as may burn with zeal, for
the honor of thy name. But what if I should not prevail with my God for a new
heart? It is all one with him to create a new, or to revive an old one; and to
me it will also prove of equal vallew. I will howsoever submitt to his
pleasure. If he give me my dead one again, restored to life, 1. King 17.20.
as he restored the son of the widow at the prayer of Elijah, I shall be as
well contented, as if he created a new one for me: for all will be one. This
also he can do, if he please: Is 57.17.
for it is his custom to revive the spirit of the humble, and to revive the
heart of the contrite ones: But if it be re-vived, it must be washed, before it
will be fit to be presented unto him. And it must be washed by me, the pains
must be taken by my self: Ier. 4.14.
for what he said to Jerusalem he speaks unto me; O Jerusalem wash thine
heart from wickedness, that thou may be saved: how long shall thy vain
thoughts lodge within thee? But when it is walhed, 2. pet. 2 22.
it must not return again, with the sow that is washed, to wallow in the mire.
Noe, noe; it must go forward in goodness, that so I may be able to speak as
does the psalmist, and say, My heart is not turned back, Ps. 44.8
neither have my stepps declined from thy way; And when I shall have such a
heart, such a new heart, such a revived heart, such a washed heart a heart so
forward to goodness, then (I resolve) it shall be ordered constantly to look
up-wards to the donour, to the re-viver there of. If mine eyes look upwards,
surely mine heart shall not stoop downe-wards. The very herbs, and flowers
teach me this lesson: for they are noe sooner delivered from the womb of the
earth, but up-wards they grow and aspire; upwards they open; as if nature had
dispatched them into the world, upon this very condition that they should
gratefully look upward toward the God of nature. This new heart I would have
wholly devoted to the fear of the donour. Deu. 5, 29.
Oh that there were such a heart in me that I would fear him, and keep all
his commandments allways, that it might be well with me for ever! I would
have it both fear, and likewise love him too: 2. These 3.5. Prove. 16.1.
I would have it directed to the love of him, and into a patient waiting for
his son. And (for as much as the preparations or disposing of the heart in
man, is from the Lord) I will beg of him so much of his grace, as that
therewith I may sanctify him in my heart, 1. Pet. 3.15, Ps. 86.11.
even in that very heart. I would have it united unto him, that I might bear
his name. Then shall this new heart, thus fearing and loving my Creator, be
disposed by him: it shall sanctify him; and being united unto him, it shall
ever be with him and allways be protected, and preserved by him. I would have
my new heart to be a chamber of presence, a privy chamber, a bed chamber for
the King of glory; 1. Pet. 3 4. Gal. 4.6 Ps. 27.8
that so he may be hidden in mine heart. I would have the spirit of his son
be sent into it, to teach me to cry unto him, Abba, father: for this new
heart, this infant heart, must be able to speak and not only able but ready
also to speak; willing to answer; that so when God shall say, Seek ye my
face; Ps. 51.10.
my heart, with David's, may be ready to answer, Thy face, Lord, will I seek.
I would have it to be clean, clean washed from the filthiness of former
offenses; and purified, Act. 15 9.
as were the hearts of the Gentiles. I would have it freed from the foul
opinions, thoughts, and desires, which hung like so many cobwebs in every
corner thereof. I would have it clean from all evil counsels, that it may
perform a new obedience to my God. I would have it true too, as well as
clean; Hebr. 10.22.
not only sprinkled from an evil conscience, and my body washed with pure
water, but I would have it true also, that I may draw near with it unto the
Lord, in full assurance of faith. Prove. 19.8.
I would have it wise to with-stand all evil motions, and affections because
he that gets wisdom in heart, loves his own soul; and he that keeps
understanding shall live. 1. King 3.6.
I would have it upright, for so David (who was a man after Gods own heart)
walked before the Lord in truth, and in righteousness. and in uprightness of
heart: and then I shall be sure to have it defended; Ps. 7.10
for my defense shall be of God, which saves the upright in heart. I would
have it enlightened; 2. Cor. 4.6.
I would have God, who commanded the light to shine out of darkness, shine in my
heart, to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God, in the face of
Jesus Christ. 2. Pet. 1 19.
I would have the day dawne, and the day star arise in my heart: for only
such an enlightened heart can be able to perceave, Deu. 29 4.
and cause mine eyes to see, and mine cares to hear: it is only such a heart,
that can understand; it was only such a heart, as the wise, understanding King
Solomon prayed for. 1. King 3.9. Ps. 86.11. Romans 10.10. Dan. 7.9.
O what a happiness should I enjoy, could I but prevail with God for such a
heart! Such a heart as should be united to fear his name; that so, with it I
might believe unto righteousness. Surely he who is the ancient of days; he
who cried by the mouth of his holy Evangelist, saying. Rev. 21 5.
Behold I make all things new; even he, and he alone can thus renew, can
give me such a new, and good heart. It will not be new to him, though it be so
to me; for his it is of old, though not mine, I look for a new heaven, and a
new earth, where in dwells righteousness; 2 Pet. 3.13.
and I look for it, according to his own promise: but what good will that do
me, unless my earth my heart be first made new; unless I have also a new
heaven first in that heart; unless I have a new heart? Mat. 27 60.
Christ was laid in a new tomb hewn out of a rock, where in never was any
man lay before. My old heart is a rock; as hard, as heavy, impenitrable as a
rock: yet it exceeds not the power of the All-mighty, even out of that rock
to hew a new tomb, a tomb wherein the old man never lay; and there (if he
please) he can place my Jesus. I am like a lump of dough, Mat. 16 12. 1. Cor.
7.5.8. verse. 6. verse. 7.
sowred with the leaven of the Pharisees; with the leaven of malice and
wickedness; and alas I know that a little of that leaven leaveneth the whole
lump: but he can purge out that old leaven, that I may be a new lump; but
then I must moisten ^t with my tears, and kneade it with contrition. And why
should I not? Why should I not cry for such a heart? Why should I not beg,
and entreat, and weep, and mourn, for such a new heart? Children are apt to
cry for every new thing which they see, or hear of. If God would be pleased to
make me his ^hild, I should not need to cry for such a new heart; he would
freely, and quickly give it me. But yet certainly I must cry for it, before
he will give it. Tears are the counters by which my prayers, my desires must
be numbered; even all my petitions which I tender unto him for a heart so new.
In ancient times the Clepsydra's, or hower-glasses were not filled with sand,
but water; and time was measured by the drops which fell from them. Thus must I
measure my time too; even by the drops which fall from the glass, from the
crystal of mine eyes, for my want of this heart. Though formerly I have been
so exceeding dry, as to measure with sand' yet now I must dissolve into an
account by my tears. Surely such a heart as I pant for, is a most precious
jewel; and yet my God cannot choose but trust me with it, if I solicit him
with my tears, in the name of his Son. He can even congeale my tears into
oriental pearls, and so turn them into jewels; and having heightened the
vallew of those precious pearls, for them he can lend me that heart which I
sue for. I desire but the loan of it. I would not, for all the world, have it
wholly mine, for then I am sure I should presently spoil it. I would but
borrow it; Mal. 3.17.
and in that day when he makes up his jewels, I would restore it him again.
I know that he would so delight in it, if I keep it tenderly, and charily,
that he would wear it in his ear; he would hear the cry of it, as he
heard the cry of the children of Israel, Ex. 2.23. verse. 24
by reason of their bondage. Well; if that be the way to get such a jewel; a
jewel so inestimable, so precious: if I may get it by crying; surely I will
Weep, I will cry. With Joseph, Genesis 43 30.
I will make have; my bowels shall yearne within me; I will seek where to
weep. I will enter into my chamber, and weep there. He has given such a
jewel to others; and why may not I as well hope to prevail, as others have
done? He has enough of them: he make's them: he makes them at any time; and
that easily too; very easily; only with a word of his mouth. Therefore I will
cry with a great, and exceeding bitter cry, Genesis 27 34. verse. 38
and say unto him Father, bless me, even me also, o my father. I will lift
up my voice and weep, and will say unto him, Have thou but one blessing, my
father? Bless me even me also, o my father. Ier. 3.21.
Upon the high places was once heard both a weeping, and a supplication also
of the children of Israel. I will weep too toward the high place, toward the
seat of my God; and every tear shall have a tongue, and every tongue shall
cry for this heart which I want. Or ^f all that will not do; Iam. 3.5.
then this little unruely member, which has boasted so great things: this little
fire, that would formerly kindle so great matters, shall now burn with Zeal
of my desires; and with it I will pray, and say:

The Prayer.
RIghteous father, Ier. 17.10.
who searchest the hearts, and tryest the reins; and in that search do find
my corrupted heart to be full of pollution, and uncleanesse; vouchsafe I
beseech thee, to give me a sight of, and a sorrow for the offenses thereof.
Break thou my hard, and stony heart, with the knowledge of my sin; and my
due consideration of thy heavy wrath. Psalm. 5.4. Eze. 11 19. Psalm. 51.10. Deuteronomy.
4 9.10.17.17. Ps. 107.35.
Thou art a God that delightest not in wickedness: remove therefore from me
this heart of obstinacy; and give me a heart of flesh. Create in me a clean
heart, o God; and renew a right spirit within me. Let not thy commandments
depart from it, all the days of my life. Speak but the word, o God, and it
shall be done. Sanctify it in thy truth; thy word is truth. O thou that
did turn the wilderness into a standing water; and dry ground into water
springs; be pleased to show thy mercy now in the depth of my distress. Lord,
hear my desires: behold my necessities. Without a heart I cannot serve thee:
without a new heart I cannot praise thee, Lord, give me a heart to fear thee;
Is. 66.2 Ps. 38.18.
to tremble at thy word; to listen to thy promises; to confess my sins; and
to be sorry for mine offenses. Give me, o my God, Ps. 119.80.
fuch a heart as thou requirest; that so it may be allways sound in thy
statutes. Give me a heart that may mourn in secret for all my sins, both
secret, and open: that may be zealous for thine honor; that may be tender of
thy displeasure; and that may shun both the inclination to and the desire of
offending thee, my great Creator. Hear me o God, Io. 19.34. Mat. 26 38.
for thy mercies are great. Hear me, o Christ, whose side was pierced; whose
soul was sorrowful; and all to purchase new hearts for all that are penitent
sinners. Hear me o blessed spirit, and assist me in my petitions, with
sighs, Romans 8 26. Can. 8.6.
and groans that cannot be expressed. Give me a heart for thy service; and
then set me, o Lord, as a seal upon thine ^rme. O Lord give! O Lord forgive!
Forgive my sins; and give me the blessing of a righteous heart; that so I
may fear thee as long as I shall remain in this vallie of tears; and then
receave me, o my father into thy celestial Kingdom, that I may live with
thee in glory for ever, and ever, through Jesus Christ my only mediator, and
redeemer, Amen.

THE THIRD SUBJECT. Tears of Time.
The Soliloquie consisting of three parts: viz: 1 A re-view of the time past. 2
A consideration of the time present. 3 A resolution for the time to come.

The First part. A re-view of the time past,
THE EjACULATION.
Psalm. 5. verse. 1. Give ear to my words, o Lord; consider my meditation:

verse. 2. Hearken unto the voice of my cry, my king, and my God; for unto thee
will I pray.

THe four beasts, in the Apocalypse, that were full of eyes before, behind, and
within, sitting upon the throne which was set in heaven, rested not day and
night saying, Rev. 4.8.
Holy, holy, holy Lord God Allmighty, which was, and is, and is to come. What a
high description is here of the sacred Trinity! The Father holy; the Son
holy; and the Spirit holy: and yet not three holies, but one holy. The Father
Lord; the Son Lord; and the Holy Ghost Lord. The Father God; the Son God;
and the Holy Ghost God. The Father All mighty; the Son All mighty; and the
Holy Ghost All mighty. The Father Eternal; the Son Eternal; and the Holy
Ghost Etemall: and yet not three Lords, nor three Gods, nor three Allmighties,
not three Eternalls; but one Lord, one God, one All mighty, and one Eternal.
Eternal? What Is that? The text says which was; not as if he had been, (but
is not) therefore it is added which is: yet not so is, as if he should be no
more; therefore it is farther added and is to come. Surely he that was, without
beginning; which is, immutable, and which shall be the judge both of the quick
and the dead; even the same God was, is, and shall be Holy in his essency, Lord
in his dominion, God in his excellency, Allmighty in his power, and Eternal in
all. When I read these deep mysteries of my God, o how I am divided, me
think's, in my self! How do I vary in my thoughts, and meditations! The
singing of those heavenly beasts, make's me rejoice; but their song it self
drive's me into a sadness: for they tell me that holiness, and
righteousness, and glory, and power, and eternity is the very nature of God;
in none whereof I can find my self to be like unto him. Lord, I wish that I
were with the beasts, upon the throne, that I might be a little more cheerful
then I am here at the foot stool. But alas my wishes cannot be purchases:
for none can come to God, but those alone, who are like unto God. 1 Cor. 29.
Before I can come to sit upon that throne, I must certainly be holy; for he
is holy: I must be righteous; for he is righteous: and then, though I shall
not have such power, nor glory as he has; yet I shall have my share; I shall
have my proportion, I shall have such power to magnify my God, as that nothing
shall be able either to oppose, or divert me: I shall have such glory, as
neither eye has seen, 1, Pet. 1 15.
nor ear has heard, nor yet can enter into the heart of man to conceave: yea
and I shall have eternity too; for though I cannot be said to be perfectly
eternal, because I had a beginning; yet I shall be certainly eternal, in that
I shall have noe end. But how shall I gain this holiness that I may come to
that eternity; Surely I must look upon the three distinctions, or parts of
time; and if I consider them as limited, I must find my self in them; if as
unlimitted, I must find my God in them. For God is not so said which was, which
is, and which is to come, as if this description did any way come near a full
expression of his eternity: but rather submitt's, as it were, only to our
capacity; that so by this, I may partly conjecture at what I cannot yet
possibly comprehend. Noe time can properly be asscribed unto God; for each part
thereof has a bound, and limitation, which God can not have. The time past is
gone already from us: the time present is goeing: and the time to come is not
yet ours. But when we say God was, we intimate his perfection in being,
without a beginning of being: When we say God is, we express his vigor and
readiness, and power to effect his purposes: and when we say God shall be,
we undoubtedly acknowledge, and confess his perpetuity. The time was, when I
was not; and I, again, shall be, when time shall not. I shall be, indeed: but
where shall I be? Eternity has but two mansions; heaven, and hell. If I do
not take heed, I may be tormented for ever (Lord how I tremble at the thought
of it!) in the land of darkness: and yet't is possible for me to avoid that
fire and brimstone, and live eternally in the heavens. Surely, if the choice be
in my power, I am a thousand times worse then the maddest woman that ever was
bereft of her senses, if I choose not heaven much rather then hell; for in
heaven is an eternal life, but in hell; an eternal death. In the one shall be
noe end of living: in the other shall be noe end of dying. It Is concluded then:
if my choice be free, I lay hands upon heaven; that shall be mine. And who can
blame me? The choice, I am sure, is good: but yet there remaine's more then
the bare saying, I choose heaven for my lot. Yes surely: there is more then
this, or else it had been impossible that ever any should have been damned,
if the fruition of happiness should immediately have ensued upon the election
by word, or speech alone. What then is next required to my choice? My Savior
tell's me: Mat: 7.21.
Not every one that says unto me Lord Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of
heaven: but he that does the will of my father which is in heaven. Do his
will? What Is that? What is his will? Surely the Prophet tell's me, when he
says, and advise's, Is: 55.6.
Seek the Lord while he may be found; call upon him while he is near. Seek
him? Why? He Is in heaven. While he may be found? Why? When cannot he be
found who is every where, and for ever and ever? True it is that he is allways
to be found; but, only of them that seek him: and those that seek, must
seek as they ought, or else they shall not find him whom they would. He is
allways to be found; but is he allways to be found of me? This question is to
the purpose indeed: for what is it to me, if all the world besides should
find him? What content could I receive in that joy which others would have in
the fruition of him, if I find him not? Certainly noe pleasure could redound to
me, if I should have, though the whole, land of darkuesse to my self; and nobody else allotted to share with me. Alas, alas, God is not all ways to be
found, because he is not allways sought. The defect is in our selves, and not
in him: for those that will find him, must seek him: he is very well worth the
looking for. Where now have I been all this while; or where has He been
ever since I was borne; that I have triseled out so much time, and yet have not
found him? Oh, though I sought him not, yet he found me: though I knew him
not, yet he knew me: though I minded him not, ye: he watched over me. He
sought me; he called me; he wooed me to come to him: and when I still
denied, he offered me precious things; precious indeed, if I would but come
to him: and yet I would not; but back again, like a child, I still ran to my
nurse; I hid my self from him; and with my nurse I sported, and played. But
why would not Nature my fond nurse, suffer me to go to him? Oh, because she
knew that if once I should go home to my heavenly father, he would weane me
presently; and never suffer my nurse to fool me any more. Moreover, she
thought that he would use me hardly, and chide me, and scourge me; and that
she could not endure; it went against her disposition. Lord, now thou have
opened mine eyes, that I might seek thee; now I do seek thee; do thou
reveal thy self unto me: be ever with me: be thou ever mine. Make me to
see what I was, with shame and horror; and now to be what I should be; even a
sighing, sobbing, sorrowful convert. Make me see, what I was, say I? Indeed
what was I not, that was not good, that was wicked, and corrupt? I cannot
remember that in all my life, I ever did any one thing, which might truly, and
justly be called good. Ay me! All my time past, was given for nothing: I have
quite lost it. How said I? For nothing? It were well indeed for me, if it
were so well: I pray God it may be so. But there is an old score, and a great
one too, for which I must call my self to an account; or else I am sure that
the All mighty will. Better it will be for me, that I do it, then he; and
yet I cannot do it, without him. Lord grant, that I may now spend my time
well, even in the recounting how ill I formerly consumed it; and in repenting
of that ill. At my birth I surely began well; for I was ignorant of evil; I
was innocent: and yet (now I better bethink my self of it) I did not I was
not so ignorant, or not so innocent; for I was both conceaved in sin, and borne
in sin too; Ps: 51.5
I was shapen in iniquity; and in sin did my mother conceave me. Yet I was a
kind of prophetess at my birth; for I came werping into the world: so do all:
and questionless the first cry was caused by sin; foreseeing, as it were,
the sin I should committ; and grieving in a sort, for the sin which I
inherited. But did I begin so well, and proceed so ill? Was I a young saint;
and am I an old sinner? Was I borne a prophetess, and have I lived a
transgressour? Yes, I have: oh I have. I grew in wickedness, as I grew in
years. When I was a child, I lived in ignorance: 1. Cor: 13.11.
I spoke as a child; I understood as a child; I thought as a child: yet when I
grew past that childhood, I did not put away child^sh things. Act: 17 30.
I lived indeed in ignorance; and yet the time of that ignorance God winked
at; but now he command's me to repent. Foolish I was, Ps: 73.22.
and ignorant, even as a beast before him: for I looked only after things
temporal; and never thought upon those that are eternal. and yet (if I
consider well of it) there neither is, nor can be any due comparison between
them: for there hould's noe proportion; there is noe analogy, or resemblance
held between things finite, and things infinite. I may observe some difference
between them, if I do but consider how Eagerly I long for things temporal,
and how I love them before I obtain them; but, when for a moment I have
enjoyed them, their vallew is forgotten, for I am surfeited, I am cloyed with
them; and all this, because they have nor power, nor goodness enough, to
bound, and limit my desires: But things eternal, though here they are more
coldly desired; yet they shall be beloved, and enjoyed, with true content, and
continual rejoicing hereafter. Peradventure those things which I seek for
here, I obtain not, or if I gain them, and should possess them all my life
time; yet they would not continue, they would remain but a short space with
me; because I shall not continue; my life is short. If I could possibly be as
old, if I could live as long as from time to time; from the beginning of time,
to the end of time, from the creation of the world, to the dissolution of the
world; yet all this time would not be long, yea it would be nothing in
comparison of eternity. It would not be the hundred thousand thousand thousand
thousandth part so much as one grain of sand, is to the whole earth; to the
whole world, and all therein contained, allthough the world should be a million
of millions of thousands of millions of times greater then it is, or could be
accounted by Arithmetic. Well then; I can have but my life in earthly things;
and perhaps not that neither in those things which I desire: they will not be
mine for ever: noe for they shall not endure for ever: but that which is
eternal shall be for ever, and ever, world without end: I mean not, this
world without end, for this shall have an end: but I mean that other world,
that better world; the world to come, eternal in the heavens. Sinful I was,
even before I was, before I was in the world; for I had the stain of original
corruption, even in my mother's belly; and then I was not; or not in this
world; for so our common speech goe's; yea and so our Savior him self does
say also A woman, Io: 16.21.
when she is in her travail, has sorrow because her hour is come: but as
soon as she is delivered of the child, she remembers noe more the anguish,
for joy that a man is borne into the world. Our years are constantly reckoned,
not from our conceptions, for then we were imperfect: noe nor from the time of
life, from the time we were first quick, when our souls were at once both
created and infused into us; and yet then we were guilty of original
pollution: but as if we were not worthy to be said to be, until we may
begin to be more sinful; our age is only reckoned from our first society
with sinners. The simple world account's that we have been but just so long,
as we have been companions together in the view of men: and so if men were to
number my transgressions, and had both power and skill to sum them up, they
would begin but at my birth only; at that time when they began to corrupt me:
but God will, begin at my beginning; at the first time that I received a
soul; and from that very instant shall my soul be accountable for all my
sins. But if he be so strickt, as to begin with my original uncleanesse
when I knew it not; oh what will he say to mine actual abominations, which I
both did, and do know? So many actual sins I have committed, that I cannot
number them: so great, and grievous actual sins, that I cannot estimate
them. All my former time has indeed been wholly mine; none of it was God's.
But what good have I done to, or for my self, in all this time? Just none at
all: nay on the contrary, infinite hurt; infinite injury: for I have not
only dishonored my God; and offended my neighbor; but also I have every
moment made my self more liable to eternal damnation. But shall I have my
time; and shall not God have his too? Yes, yes; he has all this while had his
time, Rom: 2 4.
his time of patience, and forbearance, and long-suffering, daily expecting my
repentance, and conversion. But this was rather my time, then his; for it was
for my good, in that he spared me. And shall not he yet have his time? Some
other time? Yes; he will have it. He will have a time of visiting the proud;
for so he threatened Babylon by the mouth of his Prophet, saying, Ier: 50.31.
Behold I am against thee, o thou most proud, says the Lord God of hosts;
for thy day is come; the time that I will visit thee. I have been proud,
with Babylon; justly therefore may I expect, that God should visit me, as he
visited Babylon. He will have a time of vengeance: C: 51.6
for so says the Prophet too: Flee out of the midst of Babylon, and deliver
every man his soule^: be not cut off in her iniquity; for this is the time of
the Lord's vengeance; he will render unto her a recompense. I have lived all
this while in Babylon; and I have sinned with Babylon; and justly therefore
might I be destroyed with Babylon: But the goodness of my God has hitherto
spared me: his kindness is greater then I can meritt, or requite, or vallew:
for though he had his time of vengeance against Babylon; yet his time of
mercy continues to me, in calling me to flee from out of the midst of
her. He did call before; but I heard not before: for though the silly birds,
and the fowls do know their times, and seasons; yet I knew not my time, when
God called for my conversion, C: 8.7.
The Storke in the heaven knows her appointed times; and the Turtle and the
Crane, and the Swallow observe the time of their coming: but I, poor I, simple
I did not know the judgments of the Lord. He will also have a time of calling
every one to an account for their sins; and that time he may take when
soever he pleases: yea and so he does too; for, every day some or other do
appear at his tribunal. This time he might have taken against me also, all
this while; while I have lived in my sins; for I did not watch, Mar: 13 33.
and pray; though I knew not when the time would be. After judgment he will
have a time of execution too; but he deferr's, he delay's both judgment, and
execution. This was well known even unto those two possessed with Devils,
Mat. 8: 28.
in the country of the Gergesenes, which met my Redeemer as they were coming
out of the tombs, exceeding fierce, so that noe man might pass by that way:
for they cried out saying. verse: 29
What have we to do with thee Jesus, thou son of God? Art thou come hither
to torment us, before the time? O let the time of vengeance put me in mind of
my sins, and what I have deserved justly by them! Mat: 13 25.
Yet, lest Satan should sow tares among my wheat: lest he should tempt me
to despair, when I prepare to repent; let me as well consider that God has a
time of love too, as hatred; of mercy, as of fury. Thus the Apostle tells
me: Gal: 4.4
When the fulness of time was come, God sent forth his son, made of a
woman, verse: 5.
made under the law: To redeem them that were under the law, that we might
receave the adoption of sons. O what a blessed time of love was this, when
his own son, his only son, his son of his bosom was sent to redeem
such wicked, and ungodly wretches, as I poor creature am! Jerusalem found a
time of love too, of infinite love, when the Lord passed by her, and looked
upon her; Eze: 16 8.
and behold, her time was the time of love; and he spread his skirt over her,
and covered her nakedness. Yea, and I have had a time of his love too, when
all this while that I have continued in obstinacy and rebellion, he has yet
deferred the execution of his justice. But now, most of all now, o my God, I
find, and feel thy love which I was not sensible of before. It is thy love,
that I affect thy love; that I seek thy love, because I begin to know my
sins which hindered me from the knowledge of thy love: and among the rest of
my sins, because I now begin to be sensible of my precious, but ill-spent,
and lost time. And since thou have now begun thy love, the manifestation of
thy love to me, I am so much the more revived, by how much I know that thou
can not choose but continue thy love, even for my good; that I may have time
and knowledge, and desire, and power to love thee again: But especially for
thine own sake; for thou that art eternal, even thou, and thou alone art
likewise love; for so the Apostle tell's me; God is love: 1. Io: 4, 16.
Thy love therefore being thy self, and thy self being eternal, for thine
own sake, o love eternal, continue unto me thy love. And that I may be the
more sensible of it, 1. Pet: 4 3.
Lord let it suffice that the time past of my life I have wrought the will of
the Gentiles, verse: 7.
when I walked in all manner of wickedness, and ungodliness. And now (seeing
the end of allthingsis at hand) make me to be sober, and to watch unto prayer.
Make me to walk circumspectly; Ephesians: 5.15. verse: 16
nos as a fool, but as the wise; Redeeming the time, because the days are
evil. But how shall I redeem the time, since I have already quite lost it?
There is noe other way, but by un-doeing, un-sinning the evil which I have
hitherto committed: and this must be with my present sorrows, for my past, my
deluding joys. Lord, will one tear serve thy turn, for one sin? I know it
is too little; I confess it; and yet that one for one is more then I can give;
for my tears can be but finite, but few; whereas my sins are many, are
infinite. But may one tear serve thee for all my sins? Alas, that is too
little in all conscience; and yet even that is more then by nature I am willing
to give. I must, I must weep, if ever I hope to receave any comfort: yea, and
when I have wept as much as I well can weep, even then I must endeavor to
weep, because I can weep noe more. David was a man; and yet he could weep:
yea he had so many tears, that he was charitablie pleased to dispose of some
for others; yea very many; for his own words are, Ps: 119.136.
Rivers of waters run down mine eyes, because men keep not thy law. I am a
woman, and shall I have noe tears, I can cry sometimes for anger; and that is
only to satisfy a sinful passion. I can cry some times for a loss; when as
that which I loose is not worth a tear. O if ever I will be angry while I
live, let me be angry now! Let me be angry at my self for misse-spending my
time! Let me be heartily angry, even till I cry again! O, if ever loss was
great, I am sure that mine is; for I have lost my time; my precious time; my
whole time; even my whole life ever since I was borne, unto this very minuit.
Otherwise I might have had in all this space whole millions of good thoughts,
and speeches, and actions, and sobbs, and tears registered in heaven against my
appearing at the tribunal. But instead of those, I have filled the book of
remembrance of my God, with nothing but vanities and follies; with sins, and
wickedness; with omissions, and commissions, so many, and so grievous, that
unless they be blotted out there is noe remedy but I my self must be blotted
out of the book of life. But there is yet hope, so long as there is life.
There is hope that they may be expunged; but then I must begin the work, in
my repentance, and so blott them with my tears. O that I were now a very
pillar of salt; Gen: 19 26.
even such a one as Lot's wife was turned into; though not with her
backsliding; not with her looking back, and longing to return to Sodom
again. Noe, noe; that were to repent of my repentance; and to undo, what I
have begun. But I would be salt, because a tear is so; and I would be all
salt, a whole pillar of falt, that so in my repentance, I might be all sorrow,
all tears, and melt quite away in my laments for my wickedness: for thus
might I begin to blott out the sins which I have committed. But if I may not
have that wish, Lord let me howsoever weep as much as I may; as much as
nature and grace can possibly wring from the eyes of a woman: and when I have
thus endeavored to begin to blott out the offenses of the time which is
past; then help me, o my God; assist me, o Christ, o Jesus; and with thy
most precious blood which was ^hed upon the cross, blott them all out of thy
remembrance, for ever, and ever.

The second part, Of the Soliloquie. A consideration of the time present.
IT is the practice of the wise, to redeem the time past; to govern well the
time present; and carefully to provide for the time to come. That which is
past, may be redeemed ^y sorrow at the time which is present; and the well
employing of the present, may prepare us for the future. I have wickedly lost
that time which is past; I would therefore dispose well of that which is
present. And yet, Lord how swiftly does this present time hasten away! If I
mark but the pulse of my watch, I hear it cry tick tick, tick tick, as ^ast
as I can well count; and yet that come's not near a full informing me of the
flight of the time. Alack; the last minuit is already gone: that which is
present, is but an ^nstant, and not discernable; it continues at most, but the
twinkling of an eye; and yet the present moment is often lost in the
expectation of the future. The minuits fty; and stay not the accountant's
leisure. The days hasten; and in their swift expedition, chide my negligence,
and slownesse in religion. But, if I well consider it, my time is not so short;
but I am an ill house-wife of it: there is the fault. I receave not a short
life; but I make it short: for I am not driven to a poverty of time; but
contrarily, I am guilty of the prodigality. I am careful, and provident, for
my outward estate; and with all my discretion, and industry I endeavor, at
least to keep it, if not to increase it: but as touching my time, away I let
it pass; I give it away; I lavish it away; whereas noe coveteousnesse is
either commendable, or so much as lawful, but only the coveting of our most
precious time. I commonly accuse nature (or rather, the God of nature) for
allowing me such a short time upon earth: and yet certainly I speak not as I
mean; I do not account it short; for I throw it away; I cast it away: yea I
contemn it, as if it were base, and not worth the owning. Yea more; I even
wish it away. for sometimes I wish for the expiring of a lease; sometimes for
the death of a friend, after whose decease, I shall possess such, or such a
revennue; whereas the shortest of these times may be many years; and yet I
consider not that every moment shorten's my life. Thus the time it self is
become a burden to me; for I wish to hasten it; and yet I consider not that
the fruition of my desires would make me in debt to years; a thing which I
dread much more, then I pretend to fear the loss of my time. It is the
custom of our sex to desire to live; yet not to live without our youthful
desires. Old age, we conceave, may be accounted venerable; but youthful
years we only delight in: thus we contemn that which is honorable; and
pride our selves in that which is sinful: We hasten, in our wishes, the
fleeting time; but we desire to retard the chillowed, and furrowed effects
thereof. We wish too early, for the time not expired, and then we wish too
late, for what cannot be recalled. My time, (...) longest, is but short, very
short, if compared with gray headed eternity: so was the Pro^het's also; even
the Prophet David's; Ps: 89.47.
which made him cry out, Remember how short my time (...): wherefore have thou
made all men in vain? ^aint Paul acknowledges likewise the shortness of our
age, speaking thus: 1. Cor: 7.29.
This I say brethren; the time is short: it remains that both they that have
wives, be as though they had none etc: And yet, as short as it is, I endeavor
to make (...) shorter: for (to speak truly) the time ^yeth not away from me;
but I drive it away. Religious exercises make me deem it long, and tedious:
but sports, and delights seem to ^end it a wing, or to ympe a feather. I
vallew it therefore, according to my employment; and esteem it only according
to my affairs. If I therefore seriously consider of it, I shall ^ind it flying
from those that are sportfull; but walking leasurely from those who either are
^mployed in matters of religion; or groan under the burden of any heavy
affliction: Thus far opinion either lends it wings; or pulls the quills. But
if with a more judicious eye I prye into my life; the time of my life; I shall
find, that a great part thereof is lost, in doing evil: the most of it in
doing nothing: but (I fear that I may truly say) all of it, in doing what I
ought not. And yet, for all this, I cry out upon my time; upon my lost time:
but allways I conceal to my self the follies where in I lost this time. All
this I confess: why then do I not well employ, the little of this little time;
that so, when I dye, I may outlive even time it self? I am not of their
opinions, who attribute wisdom unto time; because it discover's, teache's,
and alter's all things. This is not an act of time; but in time our judgments
come to maturitie; and in time the decays of nature are discovered. As little
also do I concur with them, who account it foolish, because (say they) it
is the master of oblivion: for in time all things are forgotten. I attribute
not either wisdom or folly to the mensuration of our lives; but those I
deem either wise, or foolish, who well or ill dispose of their time. I will
endeavor for so much wisdom, as to employ my days in religious wisdom;
and I will not, I need not go farther to seek for the foolish and unwise,
then to my self, when I vainly misspend the jewel of a minuit. Every day I
will account as lost wherein I have not been careful to perform my duty: and
every such day I will endeavor to redeem, by a sorrowful night. If a hair
does happen to fall from my head, it is beyond my art to fasten it where it
grew: and yet I do not use to think, that the minuit which is past is more
certainly irrevocable. I can speak my words again, and again; but I cannot
live over my hours again, and again. And yet, for ^l this, I take delight in
those shadows of ^nity; but consider not, that such delight is ^rrow. I
labor, with industry, and weariness, ^r things that are transitory; and yet
I loose them, before I am aware. They are not gotten without dropps of sweat;
and they depart not from me without dropps of tears. All that time is but
loss, and spent in grief, which is not laid out for the purchase of
eternity. All my time is un-profitably spent, if it be not s^ent in the
service of my God. With him all times are alike, because he is eternal,
without either beginning, or ending. Neither past, ^or present, nor future can
make any alteration with him; because he sees at once, and ever did, and ever
will see all things whatsoever, which have been, are, and shall be. But it is
not so with me; for to me my time is measured out, and delivered by instants.
That which was before me, was not mine; and yet I reap some benefit from it;
because the labors, and observations of former ages, and occurrences, are left
to our times, to instruct as in wisdom. That time which shallbe, when I shall
be laid low in the dust, shall ^ot be mine: for, by reason of my sin, my
life shall not continue. My time then is only for a bare term of life; and
how long, or ^ow short this life shall continue, I know not; for every moment
draws me nearer and nearer to the period thereof. I reckon my present age by
the years that are past; as if those years were still mine own, which are
escaped from me. I reckon some times before the time; and determine that mine
age shall be so much increased, when such or such a month shall govern in the
Calendar: as if I were sure of that time which I yet have not: whereas if I
should live as long as I desire, or reckon, and make account to live; I should
heartily wish that mine account were ended; that my reckoning were discharged.
Short indeed my time is, not only in it self; or considered with eternity;
but also compared with his who is the tempter: for he was a Devil before
ever was created or made either man, or woman; and he shall be a Devil when
none shall be loft to be allured by him. He has had his time to tempt, and
seduce, ever since he conquered the first innocent: and he shall continue his
suggestions so long as men shall continue in the world; and yet, for all this,
his time is said to be but short: for so says St John: Rev. 12 12.
Woe to the inhabitants of the earth, and of the sea; for the Devil is come
down unto you, having great wrath, because he knows he has but a short
time. If his time be short, which is much longer then mine; what then is mine,
which is but a moment, in comparison of his? And yet this moment may be a
portall to erernitie if I so behave my self, as allways provi^ing to live
eternally. But how shall I setle my self, to be thus provided? I would spend
my time well; but that I account it a sin to spend my time: for if my life be
^ood, my time is not spent, but gotten. I would lead my life in the
commandments of my God: this I ought to do but I am not forward to do it.
True it is, that those which live well may be truly said to lead their lives:
they walk gently; and therefore surely: but those that live ill do spend their
lives: they spend them prodigally; they consume them ^ainely. How then shall I
lead my life, that I may live for ever? Certainly I must not do, as the world
does: I must not measure my life by either the length, or variety of
discourses. I must not determine to trifle out an hour in vain society; and
purposely address my self to companies apt to bereave me of my fleeting
time. The tongue cannot walk so speedily, as the moments can poast: I must not
therefore instruct my tongue to hasten the hours in vain discourses; for that
very hour which I resolve to sacrifice ^n common, and sinnfull language, may
peradventure be the last which God has ^lotted me. If so it should prove;
much better it were that I should lay it out in repentance, then charge it to
my sinful account, which I must suddenly balance. Nor may I think away my
time: it must not be worn out by pensive, and distracting melancholy; such as
the Devil is apt to teach, and thereto to annexe a kind of delight. Noe
thought is free, but that which is godly: Noe melancholy is justifiable, but
that which proceede's from a penitent sinner. Every thought not fixed on
goodness, is but a spurr to hasten the time, and an addition to my debts. I
must therefore enter into my self, as I do into my garden: I must root out
the weeds, the evil, and un-hallowed cogitations; but cherish the flowers,
the religious, and devoute meditations. There is a way, so to spend the time,
as to gain by the loss: so to give it, as to to get advantage by the gift;
and that is by giving, or rather by rendering it back to the donour. This is
done, by employing my little, my speedy time in the service of my God: which
being done, he will reward me with eternity, when time shall be forgotten.
Noe time is better spent, then that which is spent in a sorrow for sin. This
time therefore which is lent me, I will re-pay back again, in repentance for
my sins. I have knitted up a life; but the stitches are false, or broken: I
will therefore ravell it out again, in the exa mination of my errors. I have
woven up a life, full of falsehood, and misse-takes; but I will unweave the
web, by enquiring into my several breaches, mine enormities. I was borne to
work; not hereafter, but here: Lord grant, that whilst I am here, Phil. 2.12.
I may work out my salvation with fear, and trembling. I was borne to run;
to run a race; not hereafter, but here: Lord grant, that whilst I am here,
I may so run, 1. Cor. 9.24.
that hereafter I may obtain. I was borne to contend; not hereafter, but here:
Lord grant, that whilst I am here, I may so strive that I may get the
masterie, 2. Tim. 2.5.
and hereafter obtain an incorruptible crown of glory: I must work, and
labor in repentance; I must run in faith; I must strive in hope; and all
this must be done in this little skantling of time, which is measured to me
upon earth. Alas when I shall be snatched away from these earthly
employments, noe more time will be allotted me for either repentance, or
faith, or hope. Noe, noe: If I go to heaven; there I shall have noe need of
repentance: If I go to hell; there I shall not have power to repent. In heaven
both faith, and hope shall have their perfect consummation; and be turned into
knowledge, and fruition: In hell shall be neither faith in Christ; nor hope by
Christ. This life is the time, in which I must provide for the life to come. O
what would not Cain, or Judas, or any other of the damned in hell give (if yet
they had any thing to give) for but one of these hours which I trifle away!
How would they presently fall upon their knees, if an hour of repentance were
lent unto them; and howl, and cry, and tear, and roar; and all they would
account too little, if yet they had hopes, by repentance, to be freed from their
torments! This I read; and this I cannot choose but believe: O what care ought
I then to take, to spend my whole time in repentance whilst I am here; lest
hereafter I should have a portion with those impenitent wretches, in the land
of horror! Whilst I am here, I have hope, if yet I have grace: but if once
the sentence be passed, there will be noe re-voking it: when the soul shall be
departed, there will be noe returning. Eccl: 9.4. verse. 5.
To him (says Solomon) that is joined to all the living, there is hope: for
the living know that they shall dye; but the dead know not any thing; neither
have they any more a reward. Every one here is allotted a time to spend in
repentance; to which they are strongly persuaded eve^ by the remembrance of
death: but when once they are dead, all hope of effectual godly sorrow is but
vain, and as vain is the hope of mercy for their cries. verse. 10 c: 11.3.
There is noe work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom in the grave,
whither they go. If the tree fall toward the South, or toward the North; in
the place where the tree falls, there it shall be. Grant therefore o my God,
that I may seek thee now whilst thou may be found; Is: 55.6
and call upon thee whilst thou art near! Make me worship thee here; and
pray to the here; and weep to thee here; and believe in thee here; and hope
in thee here; Gal: 6.7 Ps: 126.5. Mat: 29.23.
and love thee here: for whatsoever I sow, that I shall be sure to reap. I
will therefore sow in prayers, and in tears here; and then I shall be sure to
reap in joy hereafter; even to enter into the joy of my Lord.

The third part Of the Soliloquie. A resolution for the time to come.
While the earth remains (says the Lord to Noah) seed time and harvest,
cold and heat, summer and winter, Gen: 8.22.
day and night shall not cease. This is a faithful promise of the true God;
and therefore cannot be questioned, or doubted by Christians. But how long shall
these seasons last? Only as long as the earth remains. And how long shall
the earth remain? God only knows that: it is not in the power, or reach of
the wisest upon earth to limit the time thereof. A time will come, Mat: 24 35.
when heaven and earth shall pass away: when the Sun shall be darkened; and
the Moon shall not give her light; verse. 29
and the Stars shall fall from heaven; and the powers of the heavens shall be
shaken: but of that day, verse. 36
and hour knows noe man, noe not the Angels in heaven; but the Father
only. The earth (I know) shall have a time of dissolution; and her funeral
piles shall be kindled, and fired by him, Is: 30.33.
whose breath, like a stream of brimstone, does kindle Tophet. Yet, though I
know not how soon this time shall be expired, I hope it may be deferred for
many ages: and so peradventure it may be. But what if it be? What can the
delaying thereof advantage me? How many ages have passed since the creation of
the world! How many millions of people have had their successions since the
death of Abel! I neither was created with the first; nor (for any thing I know)
shall I remain with the last. If therefore the earth, and the seasons of the
earth shall continue a thousand years; if yet I live not out that thousand
years, what can the age of the world advantage me? Why then do I fasten my
hopes upon future times? Why do I confidently reckon upon years to come; or
months; or weeks; or days? Nay, why upon to morrow? Why upon an hour? Why
upon a minuit? There is nothing more sure then that my former days are past,
and gone; and may not be re-called: Nothing is more certain, then that the
present instant is short, and cannot continue: And nothing, again, is more
uncertain to me, then the future time whereon I depend. Moreover: If I were
sure to live a certain proportion, and number of days, or weeks, or months:
2. King 20.6.
if I were sure that the Lord would add unto my days fifteen years as he
did to Hezekiahs; yet how do I know that he would give me grace to repent in
those fifteen years? An impenitent life is but a living death; and (which is
worst of all) after that comes judgment. Heb: 9.27.
If then I vainly flatter my self with a hope that my life shall be
prolonged; and relying upon the broken reed of that deceaving hope, if I
defer my repentance; I do but hope that God will lengthen my days that I
may increase my sins; and so, by consequence that my punishment may be
increased. There is indeed, a sort of coveteous people in the world, which
promise to themselves a continuance of their lives, that they may increase
their riches. These are they which say, Iam: 4 13.
To day, or to morrow we will go into such a city, and continue there a
year, and buy, and sell, and get gain; verse. 14
whereas (as the Apostle says) they know not what shall be to morrow. For,
what is our life? It is even a vapor, that appears for a little time and then
vanishes away. And there is a sort of luxurious Atheists, and Epicures, which
say, Come ye, Is: 56.12.
I will fetch wine and we will fill our selves with strong drink; and to
morrow shall be as this day, and much more abundant. Wised: 2.5.
These are they which say Our time is a very shadow that passes away; and
after our end, there is noe returning; for it is fast sealed that noe man
comes again: verse. 6.
Come on, therefore; let us enjoy the good things that are present; and let us
speedily use the creatures, verse. 7.
like as in youth. Let us fill our selves with costly wine, and ointments; and
let noe flower of the spring pass us. verse. 8.
Let us crown our selves with rose-buds, before they be withered: verse. 9.
Let none of us go without his part of voluptuousness; let us leave tokens of
our joyfullnes in every place; for this is our portion, and our lot is this.
And these are they, which (like the rich Epicure in the Gospel) say unto their
Souls, Lu: 12.19.
Soul, thou have much goods laid up for many years; take thine ease; eat,
drink, and be merry. All these suppose that man was created only for meats;
and not meats for man. They conceave that every one shall have a time of
pleasure; and wickedly they seek it in the vanity of the creatures. But oh!
that both they, and I, might ever have those words of the All mighty sounding
in our ears, verse. 20
Thou fool; this night thy soul shall be required of thee; and then, whose
shall those things be, which thou have provided? This night, Lord? Yes, this
very hour, this very instant thou may strike me dead, and then as death
leaves mec, judgment shall find me. O it will be a time of horror, and
amazement to those that prepare not for, to those that expect not, his comeing.
1. Pet. 4.17.
Saint Perer said long ago that, The time is come, that judgment must begin
at the house of God: and if it first begin at us (Lord put me into that
number) what shall the end be of them that obey not the Gospel of God? And if
the righteous scarcely be saved, verse. 18
where shall the ungodly, and sinners appear? Hark: Do thou hear that, o
my soul? The righteous shall scarcely be saved. This is true; for it is the
word of truth. It was inspired by his Spirit, who said, Strait is the gate,
Mat: 7.14.
and narrow is the way that leads to life; and few there be that find it. O
how I tremble, when I read that scarcely, and that few! What shall I do, to
be one of those few, allthough I obtain it never so hardly; allthough I know
that I shall scarcely attain to it? Lord, I will repent; but do thou assist
me. Lord, I will be faithful; but do thou increase my faith. Lu: 17.5.
I will, do I say? When? How? Am I sure of any time, but the present moment?
Or can I stay the present instant, and hinder it from flying? Noe, noe; I
cannot: By thy grace therefore, blessed God, even now, this very instant, I do
repent, and am unfeignedly sorrowful for all mine offenses: this very moment I
do believe all that thou have spoken in thy holy word; I do believe thee; I
do believe in thee; o Lord help thou my un-beliefe. Mar: 9.24.
If I shall have any more minuits allotted me, I will number them with my
tears, because I cannot number my sins. Is: 30.20.
I will eat the bread of sorrow; and I will drink the water of contrition,
and affliction; if I live to eat, and drink any more. See, see how
voluntarily these forward tears falling all-ready from mine eyes, present
themselves to my lips, and steal into the corners, privately (as it were)
instructing me, that they are the wine which befitt's a sinner. Lord, let me
not live, if I do not love to grieve and grieve most affectionately for my
heinous offenses: for those offenses of mine which so scourged my Redeemer,
that they fetched the very blood from his sacred body. O my God, make me,
thus, to pass away my time, if any more time shall be mine; and then I know
that thou will wi^e these tears from mine eyes; Is: 25.8
and number me with those few, Mat: 7.13.14.
which shall enter in at the strait gate. But what a tedious life in the mean
while, shall I lead, if I do nothing but weep, and cry, and mourn out my
life? Better be out of the world, then to take noe pleasure in the world. Must
I droope away my youth, and strength, while I am here; and then drop away into
my grave, and so be forgotten? Yes; I must. If I will have my heaven hereafter,
I must have my hell here. I cannot be without my hell of sin here, for the
devil is allways with me in his temptations; and why should I not desire
rather to have my hell of punishment here, then hereafter? It will be wisdom
to endure a light affliction upon earth; rather them eternal flames with the
damned. It will be good policy to forbear the vain and fruitless joys upon
earth; that I may have joys unspeakeable, and endless in heaven. This life
will not continue allways. I shall not allways live here, in the bitterness of
this anguish, and tears. There will come a time, when I shall have beauty for
ashes: Is: 61.3
the garment of gladness, for the spirit of heaviness: when I shall have
comfort and joy; and that joy shall noe man take away from me. Io: 16.22. Ps:
126.6.
If I now go on my way weeping, bearing precious seed; I shall doubtless
come again with rejoicing, bringing my sheaves with me. But when will that
time come? Will it not be long first? I am contented to weep for my sins; but
me think's, I am not willing to weep too long. O my soul, do but consider
with thy self, that all thy life is not long enough (if al of it were spent in
tears) to satisfy my God, for the smallest of mine offenses. They are
infinite in number; and he is infinite, whom they displease: Yet through the
merits of him, Lu: 19.41.
who wept over Jerusalem, my tears shall be accepted, and my sins be
forgiven. I shall not think my time of sorrow long, or tedious, if I do but
hearken to the Angel which Saint John saw standing upon the sea, and upon the
earth; Reu: 10 5.
who lifted up his hand to heaven, verse. 6^
And swear by him that lives for ever and ever; who created heaven, and the
thines that therein are; and the earth and the things that therein are; and the
sea, and the things that are there in; that there should be time noe longer.
This will come to pass; and I am sure that it cannot be long first. Let me
but have a little patience; let me possess my soul in patience but a little
while; Lu: 21.19. Heb: 10 37.
and he that shall come, will come, and he will not tarry. O my God, either
lend me noe more minuits; or howsoever let me have noe more sin. But if I
must of necessity sin, so long as I shall live; give me true repentance, as
often as I sin: or if that be a task too full of difficulty for a woman to
perform, by reason of the weakness of the sex, and the frailty of the
flesh; yet give me such repentance, as may be both true, and timely, and
acceptable. Lord, I desire not to live any longer, unless I might live without
offending thy gracious Majesty. What time soever thou shall allott me
hereafter, it shall be more then I will expect, lest it should wickedly entice
me to defer my repentance. Yet if it be thy pleasure, to add unto my days;
let it be thy pleasure likewise, to add unto my repentance. Make me thy child
by grace; and then I shall pant with David; and thirst, with David; and cry,
Ps: 42.2 Reu. 22 20.
with David, O when shall I come, and appear before thee? Finish soon these
days of sin; and come Lord Jesus; come quickly.

The Prayer.
Ancient of days, Dan. 7.9. Reu. 4.8.
whose garment is white as snow, and the hair of whose head is like the pure
wool; thou which were and art, and art to come, Lord God All mighty; have
mercy upon me, the meanest, and the unworthiest of all thy creatures. Mercy, o
Lord, I beg for the wicked, and most sinful loss of my precious time. O
Lord forgive whatsoever I have done amiss: pardon, o father, whatsoever I have
offended in. This, or none, must be my time of sorrow. Lord grant that I may
weep, and grieve, and mourn for my former sinful life. It is thy custom, o
God; it is thy promise, Ps: 50.15. Neh. 9.27.
to hearken unto those who are in distress. When the Israelites cried, thou
deliveredst them from the hand of their enemies: in their troubles when they
cried unto thee, thou heardest them from heaven. My sins are mine enemies;
and far more cruel, then were the enemies of Israel. Lord be thou as
gracious now unto me in this time of my trouble, as thou were then unto thy
people: hear me from heaven, and forgive me the wickedness of my misse-led
life. Is: 33.2.
I wait for thee o my God; be thou mine arm every morning; and my salvation
in this time of spiritual sorrow. Forgive me the loss of the time already
past; accept of my repentance, at this time which is present; and so protect,
guide, and bless me, that what time soever shall be to come, I may wholly
dedicate it to thee the donour. Ps: 20.12. 1. Pet. 1.17. Ephesians. 5.16. Romans 13.11.
Gal. 6.10. Io: 9.4:
Teach me so to number my days that I may apply my heart unto wisdom. Make
me to pass the time of my sojourning here in fear; redeeming the time,
because the days are evil; and considering, that it is now high time for me,
to awake out of the sleep of security. Grant that, as I have opportunity, I
may do good unto all; but especially to the house-hould of faith. The night
comes, when none can work: Lord do thou draw me, Heb. 12 1.
that I may follow after thee; that so I may run with patience the race which
is set before me, verse. 2.
looking unto thee, my Jesus, the author, and finisher of my faith. Make me to
watch, and attend thy coming, o Christ, with the wise virgins, Mat: 25 10.
having oil in my lamp; that so, when thou come for me, I may be ready for
thee: and then, for thine own sake, o God, Rev. 19 9.
admit me to the blessed supper of the Lamb; for thy promise sake, receave
me to mercy; and bring me to thine eternal Kingdom for Jesus sake, my only
Lord, and Savior, Amen.

THE FOURTH SUBjECT. Tears in the night.
The Soliloquie. Divided into three parts, fitted for the time. 1 Immediately
before goeing to bed. 2 Of lying down in the bed. 3 Of awaking in the night.

The First part. Immediately before goeing to bed.
THE EjACULATION.
Psalm. 5. verse. 1. Give ear to my words, o Lord; consider my meditation:

verse. 2. Hearken unto the voice of my cry, my king, and my God; for unto thee
will I pray.

IT was a pious resolution of holy David, Ps: 132.3.
that he would not come into the tabernacle of his house, nor go up into his
bed: verse. 4.
He would not give sleep to his eyes, nor slumber to his eyelids; until he
had found out a place for the Lord; verse. 5.
an habitation for the mighty God of Jacob. A resolution well besitting me
too, though he was a King, and I am but the meanest, the lowest of the
daughters of Abraham. The day has bid farewell, and is laid to sleep in the
evening; and the darkness of the evening inviteth me both by custom and by a
debt which I owe unto my wearied limbs, to prepare for rest. But she who
sleeps not in God, rest's not at all. To him therefore will I address my
self, that I may be the fitter to un-dresse my self, and repair to the place
of my sweet repose. But how shall I go to him? Where shall I find him? 'T is
too late to seek him, in the Temple; and I have not the means which David
had, to build him one, whenever I please. But this shall not much trouble
me. I must not be so superstitious as to think that God is confined only to
the material Temple: nor may I be so profane, as to neglect that place (at
fit opportunities) which is set apart for his service. I will have a
reverend, and due esteem of those sacred places dedicated wholly to the
service of my God, but I must be careful to avoid both superstition, and
profaneness. When I go into them, I must put off my shoes from my feet, as
Moses was commanded by the Lord himself; Ex. 3.5.
for the place whereon he stood was holy ground. Deu: 25 9.
His shoes were to be put off, as resigning his right unto God; as mourning,
and humbling, himself before God; Eze: 24 27. Is: 20, 2 4. 2. Sam. 15.30. Mat:
21 13.
putting off all uncleanesse and earthinesse, as he did those shoes. So must
I too, when I go unto that house of prayer: I must in all humility resign up
my self to my maker, that I may honor him with my service. But must I not,
Ought I not at all times, and in all places to do the same? Ought I not to
pray every where? Yes doubtless; Genesis 28 18.19.
this is my duty. In the field I must build him a Bethel, with the Patriarch
Jacob; and there must I pray. Io. 18.^
In the garden I must follow my blessed Redeemer; and pray where he prayed,
who satisfied his father for the transgression of Adam committed in the garden.
In my chamber I must imitate the prophet Daniel; Dan. 6.10. Reu. 3.12.
and my windows, mine eyes being open toward Jerusalem, the new Jerusalem, the
vision of peace, I must kneel upon my knees, and pray and give thanks before
my God. In my bed I must pray with sick Hezekiah, 2. King 20.2.
who turned his face to the wall, and prayed unto the Lord. Thus in the field,
in the garden, in my chamber, in my bed I must pray; in every place; upon every
opportunity. This is Saint Paul's command, that we pray every where, 1. Tim.
2.8.
lifting up holy hands. This is the exhortation of the Psalmist: Bless the
Lord in all places of his dominion: Ps: 103.22. 1. Cor. 1.2.
And Saint Paul sends salutations to all that in every place call upon the
name of Jesus Christ our Lord; both theirs (says he) and ours. This then I
must do likewise; else, though my bed be ready for me, yet I shall not be
ready for my bed: for though that be made, I may be undone. I must not think
to be refreshed by the elder brother of death, and forget the younger. I know
nothing to the contrary, but that my bed may be my grave; in which (like unto
the Princes of Babylon, and het wisemen, her Captains, and her rulers, and her
mighty men) I may sleep a perpetual sleep, Ier: 51.57.
and not awake. I will therefore embalme my self with my tears, while I am yet
alive; before I climb up into my bed, which may prove my grave. I will dye with
ease, if dye I must; or I will sleep in quiett, if sleep I may; for either
whereof, or for both I will fit, and prepare myself by a sorrow for mine
offenses. I will un-dresse my soul, and dis-robe her of all the new, but
filthy, attire of sin, which this day she has put on: and away will I throw
those polluted clothes, hoping they shall never be worn again. I will
un-brace, I will open my bosom; and there will I find the lurking iniquities,
which slunke in by day: and when I have found them, away they shall trice, they
shall be gone; for I must keep noe room for such treacherous guests. The Sunn
is set as if (me think's) it were ashamed to behold the follies which this
day I committed. The flattering darkness seems to offer me a mantle, to
hide mine enormities; and a worse darkness then this, even that of ignorance,
would rake them up in silence. But this must not be endured; for if I wink
with mine eyes that I might not see my follies, I must not imagine that my
wilful darkness, can veil the eyes of my all-seeing God. The eyes of the
Lord are in every place, Prove. 15.3.
behoulding the evil, and the good. Thus God will doubtless see mine
imperfections: but so must I too; and for them I must weep, 'till I can see
^oe more. I must view them with a mistie, drizeling, dropping eye; with
sadness and sorrow; lest he behold them with an eye of anger, and revenge.
They must be seen by me, and be bewailed by me; in sadness they must; or
else I shall never see my God with joy; and rejoicing. I will therefore sit
down, and consider with my self, and examine my self how I have spent the
day; before I betake my self to the rest of the night. I will examine my
conscience by certain Quaere's; and make it render me answers to these
demands.

1. At what time, in the morning, did I arise from my bed? 2. What first did I?
3. How devoutly prayed I? 4. What Scripture read I? 5. How did I understand it?
6. How did I meditate upon it? 7. How did I practice it? 8. What business did
I? 9. How lawful was my employment? 10. How diligently did I follow it? 11. To
what end, and purpose did I it? 12. What thoughts entertained I? 13. What
company kept I? 14. What good words spoke I? 15. What bad words uttered I? 16.
How moderately, and how thankfully did I cate, and drink? 17. What recreation
took I? 18. How lawful was it? 19. How long did it continue? 20. Was it not
affected with too much delight? 21. By it was I made more apt for my vocation?
22. How free from offending others, did I demean my self? 23. How did I
benefit my neighbors both in words, and deeds? 24. What relief did I afford
to the poor? 25. With what singleness, and privacy gave I it? 26. How often
prayed I? 27. With what zeal, and devotion? 28. What old sins thought I on?
29. With what sorrow, and contrition? 30. With what holy desire of revenge upon
my self? 31. What particular sin did I especially repent of? 32. What
comfort had I, in that repentance? 33. How careful was I to avoid temptations,
either to that, or other offenses? 34. What new sin this day has been added
to mine account? 35. What old offense has been new finned over? 36. What
tears have I shed for it? 37. What sighs, and groans have I sent to heaven
for pardon for it? 38. The Sun is set Ephesians: 4.26.
Is it not gone down on my? 1. Wrath? 2. Envy? 3. Uncharitablnesse? 4.
Ungodliness?

LOrd, how weary am I in the searching out of my sins, who have been too
too much delighted in the acting of them! How do I droope, and retch, eagerly
desiring to take my rest, before I have yet summed up mine account! O that my
heart had a pulse as audible as has the clock; and that it would strike both
truly, and lowdly whenever I offend; that I might hear it; that I might
seele it; that I might know it; that so I might repent! Though God created
darkness, Gen: 1.5. Ps: 104 20.
and called it Night: though he makes darkness, and it is night, wherein all
the beasts of the forest do creep forth: yet he created not the darkness
of mine understanding. O that all the beasts of the forest, all the sins of
my heart would now creep forth, that I might see them in their ugly shapes,
and toil them in my grief, or drown them in my sorrow! He that (I know)
does see them, I as well know does loath them. Ps: 139.12.
The darkness hides not from him, but the night shines as the day: the
darkness and light to him are both alike. He who in the night commanded both
the Manna, Number: 11.9.
and the deaw to fall upon the camp of the Israelites, can (if he please)
command the deaw of his grace to fall this night upon my sinful soul; and
with his celestial Manna he can so refresh my inward man, that I may as well
live unto him, as by him. He can lead me, Ex: 13.21.
he can go before me as he did before his people by day in a pillar of a
cloud, to lead me the way; and by night in a pillar of fire, to give me
light to go by day, and night. Lord, with thy people of Israel, I travail
through the wilderness of this world: Let the fire of thy love, o Christ,
lead me through the darkness of this present life; that so when these days
of my sin shall be finished, Ps: 56.13.
I may reign with thee, in the light of the living.

About this time it was, 2. Sam. 11.2.
that David arose from off his bed, now I am preparing to go ^to mine; even in
the evening tide: and he ^alked upon the roof of the Kings house; and ^om the
roof he saw Bathsheba, washing herself; and by the eye he was betrayed to
the ^ct of adultery. His eyes were quick, and ^en to wickedness, which by the
time of the night should rather have been ready to draw the curtains. What?
Did she purposely wash her self, that she might be the more unclean? The
more royally defiled? Did ^ee purposely arise, that he might dange^ously fall;
and that, not from the roose of the house of the King, but from the statutes,
and ordinances of the most high God? O, ^ee thinks, 't is but shifting the
sex, and in something I resemble that foul adulterer. Proudly I do walk in
my thoughts, as it were upon the roof of the King's house. My conscience, my
soul is my Bathsheba, foul and polluted; but I wash it with my tears; and
yet, Lord how apt am I to tempt her to uncleanesse worse then she has
formerly been defiled with. I am that very David: 1. Sam. 19.11.
my sin is Saul, that watches to slay me: but o let my Michal, my soul
tell me, that if I save not my life to night, to morrow, yea this night before
to morrow, I shall be, I may be, slain. To night let me therefore drown all
my Saul's, all mine iniquities in my tears; lest, Job 17.13.
before the morning, the grave be mine house, and I make my bed in the
darkness. Me think's, this very evening putts me in mind of my mortality;
for the Psalmist tell's me, Ps: 104.23.
that man goes forth unto his work, and to his labor until the evening: and
in that evening may be as well the cloasing of eyes for an eternal, as a
temporarie-sleepe. When I look out at my window, Lord how pale the Moon
appears at the sight of a sinner. O how the stars do seem to wink, and as
it were, to shut their eyes when I gaze upon them, as if it made their brighter
eyes even ready to water, to behold the dry ones of so remorselesse an
offender. By the cleerenesse of their sparkling fires they seem to look
through me; and by their wonderful numbers, in a silent arithmetic, they tell
me of mine infinite, innumerable offenses. When thus with bashfullnesse, I am
enforced to shut my casement again, and look back in my chamber, me think's
this very candle tell's me the vanity of my sinful condition. Even like unto
this, are all my best, and most glorious actions: they are composed of nothing
but tallow, and filth: and though they make a goodly, and resplendent show to
the world; yet do they stink in the nosetrills of the great Creator. This
burns; and I consume, and wast away. This I may suffer to burn, until all
the matter be consumed, and spent, ^r else I may extinguish, and put it out at
^y pleasure. Just so may my God deal ^kewise with me. He may spare me upon
^arth, Ps: 32.4
until my moisture be like to the ^routh in summer: or he may putt me out
^resently; this night; at the very instant when (...) extinguish this
enlightening flame. That which nourishes this light, is apt to destroy (...),
if I but turn it upside down: so my meats, and my drinks are apt to destroy
me with ^loying, with surfeits. Without this artificial brightness, mine eye
cannot fix it self upon any object, or distinguish of colors; and yet, what
is this to the light of the Sun; or that, ^o the brightness of my God? Lord,
what an ^ncouth thing it is, to be in darkness! Yet thus any God (if he had
so decreed) might all-ways ways have punished me; and have taken from ^nee the
sight of mine eyes. Thus, yea much worse then thus, may he justly be revenged
on me too; and for my deeds of darkness, he may throw me into utter
darkness, where shall be weeping, and gnashing of teeth. Mat: 8.12. 1. Sam.
28.8.
Surely Saul did not know this power of God; or he did not remember it, when
he disguised himself, and put on other raiment, and went, he and two men
with him and came to the witch of Endor, by night; and prayed her to divine
unto him by the familiar Spirit, and bring up Samuel again, to answer his
demands. O, that Spirit is the Devil, and that Devil is too familiar; and
yet, how apt am I with Saul, rather to consult with him, and to follow his
suggestions, then to apply my self to the oracles of my God! This present
night, for ought that I know, may be as sad, and dismal to me, as that was to
the Egyptians, when Pharach rose up in the night, Ex: 12.30.
he and all his servants and all the Egyptians; and there was a great cry in
Egypt for there was not a house, where there was not one dead. But, to prevent
the fear of such a horrid judgment, I will sue for compassion; and beg of my
God, that instead of destroying me; or any of this house with a sudden
destruction, he will this night rather not only slay my first borne, mine
original sin; but also all the abortive issue of mine actual
transgressions: And, though the cry be great because my sinful self am
unwilling to leave them, or they me; yet I will pray, that the destroying
Angel may come, and destroy them; that so my self, my poor soul may be
preserved alive. Such a destruction as this would be my best preservation; and
such a slaughter would purchase my rejoicing. These sins are mine enemies,
and those enemies whose ruin and subversion I am bound to pray for. I will
therefore humbly beseech my powerful preserver to slay them, to cut them off
speedily, presently, without any longer delay. And that my prayers may be more
effectual, they shall join with my tears in my humblest supplication for a
freedom from these ene^ies. I will imitate David; Ps: 42.3
and my tears shall be my meat day, and night. It is but justice, that these
eyes which have wandered after enticing objects, should be punished with the
smart of brinish tears. With such weeping eyes will I behold mine offenses,
and on them will I look as now I do upon ^his burning Light; that so, like
unto this, ^hey may appear glaring, and multiplied; even greater by far
through the clowdines of mine eyes, then otherwise I should view them. The eye
is commonly a teacher of merry; for when it is fixed on an object full of
dis^resse, it presently invite's the heart to compassion. The eye of my God is
never shutt; never weary of pitying; allthough both mine eyes, and my
compassion also are seldom open. Therefore mine eye shall weep; and when I
weep, his eye will pity: My heart shall sigh, and his heart will
commiserate: My whole self shall wholly offer up it self to him, in my
devotions; and then, I am assured, he will embrace me in his arms; and watch
over me by his protection. I will weep for my sins; I will grieve for the
offenses of the day that is past: and weeping, and grieving, I will address my
self to the keeper of Israel, Ps. 121.4.
who neither slumbereth, nor sleeps, and thus I will say:

The Evening prayer.
OMniscient God, who have seen the offenses which this day has produced; and
for them might justly throw me into the land of darkness; Vouchsafe, I
besiec^ thee, to behold the tears of a repenting prodigal. The sins which
I have committed I cannot number; nor can I vallew thy mercies in forbearing
me, so grievous an offendour. The day is gone, and the evening has teneth me
to my desired sleep: Lord le^ it be thy pleasure to bury my sins in the
darkness of oblivion; and make me afraid and ashamed to commit them any more
by the light of the Sun. Let thy Christ shine i^ my heart, and warm my cold
and chill^wed devotion; that with fervency, and zeal I may ever address my
prayers unto thee. O let (...) settforth before thee, as incens^ and the (...)
^f my hands, be an evening sacrifice. Ps: 74.16.
The (...), o Lord, is thine, and the night is likewise thine: do thou take
me this night, Ps: 91.5 verse. 6.
into thy holy protection. Let m^ not be afraid for the terro^ by night; nor
for the pestilence that walks i^arknesse. O tho^ that have made the Moon^ and
the Stars t^ govern the night; Ps: 136 9.
shine mercifully into m^ dark, and polluted conscience; and revea^ unto me
all the errors of my life, that a^ the gate of thy mercy I may beg for
remision. The Levites did thank, 1. Chr. 23.30.
and praise thee ^s well at evening, as in the morning. Lord, though I am
weak, though I am unworthy; ^et so well as I can, so well as thou art plea^ed
to enable thee thereto) I praise, and ^lesse thy glorious name, for all thy
mercies which thou have showed unto me; and in ^articular for thy protection
this day which ^s past. One Lamb, by thine appointment, Ex: 29.39.
^as to be offered at evening day by day, by thy ^hildren of Israel. My soul,
o Lord, should ^e that Lamb, and my self an Israelite, but ^y soul is
blemished; I my self am rebel^ous. To thee therefore do I offer ( not my
^olluted soul, as it is full of uncleanesse; but ^ather) that innocent Lamb of
thee my God which takes away the sins of the world, most ^umbly besieching
thee to hearken unto him ^terceding for me; and by his death and ^assion to
grant me pardon for mine offen^es. First, seal unto my soul the remission
^f my sins; and then let me sleep, and ^est in thee. Refresh my wearied
limbs with ^ comfortable repose: and grant that I ^ay neither offend thee by
dreams, and fan^asies; nor displease thee with excessive, and ^mmoderate
sleep. Preserve me from the ^angers of fire, storms, tempests, thieves, and
whatsoever else may hurt my person, or ^state. All is thine; do tho^ be the
keeper, and protector of all. Thou have promised by thy Prophet, that the
righteous shall ente^ into peace, Is: 57.2
and rest in their beds. Gratiou^ father, cover me with the righteousness o^
Christ thy Son; and grant me the peac^ of thy chosen, that I may rest in
thee. Let m^ sleep be like that of the Church that my hea^ may allways awake
unto thee. Cant: 5 2.
If this night^ this sleep shall be my last, Lord make it my best that I may
awake in thine arms, and live in thy bosom. Ps: 4.8.
Let me lay me do w^ in peace, and sleep; and do thou, Lord, mak^ me dwell
in safety. So be it, o my father, for the merits and worthiness of thy Son
Jesus Christ my only Lord, and Savior, Amen.

The second part Of the Soliloquie. Fitted for the time of lying down in the
bed.
THe advice of David to his enemies, I take, me think's, as spoken to my
self; where he bid's them to Stand in awe, Ps: 4.4.
and sin not; to commune with their own hearts upon their beds, and be
still. It is fit that I likewise say my request with my mouth, and my petition
with my heart, and pray upon my bed, and remember the day of death for ever. I
have meditated upon the Evening; I have prayed for ^otection: and, since that,
I have disrobed ^y self of the garments of the day: But, ^ith them, have I put
off mine offenses? (...) do not I intend to put them on again (...) morrow,
with the apparel of my body? ^o this I am apt by nature: from this, o my ^od,
deliver me, by thy grace. My clothes ^e laid by; and even now, me thought,
(...) could skarce hasten soon enough, to hide ^ee in my bed from mine own
sight of ^ine own nakedness. Lord, what a fearful ^ing is a guilty
conscience, which made Adam and Eve to see that they were naked, Genesis 3.7.
^d guilty of their folly; and yet to make ^t figge-leav'd aprons to hide their
shame! ^hus do I blush at my self; and yet I have ^ely those fig leaves to
hide my sins from ^e view of the world. verse. 8.
But Adam and Eve ^d themselves also, even from the presence of ^e Lord God:
So do I endeavor likewise ^hen I am afraid to consider of, or unwilling (...)
confess unto him my manifold transgres^ons. My garments are off, the emblems
^oth of my pride, and my poverty: for the ^ormer is discovered in the richness
of my ^bes; and the latter in the necessity of them. Thus do we simple
sinners wear the very ^wells of the worms, and the fleeces of the ^nocent
beasts, in the time of the day for ^odestie, for heat, and for ornament: and
in the night we lie down in the feathers of the fowls, for our ease, and our
delight. Here now I am laid; here I am stretched out, as if I were created
only for ease, and repose. But, o my drowzie eyes, watch ye a little; and ye
my thoughts, ponder awhile upon the place where I am laid.

Such a bed as this, has been a place of torment, Ex: 8.3
as well as ease; when the river brought forth froggs abundantly among the
Egyptians, which went up, and came into their houses, and into their
bed-chambers; yea, and upon their very beds. Lord, how it make's me startle
but to name those loathsome creatures! and yet, these were they which were the
Egyptians chamber-fellowes; these were their cold, and noisome bed-fellowes.
Even thus have I deserved to be plagued too, as were those Egyptians: for how
often has God, by his Moses, and his Aaron, by his officers, and his ministers
commanded me to let my Israel, my soul go serve the Lord; and yet, like hard
hearted Pharaoh, I have still refused? But have I not a punishment, for my
rebellion, worse then they had? For they had but the loathsome vermin to
torment their bodies but I have worse; I have my ugly sins to torment my
conscience, which croake so in my bosom, that I know not where to free my
self from their hideous noise. But since these froggs have lived in the
waters, and bred in the waters, which became blood, through the deep dye of my
heinous offenses: I will therefore do as once Elisha the Prophet did by the
waters of Jericho; 2. King. 2.21. Ps: 38.18. Ex 12.31. verse. 32
I will cast salt into the waters, and heal them. I will confess my
wickednesses, and be sorry for my sins. I will dispatch mine Israelitesse,
and she shall go, and serve the Lord: her flocks also, and her herds (my
thoughts, and my meditations) shall go and serve my God; that they may bless
me also. Then shall these crawling sins dye out of this house of my heart;
Ex: 8.13.14.
and I will gather them up together on heaps, and drown them in my tears,
because they have made such a stink in the nostrills of my God.

Such a bed as this, has been the grave, and such sheets the winding sheets
of diverse persons, who dreamed not of it. 2. Sam. 4.7.
When Ishbosheth lay on his bed in his bedchamber, the wicked and treacherous
Rechab and Baanah smote him, and slew him and beheaded him. 2. Chr: 24.25. Ps:
89.19.
So did Zabad and Iehozabad slay Ioash on his bed, and he dyed. So it may
happen unto me too, unless the Lord be my defender, and the holy one of
Israel my protector. Solomon has forbid the company of such Rechabs and
Baanahs, such Zabads, and Ichozabads saying, Prove. 4.14, verse. 16
Enter not into the path of the wicked; and go not in the way of evil men:
For thy sleep not, except they have done mis^hiefe; and their sleep is taken
away unless they cause some to fall. Yet I have entertained such in my
society; yea, I have enticed them, and hired them to the destruction even of my
self. My sins, oh my sins are the murderers that are come unto my bed;
and, without the mercy of him who destroyed death, will bring me, 2. Pet. 2 3.
even me to destruction; my damnation shall not slumber.

Such a bed as this, 2. Sam. 13.5.
has been the bed of incest, when Amnon, by the advice of Ionadab, lay down
on his bed, and made himself sick, that his sister Tamar might be sent unto
him by his tender, and compassionate father. O what hellish plotts were
invented for the satisfaction of the lust-sick adulterer! He was but to
counterfeit a sickness, who yet was wounded at the heart: and she who both by
obedience to her father, and love to her brother was ready to dress the dish
he required, was overcome at length by the scorching flames of his incestuous
fury. Heb. 13 4.
That bed which is honorable in the state of marriage, yet not unless it be
kept undefiled, was made the torment of a sister un wedded: and he who could
not enjoy her by the rules of religion, forced her to his appetite by the
violence of his hands. But as the act was foul, so the effect was revengfull;
yea and even the innocent suffered for the villainy of the rasisher; in so much
as Amnon hated her exceedingly; 2. Sam. 13.15.
so that the hatred wherewith he hated her, was greater then the love
wherewith he has loved her. Have not I been sick with Amnon too? Have not I
longed, and pined, and lingered after unlawful pleasures, and wicked delights?
What though they grew not into the height of incest, or adultery of the body?
My poor soul, that was a virgin, has been ravished, has been deflowred
with delusions; and at length has been conquered by the violence of the
tempter. O my God, do thou be pleased to put such an enmity hereafter
between the tempter and the sinner that my soul may hence forward abhor
those suggestions, as the sated ravisher did his sister; that the hatred
wherewith she shall hate them, may be greater then the love wherewith she
has loved them.

Such a bed as this (or at least thus designed for a nest of repose) did Ahab
lay him down upon, and turned away his face, 1. King 21.4.
and would eat noe bread, when he was come into his house heavy, and
displeased, because of the word which Naboth the Iezreelite had spoken unto
him: for he had said, I will not give thee the inheritance of my fathers. Here
was trouble, and discontent; and presently tossing, and tumbling upon the bed;
and all because a poor subject would not sell his little vineyard to the great
King. All this was but for a little spott of ground, so small, that it was not
so much as a grain of the finest sand, to the mountain of Ararat, in
comparison of this globe, and fabric of the earth. But I might have a Kingdom
greater then the world, above the world, which I should not buy, but only
beg; and upon my humble suite it would be freely given me: and yet though
hithexto I have neglected it, I throw not my self upon my bed in a sad, and
pensive discontent, because I have been backward in sieking, and petitioning
for it. But in steed of thus lying on my bed, into it I go, and in it I lie
down, where I rather choose to sleep away the thought of it, then in a holy
ambition contrive the way to be possessed there of.

Such a bed as this did the harlot speak of, when she enticed her lover, Pro:
7.16.
saying, I have decked my bed with coverings of tapestrie, with carved work,
verse. 17
with fine linen of Egypt: I have perfumed my bed with myrrh, aloes, and
cynamon: verse. 18
Come let us take our fill of love until the morning; let us sollace our
selves with love. O what enticements were there to wickedness! What
provocations to uncleanesse! Richer were the coverings of the harlot's bed, and
much more vallewable then was the person of the owner. Those perfumes were
ordained more for necessity then delight; and yet the stink of her wickedness
out-vyed the fragrancy of the myrrh, and the cynamon. How, me thinks, do I,
or (at least) should I loath the impudency of such a tempting adulteress! What
a stain is a harlot to our frail sex; when she whose beauty should be
discovered by the modesty of a blush, does shamefully importune her lover to
uncleanes! And yet, such a one might I have been too, had not the grace of my
preserver made me detest the offense. Even to such folly was I prone by
nature; but from it am I withdrawn by the mercy of my God. The adulteress
Iezabel had made such use of the place of repose: just it was therefore that the
Lord should cast her into a bed; Reu. 2.22.
and them that committed adultery with her into great tribulation, except
they would repent them of their deeds. The bed may be a place for pun^shment,
as well as for ease: and those who defile it with uncleanesse may look to be a
burden unto it and it unto them in their diseases. It is but justice, that
sin should be punished in the very place where 't is committed. Let me
therefore examine my self: and if God in mercy has preserved me from the
pollution, let me try if yet there lurk not an intent in the thought. Yet
here I must not stay: I must consider with my self that there is a spiritual
fornication too, as well as a corporal; and that idolatry is a spiritual
adultery. Thus upon a lofty, Is: 57.7
and high mountain had Judah set her bed; and thither went she up, to offer
sacrifice. Thus the Babylonians came to idolatrous Aholibah into the bed of
love; Eze. 23 17.
and they defiled her with their whoredom, and she was polluted with them. If
I am free from this adultery, I must bless the Lord my God, the jealous God,
Ex: 20.3.
who said in his commandment, Thou shall have none other Gods but me. If I
have been guilty, I will besiech him with my tears to remitt mine offenses;
and through his grace to preserve me from a future relapse.

On such a bed as this does the wicked usually devise his mischief; Ps: 36.4
when he sets himself in noe good way, nor abhors that which is evil.
Against such did the prophet cry out, and say, Mich. 2 ^.
Woe unto them that devise iniquity, and work evil upon their beds: when the
morning is light they practice it, because it is in the power of their hands.
From this I fear, I have not been free: for have noe wicked purposes, have
noe sinful devices been forged, ben contrived in my bed? When my meditations
should have been fixed, and fastened upon my God, have I never entertained the
suggestions of the Devil? Have I never prided my self in the richness of the
ornaments of my chamber, and my bed? In the coverings of the walls, the curious
hangings? In the deckings of the bed, the curtains and vallences? Have not my
desires been wandering after the furniture of a King, Ect. 1.6.
even King Ahasuerus; who had white, and green, and blew hangings, fastened
with cords of fine linen, and purple to silver rings, and pillars of marble?
Have I not wished, for his beds of gold, and silver, upon a pavement of red,
and blew, and white, and black marble? Or has not my bed been the bed of
wantonness, or immoderate ease? Have I not been like unto those against whom
the Prophet pronounces the woe, saying, Amos. 6.1. verse. 4.
Woe unto them that are at ease in Sion: That lie upon beds of ivory, and
stretch themselves upon their couches, and eat the lambs out of the flock,
and the calves out of the midest of the stall. I must not be too indulgent to
my self. Too much self-love may prove my destruction. The sins which I am
guilty of must not be denied; neither may they lie dry with me in my bed. O
noe: Therefore lest I sleep too much; or they have rest too much; or the devil
entertainment too much; (that unclean spirit, Mat: 12.43.
whose custom it is, in dry places to sieke his rest) I am resolved, with
David, Ps. 6.6.
that every night I will make my bed to swim and will water my couch with my
tears. Every night shall be a night of sorrow, a night of weeping for my
sins, Ps. 30.5
that so my God may send me joy in the morning. Apt I am to distrust my God,
and to fix my thoughts upon carking and caring for the things of to morrow.
Nor am I single in the offense: too many are apt to sacrifice to their own
shallow, and titular wisdom; choosing rather to depend upon their own
discretion, then to rely upon the providence of the great disposer. Eccl: 8.16.
Such there are indeed that neither day, nor night do see sleep with their
eyes and (like the wife in the Proverbs) their candle goes not out by night.
Prove: 31.18.
But I must remember the command of my Redeemer, and Take noe thought for the
morrow; Mat: 6.34.
for the morrow shall take thought for the things of it self. Sufficient unto
the day is the evil thereof. And as I may not distrust the providence of my
God; so neither will I, nor may I boast of to morrow; Prove: 27.1.
for I know not what a day, or a night may bring forth: But I will besiech my
God to give me content with what soever he shall send. Mercy I will beg for,
howsoever he shall dispose of me and comfortable sleep, if he spare me
life. I will besiech him, that if through a disturbed fant'sie. I be molested
with dreams; even in those dreams he will be pleased to open mine ears,
Job: 33.16.
and seal mine instruction. If the master, and builder of this house of clay,
the great Creator of heaven and earth, shall come, and this night shall call
me to judgment; Ps: 139.13.
Grant o my God (o thou who did form me and fashion me in the womb of
my mother) that I may watch in thee, for the comeing of thy self; whether it
shall be at midnight, or at the cock-crowing, or in the morning; Mat. 13.35.
that though thou come suddenly, yet thou find me not sleeping. And now I am
lyeing down, let me not be afraid: Prove: 3.24.
yea make me lie down, and my sleep to be sweet unto me. Thus will I close
mine eyes with sorrowful tears: and thus will I rely upon the protection of
my God.

The third part Of the soliloquie. To be used at the time of awaking in the
night.
O What a trouble is this, to one desirous to sleep! Thus to toss, and tumble
this way, and that way! Thus to long to sleep, and not be able to sleep! I am
sure that I did sleep; but I am not sure when I shall sleep again. Lord, how
silent is the night! How quiet are all things, but my disturbed self! How
slowly does the clock number the hours! It strike's, one, two etc: and yet I
sleep not. It was the complaint of holy Job unto the Lord, saying, Job: 7.13.
Verse. 14.
When I say, my bed shall comfort me; my couch shall ease my complaint: Then
thou sharest me with dreams and terrifiest me through visions. Me think's I
could partly be contented to be troubled as Job was; with dreams, and visions;
so that I might be sure to have the benefit of the sleep. Every thing that
move's but gently, possesses me with fears. The watchman of the night,
which awaked the Apostle out of the sleep of security, disturb's me with
chaunting out the disisions of the night. But is there noe way to be sure
either to sleep sweetly, or to awake contentedly? Is: 57.21.
There is noe sleep, noe rest, noe peace, says my God, to the wicked. If I am
wicked, I cannot sleep: or if I do, it is rather a cessation from labor,
then a contented repose: for the awaking conscience disturbes the fantsie with
hideous apparitions. Let me a little enter into my self, and consider whether
I was prepared for sleep, before I applied my self unto it? Did I enter into
my bed with divine meditations; and make up the account of my former life,
before I drew the curtains of mine eyes? Certainly my God awake's me, that I
may either repent of some sin which I have formerly forgotten; or praise him
for some mercy, for which I was not thankful. If thus, while I awake, my
thoughts be divine; whenever I sleep, my rest shall be comfortable. I will
therefore take up the confidence of David, who said that his soul should be
satisfied as with marrow, Ps: 63.5
and fatness; and his mouth should praise the Lord with joyful lips, when
he remembered God upon his bed; Verse. 6.
and meditated on him in the night watches. I must even do as David did, if I
hope for the blessing which David had. Yea and so I will, with the assistance
of him, Eccl. 5.12.
who causes the sleep of the laborious to be sweet.

The Prophet, me thinks, seems to challenge the Allmighty, when he says
Thou have proved mine heart, Ps. 17.3
and visited me in the night: thou have tried me, and shall find nothing in
me: nothing evil; nothing amiss. Lord, though I cannot acquitt my self in
the words of that Prophet, yet I will resolve with that Prophet; I am utterly
purposed that my mouth shall not offend. Surely that blessed Psalmist had often
discourse, and conference with his God in the times of the night: and
doubtless he was then most free for the service of his maker, when most he
was freed from the affairs of his subjects. O how comfortably he does cheer
up himself, when he says, I have remembered thy name, Ps. 119.55.
o Lord, in the night; and have kept thy law! Yet this was not the practice of
David only Noe: I find that it is a blessing which God in mercy, has sent to
others also, of his servants. Is. 26.1
The Prophet Isaiah tells Judah of a day that should come, when this song
should be sung in their land, we have a strong city; verse. 9.
salvation will God appoint for walls, and bulwarks, etc. With my soul have I
desired thee in the night: yea, with my spirit within me will I seek thee
early. O what a blessed time was this to Judah! O how sweet is the,
remembrance of God in the night! It is sweet indeed to remember him in the
night; to sieke him in the night: but then it is doubtless full of horror to
sieke, and not to find him. And yet thus God threatens Israel, and Ephraim,
and Judah; the Priests, and the people, Hos: 5.6.
and the Princes, that They should go to sieke the Lord; but they should not
find him; because he would withdraw himfelfe from them. And the Church
complains that, Cant: 3.1.
By night on her bed, she sought him whom her soul loves: she sought him,
but she found him not. Alas, how came it to pass, that her beloved would
not be found? Surely he was not talking (allthough thus Elyah mocked the
Priests of Baal, 1. King 18.27.
concerning their dumb, and stupid idol) nor pursueing, nor in a journie; nor
yet slept, that he had need to be awaked. Is: 65.1
Noe, noe: he that was found of them that sought him not, would not without
cause deny himself to her, who sought him with diligence. It was his promise
to the captives in Babylon, that after seaventie years they should return to
Jerusalem, Ier: 29.10. verse. 12
and should call upon him, and go and pray unto him, and he would hearken
unto them: They should seek him, verse. 14
and find him, when they should search for him, with all their hearts. How then
came it to pass, that his Spouse did miss of him; especially in the bed,
where she might justly expect him? Alas, alas, she thought her self so
sure of her beloved, that she laid her self down, as on the bed of ease: but
supposing him to be with her, she missed his company; and though she sought
him by solitary meditation, yet she found him not. In the night she sought
him, in the night of her afflictions; but she found him not; not presently;
and that because she neglected his grace when he offered it unto her; or
because she kept it not carefully, when he gave it unto her. Yet, Is. 54.8
though in a little wrath he hid his face from her for a moment; Cant. 3.4.
she afterward found him, whom her soul loved. And why then should not I
hope to find him too, though in my bed; though in the night? It is not through
sloth, that I seek him here: but 't is in the fervency of my affection, that
now awaking, I would find him here. If yet I cannot find him here, if thou
hidest thy self from me, o my sweetest Jesus, and that either in judgment,
for mine offenses; or in thy love, that thou may heighten, and inflame mine
affection, I will do as the Israelites did, at the news which was brought
them by those that were sent to search the land; I will lift up my voice; and
cry: yea, Number. 14.1. Ps. 6.6.
with the people too, I will weep all night. Or, with the Prophet David, All
the night will I make my bed to swim, and water my couch with my tears. Or
with Samuel for Saul; 1 Samuel 15.11.
I will cry unto God all the night. Or as King Darius for Daniel in the Lions
den; Dan: 6.18.
I will pass the night fasting, while my sleep goes from me. Or as David
again, when his child was sick; I will fast and lie all the night upon the
carth; 2. Sam. 12.16.
rather then I will not find thee, o my Savior. Thus when I have found him
whom my soul loves, then until the day break, and the shadows fly away,
Cant. 2 17.
he shall turn, and be like a Roe, or a young Heart upon the mountains of
Bether. Weep indeed I may; weep I must; for I sent my faith, as a Spy, to
the promised land, to the celestial Canaan; and she, through her weakness
and fear, has brought me word that the city is walled, Number. 13.26.
as if I could not, or should not enter: But, with Caleb, verse. 30
I will resolve that I will g^e up and possess it; for I know that, through the
assistance of my Jesus, I shall be able to conquer. Weep I must, 1. Sam. 15.11.
with Samuel, for my Saul, for my poor soul, which has turned back from
following my God, and has not performed his commandments. But I will not
only weep, but will also question my Saul, verse. 14
and say, What means this bleating of the sheep in mine ears, and this
lowing of the oxen which I hear? What means the noise of my lesser offenses;
and the roaring of the greater, which are larger, and fatter then the bulls of
Basan? I will thus examine my soul; and then I will cry for her, verse. 24
until she shall confess that she has sinned, and transgressed the
commandments of God. Weep I must, with King Darius, for my Daniel; for my
heart, Dan. 6.2. Ps. 57.4 1. Chr. 12.18. Ier. 50.17. 2. Sam. 12.15. verse. 22
which is the chief of my Presidents; for 't is in the lyon's den; my soul
is among lions; it is wounded with lions, with such mighty sins, that their
faces are as were David's worthies, even like the faces of lions. These lions,
these Kings of Assyria and Babylon have scattered this my Israel, and driven
her away, and almost devoured her. Weep I must, with David, for my child, my
darling soul; for it is stricken, it is very sick: yea I will fast, and I will
weep; for who can tell whether God will be gracious to me, that the child may
live? Why should not such thoughts as these entertain the hours, which are
borrowed from my slumbers? Dan. 2.29.
King Nebuchadnezzar had thoughts came into his mind upon his bed (for so
Daniel styleth his dreams) what should come to pass hereafter. 2. Chr. 7.12.
The Lord appeared to Solomon by night, after his dedication of the temple, and
said unto him, I have heard thy prayer, and have chosen this place to my self,
for an house of sacrifice. Jacob had a vision by night; Genesis 28. 12. verse. 13
verse. 16
and in a dream was promised the land where he flept. Thus, sleeping or
waking, I hope that it shall be truly said, The Lord is in this place. True it
is, that the night is the presenter of dismal apparitions to diverse persons;
and the absence of the Sun in many is the discoverer of the weakness of
faith. But surely those that fear the shadow of a fant'sie, do not truly
feel the power of faith, which (according to the Apostle) is the substance of
things hoped for; Heb. 11 1.
and the evidence of things not seen. The diseases of the body make sick men
sensible of the want of the Sun; for to them the nights administer both
anguish, and melancholy. Ps. 77.2. Job. 7.3
David's sore ran in the night, and ceased not; his soul refused comfort.
Job was made to possess months of vanity; and wearisome nights were appointed
to him: His bones were pierced in the night-seasons; C. 30.17.
and his sinews took noe rest. Yea, as well the healthful, as the sick, may
find the night a producer of affliction: even those that are most laborious,
Eccl. 2.22.
and industrious in the world. What has man of all his labor (says the
Preacher) and of the vexation of his heart, wherein he has labored under the
Sun? verse. 23
For all his days are sorrows, and his travail, grief: yea, his heart
takes not rest in the night. To the sick, and to the healthful; in time of
peace, and in time of watre the night has often been a time of sorrow. 2.
King 19.35.
Once did the Lord send his Angel, which went and smote in the camp of the
Assyrians an hundred fourscore and five thousand: and when they arose early in
the morming, behold they were all dead corpses. Thus have miseries siezed on
diverse in the silent night: and yet that very time which has been to some
the sad producer of woe and distress; to others it has brought the tidings of
joy, and pleasant content. C. 7.3.
Surely the four Lepers were not ^gnorant of it; who (resolving not to sit in
the gate of Samaria until they dyed, nor ^o enter into the city for fear of
the famine) went into the camp of the Syrians, verse. 5.
whom the Lord had made to fly in the twylight: and there the four poor men
did eat, verse 7. verse. 8.
and drink; and carried away thence both silver, and gold, and raiment, in
great abundance. Iud. 19 9.
The night was a time of rejoicing to the Levite, when he stayed to be merry
with the father of his contubine: but afterward it became a time of woe to
him, when the Gibeathites took the concubine from him, verse. 25
and abused her all night until the morning; and until the day began to
spring, did not let her go. Thus is not God confined to times, nor enforced to
the rules, and dictates of nature. He can, according to nature, sometimes
render us a night of sorrow: and sometimes again, besides, or above, or against
the practice of nature, he can produce light out of darkness; and comfort and
content, when we expect our disturbance. For my part therefore (seeing that my
rest departs from me; and that at this time when others securely take their
repose, mine eyes are unapt to close with my slumbers) I will make this night a
night of sorrow, that so I may hope for a morning of comfort; I will grieve for
my sins, that I may rejoice in my Savior. I wi^ take this time, C. 6.27
as Gideon did, to thron^ down the altar of Baal; because peradventure, like
unto him, I could not do it by day, for fear of displeasing. That altar of
Baal is erected in my heart: from this heart therefore even now will I separate
it; and down it shall go, away it shall be thrown; that so in the room of
it I may presently erect an altar for my God. I will take this time, as Joshua
was commanded, Ios. 1.8
to meditate in the book of the law, which shall not depart from my mouth;
but I will meditate therein day and night. 2. Pet. 1.9.
Even that sure word of prophecy will I meditate upon, whereunto (as says
Saint Peter) I shall do well, if I take heed, as unto a light that shines in
a dark place until the day-dawne, and the day star arise in my heart. I
will take this time, as David did; and will call to remembrance my song in the
night; Ps. 77.6
or rather not my song, but God's; for Job complains, Job 35.10.
that None says where is God my maker, who gives songs in the night? Not such
a song as Ephraim used, for those were howlings instead of songs; yea and
howlings without comfort, because therein was noe mention of God: for thus the
Lord complains of them, by the mouth of his Prophet, Hos. 7.14. Ps. 147 7.
saying, They have not cried unto me with their heart, when they howled upon
their beds. But my song shall be a thanksgiving, even unto my God: not short,
not of a ^all continuance, like the gourd of Jonah, Io: 4.10. verse. 7.
which came up in a night, and perished in a night: ^oe; I would not have a
worm in the morning, ^hen I arise, to smite my joy, and cause it to ^ither.
This were but to sieke my God in the (...) me of distress, and to forget him
in my ^rosperitie. But I will resolve, with David: Ps: 145.1.
(...) will extol thee, o my God, and King; and (...) will bless thy name for
ever, and ever: Every day will I bless thee; verse. 2.
and I will praise thy name for ever, and ever. Ier. 49.9.
Though thieves should come this night upon me, and think to destroy 'till
they had enough: though wicked thoughts, and evil suggestions of Satan, should
seek to rob me of my song; yet will I rely upon my God, upon my Jesus, who
sang a hymn before he went up to the mount of Olives; Mat. 26 30.
and him will I besiech that I may not be robbed, be deprived of this comfort
in the night. Mat: 25 6.
At midnight there was a cry of the comeing of the bridegroom, Behold the
bridegroom comes; go ye out to meet him. What know I, but this may prove
that very night unto me? My God may come, and call for my soul. Grant
therefore, o blessed Father, that (with the wise virgins) I may be ready, verse.
10
and go in with the bride-grome to the marriage, that the door may not be shut
against me: and that so I may pass from this song in the night of misery
upon earth, to that heavenly quire of Saints, and Angels, Reu: 22 5.
where is noe night, nor need of a candle, noe nor of the light of the Sun;
that thou, o my God, may give me light, and that I may reign for ever, and
ever. Amen.

Tears in the Day.
The Soliloquie. Divided into three parts, and fitted for the time. 1 Of
awaking early in the morning. 2 Of being newly arisen. 3 Of preparing to go to
dinner.

The first part Of the Soliloquie. Fitted for the time of awaking early in the
morning.
THE EjACULATION.
Psalm. 5. verse. 1. Give ear to my words, o Lord; consider my meditation:

verse. 2. Hearken unto the voice of my cry, my king, and my God; for unto thee
will I pray.

THe night is far spent; Romans 13.12.
the day is at hand. I wish that the night of sin were as near a period; and
the day of rejoicing, the day of eternal happiness were as near approaching.
It is the promise of God, Reu: 2.26.
that he which overcomes, and keeps the works of Christ unto the end, to
him shall be given power over the nations; verse. 28
and I will give him (says Christ) the morning star. If God be so early in
his liberality, why should not I be as early in my devotions? I am now awaked,
though yet I am somewhat drowzie, and incline to sleep again, stretching my
self in my lazy bed. But let me hear Saint Paul speaking to me, Romans 13.11.
and saying, Now it is high time to awake out of sleep; for now is salvation
nearer, then when we believed. How Is this? High time to awake? Surely the
Apostle speake's it not to me, for 't is yet very early; too soon to arise;
for I hear noe noise, noe stirring; noe body's yet up; all is hush, and
quiet. The bird which shaked a pillar of the church, Mat. 26 74.
and crowed at his act, bid's me good morrow; and tell's me 't is hardly the
break of day. Besides, the Prophet David tell's me, Ps. 127 2.
It is in vain for us to rise up early, to sit up late, and to eat the bread
of sorrows; for so we give our beloved sleep: and why then should I delight
in vanity? Prove. 6 10.
Yet a little sleep, therefore; a little slumber; a little folding of the hands to
sleep. But hark! What Is that? Me think's I hear somebody call, and say,
How long will thou sleep, verse. 9.
o sluggard. When will thou arise out of thy sleep? Yes; I did hear somebody
call so, indeed. It was none other but God himself by the mouth of King
Solomon. Even the same who tells me, that If I do not arise, verse. 11
then shall poverty come upon me, as one that travaileth; and my want, as an
armed man. c. 20.13
I must not love sleep therefore, lest I come to poverty: but I must open mine
eyes, and I shall be satisfied with bread. Well then; I Will rubb mine eyes; and
rowze up my self, and bethink my self of my business: but first I will
think upon the first, upon the best; upon God. I have reason to give him the
first, the chiefest room in my meditations; because I laid me down, and
slept; Ps. 3.5.
and again I am now awaked; and all this through the mercy, and goodness of
the Lord, who sustained me. He preserved me, who neither slumbereth, Ps.
121.4. Ps. 44.23.
nor sleeps, allthough David cries out to him, and says, Awake why sleep
thou, o Lord? Arise; cast us not off for ever? But this was only through the
fervencie of his devotion, in a time of severe persecution, and affliction: for
at another time, it was he himself who confessed, Ps. 111.4.
that He which keeps Israel shall neither slumber, nor sleep. Surely he
may more properly call out from heaven to me, then David upon earth did to him
in heaven, and say, Awake, why sleep thou? Yea, and so indeed he does;
and promises me, and offers me the morning star to light me: But it is
upon condition, that I must first overcome. Overcome? What? Must I overcome my
sleep? That I have done. Must I overcome mine enemies? Those I am commanded
to love. Mat. 5.44.
Yet I must overcome mine enemies, my sins: and I must also overcome my
self, Ps. 18.28.
the sinner; and then, I am sure, he will light my candle, as he did David's.
The Lord my God will inlighten my darkness: he will give me comfort, joy,
and prosperity after my trouble. Nay, a candle shall not serve my turn: he
has promised to give me a star, the morning star, which shall both
enlighten my soul with the brightness of divine knowledge, in this morning of
a happiness begun; and also enlighten me hereafter, in the morning of the
general re-surrection, when my body shall be glorified together with my soul,
and I shall shine as the stars for ever and ever. Dan. 12 3.
He will give me the morning star to enlighten me, not to torment me. The
prince of darkness was once an Angel of light, and then even he was a morning
stame: but now I may say with the Prophet, Is. 14.12. verf. 13
How art thou fallen from heaven, o Lutifier, son of the morning. How art
thou cut dowme to the ground which saydest in thine heart, I will exalt my
throne above the stars of God! This star, I hope, he will not suffer to
deceave me, with his false, and deluding light: for his glaring is but a
counterfeit light, and his leading tend's to the burning brimstone. Noe; he
will give me a better star; even him who came to be a light to lighten the
Gentiles, Lu. 2.32.
and to be the glory of the people Israel: even the Prophet of the highest, C.
1.76 Verse. 79
who gives light to them that s^tt in darkness, and in the shadow of death.
And who is that, but he which professes himself to be the root, Reu. 22 16.
and the offspring of David; and the bright, and the morning star. He
himself has showed me what I should do: he has taught me by his own
example, what duties I should perform: for I find it recorded of him, that In
the morning, Mar. 1.35.
rising up early, a great while before day, he went out, and departed into a
solitary place, and prayed. So should I do too: I should do so now; for it
is now about the same time; or, at most, it differs not much. I will therefore
arise, I will arise out of my sins; by his blessing I will arise out of them
before day; even before the day of the Lord comes; 2. Pet. 3 10.
and I will go out of them, or force them out of me. I will depart from them
into a solitary place, and retire to my meditations; and be both solitary,
and sorrowful for all the offenses which I have committed: and then I will
pray; I will pray for forgiveness, through the meritts of him, who prayed so
early. Or, if I am too weak to master my self in this holy resolution, I will
besiech him, that I may be as Simon, Mar: 1.36.
and those that were with him; that I may, at leastwise, follow after him.
Surely he can so illuminate my thoughts, that I may see thereby to perform my
duty. It was that morning star which enlightened David, and made him take up
that holy resolution, Ps: 5.3.
saying, My voice shall thou hear in the morning, o Lord: in the morning will
I direct my prayer unto thee, and will lock up. It was he who enlightened him
to put in practice that very resolution: for he himself testifies of
himself, Ps: 130.6.
saying, My soul wayteth for the Lord; more then they that watch for the
morning; I say, more then they that watch for the morning. It was that morning
star, which enlightened the people, Luc: 21 ^8.
that they might all see to come to him early into the temple, to hear him.
Ps: 119 147.
It was that morning star again, which enlightened David, when he prevented
the dawning of the morning, and cried; when he hoped in his word. It was that
morning star which gave light unto Joshua and the people, Ios. 6.15. verse. 20
when they compassed Jericho on the seventh day, early, about the dawning of
the day seven times; after which, the wall fell down flatt, so that the
people went up into the city, every one strait before him, and took the
city. So will I wait for him: so will I prevent the dawning of the morning:
so will I direct my prayer unto him: so will I hear him in his temple: and so
will I encompasse Jericho, about the dawning of the day; the city of Satan,
the ^trong hold of the Serpent; even mine own ^icked, and corrupted heart,
which has so ^ong stood out against my God: and I will never leave compassing
it with my tears, and my sighs, and my pensive and sorrowful thoughts,
until the wall fall down; until the stony rampard thereof yield unto the
commandments of my Lord, and my maker. But (on the contrary) certainly that
morning star did not give light to the company which were in the ship with
Saint Paul in the tempest, when he was bound toward Rome: for they, Act: 27
29.
fearing lest they should have fallen upon rocks, cast four ankers out of the
stern and wished for the day. True it is, that every one in a storm will wish
for Christ, this morning star: and ready they are to take their astro-labe,
that so they may observe the height, and the distance of him: but yet are they
apt to leave him in the tempest; and to trust to their own cables, and ankers,
which they cast out at the sternes of their ship; never considering the depth
of the seas, and the fowlenesse of the anchorrage. Every Christian, even the
most skillfull mariner, is apt to run a shore upon the world; or to fall upon
the leadges, and rocks of trouble, and temptation: but who ancoor's his hopes
in Christ? Who fasteneth the flooke of his anchor in the wounds of the
Crucified? Lord give me such a faith in thee, that I may not believe in thee
waveringly, or hope in thee weakly, or wish for thee faintly: but that I may
at all times, and upon all occasions put my whole trust, and confidence in
thee; Ps: 42.1
and say, with David, As the Heart pants after the water-brookes; so pants
my soul after thee, o God. Surely that morning star did not give light to
churlish Nabal, 1. Sam. 25.37.
when, in the morning, after the wine was gone out of him, and his wife told
him all that was done, his heart dyed within him, and he became as a stone.
Alas, every Nabel, every worldling can be jocound, and pleasant while they
surfeit upon the vain pleasures of this transitory world: they can be merry,
and drunken, very drunken with the be-witching cup: and all the while, they are
such sons of Belial, verse. 17
that a man cannot speak to them: But if once, either by poverty, sickness,
or any other calamity they are awaked, and their Abigails, their consciences
tell them that the most mighty has girded his sword upon his thigh, Ps. 45.3
with glory and majesty, and is resolved to destroy them; then, like unto
Nabal, even their very hearts dye within them, and are even as stones, for want
of the comfort, and light of his morning star. These are they who in the
morning say, Deuteronomy: 28.67.
would God it were evening! and at even they say, Would God it were morning,
for the fear of their hearts wherewith they fear, and for the sight of their
eyes which, then, they see; Job: 24.17.
for the morning is to them even as the ^shadow of death: if one know them,
they are in the terrors of the shadow of death. Therefore will I besiech that
bright morning star, Amos. 5.8.
that he will arise in my heart, that I may seek him that makes the seven
stars, and Orion, and turns the shadow of death into the morning, and
makes the day dark with night; the Lord is his name.

This is the time, Iud: 16.2.
when the Philistines thought to have killed Samson, after they had compassed
him in, and laid wait for him all night in the gate of the city of Gaza, and
were silent all the night. Lord, if at any time I sleep, if I sleep in my
sins (which do thou ever prevent, as thou do forbid it) how contented is
Satan to let me rest! How silent he is, and will not disturb me! But he
sits in the gate, and watches; and if at any time I be awaked by my God,
how does he labor to destroy me presently, with suggestions to despair or
presumption.

This is the time, when Moses was commanded by God to carry the two new tables
of stone up to the Mount: Ex: 34.2.
for God said unto him, Be ready in the morning, and come up in the morning
unto mount Sinai; and present thy self there to me, in the top of the mount.
Why may not this in some kind seem to be spoken by God to me too? For I have
one table at least, and I fear that it is stone too: but it is in his power to
make it the fleshly table of my heart. 2. Cor. 3.3.
O that he would call me! O that he would draw me up unto him, to the top
of the mount, Hos. 11.4.
with the bands of love; and that he would do it now, this morning; like as
twice in one morning he putt Moses in mind of the two tables! O that he would
write his law in this table of my heart, even with his own finger, that I
might not sin against him!

This is the time when the Angels hastened Lot to go out of Sodom. Genesis 19
15.
It was, when the morning arose, that they said unto him; Arise, take thy wife,
and thy two daughters which are here lest thou he consumed in the iniquity of
the city. The blackness of the crimes of those lustful citisens, eclypsed
the Sun: yet lest they should hope that their impieties could dazell the eyes
of the all-seeing God, they had a light from heaven to discover his wrath. The
sins of the people were retrograde to nature; and their just punishment
proceeded therefore from causes not rendered by the practice of nature. The
light body of the consuming fire was seen to descend; and the sulphurious
flames which might have been conceaved to arise from the troubled bowels of
the earth, or from the land of darkness, descended in a stormy gust from
heaven. A mixed fire and stink conlumed the transgressors: yet was not the
choking smell of the burning sulphur so offensive and loathsome, as the stench
of their wickedness. Thus the fire of their uncleanesse was revenged by the
fire of tormenting brimstone: and just it was that the messengers of vengeance
should discharge their office, whom the lewd people would not receave without
a lustful attempt of their foul desires. Their punishment for their crimes
began even in their offenses; for it was noe small severitie to suffer them to
continue in their violation of nature. Yet here it stayed not: for they lost
their sight because they saw not their faults: and at even they wearied
themselves to find the door of that righteous man, verse. 11
being stricken with blindness by those ministers of revenge. verse. 23
This dark evening was yet but a presage of a gloomie morning: for the
vengence fell when the Sun arose: and those horrid flashes of a blew and
dazeling light, served only to lend them a sight of their scorched neighbors,
and so to increase, and heighten their torments. Assuredly, if I well consider
it, I am not unlike to that Lot who was saved: for with the Sodomites I live; I
am neighboured by the wicked. O but am I just, with Lot; and, with him, 2. Pet.
2 7.
am I vexed with their unclean, their filthy conversation? O that I might so
resemble Lot, that I could avoyde the corruption of those, whose society I
cannot shun! Alas, alas, I am yet in every thing unlike unto him: for I
sin; I have a pronenesse to sin with the Sodomites; yea and by nature I am
as apt to give, as to follow an example; sometimes as ready to teach others how
to offend, as sometimes to follow, and imitate their offenses. But o I wish, I
earnestly beg, I humbly besiech my merciful Lord to send his Angels, even
this very morning, to bring me out of the sins, and the society of the
Sodomites.

This is the time when the Angel of the Covenant said unto Jacob, Genesis 32 26.
after the wrestling, Let me go, for the day breaks: But Lacob answered,
and said I will not let thee go, except thou bless me. Howsoever, me
thinks, I should be like unto Jacob: and, if I have neglected wrestling this
night with the Angel, yet now I should begin. I should wrestle, and tugge,
and strive, and hold fast by faith in my prayers, and my tears too, as Jacob
did; and not suffer him to go until he has blessed me. The Prophet
assures me, Hos. 12 4.
that he had power over the Angel, and prevailed: he wept, and made
supplication to him. O so must I too; so will I too. But how can I possibly
either be a prince; or especially such a prince as Israel was; who, as a prince
had power with God, Genesis 32 28.
and with men; and he prevailed, and was blessed? Well; it is so; I am resolved
upon it; it is the right way. I will pray, and weep; and weep, and pray. I
will beg with my tears; and I will beg with my tongue; and I will beg
with all my heart. I will strive, and pray, and mourn, and ^ry. It shall be a
clowdie morning: it shall be a thick, muddie lowering morning. Me think's I
begin to feel a cloud even break already at mine eyes. O come forth, come
forth a whole cloud of tears. Knitt your selves into blackness; and
thickness. Be fruitful; be pregnant: and when your time is come, be ye
delivered in mine eyes. I am not yet risen: come quickly, and I my self will
bring you to bed. It Is good, it is wholesome even thus to wash my sinful eyes
betimes in a morning. It is not fire, nor air that is predominant in the eyes;
but only water. Surely then I will weep, that I may see the cleerer, the
better; not outwardly, but inwardly; not to look downe-wards, but upwards,
toward this blessing Angel. Ps. 6.7.
Mine eye, with David's shall be consumed, because of grief and then, I doubt
not, but, I shall conclude with his joy, and truly say, verse. 8.
The Lord has heard the voice of my weeping.

The second part Of the Soliloquie. Fitted for one that is newly arisen.
Farewell that bed of ease, which would have betrayed me both to sloth, and
poverty. Farewell to those curtains, devised to obscure the morning's light.
See, see, how that bewitching nest does yet retain the print of my body; as
if it longed to entice me again to my sloth; and wooed me to make it the
sepulcher of my living self. I am now up: and thanks let me render to him
that has delivered me once again to the light of a morning. Genesis 1.5.
He that called the darkness Night, the light he also styled Day. He
promised Noah when he came out of the Arc, c: 8.22.
that While the earth remains, seed time and harvest, cold and heat, summer
and winter, Day and Night shall not cease. This his promise he keepe's, Ps.
19.1
for The heavens declare the glory of God; verse. 2.
and the firmament shows his handie work. Day unto Day utters speech; and
Night unto night shows knowledge. Yea, he is so sure in the performance of
whatsoever he promises to his chosen servants, that he sends a challenge
to the world, Ier. 33.20.
and says, Thus says the Lord, If ye can break my covenant of the Day, and
my covenant of the Night, and that there shall not be ^ay and Night in their
season. verse. 2^.
Then may also (...) covenant be broke with David. Surely the ^e we cannot,
and as surely the other he ^ill not do. Job. 41.18.
Now the eyelids of the morning ^e open; and what can that teach me, but
(...) open mine eyes, that I may see the good^esse of the Lord, in the
cleernesse of the ^y? Me think's it instruct's me to say ^ith David It is a
good thing to give thanks ^to the Lord; Ps 92.1
and to sing praises unto thy name, (...) most high: verse. 2.
To show forth thy loving kindness (...) the morning; and thy saithfullnesse
every ^ight. I will therefore follow the advice of ^he same Prophet, and will
Sing unto the Lord, and bless his name: Ps. 96.2
I will show forth his salva^on from day to day. Yea, Ps. 59.16.
I will sing of thy ^ower, o my God; I will sing aloud of thy mercy ^n the
morning; for thou have been my defense. His power I see, in the performance of
his covenant: his mercy I see in bringing me to the light. O how the pretty
Choristours of the woods do sing their anthemes; and in their musical notes
warble out the praises of the Creator of the morn! How the Eastern Sun does
guild the mountains with his radiant luster; and climb's by degrees higher
into the heavens, that it may with more direct beams both warm, and enlighten
me! Me think's I am chidd by the quire in the air, for my tardie
thanksgiving: and the Sun would flinke behind a shaddowing cloud, as unwilling
to give light to one that hastens not to a celestial rise. Thus I behold the
Sun arisen from the earth; and surely me thinks, I should even out-vye it both
in motion, and place: and faster should I climb, and higher should I rise; even
to the seat of blessed Eternity. But, woe is me, I have too much earth about
me; and the air is too thin to bear up my body. Had I wings like the
Eagle, I would attempt my desires: but noe means is allotted to a corporal
ascent. Yet, though my body be forbid to enter those palaces, until it shall
be glorified at the great restoration: my soul may be admitted, so soon as
ever it shall be freed from this tabernacle of flesh. Yea and my thoughts may
presently, at this very instant mount up to my God, so they be clean, and
pure: and in an humble reverence I may discourse with my Creator. It is my
duty, thus to do: and it shall be my care to observe so royal a command. O
how good is my God unto me, making me a sharer of his terrestrial blessings!
But o how far does he exceed the measure of this bounty, in giving me
the means to be partaker of heaven! Some thing I see, when up-ward I look:
and something there is, which I long to possess: but it is not that Crystal
shell that bound's, my sight, which I so count: nor is it that Sun, whose
bright rays and powerful influences do cherish my body, which I long for.
Noe: it is the heaven of heavens which I desire; Mal. 4.2.
it is the Sun of righteousness which I long to behold. This Sun which is so
great in comparison with the earth, is not to be named in comparison with him.
This poor, little, blushing Sun (though now it pride's it self in its
tryumphant rays) shall at his appearing (yea before his appearing, even as a
harbinger to prepare for his coming) be mantled in mourning: Act. 2.20.
it shall be turned into darkness, and the Moon into blood, before that
great, and notable day of the Lord come. And yet, 'till then, God has
appointed this great Light ( great to us) the Sun to rule the day, Ps.
136.8.9.
as well as the Moon and the Stars to govern the night; for his mercy
endures for ever. Even in this I see his mercy, that by the light thereof the
eyes of my body have the use of their faculties; and can present their objects
to my better part; which may, in her conternplations, admire allways the
mercies of God. If any man walk in the day (says my Savior) he stumbleth
not, Io. 11.9
because he sees the light of this world: verse. 10
But if a man waike in the night he stumbleth, because there is noe light in
him. Yet (now I think of it) there are some assuredly, who walk in the day,
and yet they stumble: yea, they contrive a way, how they may learn to stumble;
and therefore that wine which should comfort the heart, is purposely received to
disturb the brain. Thus the superior guide is mistied in a fogge lest it
should direct the feet in the carriage of the body. Is. 5.11
Such are they against whom the Prophet pronounces that Woe, saying, Woe unto
them that rise up early in the morning, that they may follow strong drink;
that continue until night, 'till wine inflame them. This is contrary to the
custom of those in Saint Paul's time: for he says, 1. These. 5.7.
They that sleep, sleep in the night; and they that are drunken, are drunken
in the night. But it is not so now: for wickedness in our times has assumed
more impudency: and that vice which formerly was deemed so shameful, that the
very wine it self enforced the sinner to some modesty in a blush; even now by
continuance, is accounted but society and to palliate the crime, the color
of the offendour borrows an excuse from the custom of inflammation. Thus is
nature constrained to plead for wickedness: and the corruption of the liver
through immoderate drinking, (which discovers it self in the stains of the
countenance) is noe longer abhorred as an effect of vice, but rather it is
pitied as an infirmity of the person.

The gray-eyed morning looke's upon my body; and teaches me to view my hidden
self, my inner man. This is a duty prescribed by religion; and it is a law of
justice, that before I walk abroad to behold my neighbors, I first do prye
into the dress of my self. The All-mighty quesstion's Ephraim and Judah by
the mouth of his prophet, saying, Hos. 6.4.
O Ephraim what shall I do unto thee? O Judah what shall I do unto thee? For
your goodness is as a morning cloud; and as the early deaw, it goes away.
This cloud, and this deaw do aptly resemble the goodness of hypocrities. The
cloud passes; the deaw drye's up. Oh thus do my promises, and vows unto God
Thus do my better actions, where in I glory: Suddenly, presently do they
vanish, and disperse. If I look upon the sky, I view the mirror of my
present thoughts: for though for a time I meditate on God, yet an empty cloud
which rides post, and flees a way upon the wings of the wind, Ps. 18.10.
is not so speedy as are these pensive, and divine contemplations. If I blush
when I see the short continuance of these heavenly thoughts, discovered in the
speedy journie of a cloud; with a dejected countenance let me look upon the
ground. Oh here again I find the reflection of my short devotions. These
private cogitations which tend to religion, are but like to the pearlie deaw
that hang's on the grass: prompt and ready to dry, and vanish. Those very
tufts of grass, those leaves of the trees, seem to lament the short
continuance of my religious exercises: as if they had spent the silent night in
anguish, and sorrow, for fear lest my doom should be to a place below their
abode. The flowers have wept all night in their beds; and the chillowed herbs
have drooped in the dark; and all of them together besiech me with tears,
that my goodness may not resemble the jewels they wear. Those pearls shall
dissolve; those tears shall be dried at the appearance of the Sun: even so
soon as he shall visit them with the warmth of his beams. Thus, thus though
I mourn in secret for my sins; yet so soon as I am warmed with the vain
delights of the enticing world, I am apt presently to forget the bitterness of
my sorrows: and to sin afresh, lest I should not have cause to lament
again. Lord I wish yet that I had but such, and so many tears for my sinsull
felfe, as the tresses of the earth do seem to mourn out for me. Such, o
such, or none, I desire to have. None other will comply with my wishes. They
must be exhaled from the earth, even the earth of my heart, by the Sun of
righteousness. Thus they must rise, that thus they may fall. And when they are
thus risen and when they are thus fallen, then shall they be dried by the
comfortable rays of that Sun of righteousness, shining in my ^eart. My
sighs, and my groans which ^ dispatch for my sinues, shall ascend like
^apours up to my brain; and by the secret in^uences of him that enlightens
me, they shall have time allotted them to unite together; and then shall they
fall in a deaw on nine eyes. Now is the time that I thus should ^eepe: now is
the time I should thus lament: for my sins must be purged with my mor^ing
tears. My yester-day's follies, my last^ight's fant^sies, and this morning's
thoughts, which saluted my earthly vanities before I ^owed to my God) even all
advise me to hye ^y self, and retire speedily into my private closet; there
to wash, and rub, and cleanse my soul in the cesterne of my tears; and never
leave rinsing, 'till the stains are fetched out. But, is this the task of a
morning? shall I not be utterly unapt for the works of my vocation, when I
have swelled mine eyes with the brinie drops? O noe: the air is cleerest, and
brightest, when storms are blown over: and content of mind, and quiet
thoughts will follow upon my mourning. Besides; there is nothing in the world
that dries sooner then tears; for many times they are slunke in a moment into
the dimple of a smile. Nay more: rather then I shall grieve too much; or then
my lawful affairs shall be hindered by my tears; I am sure that the tender
hand of my compassionate redeemer will wipe mine eyes. These, o these are the
incense which I must offer unto him. He first must smell the sweetness of a
savor arising from them, before he will be so propitious, as to send down his
benediction. Wicked, and profane Esau could sieke the blessing with tears:
Heb. 12 16. verse. 17 verse. 16
and shall not I go farther in my weeping then he who for one morsel of
meat had sold his birthright? Yes, I must; I will: for what can I do this
day in hope of a blessing, if I do not first appease my God, who is angry for
my sins? The swallows which usually sport in the air, and strive for a kind
of superiority in the height of their flying; are yet contented to humble them
selves; and draw near to the earth in their prediction of a storm. My
thoughts, like the birds, have sported themselves in the airy fant'sies of sin,
and impiety: but now they shall stoop, and humbly they shall fly; and
foretell to mine eyes the storm that is arising. It was the duty of Aaron
every morning to burn sweet incense upon the altar of intense: Ex. 30.7.
When he dressed the lamps, he was to burn incense upon it. What was that
incense, but a gum? And what was that frank, that free incense, but the
tears of a tree? What is myrrh, but an Arabian drop? What is frankincense,
but the tears which twice every year do fall from the Arabian; and Sabae'an
trees? If that gum be nothing but the tears of the plants, what other are
our tears, then the gum of our selves? Well then; I will be the Aaron; mine
eyes shall be the Lamps, which first I will dress; mine heart shall be the
Altar, dedicated wholly to the service of my God. This morning is the time
appointed to burn sweet incense on the altar. My tears therefore of
contrition, the gum which distills from my sorrowful eyes, shall be the
incense; my heart the altar; my zeal the fire; and my sighs and groans shall
ascend like the smoke, the sweetest perfume, delightful in the nostrills of
my glorious maker. Lord make thou mine offering acceptable to thy self through
the meritts of thy Son: and when thou smellest the savor, then send me thy
blessinge. Or if my sighs and tears cannot prevail, they shall be
accompanied with my petitions; and my heart, and eyes, and hands, and tongue
shall join together in a friendly consent, and so shall they tender my
supplication to the Lord of bounty. This was David's custom: Ps. 88.13.
unto thee (says he) have I cried, o Lord; and in the morning shall my prayer
prevent thee. Lord give me such a sense of my sins, now I meditate both on
their number, and their punishment; that I may heartily grieve for them: and
with my tears likewise let my tongue accord; for I must not only be chastened
every morning with the sacrifice of mine eyes; Ps. 73.14.
but I must also with my prayer prevent my God. This therefore I will presently
perform with bended knees, and yerning bowels, and an oppressed heart; and
praying I will say.

The Morning Prayer.
O Sun of righteousness, Mal. 4.2. Ps. 110.3.
glorious God, thou who had the deaw of thy birth from the womb, from the
essence of thy father, before the early morning of the world's creation; have
thou respect unto the prayers, 1. King 8.28.
and tears of thy servant. O hearken unto the cry, and to the prayer which thy
servant prays before thee this morning. My sins (I must needs confess)
are many, and black; and mine ignorance of them is thicker by far, Ex. 10.21.
then the Egyptian darkness, I feel their weight in the fierceness of thy
wrath; and the burden of them in the heaviness of my soul: o whither shall I
fly for redress, and comfort? From thee I cannot go, and yet to thee I dare
not come, because thou art so highly, and so justly displeased. But Lord, since
thou art every where, come down into my heart; and since it is thy property to
forgive the penitent; be reconciled unto me, who mourn by reason of thy
displeasure. O be grations unto me, in the tender bowels of thy wonted
compassion: and ease me of my sins, by the sufferances of thy Son. Ps:
5.8. Ps: 25.5
Lead ^ee this day in thy righteousness; lead me in ^hy truth, and teach
me; for thou art the God of ^y salvation: Ps: 5.8. Ps: 65.8.
make thy way strait before my ^ace. O thou that make the out-goeings of the
morning, and evening to rejoice; Neh: 1.6.
let thine ear be attentive, and thine eyes open, that thou may behold my
sorrows for my grievous offenses; and hearken to my desires of pardon, and
remission. In thy heavenly Jerusalem, Reu: 21 25.
o my glorious God, there is noe night at all; nor are the gates thereof shut
at all by day. At those gates o Christ, I lie: at the gate of thy mercy I
knock, o Jesus. Hear Lord, and hare mercy; Ps: 30.10.
Lord be thou my helper. Preserve me from sin, this ensueing day; and let
the light of thy grace shine so cheerely in my heart, that all my thoughts, and
words, and actions may be wholly bent to glorify thy name. Lam: 3.2^.
It was thy mercy that I was not consumed this night; and, for my sins,
delivered over to the tormentour, to be punished. Thy compassions fail not:
they are new every morning; verse: 2^.
and great is thy faithfulness. O make thou me to feel thy loving
kindnesses this morning more and more, for in thee do I trast: Ps: 143.8.
cause thou me to know the way wherein I should walk; for I lift up my soul
unto the^. Suffer me not this day either to accompanse, or to imitate the
ungodly, Ps: 90.6
whose righteousness in the morning flourishes, and grows up: but in the
evening is ^t down, and withered: But make me to walk, and continue in the
path of the just, which is as the shining light, Prove: 4 18.
that shines more and more unto the perfect day. Take me this day, and all
that thou have blessed me with, into thy gracious protection. Let not the
violent oppress me, nor the deceavers delude me, nor the enemy of mankind
ensnare me, Ps: 89.2^. Ps: 1.3. Ps: 37.5
nor the son of wickedness afflict me: and grant that whatsoever I do it
may prosper. Unto thee, Lord, do I committ my way: in thee do I trust: do
thou bring my desires to pass. verse: 6.
Bring forth my righteousness as the light; and my just dealing as the noone
day. Make me fruitful this day in every good word and work; Col: 1.10. Is.
58.10.
that I may draw out my soul to the hungry, and satisfy the afflicted soul;
and perform all the christian duties which thou command; that so my light
may rise in obscurity; and my darkness be as the noone day. Hear me, o
Lord, and grant these my peritions; and whatsoever else shall be necessary
for me; and that for the worthiness of him who is the morning starte, even
Jesus Christ my only Lord, and Savior: in whose name, and words I father call
upon thee saying.

Mat. 6.9.10.11.12.13.
Our father which art in heaven, hallowed be thy name: thy kingdom come: thy
will be done in earth, as it is in heaven: give us this day our daily bread:
and forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us:
and lead us not into temptation; but deliver us from evil: for thine is the
Kingdom, the power, and the glory for ever, and ever. Amen. The third part Of
the Soliloquie. Fitted for one, preparing to go to dinner.
When Daniel the Prophet was made chief of the Presidents, and Princes of the
Kingdom of Darius; the rest burning with fury at this his preferment, sought
(says the text) an occasion against him: Dan: 6.4.
but none they could find; for he was faithful; neither was there any error,
or fault found in him. Prove: 3.15.
At length (to magnify the King above him by whom alone Kings reign) for the
effecting of their purposes, they quarrelled with his religion; and conceaved
that their unjust designs of debasing the President, were noe ways to be
wrought, but by dishonouring his God. But when those envious parasites
pretended highly to magnify the scepter; they did indeed but labor the
satisfaction of their envy. Dan: 6. verse: 9. verse: 7.
Howsoever at length it was concluded, and the decree was signed in writing,
that, Whosoever should ask a petition of any God, or man, for thirty days,
save only of Darius; he was to be cast into the den of Lions. verse: 10
Daniel knew that the decree was signed: yet he went into his house; and his
windows being open in his chamber toward Jerusalem he kneeled upon his knees
three times a day, and praised, and gave thanks before his God, as he did
before time. Here was a worthy resolution; and as religious a performance.
Neither the envy of his adversaries; nor the displeasure of his Sovereign,
nor the greediness of the Lions could stop his proceedings; or hinder his
devotions. Deuteronomy: 5 29.
Oh that there were such a heart in me too, that I would fear the Lord; and
keep his commandments allways; that it might be well with me for ever! But,
alas, to my shame, and grief I see, that I can scarce once in a day find in
my heart to praise my God: and if twice, or thrice I attempt to fit, and
compose my self to my holy devotions, I presently repel those righteous
motions, as if it were un-necessarie whatsoever is ircksome. But why should I
not consider how slack I am in my petitions, even by the abundance of things
which I truly want? Why should I not pray by precept; or, at least, by
precedent? It was David's resolution, Ps: 55.17.
Evening and morning and at noonday will I pray, and cry aloud; and he shall
hear my voice. And his practice exceedes his promise: for his own words are,
Seven times a day do I praise thee, Ps: 11^ 164.
because of ^y righteous judgments. Yea, he goe's a little ^rther yet, and
crye's out, verse: 97
O how I love thy ^we! It is my meditation all the day. He ^uld not choose but
meditate on his law all ^e day long, Ps: 25.5
on whom he did wait all the ^y long. Thus he meditated; he meditated (...)
day; a whole day: and yet not one whole ^ay only: for he passes his promise
to the All-mighty, saying, Ps: 145 2.
Every day will I bless ^hee; and I will praise thy name for ever, and ^ver.
Thus should I do as David did: I should bless the Lord, and I should praise
^he Lord: yea I will bless him, and I will ^raise him for all his mercies; and
particularly for preserving me to the middle of this day. But is this time so
fitting, and convenient, that now especially I should setle to my meditations?
Yes doubtless: at this very instant I have more arguments to persuade me to
devotion, then at many other hours, and seasons of the day. Now my hungry
appetite puts me in mind of the ravens which he feeds, when thy call
upon him. Ps. 147.9.
Now I discover a most ample testimony of his protection, and providence: Ps.
107.9.
for now he satisfies the empty soul, and fills the hungry soul with
goodness. Longer, me think's, I cannot stay from my meat; for my empty
belly call's for a repast. Lord, how frail are we mortals; that we cannot
live one day without the satisfaction of our stomachs: Mat: 6.11. Phil: 4.19.
which made our Savior teach us to pray, Give us this day our daily bread!
Well: God is so good, as to supply all our wants: but how does he supply
them? Alas, the poor inferior creatures are faint to pay the tribute of
their lives for the satisfaction of our hunger. Our plentiful tables do
commonly speak blood in every dish, The beasts, and the fowls, and the
fishes do seem to contend for precedencie in their service to our wanton
appetites. And yet (if I consider of it) what offense that the Lamb, or the
Sheep, or the Calfe, or the Ox, or the Dove, or the Salmon committed, that
they loose their lives for the preservation of ours? Those do obey the
commands of their Creator, even unto death: and by their ready submission to
man's desires, observe the law which was first prescribed them. But why do
they so; seeing man, by his fall, did loose the prerogative of soveraigntie
over the creatures? He did so indeed: yet those creatures not willing to
insult over their sinful Lord, especially seeing the charter was renewed
afterward to Noah, Gen: 9.2.3.
continue their submission to his will, and command. In all this, how can I
choose but magnify my God; and desire him to bless the creatures unto me,
for the sustenance of my body; that I may only live to honor him, who is the
giver of all? Now again, above other times, should I think on my ^od; and
desire him, in mercy, to be gra^ous unto me: for at this time of the day ^ee
would not visit our first, and sinful pa^nts. It is now about the middle, and
heat of ^e day. The Sun is hastening to the highest ^oint in the Meridian; and
with beams direct ^eepe's through the crevices into our private ^osets: Gen:
3.8.
but it was in the cool of the day when Adam and Eve did hear the voice of
the Lord God walking in the garden: and presently did ^ide themselves from the
presence of him, amongst ^he trees of the garden. O, though 'twas in the ^oole
of the day when God was heard, yet was ^t in the heat of his anger: for the
sin of the ^ransgressours provoked him to wrath. But what though in Eden he
was not heard, but ^n the cool of the day? Gen: 18.1.
I am sure that he appeared to Abraham in the heat of the day, a^ ^hee sat
in the tent door, in the plains of Mam^re. And so he does to me now too,
inwardly, by his Spirit; if I find his grace working in my soul a desire of
his glory. I will therefore besiech him, now, while he is with me, Ps: 42.8
Ps: 22.2
to command his loving kindness in this day time to visit me; that so I may
not justly complain with David, O my God, I cry in the day time, and thou
hear not: but rather that I may hear a Phinehas saying unto me, as once
he did to the children of Reuben, Gad, and Manasseh: This day we perceave,
Ios: 22.31.
that the Lord is among us. Alas poor Jacob; how did he endure the sweat,
and the burning of this time of the day? Gen: 31.40.
In the day the drought consumed him; and the frost in the night; and his
sleep departed from him. Assuredly in those fourteen years which he spent
in the service of Laban, for his two wives; and in those six years which he
served for the flocks, and the cattle; he could not choose but loose a whole
river of sweat, that dropped from his face. Lord, how should every drop of
sweat that falls from my brows, put me in mind of the fall of Adam, which
produced this punishment! Gen: 3.19.
Yea, how should my tears too, out-vye my sweat, when I consider the number
of my foul transgressions! They, oh they, have so increased within me, that
they enforce the sweat to fly to my face; and in this heat of the day, to
tell me of a punishment in the flames of the damned. But there was once a day
of deliverance of the Israelites from the Egyptian bondage; Ex: 13.3.
and Moses commanded the people, saying, Remember this day. And what day of my
life has not been to me a day of deliverance? So many diseases, and
accidents assail the body; so many discontents the mind; so many casualties,
and chances the estate; yea and (which is worst of all) so many sins the
soul; that if I should attempt but once to number them, I could not easily
determine where to begin. Lord make me this day remember thy deliverances in
a grateful manner; and magnify thee for thy mercies.

There will be a day too; a day of death: but when it shall come, God only
knows. This (for ought I know) may prove the day. Old Ifaak told his son
Esau; saying, Gen: 27.2.
Behold now I am old; I know not the day of my death. Neither indeed do I
know mine. What know I to the contrary, but that anon at the table I may
entertain my death in a dish, or a cup? Lord make me allways provided for
thee; and then at all times thou art well-come to me. But how shall I be sure
to have my petition granted; and that God will afford me such mercy, as to
save me? I read of a day that was threatened to the Jews; even when the
Chaldaeans should become their conquerours. This the Lord fore-tould unto them,
when he said, Joel: 2.1.
Blow ye the trumpet in Sion; and sound an all-arme in my holy mountain: Let
all the inhabitants of the land tremble; for the day of the Lord comes; for it
is nigh at hand. A day of darkness, verse. 2.
and of gloominesse: a day of clouds, and of thick darkness; as the morning
spread upon the mountains. Their death was to approach by the sword of their
enemies; and their miseries to increase by the fury of their tormentours. My
death may be nearer hastening unto me, then was the destruction of the Jews
at the time of the prophecy: and in what manner it shall come I cannot assure
my self. God is not confined to time, or means, otherwise then he has
decreed himself. This very day may happen to be mine; and another day may be
appointed for another. Yea and my day too may prove a day of horror: for,
wicked I am; and I read what is spoken by the mouth of Job: Job: 21.30.
The wicked is reserved to the day of destruction: they shall be brought forth
to the day of wrath. I, poor I, am one of the wicked; and have deserved the
greatest, and severest judgments from the hand of the revenger. O if this day
should prove so terrible, insteede of pampering my body, with delightful
food, I might cry out with the Prophet, Cursed be the day wherein I was borne:
Ior: 20.14.
let not the day wherein my mother bare me, be blessed. But I have a better
confidence in the mercies of my Redeemer. Yet I cannot hope for mercy from him,
if I do not express some mercy to my self. The chiefest act of mercy to my
self, consists in a serious afflicting, and tormenting of my self for my
sins which would ruin me. With my tears I must therefore wash away my
sins: I must purge them with my tears. I must cure the sins of mine eyes
with the tears of mine eyes. And yet, since my tears are not free from
pollution; even those must be purified, and made effectual by the blood of the
Lamb. The stomach is commonly prepared for meat, by the blood of the grape.
Therefore before I will go to my food, I will prepare my self with a glass
of wine: but that wine shall be high, and excellent: it shall be the wine of
Angels. It shall have the savor of life in it: it shall have the race of
mercy in it; the sweetness of reconciliation; and the heat of grace. This
wine shall be my tears: a lean, sower, eager wine, of it self: but it shall
be sugered by the hand of my Redeemer: it shall be deep drawn, and well
dashed with the blood of the innocent. This is such as the Angels delight in.
This wine shall prove an excellent restorative: it shall be even like blood;
yea it shall be blood it self; even the blood of my drooping, my wounded, and
my dejected soul. This will exceed all the Frontiniak, or the Greek, or the
Palerma wines: for the grapes thereof do not grow upon the smooth, and
twisting branches of common vines: but they grow, like the rose, upon a thornie
bough; and yield whole clusters of joy, and content. This wine has such an
inbred virtue in it, that it gives courage to the drinker: and that good
effect, I seriously hope, it shall work in me. For I must fight, though I am
but a woman. I must fight, and war, and combat with mine enemies, with my
corruptions. Ios: 10.13.
I trust that he who made the Sun stand still in the midst of heaven, that
it hasted not to go down about a whole day, when the five Kings fought
against Gibeon; and all this only at the prayer of Joshua: even he will
assist me in this holy war, that I may destroy the Kings, the greatest, the
heads of my sins; make them fly, and hide themselves in a cave, as those
enemies of Israel in the cave of Mackedah. And if it so fall out that they take
up their cave in the hollownesse of of my heart, (their wonted place to hide
themselves,) I will either drown them up with sorrow; or smother them with my
groans; or fire them with my Zeal, Or if none of these will effect my
desires, even as Joshua did to those Kings, so will I to these: I will open the
mouth of the cave in my heart, and bring out these Kings, by a true confession:
yea, I will set my feet upon the very necks of them, in a serious contempt:
and then will I smite them, and slay them, and hang them up, in a holy revenge;
because they would have destroyed my soul, for which my Savior suffered on
the cross. This, o this, is the way to prevail with my Jesus, to say unto
me, as he did to Zacheus, Luc: 19 9. Ps: 56.4 Is: 49.8
This day is salvation come to this house. So shall I with comfort, and
thanksgiving acknowledge, that Now is the accepted time; now is the day of
salvation. Thus I shall not fear what flesh can do unto me, no devils, nor
the world nor any thing else that seeks my destruction. Ps: 12^.6. Romans 8 28.
The Sun shall not smite me by day, nor the Moon by night; but all things
shall work together for good, if I thus love God, and be called according to
his purpose.

And now, me think's, this storm of tears, has produced a calm of content,
and peace. I am now ready for my dinner. But stay a while. What all for the
body? Nothing for the soul? Shall I pamper the flesh, and starve the spirit?
This will not be a feast, but a fast: and instead of satisfaction, I shall rise
with disturbance. Act: 17 11.
I read that the Bereans are styled more noble then those in Thessalonica, in
that they received the word with all readiness of mind; and searched the
Scriptures daily, whether those things were so. More noble? There Is a title of
honor. O that I might gain such a Berean nobility, that all mine honor might
be in searching the Scriptures; the word of him, who is the fountain of
honor! Every thing is sanctified by the word of God, 1. Tim. 4.5.
and prayer. Common civility teaches me to pray for a blessing on the
creatures. But I must yet go farther; and pray with the heart, as well as the
lips; and then read with reverence, Iam: 1.21.
and receave with meekness the ingrafted Word, which is able to save my
soul. Grant, blessed God, that my first, and best care may be for the
nourishment, and preservation of my soul: and next to that, Col: 4.6.
the sustenance of my body. And to this purpose, let my discourse at my meat
be gracious, seasoned with salt; that I may know how I ought to answer every
man. And because thou have commanded me to use thy creatures for the
preservation of my body; Lord grant me a moderate appetite to my meat; and
give virtue to the meat, that it may be fire for my nourishment. Make it good,
and wholesome for me; and me obedient, and serviceable unto thee. Let me
eat with moderation, content, and thanks giving; allways observing the rule of
Saint Paul, 1. Cor. 10.31.
that whether I eat, or drink, or whatsoever I do, I may do all to the
glory of thee my God.

Tears of compassion, in the time of prosperity.
The Soliloquie treating of, The vanity of earthly riches, and the reward of
Charity.
THE EjACULATION.
Psalm. 5. verse. 1. Give ear to my words, o Lord; consider my meditation:

verse. 2. Hearken unto the voice of my cry, my king, and my God; for unto thee
will I pray.

THe Apostle command's us to Bear one another's burdens; Gal: 6.2
and so to fulfill the law of Christ. This law is Charity, and friendly
affection; which differs from the law in the former Testament, because that
was a law of fear, but this of love. This law my Redeemer gave as a cognizance
unto his disciples, saying, Io: 13.35.
By this shall all men know that ye are my disciples; if ye love one another.
This he prescribed as a rule, verse. 34
when he said, A new commandment I give unto you, That ye love one another.
And this he commended to our imitation, even by the example of himself: for
what the Prophet fore-tould, Ps: 53.4
and said, Surely he has borne our griefs, and carried our sorrows; even the
very same his Apostle assure's us he fullfilled, 1. Pet: 2 24.
who his own self bare our sins, in his own body, on the tree. This law of
love, which we owe to our brethren, is expressed chiefly in our giving, and
forgiving. We must bear with their infirmities, Rom: 12.15.
and forgive their offenses. We must rejoice with them that rejoice; and weep
with them that weep: being of the same mind one toward another. verse. 16
We must rejoice both with them, and for them: but this joy must arise from
their good, not their hurt. Prove: 2.14.
There are some (says Solomon) who rejoice to do evil. This proceede's not
from love, but hatred; for the Apostle tell's me that Charity rejoices not
in iniquity, but rejoices in the truth. 1. Cor: 13.6.
Our mirth must join in concord with the joyful: and our rejoicing must be
grounded on the good of our neighbors. And as we must have joy at their
prosperity; so must we likewise accord with them in their sorrows: for our
very tears may be the ground of comfort unto mourners, when by these we
discover the truth of our affection; and our readiness to share in the burden
of their afflictions. Such a disciple as Christ delight's in, we may certainly
believe Saint Paul to have been: for we find him rejoicing with the
Philipians, Phil: 2.17.
when he says, If I be offered upon the sacrifice, and service of your faith,
I joy and rejoice with you all: For the same cause also do ye joy, verse: 18
and rejoice with me. And again, we find him grieving for the Jews: Rom: ^
2.
for he has great heaviness, and continual sorrow in his heart for them.
Unto the Jews, he became as a Jew: 1. Cor: 9.20.
to them that were under the law, as under the law: to them that were without
law, as without law: verse: 21
to the weak he became as weak: verse: 22 2. Cor: 11.29.
and he was made all things to all men. Who was weak, and he was not weak?
Who was offended, and he burned not? The fire of his compassion gave light to
his brethren, in the darkness of their tribulations; by which he fullfilled
that law of our Redeemer. He fullfilled it; and why then should not I? I
confess my ignorance, and my many imperfections make me Infinitely unequal to
him in desert: yet the same God which inspired him with his Spirit, can (if he
please) enable me to endeavor the fullfilling of that law. But he was a
disciple: and why may not I be ranked in the number? What though I am a woman?
So was Tabitha; Act: 9.36.
yet she was a disciple: and so, I hope, shall I be too. First, then I must
strive for this theological virtue: for by this I shall be known to be a
disciple of Christ. I swim in plenty; but do I remember those that are
pinched with necessity? In my rich, and curious dresses, do I remember the
naked? In my variety of dishes, do I think upon the hungry? In the choice of
my wines, do I consider the thirsty? In the enjoyment of my freedom, do I
pity the prisoners? I fear that my heart is too much delighted with the
things I possess; and too little affected with the wants of my brethren. But
let me ever consider that it is in the power of my God, as well to make me a
beggar, as those that wait, and petition at my door: and from my plenty I may
be driven to demand an alms. He that gives, can take. I must so demean my
self in prosperity, as allways remembering that adversity is near. What
therefore I possess I will not enjoy as if I were mistress, but only steward
of it. The shivering body of a naked beggar, shall have a share and proportion
to cover his nakedness. The empty belly shall have meat to fill it: and the
thirsty soul shall be satisfied with drink: the sick I will comfort: and the
prisoners I will visit. In my liberty I will commiserate the imprisoned; in my
health, the sick; in my drink, the thirsty; in my meat, the hungry; and in
mine apparel, the naked. Lord, what a world is this wherein I live! Every one
looks on the rising Sun: Riches are the Idols almost of every one; and gold,
though the feigned, yet the admired Deity. Prove. 14.20.
The rich (says Solomon) has many friends: and I find it true. But are those
friends indeed, which pretend to friendship? Certainly not all: and yet this
is my misery, that while I am rich, I shall hardly distinguish between
friend, and foe. Most that put on the vizors of friendship, do but comply with
the plenty of my fortunes. They have falsehood vayled under theshape of love;
which will never be discovered, but by change of estate. Surely thus to be
rich, is but to be miserable. Were my treasures exhausted, I should sit alone,
without society, or pity. The doves delight in the whited houses. So long as I
shine in rich array, the capps, and the knees will do reverence to my
ornaments: but who respect's the meanly habited? Prove: 14.20.
The poor is hated, even of his own neighbor: and such a one might I have
been: yea and such a one I may be made. Let me not therefore boast of that,
which is neither truly good, nor mine, nor permanent. If I trust in these
riches, I lean upon a reed. If I boast of my riches, I forget their
uncertainty. If I am proud of my estate, I disdain the giver. This tempting
gold is nothing but earth, upon which the policy of men has set a vallew. It
was gotten with sweat; and it is preserved with cares. But why; o why do the
children of the earth thus magnify that, which is in their power to scorn?
For gold the merchants hazard their lives; the ploughmen sweat; the thievs,
and robbers do come to shameful ends: yea and most men defile their precious
souls. It Is that which imploye's the tongue of the pleader; yea and sometimes
corrupt's the justice of the Judge. It Is that which buys the skill of the
Physician: and rule's, and governe's the affairs of the world. For that do
Kingdoms strive; and the whole world contend's. But thou glistering, stupid
Idol, why art thou so honored? Why so adored? It Is true, thou art the price
of whatsoever we desire the world to furnish us with, both for necessity, and
delight: and so far I may suffer thee to lodge in my coffers. But is it in thy
power to prolong my life; and preserve me here beyond my time appointed? Can
thou give me health, or strength? Can thou afford me peace of mind; and
quietness of conscience? Can thou endowe me with spiritual, and saving
grace: and purchase me a seat in the heavenly Jerusalem? Alas poor, simple
dirt, thou can do nothing that's good; nor they whom thou foolest with the
coveteousnesse of thee. Why then do thou cheat the children of Adam: betray
them to hell by their honoring of thee? But stay: Why do I thus blame this
innocent metal? It Is not this that offend's. This would have slept in the
silent bowels of our mother earth; had not the avarice of men disturbed its
rest. It is not the gould that ^mpt's to wickedness: but it is the slight ^f
the Devil which perswade's men to ho^our it. Since then I can find noe fault
with ^y coin, let me pray that noe fault may be ^ound in my self. If I love
it, I sin: if I co^et it, I sin: if I gain it by means not varrented in
Scripture, I sin: if I increase it by extortion, or biting usurie, I sin:
if I ^ut my trust, or confidence in it, I sin: if I make it the price, and
hire of wickedness, (...) sin: if I vallew my self either greater, or
better for the possession of it, I sin: if I unjustly deteine it from those
who have right to it, I sin: if vainly, and prodigally I wast, and exhaust
it, I sin: if I deny it to them that are in destresse, I sin. Lord, how
many sins depend upon this glittering earth! I will therefore resolve to look
down on 't as on a slave, and never allow it a seat in my heart: and
willingly will I impart it to the needy, and indigent. I had rather it had
dwelt in the dark vaults, and cavernes of the earth, then ever it should be a
means to offend my God. But since my revenues are plentiful, what shall I do
with this which I posesse? I will resolve by the grace and goodness of my God,
that so I will keep it, as if I had it not: I will so use it, as if I used it
not: I will so freely give it where necessity requires, that it shall plainly
appear I love it not: and yet I will so preserve it, as if I scorned it not.
With this I will relieve the poor: I will cloth the naked: I will comfort the
distressed: and whatsoever good it may procure for my self, or others, I will
labor to purchase it, though with the expense of the coin. I will not, for
the love of this, Is: 32.6
make empty the soul of the hungry; nor cause the drink of the thirsty to
fail: for this is the property of persons that are vile. I will never so
setle my affection upon it, as to suffer it to stop mine ears at tho cry of
the poor: Prove: 21.13.
lest the time should come when I my self should cry, Job. 22 7.
and not be heard. I will not hold my bread from the hungry, as Eliphaz once
accused Job. c: 24.7.
I will not cause the naked to lodge without clothing, that they may have noe
covering in the cold: verse: 10
nor will I take away the sheafe from the hungry. for this is the property
only of the wicked. c: 22.6.
I will not take a pledge from my brother for naught; and strippe the naked of
their clothing. Ex: 22.25.
If I lend my money to any that is poor, I will not be to him as a usurer;
neither will I lay usurie upon him. Prove: 14.31.
I will not oppress the poor, lest I reproach my maker: but I will have mercy
upon him; and so honor my God. I will not mock the poor. c: 17.5.
nor be glad at his calamities; left I my self go not un-punished. I will not
oppress the widow, Zech: 7 10. Amos 2.6.
nor the fatherless; the stranger, nor the poor. I will not sell the
righteous for silver; or the poor for a pair of shoes; nor will I ever
sleep with his pledge. Deuteronomy: 24.12. Prove: 22.2. Deuteronomy: 8 3. 1. Sam. 2.7.
But seeing ^at the rich, and the poor meet together; and ^e Lord is the
maker of both: Seeing it was God who humbled Israel; and suffered him to
^unger; and fed him with Manna: Seeing that from God does proceed both
poverty, and ^iches: I will therefore magnify my liberal giver, in my gifts
to the poor. Prove: 25.21.
Since he which makes poor, and makes rich; which brings low, and lifts
up, has commanded me, if even my very enemy be hungry, to give him bread to
eat; and if he be thirsty, to give him drink: Since the Psalmist assure's
me, that they are blessed, which consider the poor; Ps: 41.1
the Lord will deliver them in the time of trouble: Since King Solomon tell's
me that He that has pity on the poor, lends unto the Lord; Prove: 19.17.
and that which he has given, he will pay him again: Since he assure's me
that, c: 29.7
The righteous considers the cause of the poor; but the wicked reguardeth
not to know it: Since my Redeemer commands, saying, Luc: 14 13. verse: 44
When thou make a feast, call the poor, the maimed, the lame, and the blind;
And thou shall be blessed, for they cannot recompense thee; for thou shall be
recompensed at the resurrection of the just: Since at the day of his comening
in the clouds, Matt: 24.30. Mart: 25.34.
with great majesty, and glory, he shall say unto them on his right hand,
Come ye blessed of my father; inherit the Kingdom prepared for you, from the
foundation of the world: verse: 35
For I was an hungered, and ye gave me meat; I was thirsty, and ye gave me
drink; I was a stranger, and ye took me in; verse 36
Naked, and ye clothed me; I was sick, and ye visited me; I was in prison,
and ye came unto me: Luc: 16 9.
And lastly, since he has commanded, saying, Make to your selves friends of
the Mammon of unrighteousness, that when ye fail, they may receave you into
ever-lasting habitations: Deuteronomy: 15.7.
I will resolve therefore, that I will not harden my heart, nor shut mine hand
against my poor brother: verse: 8.
but I will open mine hand wide unto him; Job. 30.25.
and lend him sufficient for his need, in that which he wants. I will weep
for him that is in trouble: my soul shall be grieved for the poor. c: 29.16.
Is: 58.7
I will be as a father or mother to the poor; for I will deal mybread to the
hungry; and I will bring the poor, that is cast out, to my house; and when I
see the naked, I will cover him. verse: 8.
I will draw out my soul to the hungry; and satisfy the afflicted soul: Then
shall my light arise in obscurity; and my darkness shall be as the noone day.
Is: 21.14.
I will do as the inhabitants of the land of Tema did: I will bring drink to
him that is thirsty; and with my bread I will prevent him that flees. Eze: 18
7.
I will not oppress any; but I will restore to the debtour his pledge. I will
spoil none by violence; but I will give my bread to the hungry, and cover the
naked with a garment. verse: 8.
I will not give forth upon usurie; neither will I take any increase. verse: 9.
I will walk in the statutes of my God; and will keep his judgments to deal
truly. Dan: 4.27.
I will break off my sins by ^ighteousnesse; and mine iniquities, by shew^ng
mercy to the poor. Job: 31 19.
I will never see any ^erish for want of clothing; or any poor without
^overing. These ornaments of my body shall putt me in mind of mine original
corruption, which I received from Adam; who, in his integrity, was naked, and
was not ashamed: Gen: 2.25.
and of mine actual transgressions, especially of my pride, and excess in
apparel; whereas unto Adam, and to his wife, c: 3.21.
the Lord God made coats of nothing but skins, and clothed them. They shall
teach me thankfulness to him that sent them; for even thus did he discover
his love to Jerusalem, when he clothed her with broidered works, Eze: 16 10.
and shod her with badger's skins, and girded her about with fine linen, and
covered her with silk; verse:11
And decked her also with ornaments, and put bracelets upon her hands, and a
chain on her neck. They shall teach me humility, when I consider mine own
un-worthinesse; and how short I come of the goodness, and rigteousnesse of
John the Baptist, Mat: 3.4.
who notwithstanding had his raiment but of Camells hair and a leatherne
girdle about his loins; and his meat was but locusts, and wild honey. That
plenty, wherewith my table is furnished, Lu: 6.25.
shall make me tremble at the Woe pronounced by my Savior, saying, Woe unto
you that are full; for ye shall hunger. It shall put me in mind of the charge
which Moses gave unto the Israelites, Deuteronomy. 8 10.
saying, When thou have eaten, and art full; then thou shall bless the Lord
thy God. I will weep for the sins which may arise from my riches. I will
weep for the poor, who want my superfluities. I will weep for the
distressed, who may be nearer, and deerer by far unto God, then I, the worst
of sinners, am: and yet they want, what I do surfeit on. I will remember how
Dives was clothed in purple, Luc. 16 19.
and fine linen; and fared sumptuously every day: and yet at length he was
sentenced to the torments of hell. verse. 23
I will consider how, though Lazarus would have fed upon the crumbs that fell
from the rich man's table, verse 21
but was churlishly denied them; verse. 22
yet afterward he was carried by the Angels into Abraham's bosom. I will
consider with my self, that my gould and silver are nothing but earth; my
jewels but stones; mine apparel but the labor, and issue of a worm; mine
honor and respect but either the steame of an unsavourie breath; or the
wrying, and deforming of a Christians body: and yet this aerie applause, and
these congees, and salutes are grounded only on this earth and stones. Were
virtue only the ground of honor, my credit might be sullied with this dirt,
and trash: for the more I possess of this earthie mass, the heavier and
duller I grow to acts of goodness. Gold is accounted the most compacted
metal; and, to heighten the vallew of it, they boil it in broths, as a
cordial for the infirm. Peradventure the All-mighty has given it virtue to
comfort the heart: but then it must be used, and not locked up. Yet the
Physitian's prescription may be grounded on avarice; and it may be a policy
of Satan to Increase our idolatry. Thus does every one make it his business
to court this Idol whereof I am mistress. But am I sure that I am mistress
of this admired metal? Am I not rather a servant, and slave to it? If it ever
has power to tempt me to sin, I have lost my sovereignty to which I
pretend. This metal is close, and compact; more heavy and ponderous then any
of the rest. O is it not a description of my remorselesse heart? Is not that as
close, and compact: as unwilling to yield to the stroke of the hammer; to the
cries, and the tears of the poor, and the miserable? If thus I find my heart
in the gold; my next care shall be to make it as heavy. I will grieve, and
lament for the hardness of my heart; and since 't is so drossie, as to covet
the gould. I will earnestly besiech my God to refine it. I will humbly request
him to put it to the test; to put it into a crucible; and then so to draw it
down in the fire of affliction, that it may run pure, and clean; and be apt
to yield, and commiserate the cause of the helpless. Between the steel and
the lodestone the sympathy is so prevalent, that they woo each other, even
at a distance. O that my God would infuse into my heart so much of his grace,
that the stone therein might be like the lodestone, drawing the poor and the
miserable to my doors, who with indigencie and want are hammered, and beaten,
and fired like the steel. The red and fiery eyes are cured by the often touch
of the gold. Whose eyes are more inflamed then those of the poor, whose every
morsel is the price of a tear? Who is more able to cure those maladies, then
we to whom God has sent in abundance? For them then I will call, I will
sieke, I will send: and the redness of their eyes shall be cured with my
yellow, and resplendent gould. Those that steadfastly look on waterish eyes,
are subject to contract the same infirmity. Mine are clear, and free from the
malady; but it is only because I look not on them who are troubled with that
weakness. But I will labor hereafter to look upon the poor, whose eyes are
swelled with petitionarie tears; and so stedfastly-will I fasten mine eye of
compassion upon their miseries, that I will both lament their sufferances, and
relieve their wants. The purest gold is ever most pliable, and apt to bend
which way we please. Thus shall mine be ready to bow, and bend, and yield to
the necessities of my brethren. Thus shall my heart be noe longer the
possessour of my revennues, but the cabinet of charity, and tender compassion.
But when I divert ^ine eyes from the treasures of my coffers, and fasten them
on the glittering rays of my ^abinet Jewels; o then my heart, which was open,
beginn's to close again: and me thinks, I repent my promise of distributing
my massy sums; since they have power to purchase such dazeling jemms. Fond
woman, where is thy religion? Vain woman, why art thou so unconstant? These
sparkling diamonds are but the offalls of a rock; and by the hand of the artist
composed into a form, which may fitly tell me the folly of my pride. Suppose
that this, or this stone by nature was placed on the top of the rock: yet when
it fell to the ground, 'twas taken up for an idol. What stone can be harder,
then is this Adamant? Yet I find that flesh may be harder then this. My heart
is a rock; yet it is not a Diamond; for it is far inferior in the vallew, and
price. But admit howsoever that 'twere a Diamond: then I might hope that
nature or art would force some pieces, or sparks from the rock. O but I find
it will not easily yield to part with any: but when the hammer does come with
violence upon it, it forces it back again with scorn, and contempt; when the
grace of my God does offer to touch it, it is repelled by the hardness, and
obduracie there of. What shall I do to force it to yield? Nothing but a
Diamond cut's a Diamond. This very Diamond then, which I hold in my hand,
shall cut me to the heart, for the wickedness thereof. Or if that will not
do: if it will not yield without the concurrence of blood; I will besiech my
Redeemer for a drop of his blood, by virtue whereof my heart may relent. Here Is
a Pearl too, whose orient luster has so delighted my heart, that me thinks
in a manner I wear it in mine eye. It was the purchase of my coin; but from
whence at first was it derived to my possession? Nature intending to preserve
it from violence, clasped it up in the shell of a fish; and then sunk it to
the bottone of the troubled ocean. But coveteous man envying the treasures
which were hidden in the seas, ransacked the bottom to find out this jemme.
Now it is mine: it add's to my treasure; and borrows the eyes of the gazing
spectatours, making them wonder and cover this which I possess. But was it
only sent for the satisfaction of the eye? Let me a little more carefully
look upon it; and try if it offers not something of piety to a religious
soul. In the color thereof I discover heaven. In the Eastern parts from
whence are brought the crient pearls, Mat. 2.1.2.
I am put in mind of the star which appeared in the East to the wise men; and
conducted them to the sight of Christ, whom they worshipped. This cerulian,
jewel so fitly imitating the color of the heavens, whispers into me the
earnest desire which I ought to have, of that which it resembles. Shall the
color of the heavens be kept close in my cabinet, and vallewed chiefly for
it is orient luster; and shall not the desire of heaven be stirred up in my
heart; and an eamest longing to reign there eternally? This pearl shall be
made to forgett it is vallew, rather then I will prize it above my charity.
Even these very jewels shall be sold, and consumed, rather then I will value
my pride above my bounty. They shall be parcelled out in several sums, and
the naked shall wear them in their needful apparel. Or if these pearls
being sold, and dispersed to the poor, will not discover enough of my
Christian compassion; from mine eyes shall drop such a plentiful store, that
my heart shall be free in it is liberal bounty, and manifest thereby my tender
affection. There is a pearl which my Savior mentions, exceeding, Mat: 13 45.
verse. 46
all the treasures of the earth. For that pearl will I learn to play the
merchant; and sell both this, and all that I have, for the purchase of that. I
need not fear the want of ornaments, if I part from these to be partaker of
that: for that pearl is a city; Reu: 21 10.
and that city is great, and holy; even the holy Jerusalem; whose light is
like a Jasper stone, verse. 11
clear as Crystal. verse. 18
The bulding of the wall thereof is of Jasper; the city pure gold, like unto
clear glass; the foundations of the wall are garnished with all manner of
precious stones; verse. 19
even with a Jasper, a Saphir, a Calcedony, verse. 21
an Emerald, a Sardonix, a Sardius, a Chrisolite, a Berill, a Topaz, a
Chrysophrasus, a Iacinct, verse. 21
and an Amethist: the twelve gates are twelve pearls; every severallgate a
pearl: and the very street of the city is pure gold, as it were transparent
glass. O who would not leave this drossie, perishing gold, for that which is
so pure, and shall last for ever? Who would not forsake these mock, and
trivial jemmes, for those most precious, and unvalluable jewels? Long since
did my Savior tell his disciples, that it is easier for a camel to go through
the eye of a needle, Mat: 19 24.
then for the rtch to enter into the Kingdom of God. What then shall I do;
who am borne down from that Kingdom by the weight of my riches; and kept out
from the door by the bundles the greatenesse of the baggs which. I would
carry? When the ruler professed that he had kept all the commandments of God
from his youth, Luc: 18 21. verse. 22
yet lacked he one thing: He was to sell all that he had, and give to the
poor; and then, it was promised, he should have treasure in heaven, But when
he heard this, verse. 23
he was very sorrowful, for he was very rich. For my part I must confess
that I have been far more careful to keep my treasure, then the
commandment of God. Yet if I had done it, even from my youth, as the ruler
boasted; howsoever my plenty would inform me of my want. One thing yet, the
ruler wanted; and that one thing still, I stand in need of: I want the
diminishing of this earthly trash: I must sell all that I have and give to the
poor. O I fear that this command will be very sad, and sorrowful to me
too, because I am very rich. The more I possess, the more sorrow will arise,
when I shall part from my possessions. But thus I must do, if I expect what I
desire. All must go for the purchase of that pearl. The poor must have baggs
to receave my riches; and then my store shall be treasured in heaven. Yet am I
not bound so to give to the poor, as thereby to be one of the number of them.
Charity unbounded becomes prodigality. Those that are liberal must disperse
with freedom, but not with excess. He that command's me to relieve the
poor, command's me not to give 'till I am poor. If once I be reduced to such
a penury, I shall be quite deprived of the power to be liberal. What therefore
is mine I will not impropriate, and keep only to my self: but first having
furnished my self for necessity, I will prefer the wants of my brethren
before my convenience, or my delight. I will not deny my felse the use of the
creatures in a lawful manner: nor yet will I proudly satisfy my curiosity,
and leave the indigent out of my thoughts. I will labor to make these earthly
riches serviceable to the donour, even the God of heaven: and that I may the
better effect my desires, I will humble my self on my knees at his
foote-stoole, and besiech him to bow down his ear to my petitions, while I
pray unto him, and say.

The Prayer.
HEavenly father, Lord of plenty; thou who have created the world by thy power;
and continuest thy love, in thy providence, and protection: to thee do I
render thanks for my plenty; and to thee do I offer the service of my store.
What I have is thine; Ps. 24.1
for the earth is thine, and all that therein is, the compass of the world,
and they that dwell therein. It is thou only that give a blessing to the
fruit of the land; Deuteronomy: 7 13.
to the corn, to the wine, and to the oil; to the increase of the Kine, and
of the flocks of the sheep. It is thou only that command thy blessing in
the storehouses; c: 28.8.
and in all that thy servants do set their hands unto. Lord make me one of
thy faithful servants; that what thou have sent me, may be a restimonie of
thy love, and not of thy hatred. ^. Tim. 6.17.
Make me all ways magnify thee in my time of plenty; and not be high-minded,
nor trust in these uncertain riches; but in thee, the living God, who give
me richly all things to enjoy. O suffer me not so to treasure up the
deceitful riches of this sinful world, Luc. 12 25.
as thereby forgetting to be rich toward thee: but as from thy bounty I
receave these temporal blessings, so in thy mercy make me abound in grace; 2.
Cor: 9.8.
that allways having all sufficiency in all things, I may abound to every good
work, verse. 11
and be enriched in every thing to all bountifullnesse; that through me it may
cause thanksgiving unto thee my Lord, and my God. In this my prosperity give
me humility; and prepare me for adversity, if it shall please thee at any
time to send it unto me. Give me a sense of the afflictions of many of thy
saints, and distressed servants: and enlarge my heart, that I may be ready, and
forward to contribute to their necessities. Make me show mercy with
cherfulness, Romans 12.8.
and possess with thankfulness what thou sendest unto me; that I may
neither forget thee in thy members, nor deny thee to be the giver. Let me
never stop mine ears at the cries of the distressed, who beg for relief in
the name of thy self. Thou, o Christ, 2. Cor: 8.9.
who were rich, did for my sake become poor, that so through thy poverty
thou might make me rich. Lord make me as willing to be poor for thy
sake; allways considering that the vanities of earth, are not worthy to be
compared to the glory that shall be revealed. 1. Pet. 5 1. Heb. 4.13. 1. Tim.
2.9. verse. 10
O thou, to whose eyes even all things are naked, and open; grant that I may
adorn my self in modest apparel, with shamefastness and s^brietie; not so
much with gold, or pearls, or costly array; as with good works, becomeing a
professor of godliness. Make me labor for the ornaments of the hidden man
in the heart in that which is not corruptible; 1. Pet. 3 4. Luc. 12 21. 2. Cor.
9.11. 1. Tim. 6.18. Iam. 2.5. Reu: 3.18.
even the ornament of a meek, and quiet spirit, which is in thy sight of
greatest price. Make me, o heavenly father, rich in thy self; rich unto
liberality; rich in good works, and in faith. Make me buy of thee, gold
tried in the fire, that I may berich; and white raiment that I may be clothed;
and that the shame of my nakedness do not appear. Let me allways remember
that great account which one day I must render to thee the Lord of heaven, and
earth; that so I may serve thee here with my substance; in my body, and my
soul, with zeal and devotion: and hereafter be received to thine ever-lasting
glory, through the merits of thy son in thy bosom, Jesus Christ my only
Lord, and Savior. Amen.

Tears in want or in the time of adversity.
In four several Soliloquies, treating of, 1 A decayed est ate: or plenty
turned into poverty. 2 Hunger, both corporal, and spiritual. 3 Thirst, both
bodily, and ghostly. 4 Nakedness, both of the out-ward, and the in-ward man.

The first Soliloquie. Treating of a decayed estate: or Plenty turned into
poverty.
THE EjACULATION.
Psalm. 5. verse. 1. Give ear to my words, o Lord; consider my meditation.

verse. 2. Hearken unto the voice of my cry, my king, and my God; for unto thee
will I pray.

When Mary had powered her precious ointment on the head of my Redeemer, Mat:
26 7.
his disciples were filled with indignation, verse. 8. verse. 9.
and said, To what purpose is this wast? For this ointment might have been
sold for much, and given to the poor. verse. 10
But when Jesus understood it, he said, why trouble ye the woman? For she
has wrought a good work upon me: verse. 11
For ye have the poor allways with you; but me ye have not allways. O me
think's the words of my Savior do more afflict me, then the poverty which I
suffer. I thought he had been allways conversant with the poor, because he
so often commands their relief. But now he seems to leave us in our
misery, when he determines that we shall continue upon earth, but himself
resolves to leave the earth. But did he not promise in Saint Matthew, and say,
Mat. 28 20.
Lo I am with you allway, even unto the end of the world? How can his promise
be fullfilled, if we have him not allway? Will he be at the same time both
present with us, and absent from us? Or does he disdain our poverty; and for
that very reason deny us his presence? Cease, cease, o my soul, these doubts,
and questions, which savor too much of ignorance, Romans 3 4.
or infidelity. Let God be true, and every man a liar. What he spoke to his
disciples before his suffering, he spoke of his flesh: but what he said when
he was risen, he affirmed of his Spirit. True it is, o my Jesus, that thy
bodily presence I expect not upon earth: Ps. 144 5.
nor may I desire thee, to how the heavens, and come down from thy glory. ^t
is thy Spirit, o Christ, which I humbly sue ^or: even that Comforter, who may
strengthen ^ee, in the depth of my calamities. Never ^ad I more need of
comfort from God, then ^ow, when the goods of the world forsake me. Now do I
find, that I am hated, Prove. 14.20. c: 18.23 c: 19.4.
even of mine own neighbors, but the rich has many friends. I am enforced to
use entreaties: c: 18.23
but the rich answers me roughly. c: 19.4.
Wealth did make many friends: but now I am poor, I am separated from my
neighbors. verse. 7.
All my brethren do hate me: and much more do my friends go far from me.
I pursue them with words: yet they are wanting unto me. Vain world, where are
thy promises? Deceitful riches, where is your friendship? I, who so lately was
dandled in the lap of pleasure, and plenty, am now exposed to pains, and
penury. So little did I dream of this tempestuous storm, that (with David) I
said in my prosperity, Psa. 30.6.
I shall never be removed; thou Lord, of thy goodness, had made my hill so
strong. But where are now those ensigns of pride; my Rings, and my Jewels?
Where are those factours of lasciviousness; my favors, and my fashions? Where
are those robbers of time, my sports, and my games? Where are those moths, and
worms of plenty; my flattering society, and my discursive companions? Where
are those pamperers of the body; my several dishes, and dainty cookeries?
Where be those golden pictures, that often yielded me legs, and the
courtsies? Alas, all is gone: all is flowen. The Sun is hidden, and muffled in
a cloud; and by that means those atoms, those motes are obscured. Now must I
expect noe more honor, or respect. My fingers, and my wrists, and my neck must
forget, that ever they were adorned with the treasure of the seas, and the
riches of the earth. My back must forget that ever it was dressed in the
fashion of strangers. Mine ears must forget, that ever they were delighted
with the music of discourses. My palet must forget that ever it was coy, and
nice in the choice of various meats. My mind must forget, that ever I was
honored with the respect of inferiors: And my purse must forget, that ever it
was acquainted with the idol of the world. O what wonder, and misery happen's
in this change! All things are altered, as if I had slept out my time; and
only dreamed of the ple^tie, which formerly I enjoyed. Me think's I am but
just newly borne. Nay, I am worse: for now I have neither nurse to suckle me;
nor mother to dandle me. Yet am I still as if I were borne but a day, or two
since; allthough I am grown to bigness beyond the time: for I am as ignorant
of a way to live in the world, as the sucking infant that is nourished at the
breast. And now, what shall I do? Nor acquaintance, nor friends, nor kindred,
nor any will remember that ever they knew me: or if they do, they will be
moreready to taunt me, then afford me relief. Was ever misery like unto
mine? Was ever distressed soul so destitute, so forlorn as I am? Whither
shall I go? To whom shall I complain? Either my tougue has forgotten to
speak; or my friends to hear. Christianity seems to be but the labor of
the voice: for if men did believe what the Scriptures teach, they surely would
practice something of Charity.

Thus I sit, and sigh, and grieve, and expostulate, and complain: but yet I
forget what I ought to consider of. I am apt to repine at this poverty which I
suffer; but I am un-apt to enquire into the cause thereof. Solomon tell's me
that, Prove. 19.15.
Slothfullnesse casts into a deep sleep: and an idle soul shall suffer
hunger. That hunger I feel; but do I acknowledge that idleness? Do I
confess that slothfullnesse? If I should examine my hands, what work they
have done; would not their smoothness, and whiteness accuse them of
idleness? If I should ask mine eyes how vigilant they have been, in a
lawful employment; would they not drowzily, and bashfully slinke behind the
curtains? Let me then remember how Solomon tells me, c. 23.21
that drowsinesse shall cloth one with rags. And yet, me think's, this is
not all. There must be something else that bring's this affliction. Let me
but consider a little; and reason with my self. It may be I may find out
something more, by a diligent search.

I live upon the earth. I live in the world. Earth I had: the best of earth, in
the esteem of earth: I had gold and silver, so much esteemed, and honored by
man. In the world I am; and yet now my coin is gone, I am here but a stranger.
I did know many: but in the change of my fortune, I am known of none. If I call
to the earth, which so much I have loved; it will not un-bowell it self, to
offer me it is intraills. I cannot tell how, neither, to prick a vein of it,
to enrich my self; as the delvers do, though she tremble at the violence. If
I sue to the world, I am there neglected: Ps. 31.12.
I am forgotten, like a dead man out of mind; or like a broken vessel. Whence
arises this un-kindnesse of the earth? Whence proceede's this forgetfullnesse
of the world? Certainly the earth, of it self, had not malice enough, to sieke
my ruin. Surely the world, of it self, had not cruelty enough to contrive my
un-doeing. Noe, noe: there is something yet, which I have not discovered, that
question-lesse has brought this poverty upon me. I sigh; and my sighs go
up-ward; me think's, toward heaven. I look with a steady, and steadfast eye:
but it is up-ward I look; it is chiefly upon heaven. I mourn; and I cry: and
my word is chiefly, O Lord, O God. Who is this I name, so often, in my
laments? Who is this I mention, so often, in my cries? Is it not the Lord? Is
it not God? To heaven go my sighs upon heaven look mine eyes: on the God of
heaven do I call: and yet, though he is in my sighs, in mine eyes, and in my
tongue; I have all this while forgotten to entertain him in my heart. Surely,
if he had hitherto dwell't in my soul, I should either have enjoyed more of
the earth, or less of my love to it. That which I have left so un-willingly, I
have loved too much: and in that love, I have sinned too much: and by that
sin, I have moved him to anger, who has sent me this poverty. Yes, yes:
it is he, it is he that makes poor, and makes rich; 1. Sam. 2.7.
that brings low, and lifts up. All this while I have lived in such
ignorance, that either I knew him not; or, at least, I honored him not. I
lived as if there were noe other God, but only mammon; noe happiness, but on
earth; noe treasures, but gold; and noe content, but in plenty. If I ever
remembered him, it was to his dishonor: if ever I spoke of him, it was in
profaneness. I never doubted of his love, and therefore never prayed for his
blessing: or, if I did pray, it was coldly; it was faintly; and rather to
satisfy the world, then to discharge my duty; or, in an awful manner, to
have recourse to his Majesty. I measured his favors by my out-ward
possessions: and deemed them blessings, which he sent in wrath: but, I hope,
it will prove, that he has taken them in mercy. Grant, blessed God, that now
I may know thee in this my misery, who formerly forgot thee in the height of
my plenty: and that, knowing thee, I may love thee: and that, loving thee, I
may depend on thee: and that depending on thee, I may serve, and honor thee
all the days of my life. O now, me think's, I am another woman. I begin to
feel some warmth at my heart. I find that my God does speak to my
conscience. Lord send me repentance, that I may be sorry for my sins: send
me thy grace, that I may have share in thy promises: send me a lively faith,
that I may rely upon the merits of my blessed Redeemer: and, howsoever thou
disposest of this body of flesh, preserve my soul for thy celestial kingdom.
O what a sudden alteration do I find in my self! My tears, that savoured
of murmuring, and despair; shall flow abundantly for the sins I committed.
World, leawd world, thou art a jugler, and an impostour. Earth, base earth,
thou art a cozener, and a deluder. I, silly, woman, did place my happiness in
your transitory courtesies; and thought it the chief honor, to become your
minion. But now I see that you fail your servants, and mock your lovers.
There Is noe constancy, but in God. There Is noe comfort, or happiness, but in
Christ. The more I sieke him, the more I love him: and the more I love him, the
more I am beloved of him. He will not deceave me: he will not leave me, nor
forsake me. Lord let me be thine; though hungry, though thirsty, though naked
I come unto thee. I am sure that, if I serve him, I shall be provided for, by
him. He can do it, for he has enough. Col. 1.16.
He created all things; and his they are, by whom they were created. O let him
give me a little with content; rather then so much as I had, with
forgetfullnesse of him. I care not how little I possess, so I may enjoy my
Lord. The birds do never think of a morrow: and yet their hunger is satisfied
every moment. The herbs, and the flowers are infensible of their verdure: and
yet they infinitely out-vye King Solomon in his glory. Mat. 6.29.
The rivers that steal from the billowed ocean, and sport awhile in the massy
earth, are at length directed to the sea again. The stone that is dug from
the quarries in the earth, to serve for necessity, and ornament of our
structures; finds rest, at last, in a silent heap; where, making a way by
it is heavy weight, it steale's back by degrees into the womb of the earth. In
each of these I discover a providence: for he who first created, does still
preserve. O let him be mine; and then I shall be his. O let me be his; and
then he shall be mine. If I be his child by grace, and adoption; I am sure
that he will be my father, by providence, and protection. He it is who said
that he would leave in the midst of Jerusalem, Zeph: 3.12.
an afflicted, and poor people: but, with all, be promised that they should
trust in the name of the Lord. He that corrects me for mine offenses,
intends my conversion: the fault is in my self, if it turn to my ruin. He
takes away earth, that he may give me heaven: for, both, he sees, I cannot
graspe at once. Thus he at once both punishes me for mine offenses, and
provideth for my happiness. Yet, though he punishes; he does it not
hastily, nor yet un-expectedly, if I justly consider it. First he threatens,
before he scourges: and warns me to obey, before he chastises. Thus, by
his Prophet, Is. 20.3
he says, Like as my servant Isaiah has walked naked, and bare foot three
years, for a sign, and wonder upon Egypt, and upon Ethiopia: verse. 4.
So shall the King of Assyria lead away the Egyptians prisoners, and the
Ethiopians captives: young, and old; naked, and barefoote; even with their
shame un-covered to the shame of Egypt. Me he threatened too, before he thus
visited me: but mine ears were deaf; I stopped them; and refused to hearken
to the voice of the Lord. Every sickness of mine own, or my friends: every
loss of mine own, or my neighbors, was a menace ^om the All-mighty. Often
did I see his ^gments upon others; but I minded them ^t: as if it nothing
concerned me, what fell ^ot on my self. Children of Princes do ^eldome feel
the smart of a rod; but are ^errified by the stripes which others receave.
Thus the Lord dealt with me, when he scourged others: but I pitied not them,
nor yet my self: just it is therefore that none should now commiserate my case,
in the depth of my distress. Yet when I consider that this my poverty come's
from God, me think's it is a testimomie as much of his love, as of his
severitie. I know assuredly that his servant Job did suffer more then my
calamity amount's unto: yet he repined not at his losses, but glorified his
maker. Job. 1.21.
The Lord gave (says he) and the Lord has taken away; blessed be the name of
the Lord. Thus if I magnify him who sends this correction; I shall not sin
in my sufferance, verse. 22
nor charge him foolishly. Mar. 10 25.
He who said It is easier for a Camel to go through the eye of a needle, then
for a rich man to enter into the Kingdom of God: even the same Lord said to
the young man in the Gospel, If thou will be perfect, Mat: 19 21.
go and sell that thou have, and give to the poor; and thou shall have
treasure in heaven; and come, and follow me. Had I thought of heaven in my
seeming prosperity, I should not so much have been tormented with this
present loss. But I, who before neglected the poor, am ranked now in the
number of them. I who expected my heaven upon earth, have here my hell, that I
may have heaven hereafter. Why then should I murmur at this blessing from God;
and deem this a loss, which is sent for my advantage? Surely if I do but
endeavor to vallew the joys of eternity, I shall rejoice at my deliverance
from the possessions of the world. Such have did Zacheus make from the tree,
when my Savior did promise to become his guest; and with such contempt of the
world did he entertain my Redeemer, Lu: 19.8.
that he said unto him, Behold Lord, the half of my goods I give to the
poor; and if I have taken any thing from any man by false accusation, I
restore him four fould. That Sycomore tree which never before or since had
fruit, bare then a publicane ripened for Christianity. Unwilling should I
have been to have performed either of the promises of Zacheus, when I enjoyed
those vanities, which I termed goods: for I ever was as slow to the acts of
charity, as to those of justice. But what I kept from others, is now taken
from me: and what I was un-willing to restore, is returned to the owner, Shall
I therefore reine at him, because he required his own? Shall I murmur at him,
for that fault which is mine? He found me false; and would trust me noe
longer. Must this his know ledg redound to his dishonor? Shall I blame him for
his discovery of my false-hood, and negligence; and not rather ingeniously
confess the guilt of my wickedness? It Is I, it is I, that am unjust: it is he,
it is he that is righteous: and yet though I am unjust, and he is righteous,
my sins are punished to my greater advantage. I am now, in this poverty,
made liker unto him: for to the Scribe he said, The foxes have holes, Mat:
8.20.
and the birds of the air have nests; but the son of man has not where on
to lay his head. House he had none; yea, and friend he had none; for even
those did crucify him, whom he came to redeem. One of his disciples became a
traitor: and when he came to his own, Io: 1.11
his own received him not. When he was hungry, instead of figs he found
nothing but leaves; Mat: 21 19.
and at another time he contented him self with a piece of a broyled fish,
Luc: 24 42.
and an hony-kombe. When he was thirsty, he was offered vinegar to drink;
Io: 19.29. Mat: 27 28.31.
and never was it known that his garment was changed, save when the Jews put
on him the skarlet roabe; and when they had mocked him, they tooke't from him
again. The disciple is not above his master; c: 10.24.
nor the servant above his Lord. If he be my master, I shall be contented with
my poverty: if he be my Lord, I shall rejoice in my losses. Poverty is the
liverie which his servants wear: but this poverty is seated more in spirit,
then in purse: for those he pronounced truly blessed; and to them he
promised the kingdom of heaven. Mat: 5.3.
The poor that are wicked, he double hate's, both because they neglect their
common duties; and for contemning that poverty, which he send's for a
blessing. Those who have least of temporal goods, should most be busied about
things eternal. The rich have some plea for neglecting his service, because
they are busied in managing their estates: but the poor have noe pretense for
failing in their duties, to whom God has afforded nothing for their
hinderance. Is: 66.2
To this man will I look (says God hin self) even to him that is poor. Yet
he stays not here; but farther describes what poor he intends, and
says, Even him that is of a contrite spirit, and trembles at my word. Prove:
19.1.
It is only the poor man walking in his integrity, who is better then he
that is perverse in his lips. The prophet does promise that The meek shall
increase their joy in the Lord; Is. 29.19.
and the poor among men shall rejoice in the holy one of Israel: But this
promise belongs only to the godly. If my God will but vouchsafe to sanctify
my poverty, I shall be richer then those, who have the world at command: Iam:
2.5.
for he has chosen the poor of this world, rich in faith, and heirs of the
Kingdom which he has promised to them that love him. If I can be sure of
heaven, I shall never care for the treasures of the earth. Make me thy child,
o God, by grace; and then I shall willingly pass through poverty, to
unspeakeable glory. The world may scorn me; but it shall not ruin me,
Poverty is contemptible; but it may end in riches. True it is, that now I am
fallen into this decay, I must expect the frowns, and scorn of the people.
But what of that? Earthly honor is but the fondness of opinion: and the
credit of the world is as falsely grounded, as suddenly lost. The sporting
winds that toss the ships upon the swelling ocean, do often convert their
passe-time into fury; and sink at once both the ship, and the adventurer. The
idolatrous Mammonist that worship's his coin, is sometimes bereft of his
speechless idol by the fellonious robber. Storms, or waters, or time and age
can cause our proudest structures to fall upon their knees: and when that is
gone which purchased our credit, our contempt is as great as once was our
honor. The world does reverence none but those, who are accounted rich. It is
just in our times, as it was in the days when the Apostle lived. Iam: 2.2.
If there come into an assembly a man with a gold ring, in goodly apparel; and
there come in also a poor man, in vile raiment: verse: 3.
They have respect to him that wears the gay clothing, and say unto him, Sit
thou here, in a good place: And say to the other, Stand thou here, or sit under
his footestoole. But, for this Saint James says, They are partial in them
selves; and are become judges of evil thoughts. verse. 4.
If I derive my honor from the God of honor, I shall never vallew how low the
world esteeme's me. The Elm, and the Ash are as apt for service, as the
Cedar, and the Cypress. The coursest cloth afford's more warmth, then the
taffaties, and sattaines. Those bodies that glitter in gold, and tissue, shall
appear as naked at the great tribunal, as the poorest beggar. The humble and
meek have more content in the meanest cottage, then the proud and ambitious
in the towering edifices. The coursest bread with the blessing of God, can
nourish the body as well as the whitest, and purest manchet. Suppose I should
be driven to beg my food; would not that which I sued for as well satisfy
my hunger, as if it had been bought, and procured by my coin? If yet I should
ask, and be denied, when the violence of hunger command's me to petition;
howsoever I have thus much to quiet my mind, that the more I pine, the more
near I draw to the place of delight: for when I am out of the world, I shall
inherit a kingdom. What difference is there between gift, and price? It
alters not the thing; but only varie's the manner of our getting the thing. If
I beg for necessaries; they are as apt for use, as those that I can buy.
Again; I beg but of those, to whom they are lent. If I speed in my suite,
my thanks must be first directed to God, by whose bounty I receave: and next
unto man, for fullfilling his duty. If I am denied what I ask, I must know
that the hand of providence is in that denial: for though the devil may work
in him that refuses; yet God does speak to me in the repulse. Hunger, and
thirst, and cold, and nakedness, all are but trials of my patience, and
hasteners of my deliverance. If creditours should deprive me of my beloved
liberty, I should but be eased from wandering abroad in the wearisome world.
The iron gates have not strength, and power to shutt out my God. He spoke to
Jeremiah, Ier: 39.15. Act: 5.19. Prove: 22.27.
and comforted the Apostles when they were locked up in the prisons. If those
people to whom I am indebted, should be so merciless as to take away the very
bed from under me, when I have nothing to pay; peradventure I might sleep as
well upon the earth that bears me, as those that lie on their beds of down.
The Patriarch Jacob had but the ground for his couch, Gen: 28 11.
and the stones for his pillow, when in his sweetest sleep he was promised by
God, the land where he lay. verse. 13
Yet peradventure I may be eased of this misery too, if I address my
complaint to the defender of the poor. 2. King 4.1.
When the widow of the prophet cried to Elisha, and said, Thy servant my
husband is dead, and thou know that thy servant did fear the Lord; and the
creditour is come to take my two sons unto him, to be bondmen: verse. 6. verse.
7.
even then Elisha multiplied her oil; and with that she satisfied her hungry
creditour. Poverty has been frequently the object of pity; yea and
sometimes also the ground of plenty. When Jerusalem was taken by
Nebuchad-nezzar King of Babylon, Ier: 39.10.
Nebuzaradan the Captain of the guard left the poor of the people, which had
nothing in the land of Iudak; and to them he gave both vine-yards, and fields.
God has ever been a protector of the poor that were faithful; and relieved
their indigencie, Romans 15.26.
when they trusted in him. It pleased them of Macedonia, and Achaia (says
Saint Paul) to make a certain contribution for the poor saints at Jerusalem.
He took away my riches, that I might depend upon him; and that, finding the
uncertainty of earth, I might rely upon heaven. Mat: 6.25.
He command's me to take noe thought for my life, what I shall eat, or what
I shall drink; nor yet for my body, what I shall put on. verse. 30
The life is more them meat; and the body then raiment. Surely if he
cloathe's the grass of the field, which to day is, and to morrow is cast into
the oven; much more am I certain that he will cloth his servants. From him
proceeds every good gift. Iam: 1.17.
He will either send me what I desire; or else he will cause me not to
desire what he resolve's not to send me. Whatsoever he gives, he intends
it for his honor. If I may honor him by hunger, or thirst, or whatsoever
sufferance; his is the glory, and mine shall be the reward. Those are not rich,
whom the world so esteems. Content is certainly the best riches; and that is
only proper to the godly. Reu: 3.17.
Laodicea said, I am rich, and increased with goods, and have need of nothing:
but alas, she was miserable, and wretched, and poor, and blind, and naked.
When the Israelites were to give an offering to the Lord, to make an atonement
for their souls, Ex: 30.15.
the rich were not to give more, nor the poor to give less then half a
shekel. If God should require so much at my hands, I should be apt to plead
the want of money: or if I had so much, I fear that I should appear too
unwilling to spare it. But all coveteousnesse is a distrust of providence; and
either denies the power, or questioneth the will of the great disposer. He
provided for the poorest Israelite: on him therefore must I depend for relief,
and comfort. Something he require's that I should offer unto him. I have
nothing of the world's. All that I can offer, is but my self; and certainly my
self shall be best accepted. If I can but present him an honest heart, it
matter's not how hungry, or thirsty, or cold, or naked the body is, which
contains that heart. Job. 34.19.
He accepts not the persons of Princes; nor regards the rich more then the
poor: for they all are the work of his hands. The rich may offer to him of
their abundance: Mar: 12 44.
but I, of my want, will give him my heart, which is all that I have.
Peradventure he will say of me, verse. 43
as he did once of the widow, This poor woman has cast more in, then all
they that have cast into the treasury. Thus if I sieke the Lord, I cannot
want: for so the Prophet tells me; Ps: 34.10.
The young Lions do lack, and suffer hunger: but they that sieke the Lord,
shall not want any good thing. Saint Paul assures me saying, 1. Cor: 3.22.
Whether Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, or the world, or life, or death, or
things present, or things to come; verse. 23
all are yours, and ye are Christ's, and Christ is God's. And now, what can I
fear? Whereat can I be displeased? God is mine, and I am his. For what he
gives me, I will be thankful: whatsoever earthly thing he depriveth me of,
I will be contented. This poverty will not endure for ever. If it continues
while I live, yet it must end when I die; and that blessed time draws nearer
and nearer every moment. I am assured of a deliverance; I must attend with
patience. Afflicted Job does certainly assure me that, Job. 36.15.
God delivers the poor in his affliction; and opens their ears in
oppression. The same God promised to Tzion, saying, I will abundantly bless
her provision: Ps. 132.15.
I will satisfy her poor with bread. The Psalmist refreshes me with
unspeakeable comfort, when he tells me that, Ps: 9.18 Ps: 72.12.
The needy shall not allways be forgotten: the expectation of the poor shall
not perish for ever. The Lord shall deliver the needy, when he cries: the
poor also; and him that has noe helper. He will defend the poor, Ps: 82.3
and fatherless: he will do justice to the afflicted, and needy. Ps: 140.12.
He will maintain the cause of the afflicted; and the right of the poor.
Thus am I promised; and thus shall it be performed. It is noe new thing with
God to take pity upon the distressed. The Prophet Isaiah says unto him, Thou
have been a strength to the poor; Is: 25.4
a strength to the needy in his distress; a refuge from the storm; a shadow
from the heat. Ps: 34.6
This poor man cried (says David) and the Lord heard him; and saved him out
of all his troubles. Again: He raises up the poor out of the dust; Ps.
113.7. Ps. 10.14. Heb. 13 5.
and lifts the needy out of the dunghill. Therefore I resolve that I will
commit my self unto him; for he is the helper of the friendlesse. He has
promised that he will never leave nor forsake them that trust in him. Parents
are commonly indulgent to their children: yet because their natural affection
is possible to be quenched, therefore says the Psalmist, When my father, and my
mother forsake me; Ps. 27.10.
then the Lord, will take me up. I will therefore beg, seeing now I am poor:
I will beg of God, because he is rich: I will beg of God to keep me, to
love me, to bless me; that so I may never forsake my dependence on him; nor
he his love, and compassion to me. Earnestly will I besiech him, and
confidently will I resolve, Rom: 8 38.
that Neither death, nor life, nor Angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor
things present; verse. 39.
nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature, shall ever
be able to separate me from the love of God, which is in Jesus Christ our Lord.

The Prayer.
FAther of pitties, Lord of comfort, thou that hear the cries of the
afflicted; Job. 34.28. Ps: 32.4
look down in mercy on a distressed sinner. Thy hand, o God, is heavy upon
me: for thou have taken from me what I called mine, by reason that I did not
acknowledge it thine. o Lord thou know my bleeding heart, my sorrowful eyes,
and my mournful tears. Thou see how poor I am; and what miseries I suffer.
Ps: 44.13.
I am a scorn to my neighbors; and a derision to them that are round about
me. My life is become a burden unto me, because thou have deprived me of the
comforts thereof. My lovers, Ps: 38.11.
and mine acquaintance stand looking upon my misery; and my kinsmen stand a
far off, Lord, if it be thy pleasure thus to humble me with poverty; let it
be thy goodness to give me patience to endure it. The pride of my heart, and
my forgetfullnesse of thee in the time of plenty, did cry aloud for thy
severest punishments. Now, o now, I feel thy just displeasure; and I groan
under the burden, and weight thereof. Yet thou Lord, can ease me; thou can
restore me. Hear, Lord, and have mercy: Lord, Ps: 30.10.
be thou my helper. Suffer me noe more to rely upon the arm of flesh; 1. Tim:
6.17.
or to put my trust in un-certaine riches: but make me for ever depend upon
thy bounty. Forgive me, o father, the sins which I committed, when I lived
in prosperity: Ps: 30.7
for I am sensible that they are a cause, why at this time thou hidest thy face
from me; and causest me to be troubled. O give me a sight, and sense of the
greatness of them; and true contrition, and sorrow for them; that so, though
the world forsake me, yet I may find favor, and mercy in thy sight. Without
thy assistance, this sore burden is too heavy for me to bear. Ps: 38.4
Lord either remove it from me, or make it easier for me. Lend me thy
gracious, and helping hand; Ps: 23.4
that as I am scourged with thy rod, so I may lean upon thy staff. Let me
never despair of thy comfortable relief: but in all my miseries be thou my
refuge. Be pleased to endue me with patience from above; that I may give noe
advantage to the tempter, in my sufferings. Open the eyes, and the charitable
hands of those that should see, and know mine adversity: and so enlarge their
hearts, that they may administer comfort, and relief to me, in the midst of
my necessities. Ps. 147 9. Dan. 1.15.
O thou that feedest even the young Ravens, which call upon thee; thou that
did bless the pulse to thy servant Daniel; be pleased to fill my hungry
soul with the blessings of thy bounty. Grant that whatsoever I suffer in my
body, my soul may thereby draw nearer unto thee. In the misery of hunger, do
thou satisfy me with thy grace: in my scorching thirst, do thou cause me
with joy to draw water out of the wells of salvation: Is. 12.3.
in the pinching cold, do thou warm my devotion: and in my poorest, and
meanest habit, do thou cloth my soul with the righteousness of my Redeemer.
O suffer me not to offend thee in my greatest want: but make me rely, and
depend upon thee. Teach me, by this chastisement, the vanity of the world; and
weane me from the fond delights thereof. Prove. 10.22.
It is thy blessing only that makes rich; and thou addest noe sorrow with it:
send me that blessing to ease me of my sorrows. Mat. 6.33.
It is thy promise that if first I sieke thy Kingdom; and the righteousness
thereof; then all other things shall be added unto me. Make me thus to sieke
what thou command; and then give unto me that which thou promisest. Ps.
119.91.
All things, in their order, do service unto thee: Lord make them, in some
measure, serviceable unto me, that I may the better be enabled to be
serviceable unto thee. O thou, my Jesus, who did hunger, Mat. 4.2. Io. 19.28.
and thirst, look mercifully upon thy servant in this state of misery: and so
carry me through the storms of this troublesome life; that, in the end, I may
arive at the fair haven of eternal peace, and rest; through thine own
meritts, and passion, o Jesus Christ, my Lord, and only Savior. Amen.

Treating of hunger, both corporal, and spiritual.
THE EjACULATION.
Psalm. 5. verse. 1. Give ear to my words, o Lord; consider my meditation:

verse. 2. Hearken unto the voice of my cry, my king, and my God; for unto thee
will I pray.

WHen Sion bewailed her pittyfull estate, she cried out in her misery, Lam.
4.9.
and said, They that be slain with the sword, are better then they that are
slain with hunger: for these pine only, stricken through for want of the
fruits of the field. Surely this affliction was most dreadful in the
sufferance; which sounds so heavily in the sad complaint. Hunger has been
allways acknowledged violent; eve^ of force to break through walls of stone.
The cry for bread, bread, bread, strike's such compassion in the ears of the
auditors, that the hardest heart would melt at the voice. He that taught us to
pray for our daily bread, Mat. 6.11.
knew the necessi^ie of our daily food. But I, poor I, do beg, and pray,
and cry for bread, for daily bread; and yet I find neither supply, nor hope.
Had I the employment, and righteousness of Moses, Deuteronomy: 9 18.
I might fall down before the Lord for forty days and forty nights, as he
did; and in all that time, neither eat bread, nor drink water: Yea, and if
once would not serve the turn, I could return again to my former abstinence.
Had I authority from heaven, as Elijah had, I could eat, and drink, 1. King
19.8.
and go in the strength of that meat forty days, and forty nights too.
Could I encounter the tempter, as once my Savior did in the wilderness, Mat:
4.2.
I might likewise fast both forty days, and forty nights. But miracles are
ceased: I cannot therefore hope for so long an abstinence; nor know I where to
satisfy my hunger. I daily want, that I may daily pray: and in this want I
feel a necessity of depending on my God. O what shall I do? Where shall I
sieke? To whom shall I complain? My spirits are fainting: my heart is even
ready to dye within me: 1. Sam: 25.37.
and my feeble knees are un-able to bear the weight of my body. I am ready to
perish for want of food; and yet me think's, I am somewhat un-willing to
disclose my wants, or else I am afraid my suite will be denied. When David
pursued the Amalekites, after the spoiling of Ziklag, 1. Sam. 30.11.
his soldiers found an Egyptian in the field, and brought him to David; and
gave him bread, and he did eat; and they made him drink water: verse: 12
And they gave him a piece of a cake of figs, and two clusters of raisins;
and when he had eaten, his spirit came again to him; for he had eaten noe
bread, nor drunk any water three days, and three nights. As that Eunuch was,
so, me think's, am I. I am feeble, and faint, and my spirit is gone: I know
not what to do for something to refresh me. O, had I but such bread, and such
drink, how thankfully should I take, what diverse do scorn! Labor I would,
to procure my sustenance; but I cannot work, because I have not to eat. Eze:
4.16.
Walk I would, industriously in my calling; but the staff of bread is taken
from me and without a staff I cannot walk. My wants I know, and complain of
them: but where shall I find a charitable person, who will satisfy my
appetite? But, why do I make these sad laments; and condole my poverty, as if
noe people ever had suffered the like? In former times whole nations, and
countries have been pined with such misery, as now I endure. Famine is a
punishment which comes from God; and does not allways derive it is cause from
things that are natural. 2. King 25.3.
At the siege of Jerusalem, on the nineth day of the fourth month, the famine
so prevayled within the city, that there was noe bread for the people of the
land. Lam: 1.19.
My Priests (says ^hee in her great complaint) and mine Elders gave up the
ghost in the city; while they sought their meat, to relieve their souls.
Several famines have been often threatened; and as severely, many times, have
been brought to pass. Among other curses wherewith the Israelites were
menaced, upon their disobedience, this was not the least of them, which was
told them by the mouth of Moses, when he said Thou shall eat the fruit of
thine own body, the flesh of thy sons, and of thy daughters, Deu: 28 53.
which the Lord thy God has given thee, in the siege; and in the straitness
where with thine enemies shall distress thee. And again the Lord himself did
speak unto them, and say, If ye will not hearken unto me, Lev: 26 27. verse.
28
but walk contrary unto me, Then I will walk also contrary unto you in
fury; and I, even I will chastife you seven times for your sins: verse. 29
And ye shall eat the flesh of your sons; and the flesh of your daughters
shall ye eat. This was threatened, and this was inflicted; the sad story
whereof is obvious to every willing eye, according as it is recorded in sacred
Writ. 2. King 6.25.
A great famine there was in Samaria; and behold they besieged it, until an
Asse's head was sold for fourscore pieces of silver; and a fourth part of a
Kabbe of dove's dung for five pieces of silver: verse: 26
And as the King of Israel was passing by, upon the wall, there cried a woman
unto him, saying, Help my Lord, verse: 27
o King: And he said, If the Lord do not help thee; whence shall I help
thee? Out of the barn floor; or out of the wine press? And the King said
unto her, verse. 28
what ayleth thee? And she answered, This woman said unto me, Give thy son,
that we may eat him to day; and we will eat my son to morrow: verse. 29
So we boiled my son, and did eat him. And I said unto her, on the next
day, Give thy son, that we may eat him: and she has hidden him. O what a
famine was this, which instructed nature to become unnatural! The lives of the
mothers were preserved only by the deaths of their issue. The children, in
recompense for the milk they had sucked, were enforced to pay the tribute of
their blood. Those bellies which harbored the children unborne, were made the
tombs of the murdered children. They which were a burden once to the parent,
were now the nourishers. The famine did make the innocent guilty: and to
prevent the hands of crueller executioners, the mothers did friendly betray
them to their murder. They express their love, in preserving them from
starving: and so at once were merciful to the babes, in borrowing their lives;
and careful for themselves, to prevent their destruction. Lord, what a horrid
act was this, when the child which was tenderly beloved of the parents, was
greedily chewed in the teeth of the mother! Our offspring are bound by the
commandment of God, to render us honor; but yet not thus ^o dye for our
lives: yet these innocents were obedient before they knew it; and became the
preservers of them that had nourished them. In the place where first they
received life they preserved life by the deaths of themselves. Thus did their
mothers most truly set them at their hearts: but more in affection to
themselves, then their issue. The children dyed, that they might not dye: they
were murdered, that they might not be starved. They were dandled to their
destruction, by the hands of their parents; and yet the act did appear rather
care then cruelty. Lam: 4.10.
The hands of the pitiful women (says the Prophet) have sodden their own
children: they were their meat in the destruction of the daughter of my
people. Yet their flesh was not sensible of the fiercnesse of the fire: nor did
they feel the teeth of their greedy parents. The bellies of the unnatural
became their graves: and yet if there the dead had received their rest, then
their inhumanitie might have seemed to be pity. Those who once required the
assistance of a midwife, were a second time delivered of their deceased
burdens. But, was there noe Prophet among them left to entreat? Was there none
to intercede to the All mighty for them? c: 2.20.
Shall the women eat their fruit; and children of a spanne long? The head of
an ass was the ransom af a child: and the dung of the doves a repreever af
the infants. But when the heads of the beasts had been devoured by the people;
the very women themselves were transformed in to beasts: Yea, that cruelty
which the beasts would have stood amazed at; the greedy starvelings blushed
not to practice. O, me think's, the remembrance of the doves should have
heightened their affection; and not the dung of the doves have ushered in their
murders. This was a famine which I tremble to remember: and it grieveth me to
think that my sex was so cowardly. Had the old and the young expired
together, I should have thought the women indulgent mothers. This famine was
worse then that which Rabshakeh threatened to Jerusalem: for he menaced but the
feeding on the dung of themselves; but here was served in the very fruit of
their loins. Yet that other was terrible too, even in the threat; when railing
Rabshakeh said unto Eliakim, Shebna, and Ioah, 2 King: 18.27.
Has my master sent me to thy master, and to thee, to speak these words?
Has he not sent me to the men that sit on the wall, that they may eat their
own dung, and drink their own piss? These, these were famines which are
more dreadful in their relation^, then mine is in the sufferance: yet seeing
they were universal, they were the easier to be borne. Misery has some
comfort, if it be ^ot singular. The sufferance is easier, when ^ce it grow'es
general. If the whole world ^ere reduced to the same distress as now ^
suffer, I should ease my complaint by the sufferance of others. But is not this
an argument of uncharitable wickedness, when (...) grieve not so much at my
particular durance, as I repine because the penury is not univerfall? While
others have, I may hope for relief: but if the famine were general, I could
not expect it. This is the wickedness of most which sulfer, that they vailew
their miseries more by comparison then justice; and deem themselves the more
unhappy, because every one else is not so low as they. I must therefore take
heed that I neither offend in my sufferance, nor repine because I am singular.
If I take this hunger as a chastisement from God, I may hope to be relieved in
his own good time. Let me enquire into the cause of this my visitation; and
so I may be instructed how to demean my self. In the depth of this affliction
I cannot choose but behold an angry Lord. He, o he is offended, who said in
the Psalms, Every beast of the forest is mine; Ps: 50.10. verse: 11 verse. 12
and the cattle upon a thousand hills. I know all the fowls of the
mountains; and the wild beasts of the field are mine. The world is mine, and
the fulness thereof. He has enough, I see, to give; though he deemeth me
not worthy enough to receave. I am afraid that I formerly thanked him not for
what I had; and therefore now he decrees that I shall wish to have. It has
been commonly his custom thus to punish those that offended. To disobedient
Israel he threatened this, and also the sword, Deuteronomy. 28.48:
by the mouth of Moses, saying, Thou shall serve thine enemies which the Lord
shall send against thee, in hunger, and in thirst, and in nakedness, and in
want of all things. Again, of impenitent Israel he says by his Prophet, Is.
9.20
He shall snatch on the right hand, and be hungry; and he shall eat on the
left hand, and they shall not be satisfied: they shall eat every man the flesh
of his own arms. Touching Jerusalem he said by his Prophet Ezekiel, Eze:
4.10.
Thy meat which thou shall eat, shall be by weight; twenty shekels a day:
from time to time shall thou eat it. verse. 11
Thou shall drink also water by measure; the sixth part of an Hin from time
to time shall thou drink. verse. 12
And thou shall eat it as barley cakes; and thou shall bake it with dung that
comes out of man, verse. 13
in their sight. And the Lord said unto him, Even thus shall the children of
Israel eat their defiled bread among the Gentiles, whither I will drive them.
Among other curses which Israel should endure for rebellion, and disobedience,
the forerunner of famine was not the least. Deuteronomy: 28.39.
Thou shall plant vine yards, and dress them; but shall neither drink of the
wine, nor gather of the grapes; for the worms shall eat them. Among other
punishments sent upon idolaters, the Prophet terrifieth them with this above
all: When they shall be hungry, Is: 8.21.
they shall frett themselves, and curse their King, and their God, and look
up-wards. Here was almost all the misery that man could suffer, and the
wickedness that he could act, in this present world. Hunger was sent as a
punishment for idolatry; and rebellion, blasphemy, and impenitency were the
effects of the punishment. Hunger produces rebellion; they curse their King:
rebellion blasphemy; they curse their God: and blasphemy both impudence, and
impenitencie; they look up-wards, toward heaven, as if they were not ashamed.
The curse which should happen to the enemies of Sion was accounted great,
because they should be resembled to people that are hungry: c: 29.8.
As when a hungry man dreameth, and behold he eats; but he awaketh, and
his soul is empty: or, as when a thirsty man dreameth, and behold he
drinks; but he awaketh, and behold he is faint, and his soul has
appetite: So shall the multitude of the nations be, that fight against mount
Sion. But what is the cause why the anger of the most high is commonly
discovered in the curse of famine? What moves the Lord to punish his creatures
with this pining destruction? Whence arises his wrath, that his vengeance is
so terrible? Alas, alas, I need not wonder that his fury is so fierce, if
I do but remember how justly he punishes. He smites not, before we
offend: he punishes not, before we transgress. When our sins are so
impudent, as to provoke his displeasure, how can he choose but awake, Ps:
78.65.
as one out of sleep; and like a mighty man that shouteth by reason of wine?
For iniquity only does he visitt: he visits our offenses with the rod;
Ps. 89.32.
and our sin with scourges. For this did he give Israel cleanesse of teeth,
Amos. 4.6.
in all their cities; and want of bread in all their places: yet they returned
not unto the Lord. 2. Sam: 21.1.
For Saul, and for his bloody issue, because he slew the Gibeonites, therefore
there was a famine in the days of David three years, year after year: and
it ceased by the execution of seven of Readiness sons. Is: 5.13.
Therefore (says God) my people are gone into captivity, because they have noe
knowledge: and their honorable men are famished; and their multitude dried up
with thirst. This is the punishment for sin: and yet, upon repentance, the
Lord is as willing to remove it from us, as, when we offended, he was just in
sending it. His promises were gracious to the Gentiles, which should be
fullfilled by Christ, as his Prophet relates them. Is: 49.10.
They shall not hunger, nor thirst; neither shall the heat, nor Sun smite
them: for he that has mercy on them shall lead them; even by the springs of
water he shall guide them. Yet, let me not too much forget my self. Though
this famine be one of the weapons with which the Lord does commonly fight, and
wound his enemies; I must not therefore conclude that they all are forsaken, and
hated, who endure this affliction. I must not conclude that, Because with this
he punishes his enemies, therefore with this he corrects not his saints.
This were but to frame an argument, to urge me to despair: and to judge my
self with greater severitie, then the Lord himself, I hope, will judge me.
Every scourge which he takes in his hand, may be for chastisement to the
godly, as well as a judgment to the wicked. Though this must bring me to a
sight of my sins; yet it may not enforce me to a distrust of his mercies.
Though sometimes the godly dye under an affliction: yet they know that they
shall live by the merits of Christ. We have noe more freedom from punishments
here, then the worst of reprobates. Yea, our portion is greater and bitterer
here then theirs: 1. Cor. 11.32.
but we are chastened of the Lord, that we might not be condemned with the
world. There is a greater deal of difference between corrections, and
judgments. The beloved child may be wounded as deep, yea deeper then an
enemy: but the deeper his Wound, the surer is his cure. To the godly they are
afflictions; to the reprobate torments: to the godly chastisements; upon the
reprobate revenge. At the famine in Samaria, 1. King 18.5.
good Obadiah went into the land, unto all fountains of water, and unto all
brooks, to sieke for grass, that he might save the horses, and mules alive.
When the Prophet Jeremiah was cast into the dungeon, Ier: 38.9.
he was like to die for hunger in the place; for there was noe bread in the
city. 1. Cor. 4.11.
The holy Apostles did both hunger, and thirst, and were naked, and buffeted;
and had noe certain dwelling place. They were in weariness, 2. Cor. 11.27.
and painefullnesse; in watchings often; in hunger, and thirst; in fastings
often; in cold, Act: 10 9.
and nakedness. When Saint Peter went up upon the house to pray, the vision
appeared to him while he was hungry. verse. 10
Saint Paul professed that he had learned both how to be abased, Phil. 4.12.
and how to abound. Every where, and in all things he was instructed, both to
be full, and to be hungry: both to abound, and to suffer need. Genesis 12 10.
When a famine was in the land where Abraham dwelt, he was enforced to go
down into Egypt, to sojourne there: for the famine was grievous in the land.
Many saints, and servants of God have drunk very deep of this cup of
afliction. Why should I then, be too much dejected; and complain so of want,
as if God had forgotten me? How know I to the contrary, but it may be his
pleasure, even by this affliction, to bring me to humility, and so unto
glory? It is my part to thank him for his visitation; and not to repine at his
correction. Plenty is commonly the ground of forgetfullnesse. I should never
have known the benefit of fulness, if I had not learned it by an empty
belly. I will therefore beg of him a blessing to this cross; that the more I
want of out-ward blessings, the more eagerly I may sieke for inward content. I
will resolve, Hab. 3.17.
with the Prophet, that, Allthough the fig tree shall not blossom; neither
fruit be in the vines: though the labor of the Olive shall fail, and the
fields shall yield me noe meat: though the flocks shall be cut off from the
foald, verse. 18
and there shall be noe heard in the stalls: Yet I will rejoice in the Lord; I
will joy in the God of my salvation. Romans 8 35.
Neither tribulation, nor distress, nor persecution cut, nor famine, nor
nakedness, nor sword shall ever separate me from the love of Christ. I know
that he which can send provisions without content; can likewise feed me,
when I least expect it. Hag. 1.6.
Ye have sowed much (says the Prophet) and bring in little: ye eat, but ye
have not enough: ye drink, but ye are not filled with drink: ye cloth
you, but there is none warm: and he that earneth wages: earneth wages, to
putt in a bag with holes. The curse is as great, to eat without
satisfaction; as to want what we desire. I know that God oftentimes has sent
a famine, that so his people might the more depend upon him. So has his
goodness many times appeared, Gen: 42 5.
when men had least expectation of supplies. True it is, that, when the famine
was sore in the land of Canaan, the Sons of Israel bought corn in Egypt. Men
have ever vallewed their bellies above their estates. In the Egyptian famine
Joseph bought all the land of Egypt for Pharaoh the King: c: 47.20
for the Egyptians sold every man his field, because the famine prevailed over
them: so the land became Pharaoh's. When Esau was faint, comeing out of the
field, and Jacob refused him a mess of pottage, under the price of his
birthright; c: 25.32. verse: 33
he said, Behold I am at the point to die, and what profit shall this birth
right do to me? So he sold his birthright unto Jacob. The Prophet
lamenting the people of Jerusalem, Lam: 1.11.
says, All her people sigh; they seek bread: they have given their pleasant
things for meat, to relieve the soul. All these have been furnished by
ordinary means: but I also read that God has provided, when men could
least expect, 1. King 17.10. verse: 12
or help. When the widow of Zarephath had nothing left but a poor handful
of meal in a barrel, and a little oil in a cruse; and went out to gather two
sticks, that she might go in, and dress it for her, and her son, that they
might eat it, and dye: even then she received comfort from the Prophet
Elijah: verse: 16
for her harrell of meal wasted not; neither did the cruse of oil fail; as
the Lord had spoken by the mouth of the Prophet. When the selfsame Prophet, by
the command of God, dwelt by the brook Cherith, that is before Jordan (even
before the increase of the meal, verse: 5.
and the oil was miraculously effected) in a wonderful manner he was fed by
the Ravens: verse. 6.
for they brought him bread, and flesh in the morning; and bread, and flesh in
the evening; and he drank of the brook. Again; when the same Elijah fled to
Beersheba, upon the threats of Iezebel; c: 19.4.
he went a daye's journie into the wilderness, and came, and sat under a
Juniper tree: and he requested for himself, that he might dye, and said, It
is enough now, o Lord; take away my life; for I am not better then my fathers.
verse. 5.
Yet as he lay and slept under the Juniper tree, behold there an Angel touched
him, and said unto him, Arise, verse. 6.
and eat. And when he looked, and behold there was a cake baked on the
coals, and a cruse of water at his head; he did eat, and drink; and laid
him down again. verse: 7.
And the Angel of the Lord came again the second time, and touched him, and
said, Arise, and eat. verse: 8.
And be arose again the second time, and did eat; and went in the strength
of the meat forty days. Gen: 21 14.
When Abraham rose up early in the morning, and took bread, and a botle of
water, and gave it unto Hagar, putting it on her shoulder, and the child
Ismael; and sent her away; and she departed, and wandered in the wilderness
of Beersheba: after a while, the water was spent in the botle; verse: 15
and she, poor soul, verse. 16
cast the child under one of the shrubbs: And she went, and sat her down
over against him, a good way off, as it were a bow shoot (for she said, Let
me not see the death of the child) And she sat over against him, verse. 17
and lift up her voice, and wept. Yet, even then, God heard the voice of the
lad; and the Angel of God called to Hagar out of heaven, and said unto her,
What ayleth thee Hagar? Fear not, for God has heard the voice of the lad
where he is. Arise, verse. 18.
lift up the lad, and hold him in thine hand; verse. 19
for I will make of him a great nation. And God opened her eyes, and she saw
a well of water; and she went and filled the botle with water, and gave the
lad drink. Thus my God, if he please, can do for me too: for I cry, and I
weep, with distressed Hagar; not for drink, Ps. 145 19.
but bread: Who knows but the Lord may hear my cry, and may help me? The
birds that nest in the Cedars of Lebanon; the goats on the hills, and the
conies in the rocks; the beasts of the forests, and the roaring Lions; the
creeping things in the great and wide sea, and the Leviathan which is made to
play in the waters; Ps. 104 27.
These all wait upon him, Job. 38.41. Ps. 145.15.
that he may give them their meat in due season. He provideth for the Raven
his food: when his young ones cry unto God, they wander, for lack of meat.
The eyes of all wait upon him, and he gives them their meat in due season.
verse. 16
He opens his hand and satisfies the desire of every living thing. Why then
should I vex, and torment my self in this time of want, as if either the Lord
were ignorant of my calamity; or else were unable, or unwilling to help me?
I resolve with my self, that, though the conflict be great between my self
and my appetite; though my stomach cry, and my belly complain; though
leanenesse possesses my cheeks, and palenesse sets up it is rest in my
countenance; though feeblnesse steals upon my joints, and faintness on my
spirits; yet will I not leave my confidence in my God. I shall not the sooner
purchase my desires, by declining his mercy. If any thing comes, it is sent by
his providence: if nothing comes, yet still I have God, who is the best of
all. If it be his pleasure to bring me to the earth by this consuming want, my
body indeed shall yield the less food to the worms; but my soul shall be
filled with un-speakeable comforts. Lord, what a base lump of clay is this,
which would so tyrannize over my soul, as to make it leave it is confidence in
thee! What art thou that complainest, and yawnest and gapest so greedily for
satisfaction? Thou art but earth, at the best; and by the earth thou have been
fed; and to the earth thou shall return. The food which thou desire, is a
thing to be loathed, if thou did but consider in what manner thou were
furnished. The earth produces grass, for the food of the beasts: they are
fatted, to furnish the tables of men: and when men do plentifully feed upon
them, the least part thereof conduces to their nourishment; the most of it
goes out into the draffe: and even that which is putrified, it returne's to
the earth again, to render it fertile. Thus we live by excrements; and we
are fed by putrefaction. That which we loath both in the sent, and the sight,
is forgotten when we feed upon it in our bread. Thus I pine then, for nothing
but dung, and filth; for want whereof, my belly would force me to repine
against my maker. Our fowls are fed with the filthy worms that proceed from
our dung hills: our fishes are composed of mudde, and slime: our beasts are
nourished by virtue of that which we loath to remember: and from all these is
patched up such a body, as at the second, or third hand, is nothing but dung,
or whatsoever is worse. Were it not shame then, for me to suffer this body,
which being dead, in three or four days will be odious to the living, to
entice my soul to rebel against my maker? O, I may not; I will not. This
leanenesse does but lecture to me, what I am framed of; and the soul is
comforted in the weakness of the prison. That better part does long to dwell
with the father of spirits. Each bitt I should eat, Heb: 12 9.
would but delay my time; and retard the fruition of a crown of glory. O my
God be pleased to send me thy blessing as well in want, as in plenty; that so
I may decree, and resolve with Saint Paul, in whatsoever state I am, Phil: 4.11.
there with to be content. Thus I should be; and thus I desire to be: for
hunger, with content, is better then feasting; and feasting, without it, is
worse then famine. If God in his wisdom sees it good for me that I should
be filled, I doubt not of his providence in sending what is good. I will (as I
ought) sieke the ordinary means for the preservation of life. I will
industriously labor, or earnestly besiech, or painfully travail for that
which may nourish me. If it comes as I desire, I will thank him who sends
it: if it comes not as I wish, howsoever I will labor to be content with my
lot. Him will I honor both in plenty, and in want: and to his disposing will
I yield up my self. True it is that he created meats for the belly, 1. Cor:
6.13.
and the belly for meats: but yet he will destroy both it, and them. He has
sent me this affliction to physic my soul: and to put me in mind how nicely
I have refused in plenty, what now I should thankfully receave in my want.
Those that are full, are apt to surfeit; and hasten with more disturbance to
the gates of the grave, then we who in hunger do willingly meet, and desire
our death. Yet I am not so unwilling to live, as that I would refuse my
nourishment, though of the meanest sort: nor am I so unwilling to dye, Prove.
27.7.
as by unlawful means to satisfy my appetite. The full soul loatheth an
honycomb: but to the hungry soul every bitter thing is sweet. I dare not
imitate the Israelites, who murmured and repined against Moses and Aaron, Ex:
16.3.
and said unto them, Would to God we had dyed by the hand of the Lord in the
land of Egypt, when we sat by the fleshpots, and when we did eat bread to
the full; for ye have brought us forth into this wilderness, to kill this
whole assembly with hunger. What would it advantage me, if God in his judgment
should send me my desires? Is it not better to partake of his mercy in
misery, then of his displeasure in plenty? Ps. 78.27. verse. 28
At the desire of the Israelites he rained flesh upon them as dust, and
feathered fowls like as the sand of the sea: And he let it fall in the
midst of the camp, round about their habitations: verse. 29
So they did eat, and were filled; verse. 30
he gave them their own desire; they were not estranged from their lust.
Those on whom he rained down Manna to eat, verse. 24
and gave them of the corn of heaven; even they were likewise stored with the
flocks of the Quails. But their sweet meat had sour sauce: verse. 30 verse. 31
for while their meat was yet in their mouths, the wrath of God came upon
them, and slew the fattest of them; Prove. 10.22.
and smote down the chosen men in Israel. It is only the blessing of the Lord
that makes rich; even of him who promised to the Israelites, Ex: 23.25.
if they would serve him, to bless their bread and their water and to take
sickness away from the midd'est of them. He it was who moved Shobi, and
Machir, 2. Sam. 17.27.
and Barzillai to bring unto David at Mahanaim, and to his people that were
hungry, and weary, verse. 28
and thirsty in the wilderness, both beds, and cupps, and earthen vessels:
and wheat, and barley, and flower, and parched corn, and beans, and
lentills, and parched pulse, And honey, verse. 29
and butter, and sheep, and cheese of kine. Luc. 1.53.
He fills the hungry with good things, and the rich he sends empty
away: Job. 34.28.
The cry of the poor comes unto him; and he hears the cry of the
afflicted. Hungry and thirsty, Ps. 107 5.
the souls of the Israelites fainted in them: Then they cried unto the Lord in
their trouble, verse. 6. verse. 9.
and he delivered them out of their distresses. He satisfies the longing
soul, and fills the hungry soul with goodness. Thus he may do for me,
as he did for them; but then I must pray, and that in faith: I must weep, and
that in hope. I must remember my sins, which have deserved this punishment;
yea greater then here can be inflicted upon me: and I must thank my Creator,
who visits me in mercy. I must submitt to his pleasure, and kiss the rod.
Though now, as was the Prodigal, Lu: 15.14. verse: 16
I am brought into want, and feign would fill my belly even with the husks
that swine do eat, but noe man gives them unto me. verse. 17.
Though I know that many hired servants have bread enough, and to spare; and
yet I am ready to perish with hunger: Though thus I know my misery, yet I
skarce remember the cause: But I will beg of my heavenly father, verse: 17
that I may come unto my self; and then that my self may come unto him. I
know that he is angry; and his wrath is terrible: but if I absent my self,
his displeasure will increase. The longer I strive to keep out of his sight,
the more will be his severitie, and the more grievous my punishment. verse: 18
I will therefore arise, and go to my father, and say unto him, Father, I have
sinned against heaven, verse: 19
and before thee, and am noe more worthy to be called thy child: make me as
one of thy hired servants. Job 42.6. Ps: 102.9. Ps: 80.5
I will abhor my self in dust, and ashes. As David did, so will I: I will
eat ashes as it were bread; and I will have plenteousnesse of tears to
drink. I will mourn for my sins, which have caused this judgment: and with
my tears in mine eyes, and compunction in my heart, and humility in my soul,
I will fall on my knees before his footestoole, and pray unto him, and say,

The Prayer.
ALl-mighty, and all-sufficient Lord God, who by thy power did lay the
foundations of the world; and by thy providence do guide, and protect the
things therein contained; be pleased to look upon the sorrows, and
sufferances of thy distressed servant. Thou know my wants before I ask, and
see how low I am brought with hunger. The inferior creatures thou fillest
with plenty; but me thou suffer to pine with famine. Shall not the cries of
the hungry pierce thine ears? Shall the soul of the empty be despised by
it is maker? Hear, Lord, Ps: 30.10.
and have mercy: o be thou my helper. Thou know how I groan under the
burden of this affliction: and will thou allways know it, and never remove it?
where are thy mercies which thou shewedst to thine Israelites? Where is they
goodness which was manifested to he widow of Sarepta? Thou can not decrease
in thy mercies, nor forget thy compassion. The stomach crye's, and the belly
cries, and a poor languishing soul cries unto thee, o Lord, in the depth of
distress. O my father, shut not up thy merciful ears to my prayers; but
hear me in heaven, and succor me with thy relief. Thy store will not be
lessened, nor thy treasure diminished, by sparing to me a morsel of bread.
Lord, if it may stand with thy good will, preserve me from death and deliver
me from this famine: or else arm me with patience, that I may under-goe thy
chastisement with comfort, and content. O thou Savior of the world, to whom
the cursed Jews gave gall to eat, Ps. 69.21.
and when thou were thirsty, even vinegar to drink; do thou ease my grief,
and hearken to my complaint. Thou in thy humanity did seele the wants of
these out-ward things; and know what grief, and anguish I suffer. To
Samaria thou sentest plenty beyond expectation, 2. King 7.18.
in the space of a night. Thou art neither confined to time, nor tied to the
means: thou can send me comfort, even above my hopes. Lord, either send me
plenty, or bless my want; that so I may willingly submitt to thy pleasure, and
patiently suffer what thou have decreed. Though my body languish for want of
sustenance, yet fill thou my soul with the riches of thy goodness. Amos.
8.11. 2. Chr. 15.3.
O let me never be cursed with a famine of thy word: Let me never be as once
the Israelites were, without thee the true God, and without a teaching Priest,
and without law. Howsoever thou disposest of the outward man, let not my soul
want it is spiritual nourishment, whereby it should be fed to a life immortal.
It was thy meat, o Christ, Io: 4.34.
to do the will of him that sent thee, and to finish his work. Grant, o
Jesus, that I may follow thy stepps; and make it my food, and my delight, to
fulfill thy commandments. Let me not labor here for the meat that
perishes, c. 6.27
so much as for that meat which endures to everlasting life: My body is
thine; dispose of it as thou please. My soul is thine; preserve it in
holiness. Lord be gracious to me thy child, Genesis 43 29.
and comfort me now in this great extreamitie, that so I may neither offend
thee in my sufferance, nor despair of thy providence: but that wholly relying
upon thy gracious goodness, I may suffer with thankfulness whatsoever thou
please; and then that my sufferances may end in happiness. Hear me,
blessed God, and help me, for the worthiness of thy Son; in whose name, and
words I farther call upon thee, saying

Mat. 6.9.10.11.12.13.
Our father which art in heaven, hallowed be thy name; thy Kingdom come: thy
will be done in earth, as it is in heaven: give us this day our daily bread:
and forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us:
and lead us not into temptation: but deliver us from evil; for thine is the
Kingdom, the power, and the glory for ever and ever. Amen. THE THIRD
SOLILOQUIE. Treating of thirst, both bodily, and ghostly.
THE EjACULATION.
Psalm. 5. verse. 1. Give ear to my words, o Lord; consider my meditation.

verse. 2. Hearken unto the voice of my cry, my king, and my God; for unto thee
will I pray.

THe Prophet bewayling the distressed estate of afflicted Sion, complainth
thus: Lam. 4.4.
The tongue of the sucking child cleaves to the roof of his mouth, for
thirst: the young children ask bread, and noe man breaks it unto them. They
that did feed delicately are desolate in the streets: verse. 5.
they that were brought up in scarlet, embrace the dunghills. Grievous was that
misery the infants endured, who neither knew how to complain, nor where to be
satisfied. Their tongues, which in time might relate the story, were scorched
with the drought, and heat of thrist. Those little members, which as yet were
not un ruely, found a punishment as if they had offended. The mothers lamenting
the torments of the young ones, offered them drink from the fountains of
their eyes: but so un-able was that offering to please the innocents, that
their thirst increased by that which should quench it. Surely the misery was
great which the babes could not utter; since mine is so severe, that I think
it ineffable. The more I complain, the more thirsty I am; for the motion of
the tongue increases the drought. Iam. 3.6.
The tongne that is un-ruely, is set on fire of hell: but mine is silent, and
yet it scorcheth. That little moisture which is left in my mouth is grown so
glutenous, that it binds my tongue to an un-willing silence. My body burns;
Ps: 69.3 Ps. 137 6.
my throat is dried; my tongue cleaves to the roof of my mouth: o I burn, I
fry, and know not where to be releived. Did the drunkards, who are mighty to
power in wine, Is: 5.22
and those who are men of strength to mingle strong drink, but know the
misery which I endure, they would spare from their excess as much as would
comfort me. For their own sakes they would spare the abuse of that creature
for want whereof I now complain. Hab: 2.15.
The Prophet pronounces a woe unto him that gives his neighbor drink; that
puts his bottell to him, and makes him drunken also, that he may look on
his nakedness. But I do cry woe unto my self, because I have noe neighbor
to give me drink. Here is none that puts his bottell to my mouth. It is
not the gust of the wine, nor the strength of the drink, nor the pleasantness
of the liquour, that I do covet. The limpid water would be better then wine:
yea the springs, or the fountains would make me rejoice. But where, o where
are those pleasant potions? Where are those snakie rivers, which curle, and
wind themselves in their sporting wreaths? Alas, alas, I ask noe more then
what beggars disdain; and yet my desires are not fullfilled. Mine eyes do
lament the greatness of my sins; and my charitable tears do woo me to
give them rest in my mouth; as if repentance in this had taught them mercy. But
when I thankfully accept their friendly courtesy, instead of comforters they
become my tormentours. These brackish rivelets may refresh my soul; but they
can never cure the thirst of my body. Me think's they are somewhat like the
wife of Heber, who entertained Sisera in a friendly manner, as he did imagine:
for she covered him in her tent; Iud 4.18. verse. 19
and when he said unto her, Give me, I pray thee, a little water to drink,
for I am thirsty, She opened a bottell of milk, and gave him drink, and
covered him. But when he committed his wearied limbs to a sweet repose,
verse. 21
she took a nail of the tent, and took a hammer in her hand, and went
softly to him, and smote the nail into his temples, and fastened it into the
ground, and he dyed. Thus my tears do offer me relief; and, like unto
Iael, they offer me milk instead of water: but with their saltness they
increase my drought; and fasten me to the ground in my burning flames. Yet,
Ps. 42.5
why art thou so cast down, o my soul; and why art thou so disquieted within
me? Hope thou in thy God; verse. 7.
for I will yet praise him, who shall be the help of my countenance, and my
God. Ps. 43.5
All his waves, and storms do go over me; and yet I cry for water, in the
midst of the waves. I cry, and by my cries I increase my misery: and yet cry
I must; I am enforced to it by my fires, by my drought: and yet hope I will
too; even in my God will I hope; for I am invited unto it by his mercy. He
promised to his servants, by the mouth of his Prophet, saying, Is. 41.17.
When the poor and needy sieke water, and there is none; and their tongue
fails for thirst; I the Lord will hear them: I the God of Israel will not
forsake them. I will open rivers in high places; and fountains in the midst
of the valleys: verse. 18
I will make the wilderness a poole of water, and the dry land springs of
waters. Now, o my God, is the time that I look for the fullfilling of this
promise: for, water I sieke, but none I find. I am poor, and needy: my very
tongue fails for thirst; and upon thee therefore do I call. I am sure that my
God cannot promise more then he can, nor will he promise more then he will,
perform. Time was when the Israelites pitching in Rephidim, Ex: 17.1. verse: 2.
there was noe water for the people to drink: Wherefore the people did chide
with Moses, and said, Give us water, that we may drink; And Moses said unto
them, Why chide ye with me? Wherefore do ye tempt the Lord? verse: 3.
And the people thirsted there for water, and the people murmured against
Moses, and said, Wherefore is this, that thou have brought us up out of Egypt,
to kill us, and our children, verse: 5.
and our cattle with thirst? And the Lord said unto Moses, Go on before the
people, and take with thee of the Elders of Israel; and thy rod, wherewith thou
smotest the river, take in thine hand, and go. Behold I will stand before
thee, there, upon the rock in Horeb; verse: 6.
and thou shall smite the rock, and there shall come water out of it, that the
people may drink: And Moses did so, in the sight of the children of Israel.
Thus I thirst, as did the Israelites; but I will not murmr, as did the
Israelites; because the God of Israel is my God. I may not displease him, with
repining at my sufferings; lest with his rod he smite me, as did Moses the
stone. All that I can hope for must come by my prayers, and my patience through
the merits, of my savior. It is not Meribah, or Massah; my temptation, verse: 7.
or my chiding, that will prevail for my comfort. He may give me water, and
then punish me with fire. O what do those damned souls in the infernal
flames suffer, Lu: 16.24.
where Dives begged of Abraham to have mercy on him, and to send Lazarus that
he might dippe, though but, the tippe of his finger in water, and cool his
tongue; because he was tormented in the flames! If I compare my sufferings
with my desert, I shall the easier endure this gentle fire. This cannot be
comparable to the fire of hell: and that I have deserved, yet suffer but this.
The merciful Lord so sanctify this sufferance, that the fire which I merit may
be extinguished by my tears, assisted with the blood of the Lamb un-spotted:
and then I shall rejoice in this chastisement. At Kadesh once, in the
wilderness of Zin, there was noe water for the congregation: Number: 20.2. verse:
7. verse: 8.
and they gathered themselves together against Moses, and against Aaron. And
the Lord spoke unto Moses, saying, Take the rod, and gather thou the assembly
together, thou, and Aaron thy brother; and speak ye unto the rock before
their eyes: and it shall give forth it is water; and thou shall bring forth
water to them, out of the rock: so thou shall give the congregation, and their
beasts drink. verse 9. verse. 10
And Moses took the rod from before the Lord, as he commanded him: And Moses
and Aaron gathered the congregation together before the rock, and he said unto
them, Hear now ye rebels: must we fetch you water out of the rock? verse. 11
And Moses lifted up his hand, and with his rod he smote the rock twice; and
the water came out abundantly; and the congregation drank, and their beasts
also. Well might this rod flouri^h with blossoms, c: 17.8.
which had power to command water out of the rocks. Thus was Israel watered by
miracle; and the thirst of the people was slacked by the waters which issued
even from the stones. But Moses is dead; and the rod is not heard of; and the
rock I find not: Ps. 18.2 Ps. 23.2
yet will I not despair. The Lord shall be my rock; and he shall lead me to
waters of comfort. When Samson had slain a thousand Philistines with the
jaw bone of an ass, Iud. 15.18.
he was sore a thirst; and called on the Lord, and said, Thou have given this
great deliverance into the hand of thy servant; and now shall I dye for
thirst, and fall into the hand of the uncircumcised? verse. 19
But God clave an hollow place that was in the jaw, and there came water
thereout; and when he had drunk, his spirit came again, Mat. 19 26.
and he revived. Thus with God are all things possible. Since then I know it
exceeds not his power to help me in this misery, I will certainly rely
upon the hope of his goodness. When Mesha rebelled, Iehoram, with Iehoshaphat,
and the King of Edom fetched a compass of seven days journie; and there was
noe water for the host, 2. King 3.9. verse. 15
and for the cattle that followed them. Then Elisha said, Bring me a
minstrell. And it came to pass, when the minstrell played, that the hand of
the Lord came upon him: And he said, verse: 16
Thus says the Lord, Make this valley full of ditches; for thus says the
Lord, verse: 17
Ye shall not see wind, neither shall ye see rain; yet that valley shall be
filled with water, that ye may drink, both ye, and your cattle, and your
beasts. verse: 18
And this is but a little thing in the sight of the Lord: he will deliver the
Moabites also into your hand. verse: 20
And it came to pass in the morning, when the meate-offering was offered, that
behold there came water by the way of Edom and the country was filled with
water. Lord I am one of the valleys; I am the lowest, the meanest, the worst of
thy people: o send thy waters into the lowest valley, that I may rejoice in thy
mercy, and praise thee for thy liberality.

But while I complain of the drought of my body, me think's I forget that
spiritual thirst which should make me blessed. Those my Redeemer pronunceth
blessed, Mat: 5.6.
who do hunger, and thirst after righteousness; for they shall be filled. If
I have not a thirst more spiritual then corporal, I may justly suspect my
self to be of the number of those Wicked ones, of whom the Prophet speaks,
saying, Thus says the Lord God, Is: 65.13.
Behold my servants shall eat, but ye shall be hungry: behold my servants
shall drink, but ye shall be thirsty: behold my servants shall rejoice, but
ye shall be ashamed. My Savior told the woman of Samaria at Jacobs well, Io:
4.13 verse: 14
saying, Whosoever drinks of this water shall thirst again: But whosoever
drinks of the water that I shall give him, shall never thirst; but the water
that I shall give him shall be in him a well of water, springing up into
everlasting life. Here is noe Jacobs well to cool my tongue; Ps: 36.9
but the well of life is present, and open. True it is that this well is deep,
and I have nothing to draw: I have noe goodness to merit it; and scarce have I
a heart to desire it: yet Lord, such as I am, I come unto thee. My self I
renounce; and I fly to the worthiness of Christ my Redeemer. For his sake, o
my God, give me that water, that I thirst not again. For that water do I
long, more the^ for the rivers of waters which incompasse the earth. 2. King.
5.12.
Neither Abanah, nor Pharpar, the rivers of Damascus; noe nor Iordane it self
is comparable unto this. Thou, o Christ, art this well; Io: 6.35
thou art this water. Thou have promised that he which comes to thee, shall
never hunger; and he which believes in thee, shall never thirst. For thee,
Ps: 42.1
o Savior, I thirst: for thy salvation I cry, and entreat. As the Heart
pants for the water brooks; so pants my soul after thee, o God. verse: 2.
My soul thirsts for God; for the living God: When shall I come, and appear
before God? O God my soul thirsts for thee; Ps: 63.1
my flesh longs for thee, in a dry, and thirsty land, where noe water is.
Noe more will I mind this body of earth; or howsoever, not so wholly bend my
thoughts upon the quenching the thirst of this parched clay. This will I
refer to the disposal of my God; and pray for comfort; but only
conditionally. If he shall account it fit for me to die by this present
thirst; and that my moisture shall be turned into the drought of summer; Ps:
32.4
I shall willingly submitt. Howsoever since his will is yet kept secret from
me, I will pray for that which may yield me comfort; but only conditionally,
if it may stand with his liking. But as touching my poor, dry, thirsty soul,
I will pray directly, peremptorily, and absolutely; besieching him to refresh
it with the deaw of his grace. He promised by his Prophet, Is: 35.7
that The parched ground should become a poole, and the thirsty land springs
of waters. I am that parched ground; my languishing soul is that thirsty
land: Lord send me that poole; and those springs of waters. By the same
Prophet again he promised to his Church, and said, I will power water upon
him that is thirsty; and floods upon the dry ground: c: 44.3.
I will power my spirit upon thy seed, and my blessing upon thy offspring.
This is his promise indeed: but may I be so bold as to put him in mind of it.
Yes, yes; do so, o my soul. He loves it: he delights in it.
Bashfullnesse in these cases, is but dull stupiditie; seeing thou have
authority to speak with confidence. We must come boldly unto the throne of
grace, Heb: 4.16.
that we may obtain mercy, and find grace to help in time of need. I will
not leave him therefore; I will not forsake him: I will hang upon him; I will
follow him; for those only speed who are earnest in their suites. He keeps
us off, only to heighten our desires, not to deny our requests. He seems to
be angry when we begin to petition; but we misse-take the cause. He Is
displeased because we came noe sooner; or because we come on noe faster.
Whatsoever he has promised, he will undoubtedly make good, if we are not
weary, and slack in soliciting. It is his delight to see us earnest: and our
reward shall be greater, if we continue in our industry. This is my way; and
thus I will follow him. He who sat upon the throne, Reu: 21 6.
and said, It is done: I am Alpha, and Omega, the beginning and the end: even
the same Lord said, I will give unto him that is a thirst, of the fountain of
the water of life freely. He inviteth me by his Prophet, and speaks to me
among the rest, when he says, Is: 55.1.
Ho every one that thirsts, come ye to the waters; and he that has noe
money: come and buy, and eat; yea come and buy wine, and milk without money,
Reu: 22 17.
and without price. The Spirit and the Bride (says Saint John) say Come; and
let him that hears, say Come; and let him that is a thirst Come: and
whosoever will, let him take of the water of life freely. I am thirsty; he
has promised therefore to me the fountains of the water of life. I am
thirsty, and yet I am poor, and have not wherewith to buy what I need. My
deeds are wicked, and of noe validity: my words are idle, and deserve noe
good: my thoughts are sinful, and cannot merit. What then? Shall I starve for
want, because I have not price to give? Noe, noe; me it is he calls unto,
that I may buy without money: me he means to make partaker of his promise.
I will buy what I want; but I can give nothing but tears: or at most (which
indeed is the best, even) the blood of him who was slain for my peace. But
why do I call that blood mine own? May I safely do it? Yes; it was his; but
it is mine. Because he needed not that price as a ransom for himself; he
gave it to me, and all the faithful to purchase our redemption. This, o
father, I offer unto thee: upon my knees I tender it, with a lowly heart, and a
bleeding soul, and a submissive speech, praying unto thee, and saying.

The Prayer.
GRacious father, Ps: 123.1. Mat: 5.45.
thou that dwell in the heavens, and from heaven do send the rain both
on the just, and the unjust; take pity, and compassion on the meanest of thy
servants, who cries unto thee out of the depth of misery. O my God thou see
how I am dried up with thirst; and am weary of my life, for want of thy
comforts. I know that thou have power to break a clowd; and can command it
to water my parched body. Thou can give me drink out of the windows of
heaven: Gen: 7.11.
or can cause the earth to answer my desires. Ps: 6:1.
Lord rebuke me not in thine anger; neither chasten me in thy heavy
displeasure. I must confess that I have worthily deserved thy severest
punishments; and most justly therefore do I feel the heat of thine anger in
my burning thirst. Ps: 79.5
But, Lord, shall thy displeasure burn like fire for ever? Shall it never be
allayed with the shewers of my tears; or with that which infinitely exceede's
them, both in vallew, and power; even the dropps of blood which fell from my
Redeemer? O thou who with a stroke of a rod did make the relenting rocks
to relieve the thirsty; do thou be pleased to pity the complaint of a
fainting sinner. Cool my body which burns with heat, and refresh me now in
this extremest anguish, if it may stand with thy gracious will, and pleasure.
If thou see it fitting that my life should be prolonged, afford me the
means for the preservation thereof. On thee alone do I depend; and to thee
alone do I address my supplication. To thee I refer the disposing of this
parched, and dried earth; humbly besieching thee to bend my will to submit unto
thine. O let me never utter any words of despair, or discontent; but in all
my groans let me acknowledge thy justice. Holy Father be pleased to fix my
thoughts upon my inward man; that my care may be greater for the spirit, them
the flesh. I want that spiritual desire which thou requirest: I thirst for
that thirst. My soul is dry, for want of thy grace; and so seered is my
conscience, that I know not my miseries. Lord open mine eyes, that I may see my
wants; that so my thirst may be turned into a thirst for thy mercy. Thou, o
God, art rich, but I am poor: thou art filled with blessings, but I am not yet
so much as sensible of my want of them. O give me both a sight of my poverty,
and a desire of thy grace; and then grant unto thy servant according to my
desires. I thirst, Lord; I thirst after thee the wellspring yea the ocean of
mercy. O send me but a drop of thy heavenly ocean, that it may increase in me
a desire of enjoying thy self. Ps: 36.8
Give me to drink of thy pleasures as of a river; that so I may refer my
body to thy holy will; and willingly yield this dust to thy disposal. Gen:
3.19.
This dust shall return to the dust whence it came; but o let my soul be
vallewed so dear in thy sight, that it may here have a taste of thy
bottomless bounty; and hereafter be admitted to the paradise of thee my God.
Reu: 2.7.
Hear me, o father, and grant my requests, Zech: 13.1.
for the worthiness of him who opened unto me a fountain for sin, even Jesus
Christ my only Lord, and Savior, Amen.

Treating of Nakedness both of the out-ward, and in-ward man.
THE EjACULATION.
Psalm. 5. verse. 1. Give ear to my words, o Lord; consider my meditation:

verse. 2. Hearken unto the voice of my cry, my king, and my God; for unto thee
will I pray.

WHen Noah was overcome with the wine which he had drank, sleeping he lay
un-covered in his tent. Gen: 9.21. verse: 22
Accursed Ham saw the nakedness of his father, and told his brethren: but
Shem, and Iaphet took a garment, verse: 23
and laid it on both their shoulders, and went back-ward, and covered the
nakedness of their father: and their faces were back-ward, and they saw not
their father's nakedness. All these were the sons of one, and the selfsame
father; but they differed in conditions, as if they had not been hrothers. One
was so unnatural, that he seemed to boast in the folly of his parent: and
when wine had disturbed the brain of his father, and the heat of the drink
had laid him naked; the wicked son (as rejoicing at his weakness) told
his brethren the effect of the drunkenness. But the other two (blushing at the
effect, as well as the cause) modestly hid, what ought to be concealed. Such a
Ham have I: it is my poverty: Only, in this it differs from the son of
Naoh, that it first inebriateth me, and then uncovereth me. I am so
intoxicated with want, that it bereave's me of my senses; and, being thus
poor, it leave's me naked. O where shall I find a Shem, or a Iaphet, to cover
my nakedness? I am clothed indeed; Zech: 3 3.
but it is with rags, and filthy garments, as bad or worse then was Joshua,
when once he stood before the Angel. Such an Angel I want, verse: 4.
as was he who spoke unto them that were before him, and said, Take away the
filthy garments from him. The cause of my shame is sin: the cause of my
poverty is mine iniquity. O that the Angel of the covenant would say unto me,
Behold I have caused thine iniquity to pass from thee; and I will cloth thee
with change of raiment! Me think's I look like the counterfeiting Gibeonites,
when by craft they obtained a league with Joshua: Ios: 9.4
for they took old sacks upon their asses; and wine bottells old, and rent;
and bound up: verse: 5.
And old shoes, and clowted upon their feet; and old garments upon them; and
all the bread of their provision was dry, and mouldie. Ierusalem's curse is
fallen upon me: as God threatened her, so am I punished. Eze: 16 39.
I will give thee (says the Lord) into thine enemies hand and they shall throw
down thine eminent place and shall break down thine high places: they shall
strippe thee also of thy clothes, and shall take thy fair jewels, and leave
thee naked, and bare. It is thus with me too. Poverty is mine enemy, into
whose hands I am fallen: It has thrown down mine eminent place; it has
dejected my countenance: My high places it has broken down; my lofty
thoughts, and proud imaginations: It has also stripped me of my clothes, and
took away my fair jewels; and thus has it left me naked, and bare. The
curse which David wished to his enemies, has seized on me; Ps: 109 29.
for I am clothed with shame; and covered with confusion, as with a mantle.
And yet, if I truly consider the state I am in, I cannot deny but my
sufferance is just: for apt I have been to wish evil to others, and the same
is fallen now upon my self. In my passion I have been ready to cloth my
self with cursing, verse: 18
like as with a garment; and it is now come into my bowels like water, and
like oil into my bones. O that I could bemoane my self of my former
prosperity, as Job did him self; and that I could as truly say of my self,
that I put on righteousness, and it clothed me: Job. 29.14.
my judgment was a robe, and a diadem. But, for want of that robe of
righteousness, I am clothed now with the rags of poverty; in so much that I
am almost as much ashamed of the cover of my nakedness, as I am to appear
naked without a covering. Where, o where, is that courteous Saul, 2. Sam: 1.24.
at whose death King David lamenting, sang this Elegy, Ye daughters of Israel
weep over Saul, who clothed you in scarlet, with other delights; who put on
ornaments of gold upon your appearell? Alas, here is neither scarlet, nor
ornaments; noe nor a Saul to bestow them on me. Mat: 11 8. Luc: 16 19.
They that wear soft clothing are in Kings houses. It is for such as Dives
was, to be clothed in purple, and fine linen: I can expect noe such costly
coverings. But is not my heart desirous of the gayest robes? Is not my mind
employed in wishes for such vanities? Let me not deceave my self. When I see
another sumptously arrayed, does not the sight thereof incline me to pride?
Could I not dispense with the vanity of silks, and colors, and fashions, if I
had but means to purchase, or procure them? Do not I honor the person for
the borrowed habit; and vallew more the richness of the clothes, then the
virtue of the person? I fear that my heart is not truly humbled: for if I
long for that which now I am denied; if my mind submitt not to the weakness
of my fortunes, it is much to be feared I am poor in habit, but not in spirit.
But whence proceed my murmurings, and discontents? Why am I so desirous of
sumptuous apparel? Do colors add any thing at all to the heat? Or do
only silks, and costly stuffs preserve the body from the view of spectatours?
Certainly the coursest wool which grows on the sheep, has power enough
both to cover, and to warm. From whence then proceeds the ground of my
discontent? Is it not from pride; yea such pride as stands not either with
religion, or reason? Religion forbids it; Iam: 4.6.
for God resists the proud, but gives grace to the humble. Reason
contradicts it: for why should we strive for a pompous covering, and to
outvye each other in the glory of our garments, when as all of us have been
equally naked at our births; and shall equally return to the earth our mother?
Those silks which so highly are vallewed in our esteem, are but the intrails
of a very worm, which seems to lie as an agent for the tempter. She seeing
how vainly we magnify her esteem, preserves her vallew by loss of her
bowels: and all to maintain the pride of fools. But why should it retain
such respect among us; as if the carkenet were much more worth then the jewel;
or the labor of a worm were of more account then the skin of a Christian?
If we prize the color that is set on the silks, we doat upon that which is
fondly made, and quickly decayed. Some borrow of the tree the berrie that
dye's; and some of the fields the her^s that colour's; and some of the earth,
that which fitt's for a tincture: and yet, when the choycest colors are set
on our silks, we cannot deny them all to be stains. Me think's the very
flowers chide our madness for our esteem of colors. The Lilly is afraid
lest we should adore its whiteness; and the fear thereof enforces a
palenesse. The Tulip blusheth at the simplnesse of our opinions: and to teach
us our vanity, it withers in a day. Our coverings are only remembrancers of
our fall: and yet to increase the number of our sins, we have added pride to
the necessity of apparel. We magnify our selves in these emblemes of our
disobedience; and render them such honor, as if we rejoiced at our misery.
Nothing upon earth offended the Creator, but only our parents: and nothing
therefore, save only their offspring, does borrow a covering. It is true
indeed that the wretchedness of our condition was the parent of a virtue: for
modesty had noe name in the time of innocence. This virtue is since become a
duty: but we out-doe our commands in the excess of our apparel. But what
can we wear, which properly, and truly may be termed ours? Or how long can
that continue, which we borrow of the creatures? The Parrat, the Finch, and
the bird of Paradise; all these outshine us in the variety of colors; and in
their natural glory teach us the vanity of our imitating art. Those colors
which we have, are not properly ours; nor can their beauty long continue; for
they dye at that instant when they first begin. Why then do I vex and
repine at my want of that which is so vain? In all these brave and borrowed
habits, what can I discover, but sin in the necessity, and pride in the
superfluity? What an idol do people make of this wandering earth; employing
their time in tricking up but a dunghill! The Spanish woolls, and the softer
siskes have not Rhetotick enough to silence death; nor can they bar the worm
from preying on the carkeise. I will therefore resolve to content my self with
the meandness of my condition: and to desire noe other covering, or apparel,
then what may preserve me from cold, and nakedness. Necessity, and modesty
plead for these: and my Savior reckons it among the acts of charity, to
cloth the naked. Matt: 25.36.
When Judah was taken captive by Israel, and thousands of them slain, their
cruelty was so great, that the Prophet checked them for their violence to
their brethren, saying, 2. Chr: 28.10.
Are there not with you, even with you, sins against the Lord? Now hear me
therefore, verse: 1.1.
and deliver the captives again, which ye have taken captive of your
brethren; for the fierce wrath of God is upon you. verse: 15
And the men which were expressed by name, rose up, and took the captives, and
with the spoil clothed all that were naked among them, and arrayed them, and
shod them, etc. It appears then that God does not like the nakedness of a
sinner, Gen: 3.21.
who first did cloth the sinners with skins. I may therefore lawfully besiech
him to send me what necessity, and modesty shall require me to wear: more
I dare not importune him for.

But whence arises this my indigency? Is not my new punishment sent unto me
for some old sin? In my prosperity peradventure I was guilly of pride; and
therefore am humbled: Heb. 12 10.
but I am chastised for my greater profit. If my God will be pleased to humble
my heart; then my outward condition and that will be suitable. If he vouchsafe
me a serious sight of my pride, noe earthly punishment shall I think too much
for so high an offense. If by this my want, he bring to my remembrance how I
sought the creature more then the Creator, I shall thankfully acknowledge that
I deserve this affliction. O my God do thou send me the light of thy
countenance, Ps: 4.6.
and I shall contemn the obloquie, and scorn of the world.

All these discontents arise from the want of ornaments for the body; but what
care do I take for my naked soul? There is another garment more earnestly to
be sought for, besides that which should cover this outward skin. This in
modesty I desire to hide; but alas I care not how naked my soul appears.
That is laid open to storms, and tempests: it is ever exposed to heates, and
colds: it is viewed by a spectatour, whose purest eyes abhor the filth, and
pollution of sin. The storms of temptations howerly beat upon it; yet I
take noe care to cloth it for defense. The heates of passions, and the cold of
despair do daily assail it; yet I neither hide it from the heat, nor cloth
it for warmth. It is foul, and deformed; yet I neither cleanse, nor adorn it,
that it might please the spectatour. All my care, and complaint is for the
body: but I never mind, nor provide for the spirit. Alas, this body is of
short continuance, upon which I fasten my cares, and disturbances. It shall
shortly moulder in the grave, where it shall speedily be converted again into
dust; yea and the richest robes shall there be soon turned into rags; and
the vallew, and account of them both shall be equal. But my soul shall not
sleep in the dust with my body; but appear at the tribunal of the judge of
the world. O what shall I do when I stand before him? If mine impenitency and
infidellitie, do present me naked before him, he will turn me aside in
great disdain. Those that are naked shall be judged, and condemned: but those
which are clothed shall be crowned with bliss. Why then have I so long
neglected the trimming of my wretched soul? 'T is that which shall go to
torments, or happiness, so soon as ever it leaves this tabernacle of flesh.
I was sent into the world to make war upon the tempter. When I shall be
called to account how I fought the battle, if I plead that my garments
pinioned mine arms, and manacled my hands; my very excuse will add to my
punishment. I was not sent to doat upon the creature, but to glorify my
Creator. If I prowdly boast of my out-ward ornaments, that which covers the
body lays naked the soul. O my poor soul, how art thou covered? How art
thou adorned? I have so long forgotten thee, that thou art quite out of
fashion. I suffered thee to wander so long without robes, that now I fear I
shall have none to fit there. There is nothing, I know, can truly cover her,
but only the merits, and righteousness of Christ. Where, o where shall I find
this covering? Of whom shall I beg this desired garment? There Is none that
can give it, but he that owne's it. To thee therefore, o Christ, must I
address my self: to thee will I cry: on thee will I call: of thee will I
beg for Gods sake, (that so he my be honored) for pittie's sake (that so I
may not be damned) for charitie's sake (that so I may not be rejected) yea for
thine own sake, o Jesus, (who here requirest the clothing of thy naked
members) do thou cover me, do thou hide me, do thou adorn me with the
robes of thy righteousness. Why should I be cast out from the marriage of the
Lamb, for want of a garment, since thou can spare one? Why should I forbear
petitioning my Jesus to furnish me; to supply my wants; since he has
promised help to them that ask? Mat: 7.7.
I must have it, or I dye; and therefore have it I will, or else I Will fight for
it. Yea and fight I must; and conquer I must; and then I know what shall be my
reward. My God has promised that he which over-cometh, Reu: 3.5.
the same shall be clothed in white raiment, I shall be taken into the number,
and fellowship of them which noe man could number, c: 7.9.
of all nations, and kindreds, and people, and tongues; and with them shall I
be clothed with a long white robe, and a palm shall be in my hand. Wher-fore,
that neither the want of necessaries for the out-ward man, may take off my
courage; nor the want of grace may hinder the conquest; I will sue for both at
the hands of my Creator. I will worship, Ps: 95.6
and fall down, and kneel before the Lord my maker; and on my knees will I
pray unto him, and say.

The prayer.
Merciful Lord, Mat: 6.30.
thou who cloathest the lillies of the field, which to day are, and to morrow
are cast into the oven; extend thy mercy to thy distressed servant. O my God
thou see the nakedness which I suffer, and thou feel the cold which my
body endures; for of thee, o Christ, I am a part; of thy mystical body I am a
member. These mean and ragged coverings do speak at once both my wants, and
my desires. What shall I do, o father? Shall I noe longer believe thy
providence? Or shall I despair of thy power? O I dare not do either; for I
know that thou can, and wilt relieve me, when thou in thy wisdom shall see
it requisite. Blessed Lord, subdue my heart, as thou have humbled my body; and
forgive the sins of pride, and discontent which harbor therein. Many of thy
Saints have wanted the things of the outward man; yet have thou enriched their
souls with the graces of thy Spirit. I know, Lord, that thou delightest not in
the ornaments of the body. Thou can give what thou will; and withhold what
thou please. Lu: 16.22.
Distressed Lazarus, who for a while did lie at the gate of gorgeous Dives, was
carried by Angels into Abraham's bosom. Enable me with patience to suffer my
wants; and willingly to submitt to thy heavenly pleasure. Ps: 104 1.
O thou that art clothed with Majesty, and honor, vouchsafe to cover my
naked soul. Through the merits of thy Christ let it be presented to thee both
clean and unspotted. Make me to labor the purifying thereof with a flood of
my tears: Io. 11.33.
and accept of my groans through the righteousness of him who groaned in
spirit when he beheld the tears of lamenting Marie. Holy father adorn thou
my inward man with righteousness, and holiness; that it may be acceptable
unto thee when it shall come to thy tribunal. Nothing can hide it from thy
wrath, o father, but the garment of the righteousness of Christ my brother.
Wrappe me, o Jesus, in that sacred mantle, that I may be hid from the wrath of
the reveng-full judge. Is: 50 3
O thou that cloathest the heavens with blackness, and make sackcloth their
covering; do thou apparel my soul with the blackness of sorrow, and the
sackcloth of mourning for my crying offenses! And so accept of my contrition,
that I may hereafter appear in a long white robe with thy holy Saints, Reu:
7.9.
and be admitted a member of thy church tryumphant, there to reign with thee
world without end, through Jesus Christ my only Lord, and Savior. Amen.

A Virgin's tears.
The Soliloquie. Treating of the virginity both of the body, and the soul.
THE EjACULATION.
Psalm. 5. verse. 1. Give ear to my words, o Lord; consider my meditation:

verse. 2. Hearken unto the voice of my cry, my king, and my God; for unto thee
will I pray.

THe un-maried woman (says the faithful Apostle) cares for the things of the
Lord, 1. Cor. 7.25. verse: 34
that she may be holy both in body, and spirit. Such a one am I: unmaried I
am: but am I such a one also in my care? Do I care for the things of the
Lord, that I may be holy both in body, and spirit? This is a question not
easily resolved; it is a duty not, ordinarily performed. The external form
does commonly borrow the hours of virgins: the dresses and the ornaments of
the fading body employ our minuits: and our care is generally more for the day
of our marriage, then the time of our account. Seldom do we vallew religion
above our dresses; or the service of God above the ornaments of our selves. But
neither is the beauty of the countenance prevalent with the All-mighty; nor the
neatenesse of attire vallewed in his eyes. He love's not that care which
arises from pride; but that which discovers a zeal for his honor. The most
admired beauty shall be shriveled in the flames of eternal horror, unless
the soul be more comely by far then the countenance. The exactest features
of the outward man do illest suite with a lascivious tongue, or an immodest
thought. Devoutest virgins are allways fairest; and borrow so much of the
flowers of the spring, as to wear a maidens blush in the seat of beauty. My
God has given me the honor of virginity; and expects to be honored both
in it, and by it. If my soul be as un-spotted as my body is un-defiled, I may
hope for a seat with the tryumphant virgins. Reu: 14.1.
With the Lamb (says Saint John) were a hundred forty and four thousand
having his fathers name written in their foreheads. verse: 4.
These are they which were not defiled with women; for they are virgins: these
are they which follow the Lamb whithersoever he goes. That Lamb is Christ:
those hundred forty and four thousand virgins are the elect: his name in
their foreheads is their adoption by grace: they follow the Lamb in the purity
of their souls: and in their chaste and spiritual virginity they are
preserved from the pollutions, and uncleanesse of the seducing tempter. With
these virgins I desire to sing my part: for my sex cannot hinder the hope of
immortality. With those saints which defiled not themselves with women shall
accord those women not defiled with men. It was an honor to our sex, and my
present condition, that my Savior was borne of the virgin Mary. But I must
know that virginity consists not so much in the chastity of the body, as
the purity of the soul. Even those that are married may have virgin souls;
and we that are virgins may be spiritual adulteresses. 1. These. 4.4.
She that preserve's her vessel in holiness performs a duty required by
our maker: but unless to this be added the chastity of the soul, both body
and soul may suffer eternally. The purest virgin is the loyallest wife: for
though we never were engaged by marriage to a man; yet all of us ought to be
married to Christ, 2. Cor: 11.2.
Saint Paul says that he had espoused the Corinthians to one husband, that
he might present them as a chaste virgin unto Christ. This husband is mine; for
to him am I espoused; to him am I wedded? But am I a loyal wife to this
indulgent husband? Do I love him? Do I honor him? Do I obey him? Have I
been allways true, and faithful unto him? If every sin be a spiritual
adultery, if every transgression be a dishonor unto him; o then my conscience
will write me guilty. O my sweet husband, o my Jesus what shall I say, or
plead for my self? I have forsaken my redeemer to sin with the tempter, I
have declined my husband to committ un-cleanesse with that ugly serpent: for
he enticed, and I consented. Lev: 20.10.
By the old law an adulteress was to suffer death. That law does still
remain in force; for death eternal is decreed as a punishment for those that
dishonor my patient husband. O what then shall I do when he shall question
my disloyalty? Yet, can he be so loving as to forbear my punishment, and can
he not be so merciful as freely to forgive it? O yes, he can if he please:
but which way shall I endeavor thus to please him? O my Jesus vouchsafe to me
thy grace as thou did once to an adulteress; and then, with her, I will
weep, and lament. Be reconciled unto me as thou wast unto her; Lu: 7.38.
and then will I wash thy feet with my tears; and will wipe them with the
hairs of my head. I will not spare the costliest spicknard, though it drop
from the wounds of my sorrowful heart. I will kiss thy feet, and anoint them
with the ointment. O say of me, as thou did of her, verse: 47
Her sins, which are many, are forgiven; for she loves much. Her soul was
polluted; so is mine: Her body was likewise unclean; but so is not mine: yet
even so had mine also been, had not he preserved me, who is the husband of
my soul. Of my self I am frail, and apt to be shaken by every temptation; to
him alone therefore must I render the thanks, who has kept me from dis-honour;
and to him must I pray for the continuance of his protection.

But is every sin accounted adultery? Is the breach of every command an act
of disloyalty? Then virginity it self seems to be adultery: and the
chastity of the body to violate the bond of wed-lock with Christ: for Saint
Paul's words are peremptory, saying, I will that the younger women marry, 1.
Tim. 5.14.
bear children, and guide the house, etc. Never was I yet the mother of a
child, nor the guide of a house, for never was I married, though the Apostle
requires it. Is it therefore an offense because I am not a wife: Thus indeed
they are apt to plead, who un-willingly submitt to my present condition. Saint
Paul (if rightly understood) seems but to allow it, rather then command it;
for when he decrees marriage to be an ordinance of God, he does not thereby
determine virginity a crime. So far is he from that, 1. Cor: 7.28.
that though he says, If a virgin marry, she has not sinned; yet he
concludes saying, verse. 38
He that gives her in marriage does well; but he that gives her not in
marriage, does better. Heb. 13.4.
It is true that marriage is honorable in all, and the bed undefiled: but only
we that are virgins, Mat. 22 30.
who neither marry, nor are given in marriage, are as the Angels of God in
heaven. Thus is our honor as great as theirs in the bed un-defiled: yea and
more honorable are we in that our condition resembles the Angels of God. So
long as I remain in this state of virginity, Genesis 3.16. Ephesians. 5.22.
neither are my desires subject to a husband; nor am I tied to submission; nor
yet are my sorrows multiplied, as are theirs who in conception are severely
sensible of an hereditarie punishment. True it is that I am bound to obedience;
yet not to a husband whose conditions I know not; but to my parents, Ex. 20.12.
of whose love I am certain. This is a knot which nothing but death can ever
untye. Marriage is then but an honorable bondage accompanied with sorrows,
making us subject to him that is our head, yet not freeing us from obedience to
those that are our parents. But Virginity has fewer sorrows, and less
subjection; yet less too are the comforts, and fewer the blessings. It is my
duty therefore to submitt to the pleasure of my God; and strive to honor him,
in what condition soever I shall live. Should all decree to continue virgins,
the number of saints should not be increased, nor the world remain above the
space of an age. Wherefore, I will not so love virginity as contemning marriage;
nor so honor marriage as undervallewing virginity. In each condition those are
most honorable, who most do endeavor for the honor of God. In ancient times
so great was the submission of virgins to their parents, that even their vows
to God were subject to alteration at the discretion of the earthly father. So
says the law: If a woman vow a vow unto the Lord, Number. 30.3. verse. 4.
and bind herself by a bond being in her father's house in her youth: And her
father hear her vow, and her bond wherewith she has bound her soul, and her
father hold his peace at her: then all her vows shall stand; and every bond
wherewith she has bound her soul shall stand. verse. 5.
But if her father dis-allow her in the day that he hears; not any of her
vows, or of her bonds, wherewith she has bound her soul, shall stand: and
the Lord shall forgive her because her father disallowed her. If a vow to God
which was made by a virgin, did thus depend upon the pleasure of her father;
assuredly then, the vow of marriage ought not to pass without the parents
consent. If by their indiscretion our choice be amiss, though the sufferance
be ours, yet the blame is theirs: if it prove successful, our joy shall be
doubled by our willing obedience. In those weighty affairs concerning wedlock,
there is greatest need of a vigilant eye. It is but justice that the parent
should lead her by advice, whose eye is darkened by the violence of affection.
She that wed's not without counsel, lives not without comfort: for she
judges not by the event, but rejoices in her obedience. Thus if I do obey
the commands of my parents, I manifest my self to be a child of my God, If I
willingly submitt to their discretion, I may undoubtedly hope for the blessing
of my maker; yea, and peradventure it may succeed beyond expectation. God has
been ever a father to those virgins, who have been faithfully obedient to his
commands. In marriage there is allways a hand of providence: happy are those
that marry in the Lord. He was a father to the virgin Rebeckah, Genesis 24 16.
Est. 2.17.
when he gave her unto Isaak. He was a father to the virgin Esther, whom
Ahasuerus the King so fervently loved, that he not only wedded her, but also
crown'e her, yet was she alas but a poor Iewesse, taken into the charitable
care of her uncle Mordecai, verse. 7.
after her father's and mothers decease. Thus does the Allmighty provide for
those who submitt to his pleasure: and labor to espouse a virgin soul to
Christ the bridegroom. O my God do thou be for ever my father, and thy son
my loving and affectionate husband, that my soul may be adorned with the
graces of thy spirit, and be allways acceptable to my dearest Lord. Can a maid
forgett her ornaments; Ier. 2.32.
(says God by his Prophet) or a bride her attire? Yet my people have forgotten
me, days without number. My soul was a virgin; but she forgot her
ornaments: she was a bride, espoused to Christ; but she forgott her attire;
she has forgotten her husband days without number. The King's daughter, Ps.
45.13. verse. 14
which is all glorious with in, has virgins for her companians when she is
brought unto the King. Such a virgin should my soul have been; but alas
she dare's not appear in the sight of the King, because she has left off
the ornaments of her virginity. Ier. 13.23.
Can the Ethiopian change his skin; or the Leopard his spotts? Can my soul
which is deflowred with the filthiness of sin, ever hope to be reckoned
among the number of virgins? Can she which has assumed the impudency of an
harlot, ever expect to be accounted modest? Can she which is deformed with the
stains of iniquity, ever hope to be deemed fair, and beautiful? Alas,
what shall I do? Unless my husband be reconciled unto me, it is impossible I
should escape the torments of hell? Some that have offended, have found him
gracious: why may not I hope for a taste of his mercy? Could I but appear in
his sight with beauty, and comeliness, he would presently renew his love, and
affection. O but my soul is full of deformity, and for want of care she is
loathsome and uglie. But is there noe recoverie of a decayed form? Is there
noe way to restore a declined beauty? Though she be not beautiful, yet let
her be comely; for thus she may be, allthough she is black. To work then
will I go; Cant: 1.5. Is: 1.6.
and wholly will I labor to make her amiable in the sight of her Lord. Alas
this state and condition which she is in, is full of horror, and disconsolate
torments. From the sole of the foot, even unto the head, there is noe
foundnesse in her; but wounds, and bruises, and putrefying sores; they have not
been closed neither bound up, neither mollified with ointment. Ps: 38.5.
Thus do her wounds stink, and are corrupt, because of my foolishness. Thus
through the stench of her wounds, and the loathsomenesse of her sores, and the
deformity of her scarrs, and the impudency of her looks, and the foulness
of her face, I know not what to do to restore her to his favor. Is: 1.16.
But I will endeavor to wash her, to make her clean, and to put away the
evil of her doeings from before his eyes. With my tears I will wash her; with
my tears I will cleanse her. For every spot of sin which has defiled her, I
will shed a whole fountain, a river of tears. Yet sooner can I drown my
self in my tears, then they of them selves can recover her beauty. It must be
thou, o my Jesus, that must assist me: it must be thy blood, o my husband,
which must cleanse my pollutions. Lord accept yet of my tears which are all
that I can offer; and wash this thy sinful spouse in the larer of thy blood.
This must be the way to regaine his love, from whose affectionate bosom my
soul is divorced. By this means only shall she once again be received as a
virgin, though she has played the harlot with many lovers. Ier: 3.1
Thus therefore will I come, and humbly will I crave his pardon, and
forgiveness, I will besiech him to preserve my vessel in honor, and my soul
in sincerity. I will beg, I will entreat, I will pray; and begging, and
entreating, and praying I will say.

The Prayer.
BLessed Lord, Son of a virgin, who did honor virginity when thou tookest
our nature; hearken to the cries of a lamenting maid. Mat: 8.8.
Lord, I am not worthy to come unto thee; I am not worthy to receave any favor
from thee; for I have forsaken thee my most indulgent husband, Ier: 3.1.
and played the herlot with many lovers. My soul is too foul to be called
thine: too often has she broken her vows and promises, to hope for thy love,
or thy gracious pardon. But Lord, what now shall I do? If yet I should fall
into a despair of thy mercies, I should increase my disloyalty; and either
deny, or despise the power of thy passion. So great was thy love to the Church
thy Spouse, that thou gave thy self to sanctify and cleanse it with the
washing of water, by the word. Ephesians: 5.25.26.
My soul, o Christ, is a member of thy Spouse: be pleased, o Jesus, so to
sanctify and wash her, that thou may present her to thy felfe without spot,
or wrinkle, both holy, and blameless. verse: 27 Zech: 13.1.
O thou who have opened a fountain to the house of David, and to the
inhabitants of Jerusalem, Ps: 51.2.
for sin, and for uncleanesse; do thou wash me thoroughly from mine
iniquity, and cleanse me from my sin. Lord as in mercy thou have given me
chastity of body; so give me likewise the chastity of mind, and the purity
of soul. Suffer not either the flesh, or the Devil by their wicked
suggestions to seduce me to uncleanesse. Though I am a weak, 1 Pet: 3.7. 2
Cor: 4.7. Act. 9.15. Rom: 9.23. 1 These: 4.4. verse. 5.
though but an earthen vessel; yet be thou pleased to make me a chosen
vessel, a vessel of mercy. Cause me to keep the vessel of my body, and to
possess it in sanctification, and honor; and not in the lust of
concupiscence, like the Gentiles, which know thee not. O be thou my father in
the grace of adoption; be thou my brother in thy pity, and compassion; be thou
my husband in thy love, and affection; and be thou my Jesus in the salvation of
my sick, and sinful soul. Arm me with constancy against all assaults of
carnal imaginations. Give me modesty in my countenance, decency in my
apparel, civilitie in my behavior, sobriety in my discourse, and
contentedness in my condition. Make me obedient to my parents, respective to
my superiors, courteous to my inferiors, and loving unto all. Let not my
adorning be outward, 1 Pet: 3.3. Iam: 3.17. Prove: 1.9.
of putting on of apparel: but give me that wisdom which is from above, to
be as an ornament of grace unto my head; and as chains about my neck.
Preserve, o Christ, both my body and soul in chastity and honor while I am
here upon earth, as becomes a virgin espoused to thy self: Eccl: 12.7. Reu:
14.3.
and when my dust shall return to the earth as it was, let my spirit return
unto thy self who gave it: and to thee let it sing that new song with the
quire of virgins, before thy throne for ever and ever. Amen.

Tears of a woman in the state of marriage.
The Soliloquie. Treating of the duties of a wife to her husband.
THE EjACULATION.
Psalm. 5. verse. 1. Give ear to my words, o Lord; consider my meditation.

verse. 2. Hearken unto the voice of my cry, my king, and my God; for unto thee
will I pray.

MAn was created in the image of God: Gen: 1:27. c: 2.18. verse: 21 verse: 22
yet because it was not good that he should be alone, the Lord did make him an
help that was meet for him. A deep sleep fell upon Adam: in which, of a rib
that was taken from his side, was made a woman, the wife of his bosom. Thus
was marriage instituted at first in paradise, and though, after the woman was
framed by the Creator, c: 2.31.
it is not directly said she was very good: yet seeing it was verified of Adam,
it was true of Eve; both of them yet remaining innocent. O blessed was that
time when the husband and wife were so truly one, 2. King: 19.22.
that they were free from offending the holy one. But they stood not long in
this their integrity: for they conspiring together in the first offense, laid
the foundation of discord, and division From hence do flow the disturbances of
marriage: c: 3.24.
and since Adam and Eve were driven out of Paradise, neither is virginity
allways contented; neither is wedlock free from disquietnesse. Ps: 78.58. verse:
59 verse. 63
When the Lord. was moved to jealousy by the idolatrous Israelites, he
greatly abhorred them, in so much as he caused the fire to consume their
young men; and their maidens were not given to marriage. Well might the Psalmist
say he was wrath when the maidens were deprived of their ^uptiall honors. Yet
had the virgins known the cares of wedlock, peradventure their curse might
have been deemed a blessing. We who are taken from the wings of our parents,
fieke for our content in the bosoms of our husbands: yet (lest we should
idolatrously dote on them that are our heads) even thence many times do flow
our disturbances whence we expect our happiness. But why alas do arise
those storms of discontent? Marriage should unite the hearts, and affections;
Ephesians: 5.31.
and those who thereby are made one flesh, should likewise be one in the bond
of love. Discords and divisions are the cankers of a mitie: Jonah: 4.7.
and like unto the worm in the gourd of Jonas, bring confusion where they are
nourished. Saint John determine's that God is love: 1 Io: 4.8.
wheresoever therefore we find not love, we may justly conclude there is not
God. Yet many times do I hear the clamours of prople: for many men and their
wives are more subject to complain, then to conceal the frowardness of their
violent passions. But am not I one of those whose indisposition to obedience,
or want of discretion, sieketh to violate the laws of marriage? All such
divisions are both irreligious, and sieke to destroy the very rules of nature.
By marriage two are united into one: but by discords one is divided into two.
Where wedlock tyeth not two in one, there is noe obedience to him who is three
in one. If therefore I enjoy not that happy concord. I must search into the
cause which produces such discord. Assuredly that wedlock which at first was
instituted by the All mighty, and seconded by the blessing of increase and
multiplying, Gen^ 1.28.
cannot be accompanied with schisms, and contentions without a great offense
to him that ordained it. Chrest my Reedemer did honor it with his presence;
and to show how much he delighted in this sacred union, he began his miracles
at a wedding in Galilee. Io: 2.1. verse: 7.8.
But if marriage be so ancient, as to fetch its beginning from man in innocence;
if it be so religious, as to be honored thus by my Lord and Savior, why then
is it so peremptorily concluded by the Apostle, that It is good for a man not
to touch a woman? 1 Cor: 7.1.
Are women so odious in the eyes of Saint Paul, that he should account it not
good for a man to touch his helper, his rib, himself? What should the Apostle
mean in this position, when as God himself determined, Gen: 2.18.
and said, It is not good that the man should be alone? Can the scripture
contain a manifest contradiction: or does St. Paul decree directly against
God? Noe, noe: let me search more narrowly into those sacred texts, and I
shall find that my God does speak of that good which concerns propagation,
without which the whole race of humanity would soon be extinct: but by his
Apostle he speaks of a good which opposes not honesty, but which is joined
with profit: he decree's not that it is sinful but only inconvenient. Moreover
he speaks not of all in general, but only of those who are endued from
above with the gift of continency: afterward therefore he thus concludes, 1
Cor: 7.28.
saying, But if thou marry, thou have not sinned: and if a virgin marry, she
has not sinned: nevertheless such shall have trouble in the flesh, Thus may
marriage indeed be troublesome, but it is not dishonest; it may be
inconvenient, but it is not unlawful. In it self considered it has
authority from God: yet upon some considerations, or private respects to some
indeed it may prove unlawful. Whatsoever is concluded without the free
consent of both the parties, is not regulated according unto law. Neither
fears, nor menates, nor delusions, nor compulsions, noe nor want of years, or
judgment can be legally present at the tying of this knott. The consent must be
mutual, and proceed from a sound, a free, and un-corrupted judgment. When the
servant of Abraham treated of a marriage between Isaak and Rebeckah, her
brother and her mother concluded not hastily, but said, We will call the
damsel, and enquire at her mouth. Gen: 24.57. verse: 58
And they called Rebeckah, and said unto her, Will thou go with this man? And
she said, I will go. Thus must a mutual, and free consent, without the
disturbance of the reason by either excess of wine, or d^stracted thoughts, or
fears and terrors, or cozening and delusive promises, be present at the
making of this holy contract. The consent indeed must be free, without
compulsion; but not without advice and direction. The will of a child
(especially in this) must submitt to the wisdom, and the counsel of parents:
for seeing that children are reckoned among the goods and possessions of
parents, even reason decrees that their Lords should dispose of them. When
Abraham dispatched his servant to sieke a wife for Isaak he made him swear by
the Lord, Genesis 24.3.
the God of heaven, and the God of earth, that he would not take a wife unto
his son of the daughters of the Caaannites. c. 28.1.
When Isaak called Jacob, and blessed him, he charged him, and said unto him,
Thou shall not take a wife of the daughters of Canaan. Thus the law of the
parents was a rule for the children: and they durst not marie where they were
forbidden. In a letter which the Prophet sent unto the people whom
Nebuchad-nezzar had carried captive to Babylon, Ier. 29.6.
he not only wrote unto them, saying, Take ye wives, and begett sons and
daughters: but he also ordered them to take wives for their sons, and to
give their daughters to husbands. Thus must children, (especially in the
serious and weighty affair of marriage) obey their parents in the Lord; Ephesians.
6.1. Col. 3.20.
for this is right. They must obey their parents in all things; much more
therefore in the choice of those whom wedlock must conjoyne: for this is well
pleasing unto the Lord. It is in the fathers power to give his virgin in
marriage: 1 Cor. 7.38.
and the Apostle says, that he which does so, does well; allthough he which
gives her not in marriage is said to do better. The heat of desire does often
darken the eye of reason; and make's us more apt to study our present content,
then wisely to prevent an ensueing danger. Therefore must parents have power to
dispose of those, who for want of advice may wedde their destruction. This
counsel and direction takes not off from the freedom of consent; but rather
sett's them at liberty who for want of discretion had not power to consent.
Nature is easily led amiss; and unadvised youth besides other inconveniences
may fall upon the shelves of neerenesse of blood, unless they have some to
advise, and direct them. Those that choose without reason, and marry without
advice, do but climb up a steep and lofty rock, to throw themselves down a
mighty precipice. Lev. 18
Though the Leviticall law has forbidden diverse to agree in wedlock, yet
often we see that men are apt either directly to oppose that law, or at least
to affect most dearly those whom even nature it self forbids wedlock;
allthough not directly mentioned in the law. But the sager parent will easily
conclude, that those whom the law forbids not expressly to join in
wedlock, implicitly it prohibiteth, if the propinquitie of blood be equal to
those whom it denies marriage. The safest way is to avoid such contracts as are
not in words permitted by the All-mighty. That marriage must needs be full of
discontent, which is not directly grounded on a positive law. He who first did
institute marriage, did afterward bound, and limitt the institution. If the
spring be troubled, the water of necessity must become impure. If we do not
begin our wedlock according to rule, we cannot expect that content which our
hearts desire. Those who begin with a breach of the law, can hardly live
according to law. Lord, how many sins and infirmities do attend us mortals!
We are apt to fall, when we want a guide; and yet we are unwilling to be
guided by our directours. The way to heaven is full of difficulties; yet God
has provided us means to overcome them. To prevent the ruin, and destruction
of the Kind, Gen: 1.28. 1 Cor. 7.2. verse. 5.
he instituted marriage that we might be fruitful, and multiply. To avoid
uncleanesse every man is allowed to have his own wife, and every woman her
own husband, that Satan tempt them not for their incontinency. To prevent a
scarcity of godly saints, Ephesians. 6.4.
he allowed wedlock; and commanded parents to bring up their children in the
nurture, and admonition of the Lord. Thus our good God is pleased to give us
the blessing of increase, that thereby we may add to the number of Saints.
He gives us a being by his power; a well-being by his providence; yea a
christian and comfortable being by his goodness, if we obey his commands, and
forget not his statutes. O what a happiness does that marriage produce, which
is both begun, and continued in God! It puts us in mind of that happy
accord which was between Adam and Eve in innotency: and when we remember it,
we strive to imitate it. In our choice, we magnify God, when we honor our
parents. In our consent we glorify God for the use of our reason. In the
freedom of our consent we are taught to be sensible how sin had enslaved
us; and yet how we are freed by the mercies of our Redeemer. Thus when we
address our selves to God in all things; and both choose, consent, and wedd
according to his appointment, our lives are full of comfort, and content. Those
who are thus united together, are careful to live in righteousness toward
God; and in amity, and chaste sobriety among themselves. In afflictions they
are each a comforter to the other: in prosperity they share their plenty, and
increase: in their issue they magnify God for his blessings, and both of them
strive to make those pledges of love which resemble them selves, to be more
like unto God their father in heaven. Ephesians. 5.23.
As the husband is made the head of his wife, so he strives to protect her,
and indulgently cherishes the flesh of his flesh. He instructs her in
righteousness, Genesis 2.23. 1 Pet. 3.3.7.
and according to knowledge he dwells with her, giving honor unto her, as to
the weaker vessel. Again, as Eve was not made of the head but the rib, so the
good wife does not seek to rule, verse. 5.6. Ephesians. 5.22. verse. 33. 1 Cor. 14.35.
but be governed; and being thus in subjection to her own husband, she
obeys her Lord, as Sarah did Abraham. She willingly submits herself to
her husband, as unto the Lord. Him she reverenceth; him she obeys; and
quietly, and meekely asks him at home, what she desires to learn. These, o
these are the sweet contents which crown the married, c. 7.39.
if they marry in the Lord. It Is true that many times these duties are
neglected through the want of religion: Genesis 3.1.
and the scrpent come's often between the husband and wife, as at first he
did between Adam and Eve. That sin which expelled him out of heaven he
labors to kindle in our secret hearts: and then the wind of the apple does
blow the coals. From hence arises the smoke of d^scontent: from hence does
issue the contention of her which the wise man resembles to a continual
dropping in a very rainy day. Prove. 27.15. Mar. 10.9.
But those whom God has joined together, nothing, should separate. Nothing
indeed should, and nothing does separate them; for 't is only sin which
causes dissension; and that sin is only a privation of goodness. Had not
sin been acted even in that very garden where marriage was instituted, that
sacred yoke had never been burdensome. O that our God would be pleased to
make us again so like unto himself, that our love might be tied up in the
bond of peace! Ephesians. 4.3.
We who by nature are fuller of imperfections then those that are our Lords,
should then be freed from the blame of disquietnesse. God has so honored our
sex, that he has called his Church by the name of a woman: and not only so,
but also of a wife; for so the Angel said to Saint John: Come hither; Rev.
21.9.
I will show thee the Bride, the Lamb's wife. Of that woman, of that wife of my
God must I learn the duty which I owe to my husband. Ephesians. 5.22.
To him must I submitt my self, as unto the Lord, because the husband, is the
head of the wife, ver. 23.
eveu as Christ is the head of the church. Him I must love: to him I must be
subject in every thing. Tit. 2.4 Ephesians. 5.24. 1 Cor: 7.34. Ephesians. 5.33. 1 Pet. 3.6,
1 Cor. 14.35. c. 7.10. Tit. 2.5 Col. 3.18. 1 Pet. 3.1.
I must care how to please him: I must reverence him: I must obey him, as Sara
obeyed Abraham, calling him Lord: I must be instructed by him. I must not
depart from him; but must be discreet, and chaste; a keeper at home; good, and
obedient unto him; that the word of God; be not blasphemed. To hin indeed I
must submitt my self as unto the Lord: but this submission must not be
servile; for it must be only so as it is fit in the Lord. Him I must love,
for he is my self. To him I must be subject, as the inferior parts are unto
the head. I must care how to please him both for the performance of my duty,
and for the quietness and content which will ensue upon it. I must reverence
him, for he is my superior: I must obey him, for he is my Lord; I must be
instructed by him, for, he is my teacher: I must not depart from him, 1 Cor.
7.4.
because the power which formerly I had over my self, is resigned up to his
will; and pleasure. I must be discreet, because I am a wife: chaste, because I
must be a loyal wife: a keeper at home, because a house-wife: good, and
obedient, that the word of God be not blasphemed. Submission is required,
joined with love, to avoid anger and contention; Prove. 21.19.
for Solomon has decreed that It it better to dwell in the wilderness, then
with a contentious, and an angry woman. Subjection and reverenceare arguments
of a meek, 1 Pet: 3.4. Prove. 9.13.
and quiet spirit, which in the sight of God is of great price: for a clamorous
woman is styled foolish. Obedience is due to those that are our instructers:
seeing therefore our sex is guilty of ignorance, 1 Timothy 2.11.
we are commanded to learn in silence, with all subjection; for if we are
wise in our own conceits, Prove. 26.12.
the wise man says there is more hope of a fool, then of such. Discretion is
also required in our sex; for long ago did Solomon say, c. 11.22
As a jewel of gold in a swine's snowt so is a fair woman which is without
discretion. Certainly those who submitt to their husbands, who love them, are
subject to them, careful to please them, reverence them, obey them, are
willing to be instructed by them, depart not from them, and are truly
discreet, conscience will preserve them chaste, civilitie will keep them at
home, and religion will make them good. Ps: 119.5.
O that our ways were made so direct, that we might keep these statutes!
When I consider of this bond which unite's me to my husband, how can I choose
but bless my God for his ordinance. When I look upon the pledges of our
mutual love, those children which God does send for our comfort, how can I
choose but magnify his blessing? Though many are the infirmities of a woman;
many duties belong to a wife; many cares and pangs belong to a mother; yet our
infirmities are aften redressed by marriage; our duties are our delight, being
guided and comforted by our careful Lords: and our cares, and pangs are richly
rewarded in our obedient children. O how gracious is our God unto us, who
governs us by those who are made our selves: and to increase our love and
obedience to our husbands, gives us the lively resemblance of both in our
tender offspring! These children whom I would have obedient unto me do put
me in mind of that obedience which I owe to my husband: and much more of that
which all of us owe to our bountiful God. That sacred tie of holy wedlock
puts me in mind of the infinite love of Christ to his church. He has
blessed me with the first; and shall I not labor to be a worthy, and a
thankful partaker of his love in the last? The first I enjoy, though I deserve
it not: the last I am offered, yet zealously and religiously enough I embrace
it not. If I neglect my love and duty to my husband, I cannot expect the love
of Christ. Alas by sex I am frail, and not willing to obey: by pains I am
froward, and not fit for advice: by sin I am haughty, and not apt for
submission. Nature enclineth us to love; but unless that love be regulated by
religion, it often either is sullied with impuritie, or clegenerateth into
hatred. O what shall I provide to answer my God, when he shall stricktly
examine me concerning my duty first to himself; next to him whom he has
made my Lord; and lastly to them who are my tender, and parcelled self?
Certainly obedient enough I cannot be to God: dutiful enough I can scarcely be
to my husband: loving and careful enough I can hardly be of my children. All
of us fail in some thing or other: and I fear that I am the weakest of all.
Every sin displeases my God: o what shall I do to appease his wrath?
Wherewithal shall I come before the Lord; Mic. 6.6.
and bow myself before the high God? Shall I come before him with Burnt
offerings; with calves of a year old? verse. 7.
Will the Lord be pleased with thousands of rams, or with ten thousand rivers
of oil? Shall I give my firstborn for my transgressions: Ps. 51.16. verse: 17
the fruit of my body for the sin of my soul? Alas he desires not
sacrifice: he delights not in burnt offering. The sacrifices of God are a
broken spirit: a broken, and a contrite heart he will not despise. To my Lord
therefore will I hasten whom I have offended: to my God will I address my
self, whom I have displeased by my manifold neglects: and insteede of rivers
of oil, I will swim unto him in rivers of my tears. My heart I will teach
to groan so loud, that it shall be heard to heaven. Each tear which I shed
shall proceed from a heart so humbly sorrowful, that they shall seem to have
the faces of Angels in reflection; and I will pray that those tears may be
accepted by the Angel of the covenant. Mal: 3.1.
If through my indiscretion contentions have arisen between my head and the
members, I will meekely justify the words of the King Solomon; and not only
resemble, but have even the same to which he compares me: Pro: 27.15.
I will have a continual dropping in a very rainie day. Mine eyes shall
drop, and my heart shall drop; and from them both shall issue as it were
water and blood, that with my tears I may wash the sacrifice of my God; and my
heart may be made an accepted offering. Mat: 7.25.
Yet shall not the rain descend only, and the floods come, but the winds
also shall blow. From mine eyes shall the rain descend, and the floods of my
tears shall come: and then from my heart the winds shall blow. From my heart I
will send out sight of sorrow, 1. King 19.11.
and the Lord shall be in the wind. And with that wind shall be an earthquake;
my enlivened earth shall quake with fear of the judgments of my God: so the
Lord shall be likewise in the earthquake. And with that earthquake shall be
fire; verse. 12
even the fire of love, and zeal together: so the Lord shall be in that fire.
And with that fire shall be a still small voice; and unto the Lord shall that
voice be directed; for to him will I look, and pray, and say.

The Prayer.
All-mighty Lord, ever-lasting father, who have been pleased to vouch safe me
the blessings of this life, and to give me my desires both in a husband, and
children: be pleased to give me a thankful heart for these thy mercies. It is
thy goodness, and not my merit, that I have received from thee these blessings
of thy bounty. Justly, o most justly, might thou at once deprive me of
these comforts, because I have neglected my obedience to the one, and my care
of the other. Humbly, o my God, and with a bleeding heart I confess my
faylings, and am sorry for mine offenses: Lord be gracious to me thy servant.
It is thy hand alone which has preserved me from the foul offenses which
many commit: for without thy protection by nature I am noe better then that
strange woman, Pro: 2.17.
who forsakes the guide of her youth, and forgets the covenant of her God.
By nature I am carnally worse by far then were Aholah, and Aholibah
spiritually, who committed whoredoms in their youth. Eze: 23 3.
Lord make me ever acknowledge this thy protection; and testify my
thankfulness in my industrious care to perform my duties. Be thou still the
protector and the gracious defender both of me, and mine. Bless him whom
thou have set over me; and grant that he may dwell with me according to
knowledge, 1. Pet. 3.7.
that so we being heirs together of the grace of life, our prayers may not be
hindered. As thou have made me a fruitful vine by the walls of his house, so
make me endeavor to be fruitful in good works, Ps. 128.3. Col: 1.10. Ps:
128 3. Ps: 52.8 Prove. 19.14. c: 5.18. Ps: 141.3. Prove. 11.16. c: 12.4. c: 14.1.
c: 31.10 verse. 30
and increase to be fruitful in good Works, and increase in the knowledge of
thee my God. Let those Olive branches, about my table be every one of them like
a green Olive in the house of thee, o my God; and trust in thy mercy for ever
and ever. Make me to my husband a prudent wife, as sent from thee, that he
may rejoice with me the wife of his youth. To this purpose, set a watch, o
Lord, before my mouth, and keep the door of my lips. Make me a gracious
woman retaining honor, that I may be a crown to my husband: a wise woman,
laboring to build up my house, and family: and a virtuous woman, fearing
thee. Hear me, o my God, and grant me my petitions for the worthiness of
him who is an indulgent husband to his Spouse the Church, even Jesus Christ my
only Lord, and Savior. Amen.

Tears of an Aged woman.
The Soliloquie.
THE EjACULATION.
Psalm. 5. verse. 1. Give ear to my words, o Lord; consider my meditation:

verse. 2. Hearken unto the voice of my cry, my king, and my God; for unto thee
will I pray.

THe days of our age are threescore years, and ten; Ps: 90.10.
(says David) and if by reason of strength they be foure-score years, yet is
their strength labor, and sorrow; for it is soon cut off, and we flee away.
Lord how true did thou speak by the mouth of that Prophet! True I find it,
who have now accomplished the number of so many years. My strength is labor,
not because of any pains which I take, but only by reason of the pains which
I suffer. Age has been always freed from work, because it suffers more
in a languishing weakness, then the young and lusty do in their travells.
Number: 8 24.
From twenty and five years old and upward the Levites were required to wait
upon the service of the Tabernacle of the congregation: verse. 25
And from the age of fifty years, they were to cease waiting upon the service
thereof and to serve noe more. God will have the best of our time, yea all for
his service. But, alas, the custom is too common among us to serve our
selves at least until fifty; and it may be then, or not so soon, we think
upon God. But why should we not rather render the years of our strength to
the God of our strength? Ps: 43.2
The fault which I complain of is too frequent among others; but can I excuse
my self from the guilt thereof? I now begin to think upon the service of my
God, when through age I am noe more able to serve my self. Every thing
disturbeth and tormenteth my aged limbs: even my very apparel becomes a
burden. O why do people so fondly desire to live to be aged? Have the gray
hairs delight; or the parched, and dried body any pleasure? Alas noe: I find
it has not. This; this is the time which the Preacher speaks of. Eccl: 12.2.
Now the Sun, and the light, and the moon, and the stars are darkened; and
the clouds return after the rain. The beauty of the countenance which
shined like the Sun; the skiecolloured eyes; the apples of those eyes which
sparkeled like the Stars, are grown dim, and obscure. The eye-lidds are
filled with waters like a swollen cloud, laboring in the deliverie of it is
mournful burden. Pleasures, and delights, and joys, and merriments have now
with-drawne the luster of their glory: and pains, and dolours, and griefs,
and sadness have benighted my feeble, and crazie body. Now the keepers of the
house tremble, verse. 3.
and the strong men bow themselves, and the grinders cease because they are
few, and those that look out of the windows be darkened. My knees, which were
the supporters of this walking dust, begin to creeckle, and tremble under their
oppressing burden. Mine arms, and hands have forgotten their steadfastness,
and quake and faint in the execution of their just commands. The teeth which
prepared the meat for the stomach, are fled away from their narrow chambers;
and left the open doors, the hollow gummes in trust to mock my desires. Those
eyes which once could dazell the spectatours; and sat proudly in their
thrones, darting their rays upon their desired objects, have now the curtains
of age drawn over their flames; and the veil of antiquity eclipseth their
glory. Now the doors are shut in the streets, verse. 4.
and the sound of the grinding is low, and here is rising up at the voice of
the bird, and the daughters of music are brought low. My feet are afflicted
with lamenesse, that they cannot any longer carry me into the streets. The
sound of the grinding, the desire of food, the sharpness of the appetite is
abated, and grown low. The birds of the night, the thieves and the robbers
awake me out of my slumbers; and sometime my careful thoughts present to my
fant'sie a fear of their entrance, which causes me to watch when there is
noe necessity. The daughters of music, the tongue that was so nimble, and the
lips that were so active, and the voice that was so melodious, have forgotten
the songs, and sonnets of youth. verse. 5.
Now I am afraid of that which is high, and fears are in the way: and the
Almond-tree flourishes; and the grasse-hopper is a burden; and desire fails.
When I attempt to walk, the dimnesse of mine eyes does multiply the objects,
and makes me believe that I must climb over mountains. The weakness of my
feeling persuadeth my feet that the smallest stones are mighty hills. Every
bush in the way that shoots up its twigges, appears like the ragged teeth
of a devouring saw. The Almond-tree flourishes; the early, watchful
Almond-tree, which forwardly produces its fruits in the prime of the year: my
cares increase, and cause me to walk betimes in the mornings. My weakness
accounts the leaping of a grasse-hopper upon my furrowed skin, like the
weight of a burden that would crush me to the earth: and the desire of
youthful delights is fled from my remembrance. The silver chord is loosed;
verse. 6.
and the golden bowl is broken; and the pitcher is broken at the fountain;
and the wheel is broken at the cesterne. The tongue is grown silent, which
was wont to sing like the silver trumpetts; the strength of the loins has
submitted to age: the brain which was kept in the bowl of the skull, is dried
up in the pan which so carefully preserved it. The very gall is broken, and
separated from the liver the fountain of blood; and the whole body is readily
prepared for the sepulcher.

Thus has my God spared me so long, until I am even weary of this his
mercy: for in my youth I was not so fearful to be snatched from my pleasures,
as now I have a longing to be released of my pains. My flesh, Lam: 3.4.
and my skin are made old; and my bones are broken. Such years have seldom
crowned the issue of Adam, without the society of weaknesses, and sorrows.
Gen: 48 10. 1. King 14.4. c: 15.23
The eyes of Israel were dim for age, so that he could not see. Ahijah the
Prophet could not see; for his eyes were set, by reason of age. Asa in the
time of his old age was diseased in his feet. Thus we that are ancient are
subject to as many infirmities as we have lived years; and each part of our
bodies is ready to torment us with several aches. Now I I stand in need of a
Job, whose comforts may uphold me as I am falling; Job. 4.4
and that he may strengthen my fecble knees. O how I want some charitable
person, Is: 35.3
who could strengthen my weak hands, and confirm these feeble joints! Aged I
am; feeble I am: I have that which Solomon calls the beauty of age; Prove:
20.29.
I have the gray head. But what beauty is there in these silver hairs, unless
I have religion springing in my heart? c: 16.31
The hoary head is a crown of glory: yet, not unless it be found in the way
of righteousness. The Israelites were commanded to rise up before the hoarie
head; Lev: 19 32.
and to honor the face of the old: but surely the Lord intended not that
reverence should be given so much to the age, as to the goodness of the person
who was thus to be respected. As we that are aged have more experience through
the multitude of our years, then the young and lusty inhabitants of the earth
so should we be instructers of them in goodness, and virtue. As we do
somewhat resemble our God in the number of our days; 1. Pet: 1 26. Dan: 7.9.
so should we strive to be holy as he is holy, who is the ancient of days. I
can speak the chronicles of times that are past; and report the various
occurrences, which happened in my youth: but do I strive therein to set forth
the goodness, and mercies of him that has spared me so long to publish his
praises? Job says that With the ancient is wisdom, Job. 12.12.
and in length of days understanding. Thus indeed it should be; but do I
verefie those words of Job? The Prophet complains that gray hairs were here
and there upon Israel; Hos: 7.9. Job. 32.9.
yet he had noe knowledge. Great men are not allways wise: neither do the
aged allways understand wisdom. That is only true wisdom which makes us
resemble the Prophet David, who understood more then the ancients, Ps: 119.100.
because he kept the precepts of the most high. As for other wisdom, it has
noe vallew in comparison of this, for of such it is that Job speaks when he
says, God removes away the speech of the trusty; Job: 12.20.
and takes away the understanding of the aged. It is that wisdom alone; it
is that understanding only that David had, which causes both the gift, and
the blessing of antiquity. Prove: 3.1.
Let thine heart keep my commandments (says the Lord by king Solomon) for
length of days, verse. 2.
and long life, and peace shall they add unto thee. This is that true wisdom
indeed, which has length of days, in her right hand; verse. 16
and in her left hand riches and honor. Such aged people as these were they
whom God promised at the restoration of Jerusalem, when he said, there shall
yet old men, Zech: 8 4.
and old women dwell in the streets of Jerusalem; and every man with his
staff in his hand for very age. Such as these doubtless were they of whom
Eliphaz boasted to Job in his distress, when he said, Job. 15.10.
with us are both the gray headed, and very aged men, much elder then thy
father. Thus I read of the wisely ancient; but am I one of those who have
Wisdom, and understanding? Is my zeal as much inflamed with the love of my
God, as my body has abated of its youthful heat? Long enough have I lived to
be acquainted with the precepts, and commandments of the most high: and to
teach the younger by a religious example. How many in all these clusters, these
heaps of years have I advantaged in the way of godliness? How many have I
endeavored to reclayme from wickedness? What judgments of God upon sinful
miscreants have I observed in my time? What use have I made of them for mine
own humiliation? How often have I discoursed of them to the younger people,
that so they might be affrighted from the perverseness of their evil ways? I
can remember trifles which happened even in my childhood; but did I ever
observe the goodness, and the tender mercies of my maker? My numerous years
command me now to be an adviser of youth. Every one honors the hoarie
hairs: but if there be as well a frost in the conscience, as snow upon the
head, wherein do I excel the very heaps of soil which are cast out from our
dwellings? The dustie monuments of those our ancestors, which in their
declining columns nodde toward the earth, do as gravely ^each the certainty
of our end, as these skarres, and wrinkles of age in my shrivelled skin. The
less I enjoy of a radical moisture, the sooner, shall I become the sport of
the winds, and be blown about in mistie ashes. My multiplied days are but the
increase of my sins, unless I can make each line in my face a correctour of
vice; that people may imagine that they were placed there as much by my holy
anger at offenders, as by the continued account of my flying minuits. Most
powerful was that exhortation of the valiant Joshua, when, being old and
stricken in years, Ios: 23.2.
he put the Israelites in mind of the mercies of God. Most prevalent was the
rhetoric of the Doctor of the Gentiles, when (though, as himself says,
Philem. verse. 8. verse. 9.
he might be much bold in Christ to enjoyne Philemon that which was
convenient, yet) for loves sake he rather besought him, being such a one as
Paul the aged. Were I such a one as was Joshua, or Paul, my death might be
lamented when I shall be carried to my grave. When the great confusion was to
come upon Jerusalem for her many rebellions, it was not to be the least of
their punishments, that God would take away from them the prudent, and the
ancient. Is. 3.2. c: 9.13.
Because the people turned not unto him that did smite them, neither did they
seek the Lord of hosts; verse. 14
therefore (says the Prophet) the Lord will out off from Israel head; and
tail, branch and root in one day. verse 15.
The ancient and honorable he is the head; and the Prophet that teaches lies
he is the tail. Mine years do number me among the ancient of our times,
but do my virtues rank me with those that are truly honorable? Those who
have well deserved in the time of their lives, are embalmed with tears at
their sad, and doleful interments. But shall I be lamented at my funeral
obsequies? Peradventure I may; for some may remember that I have been
open-handed to the poor, and indigent: some that I have visited the sick, and
infirm. But what of that? These might appear to others as acts of charity;
and yet by some sinister intent which I might harbor in my bosom, they may be
charged to mine account for heinous offenses by the all-seeing God. That good
which I perform to any of my neighbors, ought to be done only in obedience
to my Lord. I must therefore be careful that both my acts, and intents be
truly good. If I do noe good even in the neglect of good, I am guilty of
evil. If I serve not my God I robb the Saints upon earth, Ps: 16.3
and I eat and drink those creatures of his which might relieve his
thankful, and obedient servants. Whatsoever I have I do not create it, I
only receave it: so I must necessarily acknowledge it not mine, but Gods. If I
employ not his gifts for the advantage of his glory, I do but borrow that
which I intend not to restore: so though my God neede's not my thanks, yet
needs he must punish me for mine un-thankfullnesse. What then shall I do?
Have I lived thus long at the bounty of my God, and am I now to begin to be
thankful to my God? Old I am; Gen: 27.2.
and (as Isaak said to Esau) I know not the day of my death: I must therefore so
provide for my death, as if this moment were the period of my life. The young
may dye; the old must dye. So teach me, o Lord, Ps: 90.12.
to number my days, that I may apply my heart unto wisdom. O that I were as
good as I am aged! Many that are younger in years then my self, are elder by
far in goodness, and virtue. But why have I been so slothful, so negligent
in the affairs of heaven? Must age be honored? Why then do I not strive to
honor him who ever was, even before the foundations of the earth were laid? I
must not be received into the quire of saints for the number of my years: nor
can I come thither unless my soul be more innocent then the whiteness of my
head would seem to resemble. Mine age should truly be reckoned from my
conversion. Numbers of years do but draw me nearer to my withdrawing
chamber; but numbers of virtues may bring me nearer unto heaven. By the
multiplying of my minuits, I have but for a time prevented the longing worms.
I cannot satisfy for my sins, though I should continue as long as the world
shall endure. Yet if I could, it were folly in me to expect much longer
continuance upon earth. I am traveling to the grave. Eccl: 12.1.
Near it I am. The years are now come wherein I must say, I have noe pleasure
in them. Every age has sins which attends it. Though some have forsaken
me, yet others are apt to succeed in their rooms: hardly would they be so
soon in my grave, and be buried in my repentance. The more low we aged people
do stoop toward our mother through the decay of nature, for the most part
we grow the more coveteous of that which is dug from the earth. But why
should we who are ancient be so desirous of money? This is not providence, but
ungrounded coveteousnesse. A little will serve us for that little time we can
stay upon the earth. But to prevent this sin, my bending to the earth shall
put me in mind of the dust whence I came; and viewing the base original of my
flesh, I will labor to serve the father of spirits. Heb: 12.9. Phil: 3.8. Rev:
21.21,
All things will I account but loss, and dung, that I may win my Jesus. He
sits inthroned in the new Jerusalem, the very streets whereof are the
purest gold. O my God shutt me out noe longer from those eternal riches. I can
not choose but offend thee while I remain upon earth: for his sake therefore
who dyed on the cresse, make have to receave me into that heavenly paradise. O
how sick, me thinks, I grow of this wretched world! My limbs would willingly
yield to mortality; and lie down in the bed of a silent grave. O that the
time were come when I shall say to corruption, Job. 17.14.
Thou art my father, and to the worms, ye are my mother, and my sisters. Gen:
25 17.
When Ishmael was an hundred thirty and seven years old, he gave up the
ghost, and dyed and was gathered to his fathers. Isaak gave up the ghost, c:
35.29
and dyed, and was gathered to his people, being old, and full of days.
Abraham gave up the ghost, c: 25.8.
and dyed in a good old age; Iud: 8.32. 1. Chr: 29.28. Gen: 23 1. verse. 2.
an old man full of years; and was gathered to his people. Gideon the son of
Ioash dyed in a good old age. David dyed in a good old age, full of days,
riches, and honor. Sarah was an hundred twenty and seven years old when
she dyed in Kiriath. arba. These, and thousands of others who lived great and
good ages, lay down in the dust; and their spirits were carried by Angels into
the kingdom of happiness, the city of my God: why then should not I
endeavor to follow them to bliss? Dye I must; but when, or where, or how I
can not determine. Yet sure I am that if I live the life of the righteous, I
shall dye their death, Number: 23.10.
and receave their reward. As near as I am to my longest home, I am not
assured what death I shall dye; neither by what disease, nor with what
torments, or ease. Gen: 42.38.
Jacob was afraid that his gray hairs should be brought down with sorrow to
the grave. When David gave Solomon a charge concerning Ioab, he commanded him,
1. King. 2.6.
saying, Let not his hoary head go down to the grave in peace. Concerning
Shimei he likewise charged him, verse. 9.
saying, His hoary head bring thou down to the grave with blood. The
rebellious Israelites were threatened for their disobedience, Deuteronomy: 28.49. verse.
50
that the Lord should bring a nation against them, which should not regard the
person of the old^, nor show favor to the young. I have noe more privilege,
nor prerogative then they, unless I can prove that I am better then they. Nay
more; the manner, or the kind of death, though never so tormenting, is far
from satisfying for the smallest offense. My death may be troublsome, and sull
of misery; and yet my doom may be full of horror. O what shall I do, What
shall I do to escape that sentence of wrath which can never be recalled? The
more years I have lived, the more sins I have committed. The words of the
old Patriarch do more properly belong unto mes, then they did unto him: Few,
Gen: 47.9.
and evil have the days of the years of my life been. O what a world of
crimes is my soul oppressed with! What shall I do to pacify my God, against
whom my sins, and offenses have been committed? Nothing but blood can
satisfy for my skarlet crimes; and noe blood can appease him, but the blood of
his Son; and noe share can I have in that most precious blood, unless I
seriously, and faithfully repent me of my sins. Lord, Is: 56.3
though I may say with the Eunuch, Behold I am a dry tree; yet it is in thy
power as well to draw water out of the dryest tree, as the obdurate rocks. O
my God I desire to offer thee both mine eyes full of tears, and a heart full
of groans. If all that little moisture which is left in my body could possibly
be converted into one tear of timely, and acceptable repentance; even that
tear, o God, would I readily offer thee. Lord I grieve in my very soul for
the pollutions of my soul; and am seriously, and heartily offended at my
self, for offending thee. Accept, o God, the throbs of my fainting heart; and
be reconciled unto me in the blood of thy son. O Lord I sigh: o Lord I
grieve. My heart pants, my bowels yerne, and my very soul languisheth and
pineth to receave the assurance of thy favor I will lie at the poole of
Bethesda, as he did who was diseased near forty years. Io. 5.5.
I will lie at the gate of thy mercy, o Jesus; and there will I weep, and
grieve, and lament, and call, and cry for mercy at thy hands, o blessed
Redeemer: and my petitions I will tender in all humility, and devotion,
praying, and saying.

The Prayer.
Merciful Lord God, Is: 46.3
who did promise to carry the house of Jacob from the belly and the womb,
verse. 4.
even to old age, and hoary hairs: despise not the humble suite of thine aged,
and feeble servant. My many years, I must confess, I have spent in vanity;
and scarce one minuit of them have I devoted to thy service, as I ought to have
done. Every day have I offended thee; and every hour have I been disobedient
to thy laws. My childhood has been full of folly; my youth of stubbornness;
my riper years have been apt to wantonness; and mine old, and aged days to
coveteousnesse, and impenitencie. Thou might long since in thy justice have
destroyed me in my sins; and have given me a portion in the land of
darkness. But now, o father, since thou have spared me so long, do not
condemn me at the last. Let the heavy heart, and the trembling tongue, and
the shaking hands, and the most sorrowful soul of an humble convert find
favor in thine eyes. With thy mercy, Job. 4.4 Ps: 35.3 Ps: 39.4
o Lord, strengthen my weak hands, support my feeble knees, comfort my
drooping heart; and say unto my soul, I am thy salvation. Lord make me to
know mine end, and the measure of my days, that I may know how frail I am.
verse: 5. Ps: 93.2 Ps: 102.27. Ps: 90.9
Mine age is nothing before thee; for thou art from everlasting, and thy years
shall not fail. O be thou reconciled unto me through the passion of my
Redeemer; for when thou art angry, all our days are gone: we bring our years
to an end as a tale that is told. Ps: 71.9
O cast me not off in this time of old age: forsake me not, now my strength
fails me. Though the heavens, Is: 51.6
and the ^earth shall wax old as does a garment, and they that dwell therein
shall dye; yet thy salvation shall be for ever, and thy righteousness. shall
not be abolished. Ps: 43.3. Ps: 71.18. Ps: 23.4 Ps: 62.7 Prove. 23.22.
O send out thy light and thy truth to lead me now I am old, and gray
headed: o my staff, and thou who art the only rock of strength, forsake me
not. Thou have commanded our children to hearken to their fathers that begat
them; and not to despise their mothers when they are old. O my heavenly father
do thou make me thy child by grace and adoption, that I may hearken unto
thee; and never despise, or forsake thy commandments. Make me allways
remember thy works, o Lord; Ps: 77.11.
and call to mind thy wonders of old time. Give me grace to be in behavior as
becomes holinsse; Tit: 2.3
not given to the vices which commonly delude the ancient, and decrepid; but
that I may be a teacher of the things that are good. Peaceably, o my father,
Job. 5.26.
let me come to my grave in a full age, like as a shock of corn comes in, in
his season. By the course of nature I am ready to go the way of all the earth.
1. King. 2.2. Job. 17.1.
My breath, and my spirits almost are spent; my days are near extinct, and
now the grave is ready for me: do thou, o my God, prepare me for thy self.
With thee I long, and desire to live. To thee I desire to sing praises with the
glorified Saints in thy celestial Paradise. O free me from the burden of the
flesh, and the fetters of sin; and grant that when I shall render thee an
account of my years, I may behold thy face with comfort, and joy. Let me with
desire attend the time of my change, and the hopeful expectation of a happy
resurrection. Come o my God, and free me from the bondage of sin and
corruption, that I may sit at thy right hand for ever, and ever. Hear me o
father, and grant my petitions through the meritorious death of the Lord of
life, even Jesus Christ my only mediator, and redeemer. Amen.

Tears of a Barren woman.
The Soliloquie.
THE EjACULATION.
Psalm. 5. verse. 1. Give ear to my words, o Lord; consider my meditation.

verse. 2. Hearken unto the voice of my cry, my king, and my God; for unto thee
will I pray.

WHen God had created Adam and Eve, he blessed them, Gen: 1.28.
and said, Be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the earth. This was a
blessing in the time of innocence; but did it remain a blessing after the
fall? Yes doubtless; for long after the breach of the first commandment the
Psalmist determined that Children are an heritage of the Lord: Ps: 127 3.
and the fruit of the womb is his reward. Yet, though it remains a blessing,
it is not without the society of a punishment: for so the Lord said unto the
woman; Gen: 3.16.
I will greatly multiply thy sorrow, and thy conception: in sorrow shall thou
bring forth children. This sorrow is an effect of sin, and not a sorrow for
sin. Yet surely it has something in it above, or beside a punishment for the
first offense: for neither is the sorrow in it self a sin, as is always
that which is only worldly, which begins, continues, and ends in grief:
nor does this sorrow conclude in either sin, or shame, Io: 16.21.
or griese; but (as our Savior says) As soon as she is delivered of the
child, she remembers noe more the anguish, for joy that a man is borne into
the world. The pain is a remembrancer of original corruption; but the issue
is a continuance of the blessing in Paradise. This pain I am freed from
whilst I continue barren: but then I want the blessing, and the joy which
accompany the pain. But why do I complain? Why do I disturb my self for
want of that which might become my tormentour? All children are not blessed:
all are not elected to be heirs of salvation. Mat: 20 16.
Many indeed are called; but few are chosen. Doubtless Cain, and Ham, and
Esau, and Judas, and many millions besides, did cost their mothers many bitter
throws, and torments, and cries; yet reaped not their parents that joy which
others have received. Is it not then better for me to content my self with
this state which I am in; then to be the mother of a child, which might be a
firebrand of hell? All are not chosen to be vessels unto honor. 2. Tim. 2.21.
The way to destruction is a beaten road. My torments would be greater (were I
the mother of a child) for fear that my child should dishonor my God; then
they could be with bringing that child into the world. The cares of parents are
full of trembling, and disquietnesse, allways suspecting ill accidents, or
diseases; or (which is worse) a second death to befall their issues. Reu: 21 8.
From these I am freed whilst I continue fruitless; and I enjoy the society
of a husband without the disturbance of children. But yet, me think's, I rest:
not satisfied; for barrenness was ever accounted a reproach; therefore
Elizabeth upon her conception said. Luc: 1.25.
Thus has the Lord dealt with me in the days wherein he looked on me, to
take away my reproach among men. Gen: 16 4.
Thus when Hagar had conceaved by Abram, her mistress Sarai was despised in
her eyes. But alas what is this? A little reproach it may be among men; but such
as cannot continue long: not longer, at most, then my life shall last; and then
it will cease, or at least not trouble me. Surely it is not so contemptible in
the eyes of my God; for if so it were, then Job would not put it as a mark of
the wicked, Job: 24 21.
that He evil entreats the barren that bears not. And yet I suspect that
some grievous sin is the cause of mine affliction; for barrenness has been
often sent as a curse, and fruitfullnesse as a blessing. How happy was the
wife of Terah in her faithful Son Abraham! How happy was Iochebed in her
meek Son Moses! How happy was Elizabeth in John the Baptist! But how most
happy of all was the virgin Mary in her holy child Jesus, prononnced so by he^
cosijn Elizabeth, who said unto her, Blessed art thou among women, Luc: 1.42.
and blessed is the fruit of thy womb! This blessing, me thinks, I seriously
long for, though I cannot expect a child of such excellency as was Abraham, or
Moses, or John the Baptist. But why do I thus disturb my self about that
which is not in my power to amend, or alter? Fruitfullnesse has not allways
been a token of mercy: sometimes it has spoken the wrath of the All-mighty.
2. Sam. 11.5.
Bathsheba indeed was free from barrenness; but her child by King David was
the spurious issue of a defiled bed. Such sinister practices have been the
faults of diverse, who have rather chosen to dishonor God, then to be despised
by men. But this remedy would prove far worse then the disease, if I should
seek to be pregnant by the ways of wickedness. Thus to become a mother I
should dishonor my husband, and (which is infinitely worse) my Lord and my
God. Thus should I desclayme the protection of God my father, and the love of
mine indulgent husband; and all in a wicked and lustful curiosity to take
away my reproach among men. Yea thus by endeavoring to salve my credit I
should more deeply wound it: and to avoid a contempt for what I cannot help,
I should be branded with infamy which I could never wipe off. Conscience, and
obedience to the laws of my God forbid the thought of so dangerous a cure:
loyalty, and affection to my husband deny it: love, and desire of virtue chide
it: yea and care of my good name does plainly prohibit it. I had rather
continue for a time a reproached Elizabeth, then be a lustful Bathsheba to be
the wife of a King. It lies in the power of him who is omnipotent to make me
(if he pleases) a joyful mother. I will not despair while I live upon the
earth, because I know that my God is powerful who dwells in heaven. This
barrenness may peradventure be sent me in mercy, allthough so heavily I take
it for a judgment. It may be I should fail in the duty of patience in the
time of my travel; or of love, and care in the education of my children: or I
might be too fondly guilty of doting on them; and so idolatrously rob my
God of his honor, to confer it wickedly on the issue of my loins. Moreover
who knows what times of trouble may come upon the land; or what destruction,
and desolation may be sent upon my country. If persecution, or war should
enforce me to flee, I can the better escape now I am free from children. For
this very cause my blessed Redeemer foretelling the destruction of the city of
Jerusalem, said unto the women, Daughters of Ier^salem weep not for me, Lu:
23.28. verse: 29
but weep for your selves, and for your children: For behold the days are
comeing in the which they shall say, Blessed are the barren, and the womb that
never bare, and the pappes that never gave suck. So this barrenness may bring
content, in that it freeth me from cares, and various perturbations; although
(if it might seem good in the eyes of my God) most willingly would I embrace
the trouble, that I might increase his Kingdom. I will resolve howsoever to
submit my self to the great disposer; and will hope that it may be his
pleasure to send me my desires. Time was when the Gentiles knew not God; which
made the Psalmist so magnify God for his mercies to Israel, Ps: 147.19:
when he said, He shows his word unto Jacob: his statutes, and his
judgments, unto Israel: verse: 20
He has not dealt so with any nation; neither have the heathen knowledge of
his law. Then had the Gentiles a spiritual barrenness, for they were barren
of religion; and yet the Prophet comfort them, Is: 54.1
saying, Sing o barren, thou that did not bear: break forth into singing,
and cry alowd thou that did not travel with child; for more are the children
of the desolate, then the children of the married wife, says the Lord. This
Prophecy is fullfilled to the joy and rejoicing of my self, and many millions
more: for the song does noe longer run in the phrase of the Psalmist, Ps:
76.1 ves. 2.
In Judah is God known; his name is great in Israel: In Salem also is his
tabernacle; and his dwelling place in Sion. Noe, noe: Lu: 2.32.
he who was the glory of the people Israel, did come to be a light to lighten
the Gentiles. Thus the Gentiles which had not been a people, Romans 9 25.
were called to be the people of the most high God: she who had not been
beloved did through his mercy become the beloved of God: and she that was
barren through ignorance and infidelity, grew the faithful spouse of the most
high. Why should I then give over my hopes? He who made a fruitful church
even of the heathen which knew him not, Is. 54.3
can (if he pleases) make me a fruitful mother of children. verf 5.
Her maker is her husband; the Lord of hosts is his name: and her redeemer is
the holy one of Israel; the God of the whole earth shall he be called. I am
one of the members of that church which has Christ to her husband: I will
therefore never despair either of his power, or mercy. I dare not repine as
Rachel did, when she bare Jacob noe children and envyed her sister. Gen: 34 1.
verse: 2.
I dare not say to my husband as she did to hers, Give me children or else I
dye; lest his anger should be kindled against me, and he should answer me as
Jacob did her, and say, Am I in God's steed, who has withheld from thee the
fruit of the womb? I know it is God who gives; and I know it is God who
withholdeth these mercies. I dare not be too inquisitive into a reason in
nature, lest I dis-honour him who is the God of nature. I may, and I will
desire this blessing at the hands of him who gives liberally, Iam: 1.5.
and upbraideth not. Yet lest my petitions should be empty if they rise not
with tears, I will weep for my sins which have caused his displeasure: and
yet I will weep in hope that he will be reconciled unto me. Of every
judgment I must find the cause in the wickedness of my self. I want the
comfort and content of children, because I my self have been a child
disobedient to my God. But I will bewail my sins, and bemoane my condition:
and allthough he cannot be ignorant of my servent desires, yet I will lay open
to him the grief of my heart. Gen: 25 21.
Isaak entreated him for his wife, because she was barren; and he was
entreated of him, and Rebekah his wife conceaved: And she had two children
which strugled together in their mother's womb. ver: 22
At the prayer of Elisha the good Shunamitish woman conceaved, 2. King 4.17.
Gen: 20 17.
and bare a son at that very season that Elisha had said unto her, according
to the time of life. Faithful Abraham prayed unto the Lord, and the Lord
healed Abimelech, and his wife, and his maid servants, and they bare children:
verse: 18
for the Lord had first closed up all the wombes of the house of Abimelech,
because of Sarah Abraham's wife. The Lord did promise unto Israel upon
obedience, saying, There shall nothing cast their young, Ex. 23.26. Deuteronomy. 7 12.
nor be barren in thy land. Another promise was made unto them by God himself,
when he said, It shall come to pass if ye hearken to these judgments, and
do them, Thou shall be blessed above all people: there shall not be male, or
female barren among you, or among your cattle. Again they were promised by
the mouth of Moses, saying, It shall come to pass, c. 28.1.
if thou shall hearken diligently unto the voice of the Lord thy God, to
observe and to do all the commandments which I command thee this day: verse. 11
the Lord shall make thee plenteous in goods, in the fruit of thy body, and in
the fruit of thy cattle, and in the fruit of thy ground, in the land which the
Lord swear unto thy fathers to give thee. But I have not such an Isaak to
entreat for me, as Rebekah had; nor such an Elisha as the Shunamitesse had;
nor such an Abraham as Abimelech had. What then? I have the promise of my God,
if I be a true Israelite indeed, Io. 1.47
such a one as Nathaniel was, in whom was noe guile. If I obey my God, and
hearken to his judgments, and do them: If I hearken diligently unto the voice
of the Lord my God to observe, and to do all the commandments which he
commands me to do; then I may expect the blessing which was promised unto
Israel. The promises of God are made upon conditions; and my petitions to God
must be likewise upon conditions, when I beg of him but temporal blessings.
His blessings descend not, unless they be called down by my religious
obedience: nor may I pray for the blessings which concern this life but with
this condition, If they may stand with his pleasure. In his power it is to
grant the suite which so earnestly I make: I wish it may be his pleasure to
fulfill my desires. Barren Sarai was promised a son, and Isaak was borne.
Genesis 21 2.3. Lu: 1.7 verse. 57 Genesis 29 31. c 30.22. verse. 23
Though Zacharias and Elizabeth were stricken in years, and Elizabeth was
barren, yet they were blessed with John the Baptist. Though Leah was hated by
reason of her barrenness, yet we read that the Lord did open her womb. God
remembered Rachel, and hearkened unto her, and opened her womb: and she
conceaved, and bare a son, and said, God has taken away my reproach. The
wife of Manoah the Danite was barren; Iud. 13.2. verse. 3. verse. 14
yet the Angel of the Lord appeared unto her, and said unto her, Behold now
thou art barren, and bear not; but thou shall conceave, and bear a son:
And the woman bare a son, and called his name Samson; and the child grew, and
the Lord blessed him. 1. Sam. 1.10.
Barren Hannah was in bitterness of soul for want of a child, when Peninnah
her fruitful rival provoked her sore to make her fret, verse. 6. verse. 20
because the Lord had shut up her womb: and she had a son whom she named
Samuel. Thus may God, if he please, look upon my reproach; and send me a
child, which I may dedicate to his service. I will therefore follow the stepps
of Hannah the devout: verse: 15
I will weep with her, and I will fast with her; and with her, will I power
out my soul before the Lord. Who knows but my tears may prevayle through
the merits of my Redeemer; and my sobbs, and sighs may draw down a blessing?
Ps. 30.8
On my knees therefore will I go unto the Lord and get me unto my Lord right
humbly. I will weep and pray, and mourn and pray, and sigh and pray; and
praying I will say.

The Prayer.
HEeavenly King, father of mercies, Ps: 72.5
thou who tookest me out of my mother's womb, but have denied unto me the
fruit of mine: vouchsafe to look upon the reproach of thy servant. I know that
my sins do stop the current of thy mercies: but it is thine honor that
thou art a forgiver of offenses. Forgive my sins the cause of thy curse; and
heal the barrenness of thy despised hand-mayd. 1. Sam. 1.11.
O Lord of hosts if thou will indeed look upon the affliction of thine
hand-mayd, and remember me, and not forget thine hand-mayd, but wilt give unto
thine hand-mayd a man-child; then I will give him unto thee all the days of
his life. Thou know that I am a woman of a sorrowful spirit; and out of the
abundance of my complaint, verse. 16
and grief do I pray unto thee. Send me, I beseech thee, a Samuel, even such
a child as I have asked of thee (if it may stand with the pleasure of thee my
Lord, and King) that may bring honor unto thee, and comfort unto thy
petitioner. I shall never be satisfied until thou hear my supplications.
Pro. 30 15.
Either grant my desires, or arm me with patience; that in all things I may
serve thee with quietness, Mat: 4.28.
and content. The earth thou have made to bring forth fruit of her self: and
it is as easy for thee to bless me with increase. But if thou have otherwise
determined in thy secret will, howsoever grant that I may never conceave
wickedness in my heart, Act: 5.4.
to whom thou denyest the conception of a child. Iam. 1.15.
Let not lust conceave in me, lest it bring forth sin; and sin when it is
finished bring forth death. Say unto my heart as effectually as once thou did
unto the fig tree; Mat: 21 19. Gal: 5.22. verse. 23 Heb. 12 11.
let noe such fruit grow on thee hence forth for ever: but let me allways
produce the fruits of the spirit, against which thine Apostle assures me that
there is noe law. Let this thy chastening yield unto me the peaceable fruit of
righteousness, since I am exercised therein: so shall I willingly submit to
thy pleasure, and beseech thee to grant me comfort and joy in that blessed
son of a happy woman, even Jesus Christ my only Lord, and Savior. Amen.

THE TWELFTH SUBjECT. Tears of a childbearing woman. 1 At the time when she
begins to fall in travel. 2 After her deliverie.

Is It: Her tears when she begins to fall in travel. The Soliloquie
consisting of three parts: viz: 1 The cause of the sorrow, and the confidence
of the sorrowing. 2 The greatenesse of the pangs, hazards, and fears of a
traveling woman. 3 Consolation, and comfort for a woman in the bitterness of
her travel.

The first part of the Soliloquie, treating of the cause of the sorrow, and the
confidence of the sorrowing.
THE EjACULATION.
Psalm. 5. verse. 1. Give ear to my words, o Lord; consider my meditation:

verse. 2. Hearken unto the voice of my cry, my King, and my God; for unto the
will I pray.

When David confessed his actual crimes, he forgot not the guilt of
original corruption; and therefore he professed, saying, Behold I was shapen in
iniquity, verse. 5.
and in sin did my mother conceave me. By the corruption of nature even
Saint Paul himself was not without sin that dwelled in him. That which is
borne of the flesh is flesh, Rom: 7 17. Io. 3.6.
as my Savior himself did tell Nicoden us; and this flesh concludes us all
to be carnal, Rom: 7 14.
and sold under sin. This original stayne is the ground of all our actual
impieties: justly therefore is the birth of a child accompanied with the
torments, and sorrows of the mother, left women should forget the taste of the
apple. I will greatly multiply thy sorrow, Gen: 3.16.
and thy conception (said the Lord unto Eve) in sorrow thou shall bring forth
children. O this heavy chastisement does now approach, to make me sensible of
my sinful beginning. As I caused the tears to flow from the eyes of my
groaning mother; so now even in mine eyes do they likewise arise through the
pangs which do seize on me by reason of my babe. Lord, what a trembling
possesses every joint of me! and when I hope for ease by changing my seat,
or lying on my Couch, or attempting to walk, even in every place does the
sharpness of the pain increase its strength; and though I multiply my cries,
yet mine anguish cease not. O what miserable perplexities are we weak, and
sinful women involved in! We who can worst endure are most afflicted: and
allthough our tempers, and constitutions conclude us weaker by far then our
husbands; yet our sorrows do greatly exceed their sufferances. Certainly we
suffer more, because we were first in the first offense: and for our
forwardness both to consult with the Serpent, and to tempt the man, our
portion is the greater in pangs, and throws. We are driven to such
extreamities, that either we must be tormented in our issue, or else
reproached for our barrenness. Surely had Eve but been sensible of the least
smart of a traveling woman, she would have continued in integrity for fear
of the punishment. Gen: 2.17.
Our first parents were threatened but with dying the death in the day they did
eat of the tree of knowledge: but I, me thinks, do find that that curse is
increased; for death will not come without the society of pains. There is
something of that punishment in the pains which prepare us for the
entertainment of death; something in the very instant of the soul's departure;
and yet, unless our merciful Redeemer take pity upon us, the greatest of all
will be in a second death. Of the first pains I am now made most accurately
sensible: in the second I must agree with the children of Eve: but from the
last I have an assured hope that my God will deliver me. Oh, my pains, my
pains grow stronger, and stronger: What shall I do? Strengthen me, o Jesus,
and enable me to suffer with constancy, and patience what I must endure for a
child. Elizabeth was not come to the hour of torment when, Lu: 1.24. verse. 25
hiding her self for five months together, she rejoiced, and said, Thus has
the Lord dealt with me in the days wherein he looked on me, to take away my
reproach among men. Yet are these pangs more desirable then the reproach of
barrenness; not for themselves, but for their happy event. Barrenness
produces shame, and discontent: but fruitfullnesse produces sorrow with
comfort. The barren desire what they partake not of: the fruitful may have
content in that which causes their torments. By us the kingdom of heaven is
increased: by them the world seems ready to expire. But whence does this
fruitfullnesse accrow unto us? If it were only, and merely from our selves,
then I suppose that none would be barren. If it be a blessing sent from God, I
wonder at the wicked; for the Psalmist says, They are full of children, Ps:
17.14.
and leave the rest of their substance for their babes. But I need not wonder,
if I either consider the fore-goeing words, where the Prophet says, They have
their portion in this life: or if I remember that it is in the power of God
even from them to produce some vessels of honor. Israel was threatened by
Moses, saying, Deuteronomy: 28.15.
It shall come to pass, if thou will not hearken unto the voice of the Lord
thy God, that Cursed shall be the fruit of thy body. verse. 18
O how full of horror assuredly was this to the women of Israel, that those
children should be sentenced to eternal weeping, for whom their mothers had
cried in the anguish of their births! Such, o such there are, and allways shall
be, even to the end of the world, as shall draw tears from the eyes of the
weaker parent both in the extreamitie of the throws, and in the fear of their
destruction. Surely such wieked children as those, if any, shall have cause to
expostulate as did the patient Job, Job. 3.11. verse: 12
and cry, Why dyed I not from the womb? Why did I not give up the ghost when I
came out of the beliy? Why did the knees prevent me; or why the beeasts that I
should suck? c: 10.18
Wherefore have thou brought me forth out of the womb? Oh that I had given up
the ghost and noe eye had seen me! Or they may say as once did the Prophet
Jeremiah, Cursed be the day wherein I was borne: Ier. 20.14. verse. 15
let not the day wherein my mother bare me be blessed. Cursed be the man who
brought tidings to my father, saying, A man-child is borne unto thee, making
him very glad. verse. 16
And let that man be as the cities which the Lord overthrew, and repented not:
and let him hear the cry in the morning, and the showting at noone-tide: verse
17
because he slew me not from the womb; or that my mother might have been my
grave and her womb to be allways great with me. verse. 18
Wherefore came I forth out of the womb to see labor, and sorrow, that my
days should be consumed with shame? But I will hope better things of mine, and
beseech my God that it may be like unto Paul, who speaks of himself, saying,
Gal: 1.15. verse. 16
God did separate me from my mother's womb, and called me by his grace, to
reveal his son in me etc.

Oh my pains grow sharper and sharper, and are strong remembrancers of the
pollution even of conception. But there is a conception as well Spiritual as
Carnal: I must therefore examine Whether the womb of my heart has not
conceaved sin? Job. 15 35. Is: 33.11.
for these pangs arise not without foregoeing wickedness. The hypocrites,
says Job, do conceave mischief. The enemies of the church, says the Prophet
Isaiah shall conceave chafe. If therefore, with the hypocrites, c. 59.4.
I have conceaved mischief, I fear that with them too, I have brought
forth-vanity, and my belly has prepared deceit. If, with the sinful Jews, I
have not called for justice, nor pleaded for truth: if I have trusted in
vanity, and have spoken lies; then I fear that with them too, I have conceaved
mischife, and brought forth iniquity. If, with the enemies of the church, I
have conceaved chafe; then I fear that, with them too, I have brought forth
stubble, and I may justly suspect that my breath, as fire, shall devour it.
Ps: 7.14
If, which the ungodly, I have traveled with iniquity, and have conceaved
mischief; then I fear that, with them too, I have brought forth falsehood.
Thus if I have joined with the hypocrites, if with the enemies of the church,
if with the sinful Jews, if with the ungodly, or if I have trusted in vanity,
what then can I look for, but that having conceaved all kind of abominations,
I should (with the wicked man) travel with pain all my days? Job. 15.20.
Thus, I must confess, I have been forward in the conception of all manner of
evil; and the production has been even as quick as the thought. Ex: 1.19.
I may say of my self as the Mid-wives said once to angry King Pharaoh
concerning the Hebrew women; I have been lively, and have been delivered of
my grievous crimes ere any midwife came in unto me. I have been both father,
and mother, and midwife, and nurse, and every thing else to bring the abortive
bratts of impiety into the world. What now can I expect therefore, but that I
should dye in anguish; and that my child which I go with, should be at once
both mine issue, and my destroyer? But I will hope for better, and I will pray
for better; for I have a good, and a merciful God, in whom I will trust. To
him I will fly both for remission, comfort, and succor. I know that he is
offended with the sinful progeny of my corrupted heart: Ex: 1.16.
but to appease him I will destroy them all, as the Mid-wives were commanded to
do by the Hebrew males. Ps: 137.9.
I will gain happiness by such an execution as was required upon the daughter
of Babylon: for I will take them, and dash them, both the great and the little
ones against the stones. Or if that will not destroy them, I will use them as
the Allmighty did the chariotts and the bost of Pharaoh; I will cast them into
the sea, Ex: 15.4. verse. 5. verse. 1.
and the depths shall cover them. The sea shall be my tears, in which I will
sink them so deep, (even the horse and his rider; the heart that has
conceaved, and the sin that has been borne) that they shall never rise
again. Or if this yet will not suffice, verse. 4.
I will use them as the Lord did the chosen Captains of the King: I will
drown them in the red sea; even in the blood of my blessed Reedemer; where
they shall be sunk so deep, that it shall be quite forgotten that ever they
were. Thus shall my God be appeased, and shall visit me in love; so that I
shall not need to fear when my throws increase, because I will depend on the
rock of my salvation. I will resolve with confidence, and a settled mind, that
allthough he slay me, Job 13.15.
yet will I put my trust in his mercy; and I am assured that he will send me
a happy issue to my trials and afflictions.

greatness of the pangs, hazards, and fears of a traveling woman.
SAint John in the Apocalypse tells us, Rev. 12 1.
that There appeared a great wonder in heaven; A woman clothed with the
Sun; and the Moon was under her feet; and upon her head was a crown of
twelve stars: verse. 2.
And she being with child, cried, trave^ing in birth, and pained to be
delivered. That woman is the Church, styled a woman both because she is
fruitful, and by reason of her subjection to Christ her husband. The Moon is
under her feet; the pomp, and prosperity of the world is placed far
beneath her affections. Her crown of stars is the twelve Apostles. This
woman, this Church is with child: she conceaveth by faith, she cries out in
her devotions; she is pained in her sorrows, and several afflictions; and
she is delivered when her children are received into glory. If Saint John did
liken her pangs unto the pinching throws of a traveling woman, it must needs
be imagined that her pains were grievous. Oh I feel, I feel what her
torments were resembled unto. Such pains do now begin ginne to seize on
me, as the greatest in the world have been described by these. Ier. 13.21.
Such were threatened to Judah: Shall not sorrows take thee as a woman in
travel? Such to Lebanon: O inhabitant of Lebanon, c: 12.23.
that make thy nests in the Cedars, how gracious shall thou be when pangs
come upon thee, the pain as of a woman in travel? Such to Babylon: Is. 13.6
Howl ye, for the day of the Lord is at hand; it shall come as a destruction
from the All-mighty: Therefore shall all hands be faint, verse. 7.
and every man's heart shall melt: and they shall be afraid; verse. 8.
they shall be inpaine, Ier: 48.41.
Kerioth is taken, and the strong holds are surprised, and the mighty men's
hearts in Moab at that day shall be as the heart of a woman in her pangs. Such
to Edome: c: 49.22.
The heart of the mighty men of Edome shall be as the heart of a woman in her
pangs. Such to Ephraim: Hos. 13 12. verse. 13.
The iniquity of Ephraim is bound up; his sin is hid: the sorrows of a
traveling woman shall come upon him: And such to the ungodly, when our Savior
shall come in the clouds: When they shall say, 1. These. 5.3.
Peace, and Safety, then sudden destruction comes upon them, as travail upon
a woman with child; and they shall not escape. Such as these were inflicted on
those Kings that were assembled, and passed by the city of the great King on
the north sides of the mountain of holiness: Ps. 48.6
Fear took hold upon them there; and pain as of a woman in travail. Such on
Sion: We have heard the fame thereof; Ier. 6.24.
our hands wan^ feeble; anguish has taken hold of us, and pain as of a woman
in travail. c 4.31.
And again: I have heard a voice as of a woman in travel, and the anguish as
of her that brings forth her first child; the voice of the daughter of Zion
that bewayleth her self, that spreads her hands, saying, Woe is me now, for
my soul is wearied because of murderers. Such on Damascus: Damascus is waxed
feeble, c: 49.24.
and turns herself to flee, and fear has seized on her: anguish, and
sorrows have taken her, as a woman in travel. c: 50.42.
Such on the King of Babylon: Every one of the people of the North shall be put
in array like a man to battle against thee o daughter of Babylon: verse. 43
The King of Babylon has heard the report of them, and his hands waxed feeble:
anguish took hold of him, and pangs as of a woman in travel. Such on the
Prophet Isaiah, bewayling the captivity of the people: Is 21.3.
My loins are filled with pain; pangs have taken hold upon me, as the pangs
of a woman that travelleth: I was bowed down at the hearing of it; I was
dismayed at the seeing of it. And such on the people of God, when they were
carried into captivity: c. 26.16.
Lord in trouble have they visited thee; they powered out a prayer when thy
chastening was upon them: verse. 17
like as a woman with child, that draws near the time of her deliverie, is
in pain, and cries out in her pangs; so have we been in thy sight o Lord. O
these sorrows, these pangs and pains, this faint^esse of hands, this melting
of heart, this anguish, this weariness of soul, this feebleness, this
turning to flee, this pain of the loins, this bowing down, this dismaying,
and this ^ying out in pangs is now my portion. Deep shall I drink of this cup
of trembling: Is. 51.17.
it is already at my mouth: I quiver, and quake at the bitterness thereof.
Feign would I delay it; feign would I forget what I must endure it. I shift
from place to place, from seat to seat: I wring my hands; I tremble in my
cold, and fainting sweates. Feign would I buy it off; and be contented to offer
the service even of my whole life, but to be freed from these calamities, which
begin to fall on me. Ps: 55.4
My heart is sore pained within me; and the terrors of death are fallen upon
me. Fearefullnesse, and trembling are come upon me; verse. 5.
and horror has almost over whelmed me. I cannot forget how the wife of
Phinehas the son of Eli, being near to be delivered; 1. Sam: 4. 19.
when she heard the sad tidings that the Ark of God was taken, and that her
husband, and her father in law were dead, she bowed herself, and traveled;
for her pains came upon her: she traveled, was delivered and dyed. I cannot
forget how Rachel journeying from Bethel, Gen: 35 16.
when there was but a little way to come to Ephrath, traveled, and had hard
labor: And though when she had hard labor, the Mid wife said unto her, verse.
17
Fear not, thou shall have this son also: verse. 18
and she had her son, and called him Ben-oni, the soon of her sorrow; but
his father called him Benjamin, the son of his right hand; yet she dyed, The
remembrance of these that dyed in childbirth increases my fears, and adds
to mine affliction. I am so dismayed between the pangs which I suffer, and the
suspicion of death which possesses my soul, that I am I know not how divided,
and forlorn. One while I resolve to submit to my God; another while I suspect
that I shall not possibly endure the severity of my tortures. My tears are
many: my pangs increase, and double and treble themselves upon me. One O is
not enough to cry; but, as if my short life were only to be inployed in
accents of sorrow, I leng then my exclamations, and I cry oooooo etc: as if my
pain wax the lesser when I make my complaints either louder, or longer.
Sometimes my pangs are so thick, and so violent, that I have not time to fear:
and sometimes again my fear is so great, that I have not leisure to mind the
pangs I endure. The body suffers and the mind labor's; and all is in a kind of
destruction, and confusion. Sometimes I fear that I am yielding up the ghost,
and then a pull, a tugge, a throw command's ^nee to forget my fear, and set
my self to endure. Sometimes I fear least my child should not come right, or
not be rightly shaped, or not be perfectly limbed; and then a throw again
makes me lay aside my fears. In the depth of my sufferances I am all most
bereft of my senses with the violence of the pain: and at times of
intermission I am half distracted with these doubts, and fears. Act: 3.2.
Sometimes I think of the man that was lame from his mother's womb, and was
faint to be carried; whom they laid daily at the gate of the temple which was
called Beautiful, to ask alms of them that entered into the temple: and then
I am jealous that either my child may be a creeple; or else a beggar. At other
times I think of the man at Lystra, c: 14.8.
impotent in his feet, who was likewise a creeple from his mother's womb, and
never had walked: and presently I fear that mine may be so too. Again
sometimes my anxious thoughts fix upon the man who was blind from his birth:
Io: 9.1. Mat: 12 22. Mar: 7.32.
sometimes on him who was blind and dumb: sometimes on him who was deaf, and
had an impediment in his speech: and then I suspect that mine infant may be so
too. But why, o why do I harbor such thoughts, or utter such cries of
distrust? Why do I embrace such suspicions and fears of the death of my
self, or of impotency of my child? If I despair of ease, I forget my
comforter. If I submit not to his pleasure, I deny him to be my God. If I
repine at my sufferances, I add unto the cause, and so I multiply mine
iniquities. I cannot deny that my God is omniscient: I may not deny that my God
is omnipotent: I would not deny that my God is compassionate. Since then I do
know that he knows my miseries, and that he has power to release me
whenever he pleases; it is my duty to hope in his mercy, and tender
compassion. If I fear my death, I condemn my life; and publish to the world
my neglect of preparation. If I have not laid up in store against the hour of
my departure, especially seeing I do know that many have dyed in the
extreamitie of their throws, it will plainly appear that I either cared not
for heaven, or dreaded not hell. If I fear too much that my child may fail in
a due proportion, or too vainly distrust that it may come imperfect, I
dishonor my God, who shaped it in my womb. It is not of mine own fashioning:
Ps: 139.14.
it wa fearfully, and wonderfully made by my maker: I must therefore content my
self with what he has allotted me. If the shape be perfect, the greater
must be my thanks: if it prove imperfect, the greater must be my patience: in
all I must be sure to give glory unto God. My service to him has been weak,
and imperfect; he may justly therefore shape my child according to my service.
If so he should do, I cannot resist it; I must not repine at it. I will
resolve therefore by the assistance of his grace, that allthough my cries may be
loud, yet they shall not be sinful: they may express my sufferance, but not
any impatience. I will fear to dye when I think only of my desert; but I
will desire to dye when I faithfully rely upon the merits of my Redeemer; and
desire that this mortal may put on immortality. 1. Cor. 15.54.
I know that some children have been borne imperfect; but what I my self do
not fashion, I will never repine at. Had I made it my self, it would have
been monstrously deformed; for my very best, and most accurate actions are
full of imperfections. If therefore it shall have too much, or too little; yet it
will be too much for me to sin by murmuring. Lord arm me with patience to
suffer what thou please; with faith and hope to go when thou call; and
with joy and thanks to receave what thou give.


THe blessed Apostle comforting the Corinthians speaks to the souls of all
the elect, 1. Cor. 10.13.
when he says There has noe temptation taken you, but such as is common to
man: but God is faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above that you
are able: but will with the temptation allsu make a way to escape, that ye may
be able to bear it. O gracious promise! O heavenly mercy! Be just, o my God,
in the performance: be speedy in my deliverance. I faint; I dye. How long
Lord, how long shall I cry? These afflictions seem to exceed the power of a
mortal woman to bear, or her patience to endure. O what shall I do? What
shall I do? I cry, Ps: 38.8
I rear for the very disquietnesse of my heart. But has not God promised to
bear my cry, and to help me? Has he not commanded me to call upon him in
the day of trouble; Ps: 50.15.
and then promised that he will deliver me, and I shall glorify him? Now, o
now is the time for the fullfilling of his promise. This, this is the day of my
trouble. Ps: 143.7.
My spirit is waxed faint; my friends are disturbed: all eyes here pity me,
and weep for my sufferances; and grieve that they cannot ease me. But what
shall I do? Shall I despair of his mercy who has promised me deliverance? O
noe; I may not; I dare not; I dare not; I will not. ps. 71.5 verse. 6.
The Lord God shall be my hope: he who has been my trust from my youth. By
him have I been holden up from the womb: he it is who took me out of my
mother's bowels, and may deliver me of mine infant: my praise shall therefore
be ever of him. I cannot choose but think that Tamar had pangs as great as
mine can be, when she labored of the twins. Gen: 38 27.
I cannot choose but imagine that Rebekah suffered as much as I do, c: 25.22.
when Esau and Jacob struggled in her womb. If these were freed from their
pains, and delivered of their children. Why should I complain so much of my
torments, and forget what greater I have justly merited? Should I live a
thousand years in one continued, and most bitter throw, yet would it not be
comparable to a minuit of sufferance in the infernal flames: and yet eternity
of those have I wickedly merited, allthough I feel them not. Seeing then that
my God is so good as not only to send me here less torment then I deserve,
but also to assure me of an escape from those infernal horrors, why should
I repine at these lesser sufferances? Sometimes I find a comfortable
intermission: my pangs are not constant, and continued: I have times to breath,
and provide for the next. Surely he who sometimes refreshes me with respite,
and cessation, does intend that in my pain I should rely upon his mercy. Is:
66.5 verse. 9.
Let him therefore be glorified, and he shall appear to my joy. Shall he
bring to the birth, and not cause to bring forth? Shall I cause to bring forth,
and shut the womb says the Lord God? There is comfort in his promises: there
is ease in his mercy. I must wait the time of his pleasure; and then shall I
have the content which he has promised his chosen. My pangs may endure for a
while, but they shall not continue long. 1. Tim. 2.14.
This chastisement is sent to put me in mind that Adani was not deceaved; but
the woman being deceaved was in transgression. Yet to my comfort let me
likewise remember that the Apostle adds, Notwithstanding she shall be saved
in child bearing, verse: 15
if they continue in faith, and charity, and holiness with sobriety. By
childbearing is meant the plunges which I am in, as well as the cares of
education, and the rest of the duties to which we are obliged. Do thou, o my
Jesus, strengthen my faith in the assurance of thy merits: renew my love and my
charity both to my maker, and my neighbor: sanctify me, o blessed Spirit,
that I may continue in holiness; and give me patience, that I may endure with
sobriety and peace what I must go thorough. The time may come that this child
may bless the womb that bare it; Lue: 11 27.
and these pappes which my God may spare to give suck unto it. His will must be
fullfilled, and my will must submit. If he spare me life, I will render him
thanks: If he give me my child, I will dedicate it to his service: but if it
be his pleasure through this tribulation to end my days; then I know, and am
assured that he will wipe away all tears from mine eyes. Reu. 21.4.
Then he will bring me to his heavenly throane, where shall be noe more
death, neither sorrow, nor crying, neither shall there be any more pain; for
the former things shall be passed away.

The Prayer.
O My Lord, and my God, my heavenly father, my merciful Jesus; thou who have
filled my belly with thine hidden treasure; Ps. 17.14.
and now have brought me to hope and depend, in the midst of mine anguish,
upon thy wonted mercies: bow down thine ear, and hearken to the cries of a
pained woman. Unto thee, o Lord, do I cry; Ps: 142 5.
thou art my refuge, and my portion in the land of the living: attend therefore
unto my cry, verse: 6. Ps: 119 153. Ps: 69.29.
for I am brought very low. Consider mine affliction, and deliver me; for I
do not forget thy law. I am poor, and sorrowful: let thy salvation, o God,
set me up on high. Ps: 38.8
I am feeble, and sore smitten: I roar by reason of the disquietnesse of my
heart. verse: 9. 1. Tim. 4.10. Ps: 18.1 verse: 2.
All my desire is before thee; and my groaning is not hid from thee. In thee I
trust who art the living God; who art the savior of all, especially of them
that believe. I love thee o Lord my strength; thou art my rock, and my
fortress; my strength in whom I trust; my buckler; the horn of my salvation,
and my high tower: Ps: 7.1. Ps: 20.1
o save me now in this heavy visitation, and deliver thy servant. Hear me o
Lord, in this day of trouble: thy name, o God of Jacob, verse: 2.
defend me. Send me help from thy sanctuary, Ps: 25.16.
and strengthen me out of Sion. Turn thee unto me, and have mercy upon me;
for I am desolate, verse: 17
and afflicted. The troubles of my heart are enlarged: o bring thou me out of
my distresses. verse: 18
Look upon mine affliction, and my pain; verse: 20
and forgive all my sins. O keep my soul, and deliver me: let me not be
confounded, for I put my trust in thee. Ps: 71.1
In thee alone do I put my trust; verse. 2.
let me never be put to confusion; but deliver me in thy righteousness, and
cause me to escape: incline thine ear unto me, and save me. Ps: 40.13.
Be pleased, o Lord, to deliver me: o Lord make have to help me. Give a
happy end to these my torments, that I may enjoy the fruit of my womb for
which I suffer them. O Lord in mercy (if it may stand with thine eternal
decree) preserve both my life, and the life of mine issue. Arm me with
patience to undergo these pangs: and in the and give me comfort in what thou
shall send me. If otherwise thou have determined to end my life by these heavy
torments, o my sweet and merciful Jesus receave me into thy bosom; that I
may pass from miferie to eternal happiness. Hear Lord, and have mercy both
upon me, and mine; and grant my petitions for the worthiness of that most
merciful, and most blessed son of a woman, thine only begotten, Jesus
Christ my Lord, and only Savior. Amen.

Tears of a woman after her deliverie from the pains of Childbirth. The
Soliloquie.
THE EjACULATION.
Psalm. 5. verse. 1. Give ear to my words, o Lord; consider my meditation.

verse. 2. Hearken unto the voice of my cry, my king, and my God; for unto thee
will I pray.

A Woman, Io: 16.21.
when she is in travel, has sorrow because her hour is come: but as soon
as she is delivered of the child, she remembers noe more her anguish for joy
that a man is borne into the world. O how truly does my heavenly Jesus
describe both his mercy, and my comfort. I who ere while was full of anguish
and tears, am now with comfort brought again to my bed. I who had almost
despaired of mercy, in the midst of my sufferances have found a deliverer. Me
think's I could weep because I wept so much; and grieve because my cries did
savor of distrust. Many tears did I shed through the anguish which I
suffered; but have I none left of sorrow for offending in my pangs? I will
beg for pardon at the hands of him who sent me this ease: and then I will
thank him for his bounty in sending me this child. Pretty infant, the
beginning of his cries was the end of mine: and the beginning of his trouble
was the end of my labor. O how did I long to see him whom I now embrace! How
did I wish to be delivered of him whom yet again I receave! He is parted from
my womb to be carried in mine arms; and he who before was the burden of my
bowels, now is made the delight of mine eyes. Now with a greater comfort I
hope (then the first sinner embraced the first that ever was borne) I may
rejoice, and say, I have gotten a man from the Lord. Gen: 4.1. 1. Chr: 4.9.
Gen: 35.18.
True it is that I might call him a Iabez, because I bare him with sorrow. I
might name him Ben oni, because he was the son of mine affliction, and
sorrows: but I will rather with Jacob, call him Benjamin, the son of my
right hand. O how gracious was my God unto me, in that he sent me a midwife
to help me; neighbors to comfort me; a house to cover me; a fire to warm
me; and now a bed to ease me! The mother of my Lord had not an house, but a
stable only; Lu: 2.7
for there was noe room in the Inn. Her holy child was laid but in a manger,
whereas mine is in a cradle: yet I am wicked; I am sinful and unclean: yea
and this babe is not borne without original pollution. But I will beg of the
Lord that (with Simeon) I may take up my Jesus in mine arms, verse: 28
or rather in my heart: and I will beseech him that as I desire to embrace him
in my soul, so he will embrace me in the arms of his mercy. Me think's
when I remember how hardly the Israelites were used by the Egyptians when the
midwives were commanded to slay the males, Ex: 1.16.
I cannot choose but tremble at the miseries of the women. It might seem a
sin in them to desire sons, seeing they knew that their birth was but a
stepp to their graves. Those merciful hands which brought them into the world
were commanded to be the executioners of the innocent babes. The women were to
be as cruel in their murders as the King was in his commands: and yet such
bloody acts were to be called executions, and not styled murders. They had a
command to put in practice what was so horrid, and barbarous: whereupon they
were perplexed to think that either they must necessarily disobey authority;
or else destroy those who had not offended. It is true that if God had
commanded it, the act had been righteous. Genesis 22 2.
Abraham not only may, but must be the priest to sacrifice his son, his
only son Isaak, when God requires it. But if God forbids what man
commands, we must be more ready to suffer, then to obey those commands. When
we dare not do what we are unjustly commanded, we must dare to suffer what
shall be unjustly inflicted on us. O how grievously was Iochebed perplexed in
her miseries, Ex: 2.3
when, for fear lest her Moses should be slain according to the decree, she
was enforced to expose him to the brinke of the river! That child whom she
could noe longer hide, she was feign to cradle up in an arc of bull-rushes.
Thus she who durst not keep her infant, adventured upon a trade which she
never had learned: but her directour was his preserver. Surely the tears which
she shed for fear of his death, did persuade the river to carry him alive:
for she so bribed the torrent with the drops from her eyes, that it took
more compassion then the heart of the tyrant. One word of that King might have
saved at once both her sorrows, and her fears. Me think's the very river
might have taught him to melt for his cruelty: but where grace is wanting,
every thing that should check the petulancy of sin, does but give vigor to
the execution thereof. There was a sorrowful mother weeping for fear of the
death of him who might peradventure have cost her her life: and there was a
child too crying, as if it had been either sensible of the cruelty of the
salvage tyrant; or else struck with compassion for the tender mother. The cries
of both were so loud, and so just, that they pierced the clouds, and were
heard up to heaven: and the daughter of the King was moved to save what her
father in his fury did seek to destroy. The child was found by Pharaoh's
daughter; and ignorantly as well as compassionately she put him to nurse to
his indulgent mother. O what cannot God do, when he decrees to act? His
justice is severe and potent; Ps: 145 9.
but his mercy (which is over all his works) is full of goodness, and wonder.
He who preserved Moses, has saved this infant, and I hope he has chosen him
for a vessel of honor. Zacharias was promised that he should have joy and
gladness in John the Baptist. Luc. 1.14.
I will hope for the like in this newborn babe; and I will beg of my Lord
that he may be beloved of him. Him I must magnify for the deliverance of my
self: and him I must thank both for the shape, and the life of my child. My
womb might have proved the grave of mine infant; and my self the sepulcher of
a child unseene. I might have dyed in the birth of this which I embrace: and
the little infant ignorant of my cries, might unwittingly have been the
destroyer of his mother. Or else I might have lived, and this child have dyed:
so should the tears which I had shed through the extreamitie of my pangs, be
seconded with more for the loss of my desires. In all these mercies I must
look up to my Redeemer; and acknowledge him the father, and donour of these
blessings. I will therefore magnify him for his goodness, and praise him for
his loving-kindnesse. Ps: 106 1.
I will give thanks unto the Lord, for he is gracious, because his mercy
endures for ever.

The Prayer.
O Merciful God, heavenly father, who have now most especially made known
unto me, Ephesians: 3.20.
that thou art able to do exceeding abundantly above all that we ask, or
think; make me thankfully rejoice in the work of thy love, and thy tender
mercy. Thy favors are great and wonderful, in sparing the life of my self
and mine infant: in freeing me from my pangs, and him from the darkness of
the silent womb. Thine, o Lord, is the power by which I am delivered: thine is
the mercy by which I am safely returned unto my bed: thine is the work of the
frame and fashion of this my babe: thine therefore shall be likewise the glory
for ever and ever. Grant, blessed Father, that I may never sorget thy
goodness; but express my thankfulness in my new obedience. Make me
careful in the performance of what service I promised thee in the extreamitie
of mine anguish. As thou have given me the fruit of my body, to the joy of my
heart; so give me the fruit of righteousness sown in peace. Iam: 3.18. verse:
17
Give me the wisdom which is from above, that is full of good works without
hypocrisy. Lord make me thy servant by grace; and make this child thy child
by adoption, and mercy. Give me comfort in his life for the sorrows which I
endured at his birth. Gal: 1.15.
Separate him from the womb, as thou did Saint Paul, that he may be a
chosen vessel of sanctification, and honor. Teach me innocence and
simplicity by the example of this infant; and make me hereafter teach him
goodness and righteousness by the power of thy grace. Make us allways
children in wickedness, 1. Cor. 14.20. 1. Pet: 2.2. Gal: 4.19.
but not in understanding; that so, as newborn babes, we may desire the
sincere milk of thy word, that we may grow thereby. Let thy son Christ be
formed in this little infant that as it has been preserved by thy power and
providence in the first birth, so it may feel thy mercy and grace in the
second. Lord give a blessing to whatsoever shall be used for the recovery of my
strength, that I may allways praise thee both in prosperity and adversity.
Give thy blessing to the means for the nourishment of this child. Give it
strength that it may live to receave the seal of thy mercy in the laver of
Baptism: and do thou be present with thy blessing when the sign shall be
administered. Lu: 2.52.
O let it live (if it be thy blessed will) and grow up in wisdom, and in
stature, and in grace both with thee, and with men; that so I may magnify thy
name for making me an instrument to propagate the number of thine elect, who
am the weakest, and the unworthiest of women. Increase thy Kingdom da^ly. Take
pity upon all that suffer afflictions, especially on those women who are in
labor of children. Give them comfort in the time of their miseries, ease from
their torments, joy in their desired issue, and thankfulness for thy
blessings. Lord grant that both I and they may sing praises to thy name for
the greatness of our deliverances, and express our thanks in our godly lives;
that when this painful life shall have an end, we may sing tryumphantly in
eternal glory, through Jesus Christ our only Lord, and Savior. Amen.

13. THE THIRTEENTH SUBJECT. Tears in the time of a general Pestilence.
The Soliloquie. Consisting of six several parts, and treating of, 1 Mourning
by example, in a public calamity. 2 Several causes of God's visitations. 3
Sin especially the cause of the Pestilence. 4 Several examples of dreadful
Pestilences. 5 God's threatening before his visitation. 6 The duty of a
Christian, decreeing both to whom, and for whom we ought to pray in the time
of Pestilence.

The first part of the Soliloquie, treating, of mourning by example, in a
public calamity.
THE EjACULATION.
Psalm. 5. verse. 1. Give ear to my words, o Lord; consider my meditation.

verse. 2. Hearken unto the voice of my cry, my king, and my God; for unto thee
will I pray.

THe heart of the wise is in the house of mourning: Eccl: 7.4.
(says Solomon) but the heart of fools is in the house of mirth. Is the heart
then, sometimes in a pilgrimage from the body? Or is the body required to visit
the sick, yea though the disease be infectious? Or are we allways, by command,
Ps: 42.3
to imitate the Prophet, whose tears were his meat day and night? The heart
indeed is often from home; and is least where it lives, most where it loves.
The sick must be visited, or else my Savior will complain as he does in the
Gospel, saying, I was sick, Mat: 25 43. Job: 2.11.
and ye visited me not. When Job's three friends heard of the evil that was
come upon him, they came every one from his own place; for they had made an
appointment together to come to mourn with him, and to comfort him. verse: 13
So they sat down with him upon the ground, 2. King. 13.14.
and mourned seven days and seven nights. When Elisha was fallen sick of his
sickness wherewith he dyed, Ioash the King of Israel came down unto him, and
wept over his face, and said, O my father, my father, the charet of Israel, and
the horsemen thereof. c: 8.29.
When wicked King Ioram went to be healed in Iezreel of the wounds which the
Syrians had given him at Ramah, Ahaziah the son of heboram King of Judah went
down to see him in Iezreel, because he was sick. Thus do I read of a holy
Patient visited by friendly mourners: a holy Prophet visited by a weeping King:
a wicked King visited by another as wicked as himself. All these were
visiters, or visited: but I do not find that the diseases were infectious.
Noe: I must therefore imitate the best of them in my charity to others; but I
may not forget charity to my self. Wilfully to run into apparent danger is
desperately to tempt the keeper of Israel. What shall I then do? The passing
bells inform mine ears of the mortality of my neighbors; and yet I cannot,
I must not visit them. What (I say) shall I do? What course shall I take?
Charity commands me, compassion hasteneth me to the dying Christians, that
by my advice, or at least by my prayers I might express my commiseration. And
yet, when I am just at my door provided, resolved, intended to go, even then
mine own health, the health of my family, and (which is greater them all
these) the fear of displeasing my gracious protector bring me back again,
and keep me at home. I would not be un-charitable; but I must not be
desperate. Well then: I am resolved what I will do. I will (with Solomon) go
to the houses of mourning, the houses of the visited; yet not in body, but in
mind, and in purse; I will pity them, and I will send relief unto them. I
dare not go in person, but I will go in affection; and for my neighbors
groaning under the evil of punishment, and for my self burdened with the
evil of sin, I will feed upon my tears day and night. I must grieve for my
self in particular; and yet I must not be so unkindly coveteous, as to keep
my tears only for my self. In public calamities those who shed noe tears
may be justly suspected to have noe bowels. I find my self not un-apt to
weep; for I am prompted to that by the weakness of my disposition. And yet I
suspect my self; I am jealous of my self that my tears do rather flow from
my fear of infection, then from a fellowfeeling of the miseries which the
infected suffer. To heighten therefore my mourning, and to justify it by my
compassion, I will propose to my self the examples of others, such as I find
recorded in the word of my God.

Consider ye, Ier: 9.17.
and call for the mourning women that they may come; and send for cunning women
that they may come: And let them make have, verse: 18
and take up a wayling for us, that our eyes may run down with tears, and
our eyelids gush out with waters: verse: 19
for a voice of wayling is heard out of Zion, How are we spoiled, etc. The
women were commanded to hear the word of the Lord; verse: 20
and their ears to receave the word of his mouth: they were to teach their
daughters wayling; and every one her neighbor lamentation: verse. 21
For death was come up into their windows, and entered into their palaces; to
cut off the children from without, and the young men from their streets.
verse. 22
Even the carkeises of men did fall as dung upon the field, and as the handful
after the harvest-man; and none did gather them. The case is now with us, as it
was then with the Jews. Alas, how are we spoiled too! How is death come up
into our windows by the infectious air! How do our children dye, and our
young men fall! Our children which know not the cause; and our young men that
trusted in the strength of their youth! O how do the carkeises of men fall as
dung upon the open field, and as the hand-full after the harvest man; and yet
there are none to gather them up! They perish without, because either there is
not room enough left with in doors for them; or not people alive to attend
them in their sickness; or not people of strength enough to un-lock the
doors; or not means for their sustenance if they enter in. Thus necessity
drives them into the fields; and there mortality seizes upon them, where noe
person is found to bury their bodies; noe bearers to carry them to the
surfeited earth; noe friends to bewail the loss of their lives; and noe
Christians to cover them from their gazing spectatours, the very fowls of the
air, and the beasts of the field. What heart would not break; what eye would
not weep; what soul would not lament for this sad visitation? Lam: 1.16.
For these things (with Jeremiah) will I weep: mine eye, mine eye shall run
down with water; because the comforter which should relieve our souls, is
far from us.

The Lord has thrown down Jerusalem (says the Prophet) and has not
pitied; Lam: 2.17.
and he has caused their enemy to rejoice over them; he has set up the
horn of their adversary. verse: 18
Their heart cried unto the Lord, O wall of the daughter of Zion, let tears
run down like a river day and night: give thy self noe rest; let not the
apples of thine eyes cease. Arise, verse: 19
cry out in the night: in the beginning of the watches power out thine heart
like water before the face of the Lord: lift up thy hands toward him, for the
life of thy young children that faint in the topp of every streate. verse: 1.
Even thus has the Lord covered us also with a cloud in his anger, as then
he did the daughter of Zion; and cast down from heaven unto the earth the
beauty of our Israel; and remembered not his foot stool in the day of his
anger. An enemy destroys, and rejoices over us: but such an enemy it is,
as neither can hear, nor will spare. The very air which was created to cool
the flames of our scorching hearts, is so poisoned with the infection, that the
more we make of it, the less we our selves are made by it: the closer we
seat it even to and in our hearts, the nearer does the infection approach our
spirits. The corrupted air shall be therefore cleansed by the thick groans
that shall fly from my heavy heart; and be purified with the thunder of my
lowdest cries. With Moab in the prophecy, Is: 15.2 verse: 3.
I will howl over Nebo, and over Medeba In the streets let every one gird
himself with sackcloth: on all their heads let there be baldness: on the
tops of our houses, and in our streets let every one howl, ^er. 48.4.
weeping abundantly; for we are destroyed; for our little ones have caused a
cry to be heard. Oh our sucklings that cry for milk from the breast, suck in
destruction when they expect their nourishment. For these things (with
Jerusalem) I will weep sore in the night (in this night of a general
affliction): Lam: 1.2.
my tears shall be on my cheeks, because among all our lovers there is none
to comfort us.

Eze: 7.16.
the Prophet told them that, They that fled away of them should escape, and
should be on the mountains like Doves of the valleys, all of them mourning,
every one for his iniquity: All hands should be feeble, verse: 17
and all knees should be weak as water: verse: 18
They should also gird themselves with sackcloth and horror should cover
them; and shame should be upon all their faces, and baldness upon their heads.
Lord, what a time of mourning should here be! What a time of horror!
Destruction is threatened; and whom destruction missed, mourning should
over-take, feebleness should follow, weakness should pursue, and horror
should cover. Oh, that very time is come now upon us: that prophecy is
fullfilled in our Israel. Here is noe sword to slay us; noe fiery engines of a
hellish invention to murder us; noe men to take us captives: but here is worse,
far worse; here is the Pestilence that walks in darkness, Ps: 91.6
and the destruction that wastes at noonday. Here are houses not inhabited;
streets not trampled; churches not frequented, sick not visited, hungry not
fed, doors not opened, bells not ceased, and graves not satisfied. Is: 24.10.
Prov^ 30.15.
Every house is shut up, that noe man may come in. The horse-leech has here
her two daughters crying give, give. Here are three things not satisfied; yea
four things that say not It is enough. The hungry cry give, and the thirsty
cry give, and the sick cry give, and the grave cries give. The hungry pine,
and therefore cry; the thirsty skorch, and therefore cry; the sick want help,
and therefore cry; but, o, the grave is daily fed, and yet it is daily hungry.
The mouth thereof is opened, and it devoureth men; and yet for all that, it
still cries for our return to the dust as we were. Eccl: 12.7.
The mountains the great persons escape not: the habitations of men are like
the wildernesses for beasts, because the inhabitants are burnt up with the
fiery Pestilence. Therefore (with the Prophet) for the mountains will I take up
a weeping, Ier: 9.10.
and wayling; and for the habitations of the wilderness a lamentation; because
they are burnt up that none can pass through them; neither can men hear the
voice of the cattle.

seek the Lord: Amos. 5.4. verse: 5.
but they on the contrary are said to have sought Bethel, and to have entered
into Gilgal, and to have passed to Beersheba: verse: 16
Therefore the Lord, the Lord of hosts, the Lord said thus: Wayling shall be in
all streets, and they shall say in all high ways, Alas, Alas: and they shall
call the husbandman to mourning, and such as are skillfull of lamentation to
wayling: verse: 17
and in all vine-yards shall be wayling, for I will pass through thee, says
the Lord. Here is again a cloud of sorrows; a thick mist of groans; verse: 18
for the day of the Lord is darkness, and not light. This cloud overcasteth
us too; this mist choaketh us; this darkness blinds us. Here is wayling in
our streets, to dim our eyes; here is the husbandman mourning, to stifle us
with sorrow; and here is the mourning of the vineyards, Ps: 104.15.
to cloud our souls. Our hearts, which should have been gladded with the
fruit of the vine, are squeezed and pressed like the bunches of grapes. Our
bellies, which should have been filled with the fruits of the earth, do cry
in their emptiness, and wayle with the husbandman. One woe courteth another:
one curse saluteth another. Our sickness is great, and yet our famine too is
great; not that the earth has forgotten to be fertile, but by reason that men
are afraid to furnish us. Pestilence consumes, and hunger cries: thus the
visited dye they know not of what; for sickness calls, and hunger calls,
and want calls, and sorrow calls: all of them join in their hideous
concord, in their horrid discord, and call for our ruin, and yell for our
destruction. That heart which bleedeth not for such un-utterable sorrow, must
needs be stone, or steel: nay worse; for stones will weep, to complain with
the clouds; and steel will drop in a time of storms. Heart, if thou art a
woman's, break; if thou art a Christian's, lament; if thou art mine, bemoane
the afflictions which dwell among my friends, Joel: 2.6.
and the blackness which the faces of my neighbors have gathered. Ps: 35.13.
I will (with David) put on sackcloth now, though for my very enemies which
are sick; and humble my soul with fasting: and I will go heavily, verse: 14
as one that mourns for his mother. With the Prophet Isaiah, Is: 16.9
I will bewail with the weeping of Iazer the vine of Shibmah: I will water
thee with my tears, o Heshbon, and Elealeh. Or with Jeremiah, Let mine eyes
run down with tears night and day, and let them not cease; Ier: 14.17.
for the virgindaughter of this people is broken with a great breach, with a
very grievous blow.

The time is come; Eze: 7.12.
the day draws near: let not the buyer rejoice, nor the seller mourn; for
wrath is come upon all the multitude thereof. verse: 27
The King shall mourn, and the Prince shall be clothed with desolation; and
the hands of the people of the land shall be troubled. O Israel, how great
were thy pangs, when thus thou were visited! O how deep are our groans too in
this day of our visitation! The Israelites are dead; their torments are
forgotten: but we live; we live dying; we live to suffer; we live to dye.
To dye, said I? O that death were sweet indeed, if it would come with a wish;
if it would haste^ it is approach: it were sweeter then the honey, Ps: 19.10.
and the honiecombe. What was formerly our dread, is now our desire. What we
posted from, we would now hasten unto, could but Death yet grow so pittiefull,
so merciful as to hear our desires. But we cannot either dye when we would,
or how we would. We may not choose either the time, or the manner of our
death. See, See, how it stare's us in the face; and looke's upon us in every
passengar that crawleth by our doors; in every coffin that is carried by our
windows. Dye we must; but of what disease? By what means? If of age, it is
welcome: if of a consumption, it is kind. But what if of the Plague? What if of
the Pestilence? Woe unto us, there is our fear; thence is our trembling. If
that arrow be shot at us, we shall have noe preacher to pray by us, or to
administer ghostly consolation unto us; noe friend to visit us; yea and, it may
be, neither physic to help us, nor meat to strengthen us, noe nor servant to
attend us. We may call, but none will dare approach to answer us: we may
weep, but none will dare come to comfort us. This, this day is come upon us.
The buyer rejoices not, fearing lest with his bargain he purchase a disease.
The seller mourns not, hoping that though he loose by his bargain, yet his
money will furnish him with things for necessity. Thus the wrath of God is
come upon us: we are cleathed with desolation. This I feel; and yet I feel
it not: I hear of it; but it comes not yet upon me: it walks by my doors;
it beckeneth to me in the streets; it knocks at my habitation; and yet, for
all this (blessed be my God) it is not yet entered. But who knows how soon
that affrighting disease may force open my door; or creep in at my window; or
peep in at a key hole; or slinke in at a crevise? The disease is general; but
my sorrows shall be therefore as general. All others shall not weep, and my
self alone rejoice. Joel. 1.9.
The meate-offering and the drinke-offering (the participation of the holy
Communion) through fear is cut off from the house of the Lord: the Priests,
the Lord's Ministers do mourn. Hos: 4.3.
The land mourns, and every one that dwells therein languisheth; with the
beasts of the field, and with the fowls of the heavens. Therefore (with Ez^) I
will go into the chamber; Ezr: 10 6.
and when I am come thither, I will eat noe bread, nor drink water; for I
will mourn, because of the transgressions of us all. Or (with Nehemiah) I will
sit down and weep, Neh: 1.4.
and mourn certain days; and fast, and pray before the God of heaven.

The Lord God of hosts did threaten to touch the land of Israel, Amos. 9.5.
and it should melt, and all that dwelled therein should mourn; and it should
rise up wholly like a flood, and be drowned as by the flood of Egypt. Thus has
he threatened us also; and has he not brought it to pass? See, Ps: 97.5
See how the land melts; yea melts like wax at the presence of the Lord;
at the presence of the God of the whole earth. Needs must the land, (the
hearts of the inhabitants of the land) melt at his presence, seeing the Apostle
styleth him a consuming fire. Heb: 12 29.
O how all do mourn that dwell in the land! The parents lament the sickness
of the child; the wife of the husband; the servant of the mistress: all
mourn, all lament. It may now be truly said that the whole land is drowned:
for, what eye is not dimmed with tears? What house is not filled with tears?
What street is not washed with tears? If he saltness of water will cause a
barrenness of the earth, what fruit can possible our land produce, which is
thus moistened, thus watered with the brine of our tears? And yet, me
think's, the earth appears as greedy as ever; for it speedily devoureth
whatsoever is sprinkeled on it by the sorrows of the inhabitants. The infected
cry, and the languishing cry: and shall not my tears much rather trickle down
my cheeks, allthough my door is not yet converted into pasture; nor my walks
overgrowne with the springing grass? O yes, much, much rather: yea and with
the more courage will I weep, by how much the more I retain my strength to
weep. I hear, Ier: 4.31.
me thinke's the voices of the visited as of a woman in travel; and their
anguish as of her that brings forth her first child, bewayling themselves,
and spreading their hands, and each of them saying, woe is me now, for my
soul is wearied because of this murdering sickness. Is: 22.4
Therefore will I take up the resolution of the Prophet Isaiah; and whosoever
shall come to divert my tears, to them I will say, Look away from me; I will
weep bitterly: labor not to comfort me. Or (with Jeremiah) my soul shall
weep in secret places, Ier: 13.17.
for their pains; and mine eye shall weep sore, and run down with tears;
because the Lord's flock is thus destroyed.

The Second part of the Soliloquie, treating of Several causes of God's
visitations.
I Mourn, and I mourn; and all out of a sense of the general sufferance: I
mourn and I mourn by president: But do I find the cause of our distresses?
The ground of our sicknesses? Pestilence is not the only arrow that is shot
from the All-mighty, when his revenge is stirred up: and yet every punishment
is termed a stroke a stripe, a plague. When the Lord intended the spoil of
the Egyptians by the children of Israel, that which in others would have been
deemed theft, or at the least a cozenage, was in the Israelites but justice,
and done in obedience to him who is Lord of all, Ex. 12.36.
when they spoiled the Egyptians of their jewels, which yet they but borrowed.
verse. 35
And yet this to the lenders is termed a plague; for the Lord said unto Moses,
Yet will I bring one plague more upon Pharaoh, c. 11.1.
and upon Egypt; afterward he will let you go hence. When the firstborne of
Egypt were decreed to be slain for the stubbornness of the King, the execution
of that decree was styled a plague: for God told the Israelites by his servant
Moses, c. 12.13.
saying, The blood shall be to you for a token upon the houses where ye are;
and when I see the blood, I will pass over you; and the plague shall not be
upon you to destroy you, when I smite the land of Egypt. When the children of
Israel had longed after the fleshpots of Egypt, and cried, and murmured
against Moses and Aaron, saying, c. 16.3.
Would to God we had dyed by the hand of the Lord in the land of Egypt, when
we sat by the fleshpots, and when we did eat bread to the full; for ye
have brought us forth into this wilderness to kill this whole assembly with
hunger: then (I find) the Lord was entreated for flesh; but that flesh proved
the destruction of the people, and that destruction is called a plague. For,
Number. 11.33.
while the Quails were yet between their teeth (says the text) year the
flesh was chewed, the wrath of the Lord was kindled against the people; and the
Lord smote the people with a very great plague. Consumption is also said to
be a plague; for so says the Prophet. Zech. 14.12.
This shall be the plague wherewith the Lord will smite all the people that
have fought against Jerusalem: Their flesh shall confume away while they stand
upon their feet; and their eyes shall consume away in their holes; and their
tongue shall consume away in their mouth. Thus every judgment is truly a
plague; and from God it comes; and upon men, weak men, mortal men and women
it comes: but it is for their sins; it is for their transgressions. Every
one groane's under the affliction; but few for the cause. We are angry with
the rod, and we are angry with the Correctour; and yet we quarrel not
with our selves for meriting such, yea more, yea greater, yea more tormenting,
more continueing punishments. I will therefore look into the sacred page yet
once again: I will look into the roll of that book, Eze: 2.9.
and (with Ezekiel) I will spread it before me, and find written therein the
Lamentations, verse: 10
and mournings and woes. I will find the punishments, and I will find out the
offenses too. I will mourn with them, with us, with every one that is visited:
and with them, and for our selves I will prye into the causes of our maladies,
seeing I know that God will not be angry without a cause. Ps: 89.30.
We do first forsake his laws, and walk not in his judgments; we first
profane his statutes, verse. 31
and break his commandments; verse. 32
before he visits our transgression with the rod, and our iniquity with
stripes.

Ier: 23.9.
and say, Mine heart within me is broken; all my bones shake: I am like a
drunken man, and like a man whom wine has overcome, because of the Lord,
because of the word of his holiness? Here I find the Prophet in a strange and
fervent passion, in a trembling exstasie: yet not too great if I consider the
cause, if I weigh the verse that immediately ensues: For the land (says he)
is full of adulterers: verse: 10.
for because of swearing (or cursing) the land mourns; the pleasant places of
the wilderness are dried up; and their course is evil, and their force is not
right. Was Jerusalem thus visited for swearing, and cursing? Was Samaria thus
burnt up with drought for adultery? Lord what then has not this land
deserved? An oath in every tongue causes a cross upon every door.
Uncleanness in every person causes the fowlest sores in every patient. The
sins are universal, the punisbment must needs therefore be as universal. The
punishment is become general; o that our sorrow would grow as general. This
disease may be cured by lotion: For my part therefore I will be the first that
shall step into Bethesda, Io: 5.2.
for I have layne the longest in my sins: long have I also waited for the
salvation of my God. I will imitate the Prophet Jeremiah, and cry out with him,
and as truly as he, Mine heart is broken.

Wayle, and to howl; to go stripped, and naked; Mic: 2.8.
to make a wayling like the Dragons, and mourning as the Owls? verse: 3.
Was it not because the Lord was comeing forth out of his place; comeing down
to tread upon the high places of the earth? Was it not because the mountains
should be verse: 4.
molten under him, and the valleys be cleft, as wax before the fire, and as
the waters that are powered down a steep place? Here was destruction for
Samaria, and ruin for Jerusalem; verse. 5.
but all this was for the transgression of Jacob, and for the sins of the
house of Israel. The graven images were the sins of the people: idolatry
incensed the wrath of the All mighty. Well might he punish, when the work of
men's hands robbed him of his honor whose worke-man-ship we are. Well might
he resolve to be known the mighty God in his revenge, whom they would not
acknowledge to be God when he forbore them. But is it not just so with us as
it was with them? verse: 5.
Is not Samaria the sin of Is not Samaria the sin of our Jacob? Are not the
high places of Judah our Jerusalem? Here is wrath, and wrath, and plague, and
plague; but is not idolatry still in our gates? The God of the Patriarch says
unto us, Genesis 35.2.
as Jacob did unto his house-hould, and to all that were with him, Put away the
strange gods that are among you. If therefore we have still a noise of the
beads; of the chaplets pretended to be consecrated at Rome: if we have
pictures worshipped; crucifixes adored; prayers not understood; and other
footesteps of the heathen remaining amongst us; I cannot choose but remember
what our incensed Creator says by his Prophet concerning the sins of the
Jews, Ier. 9.9
Shall I not visit them for these things, says the Lord? Shall not my soul be
avenged on such a nation as this? Lord where thou art not truly worshipped,
thou will be dreadfully feared. Though this sin be not general, though not
universal amongst us; is it not to be found in private? Does it not lurk in
private closetts? Is it not harbored in some secret hearts? Io: 3.30
It hates the light because it is not the truth: but yet our sins may
multiply in the dark, until they have brought us to the land of darkness. O
that (with Jacob) we would all arise, Gen: 35.3.
and go up to Bethel, and make there an alter unto our God; then we know, he
would answer us in our distress. This is our plague, this is our punishment
which now does rage amongst us: and is not that our sin? Is not that our
iniquity? What remains but that (so far as lies in me) I should strive
to appease the wrath of my God? I will therefore endeavor to blunt his arrow,
that it may stick noe more when he shoots it at us. I will pray unto him to
remove at once both the sin, and the punishment. I will do as did Micah: I
will wayle, and howl: I will wayle like the Dragons, and mourn like the Owls.

When Ezra had confessed the sin of the people, weeping, Ezra: 10.1.
and casting himself down before the house of God, there assembled unto him
out of Israel a very great congregation of men, and women, and children; and
the people wept very sore. What ayled the Priest to cast himself down; and
the people so sorely to weep? were they not come out of captivity? Were they
not busied in reedifying the house of the Lord? Were not their burnt offerings,
and their sacrifices made unto the God of Israel? What now should deject them?
What should dismay them? The Lord questioneth Cain the murderer, Gen: 4.6.
the fratricide, saying, Why is thy countenance fallen? If thou do well,
shall thou not be accepted? verse: 7.
And if thou do not well, sin lies at the door. Thus might Judah and
Benjamin be likewise examined. They had a sin that lay at the door; yea
nearer, cl^ser to them if possible might be; even in their beds, Ezr: 9.1.
in their bosoms. They had not separated themselves from the people of the
lands, and from doing according to their abominations: but they had taken of
their daughters for themselves, verse. 2.
and for their sons: yea the hand of the Princes, and rulers had been chief
in this trespass. Yet for all this, their punishment was not hitherto come
upon them to the full. They had yet but a sprinkeling of it: only some
drops: or at most but a gust, a small storm; a shewer or two of rain. When
the Lord was angry, the clouds frowned; they knitt their brows; and as it
were in the abundance of their compassion, c: 10.9.
they dissolved into tears for the sins of the people. But more vengeance
was expected; therefore the children of the captivity turned away their wives,
verse. 14
that the fierce wrath of God for this matter might be turned from them. If
such a sin as this be the cause of this our dreadful visitation, we ought
also (with them) to sit in the street of the house of God, trembling, verse. 9.
because of this matter. Whether this, or whatsoever else is the cause of this
contagion, the sin of this land; for my part I will resolve (with the same
Ezra) to sit astonished at the sins of the land; c: 9.4.
and (with the people) I will tremble at the words of the God of Israel,
because of the transgressions of the people of this land. I will not arise from
my heaviness; verse. 5. Joel. 2.13.
But I will rent my garment; or rather my heart, and not my garment; and turn
unto the Lord my God: for he is gracious, and merciful; slow to anger, and of
great kindness; and repents him of the evil. I will fall upon my knees,
Ezr. 9.5.
and spread out my hands unto the Lord my God.

her gates should lament, and mourn; and that she being desolate, Is. 3.26
should sit on the ground. Here was the punishment; a grievous punishment:
desolation by war; destruction by the sword. verse: 25
Her men should fall by the sword, and her mighty men in the war. But what
was the cause? What stirred up the All-mighty to shewer down his vengeance?
Alas, it is too easily found. The pride of the woman was the destruction of the
men. verse. 16
It was because the daughters of Zion were haughty, and walked with
stretched-out necks, and wanton eyes; walking, and mincing as they went, and
making a tinkling with their feet. We are punished; we are afflicted; not by
the sword, but (which is more dreadful) by the Pestilence. Our sufferances are
not in the same manner indeed as were theirs; and yet we deserve both the
manner, and the measure. Our sins are alike; our punishments must therefore be
expected alike; alike in the greatness, though they are not in the kind. They
seem (me think's) already to agree in part; for, besides our sicknesses,
Mat: 24 6.
we hear of wars, and rumors of wars. Yea, they come yet nearer alike: Is:
3.17
for they were threatened that the Lord should smite them with a scab on the
crown of the head of the daughters of Zion: and this very judgment appears
among us in every blaine, in every botch, in every carbuncle. Surely our sins
are as great, or greater then theirs. The pride of our sex in their dresses,
in their laces, in their jewels, in their fashions, in their gaites, in their
behaviors, in their attendants, in every thing is greater then Zion's, The
effects of pride, their lascivious embracings, their amorous ^urtings are
commoner, are frequenter then Zion's. verse. 18
Lord is it not just with thee then, to take away from us (as thou did ^om
Zion) the braverie of our tinkling ^naments, and our tyres, and our chains,
verse. 19 verse: 21 verse. 22 verse. 23
and our bracelets, and our rings, and our changeable suits of apparel, and
our man^les, and our glasses, and our fine linen, and our hoods, and our
vailes? We may most justly indeed expect a stink, verse. 24
instead of a sweet smell; and instead of a girdle a ^ent; and instead of
well-set hair, bald^esse; and instead of a stomacher, a girdle of sackcloth;
and burning, instead of beauty. For us the land mourns; for our pride he
people are humbled; for our sins the Pestilence reigns. Lord make us all,
with Zion, lament and mourn: make us fit on the ground, acknowledging thy
justice, and our sinfullnesse. Eze. 31 15.
God has come down to the grave among us, as he did at the destruction of
Assyria for the pride thereof; and caused Libanon to mourn for us; and the
trees of the field to faint for us: therefore, with Zion, I will lament, I will
mourn, I will sit on the ground.

A voice was once heard from the high places of Israel, Ier: 3.21.
weeping and supplications of the people; because they had perverted their way,
they had forgotten the Lord their God. Here was sorrow at the heart for the
sin of the soul; and yet noe destruction of the body threatened for
disobedience. Had they continued in this their repentance they might have
prevented the ensueing judgments: but intermission of sorrow proved to be the
ground of their sorrow. Hence came the^ land to be cursed with barrenness and
the Prophet to cry out, c: 12.4.
How long shall the land mourn, and the herbs of every field wither, for the
wickedness of them that dwell therein^ Here wickedness was the cause, and
barrenness^ the effect. But why should the herbs and flowers of the field
suffer for the sins of the people? Alas they grew up toward heaven in their
grateful acknowledgment that from thence they received their nourishment in
the earth. Yea so innocent they were, that when they looked about them, and saw
(as it were) the wickedness of them for whose service they were made, every
morning hung pearlie tears upon their drooping eyes: and when they saw that
men had not half so much remorse as they themselves, they sadly shrunk to bed
again in the earth. It was a curse to them to be enslaved in the service of
cursed sins: so poisonous is transgression; so mischievous is iniquity. Thus
the herbs were cursed for the sins of the Jews: but what had the Jews done
amiss, which we have not exceeded? What wickedness had they committed which
we have not surpassed? Therefore our herbs and our flowers, the beauty of our
gardens and the pride of our knotts is nipped, is withered with the poisonous
breath that arises from our infected bodies: and yet we fear that what we
dispatched the air to kill in our gardens will bring poison to us, and slay us
in our houses. Thus we suffer; for, thus have we finned. I will therefore
resolve with the Prophet David, Ps: 119 136.
that Rivers of waters shall run down mine eyes, because we have not kept
the ^aw of our God.

Shall not the land tremble for this, Amos. 8.8.
and every ^e mourn that dwells therein? Says the Prophet Amos. Tremble?
For what? Israel knew well enough; the poor were sensible enough; verse. 6.
even the poor that were bought for silver, and the needy that were sold for
a pair of shoes. Here was oppression in the streets, and crying in the
gates; verse. 5.
for the Ephah was made small, and the Shekel great; and the balances were
falsified by deceit. Noe marveile that the Psalmist concludes, Ps. 62.9.
Surely men of low degree are vanity, and men of high degree are a lie: to be
laid in the balance they are altogether lighter then vanity. It was thus
among the Israelites; and thus it is among us also. Men of low degree are
vanity; vanity in the account, and contempt of superiors? vanity in the
cruelty of superiors. Men of high degree, the richest traders, the merchants
of corn and the other fruits of the earth are a lie: their measures are false,
the^ weights are false: yea they buy by one, and they sell by another. They
devour their brethren, and yet they do it by a^ show of Justice; for the
balances they haw corrupted, and the weights they have pared insomuch as men
err most, they are most deceaved when they think themselves most righted,
best dealt with. This injustie commands us justly to mourn: so the belly
cries, and the back cries. The hungry cry when they buy of the rich, and are
cozened by the rich: when they suffer in the cozenage, and suffer likewise in
the public, in the general punishment for the cozenage. For this our land
mourns: for this our people are visited, our houses are shut up, our streets
are not frequented, ou^ markets not filled; and yet the hungry lament, and the
thirsty do mourn. The poor can neither buy for their money; not be employed
in their willing labors to earne them money; Is. 59.11.
nor live without money. We roar all like Bears, and mourn sore like Doves.
We look for judgment, but there is none: for salvatien, but it is far from
us. Therefore with the oppressed I will cry, and with the visited also I will
cry. I will cry with the oppressed for right; and I will cry with ^e visited
for health. How long, Lord, ^ow long will thou punish us? c. 44.22.
O remove ^ur sins like a cloud: blott out, as a thick cloud, our
transgressions, and as a cloud our sins: return unto us, for thou have
redeemed us.


THe diseased (ignorant of the kind of their maladies) cause the Physician
(...) consult with their pulses; to examine their ^rine; and by symptoms to
find out the ^ause of their disturbance. So should the sick soul also; or
else the ignorance of the sin may hinder the cure. General complaints have
been made by men groaning under the burdens of several visitations: but does
the Pestilance come by the same rules, and arise from the same causes?
Surfeits, and Consumptions, and Fevers, and Palsies, and Plurisies, and other
such sicknesses may have their causes in nature, and their remedies oftentimes
by physic: but neither is the cause of the Pestilence so clear in nature; nor
is the cure thereof so easy by physic. Or if it be; yet is this disease more
infectious, more mortal, and therefore more dreadful then any of the rest. It
shall therefore be my first care to find out the cause in my soul, before I
look upon the effects thereof in the bodies of sinful mortals. I will
examine our times by those of our ancestors; and see whether this general
contagion does not rather proceed from the malice of the soul, then from
the air diet, or whatsoever else the Physicians conjecture at.

The men which Moses had sent to spy out the land of Canaan returned, 1. Number:
14.36.
and made all the congregation to murmur against Moses, by bringing up a
slander upon that land of promise: and those very men that did bring up that
evil report upon the land, verse. 37
dyed of the plague before the Lord. What? Of the plague? Of the Pestilence?
There were but ten of those spies, and those ten only dyed. We have the
Pestilence too; but it contenteth not it self with ten, and ten, and ten, and
ten; but hundreds dye; hundreds are visited; thousands complain; every one
fears. But was their disease the same as ours? Was not theirs an inflammation
of their tongues, and worms issueing out of them, as a just recompense^,
because with their tongues they had lied? Or was it not some other
extraordinary plague from the hand of God? Or was it not that Pestilence which
was threatened when the Lord said unto Moses, verse. 11
How long will this people provoke me; and how long will it be ere they
believe me, for all the signs which I have showed among them? verse. 12
I will smite them with the Pestilence, and disinherit them; and will make of
thee a greater nation, and mightier then they? Whatsoever their disease was,
though I cannot determine it; yet will I consider the cause thereof. The cause
was a sin, a grievous sin; a lie: and the effect of this was a sin, a
grievous sin; it was murmuring. O thus have we also added sins unto
sins. We also lie; we lie grievously, desperately, impudently. Like unto
Job's friends, we are forgers of lies; Job. 13.4. Ps. 40.4 Ps. 58.3 Ps. 62.4
Eze. 24 12. Hos. 10 13.
we turn aside to lies: we go astray so soon as we be borne, and speak
lies: we delight in lies: and we have wearied our selves with lies: justly
therefore now do we eat the fruit of lies. And yet, not contented with this,
we murmur too. Against our superiors we murmur, for not governing us
according to our licentious, and sinful desires: against the rich we murmur,
because we floate not in their plenty: yea even against God himself we
murmur, because he grants not our sinful desires. Thus in every thought,
and in every word we either find a sin, or make a sin. For this our lying,
for this our murmuring we are now visited; we are now stricken; we are (as
those spies were) destroyed of the destroyer. 1. Cor. 10.10.


The rebellious Israelites were threatened by Moses that Every sickness, 2.
Deuteronomy. 28.61.
every plague which was not written in the book of the law, them should the
Lord bring upon them, until they were destroyed: verse 62
And they should be left few in number, whereas they were as the stars of
heaven for multitude. These were the menaces, these were the threats to the
children of Israel: but among all these sicknesses, where is that which
reigns among us? Has God prepared a new punishment for us, such as the
Israelites never suffered, nor the law ever mentioned, nor skill ever cured?
Doubtless thus God could afflict us; but he chooses rather to punish us as
he did others, that so we might find out the cause as others have done. He
was pleased to tell the Israelites the cause of their plague which he would
send upon them; verse. 62
even Because they would not obey the voice of the Lord their God. Just thus
he punishes us as he punished them; even until we are almost quite
destroyed: and he tells us our sin, our offense too, by his word, by his
ministers, by our own consciences, even, that we refuse to obey the voice of
the Lord. Just therefore, most just it is, that seeing we have, we do, we
will thus sin; even thus, yea thus severely likewise we should be punished.
Yea, we deserve it in a far greater manner; in a sarre greater measure. He
who threatened those that would walk contrary unto him, and would not hearken
unto him, Lev: 26 21.
that he would bring seven times more plagues upon them, according to their
sins: He who by Moses threatened them that If they would not observe to do
all the words of that law which are written in that book, Deuteronomy: 28.58.
that they might fear this glorious name, The Lord thy God: verse. 59
Then the Lord should make their plagues wonderful, and the plagues of their
seed; even great plagues, and of long continuance: and sore sicknesses, and
of long continuance: The selfsame God has found us walking contrary unto
him; and therefore has brought on us seven times more plagues then formerly.
He sees that we fear not this glorious name The Lord our God; therefore has
he sent us great plagues, and of long continuance; and sore sickness, and of
long continuance.

Thus I sit, and muse, and consider of the sickness. I hear the bells
tolling; even those bells which were wont to invite us to the temple, that we
might know our sins at the mouth of the preacher, and pray for remission of
our sins by the help of the preacher; the very selfsame bells serve now to
tell me that one man lies languishing, and desires my prayers; another man
is departed, and wants nothing but a funeral; a third man is to be buried,
but a neighbourly, and friendly company is wanting. Every stroke of a bell
(me think's) hitteth me at the heart, and bids me to prepare for my last
farewell. Every toul awakeneth my conscience; and bids me remember what my
sins have merited. Thus mine ears receave a sound; and thus my trembling
heart feels a throb, a heating, a panting for my particular sins which have
been some cause of this general sickness.

Moses went unto the Lord, 3. Ex: 32.31.
and said, Oh this people have sinned a great sin, and have made them Gods
of gold! But what followed? The Lord plagued the people, verse: 35
because they worshipped the Calse which Aaron had made. There was the sin;
and there was the punishment. But was that plague the same as this which now
does rave, and rage amongst us? Surely our sins are the same as were theirs;
for we dig the entrails of our mother earth, and (like the Augures, the
Soothsayers, though they said noe sooth, noe truth at all) we conjecture,
we divine by those entrails; yea and we decree him who is rich, to be a good
man, a fufficient man, an honest man, and what not? We vallew the man for the
gold; we worship him for it; we honor him for it. And is not this to sin
with the Israelites? We do very little differ from those idolaters; even
nothing at all. They made them Gods of gold, and we make gold our God. Justly
therefore are we thus punished by the true God, because we honor that which
is noe God. The Israelites had this very kind, and sort of plague; such a very
pestilence as ours; and for just such a sin as this of ours. Though Moses
prayed for them; yea though he desired to be blotted out of the book of God,
verse: 32
rather then they should not be forgiven; yet God decreed saying, verse: 33
Whosoever has sinned against me, him will I blott out of my book. Whosoever
has sinned against him? If he should deal so with us, who should people the
land? Who should inhabit our dwellings? Who should enjoy our treasures? He
has begun blotting indeed already. His ink is found in the blackness of
every blaine; in the blewnesse of every token; in the redness of every crossed
door. But will this blotting always continue? Will he not stay his hand?
Will his wrath burn like fire for ever? Ps: 141.7.
Our bones lie scattered at the graves mouth, as when one cutteth, and cleaves
wood upon the earth. verse: 8.
But mine eyes are unto thee, o God, the Lord: in thee is my trust. Either
blott not at all, or only blott out our offenses. Hide thy face from our
sins, and blott out all our iniquities. Say unto every one of us as thou
did unto Jacob by the mouth of thy Prophet; I, Is: 43.25.
even I am he that blotteth out thy transgressions, for mine own name's sake;
and will not remember thy sins.

The Fourth part of the Soliloquie, consisting, of Several examples of
dreadful Pestilences.
LOrd what a hideous dinne is this in mine ears! There was a groan able to
have shaken even the earth it self, had it been imprisoned in the deepest
bowels thereof. What, another? Hark! There Is weeping too. Oh this is the
sad, and wearisome life of us poor sinners, who are caged, and miewed up in
our infected cities, and towns, and villages. The diseased groan through the
extreamitie of their pains; and for want of comforts both of body, and soul.
The sound are weeping for the miseries of the sick; and long for the
deliverance even of their whole familes from the burden of the flesh. Some
habitations are made both hospitalls, and charnell houses, where many a one
lies sick; and for want of help, they sicken without hope, they dye without
comfort, and they consume without interment. Sometimes again the mother, who
dandled her infant in her clasping arms, is enforced in those arms to carry
it to the grave. Sometimes the husband, who dearly affected the wife of his
bosom, is enforced to make her the burden of his shoulders; and to bear her
dead corpse to the devouring earth, for want of friends, and neighbors to ease
him of the burden. Yea, sometimes the children are enforced to assist their
father, in the carriage of their mother to her longest home. O horror, horror,
horror! Can pity find noe entrance at the hearts of strangers? Can
compassionfind noe harbor in the bowels of neighbors? Will none perform
this act of piety to key-cold woman to the carkeise of a woman, but only her
husband, the husband of her affection; and her children, the labor and the
fruit of her womb? O how diverse in the world would stand amazed at the sight,
and hardly determine whether the dropps which fall from the faces of the
bearers be the sweat of their brows, or the tears of their eyes. Oh what
adreadfull time is this! Did ever any age produce a parallel to this severe
contagion? Was it ever known that a Pestilence was so general, and so
malignant? Did ever any people drink so deep of the cup of sorrow,
astonishment, Eze: 23 33. verse: 4.
and desolation as we do? Was ever Samaria, or Aholah, or Aholibah, or
Babylon, or Jerusalem; Ier: 25.20.
was ever the king of the land of the Philistines, or Askelon, or Azzah, or
Ekron, verse: 21
or Ashdod; was ever Edom, or Moab, or Ammon, or Tyrus, or Zidon; verse: 22
was ever Dedan, or Tema, verse: 23
or any other place so drunk with the cup of fury from the Lords hands, as
we are? Hos: 4.18.
Our drink was formerly sour with our whoredoms with our abominations: now
therefore we have waters of gall to drink; Ier: 8.14. c: 23.15. c: 25.15. Eze:
39 17. verse: 18 verse: 19 Lam: 1.12.
we are fed with wormwood; and our cup is a cup of fury, of trembling, and
of astonishment. O the plague, the plague it is that eats our flesh, and
drinks our blood: it eats the flesh of the mighty, and drinks the blood
of Princes; it drinks even until it is drunken with our blood. Was there
ever any sorrow like unto our sorrow where with the Lord does afflict us in
this day of his fierce wrath?

But why do I thus cry out? Why complain I so mournefully, as if our
afflictions exceeded all that ever were sent upon the children of men? If I
consider our estate by it self, I cannot choose indeed but conclude it
miserable: but if I weigh it with the Pestilences of former ages, it will not
perhapps appear a burden so un-supportable. Comparisons may peradventure ease
my griese, and lessen my torments: therefore (with David) I will remember the
days of old; I will meditate on all the works of God. Ps: 143 5.
It may be that Solomon may advise me, and comfort me too, where he thus
counsels, Eccl: 7.10.
Say not in thine heart, What is the cause that the former days were better
then these? For thou do not enquire wisely concerning this. I will therefore
consider the days of old, Ps: 77.5
and the years of ancient times. Number: 16.41.


The children of Israel murmured against Moses and Aaron about the destruction
of Korah, Dathan, Abiram, and their accomplices, saying, Ye have killed the
people of the Lord: verse: 46
and presently there was wrath gone out from the Lord, the plague was begun.
verse: 49
So they that dyed of the plague were fourteen thousand and seven hundred,
and all in a day; beside them that dyed about the matter of Korah.

Israel abode at Shittim, the people committed whoredom with the daughters of
Moab: and, Number: 25.1. verse: 3. Ps: 106 28. verse: 29
not contented with this high offense, they also joined themselves unto
Baal-Peor, and did eat the sacrifices of the dead. Thus they provoked the Lord
to anger with their inventions; and the plague brake in upon them: Number: 25.9.
and those that dyed in the plague were twenty and four thousand. Their sin
was double; it was whoredom both carnal, and spiritual: their punishment was
therefore almost double to that which was sent for murmuring.

2. Sa^ 24.3.
Now the Lord thy God add unto the people (how many soever they be) an hundred
fold; and that the eyes of my Lord the King may see it: but why does my Lord
the King delight in this thing? verse. 4.
Notwithstanding the King's word prevailed against Ioab, and against the
Captains of the boast: and Ioab, and the Captains of the host went out from
the presence of the King to number the people of Israel. But what was the event
thereof? verse: 15
The Lord sent a Pestilence upon Israel from the morning even to the time
appointed: and there dyed of the people from Dan even to Beersheba seaventy
thousand men; and all of them in the space of but three days. verse: 13
Here was yet a greater number then before; and yet all of them fell for the
sin of one only man: but this one man was a King; and for his eminent
offense five times as many were slain, as when the multitude of people joined
in a murmuring. He who by the people was acknowledged worth ten thousand of
them, c: 18.3.
now for his sin became the destroyer of seven times as many of them as he
was vallued at by them: so great was the anger of the Lord, for a sin so
great, and committed by a person so great, so eminent.

Jerusalem by the mouth of his Prophet, that he would make that city
desolate, Ier: 19.8.
and an hissing: every one that passed thereby should be astonished, and hiss,
c: 49.17.
because of the plagues thereof. The same God threatened Edom also by the same
Prophet, saying, Edom shall be a desolation: every one that goes by shall be
astonished, and shall hiss at the plagues thereof. The same God again
threatened Babylon by the same Prophet, saying, c: 50.13.
Because of the word of the Lord, it shall not be inhabited, but it shall be
wholly desolate: Every one that goes by Babylon shall be astonished, and hiss
at her plagues.

Thus I remember thy judgments of old, o Lord, Ps. 119 52.
and receave comfort. Comfesse I must indeed that we have sinned with our
fathers, 2. Chr: 6.37.
we have done amiss, and dealt wickedly: but are our punishments as great as
our fathers were? Fourteen thousand and seven hundred of them fell at one
time: twenty and four thousand at another time: threescore and ten thousand
at a third time. Lord, what mighty numbers were here! and yet we fear when
one dies; we tremble when ten; we run when twenty; we are dismayed when
an hundred; we are hopeless, heartlesse, even almost quite dead already
when a thousand depart. But why should not we expect as great plagues as were
sent upon any of our ancestors, seeing, that our sins are not less either
in number, or weight? Wherein are we better then Jerusalem, or Edom, or
Babylon, that we are not yet as desolate as were they? That every one that
passes by is not astonished, nor hisseth at us, as they did at them? He who
visited them does visit us: Ps: 89.32.
he visits our offenses with his rod, and our sins with his scourges. Yet
he visits us not so sorely as he did the Israelites, when fowreteene
thousand and seven hundred of them dyed; or not so severely as when twenty
and four thousand of them were swept away: or not so grie. vously as when
threescore and ten thousand of them were destroyed; or not so terribly as
Jerusalem, Edom, and Babylon; for we are not quite desolate: or not so
furiously as Nineveh, to whom God spoke by his Prophet saying, Nah: 3.19.
There is noe healing of thy bruise; thy wound is grievous: all that hear the
brute of thee shall clapp the hands over thee: Or howsoever not so remedilesly
as the army of Pharaoh at Euphrates, whom the Lord mocketh by the mouth of his
Prophet, saying, Ier: 46.11.
Go up unto Gilead, and take balm, o virgin, the daughter of Egypt: In vain
shall thou use any medicines, for thou shall not be cured. Eze: 12 18.
This, o this makes me to eat my bread with quaking, and to drink my water
with trembling and carefullnesse, for fear lest our sinne-revenging God should
punish us as he has done them. O what mercies does he not yet offer unto
us? What kindness does he not yet afford us? To our Physicians he gives
knowledge: to our medicines he gives virtue. The herbs of the fields, and the
fruits of the trees, and the flesh of the beasts do yet offer themselves for
our cure, and our sustenance. O that we had but so much happiness, as to know
the misery which is due to our offenses! O that we had but so much mercy from
God, as to know his mercy in his gentle visitation! For this our misery will I
groan; for these our sins I will lament; for the mercy of my God I will
pray, and I will cry, Hear, Ps: 30.10. Ps: 60.11.
o Lord, and have mercy upon us: Lord be thou our helper. O be thou our help
in trouble, for vain is the help of man.


IT is a weakness, it is a fondness, it is a madness in people not to
believe the sure effects of certain causes, before they become obvious to
their senses. In the course of nature we are apt to believe what we dare not
try. Who will put his finger into the fire to try if it will burn? Who will
cast himself into the water to try whether it will drown him? Yet in things
divine we are too incredulous; too full of un-beliefe. I find that my God has
stricken diverse with plagues for the sins which they have committed: But I
likewise find that he has threatened diverse before he visited them, that so
by their amendment they might prevent those judgments which otherwise would
ensue. It is my best way to find out the crying sins of the land, by
observing the punishments which are sent us for them: but I must not forget
either the patience of our God, or the obstinacy of men; the long-suffering of
our Creator, or the impenitencie of his creatures. Sure I am that the Lord did
allways call to repentance before he punished offenders: he has ever wooed
transgressors both by promises, and by threatenings before he ever made them
sick in smiting them for their transgressions. Mic: 6.13.


The God of the Hebrews has met with us: Ex: 5.3
let us go, we pray thee, three days journie into the desert, and sacrifice
to the Lord our God, lest he fall upon us with the Pestilence, or with the
sword. Lord, how meek Moses begged for the people! yea and in the name of God
too; and for an act of religion too; and for fear of judgments too: yea and
those judgments not small, or trivial; for they should be either the
Pestilence, or the sword; yea and he pretends that those judgments should
fall upon the Israelites, the people of God, if they neglect their sacrifices;
he says not, upon the Egyptians; he says not, upon the King: And yet, for
all this, the King yielded not; the Israelites sacrificed not; and therefore the
plagues, the vengeance came upon the heads of their oppressors.

were to be his purchase; Eze: 38.11.
the un-walled villages his pray; all that dwelled without walls, and had
neither bars, nor gates should be made desolate by him. Thus the people of
God were to suffer for the sins committed against their God. But was the
enemy to escape, by whom the people should be corrected? Was Gog to be
enriched, and to enjoy the spoil? Nothing less. The very instrument of
revenge was not to be freed from the wrath of the revenger; nor the executioner
to be accounted innocent, though he punished the guilty. verse. 22
I will plead against him with pestilence (says the Lord, and with blood. I
will rain upon him, and upon his bands, and upon the many people that are with
him, an overflowing rain, and great hailestones, fire, and brimstone. Thus
the Israelites offended, and were threatened with the armies of Gog. Gog
offended, in that he knew not his maker; in that he looked only to his
advantage and spoils, whilst yet he executed the vengeance of God: he is
therefore threatened; he shall therefore be consumed. When he should have
revenged God upon the rebellious people, then God himself would be revenged
upon him with judgments from heaven.

him, Eze: 6.11.
Smite with thine hand, and stamp with thy foot, and say, Alas for all the
evil abominations of the house of Israel; for they shall fall by the sword, by
the famine, and by the pestilence. verse: 12
He that is far off shall dye of the pestilence; and he that is near shall
fall by the sword; and he that remains, and is besieged shall dye by the
famine: thus will I accomplish my fury upon them. Here is warning given before
the blow be stricken; there is the sword already half out; here is the famine
already in a due preparation; here is an Angel ready to disperse the
pestilence: but, before execution here is notice given; before the punishment
here is a threatening sent. Even thus also has our good God dealt with us:
thus has he warned us. Eze: 33 11.
He who delights not in the death of a sinner, does never strike before
notice given; for he had rather that our repentance should quiver his arrows,
then that by our sins he should be enforced to hit us at the heart.

I will smite the inhabitants of this city (says God by Jeremiah concerning
Jerusalem) both man, Ier: 21.6.
and beast: they shall dye of a great Pestilence. Lo here is still the future
tense, I will; not I do. God delights not in the execution of his wrath; but
yet his I will is as sure as his I do. Thus he has formerly threatened us
with his I will; I confess indeed he has: and yet we would not believe
what was to come; and only because we found it not instantly present. Hence
it is that now our people cry; now our beasts do roar: and it is but just
that men and women should be ranked in the order with beasts, seeing that our
sins have discovered us to be more stupid then them. Yet the beasts perish,
though they could not sin; and we perish because we can do noe-thing but
sin. So the servant suffers for the offenses of the master: so the beasts
are punished for the sins of the owners. The Pestilence puts noe
distinction between them both, allthough the one could not, the other would
not avoyde the punishment.

Ex: 9.15.
and the Egyptians Now I will stretch out mine hand, that I may smite thee and
thy people with Pestilence; and thou shall be cut off from the earth. Take
heed Pharaoh: he is true who threatens: and allthough he says I will, yet
he says also now I will. He is ready for thee, allthough thy heart be not
ready for him: he is just now prepared to punish, if thou be not just now
prepared to obey. I will bring a sword upon you, Lev: 26 25.
that shall avenge the quarrel of my covenant: and when ye are gathered
together in your cities, I will send the Pestilence among you; and ye shall
be delivered into the hand of your enemies, says the Lord to the Israelites.
And again: Deuteronomy: 28.21.
The Lord shall make the Pestilence to cleave to thee, until he have consumed
thee from offe the land whither thou go to possess it. Yea, and yet once
again: The Lord said unto Moses, Number: 14.11.
How long will this people provoke me? And how long will it be ere they
believe me, for all the signs that I have showed among them? verse: 12
I will smite them with the pestilence, and disinherit them, and will make of
thee a mightier nation then they. O the fathomlesse treasure of the bounty of
my God! Rom: 2 4.
O the riches of his goodness, and patience, and long suffering, leading us to
repentance! What were the Israelites, that he should not plague them? Why not
presently? The wages is due so soon as the service is done; and the punishment
is as due, so soon as the offense is committed: and yet, allthough God be
forward in the former, he is slow to the latter: allthough he delight in the
former, yet is he hardly drawn to the latter. Me think's when I consider the
Israelites, I wonder at their rebellions: and yet, me think's, when I consider
our selves, I wonder much more. Is: 5.1.
What could have been done more to this vineyard of God, that he has not
done unto us? verse: 2.
He has senced us, and gathered out the stones from us, and planted us with
the choycest vine, and built a tower in the midst of us, and also made a
wine press in this his vineyard, and yet for all this, when he looked that
we should bring forth grapes, behold wild grapes. Oh how my heart pants
within me, and my whole self is in a trembling fear, when I consider his
mercies, and our rebellions! Dan: 5.5.
O me think's I see a handwriting against us almost upon every door, every
inhabitant, written as it were, with the fingers of a man's hand (as once
Be^shazzar saw upon the plaster of the wall); which makes my countenance
change, verse: 6.
and my thoughts be troubled, so that the joints of my loins be loosed, and my
knees smite one against another: and I cry for mercy, for I have offended; and
I knock for compassion, for I have transgressed. God did threaten Israel with a
pestilence when they should be gathered together in their cities; with a
Pestilence that should consume them from off the land; with a Pestilence that
should dis-inherit them: and all this to avenge the quarrel of his covenant,
because they still provoked him; because they would not believe him, for all
the signs that he had showed among them. But where in had Israel offended? In
what manner? In what measure, which this land has not exceeded? And yet, o how
unwillingly does the All-mighty punish us! O how slowly! O how gently! Matt:
11.12.
The kingdom of heaven suffers violence, says my Jesus. Violence indeed,
by our daring sins, for we draw the revenger's sword for him: we bend his
bow for him, Ps. 7.12
and make it ready: we also prepare for him the instruments of death, verse.
13 Ps. 64.3
because we whett our tongues like swords, and bend our bows to shoot our
arrows, even bitter words, verse. 4.
that we may shoot in secret at the perfect: suddenly do we shoot at him,
and fear not. And what now can we expect but judgments, seeing that we will
not offer the just, and rightful violence to the Kingdom of heaven, even the
violence of our prayers; the violence of our tears; the violence of sobbs, and
sighs; and groans in our spiritual combats; and conflicts? What can we
expect but vengeance? And what do we meet with, but destruction? He has
threatened, and threatened, again, and again; and yet we have resisted, and
resisted, again, and again too. Is: 5.7.
When he looked for righteousness, behold oppression: justly therefore, now
we look for mercy, behold a cry. A cry in the beds of the languishing; a cry
in the chambers of the infected, and pined prisoners; a cry of the healthful
for fear of infection; a cry of parents for their tender children; a cry of
children for their dying parents. Brother cries for brother; sister for
sister: all cry for help; Ps. 102 1.
all cry for mercy. O Lord hear our prayers, and let our cries come unto thee.

The Sixth part of the Soliloquie, treating of the duty of a Christian;
decreeing both to whom, and for whom we ought to pray in the time of
Pestilence.
I Weep and weep, and sigh and sigh, and pray and pray: but why do I thus
weep, and sigh, and pray? If for my self, it is a debt which is challenged
even by nature it self, so that I may have any hope by these means either to
prevent, or to cure the sickness. If for others, it is charity; it is a
religious duty. Thus we are commanded by the Apostle; Bear ye one another
burdens, Gal. 6.2
and so fulfill the law of Christ. And again by the same Apostle I am
commanded to weep with them that weep. Romans 12.15.
But must my tears be general? Must my prayers be universal? For all? For
the wicked as well as the godly? There was a time when the Prophet Jeremiah
might not pray for Judah. The Lord said unto him, Pray not for this people for
their good: Ier. 14.11. verse. 12
When they fast I will not hear their cry; and when they offer
burnt-offerings, and oblations, I will not accept them; but I will consume them
by the sword, and by the famine, and by the Pestilence. There was a time too
when the Lord said concerning the sons, c. 16.3
and concerning the daughters that were borne among the Jews, and concerning
their mothers that bare them, and concerning their fathers that begat them:
verse: 4.
They shall dye of grievous deaths; they shall not be lamented; neither shall
they be buried; but they shall be as dung upon the face of the earth; and they
shall be consumed by the sword, and by the famine; and their carkeises shall be
meat for the foul of heaven, and for the beasts of the earth. verse. 5.
For thus says the Lord, Enter not into the house of mourning; neither go to
lament, nor bemoane them; for I have taken away my peace from this people,
says the Lord; even loving kindness, and mercies. verse. 6.
Both the great and the small shall dye in this land: they shall not be buried,
neither shall men lament for them, nor cut themselves, nor make themselves
bald for them. And there was a time also when the eyes of Iehojakim the son
of Josiah King of Judah; c: 22.17.
and his heart were not but for coveteousnesse, and for to shed innocent blood,
and for oppression, and for violence to do it. verse. 18
Therefore thus said the Lord concerning him, They shall not lament for him,
saying, Ah my brother, or Ah sister: they shall not lament for him saying, Ah
Lord, or Ah his glory. verse. 19
He shall be buried with the burial of an Ass, drawn, and cast out beyond
the gates of Jerusalem. Thus it was with them; but must it therefore be thus
with those which dye of the sickness; of the Pestilence? With all? This were a
dreadful sentence indeed, To dye, and not to be pittyed: to dye of the
plague, and before death not to be prayed for. Who knows indeed, but that
some such as those men of Judah, may be among us? Who knows but that some
Iehojakims may be among the visited? What then? Shall I therefore pray for none?
Yea shall I not pray for them? God forbid. The less they pray for themselves,
the more will I pray for them. The less they know God, the more will I pray
that they may know him. The sicker they are in body, the more need they have
of comfort in mind. What though they in part may be a cause of this mortality?
What though their wickednesses have helped to bring this contagion? If they are
enemies to me in particular, I will forgive them: though they are God's, I
will pray for them; even that he in his good time would be pleased to call
them home both to the knowledge, and the practice of his truth. David I am sure
did pray for, and pity his enemies; for so he professes saying, Ps: 35.13.
As for me, when they were sick, my clothing was sackcloth: I humbled my
soul with fasting. Lu: 19.41.
And thus did my Redeemer too for Jerusalem: for, When he was come near to
the city, he beheld it; yea he wept over it, verse. 42
saying, If thou had known, even thou, at least in this thy day, the things
which belong unto thy peace! But now are they hid from thine eyes. Shall David
weep then for his enemies? Shall my Jesus weep for his enemies, for the
enemies of his father, Ioh: 20 17.
and my father, of his God, and my God; and shall not I weep for those who are
in misery, and distress? My savior knew who were elected, and who were
reprobates; and yet he wept over the whole city. I dare not pry into those
secret counsels of my God, nor can I know all those whom he has ordained for
heaven othell: shall not I then weep for them all in general in this general
calamity? Yes, I will keep my turn: I will sing my part in this doleful
consort. Surely if my God should forbid me praying for them; even the very
prohibition might peradventure encourage me to perform it, he knows that
we are apt to do whatsoever he forbids. O my God either take away my
readiness, and aptness to contradict thee; or else forbid me nothing but
what thou would have me to perform. But why should I pray for those, who
(though they are visited) refuse to repent? Shall I hope to alter the eternal
decree of him with whom is noe variableness, Iam. 1.17.
neither shadow of change? What if he has reserved them for vengeance? Can I,
by my prayers, snatch them out of the fire? If they are sick, peradventure I
cannot cure them. If they are not yet sick, I cannot preserve them. O these
churlish, inhumane, un-christian, uncharitable thoughts! God therefore sends
them this affliction, that they may repent: and that they may rather prevent,
then he exercise his revenge. Seeing therefore that I know not the hearts of
any, I will pity all: and since by my prayers I cannot prevail for them to
whom is reserved the blackness of darkness for ever; I will grieve, Iud: 13.
that Man is become so wicked, Rom: 2 5.
as to treasure up unto himself such wrath against the day of wrath. Feign
would my God have conquered the stubbornness of stiff-necked Israel with the
pleasant allurements of his heavenly blessings: yet they would not yield, they
would not relent. Then he threatened them: yet they would not yield. Then he
punished them: and yet they would not turn: which made him cry out by his
Prophet. Amos. 4.10.
I have sent among you the Pestilence after the manner of Egypt; yet have ye
not returned unto me, says the Lord. Surely the Lord is very angry with such
as will not tremble at his judgments; which made him threaten so by Ezekiel,
saying, If I send a Pestilence into that land, Eze: 14 19.
and power out my fury upon it in blood, to cut off from it man and beast:
Though Noah, Daniel, verse. 20
and Ioh were in it, as I live says the Lord God they shall deliver neither
son nor daughter: they shall deliver but their own souls by their
righteousness. What comfort then can I receave or give, when I mourn for the
comfortless? What hope have I to speed, when these worthies should be denied,
if they were here to intercede for them by their earnest supplications? Sure I
am that I am not so good as any of those three: Not as the worst. Not as Noah
though he had been drunk. Gen: 9.21.
Not as Job, though Eliphaz taxed him with impatience, when as he justified
him self, and seemed to tax even God himself with injustice, Job: 16.15.
saying, I have sewed sackcloth upon my skin, and defiled my horn in the
dust. My face is foul with weeping; verse: 16
and on mine eyelids is the shadow of death. verse: 17
Not for any injustice in my hands: also my prayer is pure. Noe, Noe: far
short come I of either, of any of them: poor I: a poor, weak sinful woman;
even as sinful as the worst; as wicked as the worst. And (now I begin better
to bethink my self by thinking worse of my felfe) what are those which I
questioned whether I might pray for them, or not? Are they sinners? So am I.
Are they grievous sinners? So am I. Surely I do not know enough of my self,
if I do not know my self the worst, the vilest, the chiefest of sinners. It
is then but justice that I should pray for the worst, since I my self either
am, or might have been worse then them. My prayers shall be general, for all;
hoping that God may be pleased to have mercy on all. But if any among them be
certainly reprobates though I know it not, yet, I will pray that they may be
taken from the number of the faithful, that so they may neither seduce by
their temptations, nor offend by their examples, nor dishonor my good God any
longer by their crying, and multiplying abominations. Yet must I howsoever be
charitable in my devotions; and pray for others, as well as for my self.

But all this while (since my thoughts have been fixed upon those that are
visited, and I am certainly resolved for whom I will pray) let me be sure that
I direct my prayers aright, or else my devotion may be but blindness, and my
religion, superstition. To him without doubt, and to him alone must I tender my
petitions, from whom, yea from whom alone this sickness is sent upon this
sinful land. And who is he which visits the earth, but only the great
Creator of heaven, and earth? The very Philistines could acknowledge this, 1.
Sam: 4.5.
when the Arc of the covenant of the Lord came into the camp, and all Israel
showted with a great showte, so that the earth rang again. They then began
to be afraid, for they said, God is come into the camp. verse: 7.
And they said, Woe unto us, for there has not been such a thing heretofore:
verse: 8.
Woe unto us; who shall deliver us out of the hands of their mighty Gods? These
are the Gods that smote the Egyptians with all the plagues in the willdernesse.
Thus even by the testimony of the uncircumcised my God is determined to be the
sin-revenging God, who punishes offenders with these plagues and Pestilences.
But shall I only depend upon their testimonies who knew not God, for my
assurance that this vengeance comes from God? Noe: I will look a little
farther, and find David the good Prophet acknowledging it in his Psalms, Ps:
78.50.
and saying, He made a way to his anger; he spared not their soul from
death; but gave their life over to the Pestilence. This the patient Job
confessed, Job. 5.17.
saying, Behold happy is the man whom God corrects: therefore despise not
thou the chastening of the Allmighty: For he makes sore, verse: 18
and binds up; he wounds, and his hands make whole. This the holy Prophet
Hosea proclaimed, Hos: 6.1.
and said, Come and let us return unto the Lord; for he has torn, and he
will heal us: he has smitten, and he will bind us up. This was the song of
devout Hannah: 1. Sam. 2.6.
The Lord kills, and makes alive; he brings down to the grave, and
brings up. Deuteronomy: 32.39.
Yea and this God himself does publish to the whole world, and says, See now
that I even I am he, and there is noe God with me. I kill, and I make alive:
I wound, and I heal: neither is there any that can deliver out of mine hand.
It is clear then, it is most apparent that in this general sickness I must
of necessity acknowledge the finger of God. There was once a time when he
himself proclaimed, saying, Is: 65.1
I am sought of them that asked not for me: I am found of them that fought me
not. I said, Behold me, verse: 2.
behold me unto a nation that was not called by my name. I have spread out my
hands all the day unto a rebellious people. And surely that time is now come
again: for we sought him not, and yet we have found him in this day of our
visitation, verse: 4.
even in this dreadful sickness. He has spread out his hands all the day
long unto us a rebellious people; but we would not hearken unto him: justly
therefore do we remain among the graves; and hence it is that our hands are
held up unto him. But, alas so weak are our devotions; so feeble are we in
our Petitions; so unconstant, so wavering are we in our faith, that our hands
are heavier then our hearts. Ex: 17.12.
We must be faint to have an Aaron, and a Hur to stay them up, or else we are
ready to let them down; and if they fall, the great Amalekites, (both our
sins, and Gods reve^ge) will prevail against us. He cries out unto us,
Behold me, Behold me; and (woe is unto us,) we do behold him in his
severe, and consuming wrath: But o that we might behold him in the clear and
most lovely glory of his mercy! O that he might now be sought of us, though
formerly we have not asked for him! He once did promise that a time should be
when the children of Israel should come, Ier: 50.4.
they and the children of Indah together, goeing, and weeping: they should go
and seek the Lord their God. Surely that time is now come to us his Israel:
for now we go, and weep as we go (as did David for Absalom); 2. Sam:
18.33. Gen: 43.30. Ps: 126.6.
We weep as wed go up to our chambers. With Joseph, we seek where to
weep; and we enter into our chambers, and weep there. With the Church in the
Psalms, we go forth and weep. With the Israelites, we weep before the
door of the tabernacle of the congregation. Number: 25.6. 2. Sam. 15.30.
With David, and the people that were with him, we weep as we go up to the
city. Yea with Ishmael, we weep all along as we go. And as we weep, so I
hope we shall seek too; Ier: 41.6.
even seek the Lord, and his strength; yea seek his face evermore. This is
the way for pardon; Ps: 105.4.
and this is the means for health: for so God promised King Solomon, saying:
If I shut up heaven that there be noe rain: 2. Chr: 7.13.
or if I command the Locusts to devours the land: or if I send a Pestilence
among my people: If my people which are called by my name shall humble
themselves, verse: 14
and pray, and seek my face, and turn from their wicked ways; then will I
hear from heaven, and will forgive their sin, and will heal their land.
Lord, this Pestilence thou have sent among us; among us Christians that are
called by thy name. Ios: 24.15.
Let others do what they will: as for me, and my house, we will serve thee,
o my Lord. Do thou make me to turn from my wicked ways, that thou may
hear from heaven, and forgive my sins, and heal this land: for I will seek
thy face; I will bumble my self; I will pray unto thee, and say.

The Prayer.
OMnipotent Lord, thou sinne-revenging God, who for disobedience did
threaten thine own people of Israel to smite them in the knees, Deuteronomy: 28.35.
and in the legs with a sore botch that could not be healed, from the sole of
the foot unto the topp of the head: verse: 27
to smite them with the botch of Egypt, whereof they could not be healed: Thou
who by the mouth of thine only son did foretell to the Jews that nation
should rise against nation, Mat: 24 7.
Kingdom against Kingdom, and that there should be famines, and Pestilences
in diverse places: be pleased, o thou great; offended Lord, in the bowels of
thy compassion to let thine anger cease, Ps: 85.4
and to bow down thine ear to thy sorrowful hand-mayd. O my God thou see
how I groan under the burden of thy wrathful indignation, bemoaning the
general sufferances for our more general sins. Our sins, our sins do
far exceed the transgressions of Israel: yea they are greater then those of
the Jews against the true Messiah; for thine own Apostle bears them
witness, 1. Cor: 2.8.
that Had they known it, they would not have crucified the Lord of Glory: but
we alas, both have known, and do know him; and yet we crucify to our selves
the son of thee our God afresh; Heb: 6.6.
and daily put him to an open shame. For these our offenses thou have begun
thy revenge, yea and most justly too; for thou art clear, though man should
judge thee. Under this thy heavy wrath we groan o Lord, we cry, we howl;
for sickness increases, death approaches: yea such a sickness, and such a
death, as makes us fear both our selves, and our neighbors; because we have
not feared thee the Lord of hosts. Thou see, o Lord, our afflictions; even
that our houses are made our prisons, and our sores our companions. Our
streets are turned into pastures, our towns into wildernesses; and, for our
backwardness in our devotions, our very doors instruct us to address our
selves unto thee, and to beseech thee Lord to have mercy upon us. Our days are
consumed in sorrows, and languishing; and our nights in weeping, and mourning.
Thou woundest us, and we cry; thou smitest us, and we roar; thou plaguest
us, and we are troubled, we are dismayed. Our Golgothaes are surfeited with
the dead, and our habitations infected with the living. We fly from place to
place from country to country; and yet we fly not from thy presence, we
avoid not thy judgments. What shall we do, What shall we do? Is there noe
balm, Ier: 8.22.
o Lord, in Gilead? Is there noe physician there? Why then is not the health of
the daughter of thy people recovered? Thy son, thy merciful son, thy
sweet son Jesus was sent to bind up the broken hearted, Is: 61.1 verse: 2.
and to open the prisons to them that were bound, and to comfort them that
mourn: and he was not backward in the performance of this for which he was
sent; Mat: 4.23. c. 15.30.
for he healed all manner of sickness, and all manner of diseases among the
people. At thy feet therefore, o Jesus thou best physician, we cast our selves
down. A multitude we are that lie at thy feere: Cure us, o Christ; heal us,
o Jesus, as thou did the multitude. Lu: 6.19. Mat: 14 14.
A whole multitude once did seek to touch thee; for there went virtue out of
thee; and thou healedst them all. Thou were moved with compassion, and did
heal their sick. Many did thou cure of their infirmities, and plagues. Luc:
7.21. Is: 59.1
Behold thy hand is not shortened that it cannot save; neither is thine ear
heavy that thou can not hear. The number of petitioners cannot deter thee;
Mat. 3.10.
the multitude of suitors cannot molest thee; for thou have healed many:
therefore, with the multitude in the gospel. we press upon thee, that we may
but touch thee; for thou have virtue in thee; thou have power to heal. O Lord
hear, o Lord forgive, o Lord heal us of our grievous wounds. In the depth of
thy fury when thou did resolve to be revenged of a rebellious people, it was
yet thy promise that thou would leave a few from the sword, Eze: 12 16.
and from the famine, and from the Pestilence, that they might declare all
their abominations among the people where they should come; that they might
know that thou art the Lord. Us thou have plagued, us thou have punished, so
sorely, so grievously, that but few of us are left: yet o Lord, now at last
look in mercy upon us: o Lord let this remnant findthy compassion. O cure us,
O heal us, o help us for thy mercie's sake. When thou were angry with Egypt,
Is: 19.22.
thou did threaten to smite it: but, even at that very instant, thou did
likewise promise to heal it; and that they should return unto thee their
Lord, and that thou would be entreated of them. Ier: 33.6.
Thou did proclaine unto Judah that thou would bring it health, and cure;
and would cure them, and reveal unto them abundance of peace, and truth.
Thou did promise unto Zion that thou would restore health unto her, c:
30.17
and heal her of her wounds, because she was called an outcast by the
people, saying, This is Zion, whom noe man seeks after. These were thy
promises even in the midst of thy threatenings: and will thou be worse unto us
then thou were unto Egypt, or Judah, or Zion? True it is that thou expectest
our conversion; Joel. 2.12.
thou command us to turn unto thee with all our hearts, and with fasting,
and with weeping, and with mourning. To thee therefore, o God (though formerly
we have not, yet now) do we turn. We turn unto thee both our weeping
eyes, and our dejected countenances, and our wringing hands, and our bended
knees, and our mournful voices, and our groaning hearts. Merciful God
behold our tears, and view our countenances, and look upon our hands, and
strengthen our knees, and hearken to our voyees, and comfort our hearts. The
Priests, o Lord, verse: 17
even thine own Ministers do weep between the porch and the altar, and they
say, Spare thy people, o Lord, and give not thine heritage to reproach. Ezra:
10.1.
Our Ezra's pray, and confess and weep, and cast themselves down before
thine house; and the people assemble themselves unto them both our men, and our
women, and our children; for we all weep very sore. Number: 2.56.
We weep, as the Israelites did before the door of the tabernacle of the
congregation, when twenty and four thousand of them dyed of the Pestilence.
Thus we mourn; thus we weep: our eyes, our hearts, our very souls do
weep: o let us taste of thy love; let us feel thy compassion. Make us to boast
of thy praise, as thy servant David did; Ps: 30.2
when he cried unto thee, and thou did heal him. Thou have been wrath with
us, as thou were with the Jews for their coveteousnesse; Is: 57.17.
and thou have smitten us: thou have bid thy self, and have been angry; yet
we have gone on frowardly in the ways of our hearts. But, o our God, do thou
make us as penitent as those jews; and then say unto us as thou did unto thy
Judah, verse. 18
I have seen thy ways, and I will heal thee: I will lead thee also, and
restore comforts unto thee and to thy mourners. Alas, we mourn, and yet we
are punished: we grieve, and yet we are plagued; and all because our
iniquities do testify against us: Ier. 14.7.
but for thy name's sake, o Lord, be pleased to spare us. verse. 8.
O the hope of Israel, the Savior thereof in the time of trouble, why
should thou be as a stranger in the land; and as a wayfaring man that
turns aside to tarry but a night? verse. 9.
Why should thou be as a man astonished; as a mighty man that cannot save?
Thou, o Lord, art still in the midst of us, and we are called by thy name;
therefore, we pray thee, 1. King 8.37. verse: 38
leave us not. O here is a Pestilence in our land; and we make our prayers and
supplications, verse: 39
and streetch forth our hands to ward thine house. Hear therefore in heaven thy
dwelling place, verse: 40
and forgive; that we may fear thee, and walk in thy ways all the days of
our lives. Or if the sins of us thy people cause thee to stop thine ears
at our prayers, 2. Chr: 30.18.
O hear thou our Hezekiah's praying for us who have not cleansed our selves.
Stay the plague from us thine Israel, as thou did from thy people, Ps: 106
30. Number. 16.46.
when thy servant Phinehas executed judgment. Cause our Aarons to take their
Censers, and to put fire in them from off the altar, and to put on incense: O
let them come quickly to our congregations, and make an atonement for us.
verse. 48
Let them stand between the dead and the living, and let the plague be stayed.
2. Sam. 24.16.
Thine Angel stretches forth his hand upon our Jerusalem to destroy it: O do
thou as in the time of King David: Repent thee of the evil and say unto the
destroying Angel, It is enough; stay now thine hand. Hear me, o Lord, for
the distressed people; and hear them for me; and hear thy Christ for us all:
that to him, and thee, and thy blessed Spirit we may render (as is most due)
all praise, and glory, and thanksgiving, and obedience from this time forth
for ever-more, Amen.

THE FOURTEENTH SUBjECT. Tears of her whose house is shut up for the
Pestilence.
The Soliloquie.
THE EjACULATION.
Psalm. 5. verse. 1. Give ear to my words, o Lord; consider my meditation.

verse. 2. Hearken unto the voice of my cry, my king, and my God; for unto thee
will I pray.

WHat? Shut up? Why so? Must mine house be a prison; and my self both the
jayler, and the prisoner too? This is a punishment added unto God's, to be thus
shut up from the society of men. Is this a visitation, thus to forbid our
visitants? Was I wont to be such a gadder abroad, that I must now be kept at
home under lock and key? Lord how suddenly am I transported with passion even
beyond the bounds of reason, and religion! O here is the messenger of death
come into mine house; and now I must be thankful to authority for commanding
me to retire my self to my private, and pensive accounts, who knows yet but
that both my self, and my family may live, for all our enclosing? It may so
please my God, that by my being secluded from the multitude, I may shun the
infection of the multitude; and so what I conceaved an injury, may end in a
blessing. I may perhaps say, and say truly, when I am awaked fully out of my
passion, Gen: 28.16.
as Jacob did when he awoke out of his sleep: Surely the Lord is in this
place, and I knew it not. My God is come indeed, Lu: 7.6
allthough I am not worthy that he should enter under my roof. O he is come,
but he is come in wrath, and shows me the tokens of his anger: but I will
submit to his pleasure, and say unto him in the language of the blessed Virgin:
Lu: 1.38.
Behold the hand-mayd of the Lord: be it unto me according to thy will. Who
knows but that instead of killing, he may come to raise me a Lazarus, Io:
11.43.44.
if occasion serves, as once he did for Martha and Marie? Peradventure he
may come in judgment to others, and yet to me in mercy. Howsoever I will hope
that I am one of those who are spoken unto from the Lord by the mouth of his
Prophet: Come my people; Is: 26.20.
enter thou into thy chambers, and shut thy doors about thee: hide thyselfe as
it were for a little moment, until the indignation be over past. Since then my
Lord is come to be my guest, my house shall be empty, swept, and garnished,
that noe thing may offend him, nothing may displease him: and thus will I
empty it, thus will I sweep it, thus will I garnish it.

Farewell vain world; thou that have deluded me with thy follies, and
cozened me with thy false, and braided wares. Come not near me; my doors
are shut, and none such as thou shall enter here. Farewell false friends, who
only gaze upon the rising Sun. Ye who were my companions in folly, and
enticers to fond and idle sports, farewell farewell: noe more shall ye enter
with your bewitching charms. Sports, passe-times, games, merry meetings,
gossipings; fare ye all well; come noe more to my doors: for if ye do come,
ye shall knock, and knock, and knock again, and all in vain; for even to
this purpose also are they now made fast. And now mine Eyes, the luster of my
countenance, ye windows of folly, take ye your leave of your vain objects;
for I have a task to set you, that ye never yet were acquainted with. First I
will prefer you to attend upon my heart; and whatever sighs and sobbes my
poor heart shall send forth, it shall be your duty to entertain them by the
way, and enforce them to accept of the company of your tears. Ye shall weep
'till ye are weary, and then shall ye read: and when indeed ye are weary
of poring upon divine pages, for your re-creation ye shall weep again, that
by that means ye may be fitted to read again. Next If at any time I give
you leave to consult with the sister of mortality (as some times I fhall be
necessitated to afford you a time of intermission by the persuasions of nature)
be sure that ye stay not too long from your employments; for my have is
great, my business is of consequence: we have only a little work to do for
the King of eternity, and then we shall be at ease. And ye, mine Ears, that
have so often hearkened to the Siren songs of the vain world, now bid ye
adieu to your musical harmonies, and ravishing concords; for I must lock ye
up for a season: and hereafter ye shall hear a melody beyond the tuning of
the spheres; for the Quire of heaven shall ravish you with their Halelujah's.
These Hands that so proudly hid themselves under the skin of the kidde, and
blushed when they were beheld by any less then an idolater, shall now entwine
each other in a mutual concord; and then revenging the quarrel of their
sins upon my treacherous heart, they shall smite it, and thumpe it, and beat
it until they have mollified it; until they have beaten that stone into
flesh, and that flesh into water, and forced that water into tears for the
sins of my whole self. Next my Tongue, mine un-toward, un-ruely, wanton
tongue; my false, pick-thanke, telltale tongue, that could never find the
way to tell the truth, or not willingly, or not with delight; thou, for thy
idle, thy profane, thy wicked speeches, shall send out nothing but cries, and
yells, and hideous dinus, and horrid screeches for thine offenses: and if at
any time I fhall, by thine obsequious service, be contented to trust thee with
an articulate prayer, be sure that thou first take direction from my heart;
Chanter in french signifies to sing. Ps: 141 3.
and then chant it out so loud (but forget not discretion) that it may be
heard up as high as the throne of my God. Be sure thou do it, for I will
have a watch over my mouth, and at the doors of my lips, that I may be
certain thou offend nor. As for the rest of my self (since I cannot stay now
to give every part a charge in particular,) I shall command them only to
attend the pleasure of my royal guest. Only my thoughts I must commit to the
tuition of my heart, allthough it formerly has been false unto me: and
desirous I am that they may be pressed, pressed down with great and heavy
burdens. But I charge thee, o my Heart, if ever thou hopest to be mine own
dear Heart, that thou suffer not an imagination, not a thought to come near
thee, but what shall be commended unto thee by religion, and what thou shall
dispatch to thy Maker.

And now I am prepared for thee: Welcome o my God. If my rooms are not clean
enough for thee I must entreat from thee both direction, and assistance to
cleanse then. If any dust of wickedness has flowne about in the sweeping of
them, I will now give my mind to wash my chambers with the tears of mine eyes;
and that, I know, thou delightest in.

O thrice well-come blessed God. Welcome, o well-come my dearest Redeemer. O
how truly did the Kingly preacher affirm that, Eccl: 7.2.
It is better to go to the house of mourning, then to go to the house of
feasting: for that is the end of all, and the living will lay it to heart! My
house is shut up indeed; it is shut up for the infection; for fear of the
infection; for fear lest others should infect my family; or for fear lest my
family should be insectious to others. But what of all that? I am not the
first that ever was shut up: I am not the only one that ever was shut up. Lev:
13 4. verse: 5.
The Leper in the law was to be shut up seven days: and at the seven days
end when the Priest looked on him, if the plague in his sight were at a stay,
and spreaded not in the skin, he was to shut him up yet seven days more.
This shutting up was rather for his cure, then intended for his hurt. Gen: 7.16.
Noah was said to be shut up in the Arc; but it was for his preservation: and
so may I be likewise. Jeremiah was shut up too; Ier. 32.2.
yea in a prison, allthough his jayle was the house of the King: and yet, even
at that time, he was visited by the best; by one better then the King; even by
God himself: for he often spoke to him in the time that he was shut up. c:
33.1.
Thus am I shut up; even in a prison made of my dwelling: I hope that my God
will speak comfortably unto me. I will hope that he has shut me up as a
jewel in a cabinet; in his care; in his tender compassion. If so, I am sure
that noe evil shall come in unto me, for he is holy, he is true, he is
powerful who has me in keeping. Reu 3.7.
He has the key of David: he opens, and noe man shuts; and he
shuts, and noe man opens True it is that sometimes he shuts out; as
when he shuts out from his ears the prayers of his people. Thus the
faithful complain by the mouth of the Prophet: Lam: 3 8.
When I cry, and showte, he shuts out my prayers. Sometimes he shuts
up; and that in judgment too; as He shuts up the eyes of idolaters, Is:
44.18.
that they cannot see; and their hearts, that they cannot understand. And
sometimes man shuts too, even when he is forsaken of God: for so says the
wise King; A violent man shuts his eyes, to devise froward things. Prove:
16.30.
And again, God is said sometimes in judgment to shut up, even heaven it
self; as in a time of drought. Therefore Moses advises the Israelites, saying,
Deuteronomy: 11.16.
Take heed to your selves that your heart be not deceaved, and ye turn aside
and serve other Gods, and worship them: verse: 17
And then the Lord's wrath be kindled against you, and he shut up the heaven
that there be noe rain, and that the land yield not her fruit, and lest ye
perish quickly from off the good land which the Lord gives you. But sure I am
that allthough he should shut me up in judgment; yet he, whose compassions
fail not, Lam: 3.22. Hab: 3.2. verse. 5.
in the midst of judgment will remember mercy. I know that in former times he
has been angry, and then before him went a Pestilence, and burning coals
went forth at his feet. I know that once when the people of Israel had
offended, then the sword was without, Eze: 7.15.
and the Pestilence and the famine within: he that was in the field was
threatened that he should die with the sword; and he that was in the city,
famine and Pestilence should devour him. I know that Elijah Prophesied against
Iehoram in writing, saying, 2. Chr: 21.12.
Thus says the Lord, Because thou have not walked in the ways of Iehoshaphat
thy father, nor in the ways of Asa King of Judah: verse: 14
Behold with a great plague will the Lord smite thy people, and thy children,
and thy wives, and all thy goods: verse: 15
And thou shall have great sickness by disease of thy bowels, until thy
bowels fall out by reason of the sickness day by day. Job: 11.10.
And I know also that if he cut off, and shut up, or gather together, none
can hinder him. But what then? What though he has shut me up? Shall I
therefore rage, and rave like one distracted? c. 30.29. verse. 30
What though I am a sister to Dragons, and a companion to Owls? What though
my skin should be black upon me; and my bones be burnt up with heat? c. 3.3.
Should I therefore cry, Let the day perish wherein I was borne; and the night
in which it was said, There is a child conceaved? O noe: I will rather resolve
with afflicted Job: Though he slay me, yet will I trust in him. c. 13.15.
Why should I offer to be dismayed? That God which dwells in the heavens has
taken up my house, and is come to sojourne with me upon earth: I will speak
in the phrase of a King: But will God indeed dwell on the earth? 1. King 8.27.
Behold the heaven, and heaven of heavens cannot contain thee: how much less
this house of mine which thou now do visit! O what a happiness it is to
have God for our visitant! Though he comes in wrath, yet is he well-come. O
let me have my God any way, rather then not have him at all! If he should not
sometimes be angry with me, I should suspect that he loved me not: but if
for ever he should be angry with me, I should feel that he loved me not.
He is never angry with me, but when I am not angry with my self. I will
soon therefore appease his anger by revenging my self upon my self, for the
sins which I have committed against his glorious name. And if I cannot be
revenged enough, I will cry for anger; even for anger that I cannot punish my
self enough for displeasing him who thus honors my roof. When the
Israelites were to eat the Paschall lanb, Ex: 12.7.
they were commanded to take of the blood thereof, and to strike it on the two
sideposts, and on the upper doore-post of the houses wherein they did eat it:
verse: 13
And the blood (says the Lord) shall be to you for a token upon the houses
where ye are: and when I see the blood, I will pass over you, and the plague
shall not be upon you to destroy you when I smite the land of Egypt. O here is
comfort now in the midst of affliction: here is joy in the depth of sorrow.
See, there there is that token: there is the blood on the door, or at least,
the representation of it; for the red Cross is there. It is to me for a
token, or a memorial of the blood of that innocent Lamb without spot, that was
slain, that was crucified on the Cross for the sins of the elect. Now Lord
do what thou please; spare, or strike; it shall be all one to me, so long
as thou give me a firm assurance that he has suffered for me. I vallew
not my flesh: I care not for this lump of walking dust: let it be blown away;
let this muddewall be thrown down: it is noe matter; I am content, so long as
I am sure that the anger of my God will be appeased by the blood of my
Redeemer; and that so soon as my soul shall be freed from the prison of my
flesh, I shall for ever sit on the right hand of my Jesus. Sure I am, that
allthough my house be shut up because of the infection, yet my Christ will
cleanse my soul with his blood. Therefore World farewell: shut up whom thou
please. Thy company is not so good, nor thy courtesy so great as to
command my joy. Allthough my house here be shut up, yet he which is faithful
has promised that the gates of that new Jerusalem, Reu: 21 25.
which is above, shall not be shut at all by day: and that there shall be noe
night there. O let me beg of my Lord, my Landlord; yea my guest, my friend,
my brother, my father that (seeing I am a woman, a fearful woman, wonderfully
afraid especially of a serpent, c: 20.2.
or a dragon) he will be pleased to lay hold on the dragon, that old serpent
which is the devil, and Satan; verse: 3.
and bind him, and cast him into the bottomless pit, and shut him up, and set
a seal upon him, that he may deceave me noe more. O how contentedly then
shall I mourn! How joyfully shall I grieve for all the offenses that ever I
committed! Well; now my God is pleased to speak to my conscience, away will I
go in private, all alone, and cry in a corner. I will weep by my self: away
I will go; and separate my self from my family, yea even from him who is my
head, and my Lord; that I may the more freely weep. This I will do, and this
I may do; for when Jerusalem had her great mourning, not only every family
mourned apart, Zech: 12.12.
but even their wives also mourned apart. So will I: I will mourn apart too.
But because I must not offer to offer unto my God such a present as a little
poor botle of tears, Ps: 56.8
and say nothing to him when I render it; humbly therefore upon my knees will I
fall, and thus will I say unto him.

The Prayer.
GLorious, and ever-living Lord God, Ps: 75.5
who do suffer the wicked to live in prosperity; to be in noe trouble like
other men, nor to be plagued like other men: but have told us that whomsoever
thou love thou do chasten, Heb: 12 6.
and scourgest every child whom thou receavest: vouchsafe I beseech thee, to
sanctify this affliction which thou have laid at this time upon me and mine.
1. King 17.18.
Thou art come, o my God, to call my sins to remembrance: o let me not
frustrate thine intent, not repel the motions of thy blessed Spirit. My self,
and my family are now shut up from the lewd temptations of the seducing
world: Lord make me at this time to look into my self, into mine own wicked
and sinful heart, which has been so long shu^ up even from mine own self,
from mine understanding and my knowledge. This, o Lord, is thy time to speak:
let it, I beseech thee, be my time to hear. My house is become a house of thy
correction; and my self and family are the offenders whom thou art pleased to
chastise. Ier: 10.24. Ps: 88.7
Lord correct us, but with judgment, not in thine anger, lest thou bring us to
nothing. Thy wrath at this time lies hard upon us; and thou afflictest us with
all thy waves. Thou have put our acquaintance far from us: verse: 8.
thou have made us to be an abomination unto them: we are shut up, and cannot
come forth. Ps: 38.11.
Our lovers, and our friends stand aloof from us; and our neighbors stand
afar off. Ps: 88.9
By reason of this affliction mine eye mourns: Lord I call daily upon thee,
Ps: 69.15. Ps: 73.14. Ps: 69.3
and stretch out mine hands unto thee. O let not the water-flood overflow us;
neither let the deep swallow us up; and let not the pit shut her mouth upon
us. All the day long are we plagued, and chastened every day. I am weary of
crying; Ps: 69.3
my throat is dry: my sight even fails for waiting so long upon thee my
God. Ps. 78.39. Ps: 91.3
O consider thy distressed servants, that we are but flesh: and that we are
even a wind that passes away, and comes not again. Deliver us, o Lord from
the snare of the fowler, from the noisome Pestilence Either send unto us, or
else be thou thy self unto us a staff as well as a rod; Ps: 23.4 Ps: 91.5
a supporter as well as a correctour, that so we may not be afraid for the
terror by night, verse: 6.
nor for the arrow that flies by day; nor for the Pestilenee that walks in
darkness; nor for the destruction that wastes at moone-day. Prepare us, o
Lord, for those heavenly mansions, where thy Son sits at thy right hand
making intercession for us. Hear him pleading for our remission, and
inter-ceding for our pardon. Out of his wounds have issued that precious
balsamome, which is able to cure the sins of the whole world. In him be
pleased to be reconciled unto us: and since our times are in thine hands, Ps:
31.15.
Lord either spare us for thine honor, or else receave us to thy mercy. Let
the health of our bodies make us mindful to labor for the health of our
souls: and let the sickness of our bodies put us in mind of the diseases of
our souls. Good God, either preserve us from sickness, or protect us in
sickness. Be thou our God, and make us thy servants; and then come either with
health, or with sickness; thy will be done. Ps: 91.7
Thou can cause a thousand to fall at our side, and ten thousand at our right
hand, and yet preserve us. Thou can, if thou please, verse. 10
so protect us, that noe evil may befall us; nor any plague come nigh our
dwelling. O grant therefore that we may make thee our refuge; verse. 9. Ps. 38.6
yea thee who art the most high, our habitation. We are troubled, o Lord; we
are bowed down greatly; we go mourning all the day long. Ps. 102 9. verse. 10
We eat ashes as it were bread, and mingle our drink with weeping, because
of thine indignation, and thy wrath: for thou have lifted us up, and cast us
down. But o thou who art my only rock, Ps. 42.9
why have thou forgotten us? O why go we thus mourning by reason of this
affliction? Ps. 43.2
Thou art the God of our strength, Why do thou cast us off? O give me leave
(with Queen Esther) to speak yet again before thee the King of Kings, Est.
8.3
and to fall down at thy feet (as she did at the feet of King Ahasuerus)
and to besiech thee with tears to withdraw thy visitation. Job. 14 22.
O Lord our very souls within us do mourn; for thou do cause our Sun
to go down at noone; and do darken our earth in the clear day. Amos. 8.9.
verse: 10
Thou have turned our fasts into mourning; and all our songs into lamentation:
thou have brought sackcloth upon our loins; Lam. 5.15. verse: 16
and made our mourning as the mourning of an only son. The joy of our hearts
is ceased; and the crown is fallen from our head: Woe unto us that we have
sinned. But o thou who were anointed to preach good tidings unto the meek:
Is: 61.1
who were sent to bind up the brokenhearted; verse. 2.
to proclaim liberty to the captives, and the opening of the prison to them
that are bound: to proclaim the acceptable year of the Lord; yea and the day
of vengeance of our God: to comfort all that mourn: verse. 3.
to appoint unto them that mourn in Zion, to give unto them beawtie for ashes;
the oil of joy for mourning; the garment of praise for the spirit of
heaviness: Thou who set up on high those that be low, Job. 5.11. Ps. 102
17.
that those which mourn may be exalted to safety: Reguard thou (I most humbly,
and earnestly besiech thee) the prayers of us the poor destitute, and despise
not our desires. Thou have seen our ways; Is. 57.18.
O do thou heal us: lead us also, and restore comforts unto us, that we
may be called Trees of righteousness, the planting of thee our Lord, that thou
may be glorified. Wound us not, Ier. 30.14.
O father, with the wound of an enemy, with the chastisement of a cruel one,
for the multitude of our iniquities. verse. 15
Let not our sorrow be incurable, because our sins be increased. Though for a
small moment thou have seemed to forsake us; Is. 54.7
yet with thy great mercies gather us again. verse. 8.
In aditle wrath thou do hide thy face from us, for a moment; but with
ever-lasting kindness have mercy upon us, o Lord our Redeemer. O thou who art
our Redeemer, verse. 5. Ps: 34.15. Is: 37.17.
the Holy one of Israel, the God of the whole earth, Let thine ears be open
unto our cries: open thine eyes, and see our afflictions, how we are shut up
from the comforts of the godly, and from the society of our indeared friends.
Ps: 13.3
Consider, and hear me, o Lord my God: lighten our eyes lest we sleep the
sleep of death. Ps: 123.2.
Behold as the eyes of servants look unto the hand of their masters, and as
the eyes of a maiden unto the hand of her mistress: so our eyes wayt upon
thee, o Lord our God, until thou have mercy upon us. O do thou grant unto us
remisston of our sins; patience in our miseries; comfort in our distress;
physic for our health, and recoverie: and in thy blessed time, bring our
souls out of prison, Ps: 142.7.
that we may give thanks unto thy name: which thing if thou will grant unto
us, then shall the righteous resort again unto our company. Ps: 79.13.
So shall we that be thy people, and sheep of thy pasture give thee thanks
for ever: and show forth thy praise from generation to generation, world
without end. Amen.

Tears of her who is visited with the Pestilence, being. 1 Either wounded with
a Sore. 2 Or marked with the Tokens.


THE EjACULATION.
Psalm. 5. verse. 1. Give ear to my words, o Lord; consider my meditation:

verse. 2. Hearken unto the voice of my cry, my king, and my God; for unto thee
will I pray.

OH 't is come, 't is come. Ps. 55.4
My heart is sore pained within me; and the terrors of death are fallen upon
me. See, See; What swelling's this? What rising's this? Oh, it is the
messenger of death, and bids me to enquire into my sinful life. I am
struck, oh I am struck to the heart. This is the impression of anger, and the
blott of him who in his wrath may justly blott me out of his wonted
compassion. Yet let me not despair: let me not be too much dismayed. While
there is life, there is hope. The woman in the law who had gone aside to
another man in-steed of her husband (whereof her husband was jealous, Number. 5.20.
and brought her to her purgation) was to be charged by the Priest with an oath
of cursing: verse: 21 verse: 22
upon whose drinking of water, her belly did swell, and her thigh did rott.
Surely I have drunk none of that water: or if I have, it cannot hurt me; for
by that very law, verse. 28
the innocent escaped free from the punishment. I have never disbonoured my
nuptial bed; nor defiled my self with any other man, that this swelling
should light upon me. Yet (now I better consider of it) let me not deceave my
self. There is as well a spiritual, as a carnal adultery. Even a virgin may
be styled an adulteress. Have I never turned from my God? Has my soul never
forsaken her dearest husband my blessed Redeemer, to commit a spiritual
whoredom? O guilty, guilty: woe is me, I cannot choose but plead guilty,
to this my indictment. My conscience tells me that I have followed the
temptations of the enemies of Christ I cannot tell how often: and justly
therefore (I must confess) may this swelling be my punishment; for greater then
this, has been my due desert. Peradventure to corect my pride, this thorn in
my flesh may be a messenger of Satan, sent to buffet me, 2 Cor. 12.7.
as once Saint Paul had one sent unto him: for who of all our sex is not
guilty of this folly? Among us are the tender and the delicate women (such as
were among the Israelites) who will not adventure to set the sole of the foot
upon the ground, Deuteronomy. 28.56.
for delicateness, and tenderness: and (not to flatter, or deceave my self)
I may peradventure be one of them. Or if I have not had power to put in
practice what I desired, yet it may be that my desire has been to be as
delicate as the chiefest, and finest of our sex.

Satan is said to have gone forth from the presence of the Lord, Job 2.7.
and to have smote Job with sore boyles, from the sole of the foot to the
crown of his head. O that I were but half so righteous as was holy Job, of
whom God himself bears witness that There was none like him in the earth;
c. 1.8.
a perfect, and an upright man; one that feared God, and eschewed evil! But
alas I am noe such person; for I have, by my wickedness, as it were taught the
serpent to go forth from the presence of the Lord, and to smite me with this
sickness, this rising, this swelling, worse then those boyles which infested
Job. David had a sore too, 1 Samuel 13.14.
a running sore (allithough he was a man after God's own heart): Psa. 77.2.
for so he complained, saying, My sore ran in the night, and ceased not; my
soul refused comfort. But his Sore was not like unto mine: for his was in the
fierce combat which he had with distrust; and it may as well be meant that his
hand by night reached out in prayer, and ceased not: or by that sore may be
meant the running of his eyes, which dropped in the night for his grievous
crimes, and ceased not; as well as an impostume, or ulceration. But mine is not
such: it is a sore indeed, a carbuncle, a pestilentiall sore; allthough as yet
it is not come to such maturitie as to do as David spoke of his. It is yet but
a swelling, a hard swelling, a rising: and for its swelling, and for its
hardness it may either be my very heart removed from the seat appointed it by
nature: or else it may be sent to put me in mind of the proud swelling, and
the malicious hardness of mine impenitent heart. Alas, if I do but seriously
consider of that little morsel of proud flesh, or rather stone, hard stone
then flesh, that Adamantine heart, what have I not deserved for that wicked
heart, which others were ever punished with? Worse, far worse do I deserve
then ever did Judah: I only want a Prophet to lament mine estate as Isaiah did
hers, for the judgments of God inflicted upon her for her rebellion, Is. 1.5.
and to cry, The whole head is sick, and the whole heart is faint: from the
sole of the foot even to the head there is noe soundness in it; verse. 6.
but wounds, and bruises, and putrefying sores: they have not been closed,
neither bound up, neither mollified with ointment.

But what shall I do in this distress? May not these poisoned humors that
have conspired together in this present tumor; as well be some other disease,
as the infectious Pestelence? Lord, how feign would sinners live in ignorance,
and never either understand the offenses which they have committed, or know the
manner and the kind of their punishments! How feign would the sick delude
themselves with a conceit of health; and, hoping for life, cozen their
knowledge with the falsehood of opinion! I cannot deny but it is the sickness
which I am stricken with; the infectious sickness, the dreadful Pestilence:
and I can have noe hope of life if once it seizes on my trembling heart. To
prevent that danger therefore, since my heart has hitherto been, so stony, so
hard to entertain the motions of the blessed Spirit, I will request it now to
continue its obduracie, not against my great God, but against this sad, and
deadly sickness. What it has usually retained, almost to the utter un-doeing
and destruction of my soul, I will entreat it to continue now for the
preservation of my body. Or if that will not do; if it resolve to yield in
this time of distress, far rather then I will seek to that, I will humbly
besiech my offended Lord to take possession of my heart: and if he will
vouchsafe to grant my petition, then come what can come, I am sure I shall
have comfort, because I shall have the society of my God. But what if my heart
be preserved from these malignant humors? Have I ^hen any assurance that my
disease is not mortal? Alas noe; but I must use the means, and besiech my God
to give them his blessing. I must apply those things which will mollify this
swelling: it must be softened, be broken, be drawn, before it can be healed.
Thus, even thus must I deal with my heart too. The malicious humors of sin
and corruption have already assembled there, and caused it to swell. I will
hasten therefore to Job 's Physician, Job. 23.16.
who softened his heart; and troubled him: and I will besiech him for Christ's
sake to mollify mine; for there are more then the seven abominations of a
dissembler in it. Prove. 26.25. Joel 2.13. Hos. 10.12. Psa. 69.20. Ier. 4.4
I will pray him to rent it; to break it; to break up the fallow ground of
it; for he better can break mine, then the misery of repreach could break
the heart of the Prophet David. I will entreat him to take away the foreskinne
of it, and to wash it from wickedness, that so I may be saved, and that noe
vain thought may lodge in it. verse. 14. c. 17.10.
I will request him to search it; that he will lay something to it; Is. 47.7
Ps: 147 3.
even all the wickednesses that ever I have committed. Then, when he has
broken it, I know that he will heal it, and bind up the Wounds of it: for to
this purpose he sent his son, his onely-begotten son, my Redeemer, my
Jesus; even to bind up the broken hearted. Is. 61.1.
But when this great cure shall be wrought for me, what have I to render unto
him by way of thankfulness? Alas nothing, even just nothing at all, unless
he will accept of that broken, yet therein that whole and cured heart. That,
then shall be his, and I know that he will accept of it; for so says David,
that man after his own heart; A broken, Act. 13.22. Ps. 51.17.
and a contrite heart o God thou will not despise. from the malice of this
heart does proceed the malignitie of this my disease; for sin is the cause
of every sickness. But all this while I do but talk of this malady; I sieke
not for a remedy. Alas to whom shall I go? To what physician, or Chyrurgion
shall I repair? Lev. 13.2.
I read that if any man of the house of Israel had in the skin of his flesh
a rising, or a swelling, or a bright spott; and if it were in the skin of the
flesh like the plague of Leprosy, then he was to be brought to Aaron the
Priest, or unto one of his sons the Priests, verse. 3.
and the Priest was to look on the plague in the skin of the flesh, and then
to proceed according to order. Thus, under the Law, the Priests were the
Physicians both for the body and the soul: where upon the Prophet Jeremiah
complained, and accounted it as a great judgment upon the people for their
sins, that From the Prophet even to the Priest every one dealt falsely: Ier.
6.13. verse. 14
they healed also the hurt of the people slightly. Hence also another
Prophet reproved them, Eze. 34.4.
because. The diseased they had not strengthened; neither had they healed that
which was sick; neither had they bound up that which was broken. Under the
Gospel also the Apostles were likewise Physicians for both: Mat. 10.1.
for when Christ had called unto him his twelve Disciples, he not only gave
them power against un-cleane Spirits, to cast them out; but also to heal all
manner of sicknesses, and all manner of diseases. Doubtless by this I am
likewise taught, into whatsoever sickness I fall, Psa. 110.4. Mal. 4.2. Make
use of the prayer which follows the next Meditation.
whatsoever disease I am visited with; first of all to go to the Priest, to
the Minister of God: first to examine my soul, before I look for the cure of
my body. To the Priest will I therefore go; to the chief Priest, to the high
Priest, to the chiefest and highest that ever was; even to him who is a Priest
for ever after the order of Melchizedek: and humbly will I besiech him to teach
me to fear his name: and then I know that he who is the Sun of
righteousness will arise with healing in his wings; and will make me go
forth, and grow up as calves of the stall.

2. Tears of the visited, being marked with the Tokens. The Soliloquie.
THE EjACULATION.
Psalm. 5. verse. 1. Give ear to my words, o Lord; consider my meditation:

verse. 2. Hearken unto the voice of my cry, my king, and my God; for unto thee
will I pray.

THere is a time to kill (says Solomon) and a time to heal. Eccl. 3.3.
O that time to kill is now come upon me; but I know not how so much as to
hope for the time of healing; for here I find the tokens of death, the marks
of my mortality. This flesh, this sinful flesh of mine, which has been so
washed, so unguented, so smoothed and colored, according to the choycest wit
of art and industry, has now the stains in it of a contagious sickness.
Where are now those admirers of comeliness, and those idolatrous doaters upon
the beawtie of women? Let them come and learn the vanity of their opinions;
and chide their simplicity by these tokens of vengeance. O what a frail thing
is woman; easily deluded into a belief of her beawty, and as easily stricken
with her own deformity!

But what do these spotts mean to die my flesh, and strike such a deep
tinture in a smoothed sknne? Are diseases blind, that thus they fasten every
where without either choice, or exception? Vain woman as I am, why do I spend
these minuits, these few and winged minuits allotted unto me, in such
impertinent quaeres? These bluish stains tell me that I must provide to
answer for my sins (yea shortly, speedily) before him who dispatched them
hither unto me. Death approaches; mortality knocks at my burdened heart.
Lord, how heavy is my soul! Even as if it were already at the great
tribunal, and pleaded guilty of millions of enormities.

They have corrupted themselves (says Moses by the Israelites); Deuteronomy: 32.5.
their spot is not the spot of God's children; they are a perverse, and crooked
generation. Is there a spot then which even the children of God may be subject
unto? Why then may not these be some of those spotts and my self be one of
those children of God? Lord, how willingly, how greedily does every one strive
to dye the death of the righteous! How easily are we apt, through ignorance,
to dwell in the letter of the text, when we should rather pry into a farther
intent of the blessed Spirit! That spot of the children of God is not seated in
the body, but in the soul; and that spot in the souls of the Israelites was
chiefly Idolatry. True it is that even the righteous have their stainei too;
verse. 15 16.17.
but not such bloaches, not such great and foul spots; or howsoever not of
such a deep tincture, not dyed so in grain as are those of the wicked: for
they are washed out with the tears of sorrow through the blood of the Lamb. O
that my spotts were only in my skin, and not in my soul; and that I could
truly justify my self in the language of Job. Job. 31.6. verse. 7.
Let me be weighed in an even balance that God may know mine integrity. If
any blott has cleaved to my hands. But alas I cannot, I dare not. Yet if I
could but come to a sight of my sins, and be truly humbled for them, then am
I sure that he who taught Jacob how to increase his flock of the speckled and
the spotted, Genesis 30.39. Is. 1.18
would easily make me white as wool. But how, or upon what grounds can I
expect his mercy, feeing all that I can suffer is not punishment enough for all
that I have trespassed? Heb. 9.22.
Without shedding of blood is noe remission, says the blessed Apostle. What
comfort then can I expect, or what mercy can I hope for, seeing that my blood,
my life is not of vallew enough to suffer what my sins have merited; much
less to purchase remission of my sins? What now shall I do? What hope can I
have that my body should be freed from these spots of my disease, when I know
not how to be freed from the pollutions of my soul? By the Mosaicall law If
any one of the common people sinned against any of the commandments of God
concerning things which ought not to be done, Lev: 4.27. verse: 32
A Lamb without blemish was to be his offering, and so the atonement was made
for the sin, verse: 35
and it was forgiven. Here yet was some ease for a distressed soul: the sin
was forgiven through the blood of the Lamb. But what hope have I of remission?
That Law does noe longer stand in force: nor will the blood of a common Lamb
be accepted for the least, the smallest offense. Yet Cheer up, O my drooping
soul: Let my fainting spirits, and my sorrowful heart take comfort in the
midst of my deep distress: for there is a Lamb, Heb: 9.28.
an innocent Lamb, a Lamb without blemish which once was offered to bear the
sins of many. I am one of those many who have sinned, and why then should I
not be one of those many too, whose sins he has borne? Lord make me one of
thy children through the merits of thy Son; and cleanse the pollutions of my
Soul by the blood of that Lamb, even that Lamb of God which takes away the
sins of the world. Io: 1.29


But whilst I thus meditate upon the stains of my soul, my body bids mec
to look upon these un-wonted blemishes. Lord, how bluish they appear! Surely
if those doaters upon our sex should see these spotts, they would forget their
idolatry, and tremble at the judgment. When Mordecay was clothed in his blew
and white, Est: 8.15.
it is said that he went in royal apparel. The apparel of my skin me
thinks, does seem to resemble the covering of his body; for here is the
ancient white which nature conferred, and here is the blew come now too, sent
me from God. It is royal apparel, because it is sent me by the King of
glory: and it is well come too, 2. Cor. 1.3.
because that glorious King is the father likewise of mercies, and the God of
all consolation. Prove: 20.30.
The blewnesse of a wound cleanses away evil, says the wise King Solomon.
Surely he meant not such a wound, such a spot as is each of these; for
allthough these are blew, yet certainly they cleanse not; or if they do
cleanse, their cleansing concerns nothing but my soul, they put me in mind
of that duty, for my time is short, and suddenly shall my poor soul bid
farewell to this corrupted, to this spotted body: but as for this body it
cannot be cleansed, it may be ruined by these bluish wounds. Christ says to
his church, Thou art all fair my love; Cant: 4.7.
there is noe spot in thee: and Saint Paul tells me how it comes to pass
that it is freed from spotts; for Christ (says he) gave himself for it, Ephesians.
5.25.
that he might sanctify it, and cleanse it with the washing of water by the
word, verse. 26
that he might present it to himself a glorious church, not having spott,
verse. 27
or wrinkle, or any such thing; but that it should be holy, and without
blemish. Of this church am I a member; a poor, weak, unworthy member; and yet
I have my spotts, my corruptions in my soul, which these in my body peep out
to remember me of. But why did I not keep the commandments without spot, 1.
Tim. 6.14.
and unrebukeable? Why have I not kept my self un-spotted from the world? Iam
1.27.
O for this, for this very cause am I now thus visited, am I now thus stained:
and noe more am I able to take these prints out of my flesh, then the Ethiopian
is able to change his skin, Ier. 13.23.
or the Leopard his spotts. Yet I have comfort in my redeemer; 1. Pet. 1 18.
in him who has redeemed me (not with corruptible things, as silver, and
gold) from my vain conversation; verse. 19
but with the precious blood of himself, as of a Lamb without blemish, and
without spott. Though my body therefore decay, yet I have a confidence that my
soul shall live: I have an assurance of that; for he who brings me to a
sight of these spotts, has given me likewise a sight of my sins (his name
be for ever magnified for it); and me think's they appear a thousand thousand
times more loathsome, more ugly in my soul, then these do in my body. They
are ten million of times more certainly mortal in their own condition to my
soul with out the mercy of my Jesus, then these are to my body. Yet if it
might be safe for me to expostulate with my God, I would say unto him in the
lauguage of the Prophet, Ier. 15.18.
Why is my pain thus perpetual, and my wound in curable, which refuses to be
healed? Will thou be altogether unto me as waters that fail? Have thou
utterly rejected me? c. 14.19.
Has thy soul loathed me? Why have thou smitten me, and there is noe
healing for me? I look for peace, and there is noe good; and for the time of
healing, and behold trouble. But if I should thus expostulate in the phrase of
the Prophet, yet must I howsoever conclude with the Prophet, and say, verse. 20
I acknowledge, o Lord, my wickedness, and the iniquity of my fathers; for we
have sinned against thee. Yet, me thinks, these spotts will as hardly go out
of my mind, as out of my body. The express word of God to the Israelites was,
Ye shall not make any cutting in your flesh for the dead, nor print any marks
upon you: Lev. 1^ 28.
I am the Lord. And good reason there was for this prohibition; for they were
very apt to be led by the heathens, among whom it was a custom at the death of
their friends to lament and cut themselves: it was their manner also to make
incisions in their flesh, and to fill up the wounds with Stibium, or ink. But
I, alas, do find here such prints and marks in my flesh, as the very heathen
themselves would have stood amazed at; yet these are notcarved by the violence
of my self, but by the finger of my God. I must therefore content my self, and
rejoice at the sight of them, Iam: 1.17.
since they proceed from him who is the father of lights (allthough they
presage darkness unto me) for every good gift, and every perfect gift is
from above. This gift does not seem in it self to be either good or perfect
but upon second, and more serious cogitations, if my true repentance ensue upon
them, I shall find that they will hasten me to the best good, to the chiefest
perfection; even to the Kingdom which is purchased for me by the blood of my
Redeemer. Job 16.12.
Alas I cannot choose but cry out with Job, and say, I was at ease, but he
has broken me asunder: he has also taken me by my neck, and shaken me to
pieces, and set me up for his mark. Or with Jeremiah: Lam: 3.12.
He has bent his bow, and set me as a Mark for the arrowe. Or with Job
again, through the extreamitie of my sorrow I am enforced to expostulate with
my God, Job 7.20.
and say, Why have thou set me as a mark against thee, so that I am a burden
to my self? But I will silence my self in his words again, and say, I have
sinned; What shall I do unto thee, o thou preserver of men?

When it pleased the All-mighty to preserve his children in the city of
Jerusalem, when the rest should be destroyed, he commanded a man that was
clothed with linen, Eze: 9.2. verse: 4.
and had a writer's inke-horne by his side, to go through the midst of the
city, through the midst of Jerusalem, and to set a mark upon the foreheads of
the men that sighed, and that cried for all the abominations that were done in
the midst thereof. A mark I have too; yea more then one, and one, and one,
though not in my fore head; and they are set on as if they proceeded from the
ink of the writer: but, woe is me, I have either not cried at all, or not
enough either for mine own sins, or for the abominations of Jerusalem: how
then can I hope to escape the destruction? And yet he that spared them, if he
please, can spare me likewise: for his hand is not shortened, Is: 59.1
that it cannot save; neither is his ear heavy, that he cannot hear, 2.
King 20.1.
When Hezekiah was commanded to set his house in order; and it was told him
that he should die, and not live; verse: 2.
he turned his face to the wall, and prayed unto the Lord, and wept sore:
verse: 3. verse: 5.
and presently Isaiah was sent unto him to tell him. Thus says the Lord, the
God of David thy father, I have heard thy prayer, I have seeno thy tears;
behold I will heal thee: and I will add unto thy days fifteen years.
verse: 6.
He may be pleased to say unto me too, as he did unto Hezekiah; for I also
weep; yea I weep very sore: and I also pray; yea I pray heartily, Ps: 22.19.
and say, Be not thou far from me, o Lord: o my strength have thee to help
me. But Hezekiah was more righteous then I am; 2. King 20.3.
for he walked before the Lord in truth, and with a perfect heart, and did
that which was good in his sight: Romans 7 18. Number: 12.13.
whereas in me dwells noe good thing. But Miriam was a woman as I am, yea
and sinful; and yet when she was Leprous, Moses cried unto the Lord for her,
and said, Heal her now o God I besiech thee; and she was shut out from the
camp but seven days, verse. 15
and was healed. O but she had a Moses to pray for her, whereas I, alas, have
none; I have noe such Moses to pray for me. But what, shall I therefore remain
quite destitute of all hopes? Shall I despair of the goodness, and the tender
mercies of the most high? Noe; I may not; I must not; for that would but
increase my sin, and add to my torments. The woman in the Gospel who for
twelve years space had an issue of blood, Mar: 5.25.
and had suffered many things of many physicians, and had spent all that she
had and was nothing bettered, verse: 26 verse: 27
but rather grew worse; she only came behind my Jesus, verse: 29
and touched his garment; and straight way the fountain of her blood was dried
up, and she felt in her body that she was healed of that plague. verse: 33
With that fearing and trembling woman therefore will I in like manner fall
down before him, and tell him all the truth. I will confess unto him all my
sins; or, at least, so many as possibly I can call to my remembrance. Who
knows but that he may say unto me as he did unto her, verse: 34
Daughter thy faith has made thee whole; go in peace, and be whole of thy
plague. I am resolved to take noe repulse. The whole multitude even the
multitude of my sins shall not hinder me, (though they rebuke me) that I
should hold my peace: but (with the blind man in the Gospel) I will cry so
much the more, Lu: 18.39.
Jesus thou son of David have mercy on me. Or (if that prayer be too short)
while he shall prolong my time I will compose and settle my self to a larger
form, and earnestly fervently, zealously I will pray unto him, and say.

The Prayer.
O Eternal, and most merciful Lord God, whose eyes are ten thousand times
brighter then the Sun, and yet thou vouchsafest to look with thine eye of
providence even upon the meanest of the children of men: Lu: 1.48. Ps: 38.9
reguard (I besiech thee) the low estate of thine afflicted hand-mayd. Thou
know all my desires; and my groaning is not hid from thee. To thee the
pollutions of my poor soul are more naked and open, then these spotts in my
flesh are obvious to my sight. The fowlenesse of my corruptions have conspired
with the infectious air to cause these stains in my skinn: and by them I am
commanded to prepare for my dissolution. Lord if thou have decreed by these
means to free me from this world of pain and misery, be pleased to
translate me from hence to the joy of thee my Lord and Master. Mat. 25 23.
Give me (o my father) a sight of mine imperfections: make me loath them, and
tremble at them, more then I do at these messengers of death. Weane me from
the love of sin by the consideration both of thy displeasure, and mine own
mortality. These spotts appear like so many eyes, which seem to stare me in
the face, and would affright me with horror: and all because I had not
allways a consideration that thine eyes in every place do behold the evil,
Prove. 15.3.
and the good. Blessed God give me a sight of my corruptions, and a
detestation of them; Ps. 51.9
and then turn thou thy face away from my sins, and blot out all mine
iniquities. Speak peace, and health unto my wounded soul, which every minuit
expects thy coming. Lord thou art a God who can not abide to behold
unrighteousness: look not therefore with thy wrathful eye upon me who am all
sin. and pollution; but upon thy Son, and his sufferings. Or if thou can
not choose but look upon me, first cloth me with the righteousness of that
immaculate Lamb; so shall thou see me with love and delight, and I shall
behold thee with unspeakeable joy. Prepare me, o my God, that I may be a fit
guest to be called and invited to the supper of the Lamb. Reu: 19.9.
Seal unto my soul the remission of mine offenses; and then make me
willingly to resign up my body to thine own disposing. Yet thou may speak
the word (if so thou please) and thy servant may be healed. Mat. 8.8. Luc. 17
15.
There was a Leper in the Gospel who fell down at thy feet, o Jesus, giving
thee thunks, verse: 16
and with a loud voice glorifying thy name, because thou had healed him. It
is as easy for thee to restore me in like manner, Hos: 5: 13.
as thou did that Leper. When Ephraim saw his sickness, and went to the
Assyrian; and Judah saw his wound, and sent to King Iareb; there was found noe
healing, nor curing of the wounds: but those that come unto thee shall find
that thou art both able and willing to heal all those that are broken in
heart, Ps. 147 3.
and to give medicine to heal their sickness; for unto Israel thou did
proclayme thy self The Lord that heals. Ex: 15.26. Psl. 6.2.
Have mercy therefore upon me o Lord, for I am weak: o Lord heal me, for my
bones are vexed. Ps. 41.3 Ier: 17.14.
Strengthen me now upon my bed of languishing: make thou all my bed in my
sickness. Heal me, o Lord, and I shall be healed; save me, and I shall be
saved; for thou art my praise. c: 30.12.
O let not my bruise be incurable, though my wound be grievous. Let me have
one to plead my cause, verse: 13
even that Holy One, thine only begotten Son; that he may bind me up, and
give me healing medicines. Thou art he who did promise Jacob to correct him
in measure, verse: 11
though not to leave him altogether unpunished. Thou rebukest me for my sin,
Ps: 39.11.
and make my beauty to consume away like as it were a moath fretting a
garment. These Marks in my flesh do cause a trembling even in my spirit. Rev:
13.17. Ps: 86.16.
Lord grant that upon my soul be not found the mark of the beast, but the
mark of thy son, that he may own me for his. O turn thou unto me, and
have mercy upon me: give thy strength unto thy servant, and save thy
distressed hand-mayd. Show now some good token for good, verse: 17
that it may appear unto the world that thou Lord do help me, and comfort
me. But if in thy secret purpose thou have decreed at this time to gather me
unto my fathers; make me with joy and comfort to render mine account unto thee
the Lord of heaven and earth. Look not upon the sins and offenses of my
misse-led life; but rather look upon my Redeemer's death, Is: 53.5
who was wounded for my transgressions; bruised for mine iniquites: the
chastisement of my peace was laid upon him: by his stripes therefore let me be
healed. In the midst of the street of thy throne, o God, Reu: 22.2.
and of either side of the river of life there is a tree of life bearing twelve
manner of fruits; and the leaves of the tree are for the healing of the
nations. O my God let me but come to taste of those fruits: let me but be
shaded under the leaves of that tree of life. Ps: 41.4. Ps: 103 1.
Be merciful unto me: heal my soul, for I have sinned against thee. Then
shall my soul bless thee O my Lord: and all that is within me shall praise
thy holy name who forgivest all mine iniquities, verse: 3.
and can heal my diseases. Into thine hands I commend my spirit, Ps: 31.5
for thou have redeemed me o Lord, thou God of truth. The Spirit and the
bride say Come; Reu: 22.17.
therefore let me who now hear it, say Come. Let me hear thy voice; o God,
Gen: 3.8.
in the cool of the day; not in the heat of thy displeasure. And thou, o my
Jesus, who for such sinners were made a sacrifice on the altar of the cross;
how down thine ear as thou did upon the tree, and hear, and fulfill the
desires of thy wounded supplicant. Come o Jesus, and embrace me in thine
arms: hide me in thy wounded side from the wrath of thy father. In thee alone
do I trust: to thee alone do I flee: succor me, help me, save me, O
Christ. The world I leave: to thee I come. At the door of thy mercy do I
knock, I call, I cry. Lord protect me: Jesus comfort me. Strengthen my faith;
and confirm my hope. As my earthly body draws nearer to the earth; so do
thou draw my soul up nearer unto thee who art the father of spirits. Heb: 12 9.
O God make speed to save me. O Lord make have to help me. Finish soon
these days of sin, and then let me enter into thy celestial paradise; and
that for his sake in whom alone thou art well pleased, even Jesus Christ my
only Mediator, and Redeemer. Amen.

Tears of a Mother for the sickness of her child.
The Soliloquie.
THE EjACULATION.
Psalm. 5. verse. 1. Give ear to my words, o Lord; consider my meditation.

verse. 2. Hearken unto the voice of my cry, my king, and my God; for unto thee
will I pray.

IT shall come to pass (says Moses to the house of Israel) if thou will not
hearken to the voice of the Lord thy God, Deuteronomy: 28.15.
to observe to do all his commandments, and his statutes which I command thee
this day; that all these curses shall come upon thee, and overtake thee: verse:
16
Cursed shall thou be in the city, and cursed shall thou be in the field:
Cursed shall be thy basket, and thy store: verse. 17
yea Cursed shall be the fruit of thy body, etc. verse: 18
What, all these curses from heaven for the sins of poor distressed mortals?
O what a multitude of evils do our sins deserve! What punishment does not
iniquity cry for? It cries for the curse of the city, the decay of trading;
the curse of the field, whole rivers of blood in furious battles; the curse
of the basket and the store, the dearth of provisions. Yet all these are but
outward punishments, and reflect only upon the baser, the worse part of our
selves, the body: but Cursed shall be the fruit of the body: oh this biteth
like a Serpent, and stingeth like a Cockatrice. Prove: 23.32.
The fruit of my body Is afflicted with sickness: but is the sin of the
parent the cause of his affliction? Yes, yes: my conscience acknowledges the
guilt; let my tongue be as ready to confess it, and my heart to repent of it.
But how stands this with the justice of the Creator? Gen: 18.25.
Shall not the judge of all the earth do right? The Prophet Ezekiel tells me
from God that The son shall not bear the iniquity of the father; Eze: 18 20.
Mich: 7 6. Ier: 9.20.
neither shall the father bear the iniquity of the son; but the soul that
sins, it shall dye. Else the daughter might rise up against her mother (as
says the Prophet) and the women (by reason of the vengeance due for their
sins) might teach their daughters wayling, c: 31.29. Rom: 3 4.
if the sour grapes which the parents have eaten should set their childrens
teeth on edge.

But let God be true, and every man a liar, that he may be justified in his
sayings, and may overcome when he is judged. He it is who has threatened to
visit the iniquity of the fathers upon the children unto the third and fourth
generation of them that hate him. The sin is mine; Ex: 20.5.
but the punishment is mine infant's: and again the sin is mine infant's;
and the punishment is mine. And yet farther; The sin is of and from both; and
the punishment is inflicted upon both, His sufferance is my sorrow; and his
pains my distress. Lord what a due reward of sin is punishment! My child as
yet (it may be) knows not sin; and yet is he punished he knows not for
what. I know sin; and yet I stand not affrighted, not amazed at the
punishment thereof. Mat. 5.44.
I am commanded to love mine enemies; but doubtless sin is excepted for such
an enemy I am bound to hate. Ps. 139 22. Ps: 97.10.
O that I could hate it right sore, even as mine enemy! It is the Psalmist's
charge, O ye that love the Lord, see that ye hate the thing that is evil.
Could I thus do, it would bring peace to my self; and likewise might bring
health to my babe. Oh I now feel the sting of my sin piercing his body; and
the malignitie of my corruption breaking out in his disease. Adam in innocence
knew noe pain: but by reason of his fall, diseases are become the fruit of the
fruit. 2. King 5.27. verse: 23
Gehazy for sin was visited with the disease of Naaman the Syrian: and his
two talents of silver, and two changes of raiment burdening his conscience more
then the bodies of his servants, 2. Chr: 21.18. verse. 4.
bought him the Leprousie. The fire that Iehoram felt in his bowels made him
sensible of the punishment for his want of compassion to his brethren whom he
slew with the sword. Ex: 9.10.
The hardness of Pharaoh's heart made the ashes to turn into boyles, and
blaines in his body. 1. Cor: ^1.30.
The Corinthians not discerning the Lord's body, were therefore stricken with
sickness, weakness, and death. He that was encompassed by the bulls of
Basan, Ps: 22.12. Ps: 38.8 verse: 3.
complained that he roared for the disquietnesse of his heart: but with all
he says, There is noe health in my flesh because of thy displeasure; neither
is there any rest in my bones by reason of my sin. Lord how thou do use
me and my child as Gideon did once the Elders of the city; Iud: 8.16.
thou do scourge me with briers and thorns of the wilderness! Gen: 3.18.
The earth, for the sin of man, was cursed with the production of them; and
we, for sin, are scourged with that curse. Yet the briers and the thorns
scratch but the body of my languishing infant; but they even tear the soul of
me his sad and sorrowful mother. Yet I fast with David, 2. Sam. 12.22.
and I weep with David, and I cry with David, Who can tell whether God will be
gracious to me, that the child may live? This little lump of sinful clay
lies at the mercy of him that is the potter. It is framed, it is shaped into a
body; into a vessel: but diseases would crack it; sickness would break it.
At the taking of a besieged town that would not yield, though the men were to
be smitten with the edg of the sword, Deuteronomy: 20.14.
yet the women and the little ones were appointed to be spared. Lord I am one of
those women; my child is one of the little ones. Conquer thou, but spare: take
us, but preserve us. Thy mercy to heathen, could not be greater then it can be
to Christians.

Lord what shall I do? The infant still cries; and still the parent weepeth.
Sickness enforces the cries of the child; and the cries of the child enforce
the parents tears. O how my bowels yerne, and burn, and fry with in me;
and yet noe ease does come to my sweetest babe; noe comfort to my languishing
child! I read that Christ did chide his disciples for rebuking those who
brought the little ones unto him; and he said, Suffer little children, Mat: 19
13. verse. 14
and forbid them not to come unto me; for of such is the Kingdom of heaven.
To him, to him therefore will I go, and tender this youngling. But, alas, how
can a begging present be acceptable unto him? With what confidence can I give
him this child, when the offering is only a guiftlesse gift? Mine intent is
not to loose, but to gain: to give, but not to leave my child: to offer him to
God, but in hope that he will spare him a little while with me. And his
indeed he is: he has been his ever since he was offered unto him in the
temple; Rom: 6 4.
ever since he was buried with him by baptism. But perhaps he has since
that time been lost, and strayed from him: I will therefore take him in mine
arms, and carry him home again, I will carry him by water, for now it is
highflood; it is a springtide; mine eyes are full. We will swim together to
my Jesus; and of him I will beg I will cry for, I will prevail for his
pardon. I know that my Savior will hear; and he will be ready also to
forgive. He will forgive my child that ran away from him; and he will
forgive me my running with my child: and when he has forgiven, he will
certainly remitt the eternal punishment; and, it may be, the temporal
likewise. But how dare I, who am the greatest delinquent, to go with my child
the lesser sinner? How dare I to show my face to him, or appear in his
presence? His child (it is true) I am, as well as my babe: but I have also
offended him as much as my babe: yea more; a thousand thousand thousand,
million of millions of myriads of times more then he. This child as yet does
know noe malice, noe guile noe hypochrisie, noe envy noe evil speaking: but I
alas, not only know all, but also I harbor all, I foster all, I embosome
all; and yet my God says unto me (by the mouth of his Apostle) as well as
unto others, 1 Pet: 2 1.
Laying aside all malice, and all guile, and hypochrisies, and envies, and
evill-speakings, verse. 2.
As newborn babes desire ye the sincere milk of the word that ye may grow
thereby. His child I am, but (woe is me) I have not this long while sucked of
the breasts, the two testaments; or not eagerly; or not so understandingly as
he commands me to do, when he says, Be not children in understanding; 1.
Cor. 14.20.
howbeit in malice be ye children. O how infinitely worse am I then this my
child! He is humble, but I am proud, and haughty, and high-minded; Mat. 18 2.
yea though I know that Christ called once a little child (peradventure just
such a little child as mine is) and set it in the midst of his disciples, and
said, verily I say unto you, verse. 3.
Except ye be converted, and become as little children, ye shall not enter
into the Kingdom of heaven: verse: 4.
Whosoever therefore shall humble himself as this little child, the same is
greatest in the Kingdom of heaven. The least, me think's, I feign would be; I
would feign be greatest; the greatest in the Kingdom; yea the greatest in the
Kingdom of heaven: but the first I like not so well; it suites not so well
with wy disposition; I would not be humble. Though I am as little as was
Zacheus, Lu: 19.4.
yet I would be as high as was Zacheus too; yea though I climb up into a tree
for it. Yea I do climb; and into a tree too: O it is the tree of mine own
pride, and vanity; which bears leaves, goodly, broad, shadowing leaves; but
it bears noe fruit at all, nothing but keys; and those keys are fitted
only for the wide gate that leads to destruction; Mat. 7.13:
they will never un-lock the gates of heaven. This child is young; he is a
babe; a babe in age; a babe in growth. I am a babe; not in age, not in growth;
but such a one as the Corinthians were to whom the Apostle wrote, 1. Cor. 3.1.
and said that he could not speak unto them as unto spiritual but as unto
carnal even as unto babes in Christ. My child is young, and tender, and
simple; apt to be led with trifles; to stragle abroad with children; to be
carried any whither, at the pleasure of her to whose charge he is left. I am a
child too; a verier child then mine own; apt to be tossed to and fro, Ephesians.
4.14.
and carried about with every wind of doctrine, by the sleight of men, and
cunning craftiness whereby they lie in wayt to deceave. And now what shall I
do? I am the verier child of the two, the most sinful of the two; and yet my
child is afflicted with sickness, and to me noe other punishment is at
present allotted but the grief which I have for the sickness of my child. He
still cries; still must I therefore cry. He groaneth; and I must also groan.
Yea I do groan; I groan in spirit, that my Jesus may cure the diseases of my
soul. I groan too for my child, my pretty sweet babe, that my Jesus may
howsoever cure the infirmities of his soul; and (if he so pleases) recover
also the health of his body. This must be the way: to him I must thus go, Io.
14.6 Ps. 30.8
for he himself has styled himself the way. I will therefore cry unto the
Lord; and get me unto my Lord right humbly. I will go to the gate of the
physician, the gate of mercy; and there I will knock, and call, and cry for
entrance. I will fall upon my knees, and wring my hands, and smite my breast;
Is. 38.14.
and weep and mourn like a Crane and chatter like a Swallow, even until mine
eyes fail with looking upward: and thus will I say unto him.

The Prayer.
Great God, whose power is irresistible, and whose pleasure is the rule of thy
servant's obedience: bow down thine ear to my sad entreaties. Thou have
stricken me with sorrow, who have not mourned for the cause: and by the
sickness of mine infant thou have taught me the frailty of our mortal
bodies. I see that all flesh is as grass; 1. Pet. 1.24.
and the glory thereof but as the flower of the field. Mine impenitent heart (I
must confess) deserves thy justice; and my sinful life this punishment of my
tender infant. But thou, o Lord, art merciful, though I am sinful: and art
apt to forgive those that truly repent. O my God I desire to be sorrowful for
mine offenses: and earnestly I besiech thee to give me true contrition for all
my sins. Job. 7.20.
O thou preserver of men, remitt both my sins, and the punishment which is
justly due unto me for them; that I may rejoice in thy mercy, and magnify
thee for thy goodness. Look graciously upon this child who feels the
scourge (though gently) of thy justice due both for his, and for my
transgressions. O let not thy wrathful displeasure continue upon him: nor my
greater crimes cause an addition unto his torments. Thy servant David confessed
his sins, and submitted to thy rod: but yet he cried concerning his people,
2. Sam. 24.19.
and said, These sheep what have they done? I dare not justify this thy
patient; but I must needs acknowledge that for mine iniquities as well as for
his thou thus do wound him. But o thou who did once command, Mat. 19 14.
that little children should be brought unto thee; and did prefer them for
patterns both of innocence, and humility: show now thy power in the
weakness of this child. Enable him with patience to endure thy visitation:
and direct me to the means which may conduce to his recoverie, if thou in thy
secret decree have so determined it. Ps. 6.2.
Have mercy upon him o Lord, for he is weak: o Lord heal him, and free him
from his sufferings. Thou art he that tookest him out of my womb; Ps. 22.9.
Ps. 9.13. Ps. 41.2.
and can as easily (if thou please) lift him up now from the gates of
death. Preserve him, o God, (if it may be thy heavenly pleasure) and keep him
alive, that he may be blessed upon earth: o heal his soul, and raise him up
again. Give a blessing to the means which shall be used for his recovery; Ps.
119 91. Ps. 56.8
that all things in their order may be known to serve thee. O let the tears
of me thine afflicted supplicant be put into thy botle; and let the cries of
me thy mournful hand-mayd, who beg for this infant, be heard in the ears of
thee the Lord of hosts. Thou thy self did weep, o Christ, Io. 11.35.
for the death of Lazarus: take compassion therefore on the weeping mother of
this diseased child. O let not my tears be shed in vain; but mercifully free
this infant from his anguish, and sufferings. Yet howsoever thou have decreed,
righteous father not my will, Mat: 26.39. Ier: 10.24.
but thy will be done. Only let me besiech thee to visit him in mercy, and
not in thy fury; lest he be consumed, and brought to naught. Make him able to
bear what thou determinest to send; and in thy good time raise him out of this
misery. Lord give me also a willing submission to thy holy pleasure, that so
I may neither discover too much fondness of affection to this my beloved
issue, when I see him subject to frailty and mortality: nor too immoderately
grieve, if thou receavest him to thy self. Forgive whatsoever is amiss, in
him; and let his soul de dear, and precious in thy sight. O Let thy mercy
plead against thy severitie; let thy gracious promises be had in thy
remembrance: and let thy Christ be heard in his intercession both for me and
mine. To thy will, o Lord, make me readily submitt: to thy holy pleasure make
me willingly yield. Thine is this infant, Ps: 39.13.
and thou lentest him me: o spare him a little that he may recover his
strength before he go hence, and be noe more seen. To thy pleasure, o
heavenly father, I willingly refer him, besieching thee to send him thy grace
while he shall remain upon earth; and after that, receave him into glory, for
the worthiness of thine only begotten Son Jesus Christ our only Lord, and
Savior. Amen.

Tears of a Mother for the death of her child.
The Soliloquie.
THE EjACULATION.
Psalm. 5. verse. 1. Give ear to my words, o Lord; consider my meditation.

verse. 2. Hearken unto the voice of my cry, my king, and my God; for unto thee
will I pray.

WHen all wept, Luc: 8.52.
and bewailed the little daughter of Iairus, my Jesus forbad their tears,
saying, She is not dead, but sleeps. O sweet comfort to the lamenting
mother, whose only daughter should return from the dead. She that had shed
the tears of sorrow for the loss of her joy, was then to shed tears of joy
for the recoverie of the deceased. But I weep, and weep, Lam: 1.2.
and continually weep; the tears are on my cheeks; for my child is dead, and
I have noe hope of receaving him again to life. I, alas, am not the wife of a
ruler of the temple: I have noe Jesus here in the flesh to work such a miracle
for me. My poor child is dead; and (hopeless, and helpless as I am) there
is noe recovering, there is noe recalling him. Yet stay: howsoever I will call;
I will cry; me think's he should not be dead: who knows but my sweet babe
may hear me? Who knows but my Redeemer may awake him again? The daughter
of Iairus was dead to her parents; but she was not dead to the Messiah, He
who will one day awake the dead, and rowze them from the graves, can now (if
he pleases) speak as powerfully to my babe. My Savior can; for he himself
is neither dead, nor sleeps. True it is that once he dyed; yea he dyed for
me; and so for mine infant too: but he rose again, and from thence-forth can
die noe more; Rom: 6 9.
death has noe more dominion over him. This living Savior of mine may (if he
please) restore my dead child. I will call him: peradventure he may awake.
Son, o my son, my child, my love, my joy, my dearest infant; where art
thou? Where strayest thou? Whither wanderest thou? Return, return little
Saint, and cheer up the drooping spirits of thy fainting mother. What, noe
answer? Noe speech? Not so much as a groan, or a sigh? Will this frozen clod
of earth be noe more ^he carkenet of his immortal soul? Oh he is fled; he is
gone; he is past re-call: alas what shall I do? Is this the blessing of the
womb, ^o enjoy a child for a year or two; and then ^o have it hasten to the
womb of the earth? Is this the joy, the delight that women have in the fruit of
their bodies; Gen: 3.16.
only to conceave in sorrow; to travel in anguish; and when they are
delivered, after a year or two to be bereft of them in a moment? Could not
thousands of kisses, and dandlings, and dauncings: nay could not sckreeches,
and groans, and cries call back my child? Alas, noe: I see they could not: all
was in ^aine. He who called Lazarus from the grave, has called my little one
to the grave. His soul is with him; and nothing now but his body is left, with
me. From him I would not pluck him, me think's, if I might; for he is at
peace with him. From me, me thinks, I would not have had him call him; for
he knows how I loved him: and yet his will, not mine must be fullfilled. O
that I could so rest satisfied with the rest of my sweet infant! But why do I
only wish so? I must likewise practice it, Act. 5.29.
lest happily (as Gamaliel said unto the Jews) I be found even to fight
against God. I will therefore resolve with David, and say, 2 Samuel 12.23.
Now he is dead wherefore should I fast? Can I bring him back again? I shall
go to him, but he shall not return to me. I shall go, when he who keeps
my child in his arms shall be pleased so to embrace me likewise, and to seat
me in his Kingdom by my dearest child. Why then should I envy my little one
the joys of eternity? If I weep too much, I may discover a discontent at his
highest preferement. If I truly loved him I shall never envy him, allthough I
shall desire that to those heavenly mansions I may certainly follow him. Young
he was while mine he was; very young; tender; weak: and yet as young as he
was, he now is suddenly grown older then my self: he is my better; he is
my senior, and has gotten before me into glory. Yea and his passage thither
was fair, and gentle too, if I consider his sins which he suffered for
only in his sickness. His rich soul espied a crevise, a chinke, a flaw in
his muddie earth made by his disease, and so escaped; flew away; even with the
wings of that dove, that blessed Spirit, Ps: 55.6
which David panted for, and wished for, and cried for, saying, O that I had
the wings of a dove; Genesis 7.1. King 13.24. 2. King 2.24. Number: 21 6. Gen: 19 24.
for then would I flee away, and be at rest. Had my child been drowned, as was
the old world; or torn in pieces by Lions, as was the disobedient Prophet; or
by Bears, as were the forty and two children that mocked Elisha; or stung
with Serpents, as were the murmuring Israelites; or burnt with fire and
brimstone, as were Sodom and Gomorrha; or swallowed up quick by the yawning,
number: 16.33. act: 12 23.
gaping, devouring earth, as were Corah, Dathan, and Abiram; or had he been
smitten by the Angel of God, and eaten up of worms, of vermin, as was Herod
Agrippa; then my grief indeed might have been increased; my sorrows might
have been multiplied: and yet at length (if it had been so) I ought to have
been contented: at length (if I belong unto him to whom my child is gone) I
must have taken up the resolution of patient, of holy, of devout Job, and have
said, The Lord gave, Job. 1.21.
and the Lord has taken away; blessed be the name of the Lord. But my God has
been more merciful both to me, and mine; for he made much of my child; and
finding him a little froward, a little wayward, a little unquiet, he gently laid
him down to sleep. He sent a gentle disease to rock him, to sing him to
sleep. And seeing that he thus gently, thus securely sleepe's in God, even in
that God who never sleeps, surely whilst I awake I will sing, and give
praise, My glory shall awake; Ps: 57.8
my Lute and Harp shall awake; all my joys, all my pleasures, all my contents
shall awake, and praise him, and magnify him for ever. And yet (for all this
my resolution, for all my serious purpose thus to do) I find that in my music
I stop upon a fret. That sudden sigh stole from my heart unawares. It may be
that it was ashamed to stay there; and so slanke away. What, another? Nay, this
is too much. King Solomon tells me that there is a time to weep; Ecc: 3.4.
but he does not tell me that that time must continue so long as I continue
here upon earth. What though I am a traveller? I must sometimes rest. What
though I am an exul, a stranger, a sojourner here, as all my fathers were? I
must have a lodging, I must have a chamber, I must have a room; and in that
room, and in that chamber I may, I must have some rest. Yea and I must have
some delight in it too; and that not on^e alone, but continually: for so I am
commanded by the Apostle, Phil: 4.4.
who says, Rejoice in the Lord allways and again I say rejoice. Diverse
indeed for diverse causes have wept; but they have not allways wept. Gen:
27.38.
Esau lifted up his voice, and wept: but it was for the loss of his father's
blessing. The Elders of Ephesus wept, Act: 20 38. 2. Chr: 35 25.
yea they all wept sore; but it was sorrowing most of all for the words that
Paul had spoken unto them, that they should see his face noe more. A mourning I
read of that was in Hadadrimmon in the valley of Megiddo, when Jeremiah
lamented; and all the singing men and the singing women spoke of their King in
their lamentations, and made them an ordinance in Israel. That was for Josiah,
who was slain by the army of Pharaoh Necho, in the valley of Megiddo. In
Ramah was a voice heard, Ier: 31.15.
lamentation, and bitter weeping. Rachel weeping for her children, because they
were not. This me thinks come's home close, near to me. This was for the
captivity of Judah and Benjamin: or it was for the infants slain by that
bloody, that presecuting Herod. Here are children lamented; so far the cause
of the weeping complyeth with mine. But neither is my child slain by a
murderer; nor yet is he lead into captivity. Noe; Ephesians: 4.8.
he who did lead captivity captive, has freed my son from the fetters,
Rom: 8 21.
from the bondage of corruption, into the glorious liberty of ^he sons of
God. My child was not slain as were all the children that were in Bethlehem,
and in all the coasts thereof, Mat: 2.16.
from two years old, and under. Noe; He who was slain for him has saved
him. He who has swallowed up death in victory, Is: 25.8 Hos: 13 14.
has ransomed him from the power of the grave, and redeemed him from death.
Lord, though I am a weak, though a sinful woman, make me for ever to praise
thee for this thy goodness; Ps: 107 8.
and to declare the wonders that thou have done both for me, and mine. When
the woman of Samaria came to draw water at Jacob's well, my bountiful Jesus
freely gave her to drike of the living water, Io: 4.14.
which became in her a well of water springing up into ever-lasting life. I am
such a woman as she was: mine eyes have resembled the mouth of Jacob's well:
and though the well be deep, even deep as my heart, yet something I have had
to draw the water with. My child, mine infant has drawn, and drawn, until I
am even almost drawn dry: And in this agony, and in this distress my
Christ has come to cleanse my well, to sanctify my tears, and to ease me of
my grief. 1. King. 3.26.
My bowels indeed did yearne upon my child, as that woman's did whose issue
should have been divided for the satisfaction of the harlot. My child is
divided, though hers were spared. The better part of him, the soul is gone; it
is gone to God; for his it is, it is his own share: nothing but the earth of
him remains with me. But I will, I must be thankful: and though I find a
reluctance in my chillowed heart, yet the Prophet forbids weeping for the
dead, Ier: 22.10.
and bemoaning of them. Let me beg for patience, for submission, for
content, and say.

The Prayer.
BLessed Lord God, Ps: 68.20.
unto whom belong the issues from death; vouchsafe to hear the cry of thy
mourning hand-mayd. Thou were pleased once to bless me with increase; and to
make me a joyful mother of my now dead infant. But oh that, that very child
which was framed and fashioned by thee, is now come unto thee. The first that
sinned was a woman, tempted by the Serpent; Genesis 3.13.
and that Serpent in his temptation stung so deep that it has reached now
even to the fruit of my womb for the sins of my self. Yet Lord look down
in mercy upon me, though a sinful woman; though the most unworthy of my sex;
Mat. 15.28.
even far inferior to that woman of Canaan: for herfaith was great, but I
alas, have noe faith at all; or but a weak one, or but a dead one: otherwise
the promises of my Redeemer would control my passion, and the assurance of his
mercies would dry up my tears. Thou, o Lord, have freed mine infant from the
burden of the flesh; yet I go heavily for it, as if it were lost in my
despair. Thou have crowned it with immortality; and yet my passion declares
that I mourn as if it were lost. Ps: 38.9
O Lord God thou know all my desires; and my groaning is not hid from thee.
Thou see how my tears do flow through mine infirmity: thou hear my
sighs which arise from my dis-content. I confess it, I am sorrowful for it, I
am ashamed of it: Act. 7.60.
Lord lay not this sin to my charge. Thou have taken nothing but thine own:
O be pleased so to make me thine own by grace; and then shall I be assured
(in thine own due time) to be received into glory. Allay the heat of my
passion by the pleasant gales of thy refreshing Spirit. Grant that my tears
may be kept for my sins; and my sad laments for my deplorable condition
through my many offenses. My heart is heavy for the loss of my child; o Lord
lighten it, o Lord ease and comfort it with thy heavenly grace. Ps: 94.19.
In the multitude of sorrows which I have in my heart, let thy comforts, o
Lord, refresh my soul. My child (thou know) was dear unto me, because it
was thy pleasure to lend him unto me. He was, and he is dear unto thee; and
thou have expressed thy love in delivering him fron the evil, 1. These. 1.10.
2. Tim: 2.11.
from the wrath to come. He is deal in Christ; Lord let me be dead with
Christ, that I may also live with Christ. My child is dead because he was
sinful; but his uttermost farthing was discharged by Christ. O thou who art
rich in mercy, Ephesians: 2.4.
for the great love wherewith thou have loved mankind, grant that I may not
dye in sin, but to it; that so I may be quickened together with thy Son.
Make me to yield my self unto thee, Rom: 6 13.
as those that are alive from the dead; and my members as instruments of
righteousness unto thee my God. Forgive my excess of love to him that is
gone; my excess of tears and sighs that have been caused by his departure;
my want of patience, and submission to thy holy pleasure; and my raging
outcries which have given an evil example of impatience unto others, and a
scandal to ^y religion. It was thy pleasure to free mine ^nfant from the
tyranny of sin: it was thy love, it was thy mercy to take him, that so he
^ight sin noe more. Lord unto thy will (...) submit my will: and for thy
love, for thy mercy, for thy goodness I praise thee, I bless ^hee, I magnify
thee my Lord and my God. Vipe (I besiech thee) from mine eyes all ears of
discontent: remove from mine heart he excess of sorrow: and make me walk in
^y vocation with cherfulness; and in my ^eligion with setlednesse, and
resolution. The ^ortalitie of my child has taught me the ^ailty even of my
self: grant therefore, bles^ed God, that the longer I live the better I may
^ow both in grace and goodness; that so when his painful life shall have an
end, I may ^eete thee my God with comfort; thee my Jesus with joy and
rejoicing; and my deceased child together with the rest of the quire of Saints
with heavenly Halelujahs; and sing praise, Reu. 5.13.
and honor, and glory unto thee who sit upon the throne, and to the Lamb
for ever mere. Amen.

Tears of a wife for the sickness of her husband.
The Soliloquie.
THE EjACULATION.
Psalm. 5. verse. 1. Give ear to my words, o Lord consider my meditation:

verse. 2. Hearken unto the voice of my cry, my king, and my God; for unto thee
will I pray.

LOrd, how various is the condition of mortals! Sometimes we are sick, and
sometimes we are well. Sometimes in sickness we draw near to the grave; and
sometimes again we are in hope of recoverie. It Is thus, o it is thus with my
dearest husband. He who was my comfort and joy in his health, is now my grief^
and sorrow in his sickness. The extreamitie o^ his anguish enforces my
tears; and those conflicts of his between life and death do pierce me even
to the soul. I am, me thinks, so divided in my tears, that I cannot well
determine whether the greatest number of them ^re shed for the torments which
he suffers, ^r for the loss of mine own content, or for the ^aines which
love and loyalty enforce me to ^ake, or for fear of his departure. All of
them ^ow from the springs of love; and are ready ^o convert me into a gliding
stream^ When Eve was arraigned for enticing her (...) ^o the act of
disobedience, Gen: 3.16.
it was part of her ^unishment that her desire should be subject unto her
husband, and he should rule over her. Me think's I could be well contented to
under go this servitude, so that my husband might not under-goe this
sickness. Alas his ^isease is grown so violent that it even darke^eth his
reason; and makes him desire he knows not what. I would gladly obey him ^n
whatsoever he commands, but that I must not yield unto all his desires in
this time of his weakness. I must now obey the Physitian's order; and follow
those directions which he prescribes. O the misery of sickness, which so
enfeebleth the brain that it un-man's a husband, and pretends to free the
wife from the yoke of obedience. Now my desires must not be subject to my
dearest husband, if he requires that which may hinder his recovery: yet
howsoever my desires shall be for him, when they may not be to him; for I will
beg of the Lord to ease him of his misery, and to restore him to health. O
me think's I am not as I should be, because I want the comfort, and direction
of my head. He, poor man, i^ grown as feeble by sickness as I am by sex:
and allthough the torment be his, yet the sorrow is mine. When I remember the
un^kindnesse of the Amalekite to his sick servant, I cannot choose but wonder
at the greatness of the inhumanitie. 1. Sam. 30.13.
The master left his sick Egyptian when the enemy pursued; as if it h^d been
a high offense to want his health. Io sickness we have a certain trial of a
friend, He that only affects us in health, and leaves us in weakness, is
but a pretender to friendship, and truly loves us not. O who would leave a
languishing man, that knows not how to help himself? Me think's I rejoice
(though in my greatest perplexity) that God-hath given me both power and
ability to comfort my dearest. I howerly visit him, though not without tears:
and when I most endeavor to be a comforter unto him, even then, alas, I am
enforced to weep. Thus his very potiens are mixed with the drops that distill
from mine eyes; and at every turn I am so sensible of his misery, that I do
in a manner embalme him alive with mine abundant tears, allthough I yet have
hope of his recoverie. 2. King 8.7.


When Benhadad the King of Assyria was sick, he sent Hazael to meet Elisha
the man of God, and enquire of the Lord by him, saying, Shall I recover of this
disease? verse. 8.
Me think's I could gladly perform that office of Hazael, but where shall I
meet with-such a Prophet as Elisha? Alas it is not in the power of man to
limit our times: it is God alone who numbereth our days. I must therefore leave
my curiosity, and submit to his pleasure. And yet in my submission I cannot
leave weeping; for even nature allows me a freedom to mourn. David grieved
when his very enemies were sick: for so he says, As for me, Ps. 35.13.
when they were sick my clothing was sackcloth; I humbled my soul with
fasting. How much rather may I be allowed to grieve for my friend for my
husband! Who knows but that my sin may be the cause of his misery? By my
tears of sorrow I will therefore strive to remove the cause. It is in the power
of my Redeemer both to forgive me, and to recover him. But alas so long as he
is sick I cannot be well. So long as the head is troubled the body must needs
be disturbed. He is my head, and I am his glory. 1. Cor. 11.3. verse. 7.
Alas what comfort can I receave, when my head is sick? What glory can he take
in the wife of his bosom, when the violence of his pain depriveth him of my
society?

But why do I utter these words of discontent as if it were in the power of
man to recover my beloved? It is god alone that sends sickness, and that
sends health: on him therefore alone will I depend, and in him alone will I
hope. Saint Paul relates that Epaphroditus was sick, Phil. 2.27.
nigh unto death: but God (says he) had mercy on him; and not on him only,
but on me also, lest I should have sorrow upon sorrow. My dear husband is
sick, as was Epaphroditus; yea and (for ought that I know) he may be sick unto
death too: but I will trust in the Lord that he will have mercy upon him, and
restore him; yea and on me also that I may not be drowned in the floods of
sorrow. Mat. 8.14. verse. 15
When Jesus came into Peter's house, he saw his wive's mother laid, and sick
of a fever: And he did but touch her hand and the fever left her, and she
arose, and ministered unto them. My Jesus does still retain both his mercy and
his power. Though his body be absent, yet his spirit is present. He can if he
please, reach down from heaven; Deuteronomy: 4 34.
for he has a mighty hand, and a stretched-out arm. O that he would but
touch his patient, that so his disease might leave him, and that he might
arise and serre the Lord! The Prophet David did highly extol the goodness of
the Lord when he acknowledged saying, Ps: 30.3
O Lord thou have brought up my soul from the grave: thou have kept me alive
that I should not go down to the pit. Do thou the same, o my God, for thine
afflicted servant.

My Redeemer was pleased to tell the Pharisees that the husband and the wife
are noe more twain, but one flesh; and therefore he concluded, saying, What
God has joined together let not man put asunder. Mat: ^9 6.
My husband and my self are joined together by the sacred institution of holy
wedlock, which makes us one; for we have but one God, one body, one mind, one
affection: wherefore then should any thing attempt to separate us? Yet we may
be Separated: and if this divorce be not wrought by man, it infringeth not the
law of God. Sickness may make, yea and at this time it does make an
un-wellcome separation: yet though we are separated, we are not divided. But
I must find out more in this separation then barely the sickness. I must look
up unto him who sent this sickness; and that is God. He may separate us
indeed whenever he pleases. He may send his executioner, that pale, and
grimme death, with his sharpest Sickle; and give him power to reap down
either one; or both of us. That is the effect of sin; and I cannot deny but I
have deserved to be deprived of my husband, because I have many ways offended
him who sent him unto me. In the time of his health did I expect his
sickness? Did I provide for this evil day? Nay, did I not rather pride my
self as Babylon did, Reu: 18 7.
and say in mine heart, I sit as a Queen, and am noe widow, and shall see noe
sorrow? Certainly his sickness is also sent as a scourge unto me: for, being
flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bone, I cannot choose but be sensible of
the anguish which he suffer's. Yet, allthough it is just with God to deprive
me of my husband because of my rebellions; I have hope in his mercy if I can
but confess my wickednesses, Ps. 38.18. Eze. 34 16.
and be sorry for my sins. He promised once by the mouth of his Prophet,
saying, I will seek that which was lost, and bring again that which was
driven away, and will bind up that which was broken, and will strengthen that
which was sick. O my God make good this promise now to thy languishing servant.
He is one of thy flock: he is one of thy weak, and tender Lambs. True it is
that he was lost, when he went astray after his own inventions: but now as
thou have found him in this thy visitation, so let him find thee in the
gentlnesse of his correction. Seek him, o my God, who was lost; bring him
again unto thee, who was driven from thee by the suggestions of the tempter;
bind him up, for he is broken; Ps. 41.3
and strengthen him now upon the bed of languishing: make thou all his bed in
this his sickness.

Moses did assure the children of Israel, that If they would hearken to the
judgments of God, Deuteronomy. 7 12. verse 15
and keep, and do them, Then the Lord would take away from them all
sickness, and would put none of the evil diseases of Egypt upon them. O my
Lord be pleased to make thy feeble servant willing to hearken to thy judgments,
and ready to keep them; and then in thy good time release him from his
sickness. Again the Lord at another time did comfort his people, Ex. 23.25.
and said unto them, Ye shall serve the Lord your God, and I will take
sickness away from the midst of thee. O that my God would be pleased to draw
this languishing patient to his holy service, and accept of that service, and
then free him from this sickness! He who has woundded him, even the same can
cure him; and he expects noe reward; only he requires the heart. But alas
the very heart of my husband is tormented with sickness; he is sick at the
heart; and the Lord does say, Mal. 1.8.
If ye offer the lame and the sick, is it not evil? But what then shall he
do? He can offer noe other then what he has. Let it be thy goodness, o
God, to ture him of his lamenesse; to ease him of his sickness; and then
accept of the whole man, for he is wholly thine.

He who so friendly speaks to the house of Israel, and justifies himself
unto them, saying, O my people what have I done unto thee, Mich. 6.3.
and wherein have I wearied thee? Even the same God notwithstanding threatens
the wicked that he will make them sick in smiting verse: 13
them. My poor husband now is sensible of his wrath, because he had formerly
refused his mercy. Even he and my self have been apt to forget our good God
when he did not weary us; and therefore now he does make us sick in this
smiting us. Yet there is hope; for even the same God is ours who was the God of
Daniel; and that Prophet says, Dan: 8.27.
I Daniel fainted, and was sick certain days: afterward I rose up, and did
the King's business. My poor husband faints too; oh he is sick too: but I
will pray unto my God to raise him up again, that so he may do the King's
business; even the business of him who is King of Kings, Reu: 17.14.
and Lord of Lords. For this I will besiech him; and I will beg of him, that
in the bowels of his compassion he will open his ears to the cry of his
hand-mayd, whilst I power out my prayer and supplication unto him, and say.

The Prayer.
INcomprehensible God, whose works are deep, and whose ways are past finding
out: who smitest in thy wrath, and yet in thy wrath remembrest mercy: Hab. 3.2.
be pleased to stretch forth thine hand, and visit in mercy thine afflicted
patient. Thou art the good Samaritane from whom alone we can expect the oil
of gladness, Lu: 10.33. Ps: 45.7
and the wine of consolation. O remember not the iniquities either of my sick
Lord, or my sinful self: for we know that in thy justice thou may tear us
in pieces, Ps: 50.22. Is: 53.5
when there can be none to deliver us. O thou who did suffer thy self to be
wounded for our transgressions, be pleased to cure the wounds and maladies both
of the soul and body of thy distressed servant. Thou know, Lord, that the
feeble soul cannot praise thee with cherfulness, nor serve thee with
alacrity. The sickness of the body disturbeth the soul, and makes it un-apt
to serve thee with readiness. O say of his disease that It is enough; and
remove from him speedily this heavy visitation. Thine hand, o Lord, is laid
upon him; and the stroke is so heavy, that it wounds us both. Merciful God
let the sins of both of us be blotted out of thy remembrance like a cloud;
Is: 44.22.
and be appeased with us through the merits of thy Son. Mar: 2.17.
The whole have noe need of thee the physician, but we that are sick: O be
thou the Physician to cure our souls; and then, in thy good time, restore thy
diseased servant to his former health. But if thou have sent him this sickness
as a messenger of death, o give him patience to bear, and willingness to
suffer whatsoever thou sendest. Rank him not in the number of those rich and
wicked, Eccl. 5.17.
who have much sorrow, and wrath in their sickness; but ease his sorrow, and
appease thy wrath. Make him willing to submit to thy will and pleasure, that so
whether he lives, Romans 14.8.
he may live unto thee: or whether he dies, he may dye unto thee: yea
whether he lives or dies, that he may be thine. Luc. 18 13.
Lord be likewise merciful to me a sinner. Thou know how deeply this
affliction wounds me. To him thou gave me whom now thou visitest, that so
he might be both my head, and my directour: and thou know my weakness and
my frailties, that I cannot understand, I cannot walk in thy ways without a
counselor, I cannot apprehend what I read, Act. 8.31.
except some man should guide me. O be thou pleased therefore to spare his life
whom I am commanded to learn of at home: 1. Cor. 14.35.
for if thou call him to the joy of thine heavenly Kingdom, let it be thy
goodness to moderate my sorrow upon earth. If thou take him from my
society, let me not be left alone; but send me the comforter, even thy holy
Spirit to be my Protector, and my guide unto death. Ps. 48.14.
Release him of his torments whom thou visitest with this sickness; and ease
thou my sorrows which arise from his pains. Give the comforts of thy Spirit
both to him and me, that when this painful life shall have an end, we may be
found of thee in peace, 2. Pet. 3.14. Is. 9.6.
through the merits and mercies of the Prince of peace, even Jesus Christ my
Lord and only Savior. Amen.

THE NINETEENTH SUBJECT. Tears of a woman lamenting the death of her beloved
husband.
The Soliloquie.
THE EjACULATION.
Psalm. 5. verse. 1. Give ear to my words, o Lord; consider my meditation:

verse. 2. Hearken unto the voice of my cry, my king, and my God; for unto thee
will I pray.

WHen Mary came where Jesus was, Io. 11.32.
and saw him, she fell down at his feet, saying unto him, Lord if thou had
been here, my brother had not dyed. She wept indeed, yet it was but for a
brother; and the Jews also wept, verse. 33.
yet it was but for a common friend: but what was all that to the death of a
husband? O my husband, my husband! That very name of husband me think's would
flatter me with comfort, as if I might imagine that he could hear me. But
oh, he is dead, he is dead: he cannot hear me; he cannot behold me; he
cannot answer me: his ears are locked up, his eyes are closed, his mouth is
sealed, his soul is gone. O what shall I do for my head, my guide, my heart,
my husband? Were my Savior upon earth again, I could send one to him as Mary
did, verse. 3.
who should say, Lord behold he whom thou love is dead. Dead say I? O dead,
dead: he is gone; he is departed, and can never be re-called. But why? Why
can he not be called back again? Did not my Jesus cause Lazarus to arise when
he had been four days dead? verse 44 verse. 39
Yes, he did: but what then? I neither love my Savior so well as Mary did;
nor (I fear) does he love me so well as he did Mary: or if both were so,
yet, since miracles are ceased, I cannot so much as hope that he will call
back the spirit of my Lord; my husband. Oh, could he be wooed by the tears of
a sinful woman, never did any mourn so much as I would. But nothing will
persuade: I seek but the disturbance of him whom I mourn for, if I desire to
call him from his eternal rest. Yet I hope that it is noe sin to grieve that
he is gone. I lament not his happiness, but mine own loss. verse: 35
My Jesus himself did weep for Lazarus, in testimony of his affection, for
so said the Jews, verse: 36
Behold how he loved him. And was my love to my husband so little, or so cold,
that I should forget to testify it in a sorrowful tear? O I cannot forbear
the remembrance of him, Is: 1.2. Lam: 1.12.
who was deerer unto me then life it self. Hear o heavens, and give ear o
earth. Was it nothing to you all ye that were by him, when ye saw him
breathing out his soul, and forsaking the world? O behold, and see if there
be any sorrow like unto my sorrow which is done unto me, wherewith the Lord
has afflicted me in this day of his anger. Tell me not how Jacob lamented
the supposed death of his son Joseph. He was misse-taken in the cause; but I
see, and feel the chillowed clay of mine indulgent husband. Jacob mourned
only for a son; but I for an husband. Jacob had more, many more: I had but
one, 2. Sam: 1.26.
and the love of this one to me did pass the love of women. Yet though Joseph
was alive, and though he was the youngest save one of twelve sons, Gent
37.34.
Jacob his father rent his clothes, and put sackcloth upon his loins, and
mourned for him many days. c: 23.2.
Tell me not how Abraham bewailed the death of Sarah his wife, who dyed in
Kiriath arba in the land of Canaan. He was a man, and so neither his passion,
nor his loss could parallel mine. He had more-wives, but I had not more
husbands. And yet though Abraham lost but only a wife, I read that he came
to mourn and to weep for her. Tell me not of Abijah the son of a King, how
he dyed, and was lamented. Could a Prince be as near, and dear to the
people, as a loving husband to the wife of his bofome? Yet though neither
marriage, nor blood could plead for a tear, I find that all Israel mourned for
him. 1. King 14.18.
Had not my husband been King, yet how should I forbear the expense of a
tear when death depriveth me of the name of a wife? Had he not been godly,
then the words of the Psalmist might peradventure have been verified even of
him, Ps: 27.15.
His widow shall not weep. But o he was full of love, and he was truly
religious: for mine own loss therefore must I freely weep, because my loving,
my religious husband is taken from me. Naomi requited the love of her
daughters in law expressed to their dead husbands, with a fervent prayer
saying, Ruth. 1.8.
The Lord deal kindly with you as ye have dealt with the dead, and with me:
verse: 9.
The Lord grant that ye may find rest each of you in the house of her
husband. When the wife of Ezekiel was taken from him, I doubt not but he loved
her so well that he would have bemoaned her departure, had not the Lord
expressly charged him the contrary. Eze: 24 16.
But the Lord said unto him, Son of man, behold I take away from thee the
desire of thine eyes with a stroke; yet neither shall thou mourn, nor weep;
neither shall thy tears run down. Forbear to cry; verse. 17
make noe mourning for the dead: bind the tire of thine head upon thee, and put
on thy shoes upon thy feet, and cover not thy lips. Surely his tears were
not forbidden as if it were un-lawfull to lament the dead. Noe: it was only
because the Lord by that figne would show that the calamity of the Jews
should be beyond that sorrow which enforces a weeping. But what was Ezekiel's
loss in comparison of mine? He was a man, and a Prophet, set over his wife to
be her instructor; so was mine set over me also: but there the scholar only
departed, the wife: here the very Oracle is ceased, my husband is gone. While
he was alive, my knowledge was increased; for if I would have learned any
thing, 1. Cor: 14.15. 1. Pet: 3 7.
I could ask him at home. He dwelt with me according to knowledge, giving
honor unto me as to the weaker vessel, and as being heirs together of the
grace of life; Ephesians. 5.28. 1. Tim. 5.8.
so that our prayers were not hindered. He loved me even as his own body:
he provided both for me and mine. But now alas I may live in ignorance,
dis-respected, and un provided for: none will comfort me, none will help me
as did my husband that is gone. Act. 5.4.
Though wicked Saphira had joined with Ananias her husband in lying unto God
concerning the sale of their possession; verse. 5.
and her husband at the words of Saint Peter fell down, and gave up the ghost,
and was carried out by the young men, verse. 6.
and buried; yet she lived not long enough either to bewail his death, or to
consider of her loss. She continued a widow but about three hours space,
verse: 7. verse. 10
and then fell down at the Apostles feet, and yielded up the ghost. She
quickly followed her husband in death, who joined in the wickedness with him
in his life. She hastened to the grave of her departed consort, as if love had
forbad her to survive her husband. Yet it was not love but justice which made
them lie together in the silent grave, since they joined together in a lie in
their lives. This alas was not a testimony of her love, so quickly to follow
her husband to the land of darkness. Me think's that I could be well
contented to have dyed with my husband, and to be laid in the grave by his
frozen body: but neither would I have sin to be the cause, nor judgment the
effect. Why then do I so much lament his departure, whose death was full of an
assurance of life, and whose hope was full of immortality? Had Saphira
survived her deceased husband but so long as to have been sensible of the
manner of his death, it may be imagined that she would have sighed her self
to the grave; and even grief alone would have joined them in the vault of
darkness, and silence. But God delayed not the punishment of her who
obstinately persisted in the crime of her husband. Here is yet some comfort for
me in my deep calamity, that neither my husband was guilty of the sin of
Ananias; nor yet did his death come so unexpected. Why then should I grieve so
much for the departure of him, who is gone from hence to eternal rest? He
dyed in the Lord, Reu: 14 13.
and I cannot therefore doubt but he is assuredly blessed. He rests from his
labors, and his works do follow him. Why then do I shed such an abundance
of tears, as if I either distrusted his happiness, or envyed his felicity? My
cause is not so great (if I rightly weigh it) as to cause these floods to
arise in mine eyes. When I think upon him I have reason to rejoice both
because he is freed as well from the tyranny of sin as from the misery it
produces; and also because he is at rest in my God. If I consider my self
also, mine affliction is not so great, nor my tears so just as I do
imagine: for they will prove rather an argument of my distrust in God, then of
my love to my husband, if I give them the freedom to flow beyond moderation.
He who lent me him can send me another; yea such a one as may deserve as
well, and to whom my love may be as fervent. If I have lost mine estate, yet I
have not lost my protector, unless I forsake him in my distrust. If I
complain for want of the joy of society, even my very thoughts (so they be
religions) will delight me with their company. If I want an instructor, my
God will be my guide. If I want a comforter, my God will wipe these tears from
mine eyes. If I want either food or sustenance for my body, Prove: 15.15.
yet a good conscience will prove a continual feast. My loss is not so great
as ever was sustained, if I compare it with those which others have soffered.
Naomie's affliction was greater then mine, Ruth. 1 3.
when not only her husband Elimelech, but also her two sons Mahlon and
Chilion dyed, and the woman was left of her two sons, and her husband at
once. 1. Sam. 4.11.
It was worse by far with the wife of Phinehar then it is with me; for her
husband and his brother were both slain in one day by the Amalekites; yea and
that in judgment too, c: 3.13.
even because they made themselves vile, and their father restrained them not.
When the news came to her that the Ark of God was taken by the
un-circumcised; c: 4.13.
that old Eli her father in law hearing the news that the Arc was taken and
that his sons were slain, verse. 18
fell from the seat back-ward by the side of the gate, and brake his neck, and
dyed; she, verse. 19
poor soul, being great with child when the story of these sad accidents
was related unto her, bowed her self, and fell in travail (for her pains
came upon her) yea and at length, when she was delivered of her Ichabod, verse.
21
she gave up the ghost. Thus the Priests fell by the sword; Ps. 78.64.
and noe widow was left to make lamentation. True it is that my affliction is
great in the death of my husband; yea so great that herewith the slanderous
enemy of the Psalmist was severely cursed, Ps: 109.9.
Let his children be fatherless, and his wife a widow: yet is it far better
to see him go down to the grave in peace, then that he should have lingered
in continual misery. Ier: 22.12.
Shallum the son of Josiah King of Judah was carried captive by an enemy into
another land, and dyed there; which the Prophet confidering, speaks, and
says, verse: 10
Weep not for the dead, neither bemoane him; but weep for him that goes
away, for he shall return noe more, nor see his native country. This might
have been the portion also of my beloved: but since it was not, though my
loss be great, yet must not my sorrow be too great. Immoderate grief for
those that are dead was the practice of heathens; it becomes not the children
of God. The Israelites were forbidden it even by God himself, who says unto
them, Lev: 19 28. Deuteronomy: 14.1.
Ye shall not make any cutting in your flesh for the dead, nor print any
marks upon you: I am the Lord. And again; Ye are the children of the Lord
your God: ye shall not cut your selves, nor make any baldness between your
eyes for the dead. The Gentiles indeed at the death of friends were so
trans-ported with sorrow, that they cut themselves, Ier: 16.6.
and made themselves bald in the greatness of their lamentations. They carved
their flesh, and marked themselves for idolatry; yea they also cut their
skins when a friend deceased; and the wounds they filled up with either
Stibium, or ink, or what color they pleased, which remained in the flesh when
the skin was grown over. In all their sorrows such kinds of inscisions were
ordinary testimonies of the grief of their hearts. Ier: 41.5.
Thus the four score men that came from Shechem, from Shiloh, and from
Samariah had their beards shaven, and their clothes rent, and they had cut
themselves; and had offerings, and incense in their hands to bring to the house
of the Lord. Thus when the Priests of Baall did call on the name of their
Idol, 1. King 18.28.
they cried alowd, and cut themselves after their manner with knives and
lancers, 'till the blood gushed out upon them. Yet though it was the practice
of the Gentiles, it may not be of Christians, nor might it be of the
Israelites: they therefore punished it with many stripes. And just it was that
when their violent hands had un-naturally been stained with the blood of their
own bodies, the hand of justice should draw blood in the punishment of such a
cruel offense. The Jews might not cut themselves at the death of a friend,
noe though of a father; because they were not fatherless while the Lord was
their God. The infidells indeed had noe share in the most high, and therefore
were fatherless when their sires deceased: but it was not so with Israel, nor
is it so with me. I have a father, which is in heaven, Mat: 6.9.
to whom my husband is gone before me. I have a husband too, which is in
heaven; even the same who was a husband to Judah and Israel. I have a head too
which is in heaven; Ier: 31.32.
even my Savior Christ, Ephesians: 5.23.
who is the head of the Church. I have a brother too, which is in heaven; even
my elder brother Jesus Christ. Why then should I grieve that my husband is
dead, since he is but gone to the place where my treasure is laid up; Mat.
6.20.
and where my immortal father, and head, and brother have crowned him with
immortality? My God has taken him, that I may know where to find him. Whilst
he continued upon earth, his employments did often deprive me of his
society: but now is he seated in a place of rest, to which when I come we
shall never be separated. Whilst he was here, my affection unto him indeed
was great; and that was my duty: but yet I fear that I offended in the
excess. Had I not loved him too much I should not be immoderate in my sorrow;
but even by these tears I am taught the sinfullnesse of my passion. For this
sin therefore will I strive to weep; even for the trespass of my weeping. I
should never have been so offensively sensible of this my loss, nor so vain
in my laments, if I had allways remembered that he was created mortal; and had
therefore trusted in him who is immortal. If I do love my God more then I did
my husband, I shall find both comfort, and content in his mercy. Lord, how
frail, and weak am I, that I cannot discharge the debt of nature, but I must
bring in question the power of grace! I cannot grieve for the death of my
departed husband, without discovering some diffidence, some distrust in my God.
But I will pray unto the Lord to for give the excess of my love to my deceased
husband; the excess of my tears for the death of my husband: and to convert
these tears into dropps of sorrow for my heinous offenses. To him will I
hasten; to him will I speedily address my self; and mournfully will I cry,
and beg, and pray, and say.

The Prayer.
FAther of mercies, and God of all consolation; Ioa: 11.25. verse. 26
thou who art the resurrection, and the life; in whom whosoever believes shall
live though he were dead; and in whom whosoever lives and believes shall not
die eternally: send down thy grace into my sinful soul, that I may magnify
thy name for delivering thy servant from the miseries of this life; and for
inthroning him in the celestial ^erusalem, where I doubt not but he reigns.
Thou knew his sufferances, and the sharpness of his sickness; and in
mercy did release him of his misery to crown him with glory. Thy favors
were infinite in his spiritual comforts, when his body languished through the
extreamitie of his disease. By thy scourge thou taughtest him how thou
abhorrest sin; yet I doubt not but thou have freed him from the torments of
hell, through the sufferances of thy Son. For thy goodness to him thy name
be glorified: and I humbly besiech thee to extend thy mercy likewise unto her
who honors thee for it. Thou know, Lord, the distress of my soul for
want of him whom thou have taken from me. Thou see mine affliction, and thou
numberest my tears. O be gracious unto me thine unworthy servant, and send
me comfort in the midst of these sorrows. Give me grace to submit with
cherfulness to this thy chastisement; and to repent me of my sins, which
brought this affliction. Were it not just for me to make my complaint in the
bitterness of my sorrows, thou would not have commanded Zion to lament
like a virgin girded with sackcloth for the husband of her youth. Thou, Lam:
1.8.
o Lord, do behold my sorrow, and the grief of my heart, because thou have
taken from me the desire of mine eyes, Eze: 24 16.
and the joy of my heart. Be pleased, o my God, so to open the eyes of my soul
and understanding, that I may see as clearly the cause of thy stroke, as I am
sensible of the loss of him that was my guide. Though he was sent to be the
head of my body; yet thou, o God, did offer thy self to be the husband of my
soul: but to my shame I must confess that I followed the stepps of Samaria,
Eze: 16 45.
of Sodom, and of Jerusalem; and loathed thee my Lord, and my husband: justly
therefore might thou say of me as thou once did speak of the church of
the Jews, Hos: 2.2
She is not my wife, neither am I her husband. But, o thou father of mercies,
for give my backslidings; and add not affliction to affliction, lest I faint
under thy rod. Is: 47.9
Spiritual widow-hood was a curse which once thou did threaten unto Babylon;
o let it not fall upon me. Allthough thou have taken him that was my husband,
yet be pleased to betroth me to thy self for ever. Hos: 2.19.
Say unto me Ruchama, thou have obtained mercy; verse. 16 verse. 19
and let me answer thee, Baali, and Ishi, my Lord and my husband. Betroath me
unto thee in righteousness, and in judgment, and in loving-kindnesse, verse. 20
and in mercyes, and in faithfulness; and make me know thee to be my Lord.
2. Cor: 11.2.
Send a Paul to espouse me to one husband, that so I may be presented as a
chaste virgin unto Christ. Give me grace to do as once thou commandedst the
widows of Edom; Ier: 49.11. 1. Tim: 5.5.
even to trust in thee. Though now I am desolate, yet make me for ever to
trust in thee my God; and continue in supplications and prayers night and day.
Thus let my sorrow be sanctified, and my trust and confidence reposed in thee,
that so I may serve thee with cherfulness; endure thy visitation with
patience; and in the end that I may go to that place where I trust thou have
crowned my husband, and where my Savior is certainly gone before; even to the
Kingdom of happiness: and that through the merits and intercession of the
same Jesus Christ my only Lord and Savior. Amen.

A woman's tears at the funer all of her husband.
The Soliloquie.
THE EjACULATION.
Psalm. 5. verse. 1. Give ear to my words, o Lord; consider my meditation.

verse. 2. Hearken unto the voice of my cry, my king, and my God; for unto thee
will I pray.

WHen Sarah dyed in Kiriath-Arba Abraham stood up from before his deceased
wife, Gen 23 3.
and spoke unto the sons of Heth, verse. 4.
saying; I am a stranger, and a sojourner with you: give me a possession, and
a burying place with you, that I may bury my dead out of my fight. Though he
so tenderly affected her whilst she was living, yet he would not look to
long on her when she was dead. It is a duty as full of humanity to interre
with decency the bodies of the dead, as it is of religion to love the person
when they are alive. Yet vain is man in this affection, if he fixes his love
only on the beauty of the body. This flesh which is so tender, this skin
which I strive to preserve both smooth and white, must one day be a banquet for
the loathed worms. Noe greater privilege belongs to me, then did to my
hushand; for the time will come when I shall follow him to the earth. Had I
loved only his outward form, my love should now either quite be forgotten, or
else I should fondly defire to deny it interment: but it was his body enlivened
with a rich and excellent soul, which drew mine affection, and commanded my
desires. Had that soul and body continued their society, I had been freed
from my laments: but they have bid farewell 'till the general resurrection,
and hence am I enforced to utter my complaints. I weep for my loss because
we are divorced: but o what conflicts then can I imagine that he had, when
he was not only to part from his indeared wife, but likewise his soul was to
leave this chillowed ^earth! Oh for him, for him for my loss of him do I pay
the tribute of these watering eyes. Yet these tears must not flow in too
great abundance, lest by them I should seem to envy his happiness. Even
when his body shall be laid to sleep in the grave, if I mourn too much, it
will be justly suspected that too much I loved the worst of my husband. His
soul, which was his best, is now in perfection, and may not be lamented: his
body, which is the worse and grosser part of him, is now to be committed to the
earth whence it came. Thither it must go; to that place I must commend it;
otherwise my former love may be turned into loathing: and that which I esteemed
when it was alive, I shall be forced to abhor, if I keep it from the grave.
O it grieveth me each minuit that I think of my dearest: it troubles, and
perplexeth me with disturbed thoughts, when I consider how servently I loved
him, yet cannot enliven him. But these are only the fond conceptions of an
erring phantisie; and tell me that I loved him more then I should or else now
I would not grieve so much as I do. If my love to God be so great as I
pretend, I shall thankfully acknowledge his love to the departed. O let it never
be said that my love was idolatry, in affecting him too much who is but dust
and ashes!

But why sit I museing in these pensive thoughts, when I should rather prepare
for the burial of the dead? Have I taken a course for the place of his rest,
where his cold body may be laid to sleep? This is a duty which every age
has been careful to perform. It was a greater argument of Iehojakim's fury
against Vryah the Prophet, Ier. 26.23.
that he cast his dead body into the graves of the common people, then that
he slew him with the sword. It has also been a testimony of God's revenge,
when he suffered not the dead to have a decent interment. Eccl: 6.3.
If a man beget an hundred children (says the Preacher) and live many years,
so that the days of his years be many; and his soul be not filled with good,
and also that he have noe burial, I say that an untimely birth is better
then he. When the man of God had dis-obeyed his command, the old Prophet
told him saying, Thy carkeise shall not come into the sepulcher of thy
fathers. 1. King 13.22.
This curse was accounted as full of dread, as any that was sent upon the
sons of men. When the young man the Prophet anointed Iehu King over Israe,
2. King 9.7.
he told him that he should smite the house of Ahab his master; and that the
dogs should eat Iezebel in the portion of Iezreel; verse. 10 verse. 7.
and there should be none to bury her: that the Lord might avenge the blood of
his servants the Prophets, and the blood of all the servants of the Lord at the
hand of Iezebel. What Iehu was commanded he did faithfully execute; for when
he had caused the eunuchs to throw that painted adulteress out of the window
from whence she looked, verse. 3.
some of her blood was sprinkeled both on the wall, and on the horses, and he
trod her under foot. Afterward when he had eat and drank, he said, verse.
34.
G^e see now this cursed woman, and bury her; for she is a King's daughter.
verse. 35
And they went to bury her; verse. 37
but they found noe more of her then the skull, and the feet and the palms of
her hands; sothat they could not say, This is lezebel. Ier. 22.17.
Because the eyes of Iehojakim, and his heart were not but for his
coveteousnesse, and for to shed innocent blood, and for oppression, and for
violence to do it; verse. 18
therefore thus said the Lord concerning Iehojakim the son of Josiah King of
Judah, verse. 19
He shall be buried with the burial of an Ass; drawn, and cast forth beyond
the gates of Jerusalem. The Lord threatened the Princes of Judah, c. 34.19.
and the Princes of Jerusalem, and the Eunuchs, and the Priests and all the
people of the land which passed between the parts of the calfe, verse. 20
saying, I will even give them into the hand of their enemies, and into the
hand of them that seek their life; and their dead bodies shall be for meat
unto the fowls of heaven, and to the beasts of the earth.

But on the contrary, Ahijah the Prophet tells the wife of jeroboam
concerning her sick son Abijah, 1. King 24.12. verse. 13
saying; Arise get thee to thine house; and when thy feet enter into the
city, the child shall dye: But all Israel shall mourn for him, and bury him;
for he only of Jeroboam shall come to thegrave, because in him there is found
some good thing toward the Lord God of Israel in the house of Jeroboam.
Again, when Huldah the Prophetess did for etell the destruction of Jerusalem,
but a respite thereof in the time of Josiah, she told him, 2. King 22.20.
saying, Behold, says the Lord, I will gather thee to thy fathers; and thou
shall be gathered into thy grave in peace. Thus has it often discovered the
wrath of the All-mighty, when the earkeises of the dead have been denied their
funerals: and on the contrary, it has sometimes manifested his love, when
they have peaceably been brought to their longest home. Burial is the last of
duties which we owe unto our friends, to which both religion, and nature, and
civilitie do prompt us for ward. When Isaak, being old and full of days,
Gen: 35 29.
did give up the ghost, and dyed, and was gathered unto his people; his two
sons Esau and Jacob buried him. When John the Baptist was beheaded in the
prison, Mat: 14 12.
his disciples came and took up the body, and buried it. The disciple that was
willing to follow my Redeemer, yet accounted it his duty to attend on the
funeral of his deceased father, and therefore desired, saying, c: 8.21.
Lord suffer me first to go and bury my father. True it is that his request
was denied; not as if Christ dis-liked his piety; but to teach him that
nothing should hinder him from religion. This was as great an excuse as most
that could have been pleaded: and yet even this had not force enough to
prevayle for his departure. Our father in heaven must be preferred in our
service before the fathers of our flesh. Again, it may be conceaved that the
parent of the disciple dyed in un-beliefe: it was therefore more proper that
infidells should bury him who were dead to religion, then that a disciple of
Christ should mix with the un-faithfull. Howsoever he was not checked for
desiring leave to bury his father; but he was commanded rather to follow his
Master. Even the glutton in the Gospel had so much favor as to be brought to
his grave: so says the text; The rich man also dyed, Lu. 16.22. Job. 21.30.
verse: 32 verse. 33
and was buried. Though the wicked (says Job) is reserved to the day of
destruction, and shall be brought forth to the day of wrath: yet shall he be
brought to the grave, and shall remain in the tomb: The clods of the valley
shall be sweet unto him; and every man shall draw after him; as there are
innumerable before him. Ps. 49.14.
Though death (as the Psalmist speaks) does feed on the wicked, and the
upright shall have dominion over them in the morning, and their beawty shall
consume from their dwellings; yet in the grave shall it consume them; and in
the grave, like sheep, shall they lie. Thus the Prophet foretelling the
burial of my Redeemer, Is: 53.9
said, He made his grave with the wicked, and the rich in his death. It is
then the duty of the living to provide even for the dead, that they may be
buried in peace.

But is it a matter of any moment in what place we lay the bodies of our
deceased friends? Is it not all one, whether in the fields, or whether in our
Golgotha's? Noe doubtless; for even the laws of our land are so justly severe
against idolaters, that we suffer not the convicted to be buried in our ground
which is dedicated to this use. Neither may they be permitted to mix with our
dead, who have desperately become the murderers of themselves: but they lie in
the roades, where a stake is set up, to give notice to passengers that they
unnaturally hastened their own departure. It is a matter of some moment to us
who are living, that we lay our deceased friends in a place convenient: for
allthough it exte^deth not to their knowledge, yet it redoundeth to their
honor. When Judas had given back the thirty pieces of silver, the price of
him that was vallewed, Mat: 27 9.
to the chief Priests that hired him, they took counsel together, and, seeing
it was not fit to mix that money with the rest of their treasure because it
was the price of blood, verse. 7.
they bought the potter's field with it, verse. 6.
to bury strangers. verse. 7.
Thus they who would readily give a reward to a traitor, were not so ready to
be charitable to deceased strangers, had not the price of him who dyed for all,
been the unhallowed sum to purchase the field. When they met with that coin
which was not for their use, with that they purchased an Akeldama for foreiners.

But is it not all one in what part of the ground I bury my husband, so I lay
his body in a place that is set apart for that purpose? Surely noe: allthough
it is equal to him, yet is it not to me. Allthough at the resurrection we
shall meet again, at what distance soever our graves shall be made; yet there
is some reason we should be buried so near as we may that as our bodies were
enjoined a mutual society in the time of life; so they might also sleep
together in the silent dust. It is but just that one grave should receave the
bodies of us, for whom one bed was designed upon earth; that as in our lives
we were made one flesh, so after our deaths we should make one lump. When
Barzillay was offered a favor from King David, and wooed to spend his time at
the Court, he besought the King, saying, Let thy servant, I pray thee, turn
back again, that I may dye in mine own city, 2. Sam. 19.37.
and be buried by the grave of my father, and of my mother. Friends have ever
desired to lie by friends, that those especially who were knitt together in
blood and affection, might be joined together in their earth and ashes. In the
cave of Machpelah which Abraham bought of Ephron for four hundred shekells of
silver, Gen: 23.16.
was buried both himself, c: 49.31. c. 50.13. Act. 5.10.
and Sarah his wife. There lay Isaak, and Rebekah his wife: and there lay Leah,
and Jacob her husband. Though Saphira dyed by the judgment of God for the lie
she had told; yet when she fell dead at Peter's feet and yielded up the
ghost, the young men came in, and carried her forth, and buried her by her
husband. It is therefore convenient that I choose a place for the burial of my
husband, where (if so it may be) I my self may be laid. Convenient it is, but
not absolutely necessary; for the souls shall not enjoy the less felicity
for the remoter distance, and separation of the bodies: neither shall the
bodies: either be sensible of the disjunction; or shall it retard their meeting
at the general day. Allthough the bones of Jacob were carried into the land of
Canaan, Gen: 50.13. verse: 5.
and buried in the caye of the field of Machpelah which Abraham bought,
according as he had made his son Joseph swear to him before his death: yet
he had formerly buried his beloved Rachel in the way to Ephrah, c: 35.19.
which is Bethlehem, and there Jacob set a pillar upon her grave, which was
called the pillar of Rachel's grave. verse: 20.
When the children of Israel journied from Beeroth of the children of Iaakan to
Mosera, Deuteronomy: 10.6. Number: 20.1.
there Aaron dyed, and there he was buried: where as Miriam his wife dyed in
Kadesh, and was buried there: yea and Moses his brother the servant of the Lord
dyed in the land of Moab; Deuteronomy: 34.5. verse: 6.
and it is fayd that God himself buried him in a valley in the land of Moab,
over against Beth-Peor: but noe man knows of his sepulcher; peradventure lest
the Israelites should have committed idolatry, and wors^ipped him for a God.

Thus do I sit and muse about the burial of him whom so dearly I loved. Yet
me think's I could most readily preserve him from the dust, if either it were
in my power, or might bring me content. But go he must, and I must follow
him. This narrow room of his coffin must be put in trust with his mouldering
earth: and he who in his life time was entertained with variety of spacious
chambers, must now securely sleep in the chamber of a grave. O how it grieveth
me to see this effect of sin! Had not Adam fallen, my husband had not dyed.
But oh he is dead; and since nor tears, nor sigh's, nor groans, nor cries
have power to recall him, it is therefore my duty, and it shall be my care to
express my love to him in the rites of his funeral. Friends shall carry him;
neighbors shall attend on him; and my tears shall embalme him. The Preacher
shall be instructed in the virtue which adorned him, that so he may commend
them to others for their due imitation. The hearers shall greedily attend to
the praises of the dead; and not only acknowledge their truth, but contentedly
wish like him to live, and like him to dye.

Now, o now another storm approaches in mine eyes: for the company begins
to approach my doors; and my neighbors and my friends are hastening to my
house. But when they come let them not think to comfort me, lest they add to
my grief while they vainly strive to conquer my passion. I cannot allow an
intermission or forbearance of tears, lest I should appear un-naturall. If I
do not weep I did not love. O me think's I could willingly weep, my self
into a statue, that I might become his monument. It is the height of injustice
to forbid my tears, since the delight of mine eyes is now to be carried to the
place of oblivion. Me think's every thing seems to call for a tear, which
is the object of a sense. Those bells which so mournfully accord in their
tunes, invite my neighbors to come to the funeral: yet not to appear with
empty eyes, unless they come to learn how to weep. These herbs, these
strewings, which lately were fresh and at ease in their beds, are willing to
lie even under the feet of those that will mourn: and because they have noe
eyes themselves to weep us a tear, they lie to receave what shall drop from
the mourners. These spriggs of Rosemarie do call to my remembrance with what
joy and delight they pleased me at my nuptials: but (lest I should forget the
greater happiness of the marriage with the Lamb) even this herb which served
at our wedding does attend at the funeral. O me think's these sprigs have
sad Rhetoric sitting on their leaves: for those dropps of water which hang
upon them, were once the blood of the fragrant flowers, and now are the tears
of the drooping plants. S^ ready were these spriggs to come when I desired
them, that they slipped from their stemmes to attend these obsequies. These
exotic perfumes which delight the sense, are willing to be burned, rather then
the living shall be offended with the dead. These sable garments strike terror
into the eye; and command the spectatour to lend us a sigh. And what other
lecture is read here, or taught, but God's decree of man's mortality? The
chief speaker and Orator is he who has now forgotten to speak: for the
locking up of his senses, the silence of his tongue, and the coldness of his
pale and frozen body have more force to prove the shortness of our lives, then
the most eloquent strains of the best rhetorician. These bells assure me that
my life is but a found, a noise, an aier: these perfumes tell me that it is
but a vapor: 1. Pet. 1 24.
these herbs do teach me that flesh is as grass: and these tears, these
early tears which so suddenly arise when my heart does call, teach me
mortality in their hasty falling. And who can choose but weep for the
shortness of our lives? Who can forbear a tear at the funeral of a friend?
It was a curse inflicted upon the wicked Jews that they neither should be
buried, nor yet lamented. They shall dye of grievous deaths (says the
Prophet): Ier. 16.4.
they shall not be lamented; neither shall they be buried: but they shall be as
dung upon the face of the earth; and their carkeises shall be meat for the
fowls of heaven, verse: 5.
and for the beasts of the earth. For thus says the Lord, Enter not into the
house of mourning, neither go to lament nor bemoane them; for I have taken
away my peace from this people, says the Lord; even loving kindness, c: 25.33.
and Ierusa^mercies. So the slain of Judah, and Jerusalem (says the Prophet)
shall not be lamented, neither gathered, nor buried: they shall be dung upon
the ground. So it was threatened concerning Iehojakim the son of Josiah King
of Judah, saying, c: 22.18.
They shall not lament for him, saying, Ah my brother, or ah sister: they shall
not lament for him saying, ah Lord, or ah his glory. It was a judgment upon the
Israelites, Amos 8.2.
when the Lord said by the mouth of his Prophet, The end is come upon my people
of Israel: verse. 3.
and the songs of the temples shall be howlings in that day, says the Lord:
there shall be many dead bodies in every place: they shall cast them forth with
silence. Surely if ever nature had liberty to plead for the convenience, yea
for the necessity of a tear, it may at this time command. Grace must, and
most willingly shall have the chief predominance: but let nature have likewise
it is qualified drops, so they grow not immoderate. Though my loss be the
greatest to whom he was a husband; yet others may weep too, to whom he was a
friend: Gen: 50.7.
When Joseph went to bury his father, then all the servant^ of Pharaoh went
with him, and the Elder^ of his house, and all the Elders of the land o^ Egypt:
verse: 8.
And all the house of Joseph, and his brethren, verse: 10
and his father's house: And they came to the threshing floor of Atad, and
there they mourned with a great and very sore lamentation: and he made a
mourning for his father seven days. Io: 11.31.
When Lazarus was buried, and the Jews saw Mary rise up hastily, and go out,
they little imagined that she went to meet the Lord of life: but they followed
her, saying, She goes unto the grave to weep there. When her brother Lazarus
was dead she wept, and her sister wept, and her friends the Jews wept: and
when Christ did see them all thus weeping, he was so far from blaming them,
verse. 35 2. Chr: 35.24.
that he wept himself. When Josiah was slain, his servants took him out of
the charet wherein he was wounded, and put him in the second charet which he
had, and they brought him to Jerusalem: And he dyed, and was buried in one of
the sepulchers of his fathers: and all Judah and Jerusalem mourned for Josiah.
When Samuel was dead, 1. Sam. 28.3.
all Israel lamented him, and buried him in Ramah, in his own city. 1. King
13.29.
When the old Prophet took up the carkeise of the man of God who had been
slain by a Lion, he laid it upon the Ass, and brought it back; and came to
the ^tty to mourn, and to bury him: verse: 30
And he laid his carkeise in his own grave, and they mourned over him,
saying, Alas my brother. The children of Israel wept for Moses in the ^laines
of Moab thirty days: Deuteronomy: 34.8. 1 Samuel: 15.35.
Though Sa^uel took his leave, and departed from Saul, and come noe more to
see him until the day of ^is death; nevertheless Samuel mourned for Saul.
Iud: 11 39. verse: 40
Though Iephthah's daughter had been lead and buried long before, yet it was a
^ustome in Israel that the daughters of Israel went yearly to lament the
daughter of Iephthah ^he Gileadite four days in a year. When Stephen was
stoned, Act: 8.2.
devout men carried him to his burial, and made great lamentation over him. 2.
Chr: 32.33.
When Hezekiah slept with his fathers, he was buried in the chiefest of the
sepulchers of the sons of David; and all Judah, and the inhabitants of
Jerusalem did him honor at his death. Lu: 7.38.
When Mary Magdalene stood weeping at the feet of my Savior, and did wash
his feet with tears, and wiped them with the hairs of her head, and brought
an Alabaster box of ointment, verse: 37
and anointed him with the ointment; verse: 38
he was so far from dis-liking it in her, that he checked his disciples who
had indignation at the act, and therefore said, Mat: 26 8.
To what purpose is this wast? Yea he reproved them, and said unto them, Why
trouble ye the Woman? verse: 10
For she has wrought a good work upon me: verse: 12
For in that she has powered this ointment on my body, she did it for my
burial, She has done what she could: Mar: 14 8.
she is com^ before hand to anoint my body to the burying. Here, I find, was
ointment to embalme him; and here were also tears at his funeral: and yet so
far was Christ from blaming her for her tears, that he not only decreed
the publishing of this act through the world where the gospel should be
preached; Mat. 26 13.
and that for a memorial of her: but he likewise upbraided Simon with the
tears of the sinner, Lu: 7.44.
and said unto him, I entered into thine house, and thou gave me noe water
for my feet; but she has washed my feet with tears, and wiped them with
the hairs of her head, verse: 47
etc. Wherefore her sins, which are many, are forgiven; for she loved much.
Weep then I may upon this sad occasion: yea and weep may my friends too.
Tears are as proper at a funeral, as smiles at a wedding. We have two
marriages; the first whereof is to living dust; the last to the cold, and silent
earth. At the former we rejoice, for it was an institution of God before man
had sinned: Gen: 2.24.
at the latter we weep, for it is the effect of sin. We cloth our selves
in delightful colors when we celebrate the former: but our blacks at the
latter are our wedding garments. The Rosemarie is served about at each: the
gloves and the favors attend at each: the wine, and the other accustomed
entertainments are given at each: we go to the church for the consummation of
each: only here is the difference, that at the one we rejoice, but at the
other we mourn. Every guest that is willing to comply with the pre^ent
occasion, must as well be sad at this, as ^e merry at the other. Weep we
may, and weep we must; especially my self who have ^ost my self. But yet
let me take heed that I offend not in my tears, lest that which is my duty
be turned into a crime. I must especially take heed that I err not in the
cause of these laments: for if I griere at the happiness of him that is
departed, I discover an envy rather then affection. If I grieve for the loss
which my self sustaineth, I must take heed that I wrong not my confidence in
God. I may not offend in the number of my tears; for if I weep too much, I
may forfeit my hope; or at least I may occasion those that behold me to
think that I doubt of the salvation of the dead. Weep I may, and weep I
must: but for fear lest I offend in these my tears, in my earnest prayers I
will beg that they may be sanctified. To my God will I go for his direction
and assistance: and in this storm of my tears I will shelter my self under
his protection; and humbly will I tender my petitions, and say.

The Prayer.
O All-mighty and ever-living Lord God, thou who know whereof we are made,
Ps. 103.14.
and who remembrest that we are but dust: give me grace (I besiech thee) to
be thankful unto thee for all thy mercies: more particularly both for thy
deliverance of my husband from the miseries of this life; and for affording me
the means in peace to bring him to his longest home. Lord so arm me with
patience in this time of affliction, that I may not offend thee in my want, or
excess of mourning. Gen: 3.19.
Dust we are; and to dust we shall return. From the earth we came; and to
the earth we must go. This way which thy servant must now be disposed of, is
the way wherein thou will one day lead me also to my rest. O prepare me for
the time of my great account; Eccl: 12 7.
that so when my dust shall return to the earth as it was, my spirit may
return unto thee who did give it. Let his spectacle of mortality live in my
memory, that so when I consider that the time will come that as naked as I
came out of my mother's womb, Job: 1.21.
so naked shall I thither return again; I may wholly endeavor, and seek to
be clothed with the righteousness of thy Son. Rom: 6 4.
With him thou have been graciously pleased that by baptism I should be
buried into death: grant also, good God, that like as he was raised up from
the dead by the glory of thee the eternal Father; even so I also may walk in
newness of life. Make me ever think upon death which will seize on me;
judgment which will examine me; and hell which would devour me; that heaven
may receave me. Let this lifelesse carkeise put me in mind of the malice of
sin which is the cause of death; and of that sentence which immediately
follows this death. Thou see, o Lord, how unwilling I am to part from this
frozen, and earthie lump. Thou know how deep the departure of my joy does
pierce and wound mine afflicted heart. O be thou my comforter in this greatest
sorrow, Ps. 119.96.
that seeing now I see that all things do certainly come to an end, I may
wholly endeavor to please thee alone who shall never have end. Is: 50.3
O thou who cloathest the heavens with blackness, and have clothed me at
this time, who am but earth and ashes, with these mourning weeds; grant that
by these I may be instructed to shun the frail and fading vanities of the
earth; and strive for that Kingdom which shall endure for ever. Be pleased to
speak peace to my troubled mind; that so though nature has power to enforce
me to weep, yet grace may prevail to moderate my mourning. Ps: 106 9. Ps:
104.9.
O thou who did once rebuke the red sea that thy servants might pass
through them as on dry land; thou who have set a bound to the seas that they
may not pass over, nor turn again to cover the earth; be pleased so to
rebuke the waters of mine affliction, and put such a bound to these my tears,
that they may not drown this earth of my feeble body; but may give place to
confidence, and comfort in thy mercy. Ps. 114.3.
Iordane did yield to thy command, and was driven back: so drive thou back the
flood of my tears, that they swell not above the banks of moderation and
hope. Let the grave of the deceased put me in mind of the tomb of my blessed
Redeemer; that so when I am bowed down with sorrow at the burial of this
earth, I may be raised with joy for the benefits of the resurrection of my
Savior Christ. He has plucked out the sting which sin had formerly given
unto death: 1. Cor. 15.56. verse. 57
o let me ever be thankful unto thee my God, who give us victory through
Jesus Christ. Give me an assured belief of the general resurrection, that
when I grieve at the placing of this flesh in the grave, I may rejoice in the
certainty of his rising again. Ps. 25.17.
Though the troubles of my heart be now enlarged; yet bring thou me out of all
my fears. Ps: 94.19.
In the midst of the sorrows which I have in my heart, let thy comforts, o
God, refresh my soul. Lord make me dye to sin, and live by grace, that when
I shall put off this tabernacle of flesh, I may dwell with thee in those
eternal mansions of perfect happiness, through Jesus Christ my Lord, and
only Savior. Amen.

Tears of a woman in the state of widow-hood.
The Soliloquie.
THE EjACULATION.
Psalm. 5. verse. 1. Give ear to my words, o Lord; consider my meditation:

verse. 2. Hearken unto the voice of my cry, my king, and my God; for unto thee
will I pray.

BEcause Jerusalem had forsaken the Lord, was was gone backward, Ier: 15.6.
verse. 8.
Therefore (said my God) their widows are increased to me above the sand of
the seas. verse. 6.
He who was weary of repenting, was not weary of destroying: and yet the
judgments which fell upon the Jews were easier to the stronger, then to the
weaker sex. The males had a period set to their earthly troubles, when the
sword devoured them: but the poor females were left alive, destitute both of
the comfort, and society of their husbands. Death is a judgment mixed often
with mercy, because it finisheth our earthly sufferances: whereas a life that
is lead in continued sorrows is so much the more burdensome, because not
quickly ended. Those widows of the Jews were left alive, and therein they
were more punished then their destroyed husbands. Groans and sighs had flowne
from the slain at the hour of their departure; but their dead trunckes were
as insensible of grief or melancholy, as the earth which enclosed them. Yet
the distressed widows were left to lament; and their punishment herein was
greater then their husbands, even because their torments survived the slain.
That time was doubtless a time of horror, when the women would willingly have
slept by their husbands in their beds of earth, and would have accounted it
mercy to meet with a murderer; but yet were denied the hope of their
destruction. Ps: 94.6
The Psalmist says that the wicked slay the widow: but in Jerusalem as it
seems, the judgment was so great, that though the widows on their knees
would have begged to be slain; yet either not men enough were left for their
purpose; or the men that were left were not wicked enough to satisfy their
desites. O what miseries do fall upon us that are widows, who are left to the
world to complain of our losses; and yet in our complaints we are so far
from obtaining what we desire, that we cannot obtain so much as to dye! Our
estate is despised amongst the Sons of men, unless either our riches, or
beauty, or some other by and sinister respect can purchase us a comforter. The
widows that are poor are commonly neglected: and those that are rich, are but
vallewed for their wealth. We are exposed to the slander of every tongue; to
the scorn and derision of every enemy; and to the cruelty and tyranny of
every oppressor. Job. 24.21.
The wicked who evil entreats the barren that bears not, does noe good to
the widow also. We are mocked by the wives; neglected by our neighbors;
cozened by our visitants; and even in this our time of greatest need, our
pretended friends are not willing to counsel us. So great, so weighty, so
grievous are our afflictions, that we not only are bereft of our joys among
men; but also we seem to be forsaken even of God. Else why should we be
ranked with the profane, and the harlots? Why should the high Priest be
forbidden by God himself, saying, A widow, Lev: 21 14.
or a divorced woman, or profane, or an harlot, these shall he not take: but
he shall take a virgin of his own people to wife. Thus are we subject to the
contempt of men; and may seem to be abhorred likewise of our maker. Our
solitary lives are full of cares, and various perturbations. If we have
riches, we are apt to be deluded by false, though professed lovers. If we are
poor, we are neglected by those from whom we expect relief; and our friends
are commonly as dead unto us as are our husbands. If we have children, they
are apt to slight, or dis-obey us, through the absence of him whom they more
did fear. If we have none, as our trouble is the less, so our hopes of
relief are likewise the less: for whereas the cries of the fatherless may
prevail with the charitable, the want of those orphans make's every one
neglect us. O what calamities, and miseries attend us women! We are weak and
simple by the condition of our sex: and yet when we have husbands to instruct
and assist us, we can have noe assurance of the continuance of their lives.
We are exposed to sorrows at every turn. In sorrows we conceave; in
forrowes we travail; in sorrows we nurse our tender infants; and are made
but as servants to them in their minorities: and yet, as if all these vexations
were too few for our deserts; we are tortured and racked with the death of our
husbands. If we weep, we are frequently rather scorned then pitied, because
it is imagined that we have tears at command. If we talk, we are apt to be
censured either guilty of levitie, boldness, or simplicity. The joy we
received in the society of our husbands is seconded with contempt when once
they are dead; as if it were a sin in us to suffer them to dye, whereas we
would willingly have laid down our lives to have preserved theirs That little
wisdom or discretion which we have learned of our husbands, is styled
cunning, when once they are dead. Thus even our virtues are subject to
reproach; and our persons and conditions to the obloquie of the world.

But is this all the comfort allotted us in our misery? Has God forgotten us?
Should the world thus disdain us? Assuredly our great afflictions, and our
loud complaints must needs be entertained in the ears of him who is our
merciful God. Though man be deaf, yet God will hear. Yes doubtless: we who
so seriously bemoane the losses we sustain, shall yet find in the Scripture
that the All-mighty is our friend. If I do but loake into those sacred
Oracles, I shall presently behold the goodness of my Creator. The greater
our losses are, the diviner are our comforts: the more grievous our afflictions
are, the more ample are our joys. We are still in the hands of our gracious
God, allthough we are bereft of our earthly husbands. Our comforts are more,
our privileges are greater then ever they were while our guides were alive:
for the Lord takes notice of us; he relieveth us in our wants, yea and
sometimes miraculously comfort us in our greatest dejections; men are
commanded to help us; the rich must lend to us; the advocates must plead for
us; the judges must countenance us; the righteous must visit us; none may
afflict, or oppress us; we may rejoice with our neighbors; yea and we have
more freedom to enter into any religious vow then formerly was granted us. O
here now are garments of gladness for the spirit of heaviness; Is: 61.3
for God is our protector, and man must be our comforter.

Lord takes notice of us: for so I find by my gracious Redeemer. When he sat
over against the treasury, Mar: 12 41. verse: 42
and beheld how the people cast money into it; and many that were rich cast in
much; And there came a certain poor widow, and threw in two mites which make
a farthing: verse: 43
He called unto him his disciples, and said unto them, Verily I say unto you
that this poor widow has cast more in, then all they which have cast into the
treasure: verse: 44
For all they did cast in of their abundance; but she of her want did cast in
all that she had, even all her living.

God relieveth us, as well as behouldeth us: Ps: 146 9.
for so says the Psalmist; The Lord preserves the strangers; he relieveth
the fatherless and widow. 2 King. 4.1.
This the poor widow of the son of the Prophet's was sensible of: for when
she cried unto Elisha, saying, Thy servant my husband is dead; and thou
know that thy servant did fear the Lord: and the creditour is come to take
unto him my two Sons to be bondmen. verse: 2.
Then Elisha said unto her, What shall I do for thee? Tell me, what have thou
in thine house? And she said, thine hand-mayd has not any thing in the house
save a pot of oil. Then he said, verse: 3.
Borrow thee vessels abroad of all thy neighbors, even empty vessels: borrow
not a few. verse: 5.
So she went from him, and did as he commanded her: and when all the vessels
miraculously were filled with oil, Elisha said unto her, Go sell the oil,
verse: 7.
and pay thy debts, and live thou and thy children of the rest. This the widow
of Zarephath also found true to her comfort: for when she had but an
hand-full of meal in a barrel, 1. King 17.12.
and a little oil in a cruse; and went to gather two sticks, that she might
gee in and dress it for her and her son, that they might eat it and dye:
even then Elijah the Prophet told her, saying, Thus says the Lord of Israel,
verse: 14
The barrel of meal shall not wast, neither shall the cruse of oil fail,
until the day that he Lord sends rain upon the earth.

The Lord not only relieveth us in our wants, but also he succoureth us in
our losses, and comfort us in our sorrows. Lu: 7.12.
When my Savior came nigh to the gate of the city Naim, and behold there was
a dead man carried out, the only Son of his mother, and she was a widow, and
much people of the city was with her: even then, verse: 13 verse: 14
when the Lord saw her he had compassion on her, and said unto her, Weep not:
And he came and touched the beer, and they that bare him stood still; and he
said, Young man I say unto thee arise: verse: 15
And he that was dead, sat up, and began to speak; And he delivered him to
his mother.

Lord has likewise commanded men to help us. Thus (though Eliphaz accuses
Job, Job. 22 9. c: 31.16. verse: 22
saying, Thou have sent widows away empty, yet) Job himself says, If I have
withheld the poor from their desire, or have caused the eyes of the widow to
fail; then let mine arm fall off from my shoulder blade, and mine arm be
broken from the bone. Thus when Ioab did seek to incline the heart os David to
fetch home Absalom, who had sted from him upon his killing of his brother
Amnon, he had noe other way to effect his desires but by suborning the widow
of Tekoah: And she came to the King, 2. Sam: 14.4. verse: 5.
and fell on her face to the ground, and did obeisance, and said, Help o King.
And the King said unto her, What ayleth thee? And she answered, I am indeed a
widow woman, and mine husband is dead. etc. And by these means getting
audience of the King who pitied her as a widow, she prevailed at length for
Absalom's pardon. Thus though the un-just judge, which is mentioned in the
Gospel, Lu: 18.4. verse: 5.
did neither fear God, nor regard man; yet when a widow troubled him, he
said, I will avenge her of her adversary, lest by her continual coming she
weary me.

wants we may borrow, and the rich must lend to us; yea and they are forbidden
to use us with cruelty, or severitie. They must not so much as take a pledge of
us. The Israelites were forbidden it by God himself; for so says the Lord,
Deuteronomy. 24.17.
Thou shall not pervert the ^dgment of the stranger, nor of the fatherless;
^or take a widows raiment to pledge. Yea and among those that remove the
land-markes; Job. 24.2.
that violently take away the flocks, and feed thereof; verse. 3.
and those that drive away the Ass of the fatherless, Job does rank and
reckon them who take the widowe's ox for a pledge.

advo^ate to plead for us. Among other duties required of Judah, the Lord not
only commands that she should judge the fatherless, Is: 1.17
but also that she should plead for the Widow: and he therefore sends his
wrath, and showreth his vengeance upon them, because they judge not the
fatherless; verse. 23
neither does the cause of the widow come unto them.

The judges are also commanded to defend us, and to countenance our causes.
Every one must be a judge to the distressed widow: therefore the law runs
peremptorily, Deuteronomy: 27.19.
Cursed be he that perverteth the judgment of the stranger, fatherless, and
widow; and all the people shall say, Amen.

righteous must visit us; for the Apostle says that pure religion, Iam: ^ 27.
and un-defiled before God and the father is this, to visit (...) fatherless
and widows in their affliction, etc.

None may afflict, or oppress us; for God himself gives the charge, Ex.
22.22.
saying, (...) shall not afflict any widow. Again, by (...) Prophet thus
speaks the Lord of host saying, Zech. 7 10. Is. 10.2
Oppress not the widow. Woe unto the^ (says the Prophet Isaiah) that take
away the right from the poor of my people, that widowe^ may be their prey.

overborne with sorrows, and lost in our griefs, we have authority even
from God to be cheerful, and to rejoice. Deuteronomy. 16.14.
So says the Lord; Thou shall rejoy^ in thy feast, thou, and thy Son, and
thy daughter, and thy manservant, and thy maydservant, and the Levite, and the
stranger, and the fatherless, and the widow, that are within thy gates.

religious vow, then formerly was granted us; yea then when we were under the
tuition of our indulgent parents. Though a virgin, by the law might not fulfill
her vow, if it stood not with the liking, Number. 30.5.
and pleasure of her father; yet the Lord himself does ordain, saying, Every
vow of a widow, as well as of her that is divorced, verse. 9.
wherewith they have bound their souls, shall stand against her. Saint Paul
also treating of our liberty to tie our selves in a second vow of nuptial
duties, says, The Wife is bound by the law, as long as her husband lives:
but if her husband be dead, 1. Cor. 7.39.
she is at liberty to be married to whom she will; only in the Lord.

Seeing then the Lord is so merciful and gracious unto us who have lost the
content and comfort of our guides and directours (provided that we are widows
indeed, and desolate trusting in God, 1. Tim. 5.5.
and continuing in supplications and prayers night and day) why sit I thus
disconsolate, as if I neither had right to the society of Christians, nor were
regarded by my maker? Whence flow these tears? Whence arise these sighs and
sobbs of a troubled mind? Though I have lost my husband, yet still I have my
God. He is and will be mine, so long as I remain and continue his. What
though I miss my head, my deceased Lord, my dead husband in every place? What
though he sits not with me at the table, and therefore I sigh? What though
I find a miss of him in my sole and single life, and therefore I grieve? What
though I want him to instruct me in the ways of goodness, and to provide for
the affairs also concerning this life, and therefore mourn? I may be pensive
in the remembrance of him whom I loved, and I may lament the loss of my
instructor and my comforter: but if I grieve too much, I shall but discover
that there was folly in my love, and that there is despair in my tears. He
was not mine, but God's; and with him he lives. It must be my comfort that
he lived so well while he was upon earth, that I may hope assuredly that
he is a saint in heaven: and it must be my confidence that he is only gone a
little before, to that place of happiness whither I shall follow him. He who
lent me him, can furnish me with another; or else give me content with this
single life. He was not my choice, but God's. If I ponder upon my loss with
sorrow and grief; I must yet think upon his advantage with joy and content. I
will therefore reverence his memory without too many sobbs; and I will be
thankful to my God, because he once did lend me so good a directour. I will
(by his blessing) live a widow with content and quietness, until he shall be
pleased either to call me again to the state of wedlock, or else free me
from this sinful and troublsome world. If I marry noe more, the greater
command shall I retain of my self. I am now at liberty to employ my time in
religious duties; whereas if I were wedded to an un-godly man, even my
religion it self (without the mercy of my God) might receave some prejudice.
But if the Lord shall be pleased to bring me again into obedience to another;
I will besiech him so to direct me in my choice, that I may marry in the Lord.
I will not rashly attempt so weighty a matter; but with my prayers and tears I
will beg of the Lord to guide, and direct me. Thus that I may live in the
love of my God, and that he may allways overshadow me with his blessings;
Ier. 31.32.
and be a husband unto me, as he promised to be unto Judah and Israel, I will
humble my self at his foote-stoole, and pray unto him, and say.

The Prayer.
BLessed God, thou who once did promise to the barren church of the Gentiles
that thou would be unto her both a Redeemer and a husband: Is. 54.5
be pleased to look upon the low estate of a pensive widow. Thou know how
irksome, and full of forrowes this solitary life is: thou viewest my sad, and
dis-consolate condition. O be thou unto me both a husband and a comforter;
that in the multitude of my sorrows which I have in my heart, thy comforts, o
Lord, Ps. 94.19.
may refresh my soul. It is thy promise that, Prove. 15.25.
though thou will destroy the house of the proud, yet thou will establish the
border of the widow. Though the wicked do noe good to the widow; Job. 24.21.
yea though they stay the widow, and murder the fatherless: Ps. 94.6. Ps. 68.5
yet thou thy self have promised that thou will be a father to the
fatherless, and defend the cause of the widow; even thou, o God, who dwell
in thine holy habitations. Job. 22.9.
O send not then a poor and distressed widow away empty: but be pleased to be
my G^ my guide, and my counselor. Make me (...) honor thee in all my ways;
to rely upon thee i^ all my sorrows; to sue unto thee in all m^ wants; Ephesians.
4.24. Ps. 89.22.
and firmly to be wedded unto thee (...) righteousness, and true holiness.
Let not the oppressor exact upon me; nor the Son (...) wickedness do me
harm: but do tho^ allways preserve me under the shadow of thy wings. Be thou
my directour in all my ways, that whether I shall continue in this stated of
widow-hood, or be ordered by thee to change my condition, and be joined again
in holy wedlock; I may sue for thy counsel, and be seconded with thy blessing.
But so long as I shall lead this single life let me remain contented: Lu.
2.37.
and make me like Anna the Prophetess, not departing from thy temple, but
serving thee my God with fasting and prayer night and day. Be thou unto me in
a more excellent manner then was Job unto the widows, causing my heart to sing
for joy; Job. 29.13.
that so though mine afflictions are many, and my desolate condition be full of
perturbations, and anxious thoughts; yet I may so cleave unto thee, that I may
have comfort in thee whilst I live upon earth; and be hereafter admitted into
the society of thy saints and Angels, there to reign with thee world without
end, through Jesus Christ my only Lord, and Savior. Amen.

Tears of an Orphane at the death of her father.
The Soliloquie.
THE EjACULATION.
Psalm. 5. verse. 1. Give ear to my words, o Lord; consider my meditation:

verse. 2. Hearken unto the voice of my cry, my king, and my God; for unto thee
will I pray.

AMong other abominations which Jerusalem was guilty of it was not the least
that In her had they set light by father and mother. Eze. 22 7.
But could there live such people as neglect their parents? Could nature become
so silent in children, that they should forget the honor due to proge^itours?
Surely if even affection inhabited the breast of a Christian, it needs must
dwell in the heart of a child and point to the fathers, that did beget him.
Alas I feel a desire of expressing such an affection, which I would be as
ready to manifest in real expression: but (ay me) the object of (...) love
and my duty is snatched from me. O^ he that begat me is dead: he that
took ca^ to breed me; he that supplied my wants; b^ that instructed me in
religion; he that defen^ me from injuries; he whose labor and indstrie was
chiefly employed for the good of me his boloved child. Prove. 4 3.
I was, oh I may say I was, my father's child, tender, and only beloved of my
mother. But now where, o where is that man of affection? Where is that father
who so earnestly loved me; who so dearly affect^ me? Sick he was: dead he
is. But was my duty to him correspondent any way to his care of me? Did I
endeavor to requite his love by my service, Gen: 48 1.
and obedience? Did I visit him in his sickness, as Joseph did his dying
father When one could him saying, Behold thy father i^ sick, he took with him
his two Sons Manass^ and Ephraim, and went and visited him. This visitation
is a Christian duty, and not to be denied even to our enemies, much less to
out parents. 2. King 13.14.
When Elisha was fallen sick of his sickness whereof he dyed, and Ioash the
King of Israel went down unto him; he wept over his face, and said, O my
father, my father, the charet of Israel, and the horsemen thereof. Less then
this I could not do: for the Prophet was a stranger to the blood of the King;
and yet the King both visited, and lamented the Prophet. Had I been sick and
my father in health, ^how would he have wept, and grieved! How would he have
repaired to Physicians; ^ought for my recoverie; bought it at rates ^en beyond
his estate; and rather have chosen (...) have led his days in penury and
want, ^en I should have dyed for want of cost! and I dyed and he sur-vived,
he would have ^ourned for me many days; 1. Chr. 7.22.
as Ephraim did (...) his children that were slain by the men (...) Gath: or
(like Jacob, when he heard ^he fall report that Joseph was slain) he ^ould
have mourned, Genesis 37 34. verse. 35
and have refused to be ^forted; and peradventure he would have ^d, I will go
down into the grave unto my child, mourning. Thus, o thus my father would have
grieved for me. Yea, if mischief should have befallen me, he would have
been as ready to have said as Jacob did concerning Benjamin, c: 42.30.
My gray hairs shall be brought down with sorrow to the grave. But how did I
deserve this love at the hand of my father? It Is true that nature and religion
did teach him to be indulgent: but did both, or either of them persuade me to
my duty? Did I honor him according to the commandment of my God? Ex. 20.12.
Lev: 19 3.
Did I fear him according to the law divine? Did I love him, and that
entirely; and would I have been as forward to express my love and respect
unto him, as Rahab (though a harlot) did manifest hers, when she convenanted
with the spies, and (...) cluded, Ios: 2.13.
saying, Ye shall save alive my father my mother, and my brethren, and my
sisters, (...) all that they have; and deliver our lives (...) death? Would I
have been ready to (...) press my love and respect unto him (if (...) had
required, and opportunity and mea^ had been offered) as David did to his
^rens? 1. Sam. 22.3.
He went to Mizpeh of Moab, and (...) unto the King of Moab. Let my father, I
(...) thee; and my mother come forth and be with y^ 'till I know what God will
do for me. (...) ready thus to comfort him, thus to relieve (...) if need
had required, and thus to provide (...) him to the uttermost of my power? Did
never depart from him at any time, before had craved both his leave, and his
blessing When Elijah passed by Elisha as he (...) ploughing, 1. King 19.19.
verse. 20
and cast his mantle upon him, he le^ the oxen indeed; but he ran after
Elij^ and said, Let me I pray thee, kiss my father (...) my mother; and then
I will follow thee. Ye^ rather (on the contrary) instead of honoring him,
Mat: 10 35. Mich: 7 6.
was I not at variance against him? Was I not apt to dis-honour my father, and
to rise up against my mother? Instead of laboring to relieve and comfort him,
was I not more ready to say unto him as did the Prodigal in the Gospel, Lu:
15.12.
Father give me the portion of the goods that falls unto me? Certainly had
not he sinned, he could not have dyed: and had not I sinned, he could not
have been separated ^m me. My neglect of my duty did move (...) Allmighty to
take him from me; that (...) I may at least honor the memory of him ^w he
is gone, whom peradventure I did (...) truly reverence and obey while he was
(...). Now, o now is that time of heaviness ^en upon me, wherein I must
lament (...) Zion, and cry, Lam: 5.3.
I am an orphane and ^erlesse; my mother is a widow. Now my ^forter, my
defender is gone, I cannot ^ose but suspect that even Christians will ^ome as
bad as were the Jews who judged (...) the cause, the cause of the fatherless;
Ier: 5.28.
and yet (...) prospered. Now the curse which the P^lmist prophetically laid
upon his slan^e^ous enemy, I daily fear will happen unto ^nee; Ps: 109.12.
even that none will favor this fatherless ^hild. Hence flow my tears: hence
arise ^hese mists of sighs, and these clouds of ^rrow. My father is gone;
he is departed; he is ^ead. O what shall I do to lament enough ^e loss I
sustain? How shall I sufficiently ^ourne the departure of him, whom all my
^bbes and cries can never re-call? Weep I ^ust: I cannot choose but weep.
Nature ^ommand's it, and I hope religion will not ^orbid it. Though David
complained that ^hee was forgotten as a dead man out of mind; Ps: 31.12.
yet he could not possibly mean that the dead were forgotten by their
sur-viving offspring. O noe: the eyes of orphans are full of tears when they
call to mind their once indulgent fathers: yea and in every tear ^e^meth to be
a reflection of the deceased parent. Our laments are not only enforced by the
greatness of our losses, and the strength of our love to our departed fathers:
but even by religion it self which gives us a kind of encouragement to hope
that in their moderation they have authority from God. Deuteronomy: 21.11.
The captive woman among the people of God who was fair and beautiful, and
whom an Israelite desired to have to his wife, was to be brought home to his
house: verse. 12
and then she was to shave her head, and to pair her nails, and to put the
raiment of her captivity from off her, verse. 13
and to remain in his house: but first she ought to bewail her father and
her mother a full month before the Israelite might go in unto her; and he be
her husband, and she his wife. Me think's I could willingly yield to be thus
far a slave, as to mourn for my father: for it is some content to me in my
losses to have yet the society of my tears. Allthough among the Jews the
very touching of the dead did make the living un-cleane; yet among Christians
we have noe such laws. O how would I now go kiss his cold and wann chee
kes, and weep over his shrouded body; yea and wash that face so full of
palenesse with my warm and willing tears; if all that I could do would
restore him to life again! I would not stick to touch him; yea to kiss him:
and when my lips would be weary my tears should softly court his hollow and
closed eyes. A very Jew might have done thus much, who lived under the bondage
of the ceremeniall law: yea a Priest himself was allowed these acts so
natural and pious. Though touching the Nazarites the command was strickt which
the Lord delivered unto Moses, Number. 6 1. verse. 2.
saying, Say unto the children of Israel, when either man or woman shall
separate themselves to vow a vow of a Nazarite, to separate themselves unto the
Lord; verse. 6.
all the days that he seperateth himself unto the Lord he shall come at noe
dead body; verse. 7.
he shall not make himself un-cleane for his father, or for his mother; for
his brother, or for his sister when they dye; because the consecration of his
God is upon his head: Yet whereas the law said, Eze: 44 25.
The Priests shall come at noe dead person to defile themselves, it ran with
this exception, But for father, or for mother, or for son, or for daughter,
for brother, or for sister that has had noe husband they may defile
themselves. And again, concerning the common people the law provideth, saying,
Number: 19.16.
Whosoever touches one that is slain with the sword in the open fields, or a
dead body, or a bone of a man, or a grave, shall be unclean: but the time of
his un-cleanesse was to continue but seven days. That law has now noe power
to oblige us who are under the Gospel. I may touch my dead parent, and embrace
him, yea and kiss him, at least in my thoughts when I cannot come to his body.
And so I will: and if there remain any un-cleanesse in my cogitations, I will
purify, I will wash it away with the bath of my tears. Allthough my sorrows
cannot call him from the grave, yet they have power both to discover mine
affection, and to satisfy my desires. Heb: 11 35.
In ancient times women had their dead raised to life again. This indeed is
too much for me to expect: yet it will not be too much for me to mourn with
those women, who were afterward thus comforted. But then I must be just in my
mourning. As my love may lawfully be showed in my tears, so must my religion
be manifested in my moderation. It was a curse upon the Jews which the Prophet
pronounced, when he said, Men shall not tear themselves for them in mourning,
Ier. 16.7.
to comfort them for the dead; neither shall men give them the cupp of
consolation to drink for their father, or for their mother. I must not exceed
the bounds of modesty in my cries and lamentations; but I must drink rather
of the cupp of consolation, and hearken to the advice and counsel of my
comforters. Nature indeed may be seen in a tear, and heard in a sigh: but if
those tears be too many, or those sighs too frequent or too loud, my very
sorrows may be sinful for my want of patience. He for whom I grieve is
better then my self, and his condition is full of joy and delight: why then
should I mourn too excessively as if he were lost; and why should I grieve
too immoderately, as if I despaired of a father? He is gone to a place where
he is freed from sorrows, and can dye noe more: only I am on earth, in a
valley of tears: but I shall have a time to dye too, and be gathered unto him.
In heaven (says Saint John) there shall be noe more death, Reu. 21.4.
neither sorrow, nor crying; neither shall there be any more pain; for the
former things are passed away. My Redeemer says that they which shall be
accounted worthy to obtain that world, Luc. 20 35.
and the resurrection from the dead, neither marry, nor are given in marriage:
neither can they dye any more; verse. 36
for they are equal unto the Angels; and are the children of God, being the
children of the resurrection. Why then should I lament for him who needs not
my sorrows, and my tears are but a fruitless disturbance of my self? If I
am troubled at the loss of a friend so dear, I must rather labor to be
beloved of my God who is so good. I shall one day learn with holy Job, Job. 17
14.
to say to corruption Thou art my father; and to the worm. Thou art my mother,
and my sister. There is yet something earthly therefore which I shall
acknowledge a parent: but I must take heed that nothing upon earth does make
me an idolater. The house of Israel was once so sottish as to say to a stock,
Ier: 2.27.
Thou art my father, and to a stone, Thou have brought me forth. This were a
stupid madness in me if I should so dis-honour the memory of my father, as
to make the timber succeed him in my reverence. But more impious it would
prove, if I should reject my heavenly father; and instead of him I should
honor (as Israel did) a stock, or a stone. The greater that my loss is in my
deceased parent, the more must be my obedience to the father of lights. Iam.
1.17. Heb. 12 9.
He who is and must be the father of my spirit did lend unto me for a time
the father of my flesh. He has also taken from me my natural parent, that
my thoughts may be ever fixed upon him with whom he dwells. If my trust be
in God my comforts will abound; my sorrows will decrease. If my name be
written among the righteous, my share shall be equal to theirs in the
protection of my God. He has ever been merciful to them that were
fatherless, so that they relied on his providence, and served him with
faithfulness. Ps. 27.10. Ps. 68.5
When my father and my mother forsake me (says the Psalmist) then the Lord
will take me up: a father of the fatherless is God in his holy habitation. O
that I might have the honor to be his child, that so I might justly call him
father! O that I could truly say unto him, Thou art my father, my God, Ps.
89.26. Is. 63.16. Ier. 3.19. 2. Cor. 6.18.
and the rock of my salvation! O that I could faithfully say, Thou, o Lord, art
my father, my Redeemer; thy name is from ever-lasting! O that I could call him
my father, and not turn away from him! His mercies are great: his promises
are full of comfort. I will be a father unto you, and ye shall be my sons
and daughters says the Lord All-mighty. O what shall I do that I may be sure
to be adopted into the number of his children? Alas as I am I have but little
hope of it: for he is pure, but I am un-cleane: but I will wash my self with
my tears of repentance, and beseech his Son to cleanse me with his blood.
He is righteous, but I am sinful: but I will confess my wickedness, Ps.
38.18.
and be sorry for my sins; and then I am sure he will abundantly pardon.
Lord, though I have been thine enemy, thou can make me thy friend: though
I have hated thee, thou can incline me to love thee: though I have been
rebellious, thou can make me thy child. O be pleased to hearken to the
intercession of mine advocate pleading for me: to the intercession of thy
Christ who was obedient to thee: to the intercession of my Jesus who was
crucified for me. In him be reconciled unto me; for I am well assured that
like as a father pittieth his children, Ps: 103 13.
so thou Lord do pity them that fear thee. This, o this is the way where
in I must walk. Thus, yea only thus shall I have a father both dead and
alive. He who is dead shall not b^ immoderately bewailed, because he that is
ever living shall wipe the tears from mine eyes, Mine exchange shall be full
of advantage. For him who was willing to help me, yet was not able; for him
who loved me, but imperfectly; and left me irresistably, I shall have a
father whose will cannot be opposed; whose power noe creature is able to
resist; whose love is in perfection; and who is not subject either to change,
Dan: 7.9. Ps: 90.2. Ps: 22.9
or dye. He is the ancient of days: he is God from ever-lasting, and world
without end. If I could say with David, Thou did make me hope when I was
upon my mother's breast, as well as I can say with him, Thou art he that took
me out of my mother's womb: verse. 10
if I could say that thou art my God from my mother's belly, as well as I can
say that I was cast upon thee from the womb: if I could say that I had allways
served thee; then should my praise be of thee continually, Ps: 71.6
and then should I be safe under the shadow of thy wings. Hos: 14 3.
Ashur shall not save us (says Israel); we will not ride upon horses; neither
will we say any more to the work of our hands Ye are our God's; for in thee,
o God, the fatherless finds mercy. In God do the fatherless find mercy?
Ps: 35.14.
Why then do I how down my self thus heavily, mourning for my father,
whereas I am assured (if I serve and obey the righteous Lord) that when my
father and my mother forsake me, Ps: 27.10.
then the Lord will take me up? He that is dead was but the weak, though the
loving instrument to bring me to life: but he that is living, yea and lives
for ever and ever, is the God both of power and mercy: he therefore for ever
shall be my father. Mal: 2.10.
Have we not all one father? Says the Prophet, Has not one God created us?
Yes, yes; he is a father to all by creation: but he will not be a father to
all by regeneration, Lu: 12.32.
His flock is but little, his children are not many: I will therefore strive to
be one of the smallest number, for those alone shall inherit salvation. His
mercies were ever great to the godly: his compassions never failed the
fatherless, if they honored him. When David was promised that he should have
a Son, even then the Lord did also promise to be a father unto him. 1. Ch^
17.13.
I will be his father (says the Lord) and he shall be my Son: I will not
take my mercy away from him, as I took it from him that was before thee. But
what shall I do to gain his protection? How shall I persuade him to call me
his child? If I love the memory of my father more then I love him, then I
cannot possibly be worthy of him: for so says my Savior, Mat: 10 37.
He that loves father or mother more then me, is not worthy of me. I will
therefore strive to honor my God with the strength of my love, in heart, and in
soul: and that I may the better do it, I will imitate my dead father in all
that was just and righteous in him; but whereinsoever he failed I will decline
his stepps. 1 King. 22.52.
Ahaziah was plagued because he did evil in the sight of the Lord, and walked
in the way of his father and of his mother. 2. Chr: 22.3.
He walked in the way of the house of Ahab; for his mother was his counselor
to do wickedly. It is not the loss of a parent which can prevail for a
blessing upon the child; unless in the stead of him that was earthly, he be
made a father who is Lord of heaven. He looks not on our afflictions with
the eye of compassion, unless we look up to him with the eye of faith and
devotion. Our miseries are but judgments unless we amend, and do but
prophecy unto us a destruction at hand. When Jeroboam was fatherless he was
called to the congregation, 1. King. 12.20. c: 11.26.
and they made him King over Israel: but he whose hand at first was lifted
against the Crown, and not content with that, did afterward put it forth
against the man of God; c: 13.4.
had it justly dried up, so that he could not pull it in again unto him. Thus
the loss of an earthly father could not protect a wicked orphane: c: 14.9.
but he who did evil above all that were before him, and had gone and made
other Gods and molten images to provoke the Lord to anger, and had cast the
Lord behind his back; even upon his house was evil to be brought. verse. 10
The Lord will cut off (says the text) from Jeroboam him that pisseth against
the wall, and him that is shut up and left in Israel; and will take away the
remnant of the house of Jeroboam as a man takes away dung 'till it be all
gone. But on the contrary I find that unto the godly a father of the
fatherless, Ps: 68.5
and a judge of the widows is God in his holy habitation. 1. King. 7.13. verse.
14
Hiram the Son of a widow, of the tribe of Naptali, whose father was a man of
Tire, the same was filled with wisdom, and understanding, and cunning to
work all works in brass, and was therefore sent for by King Solomon to build
his house. Gen: 25 11. Est: 2.7
After the death of Abraham it is said that the Lord blessed his Son Isaak.
After the death of Esther's father, Mordecai the Jew took her; (she being
his uncle's daughter) for she had neither father nor mother. He took her for
his own daughter; and afterward the Lord so blessed the orphane, that she
came to sit upon the royal throne, c: 7.3. verse: 17 Ps: 10.14.
and to be the preserver of her nation. Thus the poor who commit themselves to
God do find assuredly that he is a helper of the fatherless. He executes
their judgment: so says Moses; Deuteronomy: 10.18.
The Lord does execute the judgment of the fatherless. By Moses also he
forbids the people, saying, Ye shall not afflict any widow, Ex: 22.22.
or fatherless child. Job accuses his pretended friends of an high offense,
when he charge them, Job. 6.27. Is: 10.2
saying, Ye over-whelme the fatherless. By the Prophet Isaiah a woe is
pronounced against them who take away the right from the poor of the people of
the Lord, that widows may be their prey, and that they may rob the
fatherless. Yea and from God himself by the mouth of King Solomon the advice
is given, Remove not the old land-marke; Prove. 23.10.
and enter not into the fields of the fatherless. By the Allmighty to the
fatherless friends are raised: thus was Job: Job. 29.12.
I delivered the poor (says he) that cried, and the fatherless, and him
that had none to help him. c 31.17.
And again he says, If I have eaten my morsel alone, and the fatherless
has not eaten thereof; verse. 22
then let mine arm fall from the showlder-blade, and mine arm be broken from
the bone. Thus if I am God's, then God will be mine. If in my wants I miss my
father, my God will relieve me: if in my troubles I want my father, my God
will deliver me. What could my earthly parent have added to my content, which
my heavenly parent cannot much more supply. If therefore I grieve too much for
the death of him, I forget my God who lives for ever. If too much I complain
of his absence who delighted in me, I manifest my rebellion against him who
should be my delight. Mat. 6.9.
He taught me to pray; and when I pray he taught me to say Our father which
art in heaven. On him therefore will I depend who is the father of all that
believe in him. Romans 4.11.
To him in my wants will I address my self, who is the giver of all. Iam.
1.17.
Upon him will I call, and to him will I cry, and say.

The Prayer.
ALl-mighty God, heavenly father, who art a Lord of comfort, Romans 15.5.
and a God of consolation; look down upon a sinful and distressed orphane
bereft of the joy and help of an earthly parent. Thou o Lord did send me
unto him that thy Kingdom might be increased: and thou have taken him from me
that my faith and patience might be fully tried. I was apt to forget thee while
he was living, looking upon him as the donour of blessings, and neglecting
thee from whom they proceeded. I relied too much on the arm of flesh; 2: Chr.
32.8.
and trusted too fondly in the power of man: but now thou have humbled me by
his mortality, and taught me wholly to rely and depend upon thee. Mine own
unworthiness of so loving a father made thee to take him away from mine eyes.
My dis-obedience to his commands, and my neglect of honoring him according to
thy laws, have provoked thee to anger, and to deprive me of his comfort. Lord
forgive my manifold offenses: and since I find that all flesh is but as grass,
1. Pet. 1 24. Iam. 4.14.
and that the life of man is but as a vapor which van sheth away; make me
allways to apply my service wholly unto thee who live forever. Remember thy
promises which thou have made unto the fatherless: and that I may be capable
of those thy promises, give me grace to become thy child by obedience. Thou, o
Lord, art my father to whom belongs honor; Mal. 1.6.
thou art my master, and requirest me to fear thee: Lord make me fear to
offend thee who art a righteous judge; and make me love and honor thee who
art a gracious father. Be with me in all the ways wherein I shall walk in
this mortal life, Lu 1.79.
guiding my feet into the way of peace. Comfort me in my sorrows, support
me in my miseries, provide for me in my wants; and in all places, and at all
times be thou my father, Ps. 62.6 Ps: 82.3
my rock, and my strong salvation. Do thou defend the poor and fatherless:
do justice to the afflicted and needy. Supply all my wants; and confer upon
me all necessary blessings. O be reconciled unto me in the blood of thy
son, that I may here depend upon thy fatherly protection, and hereafter be
received into thy celestial Kingdom, there to reign with thee world without
end, through Jesus Christ my only Lord and Savior. Amen.

Tears for the death of a beloved brother. And may likewise serve at the
decease of any other faithful friend.
The Soliloquie.
THE EjACULATION.
Psalm. 5. verse. 1. Give ear to my words, o Lord; consider my meditation.

verse. 2. Hearken unto the voice of my cry, my king, and my God; for unto thee
will I pray.

A Friend (says King Solomon) loves at all times; Prove. 17.17.
and a brother is borne for adversity. Friendship which is begotten by the
outward form, or any other sinister and by respect, lives noe longer then
that ground of affection: but nature is stronger then our election can be; and
religion obliges far more then both. O how great then is my loss of my
dearest brother, in whom both excellency of feature, neerenesse of blood, and a
gracious conversation conspired together to render him matchless! To me he
was a friend, but now to the grave: and what loss can be greater then the
loss of a friend? To me he was a brother, but now to the worms: and what
loss can be more deplorable then the loss of a brother? But to me he was
yet more: he was a friend in his love and courtesies, a brother by his blood,
yea and an instructor, a teacher of religion and goodness: and yet nor love,
nor blood, nor religion could preserve him mine. O what sorrows do accompany
all thing transitory! His love could not dye, but his body could: and so I am
deprived of the society of my brother, because my brother was subject to
corruption. But is this the adversity for which he was borne, according to
King Solomon? Did the wise man intend that a brother is borne to bring
adversity? Or rather to comfort us in the time of adversity? Had he been a
cause of my least disturbance while he was living, he would have eased my
grief by grieving himself. He would have comforted me in the time of
trouble, had he lived to see my grievous mourning. But now alas I am left to
lament alone; and so much the more for the want of his comfort. I now must
grieve for him who was my joy: and my laments and my griefs increase the
higher, because for his sake they arise who cannot allay them. Had we lived in
hatred, his death peradventure might have been my comfort. Had we loved but
slightly, a tear or two I might have thought enough to pay at his funeral.
But our love was firm, it was strong, yea strong as death; Cant. 8.6.
and who then can blame me if my sorrows in some measure keep pace with my
love? O what tie can be so great as that of affection? What love so great as
of a brother and sister? And yet so vain is man, so frail are mortals, that
either our affection or our persons must have a divorce. Had my deceased
brother forgotten the tie and bond of nature, and in his life had he turned
his love into hatred; yet his fault ought not to have lessened my love, to
which both nature and religion did strongly oblige me. Had he loved me but
coldly and faintly, as diverse do; yet I ought to have warmed his affection
with the fervency of mine. But, oh, he dearly loved, he cord^ally affected
me: and yet his love and his affection could not prolong his life. There was a
time when Moses was in the Mount; and while he was receaving the written laws
of our glorious Maker, the Israelites in his absence worshipped a Calfe instead
of the lawgiver. But when Moses returned he was so wrath with the people,
that for so great an offense against the law of God, he decreed a revenge
against the law of nature: yet was not that revenge provoked by a private and
^n-warranted fury, but commanded by God: for so he speaks to the sons of
Levi, and tells them, Ex: 32.27.
Thus says the Lord God of Israel, Put every man hissword by his side, and go
in and out from gate to gate through out the camp, and slay every man his
brother, and every man his companion, and every man his neighbor. Neighbors
might be near in habitation, yet not in affection; and the^ the sword would
devour greedily. Companions might love in a superficial manner, yet not in
the heart; and then the sword might wound with freedom, though perhaps not
with desire: yea and such contentions might arise in company, that the sword
might execute at the self same time as well a private as the public revenge.
But, that a brother should slay a brother; a brother more strongly allied by
spirit then flesh; a brother whose veins did swell with the selse-same blood
as his that executed him; o this, me think's, did seem very cruel. But let
me not err in my forward censure: there can be noe true affection where there
is not religion. If a brother offend, if a brother transgress the laws of
God, religion will plead to silence nature, when he who is to be beloved
above and before all, shall require our justice even against our brethren. Alas
what a sad time was it with those idolaters, when the punishment did appear as
full of terror in the actors as the sufferers! Yea it seemed easier to dye by
the hand of a brother, then to live to remember the brethren they had slain.
Had my brother and I been idolaters together, I might have believed that that
sin had slain my brother. But as our love was constant, so our religion was
undefiled: yea the strength of our love was founded on the purity of our
religion; and yet he has paid his debt to nature. Is: 19.2
The Lord did threaten to set the Egyptians against the Egyptians, and that
they should sight every one against his brother. Those Egyptians were heathens,
and enemies to the church; but mybrother and I were united both in the
profession and the love of Christianity: and yet through our finnes I fear
that even we destroy each other. My sins are partly punished in his death:
and his death has given me so deep a wound, that peradventure I shall not
long survive him. Our love was so entire, that me think's I could willingly
sleep with him in his grave: for while I live, my breast is but his walking
monument. Such love as ours did not always possess the hearts of some as
nearly allied; which makes me sigh to think that ever there were any which
had layen successively in the self same womb, and yet did not join in the
unity of affection. Such there have been; I must believe it, because I find
it in the sacred text. Yet when I read it, me think's, I have a thriling in
my blood, and a kind of holy reveng^ burning in my heart against those who
dishonored the name of a brother. There was a time when the Jews were so
wicked, that the Prophet was feign to advise them, saying, Take ye heed every
one of his neighbor, Ier. 9.4
and trust ye not in any brother; for every brother will supplant, and every
neighbor will walk with slanders. And there was a time when the Church,
complaining of her small increase, cried out in bitterness, and said, The good
man is perished out of the earth; Mich: 7 2.
there is none upright among men: They all lie in wait for blood; they hunt
every man his brother with a nett. Me think's the advice of the Prophet may in
some measure concern my self; for I am taught not to trust in any brother,
since he whom I loved has now forsaken me. Me think's the complaint of the
Church may be part of an Elegy upon my deceased brother; for with her I may
cry out, and that justly too, The good man is perished out of the earth. But
neither can I say that he was a Jew in supplanting; or an enemy to the
Church, lying in wait for blood. What secret devil did guide both the tongue
and the hand of Ioab, when under the color of friendship he asked Amasa, 2.
Sam. 20.9.
Art thou in health my brother? And took him by the beard with the right hand
to kiss him: and yet even at that time some him with his sword in the fifth
ribb, and shed out his bowels to the ground that he dyed? verse. 10
What cursed fiend did guide the tongue of that wicked miscreant whom the
Psalmist charge thus, and says, Ps: 50.20.
Thou sit and speak against thy brother; thou slanderest thine own
mothers son? Had my brother either supplanted me, or hunted me with a nett,
or sought to slay me, or slandered me with his tongue, then I might
peradventure have saved this great expense of my tears. But he was allways
so good a brother, that I could never justly charge him with the least
discourtesie. O noe: Ps: 55.14.
we took sweet counsel together, and walked unto the house of God in
company. I may say of him as Nehemiah spoke of Hanani the ruler of the
palace, Neh: 7.2.
He was a faithful man, and feared God above many. His blood was near to
me; but his soul was nearer. His person I loved, as I was prompted to it by
nature: but his inner man I more zealously affected, to which I was allured by
his gracious endowments. Such a one in some measure he was as my Redeemer
himself did style his brother; Mat: 12 49. verse. 50.
when he stretched forth his hand toward his disciples, and said, Behold my
mother, and my brethren: for whosoever shall do the will of my father which is
in heaven, the same is my brother, and sister, and mother. And yet though thus
he was my counselor; though thus he was my companion in the ways of
godliness; though thus faithful he was, and feared God above many, laboring
to do the will of him that sent my Redcemer; yet neither his counsel, nor his
society, nor his fidelity, nor his religion could preserve him from the
sentence of a temporal death. O what would I not do to call him back again?
What would I not give to have him restored to life again? But all that I can
either do, or give, cannot persuade his soul to return back to its prison.
Were I the most rich and wealthy in the world, yet could not my treasures
urchase his return. Noe, noe: I am well assured of the truth of the Psalmist,
who says that They who trust in their wealth, Ps: 49.6
and boast themselves in the multitude of their riches: verse. 7.
none of them can by any means redeem his brother; nor give to God a ransom
for him. Well then; seeing that I cannot fetch him from the grave, I will yet
send up my sighs toward the place where he is blessed. This I may do
without any check either of reason, or religion. It was a curse which God did
Inflict upon Iehojakim for his sins; Ier: 22.17.
even for his coveteousnesse, for his oppression, and for his violence, verse. 18
That they should not lament for him saying, Ah my brother. But on the
contrary when Deborah (though she was but Rebeckah's nurse) was buried beneath
Bethel under an oak, Gen: 35.8.
the name of it was called Allon-Bachuth, the oak of weeping. When the enemies
of David were sisited with sickness, Ps: 35.14.
he behaved himself as though they had been his friends, or his brethren:
yea he bowed down heavily, as one that mourns for his mother. But he who
now is dead was not mine enemy, but my friend; yea and noe common friend, but
a brother; yea and not a brother in the flesh so much as in affection, even as
dear as a mother: why then should I not sorrow for the loss of such a
brother? I will grieve, I will lament when I remember the love, and the
courtesies which he showed unto me; and I will speak in the language of the
Church to Christ, and say, O thou that were my brother, Cant: 8.1.
that sucked the breasts of my mother; when I should find thee without, I would
kiss thee; yet I should not be despised. I will lament him as David did Saul
and Jonathan, and say, 2. Sam. 1.19. verse. 23 verse. 26
The beauty of Israel is dead: he was lovely, and pleasant in his life. I am
distressed for thee my brother; very pleasant have thou been unto me; thy
love to me was wonderful, passing the love of women.

But what advantage to the dead are the tears of the living? Can my sighs
inspire life into his bosom? Can a draught of my tears fetch him back again
to life? O noe: it is this, it is this therefore that does heighten and increase
my sorrows, even that my tears cannot recover him whom I lament. But cease
fond woman, cease thy sobbs and cries of discontent. By the extreamitie of thy
passion thou may hasten to his grave: yet if the murderest thy self with
excessive sorrow, thy soul may be deprived of the locietie of his It Is true
indeed; it is most true. Little can I expect to come to heaven, if I violently
force my self from the earth. Why then do I take on, as if I either suspected
his happiness, or doubted of following him? What comfore can it bring to his
body of earth, to have i^ cabined in the grave with his dispersing ashe^ The
dust of both of us may mix in the vault, and yet noe joy arise to our
senseless asher. If his earth was that which drew mine affertion, I see my
fondness in the corruption of that earth: but if his gracious soul was the
object of my love, I must strive to come where that surviveth. To heaven he is
gone, and to heaven I Will hasten: and because I will go the surest way, I will
walk in those paths which faith and patience shall direct me in. I will noe
more disturb the peace of my mind, since that cannot help me to the company
of him. Weep indeed I do; I am enforced unto it: it is the law of nature;
it is an act of necessity; I cannot avoid it. Yet, though I weep, I will
labor for content: and since my God (as I undoubtedly believe) has been
pleased to crown my brother with glory; I will beseech him to comfort me here
with his grace. I will not immoderately weep, lest I injure my self: I will
not Weep without hope, lest I offend my Maker: but that I may weep as I
should, and hope as I ought, and live as I am required, I will humble my self
at the feet of him to whom my brother is gone, and I will pray unto him, and
say.

The Prayer.
ALl mighty God, ever-lasting father; Is: 9.6.
thou in whom we live, and move, and have pur being; be pleased to take
pity upon thy distressed servant grieving for the loss of a ^eloved brother.
Thou know, Lord, how ^eerely our hearts were knitt in affection, and
^herfore how justly I lament my loss. Be^hold how these tears do witness my
love, and imitate that ointment on Aaron's head, Ps: 133.2.
which went down to the skirts of his out ward garments. Behold how these
dropps like that deaw of Harmon, and that deaw which descended upon the
mountains of Zion, verse: 3.
do arise from that unity which thou have commanded. O how shall I bear the
loss of him whom thou in thy law did charge me to love? Thou, o God, did
tie us together in the bond of love and yet thou thy self have separated him
from my sight. But since it was thy pleasure to receave him to thy self, be
pleased also to hasten my journie to him. Give me patience to endure this
stroke of thy scourge; and thankfully to acknowledge thy goodness in his
happiness. Him thou have taken fron^ the evils to come; Rom: 7 24.
o deliver me also from thi^ body of death. Make me setle mine affection
only upon thee, that my delight may be wholly in thy righteous laws. Give me
a sight of my sins for which I have not grieved so much as for the loss of
my deceased brother: and turn all my tears into a godly sorrow for offending
thy majesty. Be thou unto me a father in thy provident care, and a brother in
thy love; that all my wants may be supplied by thy sufficience. On earth, I
see, there is nothing permanent: Lord let my treasure be stored in heaven; Mat:
6.21.
and then where my treasure is let my heart be also. When it shall be thy
pleasure to free me from this tabernacle of flesh, o let me be received into
that quire of Saints, whereof I doubt not but my brother is a joyful member.
Grant, o my God, that when I have passed the waves of this troublesome world,
I may sing tryumphant Halelujahs to thy praise and glory, through the merits of
him who is mine elder brother, even Jesus Christ my only Lord and Savior.
Amen.

Tears of a woman in a deep Consumption, or in any other languishing disease.
The Soliloquie, Consisting of three parts: viz: 1 A complaint, and description
of the nature of the disease. 2 The cause of the malady. 3 The hope of
recoverie.


THE EjACULATION.
Psalm. 5. verse. 1. Give ear to my words, o Lord; consider my meditation:

verse. 2. Hearken unto the voice of my cry, my king, and my God; for unto thee
will I pray.

ALl flesh is as grass (says the Apostle); 1. Pet: 1 24.
and all the glory of man as the flower of the grass: The grass withers,
and the flow^ thereof falls away. Blessed Apostle ho^ truly have thou
discribed the condition o^ humanity! O how sensible am I of the piercing
truth of that sacred text! Those whom age enforces to decline, do easily
feel their approaching autumn: Io: 4.35
and when they lift up their eyes and look on the field^ (on the drooping
years of their parched selves) they easily conclude themselves to be white
already unto the horvest. But must death be confined to the leisure of
antiquity; and allways be locked out until it has complied with age to
destroy the prison? O noe: I find it otherwise. Death may as easily ente^ at
the gates of diseases, as at the stooping salie-port of numerous years, Me
think's^ see it staring and gaping upon me with a^ eager appetite and when I
plead the minority of my time, it tells me that the flows may be cropped
in their spring. True it is that every one in the prime of years is like unto
grass, priding himself in the verdure of youth, if yet he be permitted to
enjoy i^ with delight. We grow up with the strength of a juycie stem; and
bear the flowers o^ beawtie and glory. But when our pomp has jollied it
self in the pleasure of earth, and our strength has wantonned among the
painted flowers of the springing fields; at length the sap shall return, the
Sun shall withdraw it self, the plant shall wither, and the since shall cut
it down. But is this true in those alone whose hearie heads incline to the
earth, and whose stooping bodies are bowed by antiquity? Alas noe: Diseases
have a power as great as has age; and can work the carkeise in the self
same mould as does length of days. I am sure it is so: I find it so, I see it
so, I feel it so in the continuance of mine infirmity. The natural heat and
moisture of my body decline like the juice of the flowers In the time of their
autumn: and, what a number of years could not easily have effected, the
sharpness of a malady can quickly conclude. Man dies (says Job), Job: 14.10.
and wastes away; yea man gives up the ghost, and where is he? Too true, too
true it is, that I dye while I live; and I wast away when I hope to increase.
My life is but a lingering death; for my meats nourish me not, my drinks
comfort me not, my physic restore's me not, my clothes content me not, and
my bed eases me not. When I hope that my meat will nourish me, then the
weakness of my stomach chides me for my hope, and tell's me that it is
weary of the labor of the teeth. When I desire that my drink should comfort
me, then the in-disposition of my concoction frustrateth my desires, and
causes my stomach to render back the present in contempt of the briberie. When
I too seriously rely upon the skill of the Physician, and have a kind of
confidence that his physic shall restore me; then, either his ignorance of my
disease, or the debilitie of my deaded body, or the in-disposition of the
druggs flowte's me for my confidence, and tell's me I must dye. When my
clothes are presented to the heat of the fire, and requested to convey the
warmth to my chillowed body; then either the air lies in wait, and robs
them of the heat; or else the stricktnesse of the poares of my shrivelled
skin deny it access by those contracted doors. Job. 7.13. verse: 14 verse: 15
verse: 16
When I say, My bed shall comfort me my couch shall ease my complaint; them am
I skared with dreams, and terrified through visions; so that my soul chooses
death rather then life. I loath it; I would not live allway: let me alone, for
my days are vanity. Ps: 22.15.
My strength is dried up like a pot-sheard; my tongue cleaves to my jaws; and
I am brought into the dust of death. I am chastened with pain upon my bed;
Job: 33 19. Ps: 22.17.
and the multitude of my bones with strong pain. I may tell all my bones; they
look and stare^ upon me. Lord what a walking ghost am I become; even able to
affright the world with amazement and wonder at the power of a Consumption!
Eyes fare ye well; ye shall noe more be admird by spectatours; nor convey
enticements of wickedness to my deluded heart. Ears fare ye well: ye shall
noe more enjoy the fond delights of earthly music; nor shall the Ecchoeing
Choristars of the yealding ajer any more bewitch you with the melody of their
voices. And ye the rest of my senses, take your leaves: labor noe more the
service of my body; for bitterness has seized upon my taste, roughness my
touch, and dullness my smelling. Mine eyes have now none other object, then
the bare perusing of ^he craggie mountains of my rising bones; and ^he pale,
dull, lead-colloured skin is so brivelled and deformed, just like the
parchment which is contracted and puckered by the ^eate of the fire. Mine Ears
are entertained with noe other sound's then a hollow cough which borrows from
my lungs as much of their froath as they can spare at a time; and make's me
see how I howerly consume by mammocks. All that I have is pain; and all that I
am is a burden to my self. When I think to walk, my knees complain, my
Feet are unwilling: and if the charitable hand of a friend supporteth me, I
am to begin again to learn to go. When I think to discourse, the first
word bids me be silent and speak noe more, lest my spirits should slinke
from me in the ajer of my speech. I am grown as much a trouble to society, as
they do appear a burden unto me. I am not so weak in my digestion as I am
various in mine appetite: and if speedily I am not furnished with what I long
for, I am presently passionate; if it comes as I desire, I am cloyed with the
sight. I puzzle mine invention to become my Caterer: and if I obtain what I
think upon, I am surfieted with looking upon it. Full I am of pain; but
distinctly and most predominantly I know not where. Every part has a share in
the anguish; and yet I cannot say which part is most afflicted. I cry when I am
pained, and yet it is a pain to me to cry yea and it is folly to cry, because
I receave (...) certain hurt by it, but noe release from the which I cryfor. I
envy all that enjoy the^ health; and each moment I am ready to repi^ at him who
has brought me so low. The smile of a visitant is a dagger at my heart: for
while I find my self thus lingering in a sickness, I look that the whole
world should decay for company. I am fretfull, and peevish, and disturbed with
every thing; yea even by a continuance of the fretfulblesse it self. One while
I feign would have my life prolonged: another while I cry out for a speedy
departure. Sometimes I have a kind of glimmering o^ health; and then I am so
proud of it, that (...) adventure too much. Either I eat too much, or I walk
too much, or I discourse too much; or one thing or other exceeding its
proportion speedes me back again to my former weakness: and then am I sorry
for what I have done and yet am I apt either to deny, or excuse it.

Thus, o thus is my body perplexed: but all this while I say nothing of my
soul. I am sensible of the anguish which I feel in my body; but in what
estate or condition do I find my foul? My body is almost resolved into that
whereof it was framed; my soul therefore is not long to continue upon earth.
When they shall part, it will prove either a day of tryumphant bliss; or else
a dismal time ^t will be of horror and confusion. O come, come thou fond and
foolish woman: look ^o that darling which ere long shall be crowned with a
diadem of glory, or else be damned with the rebellious ghosts. Well; I am
resolved: I will now take up; and banishing the thoughts or hopes of recoverie,
I will prepare my self that I may meet my God. O my God assist me in this my
resolution, and bless me in the performance.


HAd Adam continued in his integrity, man should have been freed from the
tortures of sickness. The dead and trampled earth should not have been freer
from thorns and thistles, then man the living earth from maladies and
infirmities. But o I feel the sowernesse of the apple in the bitterness and
sharpness of my disease; and needs must I therefore remember mine original
corruption. This is the cause of my languishing; this is the ground of my
feebleness. But is this all? Have I nothing but the stain which I inherit
from my parents, to be termed the cause of this my misery? One only offense
to my great creator has power enough to purchase my disquiet. But have I but
one? Is mine hereditarie sin mine only crime? Surely I fear that I have
something amiss in mine own thoughts, and words, and actions, as well as in
my parent's un-kind legacy. I cannot believe that God does afflict my body
with these chastisements, yea and threaten my soul too with eternal tortures;
and all this only for a sin of Adam so many ages since committed. Thus
indeed he might do, and yet I should not choose but justify him when he
should speak, Ps: 51.4
and clear him when he should judge. Oh but I feel something else at my
heart as weighty as lead, which make's me cry out: it is something at my
conscience, which tells me that I have more to answer for then the
pollutions of nature: it assures me that I have offended; cruelly, deeply,
desperately I have offended. It Is true, o mine angry, my disturbed conscience;
I must confess I have. Oh my heart: I feel there, I feel there something
more then an universal guilt. I have offended; I have sinned actually,
greatly, mightily, bloodily in every thought, in every word, in every action. I
have so industriously employed my time to the dishonor of my God that I cannot
remember I ever pleased him. Guilty, guilty: I must, I do confess my self,
highly guilty of fearful crimes; such as disturb me in the very
remembrance. O my God vouchsafe me a repenting heart for them; yet never
without the assurance of thy mercy and pardon through the sufferance of thy
Son. How can I choose but find my sins even in my very feeble and consuming
sickness? Since I have so many testimonies in the sacred pages, that God is
noe revenger until me are delinquents! All disturbances of the body do
un-doubtedly arise from the pollutions of the soul. The Prophet David
confessed it, and said, Ps: 38.3
There is noe soundness in my flesh because of thine anger; neither is there
any rest in my bones, by reason of my sins. My Redeemer justified it, when
he who had been shaken with a palsy was brought unto him lying upon his bed:
for he cured him, Mat: 9.2.
and said, Son be of good cheer, thy sins be forgiven thee. And again
when thirty and eight years had been spent by a man in a lingering disease;
and after that my Jesus had cured him, when he found him in the Temple, Io:
5.14.
his words to him were, Behold thou art made whole; sin noe more, lest a
worse thing come unto thee. Saint Paul assured the Corinthians, that because
they did unworthily approach the table of the Lord, 1. Cor: 11.30.
even for this cause many were weak and sick among them, and many slept. Thus
the punishment is sent from God; but the offense is both in, and from our
selves.

But have all diseases the same original? Is sin the ground of every
sickness? Cannot I be afflicted with this languishing malady, but it must
needs proceed from the wickedness I have committed? Noe doubtless: for this
very kind and manner of sickness has particularly been threatened, yea and
sent too as a punishment for disobedience. A languishing has been threatened
and sent upon the very creatures, for the sins and wickedness of the
offending people. Thus the Prophet bemoaneth the punishment of the Jews for
their great rebellions, and says, The earth mourns, Is: 24.4
and fades away; the world languisheth, and fades away; the height of the
people of the earth does languish. Ier: 14.2.
Thus in a grievous famine Judah mourned, and the gates thereof languished:
they were black unto the ground, and Jerusalem was gone up. Is: 16.8
Thus the fields of Hesbon languished, and the vine of Shibmah: the lords of
the heathen brake down the principal plants thereof. Joel 1.10.
Thus among the Jews, the field was wasted; the land mourned, for the corn
was wasted; the new wine was dried up; the oil languished: verse: 12
the vine was dried up; and the fig tree languished. Thus in the confusion of
Egypt the fishers mourned, Is: 19.8
and all that did cast the angle into the brooks lamented; and they that
spread netts upon the waters did languish. Thus among the enemies of the church
the earth mourned and languished; c: 33.9
Lebanon was ashamed and hewn down; Sharon was like a wilderness; and
Bashan, and Carmel did shake off their fruits. But what was the reason of all
these judgments; of all this languishing sent upon the creatures? I need not
go far to seek the cause: the Prophet will soon determine it: for he
complains of the people, that By swearing, and lying, Hos: 4.2.
and killing, and stealing, and committing adultery they brake forth; and
blood touched blood. These were their sins; but what was the effect? The
self same Prophet immediately after threatens them with it, saying, verse. 3.
Therefore shall the land mourn, and every one that dwells therein shall
languish, with the beasts of the field, and with the fowls of heaven. Here was
the earth, and the world; the cities, and the fields, and the vines, and the
plants, and the lands, and the corn, and the oil, and the figtrees; and all
languishing, grievously languishing; and the cause thereof was the people's
sin. But yet, me think's, this cannot much concern me. Shall I for a
smootie ear of corn or two, or for the drying of the branch of a vine or a
figtree, presently conclude that the withering of them can parallel my
consumption? Yes doubtless: I must, if I look into the cause. The trees, and
the other of the smaller plants could never either be guilty of an offense, or
be sensible of a punishment: but the men, the men, they were the offenders; and
for their transgressions, their mother earth had her second curse. I cannot
plead mine own innocence; or pretend that I am free from the guilt of
enormities. Noe, noe; I cannot. I may therefore conceave my self one of the
trees which I find so cursed: for my branches (mine arms, my legs, and my
thighs) do pine away: my fruits (my works, and my labors) are now decayed:
and what can I say, or plead for my self? I am one of those trees which the
Apostle speaks of, whose fruit withers; Iud. 12
without fruit; twice dead: and now am I ready to be plucked up by the roots.
Yet for all this my stubborn heart, me think's, stand's out; and would feign
persuade me that the curse of the trees resemble's not my disease. But I hope
that I shall came this heart of mine, and put it to silence, when I shall
search more narrowly in to the sacred book.

Wherefore did the Prophet say that he heard from the Lord God of hosts a
Consumption Is: 28.22.
determined even upon the whole earth? Was it not because the people said,
verse: 15
They had made a covenant with death; and with hell they were at agreement:
when the overflowing scourge should pass through, it should not come nigh them:
for they had made lies their refuge; and under falsehood they had hid
themselves? Does not the Lord by the mouth of Moses threaten the people,
saying, If ye will not hearken unto me, Lev: 26 14. verse. 16
and will not do these commandments, I will also do this unto you: I will
even appoint over you terror, Consumption, and the burning ague, that shall
consume the eyes, and cause sorrow of heart? Does he not again menace them,
and say, Deuteronomy: 28.
The Lord shall smite thee with a Consumption, and a fever, and with an
inflammation, and with an extreme burning? Does not the Prophet tell the
people, saying, Is: 10.22. verse. 23.
The Consumption decreed shall overflow in righteousness: for the Lord God of
hosts shall make a Consumption, even determined in the midst of all the land? O
my conscience, my conscience, thou art now at a stand^ O my heart, my hardest
heart, thou art now struck dead. Lo here is my very disease, my Consumption;
and is here not my sin too? Have I never made a covenant with death; or been
at agreement with hell? Have I never made lies my refuge; or hid my self under
false-hood? Have I not refused to hearken to my God, and to do his
commandments? O how feign would I have attributed my disease to fecond causes;
and rather have thanked the Physician then the Divine for telling me the
ground! But now I am at a stand; and must needs confess in the midst of my
torments, that I find in them the displeasure of my maker. I cannot urge one
act of goodness that ever I did, to plead my pardon for the least, for the
smallest sin which I have committed. Alas I find my destiny in the book of
Psalms, where the Prophet tells me that The wicked shall perish, Ps: 37.20.
and the enemies of the Lord shall be as the fatt of lambs: they shall Consume;
into smoke shall they Consume away. O were I but worthy to be ranked in the
form with Aoraham, I might as well as he, be styled The friend of God. Iam:
2.23.
But my conscience tells me, that though God be my friend in his goodness
and longsuffering; yet never was I hitherto a friend of his. Such a friend to
him indeed I am, as he was whom in his meekness he called a friend; Mat:
22 12.
he who shifted in for a dinner among the guests that were invited. But what
became of him? Alas when he was found not having on a wedding garment, verse:
11 verse: 13
the Lord then said unto his servants, Bind him hand and foot, and take him
away, and cast him into outward darkness; there shall be weeping, and gnashing
of teeth. O this dreadful sentence have I deserved, besides this consumption
which I now groan under: and all because I am an enemy of the Lord's. This
shall be the plague (says the Prophet) wherewith the Lord shall smite all the
people that have fought against Jerusalem: Zech: 14.12.
Their flesh shall consume away while they stand upon their feet; and their
eyes shall consume away in their holes; and their tongue shall consume away in
their mouth. Jerusalem is the vision of peace; Gal: 4.26.
But I have allways warred against it. The Church upon earth has found me an
adversary; and that Jerusalem which is above has found me an enemy. This is
my fault; and justly therefore do I feel this punishment. For this offense my
flesh consumes away while I stand on my feet; mine eyes are mistied, and
over-cast with dimnesse; and my tongue is so feeble, that I can skarce
complain. I may now cry out as Hezekiah did, and say, Mine age is departed,
Is: 38.12.
and is removed from me as a sheep-heard's tent: I have cut off, like a
weaver, my life: he will cut me off with pining sickness: from day even to
night will thou make an end of me. But let me not forget the sin of
Hezekiah. His heart was lifted up; 2. Ch^ 32.25.
therefore there was wrath upon him, and upon Judah, and upon Jerusalem. Let
me not forget mine own sin. My heart has been lifted up too: I have been
proud; yea I have swelled with scorn, and contempt. O that with Hezekiah too,
verse: 26
I could humble my self for the pride of my heart, so that the wrath of the
Lord might not come upon me. O that I could pray, with Hezekiah, and weep
with Hezekiah; that the Lord might say unto me as he did unto him, Is: 38.5.
I have heard thy prayer, I have seen thy tears! That curse which David
prophetically laid upon the wicked in his time: Ps: 58.7
me think's, does seem at the first severe; but yet it is just: Let them
melt away as waters which run continually: verse. 8.
as a snaile which melts let every one of them pass away; like the untimely
sruit of a woman, that they may not see the Sun. The snaile consumes
wheresoever it crawleth: and yet the providence of God is such, that the
consuming snaile is often found a remedy for the Consumption. Thus what is
good for my disease is troubled with the same: and that which some have found
to be a remedy, is to me a certain remembrancer of my misery: o that every
thing might put me in mind as well of the cause of this my disease!

Lord how my flesh does quiver, though but little is left of it! How my heart
does tremble, as if noe comfort were left me! I have sinned: I have done very
wickedly. But does the cure of my sickness as much exceed the power of my
God, as the skill of my Physician? Noe, noe: he may, if he please, restore
me to health again: and he may, when he pleases, commit me to the worms.
All is in his hand: o what shall I do to purchase his favor? What shall I do
to have him reconciled? Feign I would weep for my sins, but I know not how.
Feign I would shed some penitent tears; but hardly will nature afford me
moisture enough. But I resolve howsoever that noe excuse shall save a tear, or
a throb; since without these I cannot hope for excuse, and pardon. Alas my
sins lie heavy at the door: Gen: 4.7.
but I will roll them away with the force of a water course. I will grieve for
my offending so merciful a God: I will lament for the offenses which I have
committed against him that visits me. I have but a little time to continue
upon earth, unless it shall please him to restore me to health. Earth I am; I
must confess it: but I would not be dry; I would not be dust, until I am
laid to sleep in the dust. Io: 9.6.
He who made clay with his spitle to cure the blind, can open mine eyes with
the blessing of a tear. Me think's I am like unto the corn that is ground in
a mill; for so am I torn so am I crumbled, and worn into meal. But since I
am so, I will make dough of this meal: I will leaven it with my sorrows; I
will add unto it the water of my tears; I will kneade it by contrition; and
bake it with the heat of that zeal which I will preserve in my heart: and
then will I pray that it may be a present accepted by my God. Thus will I weep
in my languishing sickness; thus will I lament for the cause of my sickness:
but I will weep in faith, and I will lament in hope that my Jesus will say
unto me as he did to the woman that touched his garment, Mat: 9.22.
Daughter be of good comfort; thy faith has made thee whole; thy sins are
forgiven thee.


THe hour of death seems near approaching; and puts me in remembrance
of my last account. The weakness of my body tells me now that the time is
comeing wherein I must appear at the great tribunal, Me think's these lean
and languishing joints do seem to wonder at me for so long entertaining the
fleeting air; and do groan under the burden of this sharp disease. Lord I
cannot hope to continue here long, since the little house of my body is so
tottering and shaking. And yet me thinks I have not sufficiently completed
the work of my repentance; and cannot therefore account my self ready to meet
my God. I repent indeed of whatsoever formerly I have done amiss; and yet I
cannot choose but do amiss again, even as soon as I have repented. I
tremble when I think upon the punishment due to offenders; and yet I tremble
not when I commit, when I act mine offenses. Ready I am not to dye; too
desirous I would not be to live: and yet dye I must; and yet live I may. Lord
if thou prolongest my life, renew mine obedience. I would be contented to live;
but then I would live without sin. I could yield to continue a while that I
might perfect my repentance; but then I am sure I should add to the number of
those sins whereof I repent. I will resolve therefore neither to hasten my
death, nor yet too eagerly will I desire life. I must needs confess that I am
willing enough to live. Lord grant that if I do live, I may live to thy
glory; and if I do recover my health, I may express my thanks in a religious
life. Thus I pray with my lipp; but do I pray so with my heart? I am apt to
promise unto God more then I fear I shall be able to perform; and all these
promises are made in hope that I may recover my strength. Yea and it may please
him who is the Physician both of the soul and body, to restore my body to
health and strength. I know that it is in his power; he may do it if he
pleases. Mat: 19 26.
With men indeed this seems impossible; but with God all things are
possible. If I live, I will spend my time in his service: and upon these
conditions I may hope to live. Yea and so I will hope: why should I not? He,
in whom alone I do hope, has power to grant the thing that I hope for; yea
and to give a blessing thereto if he full-filleth my hopes. By him even dead
bodies have been restored to life: it is not hard therefore for him to restore
a living body to health. When Tabitha was dead, Act: 9.37. verse: 39
and washed, and laid out, Peter went into the upper chamber, where all the
widows stood by him weeping, and showing the coats and garments which Dorc^s
had made whilst yet she was with them. verse: 40
Then the Apostle put them all forth, and kneeled down, and prayed: and
turning him to the body he said, Tabitha arise; and she opened her eyes: and
when she saw Peter, she sat up. Here was a wonder wrought by a man, far
greater then the recoverie of my health would prove: but this man received his
power from God. Mat. 9.8.
Well might the people marveile when they saw such things; and glorify God,
who had given such power unto men. But Saint Peter is dead; and in these latter
times those miracles are ceased of restoring the dead. What then? I am yet
alive; and my cure is not difficult to him who is emnipotent. He did work
many wonders by his Apostles, Act: 19 11.
even upon the living; and special miracles by the hand of Saint Paul; verse: 12
so that from his body were brought unto the sick, handkercheifs or aprons; and
the diseases departed from them, and the evil spirits went out of them. And
he who wrought cure of the people without means, can give such a blessing to
the means, that I may thereby be restored again, many diseases my Redeemer
himself did cure, while he was upon earth. It is true that he is now not
here in the flesh: he is ascended into heaven. But what of that? Though his
humanity be there, yet his divinity is every where. I will therefore submit to
his pleasure; and I will hope for my health. While he was upon earth he
delighted in cures; and his mercy remains still the same: readily will I
therefore submit to his pleasure. Mar. 2.3.
Once was a man so weak with the palsy; that he was borne by four: verse 4.
and when by reason of the preasse they could not come near the doors of the
house where my Savior was, they un-covered the roof, and let him down in his
bed. When Jesus saw their faith, verse. 5.
he said unto the sick of the palsy, Son thy sins be forgiven thee. Mat:
8.14.
When Peter's wive's mother was sick of a fever, verse. 15
my Savior did but only touch her hand, and the fever left her, and she
arose, and ministered unto them. c. 4.24.
The people brought unto him all sick folk that were taken with diverse
diseases, and torments; and those that were possessed with devils, and those
that were lunatic, and those that had the palsy; and he healed them. It is
he alone that can heal; and therefore to him alone will I pray that I may be
healed. Were my disease as old as my body, and my body as ancient as time it
self; yet he that can remit my sins, can restore my health. But my disease
is not so ancient; and therefore the cure does not seem to be so hard. Suppose
that I have languished a month, a quarter, a whole year: What if three? What
if six? What if a dozen years? It exceeds not either his power, Mat. 9.20.
or skill to make me whole. He cured a woman who for twelve years together
had been diseased of an issue of blood in her body. Mar: 5.26.
She, poor woman, had suffered many things of many physicians, and had spent
all that she had; and yet was nothing bettered, but rather grew worse. Thus
despairing of any help from man, she addressed herself to him who is both
God and man. To him that cure was so easy, that she did but only touch the
hemme of his garment and strait way the fountain of her blood was dried up,
verse. 29
and she felt in her body that she was healed of that plague. There was a
miracle indeed, that with the touch of a garment the disease should be cured.
If such power did lie in the hemne of his garment, what virtue must I needs
believe did lie in his body! But what comfort can I receave from this which I
read, when I know that that body is ascended into heaven? Fond woman as I am,
why do I thus waver? Though his flesh be from me, yet his spirit is with me.
Yea and his flesh, and his blood is offered still unto Christians upon earth.
He gives not only his garment to touch, but also his flesh: and that not to
touch, only, but even to eat, to seed upon in the blessed sacrament. That
woman was cured by the touch of his garment; and shall not I hope for his mercy
who feed upon his flesh and blood in the Eucharist? Yes, yes; I must, I will
believe that he for his own sake will remitt my sins; and that (if it may
advantage the glory of his name) he ^an, and may recover my health.

Yet all this while I think but of a disease of twelve years standing. What
if I had been sick for eighteen years together? Might I therefore despair of
his power? Noe, noe; I might not; I durst not. Lu: 13.11.
Do not I read of a woman who had a spirit of insirmitie eighteen years,
and was bowed together, and could in noe wise lift up herself? A disease she
had which in effect was not altogether unlike unto mine; for I stoop too, and
am almost bowed together through the weakness and infirmity of my body; and
cannot lift up my self, but am enforced to require the aid of my friends and
attendance to raise me, and to support me. Yet I read that when Jesus saw
her, verse: 12
he called her unto him, and said unto her, Woman thou art loosed from thine
infirmity: verse: 13
And he laid his hands on her, and immediately she was made strait, and
glorified God. It may be his pleasure to speak such comfort also unto me:
for I have not been sick so many years as was she: and I seek my Savior,
which she did not, allthough I must acknowledge it is his grace which works
in me this my seeking of him: yea and I beg the cure, whereas she was asked
if she would be cured. Why then should I not hope that he will lay his hands
upon me, and make me strait, and restore me whole, as he did that woman,
that I may glorify him for it?

But suppose that my disease had continued above twenty years: suppose above
thirty: should the long continuance make me determine the cure impossible?
Nothing less: for I read that a certain man was at the poole of Bethesda,
Io. 5.5.
who had an infirmity thirty and eight years: verse. 6.
and when my Jesus sam him lie there, and knew that he had been now a long
time in that case, he said unto him, Will thou be whole? verse. 7.
The impotent man answered him, Sir I have noe man, when the water is troubled,
to put me into the poole; but while I am coming, another steppeth down before
me. verse. 8. verse. 9.
Jesus says unto him, Rise, take up thy bed, and walk: and immediately the
man was made whole, and took up his bed, and walked. Lo here is some comfort
still: thirty and eight years continuance was nothing to Christ. He who is
eternal sees all things at once, and does all things without difficulty.
Surely that man was intended for a pattern of patience; and that I might
learn contentedly to suffer what my God shall lay upon me. He despaired not
of health though his disease was inveterate; but he lay ^ the poole, and
expected still the hand of mercy ^o lift him into the water, nothing doubting
^f the cure if he could in due time but get ^to the poole. Nor may I despair
of what ^y God can do; but I must continue in my ^pplications, enduring mine
affliction with ^tience, and referring all to his holy pleasure, (...) must be
as constant in my prayers as the man ^as constant in his attendance at the
poole. At ^y gate, o Christ, I must, I do continually ^e. Thy blood, o Jesus
is the only Bethesda ^r my distressed soul. Lord lead me into ^at poole of
blood by the hand of faith, and then I shall not distrust the effect of that
^ver. O cleanse my soul, and then I shall willingly submit to thy pleasure for
my body.

But still, o still my pains increase, and my flesh consume's. I pray, and I
beg, and I beseech; and yet I find noe ease, noe relief. The continuance of
my sickness does but ^each me the ignorance of the Physicians; or ^he
deadness of the druggs and potions. I am dyeted, and I am physicked, and my
body is become the very shop of an Apothecarie; and yet I find noe ease, noe
comfort. It Is true that thirty and eight years continuance of a malady
hindered not Christ from curing with a word. But if it had remained longer,
could he have done the like? Yes surely: why not? He himself could as well
have doo^ that, as have given power to his Apostles t^ restore the Criple, who
had been forty yea^ lame. This was done by Peter and John: for the man that
was above forty years old, Act: 14 22. c: 3.2.
and had been lame from his mother's womb, even on him was showed this
miracle of healing I may hope for some favor too from the hands of my God: for
though to me it might appear almost a miracle that I should recore, yet with
God it is as easily effected by a word, as was the great creation of heaven
and earth. I will therefore submit to his pleasure, and (...) upon his
goodness. He is a God of mercy, an tender compassion: he is the great
Physitia both of soul, and body: he has allways delighted in acts of
charity. It was his promise upon some conditions, to heal a who^ land: 2.
Chr: 7.14.
for his own words are, If my people which are called by my name, shall humble
themselves, and pray, and seek my face, and turn^ from their wicked ways;
then will I hear from heaven, and will forgive their sin, and wi^ heal
their land. I am one of the people, o Christ that is called by thy name; for a
Christian I am though a sinful, and a feeble Christian; and thou have humbled
me with this thy visitation, and grace thou have given me (I bless the for
it) to humble my self in the consideration of mine iniquities, and to pray;
and to se^ thy face. Lord perfect thy good works, and make me turn from mine
iniquities; and then hear me from heaven, and forgive my sin; and (if it
may stand with thy eternal decree) heal thy servant.

He has likewise showed his mercy even in healing of waters: 2. King 2.21.
for his Prophet Elisha went forth to the spring of un-wholesome waters, and
cast salt in there, and said, Thus says the Lord, I have healed these waters;
there shall not ^e from thence any more death, or barren land. So the waters
were healed, verse: 22
according to the saying of Elisha the Prophet. Lord I have waters too that
require thy help; for they are un-wholesome, they are sinful. I weep, and I
lament; my tears run down on my cheeks; Lam. 1.2.
and all either with extreamitie of anguish, or fear of death, or despair of
thy power to restore me to health: few of them are for my sins, few of them
for my transgressions. But some hope I have that thou will likewise heal these
waters; for already thou have cast some salt into them; I find by my taste that
they are brackish, that they are brinish. Lord let me be noe longer a barren
land, but make me fruitful in good works, Col: 1.10 Ps: 1.3.
that I may be like unto a tree planted by the rivers of water, that brings
forth his fruit in due season: and then though this leaf for a time may
fail, though the flower of my body may be cropped, or mowed for the harvest;
yet I know that my Redeemer will not cast it into the fire, but will make it
spring up hereafter in eternal glory.

He has also healed the persons of diverse of his people; Ps: 107.20.
for so says the Psalmist, He sent his word and healed them, and delivered
them from their destructions. Is: 19.22.
So Isaiah prophesies concerning Egypt, saying, The Lord shall smite Egypt;
he shall smite and heal it; and they shall return even to the Lord, and he
shall be entreated of them, and shall heal them. O what comfortable words were
these to Egypt! He may, if he please, cheer me up also with the like; for
he has already smitten me; and in his loving kindness he has so
sanctified this affliction, that by it he has made me to return unto him. O
Lord now, if it be thy pleasure, be thou entreated of me, and heal me.

This God is the same God who speaks by the mouth of Moses, and says, See
now that I, Deuteronomy: 32.39.
even I am he, and there is noe God with me: I kill, and I make alive; I
wound, and I heal; neither is there any that can deliver out of my hand. This
is the same Lord whom Hannah did magnify in her thankful Song, and said, The
Lord kills, and makes alive; he brings down to the grave, 1. Sam. 2.6.
and brings up. This is the same God of whom Job his servant professes and
boasts, saying, He makes sore, Job. 5.18.
and binds up; he wounds, and his hands make whole. This is the same Lord
Whom David commands his soul to magnify, and says, Ps. 103 1. verse: 2.
Bless the Lord o my soul, and all that is within me bless his holy name:
Bless the Lord o my soul, and forget not all his benefits: Who forgiveth all
thine iniquities; who heals all thy diseafes; verse: 3.
and who redeemeth thy life from destruction. verse: 4.
this God is the same God who alone has power over soul and body; and can, if
he pleases, preserve them both. He it is whose mercies were promised to his
Church, when by his Prophet he said, The light of the Moon shall be as the
light of the Sun; Is: 30.26.
and the light of the Sun shall be seven fold as the light of seven days,
in the day that the Lord binds up the breach of his people, and heals the
stroke of their wound. He it is who gives such Evangelical promises to
penitent Judah, and says, I have seen his ways, and will heal him; c: 57.18.
I will lead him also, and restore comforts to him, and to his mourners. I
create the fruit of the lips, peace, peace to him that is far off, verse: 19
and to him that is near says the Lord, and I will heal him. This is he who
inviteth Israel to come unto him, and says, Return ye backsliding Children
and I will heal your backsliding. Ier: 3.22.
And this is he to whom Israel replyeth, and says, verse: 23
Behold we come unto thee, for thou art the Lord our God. Truly in vain is
salvation hoped for from the hills, and from the multitude of mountains;
truly the Lord our God is the salvation of Israel. This is he who promises
unto Zion, c: 30.17.
saying I will restore health unto thee, and I will heal thee of thy wounds,
says the Lord, because they called thee an outcast, saying, This is Zion whom
no man seeks after. This is the same Lord to whom the people of Israel
addressed themselves, Hos. 6.1.
when they said, Come and let us return unto the Lord; for he has torn, and
he will heal us: he has smitten, and he will bind us up. Since then my God
has cured both lands, and waters, and bodies, and souls: Since he wounds,
and he heals; and none can deliver out of his hand: Since he brings down
to the grave, and brings up: Since he wounds, and his hands make whole:
Since it is he only who forgiveth all our iniquities, heals all our
diseases, and saves our lives from destruction: Since it is he that binds
up the breach of his people, and heals the stroke of their wound: Since it
was he that promised to penitent Judah, that he would restore comforts to him
and to his mourners: Since it is he alone who is the salvation of Israel:
Since it is he that promised unto Zion to restore health unto her, and to
heal her of her wounds: I will resolve therefore, with the people of Israel, to
return unto him; for he has torn me, and he alone can heal me; he has
smitten me, and he alone can bind me up. To him, to him will I humbly sue
for the cure of my wounded and distressed soul; and to him will I willingly
submitt my weak, and feeble body. I will power out my soul unto him; I will
send up my supplications unto him, and will pray and say.

The Prayer.
Great Creator, full of compassion; who both sendest sickness, and restorest
health; be thou graciously pleased (I most humbly beseech thee) to turn thy
wrath from thy distressed servant. Thy hand, o Lord, is heavy upon me in this
languishing consumption; and the sting of my transgressions pierces me with
sharp, and grievous torments. Yet I must confess, o my God, that my
sufferances do not any ways equal mine offenses; nor can the pains which I
endure satisfy thee mine offended Lord for the least of my transgressions. O,
my sins are upon me, Eze: 33.10.
and I pine away in the punishment for them; how then shall I live? My body
languisheth, my flesh consumes; Ps: 22.15. Ps: 39.11. Job: 33 19. verse: 20
and now am I very near drawn unto the dust of death. Thou with thy rebukes
do correct me for mine iniquities; thou make my beauty to consume away
like a moath. I am chastened with pain upon my bed, and the multitude of my
bones with strong pain, so that my life abhors bread, and my soul the
dainty meat that is to be desired. verse: 21
My flesh is consumed away that it cannot be seen; and my bones that were not
seen, verse. 22
stick out. My soul draws near unto the grave; and my life to the
destroyers. But yet I know that with thee, o God, is compassion, Mat: 9.12.
and tender mercies. The whole have noe need of the Physician; but such as I,
who am sick, and in misery. O that it might be said of me as it was by Mary
concerning her brother Lazarus, Io: 11.3.
even that She whom thou love is sick. O my God make me thy friend in heart
and soul, and grant that I may express it in my dutiful obedience to all
thy commandments: and then be thou my friend in thy succor and relief. Ps:
41.1 verse. 2.
Deliver me now in this time of trouble; preserve me, and (If it may be thy
good pleasure) keep me alive; make me blessed upon the earth, and deliver
me not over into the hands of death. verse. 3.
Lord strengthen me upon this my bed of languishing: make thou, and turn thou
all my bed in my sickness. Thou have chastened me sore; Ps. 118.18. Ps.
116.8. verse. 9. Ps. 143.6.
o give me not over unto death; but deliver my soul from death, mine eyes
from tears, and my feet from falling, that I may walk before thee in the
land of the living. Unto thee, o my God, do I stretch forth my hands: my soul
thirsts for thee as a thirsty land. verse: 7.
Hear me speedily, o Lord; my spirit fails: hide not thy face from me, for
I am become like unto them that go down into the pit. Thou have promised by
thine Apostle, Iam: 5.15.
that the prayer of faith shall save the sick, and that thou will raise him up.
Lord I pray unto thee; strengthen thou my faith: I am sick Lord; raise thou me
up, and make good unto me, that, thy promise by thy holy Apostle. Heal me, o
Lord, Ier: 17.14.
and I shall be healed; save me and I shall be saved; for thou art my praise.
O Lord I call upon thee; Ps: 141.1.
have thee unto me; consider my voice now I cry unto thee, and restore me to
health. But howsoever if thou have otherwise determined of me, o my Jesus
cleanse thou me by thy blood, and cure my soul by the merits of thy passion.
My sins, I must confess, are the cause of my sickness: but do thou, o God,
Ps. 44.22.
blott out as a thick cloud my transgressions, and as a cloud my sins:
return unto me, for thou have redeemed me. O give me patience in this time
of adversity; give me comfort in the examples of thy mercy; and give me
assurance of thy love in the sanctifying of this sickness unto me. As my body
does daily draw nearer to the earth, so make my soul also daily draw nearer
unto heaven. If it may be thy pleasure to restore me to health again; o let
it be thy mercy also to renew mine obedience. But if thou art resolved by this
disease to free me from the labors of this wearisome world, and to bring me
down to my grave; for thy Christ's sake, o my merciful and indulgent father,
bring thou my soul into thy celestial paradise. O grant that my sins may
consume far faster then does my flesh: and as thou take away the strength
of my body, so be pleased to add unto the strength of my faith. I am thine, o
Savior, and cost thee dear, even the very blood that issued from thy
crucified body: be thou also mine, o Jesus, both now and for ever. Abate the
temptations ^ Satan; and arm me with strength to resist his suggestions.
Ravish my soul with the love of thy self, that so I may with willingness
forsake the vanities of this world; with readiness lay down this tabernacle
of flesh; and with comfort, that my soul may meet thee my God, and my
merciful Redeemer. O God comfort me: O Christ strengthen me: O Jesus save
me. Prepare me for the happy hour of my deliverance from this world: and
then bring me out of this valley of tears to those waters of comfort, where I
may sing tryumphantly to the honor of thy name, through Jesus Christ my Lord,
and my Redeemer. Amen.

Tears of a mother on her deathbed blessing her children.
The Soliloquie Consisting of two parts: viz: 1 Her preparation to bless them.
2 The blessing it self; ending in a prayer.


THE EjACULATION.
Psalm. 5. verse. 1. Give ear to my words, o Lord; consider my meditation.

verse. 2. Hearken unto the voice of my cry, my king, and my God; for unto thee
will I pray.

CHildren are an heritage of the Lord (says the Psalmist); Ps: 127.3.
and the fruit of the womb is his reward. True indeed, they come from the
Lord; and happy are they if they return unto him. Gracious has my God been
to me in the loan of my issue: but unless he shall be pleased to add grace
unto nature, his blessing will be fearfully converted into a curse. Weakness
possesses my body; faintness my spirits; 2. Tim. 4.6.
and the time of my departure is near at hand. Go I must, yea and I am
willing and joyful to meet my God: but oh the thought of my children
disturbeth my mind; and the consideration of what may become of them, fills
my dying heart with cares and anxjeties. If they live not in the fear of him
who lent them unto me, my poor issue may become the fuel of hell. What
shall I do? If I should live, I would take such care (by the blessing of my
God) as that I might be a means to nurture them up in the fear of the most
high: but if I am taken away from them, who can tell what their education may
prove? Strangers may govern them, and such people (for ought I know) may
undertake their tuition, as may neglect the care of religious instructions, and
suffer them to run headlong to the gulf of perdition. O what a curse would
it prove beyond expression, if that part of my self which is divided into
little ones, if those which cost me so many pangs and throws, should be
disobedient to my God, and so be sentenced to the flames of eternal horror!
Alas I can do noe more then what the Lord will permit me. While I am here I
am bound both by nature and grace to endeavor my utmost for their holy
advantage: but when I shall be dissolved, and lie in the cold clods of my
mother earth, then can noe more care be expected from me. Ah my poor infants;
little do they think how they will miss their mother; and wish me alive
again, as if they envyed my happiness. Hither and thither they may be tossed
and tumbled; and (which is worst of all) they may be brought up in ignorance,
or in lewdness, and sensuality. Me think's I see the frowns of a
stepmother, and the knitted brows menacing nothing but cruelty and tyranny:
and then, me think's, they weep in one corner, and lament in another; and
bemoane their hard happ in the loss of my self. Their hungry bellies may be
pinched with famine, their bodies with cold, and their backs with stripes when
I shall not either hear, or see, or know it, my head being laid in the low
and silent grave. Help they may call for, when none will have the pity to
render them help. So they may want and cry, and be beaten and cry, and be
turned out of doors and cry, when yet neither mercy will hear, nor charity
hearken to the complaints of the motherlesse.

But why do I spend so many of these swift minuits of my short continuance in
such pensive, melancholic, and distrustful thoughts and fears of what may
happen? True it is that these, and others, yea and worse inconveniences may
happen to their bodies, and yet they may prove the children of the Most high.
That, o that, is all that I aim at: for though I would not willingly have them
suffer in their bodies; yet I would not for a thousand worlds that they should
suffer in their souls. Hunger, and thirst, and stripes, and nakedness may be
endured; and in time, either age, or wealth, or friends may free them from
these out-ward sufferances: but ignorance and ungodliness (without the
infinite mercies, and goodness of my Redeemer) will be punished with torments
that shall never have end. O what shall I do then for my poor distressed
children? Grieve I do; but I fear that I offend in it: mourn I do; but I
doubt it is more then indeed I ought. God is not weak, or ignorant, or
impotent. He has been a father to me from the time of my conception; and
shall I yet distrust in his providence and protection of my children? This were
either to suspect his power, or to deny his mercy. I know it is his desire
that they should be heirs of salvation; and I know that he can effect
whatsoever he desires. To him therefore I will leave them; to his care and
tuition I will refer my tender and beloved plants. And that he may the more
willingly become their guardiaen when I shall leave them, while I live I will
beseech him with abundance of my tears to admit them his servants. The wife
of Zebideus made a bolder request to my gracious Redeemer: Mat: 20.21.
for she be sought him that those her two sons might sit, the one on his
right hand, and the other on his left, in his Kingdom. verse. 22
She poor woman (as Christ replied) did not know what she asked. She knew
not that the Kingdom of Christ was celestial; but dreamed of an earthly
diadem and glory. Her request was therefore the fuller both of boldness and
ambition, whom noe place would serve for those her children, but what was
highest and next to supreamest majesty. Yet me thinks I cannot much blame her
for her love to them whom so dearly she had bought. There is noe earthly love
to be compared to the love of a woman; nor is any woman's love to be compared to
the love of a mother. Surely David did not know how strong this passion of love
is in the weaker vessels, when he said, The love of Jonathan to him was
wonderful, 2. Sam. 1.26.
passing the love of women. We mothers are like unto the charet of King
Solomon whereof though the pillars were of silver, Cant: 3 10.
and the bottom of gold, and the covering of purple; yet the midst thereof was
paved with love for the daughters of Jerusalem. Is: 49.15.
Can a woman (says God) forget her sucking child, that she should not have
compassion. on the son of her womb? It Is very rare indeed, and yet it is
possible: for he himself does say that they may forget. Yet seldom is love
forgotten in the mother of children, Cant. 3 6.
in whom it is commonly as strong as death: verse. 7.
for many waters cannot quench it, neither can the floods drown it. Much
therefore I cannot blame the wife of Zebedeus for the fervency of her affection
to her beloved Sons. All that she erred in was both in the thing she
requested, and in the person to whom she tendered her petition. Surely without
offense I may likewise besiech my merciful Savior, that he will be pleased
to undertake the protection of my young ones. It is a petition more proper for
me then here is was for her; for she was living, and might have been a comfort
unto them: but I am dying; I am leaving the world; I lie drawingon, and waiting
for that blessed hour of my Saviors comeing. All that is left me now to do
is only to bless them before my departure: and this is the best legacy that
I can bequeath unto them. I must, I will bless them by the leave and favor of
my God; yet not as from my self, but only from God: not as thinking that my
power can purchase their happiness; but praying to him that his blessing may
prosper them. Thus by faith did dying Jacob bless both the Sons of Joseph,
Heb. 11 21.
and worshipped leaning upon the top of his staff. Thus old Isaak said unto
Esau his Son, Genesis 27 2. verse. 3.
Behold now I am old, I know not the day of my death: now therefore take I pray
thee thy we opons, thy quiver, and thy bow, and go out to the field, and take
me some venison; verse: 4.
and make me savourie meat, such as I love, and bring it to me that I may
eat, that my soul may bless thee before I dye. Thus Isaak blessed Jacob, and
said, c: 28.3.
God All-mighty bless thee, and make thee fruitful, and multiply thee, that
thou may be a multitude of people. c. 49.28.
Thus Jacob blessed the twelve tribes when he spoke unto them, and blessed
them; every one according to his blessing he blessed them. c: 31.55.
Thus Laban even in the time of his health rose up, early in the morning; and
kissed his Sons and his daughters, and blessed them; and then departed, and
returned to his place. Yea thus even Moses (who was but a leader of the people,
and not so nearly linked unto them by the bonds of nature) blessed them, and
said, Deuteronomy. 1 11.
The Lord God of your fathers make you a thousand times so many more as ye
are, and blessed you as he has promised you. Thus the same Moses again,
drawing near to the time of his leaving the world, c. 33.1.
with his blessing did bless the children of Israel before his death. Thus
when the days of David drew near that he should dye, 1. King 2.1.
he gave a charge and a blessing to his beloved Son Solomon. And noe
marveile, since it is most true that he whom God blesses is blessed, Number:
22.6.
and he whom he curses is cursed. The blessing of a parent is nothing but a
prayer to the giver of good things, Iam. 1.17.
that he may be pleased to send his blessing on their issue. Me thinks
therefore the words of Samuel which he said unto the people, do take a deep
impression in my breast: 1. Sam. 12.23.
for he said, God forbid that I should sin against the Lord in ceasing to
pray for you. With leave then of my God I will see my children, and I will
kiss them as Laban did his and I will likewise bless them, The Lord direct
me in my prayers for them; and the Lord accept my prayers, and grant my
requests which I shall make unto him for them.


MY dearest children, ye whom I love in the tender and yerning bowels of
affection; draw near, and attend to the words of your dying mother. A weak
woman ye see I am; but yet sinful I am, which peradventure ye see not. O
weep not, my pretty ones: do not pierce and break my troubled heart with
your sad laments. I must dye, my little ones, and go to a better place, whither
ye I hope shall one day follow me. We came not together into the world; nor
shall we go together out of it. In vain do ye shed those tears of sorrow:
for allthough nature teaches you to bewail my departure, yet grace will teach
you to moderate your mourning. My heart even bleede's to leave you behind me,
fearing lest ye will forget the commandments of your God. I should be sorry
to have just cause to say unto you as Moses did to the Levites; yet I will put
you in mind of his words. Deuteronomy. 31.27.
Behold (said he) while I am yet alive with you this day, ye have been
rebellious against the Lord; verse. 29
and how much more after my death? I know that after my death ye will utterly
corrupt your selves, and turn aside from the way which I commanded you; and
evil will befall you in the latter days, because ye will do evil in the
sight of the Lord, Heb. 6.9.
to provoke him to anger through the work of your hands. But I am persuaded
better things of you and things that accompany salvation, though I thus
speak. O my dear ones, hearken unto the words which I shall say. They must be
my legacy unto you: hear me with patience; and treasure up in your memories
the last speech of your fainting, your dying mother.

How dear ye cost me before ye had life; and what pangs and torments I
suffered for you before ye were heard or seen in the world, ye cannot
imagine, nor I express. Yet all was forgotten for joy that ye were borne;
Ioa: 16.21.
and hoping that ye would add unto the quire of Saints. To this purpose I
have labored and taken care for the nourishment both of your souls and
bodies; and for your sustentation (so much as in me lay) from the breast to
this instant. O what sad and perplexed thoughts have I had for you in the day
times; and how many hours have I borrowed from my sleep in the nights, to
think what would become of you, if ye should not be obedient to the
commandments of my God! To the same God they are best known. O how often upon
my knees have I prayed for your happiness; and wept, and mourned when ye have
done what ye ought not! To him is it best known to whom I now am goeing.
Sometimes when ye have offended, I was enforced to correct you: but each
stripe which ye received did cut me into the heart. In many things ye
failed, because ye were young: and in many things I failed too, because I am a
weak and a sinful woman. If at any time ye thought that I did not my duty,
take heed that hereafter ye remember it not to my dishonor. Ponder in your
minds that curse which wretched Ham the father of Canaan received from Noah,
when he saw his nakedness and told his brethren. Gen: 9.25.
Cursed (said Noah) be Canaan: a servant of servants shall he be to his
brethren. But because Shem and Iaphet took a garment, verse: 23
and laid it upon their showlders, and went backward, and covered the
nakedness of their father, and their faces were backward, and they saw not
their father's nakedness; therefore he said, Blessed be the Lord God of Shem,
verse: 26 verse: 27
and Canaan shall be his servant. God shall enlarge Iaphet, and he shall dwell
in the tents of Shem, and Canaan shall be his servant. Consider with your
selves that I am your mother. Whatsoever imperfections ye have discovered in
me, do in some kind reflect even upon your selves: for as your bodies were
mine, so my credit and good name you must account to be yours. But I cannot
think that ye will need more advice for this, which even nature it self
should teach you to practice.

My time is but short; my speech begins to sail me. I will not trouble you
with much, allthough something more I must say unto you, which I hope ye will
remember when I shall sleep in the dust. Your first and chiefest duty must
allways be for the service of your God. If ye will daily observe the benefitts
which he sends you, ye cannot choose but thank him daily for his
blessings. Let it be your care to ground your actions upon his written law.
Undertake nothing which is not warranted by his word: and go forward in
nothing by unlawful means, or to a bad intent. Begin all in him, and
continue in him, and end in him; and he himself will be your reward. If ye
allways preserve religion in your hearts, ye will allways have quietness and
content in your minds. First make him your God, and then distrust not his
providence; noe nor his love and compassion while ye remain his children. In
whatsoever vocations ye shall lead your lives, be sure that ye be
conscionablie industrious and laborious in them; and then leave the event and
the blessing to his good pleasure. I would feine have you be his children much
more then ye are mine: for ye have nothing from me but your sin and
corruption; but from him you must expect both grace and glory. If therefore ye
strive to bless and magnify your God, ye may be sure that your God will both
bless and glorify you his children. Prove. 10.22.
Remember that the blessing of the Lord makes rich; and he adds noe sorrow
with it. Take heed therefore to your selves, and let him be in all your
thoughts; for even for them ye must account at his great tribunal. Take
heed unto your words, that they give none offense either to God or man. Ps:
62.4
There is a sort of people who bless with their mouths, but they curse in
their inward parts. I would not have you be of the number of them: Ps: 109 17.
for as they love cursing, so it shall happen unto them: they delight not in
blessing, therefore shall it be far from them. verse: 18
As they cloth themselves with cursing like as with a garment, so it shall
come into their bowels like water, and like oil into their bones. Take heed
also unto your actions, that there be not wickedness in the intent, nor sin
in the prosequution of them: for howsoever they shall appear in the eye of the
world, they will be stricktly and justly examined by the righteous judge. First
be ye sure that ye bless your God, and then ye may expect a blessing from
him. Deuteronomy: 8 10.
When ye have eaten and are full, then ye shall bless the Lord your God. 1.
Chr^ 29.20.
Remember the congregation of Israel, how they blessed the Lord God of their
fathers, and bowed down their heads, and worshipped the Lord. Neh: 9.5.
Remember how the Levites encouraged the people unto it, and said unto them,
Stand up, and bless the Lord your God for ever and ever; and blessed be thy
glorious name, which is exalted above all blessing, and praise. Remember how
the Psalmist moved them unto it when he cried, Ps. 66.8
O bless our God ye people, and make the voice of his praise to be heard: be
thankful unto him, Ps: 100.4.
and bless his name. Remember how David resolved saying, Ps: 16.7
I will bless the Lord which has given me counsel. Remember how he decreed
saying, I will bless thee while I live, Ps: 63.4
I will lift up my hands in thy name. Remember how he encouraged his soul to
this duty, saying, Ps: 103 1.
Bless the Lord o my soul; and all that is within me bless his holy name:
verse. 2.
Bless the Lord o my soul, and forget not all his benefits: Who forgiveth all
thine iniquities; verse. 3.
who heals all thy disease. Remember how he practiced it when he bless the
Lord before all the congregation, 1. Chr: 29.10.
and said, Blessed be thou Lord God of Israel our father for ever and ever.
verse. 11
Thine o Lord is the greatness, and the power, and the glory, and the victory,
and the majesty; for all that is in the heaven, and in the earth is thine:
thine is the Kingdom o Lord, and thou art exalted as head above all. verse. 12
Both riches and honor come from thee, and thou reignest over all; and in
thine hand is power and might; and in thine hand it is to make great, and to
give strength unto all: Now therefore our God we thank thee, verse 13
and praise thy glorious name. And remember how Ezra blessed the Lord, Neh. 8.6.
the great God; and all the people answered Amen Amen with lifting up their
hands; and they bowed their heads, and worshipped the Lord, with their faces to
the ground. Thus if ye bless him, if ye love him, if ye honor him, if ye
obey him, he will so bless you that ye shall delight in his service, and be
filled with his goodness. Carry in your minds those words of the Psalmist, Ps.
128.1.
Blessed is every one that fears the Lord; that walkeeh in his ways: For
thou shall eat the labor of thine hands: verse. 2.
happy shall thou be, Ier: 17.7.
and it shall be well with thee. Blessed is the man that trusts in the Lord,
and whose hope the Lord is. Genesis 25 11.
Remember how after the death of Abraham, God blessed his Son Isaak. So he
may you, and so he will you, when I, your poor feeble mother, am streched
forth and returned to the earth; if ye will hear his ^yce, and observe his
statutes. If so ye will ^oe, Deuteronomy: 14.29.
then the Lord your God will bless you in ^ll the works of your hands which
ye shall do. He who created man in his own image both ^ale and female and
blessed them; Genesis 1.27.
even the same Lord will bless you if ye be righteous; verse 28 Ps. 5.12 Ps:
115.13. 2. Tim: 4.6.
and ^ith favor he will compass you as with a shield. He will bless them
that fear him, both small and great.

And now my children I have not much more to say to you; for the time of my
departure is at hand. If ye do heartily love your God I know that ye will
affectionately love each other: ye will be observant to your guardians, and
instructours: ye will be courteous unto all. Be not dismayed at any cross, or
affliction; at any loss, or poverty which may fall upon you: Mat: 6.33. Deuteronomy:
28.8. Ex: 23.25.
but seek ye first the Kingdom of God, and his righteousness; and then all
other things shall be added unto you. Then the Lord shall command the blessing
upon you, both in your storehouses, and in all that ye set your hands unto.
He shall bless your bread, and your water; Deut^ 28.3.
and take away sickness from the midst of you. Blessed shall ye be in the
city, and blessed shall ye be in the field. verse. 4.
Blessed sha^ be the fruits of your bodies and the fruit of your grounds, and
the fruits of your cattle, and the increase of your kine, and the flocks of
your sheep: verse. 5.
Blessed shall be your basket, verse. 6.
and your store. Blessed shall ye be when ye come in, and blessed shall ye
be^ when ye go forth. c. 7.13.
The Lord will love you^ and will bless you, and multiply you; bu^ will also
bless the fruit of the womb unto you, and the fruit of your land, and your
corn, and your wine, and your oil, and the increase of your kine, and the
flocks of your sheep in the places where ye shall live. c. 28.12.
He will open unto you his good treasure; the heaven to give the rain unto
your land in his season, and to bless all the work of your hands: Genesis 49.25.
and ye shall lend unto many, and ye shall not borrow. He shall help you,
and bless you with the blessings of heaven above; blessings of the deep that
lies under; and blessings of the breasts, and of the womb. And that he may
thus bless you, the same Lord direct your hearts, and preserve you in his
blessing.

All that I can do now, is to pray for you; and my weakness will hardly
permit me to do that: yet so long as I can speak I trust I shall pray; and
in my petitions remember both my self and you. While I am yet alive it is my
duty to pray for you; and it is your duty also to pray for me. The Lord
grant that we may all do what he requires at (...) hands. Do not ye
grieve too much that I am so near my rest: for it is the decree of ^y God, and
the longing expectation of my ^earied self. The Lord give you patience to
^ndure this affliction: and the Lord give me ^atience, and perseverance unto
the end. Now I go the way of all the earth: 1. King 2.2.
Keep ye the Charge of the Lord your God, to walk in his ways; to keep his
statutes, verse. 3.
and his commandments, and his judgments, and his ^estimonies, as it is
written in the Scriptures; that ye may prosper in all that ye do, and
whithersoever ye turn your hands. The Lord give you the blessing of Judah,
Deuteronomy. 33.7.
and ^eare your voices; and let your hands be sufficient for you; and let him
be an helper to you from your enemies. and the Lord give you the blessing of
Benjamin: verse. 12
The Lord cover you all the day long, and dwell between your shoulders. And
the Lord give you the blessing of Joseph: verse. 13
Blessed of the Lord be your land for the precious things of heaven; for the
deaw; and for the deep that coucheth beneath; verse. 14
and for the precious fruits brought forth by the Sun; verse. 16
and for the precious things put forth by the Moon; and for the precious
things of the earth, and fulness thereof; and for the good will of him that
dwelt in the hush. The eternal God be your resuge, verse. 27
and underneath you the everlasting arms. 2. Sam. 7.26.
And now, o Lord God, let it please thee to bless the house of thy servant,
Verse. 29
and with thy blessing let^ family of thy servant be blessed for ever. Deuteronomy.
26.15. ps. 67.1
L^ down from thine holy habitation from hear and bless them. O my God he
merciful u^ them, and bless them, and cause thy face to (...) upon them.

And now (with Jacob) I have made an (...) of commanding you; Genesis 49.33.
and ready I am to gath^ up my feet into the bed, and to yield up the (...)
and to be gathered unto my fathers. On^ come ye near my dear ones, that I
(...) kiss you, and that my cold and clammy ha^ may be laid upon your heads,
that I may once more bless you and dye.

Farewell my pretty ones: farewell the children of my dear affection. 2.
Cor. 13.11.
I must leave you; and I hope I shall leave my God with you, who will be unto
you a father of mercies, and (...) God of all consolation Once more farewell.
1. Pet. 3 8. 2. Tim. 4.23.
Love as brethren; and the God of love and peace be with you. The Lord Jesus
Christ be with your spirits. Grace be with you all. Amen.

Tears of a dying woman; wherein is set down her religious exercises. 1 A
Soliloquie; in which is set forth. 1 A desire of life. 2 The certainty of
death.
2 A godly preparation against the minuit of death. 3 A prayer of the sick. 4
The consolation of the godly in the hour of death. 5 The resignation of the
soul into the hands of God.


A desire of life.
THE EjACULATION.
^sal. 5. verse. 1. Give ear to my words, o Lord; consider my meditation:

verse. 2. Hearken unto the voice of my cry, my king, and my God; for unto thee
will I pray.

When Ahazia had fallen down through a lattesse in his upper chamber 2. King
1.2.
that was in Samaria, and was sick of (...) fall; he sent messengers to
enquire of Baal-zebub the God of Ekron whether he should recover of that
dangerous sickness? Every one desires a fore-knowledg of events, that they
might prevent those dangers which otherwise might ensue. Herein, me thinks,
we endeavor a kind of imitation of our maker, laboring unjustly for his
attribute of prae-science. But if we desire what he forbids, we seek but
our destruction in the pursuit of our desires. Of some things he often
permits us a fore-knowledg; and somethings again he hides from us; that
so both by ou^ knowledge we may conjecture at what a blessing we should have
enjoyed, had not Adam transgressed; and also that by our ignorance we may
learn to depend upon God. Some things we think we can certainly foresee,
consulting with reason about those causes and effects which are merely
natural: but yet we often fail in our expectations, either through the
defect of reason; or the indisposition and weakness of the second causes; or
else, yea and most chiefly by the order of the Most High. Yet some are so fond
as to magnify their reason, and thereupon ground a necessity of events; not
well considering that Allthough this reason obliges men, yet it tyeth not him
who is far above both reason and nature. Some again in their curiosity
prying too nearly into things to come, borrow their assistance from the Prince
of the air; accounting their knowledge an excellency not tied to the laws of
religion. Thus did that wicked King Ahazia: but (contrary to his expectation)
he received an answer from a Prophet of the Lord: verse. 6.
for Elijah said unto him, Thus says the Lord, Therefore thou shall not come
down from that bed on which thou art gone up, but shall surely dye. O what a
dreadful sentence was this! Especially to him who sought to the Devil, that
liar, for his knowledge; but received such an answer from God who could not
deceave. Thus am I gone up to my bed too, as was that bruised King: I am
tormented with sickness, and I languish in a disease. O what shall I do?
Feign, me thinks I would be certified how long I have to live: feign I would
live; Ps: 39.4
and yet I am not certain of life. I am not ready for death; and yet I am
heartily afraid that I shall find this death too ready for me. But why should
I not dye? Am I not disturbed with heates and colds; with weakness and
feebleness? Am I not in a world that gives noe content? That can neither
bound my desires, nor yet afford what I seek? While I am here I am subject to
miseries every moment. When I shall be gone, this faintness and weakness,
these troubles and perturbations shall forsake my weak and infirm body. But
what then? When my body shall sleep in the silent grave, shall it continue
there for ever? Or shall the soul have a decay, and yeald to corruption
together with my body of clay, and earth? Noe, noe: nothing less. The body
shall indeed lie down in the dust; but yet it shall one day be summoned to
rise again: but the soul is eternal; it shall continue for ever. For ever it
shall rest in continual peace; or for ever it shall be tormented in
ever-lasting flames. Noe merveile then, o my sorrowful soul, that thou art
unwilling to leave this tabernacle of flesh, since thou know not whither
thou shall fly at thy departure. But why should not I as well hope for
felicity, as dread those torments, when my life shall end? Do I ask Why? The
reason is too plain. What good can I expect from the hands of him, whom I have
never loved; whom I have never obeyed? Those whom he crowns with heavenly
bliss, are they who sought for it in a miserable life. But I have so lived
upon earth as if earth should continue; and I have made choice of this world
for the seat of my happiness. But now, alas, to my woe I find, that earth can
neither afford any true content, nor yet a continuance of that which I
accounted good. What now shall I do? O whither shall I betake my self, that I
may be partaker of those joys which are the inheritance of the godly? Number.
23.10.
Feign I would dye the death of the righteous; and I wish that my last end
might be like unto his. But is this a desire easy to be granted? Alas, had I
lived the life of the righteous, I might then have been sure I should have
dyed the death of them. But that, o that is it which pricketh me at the heart.
I have lived in sensuality, and this evil day has been out of my
remembrance; so that I cannot comfort my self with the smallest hope of what I
so eagerly covet. But what then? Is there noe remedy at all, but that I must
have the bitter portion with the damned in hell? God forbid. He who has
forborne me so long when I went on in my wickedness, may yet (if he please)
afford me his mercy. It is not above his power; nor will it eclipse his glory.
It was once his free promise to a thief even dying upon the cross, Lu: 23.43.
2. Cor. 1.20.
This day shall thou be with me in paradise. His promises also are sure: they
are in him yea, and in him Amen: I doubt not therefore but his mercy was as
great as his word was sure. Thus he saved one, which forbids me
despairing: yet it was but one, which forbids me presuming. But surely it
can be noe presumption to build upon his goodness. He delights not in the
death of a sinner. What good can the condemning of me do either to him, or
his creatures? True it is that his justice maybe magnified by it; but yet it
will add noe glory to his mercy. Again, there are but a few in heaven to sing
forth his praises; but infinite millions in hell and destruction dishonor him
in their blasphemies. In heaven, me think's, there is one too few, until I
shall come thither to add to the number. In hell, me think's, there would be
one too many, if I should be thrown into that gulf of perdition. O my God
since thou have vouchsafed me the knowledge of a heaven, yea and of thee the
Lord of heaven and earth; allthough my knowledge be imperfect, and thou art
offended; yet for the merits of thy Son be pleased to make me a citizen of
heaven. Rev: 21 27.
It is most true that there shall in noe wise enter into that place any thing
that defiles, neither whatsoever works abomination, or makes a lie; but
they only which are written in the Lamb's book of life. Upon these terms my
hopes indeed do languish, and grow more faint then my feeble body. But who is
that which condemns the wicked? Is it not he who likewise calls the
wicked, and inviteth them to mercy? Is it not he who tells me by his
Prophet, and says it himself, Eze: 18 21.
If the wicked will turn from all his sins that he has committed, and
keep all my statutes, Verse. 22
and do that which is lawful and right; he shall surely live, he shall not
dye: All his transgressions that he has committed they shall not be mentioned
unto him. verse. 23
Have I any pleasure at all that the wicked should dye? Says the Lord God: and
not that he should return from his ways, and live? O who is more wicked then
I? Who more sinful then I? My life has been nothing but a continued
rebellion; and my time has been wasted in nothing but disobedience. Yet while
I have life I have hope. If I can but know mine iniquities, and get a
sorrowful spirit for them, and rent my heart, and amend my life, Joel: 2.13.
and faithfully rely upon the passion of my Redeemer; I may then assure my
self that he will correct me with judgment, Ier: 10:24.
and not in his anger. I know that dye I must; but in him I earnestly desire to
dye. When I was in health, I thought not of mortality: and therefore now I am
in sickness, I can skarce so much as hope for immortality. But I will beseech
him to spare me a little, that I may repent, Ps: 39.13.
before I go hence, and be noe more seen. I feign would live; not that I
might add to my sins, but that I might be sorry for my sins. I would
feign continue here a little longer, that so I might make my peace the surer.
Long I have continued in wickedness: o my God spare me a little time to spend
in contrition. If I may enjoy my life but for a little longer space, I will
resolve (by the grace of my God) to dedicate it wholly to the service of him:
and that I may in some measure make up my repentance before my departure, I
will beseech him (if it may stand with his immutable decree) to lend me a
little more time, wherein by his grace I may labor my reconciliation with him.
My time of death indeed seems to draw nigh; and yet I do not consider, or
at least I have not considered, that all this time which I have lived I have
been truly dead. Surely thus I have been; for so says King Solomon, Prove.
21.16.
The man that wandereth out of the way of understanding, shall remain in the
congregation of the dead. Thus have I been dead, even in trespasses and
sins: justly therefore now my life does hasten away, Ephesians: 2.1.
and my death approaches. I am now laid upon my bed of sorrow: Not as the
un-chast Amnon was, 2. Sam. 13.5.
who lingered after an un-cleane enjoying of his sister Tamar, only
counterfeiting a sickness: Nor like the coveteous Ahab, 1. King 21.4.
who vexed himself because Naboth had denied to sell him his vineyard: 2.
Sam. 4.7.
Nor like Ishbosheth, ready to be slain by a Rechab and a Baanah; unless my
sins, and my sickness the effect of my sins, be that Rechab and that
Baanah: But languishing I lie, almost despairing of recoverie by reason of the
weakness of my near consumed body and spirits, through the sharpness of my
disease. Is: 14.11.
My pomp is even brought down to the grave, and the noise of my violls: the
worm is spread under me, and the worms are ready to cover me. But let me
say with holy Job: Job: 10 20.
Are not my days few? Cease then, o my God, and let me alone, that I may take
comfort a little, verse. 21
Before I go whence I shall not return, even to the land of darkness, and
the shadow of death: A land of darkness, verse. 22
as darkness it self; and the shadow of death without any order, and where
the light is as darkness. There is noe work, nor device, Eccl. 9.10. Ps: 6.5.
knowledge, nor wisdom in the grave whither I am goeing. In death there is noe
remembrance of thee, o my God; in the grave who shall give thee thank's? Ps:
115.17. Is: 38.18.
The dead praise not thee, o Lord; neither any that go downeinto silence. The
grave cannot praise thee; death cannot celebrate thee: they that go down into
the pit cannot hope for thy truth. verse: 19
The living only, the living, he shall praise thee; the father to the
children shall make known thy truth. Thou thy self have professed that thou
art not a God of the dead, Matt: 22.32 Ps: 88.10. verse. 11
but of the living: will thou then show wonders to the dead? Shall the dead
arise and praife thee? Shall thy loving kindness be declared in the grave? Or
thy faithfulness in destruction? verse. 12
Shall thy wonders be known in the dark? And thy righteousness in the land
of forgetfullnesse? Consider then, Ps: 13.3 Ps: 69.15.
and hear me, o Lord my God: lighten mine eyes, that I sleep not in death.
Let not the waterflood overflow me; neither let the deep swallow me up; and
let not the pit shut her mouth upon me. Hear me, o Lord, verse: 16
for thy loving kindness is good: turn unto me, according to the multitude
of thy tender mercies. 1. Sam: 2.6.
Thou art he who do both kill, and make alive; who bring down to the
grave, 2. King 4.20.
and bring up again. When the Shunamite's child had sat on his mother's
knees until noone, verse. 21
it then departed: but she went up, and laid him on the bed of the man of
God, verse: 32
and shut the door upon him, and went out. And when Elisha was come into the
house, behold the child was dead, and laid upon his bed: verse. 33
he went in therefore, and shut the door upon them twain, and prayed unto
thee, my great and powerful God: verse. 35
And the child neezed seven times; and the child opened his eyes. Mat: 9.18.
When the ruler of the Synagogue worshipped my Savior, and said, My daughter
is even now dead; but come and lay thine hand upon her, and she shall live:
verse: 25
Then he went in, and took her by the hand, and the maid arose. O my God, to
thee I submit my self: do with me as thou please. In thy power it is to
spare me for a while. It will not be harder for thee to restore me to health,
then it was to restore the dead unto life. Feign I would live longer that I may
repent more. Lord, if it be thy pleasure, add yet some more days unto my
life: restore me to health; and make me praise thee for thy mercies. Longer I
would not live, unless thou shall be pleased with my life to renew mine
obedience: and yet dye I would not, unless thou shall first be pleased to give
me a sense of my sins, and a sorrow upon that sense, and a comfortable and
contenting joy upon that sorrow. Thou art the potter, and I am the clay:
already thou have made me; and it is now in thy power either to break me
into sheards, or to preserve me whole. I, who have cried so much in the
extreamitie of mine anguish, do now beseech thee with my tears to spare me.
Mat. 8.8.
O speak the word only, and thy servant shall be healed. But yet howsoever I
submit to thine own good pleasure. Lord (if it may be thy will) let the skill
of my Physicians, and the power of my medicines, and whatsoever shall be
administered unto me, take a blessing from thee: and, if thou shall restore me
again, to thee and to thy service will I devote my life. My time shall be
thine; my days thine; my thoughts, my words, and mine actions thine. So shall
thy mercy be magnified, and thy praise I will be for ever singing and will set
it forth from day to day. Ps: 96.2



A Braham is dead, and the Prophets are dead; and my Savior Christ said. Io:
8.52
If a man keep my sayings, he shall never taste of death. At this the Jews
were very much stumbled; and me think's they had some color for their
contention about it. For if Abraham were dead, Romans 4 11. Iam: 2.23. Gen: 22
18. Lu: 1.70.
who was the father of the faithful; who was the friend of God; he in whose
seed all the nations of the earth were promised a blessing, because he obeyed
the voice of the Lord: And if the Prophets were also dead, those holy Prophets
which have been since the world began, and by whom the Lord did reveal his
pleasure unto the people: If all these were dead, well might the Jews wonder
when our Savior said, If a man keep my saying he shall never taste of death.
Well indeed they might wonder; for ignorance is the cause of all our
merveiles. Did we but know a certain reason for every event, we should never
wonder at that which happens; but we should magnify the first and greatest
cause, which is God. The Jews wondered because they were ignorant; and
supposed that our Savior had spoken of a temporal death; whereas he meant
that which is eternal. True it is that the temporal death is an effect and
fruit of the first sin; but eternal death is the punishment of impenitencie
and infidelity: for those who both can, and truly do repent, neither can,
nor shall be liable to an eternal death. Nay dye they cannot in any kind: for
this which we call a death, shall be to them but a deliverance; and that death
which is a perpetual living death in the land of darkness, they shall be
certainly freed from by the blood of the Son of God. Yet this passage, this
sweet change in the godly, and also this gate which opens to the ungodly
the way to eternal woe, the Scripture does commonly term a death: and this
death cannot possibly be avoided by the children of Adam, Heb. 9.27.
for it is appointed unto men once to dye. It Is true, it is true indeed: I am
ready to find it verefied in my self: for the harbingers of this death have
taken up my body, where it intends to lodge. The weakness of my limbs, and
the faintness of my spirits, and the shortness of my breath, and the lowness
of my voice, and the palenesse of my cheeks, and the hollownesse of mine eyes;
all these do but assure me of the approaches of this death. But is there noe
resistance? Is there noe reversing of the decree? Noe repealing of the statute?
Alas noe; none at all. This body which has been pampered with the delicacie
of meats, must now be slaughtered, and make a feast for the worms. These
bones which have layen upon the beds of ease, must become as tables for the
loathsome vermin: And this skin, this proud skin, which has stolen so
much time to employ in the suppling, and coloring, and smoothing, and covering
of it, must serve like a cloth spread on these tables, whereon must be
presented this collation for the worms. Short is my life: fleeting are my
days: and my winged minuits fly with such speed, that I ca^ hardly count them
so fast as they consume. When I enjoyed the most sound and beloved health, even
then the shortness of my life was discovered in my breath: for I was entrusted
only with a little air, which neither was in my power long to keep, nor long
without it could I possibly continue. I was so false in my promises which I
made unto my God, that he would not trust me long with the keepng but of a
little of that element. I have allways l^ved at the brinke of death; and yet
never seriously enough thought of that which now is ready to approach. I never
thought indeed of the hour of my death, by a due preparation to entertain it
when it should come. Nay, I fondly imagined that it must of necessity keep
the road of diseases, and sickness; whereas it might have hastened by ways
un-expected. When I was healthful I grew so proud, that I imagined certainly
it either could not, or durst not assail my body: and yet when I was afflicted
with the smallest pain, then again I was so cowardly dejected, that I was
afraid it hastened by each part and member. When I smarted, I was taken off
from my pride; but the cure of that sin was an immoderate, and a slavish
fear. But now I am well assured that neither strength, nor youth, nor beauty,
nor physic, nor any thing else can secure our bodies from returning to the
earth. True it is, that the dead know not any thing; Eccl: 6.5.
neither have they any more a reward; for the memory of them is forgotten: but
the living know that they shall dye. c: 8.8.
There is noe man that has power over the spirit, to retain the spirit:
neither has he power in the day of death. Wherefore then have (...) so long
lived in ignorance, or forgetfullnesse of mine end? If I had remembered it, I
would have fitted and prepared mine accounts against the time it should come.
If I had known it, I would have labored to have made the judge my friend.
But, o, I forgot it: for I increased my sins, and thought not of the debt: I
was ignorant too, and knew not the terribloesse of the Judge. Now, me think's,
these cold and clammie sweats do chiefly arise from my chiding conscience;
and from the convulsions which there I suffer through the guilt of my sins. I
never was so careless or ignorant of death, as I now am certain of it; yet
afraid to dye. Eccl: 12.7. Job. 30.23.
Now I am sensible that my dust shall return to the earth as it was. I know
that the Lord will bring me to death, and to the house appointed for all the
living. Die, say I? Yes. But must I dye? Yes. But when? That I know not: many
days or hours I cannot expect to live, who am already pined into the
leanenesse of an Anatomy. But where must I dye? That I know not neither: even
in this bed it is most likely, where I now lie languishing in the torments of
my disease. But how, or by what means must I dye? Nor can I tell that;
allthough this sickness seems to be dispatched hither for this very purpose.
But if it be so sure that dye I must, is it likewise as sure to what place I
shall go? O this question is the common troubler of the dying. There are but
two havens where souls can arrive: the one is the holy land; the new
Jerusalem; the haven of eternal happiness: the other is a land too, but it is
a land of darkness; a land of smoakes, and stinkes; a place of eternal
horror. To the former the godly are wafted by a convoy of Angels: to the
latter the un-godly are hurried and tumbled by cursed fiends, and staring
ghosts. Here indeed the wicked spend their days in mirth: Job. 21.13. Ps
49.14.
but in a moment they go down to the grave. They are laid, like sheep, in
the grave; death shall feed on them; and the upright shall have dominion over
them in the morning: and their beauty shall consume in the grave from their
dwelling. From thence there is noe redemption. Noe, noe: there is a great
gulf; Lu: 16.26. 2. Pet. 3.12.
and greater there will be, when the earth shall be dissolved, and the elements
shall melt with fervent heat. Then only heaven and hell shall remain; and
from either of these there is noe departure. The wicked would be freed out of
hell, but cannot: the godly neither can, nor would be deprived of heaven. Lu:
16.26.
Between us and you (said Abraham to Dives) there is a great gulf fixed, so
that they which would pass from hence to you cannot; neither can they pass to
us which would come from thence. Do thou hear that, o my perplexed soul?
Do thou know that thy sentence will be either Come thou blessed, or Depart
thou cursed? Mat. 25 34. verse. 41
Do thou consider that that sentence will be immediately, so soon as thou
shall take thy flight from my body? O my conscience, why have thou not checked
me for those sins of mine which have deserved the sentence of horror? O my
soul, Ps: 89.48.
why have thou forgotten that thou must leave my body? Dye I must; for what man
is he that lives, and shall not see death? Shall he deliver his soul from
the hand of the grave? The righteous and the reprobate, even both of them shall
assuredly dye: but the latter shall have a second death; the former by death
shall enter into life. Ps: 1.4.
The wicked shall be as chafe, which the wind drives away from the face of
the earth; and when they dye, they shall be cast into un-quenchable fire: Mat:
3.12. Mat: 13 30. Io: 12.24.
but the righteous shall be like the wheat, which shall be gathered into the
barn. But first they must be sowed, before they be reaped. Except a corn of
wheat fall into the ground, and dye, it abides alone: but if it dye, it
brings forth much fruit. They dye to sin in their regeneration; and they
dye by reason of sin, at their change: but this all is, that they may spring
up in glory. Lord since I needs must dye, let me dye in thy favor, that I may
live for ever in thy celestial Kingdom. Pardon all the sins I have
committed; especially my forgetfullnesse of the time of my dissolution. So long
as I live, let me repent me of my life, and remember my death. Give me as
certain an assurance of a life in glory, as I know and am certain of a
temporal death. So shall my life here be spent in sorrow for my sins; and by
death I shall pass to those mansions of eternity. I know that I shall dye; I
beg that I may live. Let my sin here have a death in me; Col. 3.3.
and let my soul hereafter have a life for ever with Christ in God.

2. A godly preparation against the minuit of death.
MY soul is bowed down to the dust; Ps: 44.25.
my belly cleaves unto the earth; and that little all that is left of my
declining body, hasteneth apace to the chambers of death. Me think's I hear
my great Creator speaking unto me as he did once to Hezekiah lying on his
sick bed, Is: 38.1
and saying, Set thine house in order; for thou shall dye, and not live. But
what house is that which I must set in order? Is it my body? Alas I have noe
power to order that. I have referred it to the Physicians; and they instead of
composing it, and regulating it for the recoverie of my health, do but vex it
with draggs, and torment it with medicines. I feel the hand of death lying
hard upon me, and seizing upon every part and member of my body. But if it be
not the house of my body, is it then my household or family which I must set
in order? To this indeed I am instructed even by common civility: for I have a
journie to take; a long, and a far journie; and never more shall I return to
this place of misery. I must therefore bid my people farewell. I must give them
a charge, and tell them what my pleasure, what my desire is they should
perform in my absence: and that is only to be obedient to the laws of my
God. But yet, me think's, this is not all. There is yet another house which I
must set in order: a house of far more consequence to me then either of the
other. The poor rotten house of my body is ready to fall, and to come to ruin
by the storms of my sickness. Yet I strive to mend it, and to support it by
the various potions, and several dose's prescribed me by the learned: but all
I believe will not prevail: down it must, and fall into ashes. My family and
household may long continue, allthough I depart, and leave them behind me.
But all this while what have I done for my inner house? What course have I
taken for my sinful soul, which must shortly appear at the great tribunal?
That, o that, is the house which I must order, where the King of Kings does
look for entertainment. If that be not empty, Mat: 12 44.
swept, and garnshed, it can never content my husband, my Lord, my Jesus. First
therefore by an humble confession I will empty it of all pollutions and
uncleanesses which have long obscured themselves, and lurked in the corners:
Then will I sweep it by repentance, watering it with my tears: and afterward
I will besiech my God to adorn and garnish it with his spiritual graces. Ps.
4.4.
I now begin (I bless my God) to commune with mine own heart upon my bed,
and to search out mine iniquities. O my God be pleased to give me a quick
apprehension of all mine enormities. Sharpen my memory, and rowze up and awake
my sleeping conscience, that I may muster up all my sins in order, and
examine the wicked and sinful passages of my life. I will begin with mine
infancy; and proceed through all the crooked turnings and bypath of my
life, even unto this very minuit of my sorrow. I will search.

1. What sins I have committed? 2. How long they have dwelt with me? 3. What
chidings and contentions I had in my conscience for the committing of them? 4.
How often I repented for them? 5. How true that repentance was? 6. What
amendment did follow upon that repentance? 7. What thankfulness I rendered
unto God for that repentance? 8. What joy I received in my new obedience? 9.
What holy resolutions I made to continue in the way of the commandments?
And when I have met with a sin, I will ^ever leave it 'till I have chased it
away: 'till (...) have done my best to wash off the stain with my sorrowful
tears. Gen: 32 25.
I will struggle with my God for the help of his grace; and will not leave him
until he assures me that my sin is blotted out by the blood of the Lamb.
For every offense that I can remember, I will arise, and go to my father, Lu.
15.18.
with the tears standing in mine eyes, and with dropps of blood falling from
my heart in an earnest and sharp compunction. In a loathing and detestation of
my self for offending his Majesty I will humble my self, and fall at his
feet; and with bashfullnesse and shame I will besiech him, saying, verse 18
verse. 19
Father I have sinned against heaven, and before thee; and am noe more worthy
to be called thy child: make me as one of thy hired servants. I know he will
hear me, for so he has promised and said Call upon me in the day of
trouble; Ps: 50.15.
I will deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me. And when he hears, I am
sure he will help too: Ps: 46.1
for he is my refuge, and strength; a very present help in trouble. And leave
him I will not; leave crying I will not; leave weeping, and begging I will not,
until I find that he^ espyeth me comeing. Lu: 15.20.
O now (I bless him) I find that he comes to me, and armeth me with this
resolution; and I find that I am comeing unto him too, by the small sparks of
gra^ which warm my resolution. But here I must not stay; on I must; follow him
I will, and never leave him until he takes compassion of me, and runne's,
and falls upon my neck, and kisseth me. verse: 22
I will not leave following him until he brings forth the best robe, even
the robe of his Sonne's righteousness; and puts it upon me. I must have a
ring too put upon my hand; Rom: 4 11. Lu: 15. verse: 23
a sealed ring; even the seal of the righteousness of faith in the meritts of
my Redeemer. I must also feed upon the fatted Calfe; upon him who was
sacrificed for my transgressions; even the Son of his bosom, who is fatt as
it were, and full of all divine virtues and abundance of grace, able to
satisfy for the sins of the whole world. I will feed upon him in the
participation of the holy sacrament and communion of his own most blessed body
and blood. verse. 24
And when I eat I will be merry; for through faith I shall have an assurance
that hereafter I shall be entertained at the supper of the Lamb in the Kingdom
of my God. Reu: 19 9.
Thus my omissions, and thus my commissions; thus mine infirmities, and thus my
presumptions shall be laid to his charge who is the Lamb of God that takes
away the sins of the world. Io: 1.29
Unto him I will acknowledge my sins; Ps: 32.5
and mine iniquities I will not hide. I will confess my transgressions unto
the Lord; and he shall forgive the iniquity of my sins, when I say unto him
with a sorrowful Spirit, Ps. 41.4
Lord be merciful unto me: heal my soul, for I have sinned against thee.

When I have thus confessed, Job. 42 6.
and abhorred my self in dust and asbes; I will then resolve for the time to
come (by the grace of my God) and I will promise that I will take heed to my
ways, that I sin not against him; Ps: 39.1
or not willingly; or not continually; or howsoever not impenitently. Thus will
I sweep, and sweeping I will weep, and weeping I will pray that for every
unclean spirit which has dwelt in my soul, I may now have this soul
garnished with the divine and excellent graces of the Spirit of my God. By
faith I will come unto thee o Christ, and call thee my Jesus. By hope I will
come unto you o ye blessed quire of Saints and Angels; and with you I will
sing those ravishing Halelujahs. By charity I will reconcile my self to my
offended brother. I will (as much as in me lies) requite and satisfy my
injured neighbor. I will freely freely remit the injuries I have received;
certainly assuring my self that the offenses which have been offered me
(though never so high in mine own esteem) are not bad enough to be compared
to the least trespass which I have committed against my God. And (as I am
taught by the rules of charity) I will not only love my friends, to which I
am prompted both by nature and civility, but mine enemies likewise I will love,
as I am commanded by God. Yet (lest I missetake in my charity) my God a bove
all I will both love and obey; and that for noe other cause but only for
himself. Next, and in order unto him, I will love my neighbor as my self. I
will love the Lord for his power: I will love God for his wisdom: and I will
love the Lord my God for his goodness. I will love the Lord, who created me
by his power: I will love God, who instructs me by his wisdom: I will love
the Lord my God, who has communicated his goodness to a creature so
despicable. I will not only know my God, but I will also love him. I will not
only fear him, but I will also love him. I will not only fear him as he
is an omnipotent Lord, or honor him as he is God but I will also love him as
he is Mine. Yea I will love him with all my heart, because he gave me a
Being at my creation: I will love him with all my soul, because he
preserves me in this my being: I will love him with all my mind, because he
has created me a new, and given me a well-being by regeneration: and I will
love him with all my strength, because I know assuredly that he will glorify
me in the most excellent Being. I will lore him with all my heart,
understandingly, without error: I will love him with all my soul, willingly,
without contradiction: and I will love him with all my mind, treasuring him up
in my memory, without forgetfulness. I will love him with all my heart,
wisely, lest I be seduced by the suggestions of the devil: I will love him
with all my soul, sweetly and delightfully, lest I be tempted by allurements
of the flesh: and I will love him with all my strength, courageously, lest I
sink under the pressures and heavy burdens of the world. I will love him with
all my heart; for all my cogitations shall reflect upon him: I will love him
with all my soul; for all my affections shall be directed to him: and I will
love him with all my mind; for all my senses shall be obedient unto him. I will
love him with all my heart, devoutly: with all my soul, discreetely: and with
all my Mind, perseveringly. And when thus I have endeavored to love my God'
then next in order unto him, and in obedience to his commands, I will love my
neighbor as my self. I will love him with the same affection as my self: For
his sake for whom I love my self, even for God's: For the same reason as my
self; even for grace conferred in this life present, and for a certain hope
of eternal glory in the life to come: In the same order as my self; which
shall be above the world, but inferior to my God: Upon the same ground as
myself; even because of the image of God imprinted in him; and because he is
capable of immortal happiness: and lastly as long as myself; even from the
beginning unto the end, until this frail flesh shall be forsaken by my
pensive, my sad and sorrowful soul. And that my brethren, my neighbors may
be the better assured of my love, which cannot be firm unless I accord with
them in the same belief; Heb: 4.14.
and that it may be known that (through the grace of my God) I hold fast the
profession of my faith wherein I have lived, even the same which was taught by
my Savior and his Apostles according to the truth and purity of the same,
without leaning either to profaneness, atheism, superstition, or any other
error or heresy; and to the intent that they may join with me in
thanksgiving to my God for preserving me in the same, and in prayer unto God
that I may continue in the same both to the end, and in the end; I will
therefore cheerfully, faithfully, and confidently rehearse the articles of my
belief, and say.

I believe in God the Father Allmighty, Maker of heaven and earth: and in Jesus
Christ his only Son our Lord, which was conceived by the holy Ghost, borne
of the Virgin Mary, suffered under Pontius Pilate, was crucified, dead, and
buried, he descended into hell, the third day he rose again from the dead,
he ascended into heaven, and sits on the right hand of God the Father
All-mighty, from thence he shall come to judge the quick and the dead. I
believe in the holy Ghost, the holy Catholic Church, the Communion of Saints,
the forgiveness of sins, the resurrection of the body, and the life
everlasting. Amen. Thus I believe, Lord help my un-beliefe; Mar. 9.24. Ephesians.
4.14.
and grant that I may not be tossed to and fro, and carried about with every
wind of doctrine, by the sleight of men, and cunning craftiness. whereby they
lie in wayt to deceave: verse. 15
but that speaking and believing this truth in love, I may grow up unto him in
all things, which is the head, even Christ my Redeemer. And that I may thus
repent me of my sins, and continue in love, and persevere in the faith, and
submit to his good pleasure, I will with a bended heart, and a sorrowful
spirit, and weeping eyes pray unto him, and say.

The Prayer of the sick.
FAther of mercies, Lord of life; thou God which art a refuge in the time of
trouble, Ps; 6.2.
have mercy upon me, Ps: 143.4.
for I am weak, and my heart with in me is desolate. A sinner I am, (I must
confess it) not deserving thy mercy, a foul, a grievous sinner I am, who have
disobeyed thy statutes, and broken all thy commandments; and never have I set
my self in any good way to seek my peace and reconciliation with thee. My
conscience check's me, and my sins testify against me, and mine adversary
the devil strjveth to pluck from me my considence in thee. O Lord be thou my
protector, and my gracious father. Be reconciled unto me in Jesus Christ in
whom alone thou art well pleased, Io: 16.23.
and in whose name whatsoever I shall ask of thee; I am sure thou will give it
unto me. Heavenly Father do thou assist me, do thou comfort me in these my
trp^ and afflictions: Ps: 60.11.
o be thou my help in trouble, for vain is the help of man. To thee I cry,
to thee I come with a panting heart, with a sorrowful soul, with an humble
spirit. I have sinned, o I have sinned, and done amiss; and my portion might
be justly therefore in the land of darkness, there to be tormented with the
devil and his angels forever. But o thou who have promised to heal all those
that are broken in heart, Ps: 147 3.
and to bind up their wounds; be reconciled unto me in the wounds of my
Redeemer. Speak peace unto my conscience in this agony, Ps: 143.6.
in this sorrowful and deep sighing for my skarlet sins. To thee, Ps; 143.6.
and to thee alone I stretch forth my hands: to thee my soul gaspeth as a
thirsty land. verse. 7.
Hear me o Lord, and that soon, for my spirit waxes faint: hide not thy
face from me, lest I be like unto them that go down to destruction. O let
not these tears be refused, nor these groans be sighed and sobbed in vain:
but by the power of his passion out of whose precious side did issue both water
and blood, be thou reconciled unto me the unworthiest of thy creatures. Though
my soul be deeply stained with the pollutions of my transgressions, yet his
blood has power to make it white as snow. On that remission of sins by his
torments and sufferings do I wholly rely. My self I abhor, Job: 42.6.
and repent in dust and ashes; my works I disclaine, for I know their
unworthiness: on thee alone, o my Jesus, I wholly depend, and by thee alone I
hope for remission. Be thou my Jesus, be thou my Savior. Cure me by thy
wounds; heal me by thy stripes; ease me by thy torments; comfort me by
thine agony; refresh my fainting soul by thy bluodie sweat; revive me by thy
death; and o Son of God and Savior of the world, present me to thy father
in the robe of thy righteousness. Ps: 94.13.
Give me patience in this time of adversity that I may quietly and
contentedly submit to thy good pleasure; rely upon thy mercy; be thankful for
thy chastisement; and in all things so look up unto thee in this time of my
sickness, that I may hereafter be raised to glory by the power of thy
resurrection. This sickness (for ought I know) may be unto death; but in thee,
I trust, it shall be a passage unto life. If thou have passed the sentence of
the first death upon me, decreeing to execute it by this my sickness, and to
lay me in the dust by this present visitation; howsoever be pleased, o my
father, for the worthiness of thy son to free met from the horror of the
second death. Let me be found of thee in peace, 2. Pet: 3 14. Hab: 3.2. Is:
9.13 Job. 3.25. Mich: 6 13. 1. Pet 4 19. Ps: 119.175.
that it may clearly appear to me that thou art a God of truth, and in the
midst of judgment remembrest mercy. Unto thee I turn, for thou have smitten
me; and the thing that I so greatly feared is fallen upon me. My body thou
make sick in smiting, by reason of my sins; yet in considence and full
assurance of thy mercy I commit the keeping of my soul unto thee, as unto a
faithful Creator. O let that live, and it shall praise thee, for in thee do
I trust: let me not be confounded, neither let me despair of the greatness
of thy mercies. Ps. 23.4.
And though now I walk in the shadow of death; yet I know that it is in thy
power to restore me to health. Lord (if it may stand with thy secret will) be
pleased to recover me, that I may glorify thy goodness in thy work of
power. Bless all the lawful means that shall be used for that purpose. Give
skill to the Physicians, virtue to the medicines, strength to my spirits, and
health to my body. Let me recover my strength, that I may employ it in thy
service; and restore me to health, that I may be more active in mine obedience
to all thy commandments. But if otherwise thou have determined, and resolvest
at this time to make me as water spilt upon the ground; 2. Sam. 14.14.
grant me a willing, and ready submission to thy decree. Either abate the
torments of mine afflicted body, or increase my patience; that I may not offend
thee in my sufferings. Make me to magnify thee, whether by life or by death:
and grant me so safe a passage and conduct in the arms of thy mercy, that I
may be conveyed safely into Abraham's bosom. Grant this o father for the love
and merits of thy Son Jesus Christ my only intercessour and redeemer: in
whose name and words I farther call upon thee, saying.

Our Father which art in heaven, Hallowed be thy name. Thy Kingdom come. Thy
will be done in earth as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread. And
forgive us our trespasses as we forgive them that trespass against us, and
lead us not into temptation: but deliver us from evil; for thine is the
Kingdom, the power, and the glory for ever and ever. Amen.
Wherefore is light given to him that is in misery (says holy Job) and life
unto the bitter in soul? Job. 3.20. verse. 21
Which long for death, but it comes not; and dig for it more then for hid
treasures: verse. 22
Which rejoice exceedingly, and are glad when they can find the grave. This was
the complaint of a faithful man, and may now be the lamentation of a
sorrowful woman. I have grieved, and I have mourned for my sins: and my good
God (I bless him for it) is graciously pleased in the bowels of his mercy and
compassion to give me an assurance of happiness by the merits of my Jesus.
But when come thou, o my sweet, my longed for, my desired Savior? Thou
know my pains, which draw from me many sinsull thoughts, and un-fitting
cries. Thou take notice of the cunning suggestions of my greatest adversary,
and his busy allurements to rob me of my hope. Thou see how sometimes he
would lead me into carnal security; and sometimes into a belief that my
very vicet are virtues, or not seen by Thee, or not to be punished by thee:
and sometimes again he striveth to hurrie me into the very gulf of
despair. But I know and am assured that through the merits of my Redeemer the
gates of hell shall not be able to prevail against me; Mat. 16 18. Io: 13.1
Prove. 12.28.
for whom thou love thou will love unto the end. I know that in the way of
righteousness there is life, and in the pathway thereof there is noe death.
Hence away therefore ye foul fiends, and rebellious tempters. What do ye
here fawning and grinning, hoping to betray a penitent soul? These tears
which I shed for the wounds that I made in the body of my Savior by my
piercing sins, are too precious a water for you to has in; too choice a wine
for you to taste of: here are noe hopes for the enemies of mine indulgent Jesus.
Though my groans, alas, cannot be free from the pollution of sin; yet they
shall not advantage you in what ye desire. Ps. 119.115.
Away from me ye wicked ones: I will keep the commandments of my God.
Think not to affright me with my approaching death; Phil. 1.23.
for I desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ. Death I fear thee not:
come, come, and try thy power; but know that thy countenance, which is so
terrible to reprobates, is the producer of joy and comfort to my wearied heart.
Thou poor, feeble, despised nothing, what power or strength is left thee to
boast of? Grave why gapest thou, why stand thou so open as if thou did
hope to triumph, Hos: 13 14.
and conquer me? My Christ did threaten to be thy plagues, o death: my Jesus
did resolve to be thy destruction, o grave; and that repentance should be hid
from his eyes. Is: 25.8 1 Cor: 15.54.
He promised to swallow up death in victory, and to wipe away tears from off
all faces. This he did promise, and this he has performed: for by his
blessed Apostle I am well assured that death it self is swallowed up in
victory. Now I dare challenge you, o ye impotent and powerless adversaries:
I dare scorn, verse: 55
and contemn you. O death, where is thy sting? O grave, where is thy victory?
Thy sting, o death, was pullud out by him who is the Lord of life. The strength
of thy sting was that law which was fullfilled by my merciful Jesus. Hos: 13
14. Ps: 49.15. Rom: 14.9.
He, he has ransomed me from the power of the grave, and has redeemed me
from death. He has redeemed my soul from the power of hell, for he shall
receave me. To this end he dyed and rose again, and re-vived, that he might
be Lord both of the dead and of the living. Ps: 68.20. Ps. 48.14. Rom: 14 7.
verse. 8.
He that is my God is the God of salvation, unto whom belong the issues from
death. This God is my God for ever and ever: he shall be my guide, even unto
death. I live not to my self; nor do I dye unto my self: for whether I live,
I live unto the Lord; and whether I dye, I dye unto the Lord: whether I live
therefore, Phil: 1.20.
or dye, I am the Lord's. Christ shall be magnified in my body, whether it be
by life or by death: for to me to live is Christ, verse. 21 Heb. 12 18. verse 22
verse. 23 verse. 24
and to dye is gain. I come not to the mount that might not be touched; nor to
blackness, and darkness and tempest: but I come unto mount Sion, to the
general assembly, and ^rch of the firstborn which are written in heaven;
and to God the judge of all, and to the spirits of just men made perfect; and to
Jesus the Mediator of the new covenant; and to the blood of sprinkling, that
speaks better things then that of Abel. Rev. 2.10. 1. Cor: 3.21. verse. 22
verse: 23
I know that if I am faithful unto death, he will give unto me a crown of
life. I know that all things are ours so long as we are his; whether the
world, or life, or death, or things present, or things to come; all are ours,
and we are Christ's, and Christ is God's. Why the do I cry out upon my
pains? Is any pain which I can suffer, either so much as I deserve by
offending my Jesus or comparable to his torments which he suffered; for me?
Flesh, thou have disturbed me all my life, and with thy sweet, and sugered
baits have allured me to sin: but I will drown thee therefore in my tears.
Thou art already drawn low by my sickness; and yet (because this punishment
is not enough) thou who were kept from stains with curious (though simple)
art, shall now be tumbled into the dirt from whence thou came. For the beds
of down on which thou have stretched thy self, thou shall lie down in the
hard and stony earth: for the great and spacious chamber^ which thou did
pride thy self in, thou shall be confined to the skantnesse and narrowness of
a coffin: for the curious hangings which adorned thy rooms, and were the
costly adventures and labors of forreiners, thou shall be closely wrapped and
bound in thy grave-clothes: and for the gallant society which thou so
cheerfully delightedst in, thou shall have the company of nothing but worms;
yea and such worms too as thou did loath in thy seeming prosperity, shall
be at once both thine associates, and thy greedy devourers. World thou art an
imposter, and have treacherously deluded me with hopes of vanity: but now I
find that thy braverie is but folly; thy riches but fumes and smoakes that
vanish; thy friendship but hatred; thy pride but madness; thy beauty but
ugliness; and all thy temtations are but leaders to destruction. I hate thee
therefore, thou vain world, and leave thee behind me, as contemning the
society of trifles so un worthy: and though for a time thou may fool the un
wise, and bewitch them with the false glasses of thy seeming glory; yet know
thou that the time shall come when thou shall consume in thy flames, and shall
burn in a heap at the day of revenge. And as for you, o ye black and uglie
slaves of perdition, ye hellish-criew of infernal fiends; go seek some
other to delude with your suggestions: in me ye have neither share, nor hope;
for neither should your torments be lessened if ye could seduce me; nor
shall, nor can your madness prevail against thy redeemed soul, to increase
the number of your schreeches and howlings.

And now, o my Jesus, come, come away; for I am thine, and thou art mine. Why
stayest thou so long? Why delayest thou the time? The longer I live, I do but
the more offend thee; and the more I offend thee, the more do my sorrows
burden me for these mine offenses. O would it not be more for thy glory to
free me from corruption, that I might sing praises to thy name without any
fear of displeasing thee? How long, Lord, how long will thou keep me from
thy tryumphant quire? Ps. 42.2
My soul is a thirst for thee; my heart pants after thee: o when shall I
come and appear in thy presence, o my God? O how truly and eagerly do I long
for death, that I may live with thee who art the truth and the life! Io: 14.6
I know that one day dye I must, but my death shall be nothing but a passage
unto life: for though in Adam all dye; yet in thee, o Christ, 1. Cor. 15.22.
shall all be made a live. I cry, Lord, I cry: to thee I cry, because thee I
have offended: to thee only I cry, because thou only do hear; and wilt
help: to thee only I cry, because thou only have redeemed me: to thee, o to
thee I cry to hasten, to come with speed: O God make speed to save me: O
Lord make have to help me. Dan. 9.19. Rom: 7 24. Ps: 22.17.
O Lord hear: o Lord forgive o Lord deliver me from the body of this death.
These pale cheeks, and these hollow eyes, and these staring bones, and this
sbrivell'd skin are now, me think's adorned with beauty, because they bring
me the glad tidings of the approaches of my Redeemer. This bed is hard to what
I shall find in the grave: these sheets are course and un-easie to that which
I shall be wound in. Come, o Christ: o stay noe longer. I fear thou art angry
with me, or else ere now I should have seen thy face: but if thou art angry,
Ps: 30.5
I am well assured that thy wrath endures but the twinkling of an eye, and in
thy presence is life. My spirit cries come; and my wearied soul cries come;
and my weak limbs cry come: Come therefore, o my Redeemer; Come Lord Jesus,
Come quickly.


THe Prophet Jeremiah admonished the house of Israel, saying, Give glory to the
Lord your God, before he cause darkness; and before your feet stumble upon
the dark mountains; and while ye look for light, and he turn it into the
shadow of death, and make it gross darkness. That glory I have given, and
now. I do render to the Lord my God, so far as he in his goodness is
pleased to enable me. And now that time is come, that happy moment. O
Well-come blessed hour so long expected, so long desired. How rebellious has
been my flesh that it held put so long, and now hides it self under my dried
skin, and shrink's it self up as unwilling to yield! Away proud dust; thou
can have noe hope of a freedom from putrefaction, allthough the time shall
come when the Lord will glorify thee. That time, I know will come indeed, yea
I know it assuredly; Ps: 56.9 Job. 19.25. verse: 26
for the Lord is on my side. I know that my Redeemer lives, and that he shall
stand at the latter day upon the earth: and though after my skin worms
destroy this body, verse: 27
yet in my flesh I shall see God; whom I shall see for my self, and mine eyes
shall behold, and not other, though my reins be consumed within me. I have
(though weakly, and imperfectly) endeavored to glorify my God before this
hour approached, both in the confesion to him of my grievous sins (ah those
uglie sins) which I still grieve for and am sorry for them; and yet not
without a certain confidence, and assurance of his mercy. Lord I thank thee
for this happy hour: Now I find that though the wicked is driven away in his
wickedness, Pro: 14 32.
yet I am filled with hope in my death. Wicked, alas, I was; and (woe is me)
wicked I am, if considered in my felfe; but in thee, o Jesus, I am holy; in thy
righteousness I am righteous; and therefore I am strongly assured that shortly,
even presently, Ps. 36.9
in thy light, in thy Kingdom whereof thou thy self art the light, Reu: 21
23. Eccl. 7.1.
I shall see light Now do I with heavenly comfort assure my self that the day
of death is better, far better then the day of my birth: for I was borne to
sin, Ps. 23.4
but I dye to reign. Now though I walk through the valley of the shadow of
death, I can fear noe evil, for thou art with me; thy rod and thy staff thy
comfort me. What though I am counted with them that go down to the pit; Ps.
88.4
andam as a man that has noe strength? Job. 17 1.
What though my breath be corrupt; though my spirit be spent; though my days
be extinct; and though the graves be ready for me? verse. 13
What though the grave be mine house, and presently I shall make my bed in the
darkness? What though corruption, verse. 16
and the worm shall go down to the bars of the pit; and our rest shall be
together in the dust? What though death be come up into my windows, into mine
eyes; Ier. 9.21. Ps: 107 18.
and be entered into the tabernacle of my body? What though my soul abhors
all manner of meat, and I draw necre unto the gates of death? What though my
heart be sore pained within me, Ps. 55.4. Ps: 44.17.
and the terrors of death be fallen upon me? Yet though all this be come upon
me, I will not forget thee, o my God; neither will I deal falsely in thy
covenant. verse. 18
My heart shall not be turned back; neither shall my stepps decline from thy
way: noe; verse: 19
though thou have sore broken me in the place of dragons, and do cover me
with the shadow of death.

I am goeing now the way of all the earth, Ios: 23.14.
and do know in my heart, and in my soul, that not one thing shall fail me
which the Lord my God has promised to his elect. Now am I joyfully goeing to
the gates of the grave: Is: 38.10.
I am deprived of the residue of my years: verse. 11 verse: 12
I shall behold man noe more with the inhabitants of the earth. Mine age is
departed, and is removed from me, even as a shep-heard's tent. But yet, Lord,
Ps: 39.7.
what is my hope? Truly my hope is even in thee. I shall speedily depart, and
then shall I joyfully be freed from sin. Mat: 26 38.
The soul of my Redeemer was exceeding sorrowful, even unto death; and all
for my sake as well as for others; that I might now be joyful, and rejoice
unto life. Me think's that voice from heaven which was heard by the Apostle,
is now sounding in mine ears, and saying, Reu. 14 13.
Blessed are the dead which dye in the Lord from hence forth: yea, faith the
spirit, that they may rest from their labors; and their works do follow
them. Me think's I find the words of the Psalmist full of truth and comfort,
Ps: 116.15.
that Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his saints. O now, me
think's, (like that blessed martyr Saint Stephen) looking up to the heavens I
see the open; Act: 7.55. Ps: 31.5
and the glory of God; and my Jesus sta^ ding on the right hand of his father.
I come Lord, I come. Into thy hands I commend my spirit; for thou have redeemed
me, o Lord, the God of truth. Take me into thine arms, o God: Act. 7.59.
Convey me to thy Kingdom, o Christ: Lord Jesus receave my spirit. Amen.

Tears in the distressed time of civil wars.
The Soliloquie, containing a patheticall and grievous lamentation for the
present distractions both in the Church and Commonwealth, by reason of these
cruel and most bloody wars.
THE EjACULATION.
Psalm. 5. verse. 1. Give ear to my words, o Lord; consider my meditation.

verse. 2. Hearken unto the voice of my cry, my king, and my God; for unto thee
will I pray.

SHall a trumpet be blown in the city, and the people not be afraid? Amos. 3.6.
Says the Lord by the mouth of his holy Prophet. A trumpet? Why? Lev. 25 9.
Is that so dreadful? So terrible^ I find that a trumpet of Iubilee was
appointed^ be sounded in the day of atonement throughout (...) the land of
promise, when the Israelit^ should come into it: and certainly when that
trumpet sounded the people rejoiced, (...) were not afraid. Yea, but the Lord
called not to rejoicing and Jubilees, when he threatened Israel by the mouth of
that Prophe who was among the herdmen of Tekoa. Amos. 1.1.
The first sound of a trumpet that ever was heard, as the Scriptures mention,
was a cause of trembling: Ex. 19.14.15.
for the third day after Mos^ went down from the Mount unto the people; verse.
16
in the morning there were thunders, an^ lightnings, and a thick cloud upon
the mount, and the voice of the trumpet exceeding loud, so that all the people
that were in the camp trembled Yea they so trembled, and were so afraid when
they saw the thunderings, c. 20.18.
and the light^ nings, and the noise of the trumpet, and the mountain
smoking, that they removed, and stood a far off, verse: 19
and said unto Moses, Speak thou with us and we will hear: but let not God
speak with us, lest we die. This was the first sound of a trumpet that ever
was heard; and I find that this was a cause of trembling. Again, I read that
the trumpet was ordained for the sounding an all arm: Number. 10.5.
and that, o that is it which now sound's in our ears: Nothing but a point of
war: nothing but news of fir^ and fword is heard among us. The ^umpets, the
trumpets, oh, they sound, they and: a shrill and horrid dinne a fearful ^se
they make in our ears: and our new^ced cities, and our new-fortified towns ^e
encompassed as once Jericho was, when ^e trumpets of rams-hornes were blown by
^e priests, and the people showted. Ios. 6:8. verse. 16
Surely that ^ay is come upon us which the Lord threat^ed Jerusalem with, by
the mouth of his Pro^het: for the mighty man cries bitterly: Zeph. 1 14. verse.
15
the ^y of wrath is come upon us; the day of trouble ^d distress; the day of
wastnesse and desola^on; the day of darkness and gloominesse; the ^ay of
clouds and thick darkness: verse. 16
the day of the ^rumpet, and all-arme against the fenced cities, and against
the high towers. verse. 17
Distress is come upon us, that we walk like blind men, because we have
sinned against the Lord; and our blood is ^owred out as dust, and our flesh is
as the dung. Oh, that is fallen upon us which was threat^ed to Egypt. Our land
is watered with blood, Eze: 32 6.
wherein we do swim, even to the moun^aines; and the rivers are full of us.
Good God, what a menace was this which went out against Egypt! What, water the
land with blood? Yes, with blood. And good reason: for that country which had
been so fertile through the overflowings of Nilus, was now grown more glutted
with skarlet sins, then their river was pregnant and reemed with miss sh^ppen
monsters. Thus Go^ can do: and thus God will do, when hi^ patience is
over-pressed with the infinite in crease of insufferable crimes. And thus o
thus he now does to my poor, native^ bleeding country. This, this land,
which wa^ like the land of Egypt, Genesis 13 10. Lam. 1.1. Ier. 5.9 verse. 10
even as the garden of the Lord: which was great among nations, and Princess
among Provinces, is now. Made an astonishment, and an hissing, and a
desolation, The voice of mirth, and the voice of gladness, and the voice of
the Bridegroom, and the voice of the Bride, and the sound of the millstones,
and the light of the candle, are taken from us; and this whole land by degrees
become's a desolation, verse. 11 Lam. 1.4.
and an astonishment. Her priests sigh; her virgins are afflicted; and she is
in bitterness. Lord, what a strange and sad alteration is here in every corner
of the Kingdom; in all estates and conditions of the people! Our cities are
become prisoners even to their own fortifications; and seem to be coffind in
the walls of their strength. The grave and ancient inhabitants of them, who had
outlived their sweat and labor, are now enforced to become young apprentices
to their almost forgotten crafts; and finding their stiff and stickie fingers
unapt to purchase bread for their bellies, they moisten their shrivelled
cheeks with those few tears their age can allow them. The cornets and the
sack-buts are turned into trumpets and fifes: our feasts are turned into
mourning, Amos. 8.10.
and all our songs into lamentation; and sackcloth is brought upon all loins,
and baldness upon every head; and our mourning is as for an only son; and
the end of our mirth is this our bitter day. Our dances are changed into
marches; our banquets into famine; our gowns and liveries into garments made
of the skinns of Elkes and Buffeloes: and the suites of gold and Tissue into
glittering armor. The hatts composed of the sofe wool of the Beaver are
turned into helmets and beavers of hard and heavy metal: the lofty and proud
structures, into poor and narrow hutts and tents: and the pride of the
cup-board, and the glory of the fingers into salarie for soldiers, and the
price of blood. Joel. 3.9.
War is proclaimed in our gates; it is prepared: our mighty men are awaked:
all the men of war draw near, and come up. verse. 10
Our plough-shares are beaten into swords, and our pruning hooks into spears.
Our citizens hands forget the cunning of their trades and occupations, Ps.
144.1.
by teaching their hands to war, and their fingers to fight. Our penns are
turned into pikes; our maces into swords; our walking staves into halbeards,
and partisans, and leading staves; and our voices of harmony and music into
showtes and horrid cries of formidable armies. The bells which merrily rang the
peales and the changes, either roar out our destructions in engines of war
by a strange metamorphosis; or if they continue in their old condition they
skarce know any other tone then knells for the slain, the death of whom
causes the wringing of hands among orphans and widows. Our Beth-els are
turned into Beth-avens; so that now we skarce dare to seek Bethel, Amos. 5.5.
or enter into Gilgal, or pass unto Beersheba. Our Daniels, Dan. 6.16. verse. 18
oh our Daniels, are cast into the denns of Lions; and yet few of us do pass
the night in fasting; nor do we send away the instruments of music from
before us; nor does our sleep go from us. O that we would yet once tremble
and fear before the God of Daniel, verse. 26
who is the living God, and steadfast for ever; and his Kingdom that, which
shall not be destroyed; for his dominion shall be even to the end. verse. 27
He delivers, and rescueth: and he works signs and wonders in heaven, and
in earth. Sad was the time with Jeremiah the Prophet, Ier: 37.12.
when he went out of Jerusalem to go into the land of Benjamin, to separate
himself thence in the midst of the people. For, verse. 13
when he was in the gate of Benjamin, a captain of the ward was there whose
name was Irijah; verse. 14
and he took Jeremiah the Prophet, saying, Thou fallest away to the Caldeans:
but Jeremiah said, It is false; I fall not away to the Caldeans; but he
hearkened not unto him. So Irijah took Jeremiah, and brought him to the
Princes: verse. 15
wherefore the Princes were wroth with Jeremiah, and smote him, and put him in
prison in the house of Jonathan the Scribe; for they had made that a prison.
Bad, Eze: 2.6.
o full bad are our times too: for our Ezekiels live among briars and thorns;
and dwell among scorpions. Heb: 11 36.
The Prophets of the Lord have their trialls of cruel mockings; yea of bonds,
and imprisonment. They are stoned, they are tempted, verse. 37
they are slain with the sword: they wander about in sheepe-skinns, and
goate-skinns, being destitute, afflicted, and tormented; verse. 38
of whom the world is not worthy. They wander in deserts, and in mountains,
and in denns, and caves of the earth: This thou have seen, o Lord; Ps. 35.22.
verse. 23
keep not silence: o Lord be not thou far from them. Stir up thyselfe, and
awake to their judgment, and to their cause, o our God, and our Lord. The time
is already come that judgment has begun at the house of God: 1. Pet. 4.17.
and if it first begin at them, what shall the end be of them that obey not the
gospel? We see not our signs; there is skarce any Prophet more: and who is
there among us that knows how long? Ps. 74.9
We have unsettled people among us, who are apt to say to the Seers see not;
and to the Prophets, Is. 30.10.
Prophecy not unto us right things: speak unto us smooth things; Prophecy
deceits. Get ye out of the way, turn aside out of the path: verse. 11
cause the holy one of Israel to cease from before us. The Prophet Jeremiah
complained that in his time a wonderful and horrible thing was committed in
the land: Ier: 5.30. verse. 31
the Prophets prophesied lies; and the people loved to have it so: and what
(says he) shall we do in the end thereof? c: 14.13.
Again he cries out. Ah Lord God, behold the Prophets say unto them, Ye shall
not see the sword, neither shall ye have famine; but I will give you assured
peace in this place. verse. 14
The Prophets Prophecy lies in thy name whereas thou sentest them not; neither
have thou commanded them, nor spoken to them: they Prophecy unto the people a
false vision, and divination, and a thing of naught, and the deceit of their
heart. And is it not as bad in these times as it was in those? Nay do not they
now profess prophesying which are noe Prophets, Amos. 7.14.
neither sonns of Prophets; but heard-men, and gatherers of Sycomore fruits;
and yet will not believe but that God says unto them; verse. 15
Go, Prophecy unto my people Israel? Surely if such be crept in among us
through the windows, and so stopp our light, Zech: 13.4.
the day will come when they shall be ashamed every one of his vision when he
has Prophesied; and shall noe longer wear a rough garment to deceave; and
each of them shall say, I am noe Prophet; verse: 5.
I am an husbandman; for man taught me to keep cattle from my youth. Nay,
is not he now the Prophet of this people in many places, Mic. 2.11.
who walks in the spirit of falsehood; and lies, saying, I will Prophecy
unto thee of wine, and of strong drink? Ah, are not the doors of many of out
temples shut up, and diverse of our lamps put out; 2. Chr^ 29.7.
and noe incense burnt, or burnt offerings offered in the holy places unto the
God of Israel, as they were wont to be? Do not some of the lowest of the
people pretend to be priests of the high places? 1. King 13.33.
Nay do not many foul people (cunning fishers in our troubled waters) rob
even God himself in tithes and offerings? For these, o for these things, Mal.
3.8. Hab: 2.11.
the very stones do cry out of the walls, and the beams out of the timber do
answer them. Hos: 4.1.
O most justly therefore has the Lord his controversy with the inhabitants of
this land: and it is to be feared that noe truth, nor mercy, nor knowledge of
God will be left therein. Is it not now among us in many places, verse. 9.
come to that old proverb, Like people liek Priests? 1. Cor: 12.8.
Have we not those who think that to one of them is given, even by the spirit
of God, the word of wisdom; verse. 10 1. Io: 4.1. Ephesians. 2.2. 1. Io: 4.6. 1. Sam.
16.14. 1. King. 22.22. Is: 19.14.
to another Prophecy; to another discerning of spirits; and to another
interpretation of tongues? Whereas if they would try the spirits peradventure
they should find that these are not of God; but that many false Prophets are
gone out into the world. Alas such a spirit is the same, and noe other then
the same spirit that ow works in the children of disobedience. It is the
spirit of error; an evil spirit; a lying spirit; a perverse spirit; a spirit
of a deep sleep; c. 29.10. Zech: 13.2. 1. Cor: 2.12. Reu. 18 2. Eze: 13 3.
Is. 11.2. Col: 2.23. Iam. 3.15. verse: 17 Rom: 2 20. Luc: 11 52. 1. Cor. 8.1.
an unclean spirit; the spirit of the world; a foul spirit; then own spirit;
rather then the spirit of wisdom and understanding; of counsel, and might; of
knowledge, and of the fear of the Lord? They have indeed a show of wisdom:
but I fear this wisdom discendeth not from above; but is earthly, sensual,
and devilish. The wisdom that is from, above is first pure, then peaceable,
gentle, and easy to be intr^ted, full of mercy and good fruits, without
partiality and withouthypocrisie. They pretend to knowledge; but is it not the
form only if knowledge, and of the truth in the law? Ha^t they not all this
while been kept out, and entered not for want of the true key of knowledge? Or
if they do know what they ought, does not this knowledge pusse them up? He
knows most, and best, who knows him self most, and that he is the worst.
They say, Iam. 2.14. verse 20
they have faith: but what does it profit though a man say he has faith, and
have not works? Can faith save him? Faith without works is dead. I pray God
that all of us may fight the good fight of faith, 1. Tim. 6.12. 1. These. 5.8.
Gal. 5.6 Lam. 1.2.
putting on the breast plate of faith and love; even of that faith which
works by love. O merciful God, how does thy poor spouse weep sore in the
night, and her tears hang on her cheeks; and that because among all her
lovers she has few, or none, to comfort her! Her friends have dealt
trecherously with her, and are become her enemies.

Me think's our two indulgent Nurses, who should have been preserved chaste;
whose breasts have been full of sweere and wholesome milk; 1. Pet. 2.2.
and who were wont to feed us with the sincere milk of the word; the Press,
and the Pulpit, are clad like mourners: and that because they are forced, and
ravished by so many profane penns, and tongues. O how are the black penns of
our railing Scripturients (borrowed from the wings of the simplest foul, which
hisses at them for their madness) surfeited with their excessive drinking of
gall and vinegar: and how from their nibbs, their noses do dropp the very
loathsome purgations of their Masters contaminated brains! They gape, as if
they would devour him whom they point at. They scratch him: they blott, and
blurre his good repute: yea they have teeth too; and with those teeth they bite
so malliciously, so venemously, that often times the wounds do fester, and
grow incurable. We are now certainly in the Autumn of the world; and assured
thereof by the daily falling into our hands of the lyeblowne fruit and leaves
of these saplesse trunks, these un-pruined trees. The small coin which
formerly we carried about us for the relief of the poor; is now frequently
bestowed upon the falsehood of the times. Untruths are pressed into the world:
the mother suffers but a minuits pain, and so soon as she is delivered, the
daughter runn's abroad before she is so much as wrapped in swaddling clothes.
That heavy curse is fallen upon us, 2. These. 2.11.
that God has sent us strong delusions, that we also believe lies. Not is
the Pulpit freer then the Press. O my soul longs, Ps: 84.2 verse. 3.
yea even faints too for the courts of the Lord: and that because the Sparrow
has found an house, and the Swallow a nest for berselfe where she may lay her
young; even thine Altars, o Lord of hosts, my King and my God: verse. 4.
and yet I cannot be so blessed as to dwell in thine house. Alas, alas, in
too many places of this land the shcreech owl lodges there: Is. 34.14. verse.
11
the cormorant, and the Bitterne possess it; the Owl also, and the Raven
dwell in it: wild beasts of the desert lodge there; c. 13.21.
it is full of doleful creatures; and the rough Satyrs dance there. Nay more:
there are those now among us, who turn the Temples into stables, and Orateries
into oasteries: and think to find Christ, as the shepherds did, Lu: 2.16.
Dan: 3.29.
lying in a manger. King Nebuchad nezzar made a decree that every people,
nation, and language which spoke any thing amiss against the God of Shadrach,
Meshech, and Abednigo, should be cut in pieces, and their houses should be made
(Iakes): So the Geneva translation.
but now we have all pretending to be worshippers of that God; yea even those
who esteem our Churches noe better then what those Blasphemers houses were to
be turned into: yea and in good earnest, such, Joel. 2.20.
such places of stench and filthiness they account fit and good enough to
offer their incense in to the God of heaven. But do they not think that their
stink does come up, and their ill savor come up unto the great God; and that
he will say unto them, Is: 1.13
your incense is an abomination unto me? Idolatry has in ancient times
foolishly set forth our Churches with Pageantrie, and gawdie trickings of
superstition: and in our later times we dreaded the courtings, and the
slow-paced but cunning and subtle insinuations of the proud whore of Babylon:
and now me think's we have a strange kind of alteration; Mat 12 25.
for here is not only a Kingdom (o woe is the time) divided against it felfe,
but also Satan in some places seeming to cast out Satan; profaneness to cast
out superstition. 1. Chr. 2.7.
Nay every troubler of our Israel, every Schismatic, every Sectarist, every
Vpstart as well as old Heretic comes in among us as did the wise men, Ex:
7.11.
and the sorcerers, the magicians of Egypt before Pharaoh, and casts down
every man his rod, and they become serpents. Genesis 3.15.
But o when will the seed of the woman bruise, nay break these serpents
heads? When will that Angel which has the key of the bottomless pit, come
down from heaven with a great chain in his hand, Reu: 20 1. verse. 2. verse. 3.
and lay hold on the Dragon that old serpent, and all the young ones made of
the magicians rod's, and bind them, and cast them into the bottomless pit, and
shut them up, and set a se^ upon them, that they deceave the nations n^ more?
Heb: 9.10.
Is not this time hoped to be the times Reformation? Why then do Jacob and
Esa^ still strugle in the womb of our Rebeckah? Genesis 25:22. Ex. 14.24. verse:
25 Iud. 5.28. Isa. 5.28.
What troubles our host; and takes off our charet wheels, that they drive so
heavily? Why tarry the wheels of the charet? Why are not the wheels like the
whirlewind? Shall the children come to the birth, and shall there not be
strength to bring forth? Shall the seamlesse coat of Christ be allways thus
torn in pieces? Shall the soldiers still tear it? Shall they still cast lots
what every man should take? c: 37.5. Ioa. 19.23. Mar. 15.24. Ioa: 19.34. Ps.
74.10.
Yea and not content with tearing his coat, shall the soldier with a spear
pierce his very side alls^ O God, how long shall the adversary reproach! Shall
the enemies blaspheme thy name for ever!

Time was when Micah had an house of god^, and made an E^hod, and Teraphim, and
consecrated one of his Sons, who became his Priest: but in those days (says
the text) there was noe King in Israel; Iud: 17 5. verse: 6.
but every man did that which was right in his own eyes. We cannot truly say
we have noe King; but too truly we may see that almost every man striveth
to do that which is right in his own eyes. Alas! Number: 24.23. Is. 1.25 verse. 27
Who shall live when God does this? When will the Lord turn his hand upon us,
and purely purge away our dross and take away all our tin? When shall Zion
be redeemed with judgment, and her converts with righteousness? 2. Sam: 15.31.
Isa: 1.5. verse. 6.
When shall the counsel of Achitophel be turned into foolishness? The whole
head is sick, and the whole heart faint: From the sole of the foot even to the
head there is noe soundness; but wounds, and bruises and putrefying sores,
that are neither closed, nor bound up, nor mollified with ointment. Eze: 11 2.
2. King 11.17.
O that the men that devise mischief, and give wicked counsel might once come
to an end! Lord, how we long for a Iehojada to make a covenant between the
Lord and the King, and the people, that we should be the Lords people;
between the King also, and the people: verse. 18
and that all the people of our land would go into the house of Baal, and
break it down; break his altars and his images in pieces thoroughly: and that
he would take the rulers over hundreds, verse. 19 verse. 20
and the captains, and the guard, and the people of the land; and all of them
bring the King to his house, and set him upon the throne of the Kings; that all
the people of the land may rejoice, and the City may be in quiet! The Lord once
did how the hearts of all the men of Judah even as the heart of one man, 2.
Sam. 19.14. verse. 15
so that they sent this word to the King, Return thou, and all thy servants.
So the King returned and came to Jordan: and Judah came to Gilgal to meet the
King, to conduct the King. O that our days of mourning were turned into a day
of rejoicing, and showting, Ezra. 4.10.
that we might offer sacrifices of sweet savours for it unto the God heaven!
But such a day of rejoicing w^ cannot expect nor hope for, until our Go^ shall
be pleased to make us more sensibl^ first of our sins, and then of our present
an emergent calamities. Alas, Alas, we preten^ to be sorry for our sins, and
we pray for peace; and yet full little do we remembe^ that there is noe peace
says the Lord, Is. 48.22.
unto the wicked. It would prove indeed a most inralluable blessing, 2. King
20.19.
if we could see peace and truth in our days: and we are assured the to the
counselors of peace there is joy. Prove. 12.20.
But what hopes can we have of peace, while our ^quities separate between us
and our God; If. 59.2
and our sins hide his face from us, that he will n^ hear. verse. 3.
Our hands are defiled with blood, and our fingers with iniquity. Our lips
speak lies our tongues mutter perverseness: verse: 4.
who calle^ for justice? And who pleads for truth We trust in vanity, and
speak lies: we conceave mischief, and bring forth iniquity. We hatch
cockatrice eggs; verse: 5.
and weave the spiders webbs: he that eats of the eggs dies; and that which
is crushed, breaks forth into a viper. verse. 6. verse. 7.
Our works are works of iniquity; and the act of violence is in our hands.
Our feet run to evil: and we make have to shed innocent blood: our
thoughts are thoughts of iniquity; wasting and desolation are in out paths.
verse. 8.
The way of peace we know not; and there is noe judgment in our goeings: we
have made us crooked paths; whosoever goes therein shall not know peace.
Therefore is judgment far from us; neither does justice over-take us. True it
is, we have our frequent fastings, and our days of humiliation: but do we
not fast for strife and debate, verse. 9. c: 58.4.
and to smite with the fist of wickedness? What does the Lord require of us,
but to do justly, and love mercy, and to walk humbly with our God? But we,
ah sinful we, instead of doing justly, do many times labor by a new way to
execute Justice; to kill it, to destroy it with its own sword: noe merveile
therefore that when judgment is looked for, Mich. 6.8.
behold oppression; and when righteousness, behold a cry. The God of mercy
requires us to love mercy; but we, on the contrary, are ready to lay hold on
our bows and spears: Isa: 5.7.
we are cruel, and have noe mercy: our voices roar like the sea; and we
ride upon borses set in array as men for war; and that against our own
acquaintance, and neighbors, and friends, and allies: Ier. 6.23. Prove. 12.10.
Ps: 35:13. Is: 58.5
yea and our very tender mercies are cruel. He requires us to walk humbly
with him; and we pretend to put on sackcloth, and to humble our souls with
fasting: but alas, is this such a fast as God has chosen? A day for a man to
aff^ict his soul? Is it for a man to bow down his head as a bull-rush; and to
spread sackcloth and ashes under him? Will he call this a fast, verse: 6.
and an acceptable da^ unto him? Noe, noe: Is not this the fast that he has
chosen? To loose the bands of wickedness; to undo the heavy burdens; and to
let the oppressed go free; and that we break every yoke. verse: 7.
Is it not to deal our bread to the hungry; and that we bring the poor that
is cast out, to our houses? When we see the naked, that we cover him; and
that we hide not our selves from our own flesh? But do we thus fast? Do
we thus humble our selves? I fear we do not; and therefore for peace we
have great bitterness: c: 38.17. Lam. 3.15. Reu: 8.10.
we are filled with bitterness, and are made drunken with wormwood. The
great star which fell from heaven upon the third part of rivers, and upon the
fountains of waters when the third Angel sounded, is found among us: verse. 11
for our waters are become wormwood; our tears are tears of bitterness.
Prove: 11.14.
Solomon tells me that where noe counsel is, the people fall: but in the
multitude of counselors there is safety. That multitude of counselors we
have: gave, wise, and honorable counselors we have: and yet for all that me
think's we do not find that safety which Solomon speaks of: 2. Cor. 7.5. 1.
Chr. 26.14. Mar: 15.43.
for we have noe rest, but we are troubled on every side: without are
fightings, and within are fears. We have Zechariahs, wise counselors; and
we have Joseph's: honorable counselors, which also wait for the Kingdom of
God; 1. Chr. 27.32. Prove: 12.20. cap: 15.22.
and we have Ionathans to be counselors; wise men, and scribes: and yet there
is but little joy to the counselors of peace; nor are purposes yet so
established by this multitude of counselors, as has been long hoped they
would have been. What is the cause? What is the reason hereof? Ah Lord God,
we are ready to take counsel, but not of thee: Ier: 30.1. Luc: 7.30. Ps: 107
11. Is: 19.17.
to reject thy counsel against our selves, to contemn thy counsel; and
therefore we are every one afraid in himself, because of the counsel of thee
the Lord of hosts, which thou have determined against us. The noise of the
drumms and the trumpets still sounds in our ears; and noe Dove comes yet with
the olive branch of peace into our poor distressed land. O my God, my God, how
is thy sword filled with blood, c: 34.6.
and made fat with fatness, and with the blood of the lamb's and goats; with
the fat of the kidnyes of ramms; because thou have a sacrifice in Borrah, and a
great slaughter in Idumea! verse. 7.
Our land is soaked with blood; and our dust is made fat with fatness. Our
dust is turned into brimstone: verse. 9. Deuteronomy: 28.24.
the rain of our land is made pounder and dust: yea and our very water is
turned into fire. The water that is drained through the earth of our Cellars
and vaults, is turned into saltpeter; and that, and the coals, and the
brimstone kindle their fury together in chambers of iron, and in brass, and
then belch o^ fire and destruction. From hence come tho^ dreadful wonders
which we see in the heaven^ and in the earth; Joel. 2.30.
blood, and fire, and pillars of smoke. The black-mouthed Canons spitt the fire
of wrath at us; and the tokens of their malice which they send unto us, are
balls of iron fitted for our confusion. Yea, and the more to terrify us, they
roar and thunde^ out their defiances, even to the astonishment of all that
hear them. We feed them with powder and they thank us in thunder and
lightning: we crambe them with iron; and they discharge themselves of it to
the slaying of Christians. Yet me thinks even these engines of iron in dumb
lectures do seem to teach us relenting by their own examples; by their
shaking, their reversing, their ruaning when they are discharged, as if they
trembled and were afraid themselves of the mischief they do; and were glad
when they had liberty to take their ease upon their beds. Is: 66.15.
Thus the Lord comes with fire among us, and with his charets like a
whirlwind, to render his anger with fury, and his rebukes with flames of
fire: verse. 16
for by fire, and by sword the Lord pleads with us; and the slain of the
Land are many: Lam: 1.20.
Behold o Lord; for by reason hereof I am in distress; my bowels are
troubled; and mine heart is turned within me; for we have grievously
rebelled. Abroad the sword bereaveth; and at home there is as death: The Lord
is against us, Eze: 21 3.
and has drawn forth his sword out of his sheath, and does cut off from us
the rightious and the wicked. Therefore it is, verse. 6.
that now I sigh with the breaking of my loins, and with bitterness do I
sigh; verse. 7.
even for the sad tidings which I daily hear, because the sword comes: every
heart melts, and all hands are feeble, and every spirit does faint, and all
knees are weak ^s water. A sword, oh A sword, is sharpened, verse: 9.
and also fourbished: it is sharpened to make a sore slaughter; it is
fourbished that it may glitter. verse: 10 cap: 38.21.
The allmighty has called for a sword against us through out all the land;
every man's sword is against his brother: the Lord pleads against us with
blood, verse: 22 verse: 18
and with fire, and with brimstone. His fury is upon his face; verse: 19
and a great shaking is in our land. The covers of our soldiers are iron, and
their weopons are iron, and their hearts are also iron: so hard are their
hearts that they kill without remorse; and they pillage and plunder without
pity or commiseration. The baggs that swelled with unjust gain, and moneys
purchased by extortion and fraud, now wonder at their own emptiness; and in
their shrivelled and pursed cheeks seem to mourn for their falling away?
Eccles: 5.16.
This is a sore evil that in all points as the deceaver came so shall he go;
and what profit has he that has labored for the wind? The plunderers suck
down his swollen purse, and leave nothing but a be and naked skin: and by a
new law of ga^ they teach by the way of violence how to^ in an hour as much as
he in his age c^scrape up by falsehood. And when he looker with an heavy and
wish-full eye upon his departing moneys, never to be re-called; ^ deep sigh
tell's him 't is well that some me^nes are found to awaken his conscience. So
he spends his drooping days in wishing that he were as innocent as many that
are (...) poor: and it may be that by the loss of his coin he gains some
religion. Those again whose honest care and thriftie labors had been so
blessed, that their moneys had increased, yea even by diminishing; and had
multiplied for their charity; finding now the uncertainty of what the world
falsely account's a treasure, part with their money with as deep, but not a
coveteous, sigh, an^ that out of a consideration that the emptiness of their
coffers will be burdensome one day to their new, but fellonious possessours.
They grieve that rapine should be more powerful then innocence: yet content
themselves with the certain assurance of treasures in heaven. The surly robber
in the interim, with a crustie conscience rejoices at the purchase of his own
destruction: and (to show that he has as little care of his issue as he has
of his soul) consume's in riott what his children may beg for. The lowest
spoake is now come to be the highest in the wheel; and that which was the
uppermost is turned to the ground. The ^rich are become poor; and those who
formerly were of a low esteem, now pride it in the feathers of other birds.
Solomon's observations is come to pass in our days; Eccles: 10.6. verse. 7.
the rich sit in low place: yea and we see servants upon horses, and princes
walking as servants upon the earth. Ier: 12.12.
The spoilers are come upon all high places; for the sword of the Lord does
devour from the one end of the land even to the other end of the land; noe
flesh has peace. We sow wheat, verse. 13
but we reap thorns: we put our selves to pain, but noe profit come's of
it: and we are even ashamed of our revenues, because of the fierce anger of
the Lord. Our bloody victories are mixed both with joy and sorrow; for even our
very conquests and tryumphs are mournful. The more we slay, the fewer
kindred, and friends, and acquaintance are left us; and much of that blood
which we draw from others, is part of that which runs in our own veins.
Jacob and Esau, brethren of the same womb, contend for the birthright; and
many a man strive's to supplant, to surprise, to destroy his kinsman, his
brother, yea and his own father. Our tongues are become prisoners, and are
kept close under the roofes of our mouths, and within the grates of our teeth;
yea and that in the compa^ them who are, or should be dearest unto and all for
fear of treachery and discover The prudent are enforced to keep silence
because is an evil time. Amos. 13. Mic: 8.5.
We dare not trust a friend (...) put confidence in a guide: we keep (...)
doors of our mouths from them that lies our bosoms: verse. 6.
The son dishonors the fath^ the daughter rises up against her mother;
and the daughter in law against her mother in law. Brother delivers up
brother to death, Mat: 10 21.
and the father the child: and the children rise up against their parents, and
cause them to be put to death. Five in one house are divided; Luc: 12 52. verse:
53
three against two, and two against three? The father is divided against the
Son, and the son against the father: the mother against the daughter, a^
the daughter against the mother: the moth^ in law against the daughter in law,
and the daughter in law against her mother in law: and a man's foes are those
of his own household. Mat. 10 36. Mal. 4.6.
The Lord God of heaven amend these wicked times, and turn the hearts of the
fathers to the children, and the hearts of the children to the fathers; Ps:
69.22. Is: 29.21. Ier: 48.43. verse: 44
Our very tables become snares before us: and that which should have been for
our welfare, is become a trap. A man is made an offender for a word; and a
snare is laid for him that reproves in the gate. Fear, and the pit, and the
snare are upon us: he that flees from the fear, falls into the pit; and ^e
that gets up out of the pit, is taken in the ^are: the years of our
visitation are upon (...). The spoiler is come upon every city, verse. 8.
and noe ^ty escaped: the valleys also perish, and the ^aines are destroyed.
c: 15.7.
The Lord does fan (...) with a fan in the gates of our land: he ^th
bereave us of our children: he does destroy ^s people because we return not
from our ways. Our widows are increased to us above the sand ^f the seas:
verse: 8.
and the Spoyler at noone day is brought upon us. She that has borne seven,
languisheth; verse: 9.
^hee has given up the ghost: her sun is gone down while it was yet day:
and the residue of ^s are delivered to the sword before our enemies. c: 6.26.
O that we would gird our selves with sackcloth, and wallow our selves in
ashes; and make our selves mourning as for an only son, most bitter
lamentation; for the spoiler suddenly comes upon us. Isa: 21.2. Ier: 48.10.
The treacherous dealer deals treacherously, and the spoiler spoileth: Yea
and the word is given out among us Cursed be he that keeps back his sword
from blood: and yet few of us do consider that the Lord God of recompenses
shall surely requite. c: 51.56. Amos. 5.18.
Woe unto them that desired this day of the Lord. To what end is it for them?
Alas, the day of the Lord is darkness and not light. verse: 19
As if a man did flee from a lion, and a bear met him in the way; or went
into the house, and leaned his hand on the wall, and a serpent bitt him.
Wayling is in all our streets; verse. 16
and we say^ all the high ways, Alas, Alas. W^ call the husbandman to
mourning, and such are skillfull of lamentation to wailing: verse. 17
and^ all vineyards is wayling; for the Lord does p^ through us. O that now at
last we wou^ seriously lay this to our hearts, verse. 14
and seeh good and not evil, that we may live, and so the Lord, the God of
hosts may be with us! O that we would once hate the evil, verse. 15
and love the good, and establish judgment in the gate! It may be that the Lord
of hosts would be gracious unto the remnant of Joseph. But while we remain in
our rebellions, we must look to lie down in our miseries, as at this day.
Ps. 79.2
The dead bodies of the servants of the most high are given to be meat unto
the fowls of the heaven: and the flesh of his saints unto the beasts of the
earth. verse. 3.
Their blood is shed like water round about the Kingdom; and there are none to
bury them. We are become a reproach to our neighbors: verse 4.
a scorn and derision to them that are round about us. verse. 5.
How long Lord will thou be angry? for ever? verse. 8.
Shall thy jealousy burn like fire? O remember not against us our former
iniquities: let thy tender mercies speedily prevent us; for we are brought
very love. verse. 9.
Help us o God of our salvation, for the glory of thy name! O deliver us, Ps:
125 3.
and purge away our sins, for thy name's sake! O let not the rod of the wicked
(...) upon the lot of the righteous, lest the righteous (...) forth their hands
to iniquity! Oh, how our ^eres do enforce us to flee to save our lives; Ier:
48.6. Prove: 28.1. Gen: 19 22.
and ^ke us like the heath in the wilderness: and ^e sometimes flee when none
pursues us. ^hen Sodom was destroyed, Lot had a Zoar (...) flee unto: when
Jerusalem was laid wast, ^ne of the inhabitants had a Pella to escape ^to. O
that I now had wings like a dove: Ps. 55.6
(...) then would I flee away too, and be at ^st. Lo, then would I wander far
off, verse. 7.
and ^maine in the wilderness: Joel: 2.11.
for the day of the lord is great, and very verrible; and who can ^ide it? He
is the true God, Ier. 10.10.
he is the li^ing God, and an everlasting King: at his ^rath the earth does
tremble, and the nation (...) not able to abide his indignation. Ye, that do I
talk of fleeing; and wish for the ^vings of a dove, that I might flee? Alas,
whither would I flee? Can the mountains, ^r the hills cover me from the
all-seeing Lord of hosts? Ps. 139.7.
Whither shall I go from his spirit; or whither shall I flee from his
presence? If I ascend up to heaven, he is there: If I make my bed in hell,
behold he is there also. verse. 8. verse. 9. verse. 10
If I take the wings of the morning and dwell in the uttermost parts of the
sea; even there shall his hand lead me; and his right hand shall hold me: If
I say, verse. 11
surely the darkness shall cover me; even the night shall be light about me.
Yea, verse. 12
the darkness hides not from him, but the night shines as the day: the
d^nesse and the light to him are both alike. W^ then shall I yet do? Abide his
wrath I cannot: endure these troubles, and vexatio^ and impoverishings and
heart-breakings, a^ soule-bleeding perturbations any longer I cannot; and yet
whither to go or flee, to shun and avoid them, I know not. Well; I am yet
resolved what I will do. Yes; it is my only way; and do it I must, I will.
Since I cannot flee from God, I will flee to God. And yet, I will flee from
him; from his wrath, from his anger, from his displeasure: and for all that I
will flee to him also, and to none but him: to his mercy, to his promises, to
his tender compassions, which never fail. I have displeased him with my sins:
but I will displease my self for thus displeasing my kind, my good, my loving
God. I have moved the holy one of Israel to anger by mine iniquities: But I
will be angry with my self for moving him in whom I live, Act: 17 28.
and move, and have my being. I will come unto him with tears; me thinks mine
eyes already begin to water; and I will cry unto him; Job. 34.28. Ps: 65.2
for he hears the cry of the afflicted: and I will pray unto him; for he is
a god that hears prayer: and I will sigh unto him; for he caused a mark to
be set upon the foreheads of those in Jerusalem who did sigh and cry for all
the abominations which were done in the midst Ez: 9.4
thereof. Oh, who can forbear a shewer of tears, that is but the least
sensible of the storms of our calamities? Iud. 5.15.
Who can choose but have great thoughts of heart, for these divisions of
Reuben? For my part, surely my heart is not all stone: some part of it, at
least, is flesh; and therefore it must needs be sensible both of the general
sufferances, and of my particular miserable condition. Our Chirurgians have a
stone composed by art, which they call the infernal stone; with which they
stupifie and make dead the flesh, where they intend to make an orifice for a
fountenell or issue. From my heart should issue a fountain of sorrow for the
cause of my God's displeasure: and yet I am afraid me thinks, to have the
orifice made. I would be content to grieve; but, me thinks I would not have it
painful; I would do it at cheap rates. O but I must both grieve, and I must
be pained too; yea I must be cut to the heart: yet not as were the high Priest
and the Counsel, Act. 5.29.
when Peter and John told them that they ought to obey God rather then men;
where upon they were cut to the heart, and took counsel to slay them: verse.
33 c. 7.54.
nor as they were cut to the heart when they gnashed with their teeth upon
Stephen: but I must howsoever be cut, or at least I must be pricked at the
heart, as were Peter's converts, c: 2.37.
when they said unto him and to the rest of the Apostles, Men and brethren what
shall we do? Oh, but I am afraid that I shall not be sensible enough; for I
fear that I have an infernal stone lying upon my heart, which the devil
lays there purposely, that I may not be sensible. Well; if thus it be, I
shall find it by the working, by the tingling. I am sure that God now does a
Thing in our Israel, 1. Sam. 3.11.
at which both the ears of every one that hears it do tingle: yea and me
think's, not only mine ears tingle, but even my heart also tingleth and
trembles at the same. Well; though that stone be there, yet the inscision
shall be made; and howsoever I will desire that a pain I may endure. If yet I
am not sensible enough when the inscision is made, I hope I shall have time
enough to smart before the eskar be off. Lord, I desire that I may be sensible
of the wounds of this land; and that the blood which is shed in these violent
times, may be washed away by the tears of me, and other penitent sinners. Or,
if blood requires blood; Lord let the wine and oil of the best Samaritane;
let the blood of my merciful Redeemer prevail for pardon for the blood which
is shed in these un-naturall wars; and let it stop the fountain, the
current, the issue thereof. If my poor country was formerly troubled with a
plurisie, I am sure that now it uses the harsh means of phlebotomie; for it
is let blood in every part; in the head, the arms, the legs, the feet; yea
and even in the very heart. And yet for all this, are there not some among us
(upon whose hearts the stupifying infernal stone is laid) who are like unto
Moab; Ier. 48.11.
who have been at case from their youth, and have settled upon their lees; and
have not been emptyed from vessel to vessel; nor have gone into captivity;
and therefore their taste remains in them, neither is their sent changed? Are
there not those among us, that put far away the evil day; Amos. 6.3. verse. 4.
and cause the seat of violence to come near? That lie upon beds of ivory,
and stretch themselves upon their couches; and eat the lambs out of the flock,
and the calves out of the midst of the stall? verse. 5.
That chaunt to the sound of the violl, and invent to themselves instruments of
music? verse. 6.
That drink wine in bowls, and anoint themselves with the chiese ointments;
but are not grieved for the afflictions of Joseph? Jerusalem was then surest of
her destruction, when she laughed and rejoiced in her surfeits and riotts; and
my compassionate Jesus at the same time foreseeing her ruin, mourned and wept
over her. Oh, Luc. 19 41.
me thinks, when I lay my hand upon my heart, when I touch my heart, I find it
a stringed instrument; and when I stop upon the fretts, the lesson that it
plays is nothing but Lachrymae. Yet I fear I weep not so much as I should:
and I fear too that every one does not weep so much as I do. I fear there
are still those among us, Isa: 49.26.
who dilight to be fed with their own flesh; and to be drunk with their own
blood, as with sweet wine. What shall I say of such; or how shall I plead for
them? Have these workers of wickedness noe knowledge, Ps. 14.4
who eat up the people as they eat bread; and call not upon the Lord? 2. Sam.
2.26.
Lord shall their sword devour for ever? Know we not that it will be
bitterness in the latter end? How long shall it be then ere the people be bid
return from following their brethren? The Lord has said by the mouth of his
servant David that he will abhor the bloody, Ps. 5.6. Ps: 55.23.
and deceitful man: yea, he says that bloody and deceitful men shall not
live out half their days; Ps. 68.30. Ps. 51.14. Ps: 46.9
and that he will skatter the people that delight in war. Deliver (...) from
blood-guilinesse, o God, thou God of (...) salvation. O that my God would make
these wars to cease. O that he would break the bows, and cut the spears in
sunder, and bur^ the chariots in the fire! This I am sure, he^ and he alone
can do. He, and he only, is our refuge and strength; verse. 1.
and a very present he^e in trouble. This therefore that he may do, I will
imitate the Prophet Daniel; and I will speak, Dan. 9.20.
and pray, and confess mine own sinnt, and the sins of this people; and
present my supplication before the Lord my God, and thus I will say.

The First Prayer, wherein is set down. 1 Gods Justice in punishing his own
people in former times. 2 His Justice also in the present punishing us for our
offenses. 3 An earnest supplication for our repentance and his forgiveness.

O Righteous father, thou who art righteous in all thy ways, Ps. 145.17.
and holy in all thy works; I, thine unworthy creature in the very grief of
my heart, and with a sad and bleeding soul, cannot choose but sit down and
weep, Ps. 13^ 1. verse. 8.
in the consideration of our poor Sion wasted with miseries. Yet great and
grievous though our afflictions are, and the increase and growth which they may
yet arise higher unto, is all-together as unknown to us, as when the period
and end of them shall be: howsoever I must confess thee to be a righteous God,
strong, and patient. And seeing all things are naked and open unto thee, with
whom we have to do, I cannot choose but acknowledge here, upon my bended knees
before thine all-seeing majesty, that the sins, oh the grievous, the
scandalous, the out-ragious sins of this nation have cried for this vengeance,
Ps: 51.4
that thou may be justified when thou speak, and be clear now thou
judge. I confess o Lord, out of a sense of mine own transgressions, and
consideration of the crimes of this people, Is: 59.12.
that our transgressions are multiplied before thee; and our sins testify
against us: for our transgressions are with us; and as for our iniquities, I
desire of thee Lord that we may know them. When thine own dear people of
Israel would not be reformed by terror, Lev. 26 16. verse. 17
and consumption, and the burning ague; by their enemies eating that which they
had sowed, and reigning over them; by their fleeing when none did pursue them:
by making their heaven iron and their earth as brass: verse 18
by suffering them to spend their strength in vain, verse. 19
and causing their land not to yield her increase, n^ the trees their fruit:
verse. 22
by the wild beasts robbing them of their children; by destroying their
cattle, and making them few in number, and their high ways desolate: then
did thou threaten them, verse. 23
saying; If ye will yet walk contrary to me then will I walk contrary to
you; verse. 24 verse: 25
and will punish you yet seven times for your sins. I will bring a sword upon
you, that shall avenge the quarrel of my covenant: and when ye are gathered
together within your cities, I will send the Pestilence among you; Deuteronomy. 28.15.
and ye shall be delivered into the hand of the enemy. Again, thou did
also threaten them, saying, If thou will not hearken to the voice of the Lord
thy God, to observe to do all his commandments, and his statutes: verse. 25
the Lord shall cause thee to be smitten before thine enemies: thou shall go
out one way against them, and flee seven ways before them: and thy carkeise
shall be meat unto all fowls of the air, and unto the beasts of the earth;
verse. 26
and noe man shall fray them away. Iud. 2.13.
Thus when Israel forsook thee their Lord, and served Baalim and Ashahroth;
verse. 14
then thine anger was hot against them, and thou did deliver them into the
hands of spoilers that spoiled them; and did sell them into the hands of
their enemies round about, so that they could not any longer stand before their
enemies. c. 3.7.
Thus again when they did evil in thy sight, and forgot thee their Lord and
their God; and served Baalim and the groves; then thine anger was hot against
Israel, verse. 8.
and thou did sell them into the hands of Chusan-Rishathaim king of
Mesopotamia, and they served him eight years. verse. 9.
But yet when they cried unto thee, thou did raise up a deliverer to them who
delivered them. Thus also when they did evil in thy sight, c. 6.1.
thou did deliver them into the hands of Midian seven years. And thus at
another time when they did evil again in thy sight and served Baalim and
Ashtaroth, c. 10.6.
and forsook thee, and served thee not: verse: 7.
then thine anger was hot against them, and thou did sell them into the hands
of the Philistines and into the hands of the children of Ammon. c: 13.1.
Yea and thus when they also did likewise evil in thy sight, thou did
deliver them into the hands of the Philistines forty years. If then Lord thou
sparedst not thine own dear people when they thus sinned, Ps: 106.29.
and provoked thee to wrath through their own inventions; how can we the most
abominable of all thy creatures have the least hope of the cessation of thy
judgments, who still do multiply and increase our unsufferable abominations?
Neither terror nor consumption, nor any other of thy corrections formerly sent
us, have prevailed with us to search and try our ways, and to turn unto thee
our dreadful Lord. Justly therefore do thou walk contrary unto us, and
causest the sword to avenge the quarrel of thy covenant. We are smitten
before our enemies, yea even such enemie^ who have been and should have
continued our friends: for religion, country, neigbourhood, affinity, and
consanguinitie had tied us together with the bonds of love. But now alas we
go out one way against them, and flee seven ways before them. We have in
many places had those among us who served Baalim, and Ashtaroth, and the
groves: and we have had those too, who allthough they have professed with
Naaman, that they would offer neither burnt offerings, 2. King 5.17.
nor sacrifice unto other Gods, but only unto thee the true Lord: yet with
Naaman also, they have bowed in the house of Rimmon. verse: 8.
Justly therefore, o most justly is thine anger hot against us, and we are
delivered into the hands of spoylers. Confess we must o God, that we are a
sinful nation, Is. 1.4.
a people laden with iniquity, a seed of evil doers, children that are
corrupters: we have forsaken thee our Lord, we have provoked thee the
Holy-one to anger, we have gone away backward. verse. 5.
The whole head is sick, and the whole heart faint: verse. 6.
from the sole of the foot even to the head there is noe soundness; but
wounds and bruises, and putrefying sores: they have not been closed, neither
bound up, neither mollified with ointment. We have indeed with our tongues
called thee our father and our master; and yet thou may justly question us as
thou did the Israelites by the mouth of thy holy Prophet, If I be a father,
Mal: 1.6.
where is mine honor? And if I be a master, where is my fear? Ah Lord we
must confess that we are all as an unclean thing; Is: 64.6.
and all our righteousnesses are as filthy rags we all do fade as a leaf,
and our iniquities as the wind do take us away. verse: 7.
There is none among us that calls upon thy name as he ought to do; that
stirs up himself to take hold of thee: for thou have hid thy face from us,
and have consumed us because of our iniquities. verse: 8.
But now, o Lord, thou art our father: we are the clay, and thou our potter,
and we all are the work of thine hand. verse: 9.
Be not wroth very sore o Lord; neither remember iniquity for ever: behold,
see I beseech thee, we are all thy people.

True it is, c: 28.3.
o eternal Purity, that tho^ did threaten by thy Prophet, that the drunkards
of Ephraim should be trodden under feet and by thy servant Solomon thou have
warned us, Prove. 23.20. verse. 21
saying, Be not amongst wine bibbers; amongst riotous eaters of flesh: for the
drunkar^ and the glutton shall come to poverty; and drowzinesse shall cloth
them with rags. And yet, as if thy words were not true, or thy judgments not
to be feared and trembled at the is among us a root that bears gall and
wormwood, Deuteronomy. 29 18.
to add drunkenness to thirst. We heart Vriah's, 1. Sam. 11.13. 1. King 16.9.
1. Sam. 25.36.
made drunk; and we have Elah's, and Nabals, drinking themselves drunk, and
making Kingly feasts, where the end of their mirth is drunkenness. Seeing
therefore the^ is this guilt among us, how can we expect other but that thou
should tread down to people in thine anger, Is: 63.6
and make them drunk is thy fury, and bring down our strength to the earth?
It was thy judgment upon Moab, the he should be made drunken and should wall^
in his vomit and be in derision. Ier. 48.26. Is. 51.17.
We o Lord; are now made drunk with the cup of thy fury, and drink the
dreggs of the cup of trembling, and wring them out: and that because of the
cupps of drunkenness and madness which have over flowed in our land. Ier.
10.24.
But o heavenly father correct us but with judgment, and not in thine anger,
lest thou bring us to nothing. Luc: 21 34.
Make every one of us of this nation Take heed lest at any time our hearts be
overcharged with surfeiting and drunkenness, and cares of this life; and so
that day, the day of judgment, come upon us unawares.

By King Solomon, o thou glorious Essence, Frov: 16.18.
thou have told us that pride goes before destruction, and an haughty spirit
before a fall: and the Apostle tells us, Iam. 4.6. Eze: 16 49.
that thou resistest the proud, but give grace to the humble: and the
Prophet tells that pride was one of the iniquities of Sodom, as well as
fulness of bread, and abundance of idleness. Yet, o Lord God all-mighty, in
our pride we have neither remembered the destruction, nor the threatened fall;
nor thy resisting us; nor Sodom's ruin. Lord forgive this iniquity amongst us;
and give us now such humble hearts, Ps. 75.6
that we may noe more set our horns on high, nor speak with stiff necks:
for why? Thou o God art the judge: verse. 8.
thou put down one, and set up another.

We are taught, o thou just God of truth, Prove. 11.1.
that a false balance is abomination unto thee; but a just weight is thy
delight: and we know that thou did question by thy Prophet, saying, Mic:
6.11.
Shall I count them pure with the wicked balances, and with the bagg of
deceitful weights? verse. 10
Are there not in Jerusalem and Samaria the treasures of wickedness in the
house of the wicked, and the skant measure which is abo^minable? Yea and we
know that thou do^ stricktly forbid, Deuteronomy: 25.14. verse: 13 verse. 15
saying, Thou shall not have i^ thine house diverse measures, a great and
(...) small: thou shall not have in thy bag divers^ weights, a great and a
small: but thou shall have a perfect and just weight; a perfect and just
measure shall thou have, that thy days may be lengthened in the land which the
Lord thy God gives thee. And yet for all this, the same complaint may be made
against many of us, Ier: 6.13.
which was against Judah, we are given to coveteousnesse, and we dealt
falsely. Justly therefore, o most righteous judge thou may question us as thou
did the Jews and say; c: 7.9. verse: 10
will ye steal, murder, comm^ adultery, and swear falsely; and come and
stand before me in my house which is called by my name, and say, we are
delivered (...) do all these abominations?

O thou that art the easer of the oppressed thou God of compassionate bowels,
to thee are also known both the deceaver and the oppressor walking hand in
hand among us. Surely thou have seen it, Ps: 10.15.
for thou behouldest ungodliness and wrong: therefore thou call, Amos. 8.4.
verse. 5
saying, Hear this o ye that swallow up the needy, even to make the poor of
the land to fail; saying, when will the Sabbath be gone, that we may set
forth wheat, making the Ephah small, and the Shekel great, and falsifying the
balance by deceit? verse. 6.
that we may buy the poor for silver, and the needy for a pair of shoes.

Yea, o thou that make inquisition for blood, and forgettest not the
complaint of the poor, to thee we must confess that with the deceitful is
joined also among us even the bloody murderer; allthough we are well assured
that the blood-thirstie and deceitful man shall not live out half his days.
Ps. 55.25.


Yea Lord, thou God of justice, thou may also complain of us as thou did
of the Jews, Is: 59.4.
and say that few or none among us calls for justice, or pleads for truth:
we trust in vanity, and speak lies; we conceave mischief, and bring forth
iniquity. Hos. 4.2.
By swearing, and lying, and killing, and stealing, and committing adultery,
the people break out, and blood touches blood! Therefore does our land mourn,
verse: 3.
and every one that dwells therein does languish. Thus, o thus wickedly, thus
contemptuously, Iud: 10 15.
thus outragiously, yea and many more and worse though closer ways, have we
sinned, o Lord: do thou unto us whatsoever in thy mercy seems good unto
thee. For these, Ier. 50.4.
and for all other our private and public, our secret and our open, our
particular and our general crimes, I besiech thee, o father of mercies, to
grant that I, and all the people of the land may go weeping, as once did the
children of Israel, and of Judah. Lord be reconciled unto us in the blood of
that Lamb of thine who takes away the sins of the world. Cause us all now in
this time of our visitation to learn, verse. 5.
and ask the way to Sion, with our faces thitherward, saying, Come and let us
join our selves unto the Lord in a perpetual covenant that shall not be
broken. Amos. 7.2. Dan. 9.19. Joel. 2.21. verse. 26
O Lord God forgive us I beseech thee: by whom. Shall Jacob arise? For he is
small. O Lord hear; o Lord forgive; o Lord hearken and do it: so shall we be
sure that thou will do great things Cause us once again to eat in plenty,
and be satisfied, and praise thy name, o Lord our God, when thou have dealt
thus wonderously with us; and we shall never be ashamed. Ier. 29.11.
O let thy thoughts be thoughts of peace toward us, and not of evil. We
should, o my God, 1. Pet. 3 8.
we should have loved one another as brethren, and should have been pittyfull
and courteous: but to our shame I must acknowledge with a sad and a broken
heart, that we have been more ready to bite and devour one another; Gal.
5.15.
and therefore now are we justly consumed one of another. It is most just with
thee, o thou sin-revenging God, thus to visit our offenses with the rod, Ps:
89.32.
and our sins with scourges. Unnatural have been our crimes, and therefore
unnatural are likewise our punishments: Ps: 37.15.
for our swords do go through our own hearts; and we our selves are become
the destroyers of our selves. O eternal mercy! O eternal goodness, be thou
graciously pleased, I beseech thee to give us a true sight, sense, and feeling
of these and all other our faylings and backslidings; give us hearty remorse,
contrition, and sorrow for them all; together with a steadfast resolution of new
obedience: yea and so strengthen us in these our pious resolutions, and so
enable us to the performance of the same; yea so sanctify us throughout, that
our whole spirits, and souls, and bodies may be kept blameless unto the
comeing of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Thou have threatened that. If a
man will not turn, Ps. 7.13
thou will whet thy sword: and this long time thou have bent thy bow: thou
have prepared for us, verse. 14
and brought among us the instruments of death; and have ordained thine arrows
against thy persecuters. Yet Lord thou art yesterday, and to day, and the same
for ever. The same father of mercies, and God of all consolation. Remember
therefore, I beseech thee, how gracious thou were to the people of Judah, to
whom thou sentest thy Prophet to speak, Ier. 26.3.
If so be they would hearken, and turn every man from his evil way, that thou
might repent thee of the evil which thou did purpose to do unto them
because of the evil of their doeings. O Lord do thou rent our hearts in thy
mercy; and make us turn from our evil ways, that thou may repent thee of
the evil of our punishments. Make us turn unto thee with (...) our hearts,
Joel: 2.12.
with fasting, and with weeping, and with mourning: Ex: 32.12.
and then turn thou from thy fierce wrath, and repent of this evil against
thy people. Is: 1.26
Turn thine hand upon us, and purely purge a way our dross, and take away all
our tin. verse: 26
Restore our Judges as at the first, and our counselors as at the beginning:
and call our land the land of righteousness, verse: 27
the faithful land. Let our Zion be redeemed with: judgment, and our converts
with righteousness. Ps: 86.17.
Show some good token upon us for good, that they which hate us may see it and
be ashamed, because thou Lord helpest and comfortest us. Hear o my God, in the
bowels of thy compassions: close and bind up our wounds, for his sake who was
wounded for our transgressions; pardon us for his sake who is our only
reconciliation: and let the cries which our finns have sent up to heaven for
vengeance, be ceased, and quieted by the blessed pleading of our only
Mediator between thee and us, even the beloved Son of thy bosom, Jesus
Christ our only Lord and Savior. Amen.

The Second Prayer, consisting of. 1 A doleful complaint of our grievous
calamities. 2 An humble desire of the remission of our sins. 3 A fervent
supplication for righteousness and peace.

Great and glorious Lord God, who art the Lord of hosts, 1. Sam. 17.45. Exodus:
15.3.
and God of the armies of Israel; o thou who have styled thy self a man of
war, whose name is the Lord; Look down, I beseech thee, upon the distressed
anguish and consuming sorrows of this thy people in our land of blood. Thou
see Lord, thou see the afflictions of Joseph; the calamities of thy people;
how our blood is shed like water on every side of our Kingdom; how our bones
lie scattered before the pit, like as when one breaks and heweth wood upon
the earth. How long Lord, how long, just and holy, shall the prayers, and the
tears, and the cries, and the supplications of thy saints and servants ascend
up unto heaven and yet thou seem unto us as a deaf man which hears not; and
as a man which is dumb, Ps. 38.13.
that opens not his mouth? Is there noe balm in Gilead? Is there noe
physician there? Why then is n^ the health of the daughter of thy people
recovered? Ier:
O the hope of Israel, the savior thereof in the time of trouble, why should
thou be as a stranger in our land; and as wayfaring man, that turns a side
to tarr^ but a night? Psalm.
Thou have moved our land, and divided it: o heal the sores thereof for it
shakes. O let the sorrowful sighing of the prisoners come before thee:
according to the multitude of thy mercies preserve thou those that are
appointed to death: Arise o Lord, from thy resting place, thou and the arc of
thy strength. Arise, and have mercy upon our Sion; for it is time that thou
have mercy upon her, yea the time is come: for why? The servants think upon
her stones, and it greiveth us to see how she lies down in the dust. O now
at last be thou favorable and gracious to our Sion; and build thou the walls
of our Jerusalem. Send peace within our walls, and plenteousnesse within our
palaces. For our brethrens and companions sake I wish this prosperity: yea
because of the many houses of the faithful who put their trust in thee our
Lord and our God, I pray for this good. Exodus 3 7.
Thou, o Lord, have surely seen the afflictions of this thy people, and have
heard our cries by reason of the sword; for thou know our sorrows. verse. 8.
O come thou down to deliver us, as once thou did thy people of Israel from
the hand of the Egyptians. Thou see how the sword is drawn in an unnatu^ll
manner; brother against brother, neigh^our against neighbor, house against
house, ^ather against Son, and Son against Father; all having weapons of
war which ^re like to destroy the nation; and all clothing themselves in
garments rolled in blood. Isa. 9.5
Thou see how many amongst us thirst for blood, and how whole rivers thereof
run in our fields, and in our streets; and yet it is not in the power or
policy of man to stop the current. It is now, o Lord, with us as it was
once with idolatrous Israel, when Moses commanded them, saying, Exodus 32.27.
Put every man his sword by his side, and go in and out, and slay every man
his brother, and every man his companion, and every man his neighbor. Psalm:
Thy holy temples are defiled, and without thy preventing mercy; our Jerusalem
may be made an heap of stones. Heresy and Schism oppose the clear light of
thy glorious gospel: Ps: 137.7.
and like the children of Edom in the day of Jerusalem, they say even of truth
it self, down with it, down with it, even to the ground. Many of our cities
and towns do now sit solitary, Lam. 1 1. c: 2.11.
that were full of people; and are become as widows. The children and
sucklings swoone in our streets: the widows make their lamentations over the
gasping bodies of their wounded husbands: the young ones cry for bread but some
of them find neither fathers to give it the^ nor mothers to compassionate them.
Is: 33.8
The high ways lie wast; (...) wayfaring man cease: the line of confus^ is
stretched out upon the land, c. 34.11.
and the stones of e^ptinesse. verse. 13
Thorns come up in our palaces; net^ and brambles in our streets; and houses
a^ become habitations of dragons, c. 8.21.
and courts f^ owls. Some wicked ones among us that a^ hungry, Lam. 2.9.
fret themselves, and curse our Kin^ and our god, and look upward. The law i^
noe more; verse. 10
the Prophets also find noe vis^ from thee the Lord. The elders sit upon the
ground, and keep silence: they have cast up d^t upon their heads; they have
girded themselves with sackcloth: the virgins h^ down their heads to the
ground. It is not no^ as it was in the days of old, Luc. 7.25.
when men cloth^ in soft raiment, and they which were gorgeous^ apparelled, and
lived delicately, were in King courts. Is: 1.7.
Our country is desolate; our cities a^ burnt with fire; and our land is
desolate as or^ thrown by strangers. Lam: 5.1.
Remember o Lord, who is come upon thy people: consider and behold on reproach.
verse. 2.
Some of our inheritances are turned to strangers, and our houses to aliants.
Many among us are orphans and fatherless; verse. 3.
and many that were wives are become widows. Many do get their bread with the
peril of their lives, verse. 9. Ps. 142.7. verse. 6. Ps. 94.19.
because of the sword that makes our land a wilderness. O Lord, do thou
consider our complaint, for we are brought very low. Thou, o Lord, art our
hope, and our portion: in the multitude of sorrows which we have in our ^rts,
let thy comforts, o my God, refresh our ^les. Hear o Lord, and have mercy upon
us: Ps: 30.11. Ps: 65.2 Ps: 69.34.
lord be thou our helper. O thou that hear ^rayer, thou that hear the
poor, and despisest ^ot the prisoners, cause thou us to fast, and ^ay, and
read and weep, and repent as thou ^equirest; Is: 58.8
that our light may break forth as the ^orning, and our health may spring
forth speedily: ^o our righteousness shall go forth before us, and ^he glory
of thee our Lord shall be our reward. Mat: 2.18.
Oh how doleful is this voice which is heard in ^ur Rama; this lamentation,
and weeping, and great mourning: Rachel weeping for her children, and will not
be comforted, because they are not! Al-mighty God, everlasting father, Is: 9.6.
prince of ^eace, thou who did comfort thy disciples that in thee they might
have peace, Io. 16.33. Gen: 8.11.
because in the world they should have tribulation: be pleased, I beseech thee,
in mercy to send thy dove with the olive leaf of peace into this our
distressed Kingdom. When thy servant Solomon dedicated his temple to thy holy
worship, he prayed unto thee, and said; 1 King 8.33.
When thy people Israel shall be smitten down before the enemy, because they
have sinned against thee; and shall turn again to thee, and confess thy
name, and pray, verse: 34
and make supplication unto thee: Then hear thou in heaven, and forgive the
sin of thy people Israel; and bring them again to the land which thou gave
to their fathers. Heavenly father w^ are smitten down before our enemies, an^
that because we have sinned against thee but by thy grace we turn again to
the and confess thy name, and pray, and mak^ our supplications to thee in thy
temples^ Hear thou us in heaven, and forgive the sins of thy distressed and
backsliding Israel, and compose our grievous divisions and destructions.
Merciful father, bow down thine ear to me the worst of all this thine
Israel, who in the name of our whole nation do here beseech thee to be
pacified with this broken Kingdom, smitten down with its own bloody and
sharpest sword. Make us all (...) turn again unto thee; and pray, and man our
supplications unto thee more frequent^ and more fervently then formerly we ha^
done; that thou may hear us, and he alt our land. O thou sword of the Lord,
ho^ long will it be ere thou be quiet? Ier: 47.6.
Put up thy sell into thy skabbard; rest, and be still. O God of peace, o
Prince of peace, thou and tho^ only it is who make wars to cease in all the
world, Ps: 46.9
when so thou please: who breakest the bow, and knappest the spear i^
sunder, and burnest the chariots in the fire. O give thou unto us thy wounded
people such rest on every side, 1. King 5.4. c: 8.57.
that we may have neither adversary, nor evil occurrent. Do thou, o Lord
our God, be with us as thou were with our fathers: do not leave us, nor for^ke
us. Make us incline our hearts to thee, verse: 58
^d walk in thy ways, and keep thy com^andements, and thy statutes, and thy
judg^ents which thou commandedst our fathers. Thou, o God, art the God of
peace; thou, Rom: 15.33.
(...) Christ, art the Prince of peace; thou, o hea^enly and blessed Spirit,
art the Dove of ^eace: o thou united Trinity give peace in his our land, that
we may lie down, Lev: 26 6.
and ^one may make us afraid. O let not the ^word any longer go through our
land; but do ^hou walk among us, and be our God; verse: 12
and let ^s be thy people. Give peace in our time, (...) Lord: let the
righteous flourish; Ps: 72.7
yea and ^boundance of peace, so long as the moon endures. Give the King thy
judgments, verse: 1.
(...) God; and thy righteousness unto the Kings Sons. Let the mountains
bring forth peace; verse: 3.
and the little hills righteousness unto thy people. O King of Kings and Lord
of Lords, do thou in mercy direct and continue our Sovereign Lord the King in
the truth and purity of our religion, without inclining either to the right
hand, or to the left. Make him allways a Royal protector, a zealous
professor, and a constant practiser of the same. Bless him, o thou God of
blessings, in his Royal Person, bless him in his Consort, bless him in his
Issue, bless him in his Counselors, and bless him in all his People, even
from Dan to Beersheba. Be propitious, o thou wonderful Counsell^ in an
especial and peculiar manner unto the head and members of our high and most
hon^rable Parliament. Do thou knitt and un^ them, do thou guide and direct
them in a^ their counsels and consultations, that they man unanimously and
jointly conclude upon such who some laws, as may tend to the suppression o^
wickedness and vice, and the maintenance of thy true religion and virtue:
rooting up all atheisne and profaneness, all herefie and superstition, all
schism and faction; that both church and common wealth may be religiously and
firmly knitted and tied together in the unity of the spirit, Ps. 85.11.
by the bond of peace. Let thy truth, o Go^ of truth, flourish out of the
earth; and righteounesse look down from heaven. Do thou Lo^ show thy loving
kindness unto thy people; verse: 12
(...) let our land give it is increase. Let thy peop^ dwell in peaceable
habitations, Isa. 32.18.
and in su^ dwellings, and in quiet resting places. Cau^ thou us to beat our
swords into plo^ shares, c: 2.4.
and our spears into pruning-hookes^ and suffer us not to learn such civil
war^ any more. c: 11.5.
Let righteousness be the gird^ of our loins, and faithfulness the girdle of
our reins. verse. 6.
Let the wolf also dwell with t^ lamb, and the leopard lie down with the ki^
and the calfe, and the young lion, and the fatling together; and let a little
child lead^ them. verse. 8.
Let a sucking child play on the hole of ^he aspe; and a weaned child put his
hand on the ^ockatrice den. Break thou the bow, Hos: 2.18.
and the sword, and the battle out of the earth; and make us to lie down
safely. verse. 19
Betroth us unto thee for ever in righteousness, and in judgment and in loving
kindness, and in mercies. O let us sit down every one under our vines, Mic:
4.4.
and under our fig trees; and let there be none en make us afraid. Glory be to
thee, o God in the highest, Luc: 2.14. Io: 14.27. 1. Sam. 25.6. 2. These. 3.16.
Rom: 5.1. Ephesians. 2.14.
and on earth peace; and good will toward men. Suffer not, o eternal peace,
the hearts of us to be troubled, neither let us be afraid. Peace be both to us,
and peace be to our houses, and peace be to all that we have; and that in and
through him who is the Lord of peace. Justify us all by faith, that we may
have peace with thee our God, through our Lord Jesus Christ: for he is our
peace who has made both, one, and has broken down the middle wall of
partition between us. The peace of thee our God, Phil: 4.7.
which passes all understanding, keep all our hearts and minds through Jesus
Christ our only Lord and Savior. Amen.

The Third prayer; wherein the Lord is humbly implored that our Bloody battles
may be turned into a Spiritual war-fare.
O Eternal and blessed Redeemer, Mat: 10 34. verse. 35
thou who came not to send pea^ on earth, but the sword; and to sets man at
variance against his father and the daughter against her mother, and the
daughter in law against her mother in law; and to cause that a man's foes
should be those of his own household: verse: 36
behold in mercy, I most humbly beseech thee, this Sick and wound^ land,
wherein those words of my Redeem according to the letter are most stricktly
made good. O my God, my only stay and comfort, my only refuge and tower of
defense, be pleased I beseech thee, to turn the letter into the spirit, that
what is verified in the first senst may be made true only in the last. When
Knowledge and Life grew upon Trees, Innocen Adam was neither dull of
apprehension, Cen: 2.9.
no^ fearful of death. But since his Fall we find to our griefs that we
neither understand thy word of truth so fully as we should; nor art we freed
from the howerly fears of death and destruction. But for as much as thou, o my
God, have been a teacher of peace and righteousness unto thy people, and that
the^ (...) Civil and bloody Wars are noe other then (...) judgment sent from
thee upon the heads of (...) for our crimson iniquities: do thou teach is all,
I humbly pray thee, that we ought not to war after the flesh, 2. Cor. 10.3.
though we walk (...) the flesh. Thine Apostle tell's us that the weopons of
our war fare ought not to be carnal, verse. 4.
^ut spiritual, mighty through thee to the pulling down of strong holds:
verse. 5.
casting down imagina^ions, and every high thing that exalts it self
against the knowledge of thee our God; and bringing into captivity every thought
to the obedience of Christ. O Lord our God, do thou make us all as strangers
and pilgrims, 1. Pet. 2.11.
to obstaine from ^leshly lusts which war against the soul; that ^hus we
may war a good war-fare. 1. Tim. 1.18. c. 6.12.
To this purpose teach us, I pray thee to fight the good fight of faith: and
that we may be the better fitted for it, Ephesians. 6.11.
make us to put on the whole armor of thee our God, that we may ^he able to
stand against the wyles of the devil. verse. 14 verse. 15
Do thou enable us to stand, having our loins girt about with truth, and
having on the breast plate of righteousness; and our feet shod with the
preparation of the gospel of peace. Above all things make us take the shield of
faith, verse. 16
wherewith we shall be able to quench all the fiery darts of the wicked;
verse. 17 Romans 13.12. 2. Cor^ 6.7.
and the helmet of salvation and the sword of the spirit, which is the word of
thee our God. Arm us, o father, with the armor of light, and with the armor
of righteousness on the right h^ and on the left: 2. Tim: 2.3.
and then shall we lea^ endure hardness, as good souldi^rs of Jesus Ch^ Make
our Captains such as was the righ^ teous Centurion in the gospel; Mat. 8.9.
Act: 10 1. verse: 2.
or like d^vout Cornelius, a centurion of the Itali^band: even devout men,
fearing thee our Ge^ with all their house holds; giving much alme^ the people;
and praying to thee allways. Tea^ our inferior soldiers to know that it is
the^ duty to do violence to noe man, Luc: 3.14.
neither (...) accuse any falsely, and to be contented with the wages. Romans
13.12.
Let them know and consider that (...) night is far spent, and the day is at
hand: mak^ them therefore to cast off the works of darkness^ and to put on the
armor of light. verse. 13
Cause tho^ us all to walk honestly, as in the day: not rioting and
drunkenness, not in chambering as wantonness, verse. 14
not in strife and envying: (...) putting on thee our Lord Jesus Christ; as
making noe provision for the flesh to fulfill (...) lusts thereof. 2. Tim. 4.7.
So shall we fight a good figh^ and finish our courses, and keep the faith:
assuring our selves with thine holy Apostle that henceforth is laid up for us a
crow^ of righteousness which thou Lord the righteo^ judge shall give us at that
day; verse. 8.
and not (...) us only but unto all them all so which lov^ thine appearing.
Heb: 13 20.
Now thou God of peac^ who broughest again from the dead our Lord Jesus
Christ, that great sheep-heard of the sheep, through the blood of the
everlasting covenant; verse. 2^.
Make us perfect in every good work to do thy will, working in us that which
is well pleasing in thy sight, through jesus Christ, to whom be glory for ever
and ever: Amen.

FINIS.

