ALBERTI OTTONIS FABRI Medici Regii Exer. Suec. PARADOXON De Morbo Gallico,
LIBR. II. OR, A PARADOX, Concerning the Shameful Disease. For a warning to all
against deceitful Cures.

Translated out of the High Dutch, by Johan Kauffman.

This every one may read,
Not, that he to health may tread,
But acknowledge the reason,
Why we mankind
Every where find
Our selves by lust seized on.
London, Printed and to be had at the Corner-house of Addle-hill, over against
Baynards Castle, 1662.

The Preface.
WHereas in curing of the French Pox men have for a long time been basely
abused by Ignorants, Barber-Surgions and Mountebanks, so that many Patients of
high and low degree have commonly run the hazard of their lives; therefore upon
serious consideration I undertook to write something concerning it, and (if
possible) to prevent that abuse. Hereunto this has chiefly moved me, That I
lately cured several such Patients without help of any of those usual means,
and without blood-letting, purging, fluxing, bathing, sweating, yea without
Quicksilver and its properties, without Guaiacum and Sassafras, or such like;
neither were they confined to their Chambers, nor their affairs abroad
interrupted.

And that I might assure them of this kind of curing, never heard before,
namely, That it should not be hurtful to them, I my self have eaten and drunk
that which I administered unto them. For that which shall conduce to the health
of others, how can it be hurtful to the Physician? Else it might justly be said
to be mere deceit. A Physician who is sure of his skill, will not refuse to use
the Medicament himself, which he intends that others should take of him. But he
that does not so, nor will not, it is just we should not have to do with him.
But this is it we testify, and would have taken notice of, that the Physician
whom God has made, may be known thereby. He that takes heed to it, goes safe,
and needs not fear, to hear that, wherewith a Doctor was upbraided, who
ministered a Purge to his Patient, which wrought so violently, that after a
hundred and fifty stools, he purged his soul also out of his body. If such Laws
were made in the Empire. That the Doctor should first drink of his Potions,
surely Doctors would not be so numerous, as now a days they are. I am
persuaded the Roman Empire would yearly save an Army of men for the field,
which otherways are marching to the Churchyard. I often think, what urgent
cause the Romans of old had, that they in that time banished the Doctors out of
the City. I know not what to say to it. I may say as one did, that old Cato had
counseled them so to do, thereby the more to weaken the power of the Enemies
of the Romans. For when they banished the Doctors out of their City and
Country, then were they necessitated to go to the Enemy. And how could they be
more, effectually revenged upon their Enemies? than to send such Butchers
amongst them. For some say, That an Army of ten thou sand men in the Field,
cannot do so much against the Enemy, as a thousand Doctors can do among the
Enemies, or in the Enemies Countries; according to the old saying, A new
Doctor, a new Churchyard. I past once by a place where a Mountebank had set up
his Tent, namely, in Broadstreet, hard by the Cathedral Church; and I heard his
Partner say, The Doctor is hard by, he will be here presently. How now!
(thought I) is it come to this, that the Mountebanks also become Doctors! then
surely the Revolution of the Romans is not far off.

The reason why this Disease is commonly called the French Disease, or
French Pox, is not, because the Italians, Spaniards, or Germans, Dutch and
other Nations, whatever they may be called, are freed from it: Oh no! neither
is it the reason, as if it came originally from the French: No such matter at
all; for it has been elsewhere in the world, namely, in the Indies and China,
before ever it came among the French Nation. But the Name of it arose thus:
When Charles the Eighth, King of France, in the year 1493. waged war with King
Alphonsus in Italy about Naples, this Disease broke out first in the Camp of
the French, and they say, That it came amongst them by some Spaniards, who
brought it first from the Indies, where (they say) it rages Epidemically. But
the Italians have given it that Name, calling it the French Disease, or
French Pox, because it broke out first among the French, and thence it first
was known in Europe. But the French call it after the name of the Country, le
Mal de Naples. And therefore it is no jeer to that Nation, to call it the
French Disease, or French Pox. However to prevent misunderstanding, and to
speak to those which know no better, I have called it, The shameful Disease of
the Privities; as from the notation of the place of the conception of this
contagious Disease, which are the privy parts.

A PARADOX Concerning the Shameful Disease, etc:
The First BOOK.
CHAP. I. Of the Original of the Shameful Disease.
1. WHen the Lord God had created Man and his Wife, he set them in Paradise,
and commanded them, that they upon pain of death should not eat of the fruit of
the Tree in the midst of the Garden; yea, they should not touch it, lest they
dye. But both were naked, Man and his Wife, and were not ashamed.

2. Therefore we see even to this day, that little children are not ashamed,
though they go naked. But as soon as they feel in themselves an inclination to
the forbidden fruit, then they begin also to be ashamed, and will go naked no
longer, but cover themselves with fig leaves.

3. What shall we then say to it? Shall we say, that the children are ashamed
because they are naked? Not so, but therefore, because the unchaste Lust does
stir in them. Thereupon we indeed see in our children, that they by them
actions declare the Scripture unto us, viz. that Adam gave not a right answer
unto the Lord God, when he said, I was afraid, for I am naked: For he had no
cause to be afraid or ashamed because he was naked, more then little children;
but this is the reason, (as has been said) the unchaste Lust was stirring in
him for to have eat of the fruit a foresaid:

4. But now seeing that the unchaste Lust is the cause of his shame and fear;
why then does the Scripture say, they knew that they were naked? Then say we to
it, Do the little children not know that they are naked? Yes indeed, they know
it, but they perceive it not. Therefore Adam also knew that he was naked, but
he perceived it not.

5. Why so? because his help was far off from him? O no; for it stands written,
I will make him a help meet for him; (or as it is in the Hebrew) an help as
before him.

6. Therefore his Wife was before him naked, and without a covering, like as he
also was; and yet he did not perceive, nor she neither, that they were naked;
for they knew no more of shame and fear, than the little children, which we
daily see fitting in the streets naked, without shame and fear.

7. But when it came to pass, that they listened more to the Serpent than to
the Lord God, and their eyes were fixed on the pleasant tree, and its fair
fruits, (and this was not all, but) instantly they stretched forth their hands
and touched them, (ah woe! now (Lust was let loose) they took of it, and did eat;
(herewith it was done) then both their eyes were opened, and with grief they
perceived that they were naked, and twisted, or sewed figleaves together, and
made themselves aprons.

8. Now they perceived that they were naked; what else is that to say, then
what we see daily in our children, when they grow marriageable and begin to be
ashamed?

9. Hence it is apparent, that marriagebleness brings forth shame, but sname
causes fear.

10. And therefore their nakedness was not the cause of their shame and fear,
but the unchaste Lust, which after the eating of the pleasant fruit, was stirred
up in them: For Wine makes drunk; Napellus poisoneth; Cicuta makes mad, and
the fruit of the pleasant tree causes wantoness. Now this Wantonness or
Lasciviousness, being covered with the word Nakedness, is the Spirits modesty.

11. But that the fruit of this Tree has wrought in them the Disease of
unchaste Lust, and has made them drunk with Lasciviousness, and infected them
throughout, the Lord God testifies of this when he says, Who has told thee,
that thou art naked? Have, thou eaten of the Tree whereof I commanded thee,
that thou should not eat?

12. If a Flagon full of sweet Wine stood on my Table, and I should say to my
servant; take heed that thou ^rink not out of the Flagon that ^andeth on the
Table; for if thou ^rinkest out of it, it will be ill with ^hee. But he
coveting after it, should ^rink a good draught out of it, insomuch that he
reeled. And when I came home again, should call, Boy, where art thou? And the
Boy should come crawling along on his hands and feet, and could scarcely speak.
And I should say to him, What ailest thou? And he should answer me, and say, Oh
Maa-ster, I, I, I ca-ca-can not ^tand: And I should say to him, Why can thou
not stand? Thon naughty Boy, have thou drunk out of the Flagon, which I hid
thee, that thou should not drink out of it?

13. But what would we say of it? We ^nfer this, that the sweet Wine in the
Flagon, which made him drunk, caused him to reel and stutter so, that he crawls
on his hands and feet, and can scarcely speak.

14. Therefore if Adam had not caten of the Tree, he had not been made partaker
of the Tree's property in the unchaste Lust. And if he had not been partaker of
the unchaste Lust, then he would not have perceived his nakedness, but would
have continued always as the unmarriageable children, without lasciviousness,
and consequently without shame and fear: For to go naked, is no sin, because
Adam and his Wife was by God himself not only created naked, but we all after
him come naked into this Would, even unto this day. Therefore to be naked, and
to go naked, is no sin nor abomination in the eyes of God, and it was needless
for that cause, to be covered with Fig Leaves. But the abomination in the eyes
of God is unchastity, whereby the body created of God naked and pure, is
defiled. Here it is, and this is it which we fain would cover* for we are
ashamed, and are afraid* and this is the reason why we do it in private, in
dark corners, avoiding the light, and do it by night, whether it be done
honestly or dishonestly, all will not keep off the shame.

15. Come on now ye Atheists, who say, that Lust is no more sin, than eating or
drinking, or evacuating and voiding the excrement, because the one is natural
as well as the other. Answer me, and ye shall be heard; open your mouth, that we
may perceive, and answer for your selves; then will we tell you, whether you be
in the right: Why are ye ashamed to go naked now, more than when ye were
little, and of tender years? why do not you go uncovered in your privities
before all people, as the little children do? Why are ye ashamed to do your
need openly before all people, as well as ye eat and drink, and let others look
on, and are not shie of it? But ye creep into bawdy corners, as Zimri and
Cosbi, and hide your selves from the faces of men, as Adam and Eve from the
face of the Lord, among the Trees in the Garden? Answer for your selves, and
defend your cause; let us hear: But there is none that can speak for you;
neither can a rational man hear a word come from you. If I look into your
bosom, there is mere lasciviousness; and if I search among you for a pure
heart, there is none. But if there be one with a pure heart, he will not side
with you. And it is in vain to ask you questions, because ye cannot answer me.
Lo ye are full of heat unto lasciviousness, and listen after things which
provoke unto it, and you are tickled with it.

16. Is it not so, that your own soul within you, whose immortality is among
you generally denied, blames you before all, and checketh you unto blushing
and shame? Because she in you, as well as in us, is always remembering her pure
and chaste immortal flesh, which she had before the eating of the fair fruit of
the pleasant Tree. And this shame ye can never shake off, though you call on
all your Atheistical and ungodly Whimsies to help you, yet you can be as little
without shame, as ye can abstain from carnal Lust. Take notice, and be
instructed ye simple ones.

17. Now whereas the Disease of unchaste Lust is come into the world, that is,
into mankind or humanegenerations, through the eating of the fruit of the
forbidden Tree, it is clear and manifest, that man is created of God pure and
chaste, without feeling of any carnal lust-desire in himself and in his flesh;
and verily we must be of a pure heart, if so be that (as it is written) we
intend to see the face of God: And as the Scripture testisieth in another
place, where it is said, Except ye be converted, and become as, and like to
little children, ye shall not enter into the Kingdom of heaven?

18. And whereas now from the first man to us, through so many innumerable
generations, this unchast-Lust-disease is continually propagated, the same at
the present has in such a manner penetrated, tinctured and thoroughly leavened
our flesh and blood, that even, as they say, the Philosophers stone transmutes
Mercury into Gold, so that it does not differ in the least from other Gold; so
now also our quondam chaste and immortal flesh and blood, through the tincture
of this unchaste Lust is changed and altered into an unchaste now-mortal flesh
and blood, which now differs not at all from the common mortal, created flesh
and blood of the beasts, as Cows, Oxen and the like, in all its motions and
being, especially in the working of the unchaste Lust-disease, and its efficacy.

19. And this is the root from whence arises that Disease, which we speak of.

CHAP. II. From whence the shameful Disease has its offspring.
1. NOw as we have heard the unchaste Lust and Wantonness is so deep sunk into
man's nature, and is firmly united with flesh and blood, as much as ever any
Gold ^incture can be united with Mercury: and this makes out of a corruptible
volatile Mercury, a fixed Gold, permanent in the fire; even so the Unchast-Lust
has made an impure and corruptible body out of that, which was pure and
incorruptible; so we intend from hence to search, how out ^ut of it is
engendered the shamesul Disease; and yet so to speak of it, that he, who is
addicted to unchaste Li^^ and Conversation, may not so easi^ apprehend or
understand us, lest he (as it is written) put forth his hand, a^ and also take
of the Tree of Life, and ea^ live for ever; namely, in his impure fleshly-lust
and concupiscence, which were an abomination above all abominations, and
without compare before the face of the Lord, whom no unclean person shall see.

2. When a young man is inflamed in the heat of his flesh, and forbear and will
not yield to the instinct o^ provocation of his flesh, it is a precious and
acceptable Sacrifice before God: For they are those (as it is written) which
are not defiled with women for they are Virgins, and follow after the Lamb
whithersoever he goes.

3. But I saw a wild Buck leaping from one Hill to another, till he at last
fell into a deep pit full of mire and stink, from thence he could not escape
without boiles, nastiness and wounds. Now when he looked about him for a good
path, he was stung, be^re he was aware of it, by a very venomous Adder. This
poison disper^ed it self all over the body, and penetrated to the bones and
marrow. (...) Summer if a puddle stand long in place, it grows stinking, and he
that ^rinketh of it, will find himself ill after it. And what avails it, when
^essels, Dishes and the like, are kept ^ure and clean outwardly, and with^^ are
full of nastiness and dead men's ^ones? It is good fishing in muddy ^aters, but
the fish favor of the ^ud: And when Wine is mingled with water, can it again
be separated?

4. All other Diseases have one only Principle, viz. the Cure, which ^ent forth
over the Earth, whose ^uit and growth we must partake of, (...) we will live;
and thus we drink in the Curse like water, against which we are b^d to pray,
viz. Bless these thy gifts O heavenly Father; for the blessing keeps off the
curse, but the shameful Disease arises from the fountain of the Unchast-lust
wherewith Adam was already overcome, and we part take of in him even before the
earth was accursed.

5. So we see now, that the Curse is one thing, and the Unchast-lust another.
The Curse is fallen on the Earth (but not on man) contrary to Nature; but the
Unchast-lust is fallen in Man, and has united its self to Nature: So every
Difease also generated of the Curse, is easier and sooner cured, than that
which springs up from the Unchast-lust, because the other has its Principle
from the Curse against Nature; but this springs forth out of man himself from
the principle of Concupiscence with Nature.

6. Other Sins, which man commits, are without the body, as namely, Idolatry,
Unrighteousness, Swearing, Blaspheming, Disobedience, Murder, Manslaughter,
Thieving, false-witness, and the like, as it is written, All sins, which man
commits, are without the body; such are not hereditary to Children, viz. If the
Father has been an Idolater, unrighteous, covetous, a Drunkard, and the like,
it follows not that the Son must needs tread in his Fathers steps. But this,
viz. Lust, is inherited ever since the beginning of the transgression of Adam,
by all his posterity, from children to childrens children, uncessantly,
unavoidably, neither grief nor penitence can help against, nor deliver from it.
Every child born of man, must follow his fathers footsteps and bear the
Lustdisease about him as long as he lives. Therefore take heed of that Disease
which is engendered thence, and consider of it.

7. For the Curse is of God incorporated into the Earth, yet not essentially,
as if its Being were changed into somewhat else, but its operation was only
this, as is written, That the Earth should henceforth afford her strength and
virtue no more, but bear thorns andthistles.

8. But now against this Curse the Blessing was opposed, whereby the thistles
and thorns, which prick and torment us, may be rooted out again. And thus the
blessing abundantly over-ballanceth the Curse, so that the thistles and thorns,
and the Diseases which the Curse ingendereth in us through the fruits of the
Earth, cannot, rightly possess the point and center of life.

9. But the Unchast-lust was of man, incorporated into man, and that
essentially, insomuch, that thereby the immortal being of man was changed into
a mortal, stinking flesh and blood, of the which afterward the Son of God our
Savior Jesus testifies, that it avails nothing unto eternal life, as that
which cannot inherit the Kingdom of heaven.

10. To this end and purpose the Regeneration was given to this flesh and blood
spoiled by concupiscence, and unfit for the Kingdom of God, through which new
birth man is changed and fitted for the Kingdom of God, to see God. And
therefore the Regeneration of the corrupted unchaste flesh and blood, which is
received through faith, is the only means to be saved.

11. Seeing then that the Curse and the Concupiscence or Unchast-Lust are thus
far distinguished, that the one does not possess man himself, but only the
earth, but so that it does not change it, neither does it reign over the Center
of man's life with its thistles and thorns; but the other does not possess the
earth, but man himself, and that not only rightfully, but also has changed
him, inso much, that he with all his Soul, and with all his strength in the
Lust-act is plunged deep into the Lust-disease, and falls headlong into it:
What shall we infer from hence? this we will say, that the Disease which
existeth from thence, namely the shameful Disease, possesses not only the
point and center of life rightfully, but it dallies with the life it self in
the principle of Concupiscence, and stands in such an union that it seems
impossible, to separate the same from it again, unless it be by an Analogisme
of Regeneration: of this the Proverb is; Non cuivis medico contingit adire
Corinthum.

12. And therefore because the shameful disease stands in union with the life
in its off Spring, namely of the fleshly pleasant Concupiscence, such a disease
does not presently cast the patient on the bed of sickness as other diseases do,
which arise from the Curse, and for that cause cannot attain unto a constant
union with the life; but he may go and stand, eat and drink, and converse with
other folk; in the mean while, such a disease dallies with the life, and
surprizeth the same by virtue of the union of its offspring with the lustful
greedy flesh, and corrodeth and gnaweth it, til at last it sinketh along into
such putrefaction, that from henceforth no body can abide by, or be about him,
by reason of the putrid, abominable and odious stink, upon which commonly death
ensues.

CHAP. III. Of the Sophistical Cure of the Shameful Disease.
BEhold, such evil has brought upon Mankind, not only the curse of God upon
the earth, but also the pleasant fruit of the Tree in the midst of the Garden,
the which then had a property, to beget or to stir up in him, that did eat of
it, a concupiscence permanent and successive by generation, afterward become
brutish unto all posterity in those, which are born of the blood and of the
will of man, according to Scripture; from which concupiscence this Disease and
Sickness that we speak of, has its descent and original.

2. And now as there is greater difficulty, to separate the carnal
Concupiscence or Lustful-disease from the blood, flesh and will of man, tha^
the curse from, the Earth; so much harder is also the Cure of the Shameful
Disease, than other Diseases which come from the Curse.

3. So that the cure and healing of this Disease is the chiefest and hardest of
all others; therefore I marvel that those which profess themselves to be
Physicians, commit such to Barbers and Surgeous, whose limits, according to the
byword, should be, Ne Suitor ultra Crepidam, The Shoemaker should not go beyond
his Last.

4. But I think, they therefore do it, because either they cannot endure the
noisome stink of those which are gone too far in it, or they are afraid that
they may be infected thereby; or else they think, they are too good to take in
hand such base and odious Diseases. But that they should not know, how to cure
it, I neither dispute now, nor accuse any; their own Writings testify
concerning it.

5. For, they say, if Guajacum and Sassafras will not help, then Mercury must
be applied; and yet there is none of them that can with reason, or according to
the Principle of Physic, affirm or maintain the Cure by Mercury; but here
they, with Barber-Surgeons, dance after the same Pipe as Empyricks, and can
find no ground or bottom, how carefully soever they sound both here and there
with their Plummet.

6. Neither do they deny, that this way of curing the Shameful Disease by
Mercury, came originally from Barber-Surgeons, which is as much as to say, that
it is attempted or tried empyrick-like, without-ground and reason of the Art of
Physic; and yet afterward practiced by the literate Physicians; are not they
then all Empyricks?

7. But that they might not be taken for such, they have carefully endeavored
to number Mercury amongst the four Qualities, to the end that they from thence
might further proceed and go on with it rationally, according to the method of
Physic, and so shake off the Name of Empyricks.

8. Now whereas hitherto they could not agree about it, whether its temperament
be cold or hot, yet they remain the same, and empyrick-like, undertake to cure
with Mercury.

9. For that cause many renowned Physicians have abstained or left off such
curing by Mercury, and write of the many and great evils which from thence
befall the life of man.

10 Huttenius writes, he found by experience, that in his time those which made
use of such a cure, not one of a hundred escaped, they always, first or last,
had relapses.

11. Aquilianus says, that the Mercurial Cure is indeed a sophistical or false
Cure, and as many as he knew, they always relapsed.

12. Torellus calls it a very dangerous Cure, full of deadly dangers; and for
that reason men should shun it as cautiously as the Plague.

13. Montanus writes, that perchance Mercury may keep back this Disease for a
time, yet never takes it away radically, but it comes on again impetuously,
like a stopped stream, and then that Patient is in a condition ten times worse
than he was before.

14. Minadous says, that he never saw one, who was fundamentally cured by
Mercury, but they always grew worse afterward, and endured far worse
symptoms, than ever before often wishing, that they had never made use of it.

15. Fracastorius, F^rnelius, Faventinus, Fallopius, Tomitanus and Sylvaticus
say, that the Cure by Mercury is very dangerous, a deceitful Cure, yea, an
accursed Cure. Helmont also speaks in plain terms, that it is a base Cure, when
he writes at Mercury, as long as it can be revived, by any preparation
whatsoever, it is not a remedy to be used by an honest man.

15. What then? What shall we say of those which use Mercury? Shall we say,
they are base fellows? Far be it. Let it rather be so, that they are honest
men, which as it is written) do not know what they do. But if so be that they
know not what they do, and yet it is their will and purpose to make whole, then
they do it from a good intention, and may not be blamed, because the Law says,
The will and the purpose makes a distinction in Criminal things.

17. Though their good will and intention keeps up their honesty, but what is
the Patient the better for it? Mercurius Vitae and Praecipitat indeed does
purge him, but not without danger; it causes vomits, but Nature suffers wrong
by it; the vital spirits are exhausted, strength decays; the Patient looks
like death; the mouth breaks out ugly, within it swells; his swallow is
stopped; a Gangreen draws nigh, and Death stands at the door.

18. But they say, We are become wiser now, we make an unguent out of it,
therewith we anoint the Patient here and there, we put him in a warm Chamber,
wrap him up in a sheet, and lay him in a good bed; this we do once or twice
every day, till salivation ensues, and he begin to vomit. But know ye nothing?
Have ye not found by experience, that the Apoplexy, Lameness and Palsy
usually ensue upon it? The mouth grows sore and raw, the tongue is enflamed,
teeth loose, and not only much stinking poisonous stuff is cast up at the
mouth, but blood is also voided with the excrements. All which signifies, that
ye have done great violence to Nature and I wonder, how any Patient can endure
it.

19. And although this Unguent be turned into a Plaster, that it should not
fall so tedious to the Patient, and that he may go abroad, and follow his
business, yet all comes to one.

20. The Suffumigation is the last Plague, wherewith they seal up this Cure, if
they cannot help by other means: They make a close Chamber very hot, like to a
Hot-House, wherein they set up a small Tent, on which stands written,
Carnificinaseu Tortura, the Hang-man's room for tormenting: In the midst of it
there stands a stool or chair, and a close Coal pan full of glowing Coals next
to it. Then there is prepared for the Patient some comfortable food, as a
couple of new-laid Eggs and a Caudle, and a draught of good Wine mixed with
Conserve of Roses, and other Aromatical Confections. Here the Patient must
first drink and be refreshed, before he is brought to the Slaughterhouse or
place of Executions then he comes along stark naked without a shirt, and sits
on the stool which is closed round about, and behind the Tent stands the
Barbers-man, who flings of the prepared Mercury one piece after another on the
glowing Coals.

21. O ye Barber Surgeons and the like, ask (I pray) the Gold smiths, let them
tell you, and the Myners will inform you, and the Chemists know by experience,
that the fume of Mercury is a deadly poison.

22. Fernelius says, that he knew a Goldsmith, who merely by the fume of
Mercury fell deaf and dumb, and into a Lethargy.

23. Forestus writes, that it be fell a Goldsmiths Journey man, who being about
the gilding of a silver Cup, the fume of Mercury so wrought upon him, that a
shaking and trembling held him continually, and the hairs of his head were
shed, and he looked as pale as death.

24. Oethus relates, that a young Gentleman being troubled with Crab-Lice on
his privy parts, and to rid them away, he anointed the place with a Mercurial
Salve, whereby he was so much spoiled, that he became quite unable unto
procreation.

25. How much more is such a thing to be feared, if a Patient be for a whole
hour, twice in a day, yea for a whole Week fumed therewith, that he often falls
into a swounding Fit, and so must be pulled out and refresht'; but if he dies,
then they say, that he died of the French disease, and no man enquireth
further; but if it succeeds well, then he foameth and casts up every day a
matter of ten pounds of stinking, poisonous stuff, till he spews up at last his
soul also. For how is it possible that a man, who scarce weighs a hundred and
fifty pound weight, could hold out so for ten days together, and live; None
considers it from whence such filthy spittle comes, whether it come not through
the Mercurial quality, and its poisonous ferment in its corrosive, which in the
thence conceived fermentation of man's blood, breaks out in such a stinking Flux
of corrupt matter, runs on, and cease not as long as there is a drop of blood
in that man's body. Oh misery and great ignorance, yea rashness!

26. But after all this, they have invented a costly Mercurial Water, which at
last shall do the Work, yea do the Work so, that nothing shall remain. They
take sublimed Mercury, and let it boil in a great quantity of Fountain Water,
so that its astringent and acrimonious poisonous taste be scarce perceived. But
I assure and warn every body, that whoever drinks of this Water, it will be a
Water of death unto him, which will not cease to stir up strange symptoms one
after another, such as he never felt before, piercing thorough bones and
marrow, and will not suffer him to rest neither day nor night, till he yields
up his soul.

27. Thus is it found daily by experience, that many which fall into the hands
of Barber-surgeons, fare ill, fall to ruin, and die; or are not restored to
health, to the great prejudice and shortning of their lives, to the weakening
unto death of the remaining strength of their vitals, by their indiscreetly,
groundlesly, usurped Mercurials, Purgings and Salivations, Bathing, Sweating,
letting of Blood, and the like; all which is done out of a rash dumb blindness.
And because they are not curbed in it, they go on, grow proud, and are
conceited they have great knowledge of things, insomuch that now-a days there
is not a Barber-surgeons Apprentice, who (as they boast) should not know to
cure the French Disease.

28. But tell me, good people, what is Mercury or Quicksilver? What is
Mercurius Praecipitatus, or dulcis? What are the Flowers of Mercury, Aurum
Vitae, Aquila, and whatsoever they may call it? Do ye know it? Who told it you?
Where have ye read it? Come hither and instruct us, that we also may know it:
Teach us, we will not be ashamed to learn; we will attentively hearken to, and
observe what ye say. But lo, ye stand and gape for understanding, as a blind
man for the daylight. For you see, and expermentally find, that your Mercury
is an unchangeable water, though ye put all kind of Masks upon him; and your
Mercurial water, together with your Praecipitate, and Mercurius dulcis; what is
it else, but a concealed poisonous Corrosive? For why is the Sublima^e and
Arsenic a poison, unless it be by reason of the Corrosive, which has so
corroded it, and turned it to a white Mass? Separate the Corrosive from
Arsenic, then shall you see that the remainder is a Metal, and from the
Sublimate, then have thou a running Quicksilver, one pound of which you may
safely drink without hurt or good, but not when it was yet united with its
Corrosive, and was called Mercurius Sublimatus, some grains whereof are enough,
to bereave thee of thy life.

29. Hence we see, that Mercury without the Corrosive does not work; for as it
is poured in to the throat, so it runs out again below. Thus it happened to an
Apothecarie's Journey man, who coming home at night quite tippl'd, went into the
shop to take (as he used) a dram or two of Aqna Vitae, before his going to bed;
and so in the dark groaping after the bottle, his sellow-servant had removed
the bottle, and set in the place of it a bottle of Quicksilver; out of it he
took his draught, and went to bed; when he awakened in the morning, he found in
the bed that, which he drank last over n ght, gathered it together, and put it
again into the bottle for another draught.

30. But if they will have the Quicksilver to work, either for one way or
other, then it must be dissolved in Aqua fortis, or the like Corrosive, and be
reduced into subtle Powder, whereby the subtilest and sharpest part of the
Corrosive in the evaporating, joins it self to the Mercury, and represents it
to the eyes under the mask of a red or white Mass, either with, or without
taste.

31. But as soon as the Corrosive, which holds it thus bound, gets away again,
then is it (as before) a running Quicksilver: Therefore we have already told
you, that Mercury is an unchangeable water, but its Corrosive is to man's body
and health a dangerous poison, whether it show its effect shortly, or long
after, which sometimes causes a trembling and shaking of the members as long
as the party lives, as ye have heard already.

22. Seeing then that the Corrosive in sublimed Mercury is by all held for a
deadly poison, why then art thou, Barber-surgeon, so bold to poison any Patient
with Mercurius Dulcis? Know thou not, yea thou should know it; and see
thou not that the falsely up-cried Mercurius dulcis, is no other than sublimed
Mercury, which Sublimate thou and all others acknowledge to be poison? Or do
thou think that it is enough that ye put crude Mercury to the Sublimate? though
the poisonous Acrimony of the Corrosive in the Sublimate, penetrates into the
crude Mercury, and so the whole Mass becomes insipid, but ^s not sweet, as
thou call it; is therefore the poisonous Corrosive taken from it? Indeed it
is disguised and covered with a Mask, wherewith thou deceivest thy Patient, and
bereavest him of his life, according to thine own confession; for the reason
that Metcu^ius dulcis, whether it be sharpish or sweet, that is, without taste,
turns not again unto Quicksilver, is, because the Corrosive of the Sublimate
binds him.

33. Go therefore, and learn not to dissolve, but to coagulate Mercury into a
brittle Mass, so that it may be ground and beaten, and not be able to turn
again into Quicksilver, though the Corrosive be nearly and cleanly separated
from it; and then boast that thou havest a Mercurius Praecipitaetus and dulcis,
wherewith thou can cure the French Pox. But surely this will be hid from thine
eyes, and Mercury will be to thee an unchangeable Water.

34. In the mean while take notice ye Patients, and be not deceived, it
concerns you; for they do not care, whether you live or dye. And seeing it is a
Disease, of which you are ashamed, and would hide, therefore they are the more
bold, to torment you with their Corrosive Mercury, whether you live or die.

35. And that ye may rightly understand me, I will speak in plain terms We call
Corrosive a Water like an Aquafort, or the like, which eats all in pieces, and
turns it to a slime, be it Steel, Cloth, Iror, Linen, Quicksilver, Pearls,
Corals, Stones, or any thing else. The Vulgar sort of Chemists call this, a
Dissolving, and I call it a corroding, eating in pieces and turning to slime or
dust. Now when the Corrosive turns to slime the said things, it is sharpest
parts by degrees fasten on the atoms or particles that it corrodes, and unites
or binds it self therewith firmly, that although afterward the remaining weak
Corrosive Water be evaporated with a strong fire, yet that same Corrosive power
or quality will not leave the corroded Iron or Mercury, and bestows on it an a
crimonious and sad bitter taste, which the ignorant seek to conceal by adding of
fresh Mercury; and this shall be then your Medicament.

36. Be it therefore known unto you, that as long as out of the stomach there
does not come into your body any sour Acrimonie, or Corrosive aciditie, you
are in health; but as soon as there is a Corrosive admitted, flesh and blood
abhors such a strange guest, and begins to tremble at it, and in case it cannot
shake it off, nor without help cannot expel it, then this Corrofive proceeds
according to the nature of its poisonous property, and causes a putrefaction
and rottenness in the flesh and blood; which from day to day, and from year to
year unperceivably increases so much, til there be no more help for it. But
the like corrosive arises also out of the carnal concupiscence, or
Lust-disease, from which in the privy part arises a stinking corrosive quality,
which by degrees slips into the blood and flesh, where the Lust-disease keeps
its residence, and becomes one with it, propter Symbolum, from thence is
ushered in a radical putrefaction of the flesh and blood in man, which commonly
is called the French-disease.

37. Now observe concerning the Corrosive of sublimed Mercury, how it
penetrates into the crude Mercury added to it, and so disperseth it self, that
the former austere and bitter taste of the sublimate is altogether
unperceivable on the tongue; but the hurtful Corrosive is not therefore
removed, but hides his poisonous quality in the added fresh Mercury, by way of
extension. Now when ye take inwardly such insipide sublimate, in case the
stomach is strong enough, then it keeps the Corrosive in awe, or vomits it up,
and suffers it not to have its will. And this is the reason that sometimes one
escapes out of such a dangerous Cure, and gets away, whether he be sound or no.

38. And in case he thinks that he is again in health, then let him know, that
even as the Corrosive of the Sublimate is drawn into the Crude Mercury, which
is added, and is become insipid, and for that reason is thenceforth called
Mercurius dulcis; soalso may the Corrosive of the shameful Disease drawn into
the Mercurius dulcis, and not to be perceived; but the gnawing poison and
corrosive of the French Pox is not therefore taken away, though its poisonous
putrefying quality be for a time allayed by the addition of Mercurius dulcis;
and this appears, because the same putrefying quality again manifests it self
by little and little, in all manner of new symptoms, the quality of the Mercury
being dispersed and expired, then the gnawing poison of the French Disease gets
loose again, and begins to rage as formerly; yea sometimes, when Nature is too
weak, to drive out wholly the Mercurius dulcis, it stirs up greater and more
dangerous symptoms than there were before; whereby the Patient learns to know
how he was deceived by a palliating cure.

CHAP. IV. Of the right way of curing the Shameful Disease.
Htherto have we proved, that the Shameful Disease has its original not from
the Curse of the earth, as other diseases, but from a lustful Corrosive, and
this Corrosive from the Concupiscence of the flesh, or last disease, and the
fleshes concupiscence from the pleasant fruit of the Paradisical Tree, even
before the curse went out over the earth; we have also made known, what kind of
remedies they are, wherewith Barber-surgeons, Hot housekeepers and
Mountebanks, and such like, have hitherto gone to work with palliative Cures;
and there remains something to be spoken concerning the right and sundamental
Cure.

2. And if therefore the immediate cause of the shameful Disease is not indeed
the concupiscence of the or Lust-disease, which cannot possibly be rooted out
without the Regeneration of the corrupted body in death, but the from thence
arisen Corrosive, which consequently causes such a putrefaction of the flesh,
it is easy to understand, that if the lustful Corrosive be cured or taken
away, then the effect also is taken away; and that then also the from thence
derived putrefaction must cease, and may be removed by the nature of the
Archeish powers of man, without any further help.

3. Now the abolishing of the lustful Corrosive consists in its being
mortified: And this is the cure of the French disease.

4. And that such mortifying cannot be effected with Mercury and its
Corrosives, we have already proved. Neither will Guajacum, Sarsaparilla de
Guajaquil, Sassafras, Smilax, China, and Saponaria, or the like, promise us any
help for it: Purging, Bathing, or Houses, Sweating, or letting of Blood, weaken
the body no less than the Venus it self, according to the old Proverb: Corpora
debilitant, Balnea, Vi^a, Venus.

5. How now? Do we reject the usual means of Physic? What else is there
besides Purging, Bathing, Sweating and Blood-letting, from which diseases fly,
as the Devils fly from Frankincense? But we oppose the shameful disease by
mortifying of its venereal Corrosive; and we need none of the
Hot-house-keepers, we regard not purging, sweating, nor keeping within Chamber,
though it were in the midst of Winter, and we rest content, that we destroy and
kill the Corrosive of the disease, that is, that we destroy its foundation,
though the patient do not come all the Winter long into a warm Chamber.

6. When a City is besieged, whereby the means for life, viz. Victuals, Wood,
Corn and the like, are kept out, and I would help them by sending Provision
through the Enemies Camp, would not all men call me a fool? Because I should
thereby do more hurt than advantage to the City, because through my relief the
Enemy would be strengthened? So do all those, that will cure a patient of the
shameful Disease by administering of such means, through which the lustful
Corrosive, which besieged man's health, is rather strengthened.

7. But what is then to be done? namely thus, destroy, or drive away the enemy
from the City, or bring such a relief and succor into it, that they themselves
may beat him; that is, the Lustful Corrosive, as the enemy, must be destroyed,
then the siege will cease.

8. Are there other Ceremonies needful? For I hold it to be need less to open
the Gates for them, that they might go in and out; nor to bring meat and bread
to them, they themselves will fetch it; or to build again their battered
houses, which themselves know better, than a stranger. For Nature, when once
she is released or delivered of the siege, knows best, how to repair her self
without any further help.

9. Now if ye ask, What is then the mortification of the Lustful Corrosive? how
is it done? I will ask you one word also, answer me, then will I tell you, what
it is, and how it is ordered: Are ye made Doctors of God, or of men? Answer me.
But ye think with your selves, we say, We are made Doctors of God; then will he
say, Why do ye not know this thing? But if we say, Men have made us Doctors for
money and good words, then men will make no more use of us; for they know that
it is written, Deus creavit Medicum, God has made the Physician. And they
answer and say: What is that to thee? Well then, neither will I tell you, how
this lustful poison is mortified, nor how it is to be managed.

10. But to you that have need of it, which sigh after it, and seek for help
with grief and repentance; I will tell to you, to you will I tell it, that you
may have cause to rejoice, in the second part of this book.

11. Therefore observe what I say, take notice of what I write, confider it,
and search into it, then ye may be helped. For when I was young, a strange
thing befell me, and my senses were ravished with it. I walked toward the East,
through a thick forest, it was duskish and dark, round about me, and I went
astray. Then I espied a strong Castle on a high Mountain in the midst of the
forest, which afar off was like unto a fair Crystal, of one piece: I thought
to make have unto it, to view it, but could find no way, which might bring me
thither: For what way soever I turned, every where it was full of bushes and
thorns, there was no passing through. Then one took me by the hand, but I saw
him not; and he said to me. Follow me, and open thine eyes: And so we went
along with one another. Then I espied a round beam said over a narrow, quick
and deep stream, no leaning on either side. I came to it, and saw a blind man
led with a string by a Dog, setting his foot on the round beam to pass over.
And when I beheld it, I thought what will come of him; by and by I saw another
blind man coming from the other side, led by a dog, and they met on the midst
of the beam. Now when the two Dogs, which led them, thrust against one another,
and neither of them would give way, they began to snarl, and fought;
immediately they fell off from the beam, and pulled after them the two blind
men; they plunged into the water, and were carried away by the swiftness of the
stream, so I lost them out of my sight. And he that led me by the hand, said to
me, So it is, when the blind lead the blind, both fall into perdition. But be
thou careful, and shake not, we will get over safe enough. Whilst he was
setting his foot on the beam, I pulled back my hand, but he pulled me after,
and held me fast. And when we were on the midst of the beam, I seeing the
stream pass so swiftly underneath, the Earth run round with me, and was ready
to fall off. Then my eyes opened, and I perceived, that he which led me by the
hand, had two great wings, wherewith he kept us equally balanced, and could
not slide off. But instantly we were over. And it was with me as with one that
awakened out of a deep sleep, and was heartily glad, that it was not so as he
had dreamed. And I said to my Companion, Whither do we now go further? But
there was no reply; I expected an answer, but all was silent: Then I pulled my
hand, and no body held it. I thought, was I then in a dream? And I looked back
on the swift stream, and said to my self, This, this is the beam I passed over,
and this is the stream I was so shie off; I am awake, and not in a dream, Where
is then my Companion? There was no answer, all silence. Then went I straight
forward, and came directly to the Castle, which I had seen on the other side of
the water. I stood and admired at its great luster, and at the fair Fabric: I
looked after the Gate, and went round about, but could not find it. Then I grew
sad, and sat under a Tree, and still cast up my eyes to the fair Castle, till
I unawares fell into a sleep. And me thought, I saw an old man look out of a
Window, which beckned to me with his finger; Larose and came nearer: Then he
let down a Rope, which I laid hold on, and he drew me up in a moment: Then I
awakened, and said, This was a dream. I arose and would go; and behold I stood
in the midst of the Castle, in the Court of it. For as I saw now, the Castle
was built round, and in the midst thereof there was a fair Court, in its center
or middle, point there stood a deep Well, costly adorned with all manner of
fair figures and statues.

In the middle of the Well there stood the image of the Sun, like unto bright
glittering Gold, when its melted; but in the midst it was bloodred, and therein
it stood. Persectio, and a cipher by it.

Beneath about the edge of the Well there stood the Statue of Mercury, (such
was the inscription) painted of a glittering red, and had a yellow Cane in his
hand; On it stood written with silver Letters: Electrum immaturum; and on the
other side, Agens Naturae; and above: Drachmae duae,

Next to this stood the Statue of Saturn, painted black, and had in his hand a
gray glittering ball, on which stood: Coagulatio secunda, and underneath: jv.
and xij.

Next followed Jupiter, painted pale yellow, and had in his hand a flaming
Cross, on which stood written: Coeteris venenum; and in the midst stood: xij
and iv.

Then came Mars painted of a liver-colour, and had a bow in his hand, bent; and
anarrow laid upon it, with this Superscription: Indigus indigentibus subsidio,
and beneath stood: Nam xiv and ij.

Venus also was present, painted green, fair in the highest degree, and covered
her privy part with her hand, over which stood written: Noli me tangere, and on
the hand: Cave, ^e Caves, and beneath viij and viij.

Luua smiled, was painted greenblew, and with her right arm she reached after
the Sun, on which stood written: Nondum perfecta. Nam II and XIV.

Now when I had viewed these Statutes, I thought, how am I thus come among the
Heathen Gods, it seems as if I were in a Heathen Kings House! Yet I set down
their inscriptions in my Table Book, and stepped nearer unto it, and would also
my self look into the Well: but as soon as I leaned over it, and looked into it,
an invisible sum smote my face, that upon a sudden I lost both sight and
hearing. I suddenly stepped back again, and stood long before I could fetch
breath: my eyes run over, and I was tickled in my nostrils. When I came to my
self again, me thought I had seen flames of fire beneath in the Well, and had a
good mind to look in again, that I might learn the very truth of it; I thought,
How shall I go about it? I will keep in my breath, and use Spectacles to save my
eyes. Being thus cautiously armed, I stepped thither again, and would look into
it; but behold, there arose a fume out of the depth of the Well, which filled
all the Castle-Court, in manner of a stinking mist, insomuch that I could not
see at all; only above on the brim about the Well, it stood written: FONS
IGNIS SINE QUO NON. But the mist which came up out of the Well, was so great,
thick and strong, that I was forced to be gone: I run up and down in the Castle
from door to door, and knocked, to see whether one or other would open to let me
in, for I was almost choked. Then one door opened, when I run by, and I was
pulled in suddenly, and presently it was locked again; it was a black fellow in
Linen breeches, without a doublet, he sweated all his face over, and he said
to me, Sit down, I drink to thee; for he had a pot of been in his hand: I said,
Much good may it do you. He said, but how come thou hither? Who has let thee
in? I answered and said, I do not know it my self; I wish I were out again; He
answered and said, Pray do not grieve because the fume has nipped thee a
little; do thou not see how I look? And I said, Are ye a coal-burner? He
answered me and said: Yes, thou have hit it, I am a Coal-burner; for in my time
I have consumed well a hundred Load of Coals, and smiled. I thought indeed
(said I) that ye could not look so like a Smith for nothing. But what kind of
mad Well is that which ye have in the Court? He answered me and said, The Well
is not mad, but it is a Well of Life unto those, which stand by it; and he that
draws out of it, and drinks, he is healed thereby, though he had the French
disease. But I answered to him, and said, Yea a Well of death, for it cost me
almost my life, when I would but only look into it. He answered me and said,
My Son, too much is naught: The Well is good, and without this Well we cannot
make sire, but only we know how to deal carefully with (...). I said, How must
one do it? For when I came a little near to it, it beat into my face, that I
could neither smell nor see, and I thought no other but that I must ^eild up my
Ghost in the very place. He answered me and said, We have a silken rope,
therewith we let down the bucket, and thus we draw and pull it up again. We do
not come so near unto it; but we stand off a little way. How can ye then (said
I) stand so long in the Court, by reason of the strong mystie fume? He answered
and said, That Is no matter, as soon as the Sun is high, and shines clear, then
the mist falls. Thou art come to it a little too soon. Why (said J) do ye use a
silken rope, and not rather an Iron chain? but he answered: no, Iron can resist
this water; for its nature and quality is wonderful; all Metals melt in it, as
Butter melts in warm water. We could never fathem its depth, and its strength
and virtue is every morning new; it keeps constantly in one vigor, and all
poison digested therein, turns instantly unto a wholesome Medicament. J said,
Then I pray you, impart some of it unto me. Very willingly; says he, and gave
me a whole bottle full, and told me withal, how J should use it. And many
other things he told me of this Well, and of this Castle; but J took my leave
of him, and he brought me into a deep Cellar, there was a subterranean secret
way, which was paved with all sort of precious stones, with Carbuncles,
Diamonds and Saphirs, Smaragds, Rubies and Topaz, which cast such a luster,
whereby this Subterranean passage was bright and light: And J saw that it was
above, and at both sides full of fair pieces of Gold Oar, Mineral Cinober, and
Silver Oar, Oar of Lead, Pewter, Loath-and ironstone, betwixt there hung here
and there yellow ice-sickles. J beheld all with admiration, and thought, this
is indeed a rich Mine, or Metalline Rock; such another Myne-work may happily
not be in the World: And at last we went thorough a long passage, till we came
to a door; there he knocks, and gave the word, which I understood not; and the
door went open: There I espied through a little hole, the daylight afar off;
but when we came to it, it was of that bigness that one could creep through it;
but there lay a great stone before it, which he knew to remove so nimbly, that
I could not perceive how he did it; then J crep out with my bottle, and
unhappily J gave it a knock at the stone, and it broke: J called back, Oh good
Sir, the Bottle is broken, and intended to turn about; but lo, he put the stone
before it as nimbly as he had removed it, and for my life J could not roll it
away; J called, but he would not hear, for he was gone.

And now as J went a little farther, J passed through a fair large field, to a
great Highway, where many Wagons laden with Coals and Glasses were drawn
before me; J followed them, and came into a great City, which lay betwixt two
Mountains, on a fair plain, and was called Sufflers-thal.

There was an University full of Students, and there were neither Doctors nor
Professors, but every one was of himself to learn what, he would know, without
a Master. And this University was called Autodoxia, and over the Gate it stood
written: Insudore vultus tui.

And just in the Entry, at the right hand, there lay about a hundred Load of
Coals; at the left hand J saw many broken Pots and Pans, Crucibles, Retorts,
Glasses and Stacks, on a heap as great as a Hill; J thought, J have seen ere
now among Myne-Works, such a heap of slacks, and said, Surely here must be some
melting-house or other: And just as J entered, J saw a Boy with a Lap full of
broken Pans and Glasses passing on, who looked like a young Blacksmith: J asked
him, What is here to do? But he grinn'd with his teeth like a Negro, and
smiling, said, Come in hither, and thou shall see it: J went in, and behold
there stood so many Furnaces, and the like stuff, that J could not tell them;
they blowed, they melted, they reverberated, they distilled out of bodies,
great and small; out of Sand, in Balneo; they forced out of Retorts into large
Receivers; they set things in digestion; one poured coals into the Piger
Henricus, another stood luting; J saw dissolving, siltring, fixing, cohobing,
calcining, volatizing, subliming, granulating, as many terms, so many diverse
works, and who could tell them all. J stepped to one, whom J thought to be the
chief Journeyman, who just then took out a Retort; and J said to him: God save
you, what are ye a doing? He looked on me with a squint eye, and said, Thou
see what we do, thou needst not ask; and so he broke the Retort in two, and
took out the Caput mortuum. And another was taking a Crufible out of the fire,
and when it grew cold, he broke it in pieces. A third struck at a boy with a
stick, and hit a great Receiver, which flew in a hundred pieces. Then J
answered and said: Now J see indeed, what ye are doing, ye break Crusibles and
Glasses, and besides burn an abundance of coals. One among them answered me
and said: This we can do best, and never miss, though we hit nothing else. Then
there came one behind me and pulled me by the sleeve and said: allons Monsieur,
aids moy a Souffler, and so reached to me a pair of bellows. By and by an
other called to me, pray good fellow, hold this Glass a little, until I empty
this reaceaver. Another said to me, Who are you? Come, fling a handful or two
of coals into the Furnace. To be short, in a little time my half shirt was as
black as a Smiths boy, and I looked as black as they. However I liked the
foolish Work well enough, so that I tarried by it above twenty years, then I
returned home.

My Fathers Name was Autogenes, and my Mothers Name was Hethia; but he dyed a
little before J came, and my mother followed another man, and went away with
him; my eldest Sister was yet alive, but she knew me not. J told her, who J
was; then she leapt for joy, and said, O my Brother Chrysogenes, art thou he?
Our Fathers Corpse is embalmed to keep it from putrefying, that thou should
see it: come hither, and see where he lies, for thou shall find there thine
inheritance. J said, Yea Sister, I am no ignoramus also, I have not spent my
time idly among strangers in for reign parts; J can fix Mercury, I have many
brave Albations, which hold the test. J can make fixed Lnna: I can do more yet,
I can make Gold; but take heed, that you do not tell it others, else it will
cost me my life.

And we went together into the Vault where he lay; and my Sister said to me. My
Brother, J wildeclare unto thee all the Treasures of our Father, which he has
left unto us, and said to me: Argenis, abide by thy Brother. Now therefore
promise first unto me, That thou will not forsake nor leave me all the days of
thy life. And I made promise to her. Then she took up my Fathers Winding Sheet,
and uncovered the middle part of his Corpse; there his stomach lay naked, and
this Epitaph was written upon it: AUTOGENES. PALINGENIUS. FILIO. MEO.
CHRYSOGENI. SACRUM. IN. HOC. SCRINIO. RELINQUO. TIBI. REGENERATIONIS. ANALOGON.
NAM. POST. MULTAS. AMBAGES. ET. VANOS. LABORES. TANDEM. REDIBIS. AD. ME. ET.
QUOD. QUAERIS. INVENIES.

Argenis said: Here, here we have it: She drew out a knife, and said, Here
Chrysogenes, cut up, and let us see, what is in it. And when I put the knife to
it, and would anatomize the stomach, something stirred in it like a child in
the womb. However, I made an incision, and a hole in it; but presently it
hissed, and a strong scent came out. But when I made the hole of the stomach
somewhat wider, we perceived that it was full of Vermin, and among them we saw
a very nest of Lizards, all of them were as yellow as Brimstone, and looked
hard upon us. We were amazed, and said to one another, it is very well
analogized; He is full of stink and worms, and we were ready to run away.
Instantly the Lizards went assunder, and came out of the hole, the one run this
way, the other that way. There in that place whers the Lizards lay in the
stomach, we perceived a white Serpent which had a golden Crown upon her head
and a gilded Cross on her forehead and was to look on, as fine silver on the
Test, when it glitters like the fair Evening-star, when it rises, so bright
and glittering it looked. We indeed could no sooner spy it, because the
Lizards lay or sat upon her, like a Hen that sits upon her Eggs. And when I
espied the golden Crown, then I remembered the Serpents Crown, of which there is
so much talk, and would fain have had it. The Serpent began to stretch her
self, and would be gone also. But I took courage, and knew not how, as when one
goes in the dark, and it seems to him, as if he saw a spirit, and falls upon
it, when he should rather give way; so I also fell on, and fled not from the
Serpent, but caught her just by the Crown, and pulled her out. Indeed she
struggled a little, but as soon as she felt the fresh air, she yielded up her
Ghost, and dyed. I said to my Sister: Argeniis, What strange Treasures are
these? if thou had no other thing to dscover unto me, I had saved my oath
that you took of me. The Serpent's Crown may perchance be worth something, if
one knew how to use it; but as touching the Serpent, I have heard ere now, that
the powder of Serpents is good against poison; but how is it made? Argenis
answered and said, My dear brother, I know not what to say to it. This I know
well, and have often with my ears heard, that our Father used to say at the
Table: O would to God, that Chrysogenes came home before I dye. For I fear,
that he will spend his time idly where he is; he is my Son, and I am his Father.
He must learn to know me, and have of me that, which he looks for. Yet tell
him, Argenis, if I do not live at his return, that he shall seek in me, and in
my Entrails, there he shall find his portion, and the Treasure sought by many,
and found by few. Now Chrysogenes, thou thy self see, that I thought no other
but that we should find some singular thing here. Therefore I pray thee, blame
me not, I will willingly acquit thee of the Oath. Now whilst we stood thus
amazed, the Maidservant came running; and said: Mistress, it is time, the Oven
is hot, and the dow is ready to be set in. Argenis had just the dead Serpent in
her hand, and so in have went to the Baking troff very thoughtful, and put her
hands into the dow, to make the bread, but forgot the dead Serpent in her hand,
and so thrust it among the dow. I stood afar off, and called: Sister, what do
thou? But it was too late. We searched all the Dow to find the Serpent again,
but could not. The Dow began to swel, and came almost over the troff. Then they
must to kneeding, breaking, and working of the Dow. The Loaves were made and
set in, and the Oven closed, as is usual.

In the mean time we went again to the Vault, where the Corpse of our deceased
Father did lie, intending to make farther search. When we came thither without
a Candle light (for we were perplexed) we found his Corpse no more; we groaped in
the dark after it, but found it not. And whilst we were perplexed at it, lo in
the Vault, it was as light as day; and from that place where he lay, there came
a voice out of the earth, saying: What seek ye the living among the dead? O ye
fools, and of slow hearts, to understand all whatever the wise have spoken.
Have ye not your selves carried him away, do ye not know then, where ye laid
him? Then fear and trembling seized on us, and we runn away, and knew not,
what to make of it.

The Maidservant called: Mistress where are ye? I am afraid the bread in the
Oven burns, will ye not once look to it? But J believe you have tarried too long
already. Argenis said: Alas! J did not think once of it, and run hastily to the
Oven. But as the Maid had said, so it was, the bread was burnt, and turned to a
black brown biscuit, only fit to be thrown away; and it was flung in the
hogs-wash which is given to the Swine. Now at that time there was a great
Murrain among the Hogs, of which they died as fait as of a plague: and we had
then above twenty hogs, which were all sick. Now when the maid served them
with that wash, they sucking it in, all recovered at once. And when we
looked into the wash, it was as red as Claret. J said, how comes this to pass?
Surely the burnt bread has caused this; for there is nothing flung in there,
but what comes from the washing of dishes. J run to the baking Oven, and found
one crust, which J soaked in wine, which made it blood-red. J gave of it to one
of my neighbors to drink, who lay deadly sick, and he recovered at that very
hour. J drank of it, and me thought I was new born. Argenis also drank of it,
and it made her shed her white-grey hairs, and gold-yellow hairs grevv in their
place, and she found her self in her strength, as a maid of twenty years.

Then J thought upon what was past, and my eyes were opened, that J
understood all, what we had ignorantly done. Thereupon we gathered the
remaining crumbs out of the Oven, and carefully scraped the Dow-tub, and kept
it safe together. J put it all into a Box of ivory, and wrote upon it:
REGENERATION IS ANALOGON. And when J baked, put a little of it into the Dovv
instead of Leaven, and it lasted me a long time. When my good friends came to
me, I let them drink of it. But when it became known, J could not be quiet;
all those whose Hogs were sick, came running to me, to let them have some of
it, etc. Reliqua deficiant, doncese quantur, interim.

FINIS.

