A DECLARATION AND AN INFORMATION From us the People of God called QUAKERS, To
the present Governors, the KING and Both Houses of PARLIAMENT, And all whom it
may Concern.

This was Delivered into the Kings hand, the 22 day of the Fourth Month by M. F

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Simmons and Robert Wilson, 1660.

WE who are the People of God called Quakers, who are hated and despised, and
every where spoken against, as people not fit to live, as they were that went
before us, 1 Cor. 4 9, 10, 11, 12, 13.
who were of the same spirit, power, and Life and were as we are, in that they
were accounted as the offscouring of all things, by that Spirit and Nature
that is of the world, and so the Scripture is fulfilled, Gal. 4.
he that is born of the flesh persecuteth him that is born of the Spirit; We
have been a suffering people, under every Power and Change, and under every
profession of Religion that has been, and born the outward power in the Nation
these 12 years, since we were a People, and being that throw the old Enemy
which has continually appeared against us, not only in the profane people of
the Nation, but also in the highest profession of sorts and sects of Religion,
we have suffered under, and been persecuted by them all; Even some p^rsecuted
and prisoned till death; others their bodies bruised till death, stigmatized,
bored through the tongue, gagged in the mouth, stockt, and whipped through Towns
and Cities, our goods spoiled, our bodies two or three years imprisoned, with
much more that might be said, which is well known to the Actors thereof; and
this done not for the wronging of any man, nor for the breach of any just Law
of the Nation, nor for evil doing, nor desiring any evil, or wishing any hurt
to any man, but for Conscience sake toward God, because we could not bow to
their worship, and because we could not maintain a Ministry, which Ministry we
could not join with nor own; So we look upon it to be unjust to maintain them,
we receive nothing from, nor cannot trust our Souls under their Teaching, who
Teach for hire, and Divine for money, which the Prophets of the Lord cried woe
against; And Christ said a hireling was a Thief and a Robber, Joh. 10.12, 13.
and would fly because he was an hireling; And they are maintained by Tithes,
contrary to Christ and the Apostles Doctrine, Heb. 7.12.
who said the Priesthood was changed that took Tithes, and the Law also that
gave them, and who witnessed CHRIST JESUS to be the Everlasting Offering once
for all, who says, such an High Priest has become us which is holy,
harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners, and made higher then the Heavens,
who in the days of his flesh, when he had offered up prayers and
supplications, with strong cries and Tears, unto him that was able to save him
from death, and was heard in that he feared, though he was a Son yet learned he
obedience, by the things which he suffered, Heb 5.7, 8, 9.
and being made perfect be^ame the Anthor of Eternal Salvation unto all them
that obey him. And for obedience to him and his commands (do we suffer) who
has said swear not at all, Mat. 5.34, 35. Jam. 5.12. Jam. 2.10.
And he said Call no man Master upon earth, for ye have one Master in Heaven;
and who has said How can you believe that seek Honor one of another, and not
the Honor that comes from God only, and who has said let your Yea be Yea,
and your Nay, Nay, for whatsoever is more then this comes of evil; And because
we cannot respect persons, which is contrary to the Apostles Doctrine and
practice, who has said, Act. 10.34. Mat. 22.16.
of a Truth God is no respecter of Persons, but in every Nation he that fears
God, and works Righteousness is accepted of him; And the Apostle James
exhorted his Brethren not to have the Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ with
respect of persons, for if you respect persons you commit sin, and are
convinced of the Law as Transgressors, and contrary to this Faith and Doctrine
we are made Transgressors by the Powers of the Earth, because we cannot respect
persons, and commit sin, and be made Transgressors of the Law of God: And this
has been the only ground and cause of our sufferings, because we obeyed the
Command of Christ, the Author of our Eternal salvation, and observed the
Apostles Doctrine and practice, and not for any other cause or end have our
sufferings been, but for Conscience sake, because we cannot bow to men's wills
and worships contrary to the Command of Christ Jesus our Everlasting Priest,
King and Prophet, whom we serve with our spirits, and worship in that, which
the World calls Heresy Act. 24 14.


And now because that several of you, who are most concerned in this Government
are not acquainted with our principles and practices, neither have known our
Innocence and sufferings, and the Old Enemy by whom we have suffered, at this
time being ready to incense and instigate, and infuse secretly into the minds
of them, who are strangers to us, against whom we have not transgressed,
neither do we desire to give any just occasion of offense to these present
Governors, who yet have not done us much wrong, in making any Law against us,
that we know of; And we do believe would not, if ye did rightly understand our
Innocence and Integrity, nakedness and singleness in our carriage toward all
men upon the face of the earth, and if ye would but examine and search out our
carriage and behavior toward all men's persons, Souls and Estates, if these
things were scarched out and Examined through the Nations, and that no prejudice
were let into your minds from others words, which proceed from secret envy
malice and hatred, and not from any just ground they have against us, but as it
is from a contrary spirit and mind, as it was in the Jews against Christ, and
in all others against the Apostles, so it is the same now against us, but this
we commit to the Lord who will plead our cause, and clear our Innocence, who
has said vengeance is Mine, and I will repay it; And now that they know we
cannot swear, nor take an Oath for Conscience sake, but have suffered because
we could not take them; Now do the Magistrates of several Countyes of the
Nation, through the suggestion of the Priests envy, which is inveterate against
us, Tender us an Oath, which they call the Oath of Allegiance, with several
other Engagements, what their own wills can invent, on purpose to ensnare us,
that upon the denial thereof they may cast us into prison, and have already
cast several of us into prison at their own pleasure. We do therefore declare
to take of all Jealousies, Fears and Suspicions of our Truth and Fidelity to
the King, and these present Governors, that our intentions and Endeavors are
and shall be Good, True, Honest and Peaceable toward them, and that we do
Love, Own, and Honor the King and these present Governors, so far as they do
rule for God and his Truth, and do not impose any thing upon Peoples
Consciences, but let the Gospel have its free passage through the consciences
of men, which we do not know that they have (by any Law) as yet imposed; And if
they grant liberty of Conscience toward God and toward Man, then we know that
God will bless them: For want of which has been the overthrow of all that
went before them: We do not desire any liberty that may justly offend any ones
Conscience, but the Liberty we do desire is, that we may keep our Consciences
clear and void of effence toward God and toward men, and that we may enjoy
our civil Rights and Liberties of Subjects, as freeborn English men And this we
do in the presence of the Lord declare, not in flattering Titles, but in
reality and truth of our hearts, and shall manifest the same; Now that we may
be clear in the presence of the living God, and of all just and moderate men,
that they may not have their hands in Blood and Persecution, as those have had
that are gone before, and that they may not be ignorant of us, and of our
principles and practice, and so receive information against us from others
envy, which may be contrary to our very principles, and the truth as it is in
Jesus; Therefore that we may be free from the blood of all men, Act. 20.26.
and that they may not have a hand in Persecuting and Oppressing the Innocent,
whose cause God has pleaded and will plead. We do therefore inform the
Governors of this Nation high and low; That we are a People that desire the
good of all People and their peace, and desire that all may be saved, and come
to the knowledge of the Truth 1 Timothy 2 4. Act. 13.47. Rev. 21.24 2 Cor. 4.6.
the Way and the Life, which is Christ Jesus, the Everlasting Covenant, which
is given for a Light to the Gentiles, and to be the Salvation to the ends of
the Earth, and all the Nations that are saved must walk in this Light of the
Glorious Gospel, which has shined in our hearts, and given us the light of the
Knowledge of the Glory of God in the Face of Jesus Christ. And to this Light we
direct Peoples minds, that every one in particular may have a Teacher and
Testimony according to the Righteousness of Faith which speaks on this wise;
The word is very nigh in the heart and in the mouth. Rom 10.8.
And if every one would come to this, there would be a feeling of Gods Justice
and Righteousness, and our intents to be just Innocent and Righteous, who has
said, I will come near to Judgment, and be a swift witness against the
Sorcerer and Adulterer, and false swearer Mal. 3.5.
.

Now if every one would turn to this witness in their own Consciences, this
would keep from oppressing and persecuting of others without cause, for God is
coming to teach his People himself, by his own Light and Spirit, who has said,
it is written in your law, you shall be all taught of God, Joh. 6.45.
which many of us now do witness; for which cause are we persecuted, the
children of the Lord are taught of the Lord, and are established in
Righteousness, and are far from Oppression. Isa. 54.13, 14.


The Testimony that we have born, has been chiefly against the Priests,
Teachers and Professors of these Nations, that are out of the Life and power;
for when it pleased the Lord to reveal his Son in us, we saw them to be
absolute deceivers of the People and betrayers of their souls, for they lead
them wholly from that of God in them to the letter of the Scripture without
them, and to their own Inventions and Immaginations and meanings which they
speak, who are not taught of God themselves For, for all their high profession,
there is scarce one of them that dares say they have the infallible Spirit of
God, the same as the Apostles had, that gave forth the Scripture; The Apostle
says that which may be known of God is manifested in them, for God shows it
unto them. No People can retain God in their knowledge and worship him as God,
but first they must come to that of God in them; But these Teachers deny this
Doctrine, and have manifested themselves several ways to all sober minded
People, to be men not fearing God, and are not true to their Principles; for
who have minded them, and seen their Carriage and Behavior in all these
Changes that have been these 8. years (which have been many, as may be further
manifest,) for there have been Changes of Governments, of Parliaments and
Protectors several in these Eight years, and all these have been warned not to
uphold these Priests contrary to Peoples Consciences, but that every one might
have their Liberty, that they that would have them might maintain them, and
they that could not receive their Doctrine, might not be forced to maintain
them; but this would not satisfy their Covetous Practice, but they went on in
the way of Cruelty, Persecuting and Oppressing the Innocent, and casting into
Prison, and took trebble Damages, and spoiled their Goods, and made Havoc of
poor Peoples Increase and Fruits of their Labors; neither would the
Magistrates hear, but suffered them to go on in their Persecution, and upheld
them by a Law to the oppressing of the Innocent, until the Lord by his mighty
Power overturned them, and broke them one after another; and those Priests
turned to every Power, and every Government, as it turned; and made Petitions,
and Addresses, and Acknowledgements to every Change of Government, and
Conformed to every Power, and showed much Love and Zeal to every present Power
for their own ends, though many of them were Instruments to throw others out;
Yet through their Deceit and Subtilties have kept themselves in, in all these
Times, and Changes.

Now let any honest hearted People judge, whether these be sound Principled
men, that can turn, conform, and transform to every Change according to the
Times? Whether these be fit men to Teach People? But their Fruits are manifest,
and God does discover them more and more, that they cannot proceed much longer;
Their Folly is so much made manifest, they have used their utmost endeavors to
cause Persecution to continue upon us: But, the Lord has seen it, and we
commit all to him, and can freely say, The Lord forgive them for what they have
done to us, Act 7.60.
But for the bearing our Testimony against them for the deceiving and betraying
of poor ignorant People that are blind, and led by them that are blind into the
ditch, Mat. 15 14.
We cannot but in pity and love to Peoples Souls bear our Testimony against
them, Therefore have our Sufferings been because we desire the good of all
People, and the Salvation of their Souls; and this is all we desire, and Suffer
for, that all might come to the knowledge of the Lord, who said, They should
all know him, from the least to the greatest. Heb. 8.11.


We are a People that follow after those things that make for Peace, Love, and
Unity, it is our desire that others feet may walk in the same, and do deny and
bear our Testimony against all Strife, and Wars, and Contentions that come
from the Lusts that warrin the members, that war against the Soul, which we
wait for and watch for in all People, and love and desire the good of all; for
no other cause but love to the Souls of all People, have our sufferings been,
and therefore have we been numbered amongst the Transgressors, and been
accounted as sheep for the slaughter, as our Lord and Master was, who is the
Captain of our Salvation who is gone before us, who though he was a Son, yet
learned he Obedience, by the things that he suffered, who said my Kingdom is
not of this World, if my Kingdom were of this world, Joh. 18 36.
then would my Servants fight, but my Kingdom is not from hence; This is he
that comes to save men's lives, and not to destroy them, Luke 9.56.
and this is he that is our Lord and Master, whose Testimony we must seal with
our blood, if it be required of us; And our Weapons are not Carnal but
Spiritual, 2 Cor: 10.4.
who have given our Backs, our Cheeks, and our Hair to all professions, out of
the Life and Power to be smitten, who have done it to purpose, which the Lord
has overturned, who were often warned by us, under whom we have undergon cruel
sufferings. And now You are come up into the Throne to be tried, we cannot but
warn you in your day to do justly, and to love Mercy Mica. 6.8.
whereby the violence of the wicked might be stopped, which is for your own good,
and prosperity. And so we desire and also expect to have the liberty of our
Consciences and just Rights, and outward Liberties as other people of the
Nation, which we have promise of from the word of a King, that we may not be
made a prey upon by the profane envious People and Priests which we have born
our Testimony against their corruptions, who thirst not only after our Estates
and Liberties, but our blood also, who have already begun to search our Houses
and to apprehend our Members, and cast them into Prison, there to be kept
without bail or mainprize, under pretense as if we were Thieves Murderers or
Traitors, who are Enemies to no man's Person upon the Earth, which they cannot
lay to our charge, whereby they endeavor to take away our lives. Treason,
Treachery, and false Dealing we do utterly deny, false dealing, surm^zing, or
plotting against any Creature upon the Face of the Earth, and speak the truth
in plainness and singleness of heart, and all our desire is your good, and
Peace, and Love, and Unity, and this many thousands will seal with their blood,
who are ready not only to believe, but to suffer, but only that the blood of
the Innocent may not come upon your selves through false informations.

Given forth the 5 th of the 4 th Month, 1660. Margret Fell.
WE in the Unity of the Spirit, and Members of Christ, do Subscribe, and
Witness to the Truth of this, and in the behalf of those in the same Unity,

George Fox Richard Hubberthorne, Samuel Fisher, Joseph Fuce, Gobert Sikes,
Amos Stodert, William Caton, Gerrard Roberts, John Stubbs, Thomas Coveny,
Thomas Heart, James Strut, Ellis Hooks.



And now I am here to Answer what can be Objected against us on the behalf of
many Thousands, who are Baptized with one Spirit into one Body, to bear my
Testimony, and to be offered up for the Service of the Faith, and to give an
Account of the Hope, that is in me, to every one that Asks according to the
Scripture, who was moved of the Lord to leave my House and Family, and to come
Two Hundred Miles to lay these Things before you; Who to the Will of the Lord
is Committed.

M. F.



THE END.

