THE RICHES OF GRACE. A TREATISE Showing the value and Excellency of a gracious
Spirit, by comparing it with the Nature and Spirits of wicked and ungodly men,
which desire not the ways of the Lord Jesus.

By that Reverend and faithful Minister of Gods Word WILLIAM FENNER, B. D.
sometimes fellow of Pembrook Hall in Cambridge, and late of Rochford in Essex:
finished by himself.

LONDON. Printed by R. Cotes, for I. Sweeting, at the Angel in Popes head
Ally. 1641.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER, GRACE, MERCY, AND PEACE.
THere was never any age or time (Christian Reader) since the beginning of the
world, how corrupt soever, that was comparable to this our thrice unhappy age,
in all kinds of corruption, wickedness, and sin, with grief of Conscience
I speak it, with weeping I behold it, and with sorrowful heart I lament it,
and therefore seeing wickedness does so abound, the Lord (lest his Children
(frozen in the dregs of their sins) should perish with the wicked) raises
up, in his mercy, good men (as we see the Author of this Treatise, a man of
Rare parts) to pluck off the Visard of sin from their faces, and to lay it
open to the view of the whole world, to the end that every one may see the
vileness of his wicked ways and the filthy dregs of sin, thrown in their
face; may blush at the same, be ashamed, repent, amend, and turn to the Lord
Jesus, and so eternally be saved.

In this Treatise is drawn to the life, the sins and wickedness of Ungodly
men, which desire not the way of the Lord Jesus; together with the
Excellencies, riches, great value of a blessed and gracious spirit.

The Author of this Treatise was a man of a Precious spirit, as may appear by
this and other works of his in Print: A Reverent and worthy Divine gives this
Testimony in his Commendations, that he was a Minister very Conscientious, one
that had a great ability given him of God to Preach Unto, and work Upon the
hearts and consciences of men, to awaken the sleepie, to inform the erroneous,
to settle the doubtful, to confirm the wounded; also that he was a worthy
Divine, both in regard of his unwearisome pains in Preaching, consuming his
own body to save the souls of others, as also of his learning and Exemplary
Piety. They that knew him did love and reverence him; and if any did
dis-esteeme him, it was because they did not fully know him. He is now a
shining star in the firmament of heaven; also that there were hundreds of
people that will bless God to all Eternity for his pains; he needs not our
praises, but our imitation.

It is true that this birth is Posthumum opus, and comes out after the death
of the Author; but I hope it will be the more pleasing, to revive the memory of
him, whose life and labors were deservedly precious in the esteem of Gods
people.

This Treatise is one of the Sparks of the zealous (dead, yet living) Author,
finished by himself, which might have lain covered in the ashes of
forgetfulness, had it not been blown up by one (well minded) which received
it from the Authors own hand: it has been viewed by a Reverend Divine, to
prevent Errors and to make it complete for the Press, which is here
presented to thy view.

Therefore Christian Reader, let me obtain this much at thy hand as to except
of his labors as precious, well-wishing toward the truth and the professor
thereof.

The subject of this ensuing discourse is published for thy benefit, read it,
the Lord give thee understanding to conserve and practice it in thy life and
Conversation, Amen.

THE RICHES OF GRACE.
JOB 21. 14. Therefore say they unto God, Depart from us, for we desire not the
knowledge of thy ways.
JObs Friends disputing against Job, that he was a wicked man, because the
wrath of God in so grievous a manner, lay so long upon him; Job returns answer
again, If this be true Doctrine you speak, that God scourges none but wicked
men, how is it then that wicked men so often, and so much prosper in the world,
abounding in all worldly pleasures and delights?

Now Job shows that wicked men may prosper in five things.

verse 7.

multitude of Children, verse 8. A foul Sow has more young than an Ewe has
Lambs.

verse 9.

verse 10. as the wicked men have a Proverb, the worse man the better luck.

verse. 11. 12. 13.

The Job sets down two things.

They say unto God depart from us, for we desire not the knowledge of thy ways.

verse, In a moment they go down into the grave, and verse (...) The wicked
are reserved for the day of destruction; every wicked man God has laid up, and
purposed him to hell, he gives him of prosperity to fat him up, that his
damnation may be greater.

The verse read contains in it three things.

We desire not the knowledge of thy ways.

of the means of grace in these words, Depart from us, they could be content
that the Lord should depart from them in his Ordinance; if no Preaching, no
praying, no Sabbath, no sign of God amongst them they would not much care, not
much lay it to heart; nay they also desire it, they say unto God, Depart from
us.

Depart from us: though few say so with their mouths, yet by their lives so
they live, so they behave themselves.

From the first of these, viz. a wicked, man's contempt of grace we observe
this Doctrine.

That a wicked man does not so much as desire Doct.
saving grace.

For the clearing of the point, we will define the true desire of grace, A
true desire of grace, is a super-naturall appetite to grace not had, for the
goodness of it. There are four things in the true desire of grace.

appetite of the soul to grace; when the heart does even go out of it self
for the attaining of grace: there are words in the 107. Psalm, 3. v. which
sets it down expressly, by the longing soul; the word signifies, a running
soul, a soul that not only goes to grace, and the means of grace, but
runs to it with an eager desire and speed. An hungry appetite which
signifies an hunger unfeigned, which is*

First, Unsupportable without meat, so that he that truly desires grace
cannot be without grace. As one said, Take away heaven, and you take away all
from me, so it is with the poor soul, take away grace, if it be out of hope
of grace, it can never rest, it can never bear the want of it.

insatiable without meat, nothing can satisfy him but meat, though he had
all the wealth in the world, yet he could not be satisfied without meat. So
it is in the true desire of grace, fetch one all the gold of Ophir, all the
honors and pleasures of the earth, all contents under heaven cannot satisfy
him, but grace, he must have grace, no content in any thing else, but grace,
grace.

irrepulsable, it will bear no repulse of cost, when it will afford to give
large sums for mean food; nor of pains, as appears by the woman that went
five miles in the famine for food, it will bear no repulse: for were a man a
Lord, it would make him beg rather than withstand it. So the true desire of
grace is irrepulsable, who so truly desires it and cannot get it, he will not
let God alone, nor suffer him to rest but begs and cries for it, oh he could be
content to give all he has for it, and if any thing in himself hinder, he will
willingly cast it off, he will go through thick and thin, he will endure any
contempt, any disgrace for it. If he suffer any disgrace, any reproach for
grace, he glories and rejoices in it.

to sit with Christ his dogs: though with Paul's Widow they wash the Saints
feet; though with David they be doore-keepers in Gods house, yet so they may
have grace, they care not though the whole world trample upon them, though they
be accounted the off-scowring of all things.

supernatural appetite, and that to distinguish from a natural, which
natural men have, and yet hate grace. Every man naturally has a care of his
own preservation; wherefore seeing he cannot be saved, but must eternally
perish in hell without grace, he will desire it as a man may give way to
cutting off of his arm or leg, rather than his whole body should perish;
though he hate the cutting off of those members, yet seeing an unavoydable
necessity, that otherwise he must dye, or the like, he does willingly desire
it. So the foolish Virgins Mat. 25. desired Oil in their Lamps not because
they loved light, for their deeds were full of darkness, but they saw they
should be shut out of heaven and cast into Hell without it. As a dog that
desires to vomit, not because he hates the meat, for afterward he lickes up
his vomit again, but because something troubled his stomach: So many a man
vomits out his lust, gives over his drunkenness, whordome, pride, malice, and
many other sins, because they trouble his conscience, and he is evidently
convinced that he must go to hell if he live in them; but when his conscience
is quiet again, and the pinch over, he does willingly yield himself to all
his former lusts. Some have showed from that place, 1 Pet. 1. verse. 12. that
the very devils have desired the knowledge of the redemption by Christ; though
others be of judgment that it is not the meaning of the Apostle in that place,
yet certainly it is a truth, for hell were no hell, if damned men and damned
devils, did not desire to escape it; but this is not the desire of grace, it is
a super-naturall appetite.

after grace not had: the love of grace is a good thing whether had or no;
delight is in good when had, desire is in good though not had; a good though
we attain it not, nor possess it, yet we love it, because we judge and see
it to be good, or to have goodness in it, and therefore we find we delight
in it when we have it, and in the want of it, we desire to have it. A man may
desire good that he has, but then it is imperfectly had, which may be two
ways.

in him of not receiving it, grace is a whole thing, so is faith, repentance,
love, zeal, etc. they are whole, and entire graces, which go together, but
because we see how good they are, therefore we desire them in a high degree;
that desire is of grace not had, it is plain, Esa. 55. 1.

the goodness of one part, they will desire the other.

and seem to love it, but when the Gospel and these things part, then they
and the Gospel part also. But the true desire of grace is for the goodness
that is in it. Balaam could desire even the very heart of a righteous man, but
it was when he should be dying: for he saw that if he had it, there was hope of
heaven and salvation, but otherwise he must down to hell. But this desire is
nothing. Now that the true desire of grace is not in a wicked man, is clear
from Esaias 53. 2. where the Prophet speaking of Christ, who is the fountain of
all grace, says thus, There is no form nor comelines, and when we shall see
him, there is no beauty in him that we should desire him; this is meant of the
body of Christ, for as the learned have writ, Christ had all parts in the
perfection of a body, and of his soul, for it was replenished with all Divine
graces; In him dwells the fullness of the Godhead bodily, and therefore there
was beauty enough in him to have ravished all Angels, yea all the world, and
ten thousand more if there were so many. But men in their natural estate see
not this; we that are carnal, we that are sinful, we that are in our sins,
we that are not truly changed nor renewed in our minds, we see no beauty in
him that we should desire him; unless he will bring gold and silver, Hawks
and Hounds, Cards and Dice; if he would bring these, then we should see some
beauty in him, but if he bring nothing but weeping, and mourning, and
repentance, the strictness and preciseness, mortifying and crucifying their
earthly members; there is no beauty in these things that we should desire him:
wicked men may have a Would, but not a willing desire, they wish thus and thus,
but as the old Proverb is, Wishers and woulders were never good houshoulders,
but there is no true desire in them of saving grace.

Now as no love is love indeed but true love, otherwise it is hatred; no fire,
fire indeed but the true fire; no holiness, holiness indeed but true
holiness, for otherwise it is but hypocrisy, so no desire is desire indeed
but true desire.

fool is highly accounted of by his fellows: so a natural man accounts of
spiritual men as mad men, The spiritual man, says the Prophet, speaking in
the Language of wicked men, are mad. 1 Cor. 2. 14. The natural man perceives
not the things of God, for they are foolishness unto him: a natural man may
perceive sweetenes in the world, in his gain, in his profits, in his
pleasures, in his delights and vanities, and in his lusts; for these things are
carnally discerned; but not in the things of God, for they are spiritually
discerned, a wicked man may have a great deal of knowledge, that a child of
God cannot speak of more truths, nor understand more than he does, but though
a wicked man understands spiritual things yet not spiritually, but carnally
only and in a carnal sense: this is the reason that a worldling had rather
have a 1000. pound than true grace, that the covetous man had rather be in his
counting house, accounting his interest-money and his gains, than at the House
of God to hear a Sermon; because they are carnally discerned, but these things
of God are spiritually discerned. If we that are the ministers of God could
drop shillings and pounds amongst men in our preaching to them, they would
come to the Church more duly, and hear more eagarly and affectionately; but
when we deliver the things of God and the everlasting Mysteries of Salvation,
which are above their reach and understandings; if they come to Church, they
can sit quietly in their Pewes being no whit affected with the Word as if it
were nothing unto them.

Grace is contrary to Nature, fire cannot desire water, nor water fire, because
they are contrary, one expelling the other, for either the water will quench
the fire, or else the fire will lick up the water; so nature and grace do
thwart one another. Nature would have a man love himself, grace forbids it, and
commands to love God. Nature would have a man to be wrathful, choleric, and
given to revenge upon every small provocation; but Grace forbids all these and
the like. The Wisdom of the flesh is enmity against God, Romans 8. 17. Take
nature in its best wits, take a Natural man in his best understanding, best
apprehension, and sweetest affable disposition, take the very flower and height
of nature, though never so learned, and yet it is at enmity with God and grace,
and therefore impossible it should desire grace. Hereupon it is that the
Magistrate neglects, true Justice is cold or lukewarm in the cause of God, let
grace call for the contrary; Fathers and Masters will not Catechize and
instruct and bring up their Children and servants in the knowledge and fear of
the Lord, though grace reprove them never so bitterly for the neglect of it.
Diverse Christians will be earthly, dead, lukewarm, let grace stir them up
never so earnestly, yet still grace is not welcome, it imposes things
contrary; suppose a man should come to a fire and use all the rhetoric and
arguments to persuade it not to burn, let him threaten it, Burn not fire, if
you do I will pull you all to pieces, yet it will burn still; for it is
contrary to the nature of fire to suspend burning; so it is contrary to nature
to suspend its lusts.

hell gates, into hell it self, if he repents not. I grant a wicked man may
think he desires grace, when he wishes, O that I had Christ, O that I were
the child of God, and that I had grace! but if one should come to this man, and
tell him what it is to be a child of God, to have Christ and Grace, that thus
and thus he must be qualified, he must take up the cross of Christ, and
follow the precise and strict rules of Christ, and the directions of grace;
this man then would even hate those conditions and so consequently his former
wishes, Amos 5. 18. Woe unto them that desire the day of the Lord, to what end
is it for you? the day of the Lord is darkness, and not light. As if the
Prophet had said to all wicked men, You think you desire the day of the Lord,
that Christ the Savior might come into the world, but to what end is it? I
tell you the day of the Lord is not such a day, Christ is not such a Savior,
as you do imagine: The day of the Lord is darkness and not light, a day of
sorrow, of grief, of Condemnation unto you: So the Lord complains Mal. 2. 17.
by the Prophet, You have wearied me; Mal. 1. 12. 13.
Wherein have we wearied thee, say they? You have profaned the Table of Lord,
ye have snuffed at it, says the Lord: But we desire the coming of the Lord;
yea says the Prophet, The Lord shall suddenly come, but who can Mal. 3. 1. 2.
abide the day of the Lord? or who can stand when he appears? For he is like
a Refiners fire, and like Fullers Soap: Thou desire grace, thou that live
in thy sin; I tell thee that is hell and vengeance to thee, for it commands
thee to crucify thy lusts, and to descend unto the gates of death, in the true
humiliation of thy soul, or else it will damn thee in everlasting
condemnation of hell.

mouth, and there is no absolute resistance. The child of God is like a sick
man troubled with ill humors and diseases, he has true desire of grace yet
weak and low, not raised to that height and power which they shall be, when
they are perfectly recovered. Therefore the Apostle exhorts the people of God,
1 These. 5. 19. Quench not the Spirit, because even in them there are some
lusts, and corruptions springing out of the heart, which will be ready to put
out the fire of grace.

hearts in whom God has engendered the true desire of grace, let such know that
the first step to grace to see they have no grace, and the first degree of
grace is the desire of grace: it is not with the body as with the soul, if you
will be healed you shall be healed; a man may desire to be healed corporally,
and yet his disease continue upon him; but it is not so with the soul, if thou will say, Christ heal me, thou shall be made whole. If a man have but the true
desire of grace, it shall be given him, Psalm. 10. 17. Lord thou have heard the
desire of the humble: when the poor soul is humbled before God in the sense
of the want of grace, and breathes and desires after it, the Lord will grant
such desires. So Psalm. 145. 14. He will fulfill the desires of them that fear
him, he also will hear their cry and will help them. One said the greatest
part of Christianity is to desire to be a Christian And another said the total
sum of a man's Religion in this life consists in the true desires of saving
grace. This was the perfection that Saint Paul attained unto Romans 7. 18. To
will is present with me, but I find no means how to perform that which is
good. Saint Paul we know was the child of God, and one dearly beloved of
God; yet there was the pitch of his godliness, it consisted more in desire,
than in accomplishment; Can thou approve by evident and sound arguments that
thou have the true desires of grace? then know for thy comfort, that the Lords
spirit of grace has been moving and stirring in thee, Philip 2. 13. It is God
that works in you both the will and the deed, and that of his good pleasure,
not only of his bounty, from whence he has bestowed many graces even upon
such as he will damn afterward for their accursed abuse of them, with the
neglect of the power thereof. But if God have set thy will and the stream of
thy affections and desires to himself and to grace, if but thy will yet it is
Gods good pleasure from which he did at first elect thee, and gave his son to
redeem thee. As it is with sin so it is with grace in this: The desire of
murder, is murder; the desire of adultery, is adultery; the desire to steal,
is theft: So it is with grace, the desire of faith is faith; the desire of
repentance is repentance: but thou will say, What good is it to desire to
believe and not to believe; to desire to repent, and not to repent; the desire
to have an humble heart, and a broken heart, and yet not to have the heart
humble and broken? I answer, he that has the true desire of grace, has the
greatest part of grace. Suppose a man should be scraping and raking, and
grinding the face of the poor, to hoard up a great deal of treasure and
riches to himself; which I pray you is the greatest part of his covetousness,
the laying up of the money, or his greedy desires and oppressions? surely I
judge his covetous desires and oppressions. For any, even a child of God, may
lay up and gather Riches, when it pleases God to cast them upon him; so that
it is not the having of Riches, but the coveting of them that proves a man to
be a covetous man. For not only great Usurers and oppressing Landlords are
covetous worldlings, for I tell thee covetousness may be in a beggar, and
under thy leather coat; if thy mind be running after the world, thou that art
never at quiet, but thy heart, thy head, thy hand and all is taken up after it,
whether thou accomplish thy covetous lusts or no, yet thou art one of those
covetous persons spoken of in 1 Cor. 6. 10. Suppose a man should attain to a
great measure of grace, that he is marvellously humble, marvelously zealous,
marvellously holy and strict in all the ways of God, I would know which is the
greatest part of his grace, I suppose his strong and vehement desire.

by no means he can come to him, now he thinks, Oh that I had such a friend
whom if I could but come at, I would cast my whole estate upon him, and repose
much trust in him. So the soul that apprehends the wrath of God, and the
curse of the Law ready to seize on it for damnation, it would feign go to
Christ, but he cannot tell how, the sense of his vileness keeps him off, oh
he would be glad to leave and cast away all his lusts, and dearest sins, and
take up the cross of Christ, and if he could but reach Christ, oh then he
would think himself safe, he would lay all upon him, his very soul and
Salvation. Certainly this man has true faith in Christ: for a man would trust
him well before he would cast his whole estate upon him. There is an excellent
place for this in Hag. 2. 6, 7, 8. I will shake all Nations, and the desires of
all Nations shall come: where are three things,

humbling their souls and terrifying their consciences upon the sight of their
sins, and they stand in the casts off, cast-awayes.



The desire of all Nations shall come, that is, Christ shall come, where
observe that Christ is not called the assurance, but the desire of all Nations,
because that there is no child of God, but does truly desire Christ, though
many be his who have not the assurance of it: never did any man desire to eat
which had not eaten before, so [I desire to beleeve] comes from [I do
believe.] Let then none be troubled, and fear and complain for the want of
faith, for true desire springs from faith as the root of it.





Solomon; The soul of the sluggard desires, and has nothing, but the soul
of the diligent shall be made fat. As it is with a sluggish man that desires
his ground should be tilled, but yet will take no pains to plough it; who
desires that his business should go forward, that he might have the harvest,
yet will not be at the cost and charges needful for it, he may wish and desire
a harvest, but shall have nothing: So the soul of a sluggish Christian, of a
lukewarm professor, desires faith and repentance, but gets neither; but the
soul of a diligent Christian shall have enough to justify him, grace enough
eternally to save him. But the soul of a carnal Christian desires faith, but
gets but a lazy faith, a faith that will not justify him, a lean or perhaps
a lazy repentance that will not save him, a dead performance and profession
together: Romans 11. 7. Israel says the Apostle, has not obtained that which he
sought for, but the Election has obtained it, first carnal Israel sought for
the promises of Christ, but they got it not but the Election has obtained it.

Seek and ye shall find.

well; this word is of few letters, but of great force, it is the very form of
all Arts: for Rhetoric is the Art of pleading well, and Logic of disputing
well, so is Divinity the Art of seeking well, of living well; it is nothing to
desire grace, unless you seek it well: the truth is a wicked man desires not
true grace, but something that seems to him to be true grace. Now suppose a
man were sick, and five pills would cure him, he thinks four will do it,
and therefore neglects the fifth and dies for want of it. So a man having his
conscience convinced from the Word of God, that unless he have such and such
faith, such and such graces of the spirit of God, such knowledge, such
holiness, he shall be damned. He thinks if I can be but thus and thus, if I
can do but thus much, I shall be saved, whereupon he will hear the Word of
God, he will pray, he will keep the Sabbath, give over this and that sin,
leave his drunkenness, his swearing, and yet when all comes to all, he goes to
hell. Why? because true grace which was commanded, and which he should have
had, he accounted and called Puritanisme and precisnesse, and rejected as a
superfluous thing; he thinks if he can attain to such a pitch as to live
justly and quietly, and to be well governed, and to follow his particular
calling, and keep the Church, and perform some good duties, though he be not
zealous for God, nor in the worship of God, will not endure reproach for
Christ, and for his strict profession: Such a one shall be damned though he
have all the grace he looks for. A crimson shoe cannot cure the Gout; so
fine comeliness of carriage in a natural man, cannot heal the infection and
poison of corrupt nature. An Ass is an Ass still, though he be never so well
trapped: so a natural man is a natural man still, though never so well
qualified: Has he love, has he knowledge, meekness, gentleness, and a
kind of humility and liberality? comes he to the Church, hears the Word,
receives the Sacraments? yet unless he be mortified and converted, changed and
renewed by the Spirit of God, it is impossible he should be saved; Tit. 2. 11.
12. The grace of God which brings Salvation, has appeared unto all men: and
teaches us, that we should deny ungodlines, etc. as if the Apostle would give
us to understand that there is a grace that brings not Salvation; but that
which brings Salvation teaches us to deny all ungodliness and worldly
lusts, and to live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world; if
then that grace thou desire and have attained to, teach not thee to cast away
all sinful corruptions, and do not make thee live holily, it cannot bring
thee to heaven. This grace which (says the Apostle) teaches us to deny
ungodly lusts, as if he had said, I know it has appeared to all, all the world
has it offered to them, it has appeared to them, but they will not learn of
it to deny ungodliness, and worldly lusts, and therefore in stead of Salvation
it brings damnation to them; but it teaches us and brings Salvation to us.
But now because men are apt to say every one boasting, that they desire grace:
therefore for the third Use,



Now if thou have a true desire of grace, than it purifieth the conscience from
all dead works. If thy Conscience now tell thee, that thou have any sin and
corruption that thou art not willing to lay off; it is an evident
demonstration, that thou have no true desire of grace. A man that has his
hands full of base luggage, if a pearl should be at his feet, unless he
empty his hands he cannot take it up, and therefore if he will not cast away
that base stuff, we would say he has no mind to the Pearl. Now thy hands
and thy heart are full of corruption; so that though grace lie even at thy
feet, yet thou can not receive it up, unless thou empty thy hands and thy
heart.

Heb. 3. 18. Willingness and desire to live honestly, and a good conscience
are joined together; noting, that so a man cannot have a desire to live piously
according to Gods will, but he must have a good conscience in all things: If
then thy conscience tell thee that thou will swear now and then, thou will
tell a lie upon occasion, and be scandalous to others now and then, and wilt
reserve some passage for thy lusts; know that thou can not, thou do not
desire grace. For true grace animates the soul to lay off all hindrances of
the grace desired.

Draper should hold it at three or four pound, he scorns the motion and
slings away with detestation of it, he desired it, but his desire was stinted,
upon such a condition, at such a price above which he loatheth it. This is the
reason why the Mininisters of Christ are so unwelcome to men, and their
Ministry too. Because they would bring men beyond the price which they would
bid for Christ and grace; they would willingly have Christ, have faith, have
heaven, but they are loath to take so much pains, to be at so much cost, as
they must be at, if they ever have it, suppose thou give over thy whoring, thy
swearing, for grace, yet if not thy company keeping, thy lying, thou have no
true desire of grace; though thou give over all thy grosle sins, yet if thou
retainest thy deadness, thy luke-warmenesse, though thou give over all thy
sins save one, though but in a corner or a nook of thy heart, though I say
thou come to this price, yet unless thou will give all thou have, no true
desire of grace. For the man that truly desires grace, his desires are vehement
such as will part with all things for it; 2 Cor. 7. 11. Yea what vehement
desires; the word signifies desire upon desire, one desire upon the back of
another, and all for grace. Genesis 30. Give me children or else I dye, says
Rachel unto Jacob: So the heart cries unto the Lord for grace as for a thing
without which it perishes; Augustine says, that the desire of grace is the
thirst of the soul, it is a burning and gnawing desire, that will consume a
man with desiring. Here therefore the whole world is convinced of their
unprofitable desires. For what dead prayer? what dead hearing? what dead
receiving? as if men would teach God how to deny them, or as if they would bid
the Lord keep his graces. They will come and say prayers, and give an ear,
but they have no burning nor thirsting desire.

potentia, is in the Ordinance of God; therefore the man that desires grace,
he will delight in the Ordinances of grace; he that desires learning,
delights in reading and studying the means of it: so he that desires
mortification, delights in the powerful preaching, whereby he may have all
the corruptions of his heart laid open; he that desires grace, delights in all
the means of it, Psalm. 37. 4. Delight. thy self in the Lord, and he shall
give thee the desire of thine heart; Do not thou only pray, but do thou
delight in prayer? do not thou only hear the Word, but delightest in
hearing the Word? do thou not only come to the Sacraments, but delight in
the receiving? Then thy desire is true desire; when the heart has this
delight, there is an inward drawing the heart to it: Can thou find a
forcible tugging and moving of thy heart and soul to all holy duties, that
thou can not but must at them; but if thou art awkward and untoward unto holy
duties, to the worship of God, thy desires are counterfeit.

are as Oil cast into the fire, which makes the flame the greater. As a stone
the further it is from its center, the faster it goes to it: so if thou do
truly desire grace, the longer thy soul is before it can attain it, the more
thou art affected after it. The Comicke has a pretty Proverb, When a man is
athirst, it is a miserable thing to go dig a Well to quench it, for every
shovelfull will but aggravate his drought: So it is with men that desire grace:
Prove. 13. 12. Hope desired makes the heart sick; when a man's desires are held
off and still deferred, that yet he cannot have it, it does even make the heart
sick with grief: a man that wants health is sick because he cannot get it,
he tumbleth, and tosseth, and turns from this side to that side, cannot be at
rest; So the soul that truly desires grace, is even sick for it; it cannot
have content in this nor in that, it is never where it would be, it is as a
stone cast up from its own center, till it have gotten Christ and his graces;
every delay, though never so small, seems tedious to a man at such a time. But
on the contrary, thou have been without grace it may be these 20. 30. 40. 50.
or 60. years; what are thy desires? are they more than before? No, but as
before, so they are still; as thou did pray before, so thou prayest still; as
thou heardst before, so thou hear still; and as thou was faint in thy
desires, so thou art still, and such are thy endeavors; it is an evident
argument that thou did never truly desire grace; true desire the longer the
more earnest. Therefore the Prophet begins his prayer, Psalm. 13. with a How long
Lord shall I have this proud heart, shall I never be humble? How long Lord
shall I have this unbeleeving and impenitent heart, shall I never have faith to
rest upon thee, and repent of my sins committed against thee? How long Lord
shall I have such a dead heart, such earthly affections in thy worship and
service, shall my heart never be quickened, and my affections never drawn to
thee, and fastened nearer to thy service? How long Lord shall my heart be under
these corruptions shall I never get victory over them? how long shall I serve
the devil, shall I never serve my God? how long ere I shall be a factor for
heaven, as I have been for earth?

by God with grace; the Psalmist has a sweet passage, Psalm. 37. 4. Thou have
given him his hearts desire, there is no desire on man's part, but there is a
[hath given] on Gods part: Psalm. 145. 16. there is no living thing in the world
that can desire, but the Lord satisfies the desire of it. Examine therefore
thy self, have thou desired faith, and yet do thou distrust God? have thou
desired repentance, and do thou live in thy sin, never the humbler, never
the lowlyer, for all thy desires, but as thou wast yesterday, so thou art to
day, as the last week, so this, as the last year, so this? certainly thy
desires are not true.

For then thou should find God satisfying of them: as thou desire, so
thou speedest; little desiring, little speeding; great desire, great speeding;
Alamentable thing it is that the desire of grace, so great a thing, should be
so little esteemed in the world; men say they have good desires, but they are
like wicked Godfathers and Godmothers at the Font: who if the Minister asks
them, Do you forsake the Devil and all his works, the vanity and pomp of
this world; say, We forsake them all: Now let the Devil but tempt them to
pride, malice, drunkenness, revenge, and the like, presently they yield to it,
they say they forsake them all, but they do but lie; So ask them, Do you
desire grace? Yes, that is my desire, says one, and I desire it says another,
but they desire not to cut off their sins, or if they do, it is as Saul cut
off the witches, he cut them off with one hand and enquired of them with the
other, when he was in a straight: So men can be content to cut off their
sins, till a pinch come to draw them to them again, they can lay a side
their covetousness till a bait be offered them, to revenge again, to
drunkenness again, and so to gaming, whoredom, and the like: that these men
do not desire grace is evident.

of their ground, and all other requisites; but notwithstanding their desires
of grace, they are both to be at the cost and pains to hear the Word of God
and keep it: Paul and Barnabas going to Paphos, Paulus Sergus hearing of it,
presently desires to hear him Preach; no sooner can a faithful people come
to a town but the godly Christians will be at him, to preach to them: No sooner
did the Eunuch espy Philip, but he presently calls him into his Chariot to
expound the Scriptures to him; But thou may hear the Word every Sabbath day,
but it may be thou will sit at home or in the Alehouse, or if thou hear, it
is but with a slight care: Christ has commanded thee to pray for laborers,
how many prayers have thou put up to God for faithful Ministers, such as may
break to every one his portion in due season: I fear there are many thousands
amongst us to whom these things are as Riddles, men do not desire the breath
of grace, I know there are many talkers, but few doers, talkers by the ell, but
doers by the inch, men must first be doers and then talkers, some are only
great speakers of Religion and holiness: and now you all sit in your Pewes, I
know not which is the best Christian among you, you all hear and look upon
the Minister, but the trial is anon when the Church doors are shut, and you
gone home to your houses, by your meditations, repetitions, prayer, and the
like duties to engrave it into your hearts, and that your lives may be guided
by it. Many hearers are like alehouses with fair inscriptions engraven at the
entry or walls of the house, as love God, fear God, honor the King, pray
continually, be watchful, and the like; yet there is nothing but drunkenness,
and cursing, swearing, and all hellish ungodliness within: So it is with men
that make fair motions, fair shows, like Ezcchiels hearers, they will hear
well enough, but they do not; as talking without doing is nothing, so there
can be no doing without talking; a man that has true grace, he desires to be
speaking of it, we believe, and therefore we speak; if a man have grace in his
inward soul, it will cast forth a savor into his lips, it will season his
speech; the voluptuous man talks of his hounds, and Hawks; the Drunkard of
his cups, the worldling of his plough, and cart, and cowes; the trades man of
his wares, and the women of their housholdstuffe, this or that matter, but
scarce a word of God, or the work of grace.

7. Men desire not the companions of grace, like to like, and as the Proverb
is, birds of a featherwill fly together; Where shall we have the drunkard, but
at the Ale-bench? the Whore-master, but at the drabs house? the gamester, but
at the gaming house? the worldling, but with worldly men? They cannot endure
the society of the Saints, for they cannot rip up an oath, but some James will
rebuke them, saying, My brethren, swear not at all; they cannot tell a lie,
but some John will tell them of hell, that they shall be cast into the Lake
that burns with fire and brimstone; they cannot drink a pot or two, and be a
little merry, but some Paul will tell them that drunkards shall not inherit the
Kingdom of heaven; they cannot play the wantons, but some one or other that
takes Christ's part, will check them, and tell them that hell opens her mouth
wide to receive them. I never read in any history, sacred or profane, that
ever any of the governors of Sodom did visit Lot but when they would have
done him mischief.

And again, when they desire not the works of grace, grace bids men live in
love and amity and forgive wrongs, now where men conceive malice, and revenge,
and receive 6. 10. 20. Sacraments and swallow up wrath and hatred, and spend
1000. shillings in revenge, these desire grace no more than the devil: nay
grace will teach a man to deny his lusts, and sinful pleasures, and corrupt
desires: I know many think they desire grace; O they would have it feign, but
they will not have it in Gods sense.

There was a fool sent to fetch wood from the stacke, he would not go up to
the top of it, but stood pulling at the bottom, and had got but a few sticks,
which if he had gone to the top, he might have had a great many more in less
time, but whiles he was pulling at the bottom, at last the whole stacke fell
upon him and killed him. Just so it is with all men, all the world has a
stacke of sin lying upon their backs, and consciences, now they must take
away the whole stacke before they can be converted: True it is, men pray, O
Lord convert me, O Lord give me thy grace, but they cast not away all their
sins, they may be a pulling at this or that, but retain others; they live
in their deadnes and lukewarmenes in Gods worship, and in carnal performance
of Gods duties; at last the whole pile of their sins falls upon them and
damnes them, body and soul in hell for ever.

And lastly, it is an evident sign that men have not true desire of grace, for
when grace is offered, then they will not accept of it nor take it. Can a man
desire an hundred pound, and yet when it lies at his feet, and offered him,
will not take it up: God offers thee grace, he calls by his ministers, How
long will ye love foolishness? forsake your ways ye foolish, and ye shall
live, and walk in the way of understanding, Prove. 8. But now men will not,
they cast grace from them; I tell thee hereafter, thou may desire grace when
grace will not be found; You shall seek me, but you shall not find me, says
Christ. Now I bid you repent, but you will not believe and receive the Gospel,
but the time shall come, that you shall seek for me, and that grace which was
offered you, but you shall not find me, Ezekiel. 24. 13. Because I would have
purged you, and thou wast not purged, thou shall not be purged from thy
filthiness any more, till I have caused my fury to rest upon thee: even so the
Lord says to every soul to whom he offers the means of grace, Because I
would have converted thee and plucked thee from thy sins, but thou would
not, I would have purged thee from thy drunkenness, and whoredoms, and from
the foul filthiness of your corrupt heart, but ye have neglected and
contemned al those means of purging, whereby I would have purged you.
Therefore now mark Gods final sentence upon thy destruction, thou shall never
be purged, thou shall cry and call for mercy, yet thou shall never have it;
mark it now ye that have grace preached unto you, and will not take it, now
accept it, God will not let you have it hereafter, if you would never so feign,
but they that neglect grace now, grace will neglect them hereafter.

grace?

in them, but if you would desire grace, then labor to know it; Teach me the way
of thy Statutes, and I shall keep them, says the Prophet Psalm. 119. 33. Psalm.
9. 10. They that know thy name will put their trust in thee. That man that
knows and is acquainted with God, that knows what it is to be patient,
humble, holy, lowly, meek, and despised for Christ's sake, that man will put
his trust in God, and seeks after such excellent ornaments, let come what
will come of it, that which all men know to be good, all men desire, and
therefore few men desire the true good, because few men know it; knowledge of
Salvation in the Scripture is put for salvation: a man Luke 1. 7.
cannot have his sins pardoned, his heart subdued, and all his corruptions
mortified, but he must know what it is.

God never knows any but they know it themselves, those that brag of their
knowledge, and yet live in their sin, know not God, they have perhaps an
intellectual and carnal knowledge of him, but no saving knowledge of him, 1
Pet. 2. 9. Therefore one said, if all the learning in the world were put
together in one man, yet it is not so much as in the most ignorant child of
God, though never so dull and weak in apprehension of other things, yet if he
be truly acquainted with Christ, he has more knowledge than all the Doctors
in the world have by their humane learning.

Luke 5. 39. Thou that tastest of pride, of covetousness, of
worldly-mindednesse, thou tastest of very rank poison; but if once thou
tastest of the pure liquor, and of the good things of faith, repentance,
holiness, purity, and the like things of God, thou would never desire the
other again: The Prophet David knew not how to bring men to trust in God, but
by wishing them to taste how good the Lord is, Psalm. 34. 8. Has there any man
had the least relish of grace, though now they mock at it, and reproach it,
and their consciences tell them as much.

Before the Israelites tasted of the Manna, they cried out, What manner of
meat is this? here is stuff indeed; but when once they had tasted of it,
they adventured the breach of the Sabbath to get it: So men cry out at the
Preaching of the Word; what Preaching is this? here is thundering indeed, of
wrath and revenge, hell and damnation, and the like: what, can we not go to
heaven without all this pudder and stir? Alas! men know not the power of the
Word, men superficially know God and his ways; like a fool hearing of a
Lemmon tastes the pill, and because the pill is bitter he casts away the
Lemmon: So thou hear of this and that Commandment, to mortify thy lusts,
to kill thy corruption, or else of opening hell for thee, thy lips stick in
these bitter pills, and therefore thou rejectest the saving sweetness of the
Word of God. But I have given over my drunkenness, my swearing, and the like,
will some say, yet I feel no such sweetness by it, they say it is a glorious
thing to be a professor, to do thus and thus, but I see no such matter. Thou
fool thou tastest but the paring and the rind only of Religion, and do thou
therefore conclude that there is no more sweetness in the heart of it? know
thou whatsoever thou conceivest, yet Gods people that have tasted the
sweetness of it account it otherwise; so did David, Psa. 119. 103. How sweet
are thy words unto my taste! yea sweeter than honey to my mouth.

out of thy soul; Suppose a man has attained to some knowledge of grace, and
taste of it, yet if sin be not purged out, it will dead his desires.
Barzillay refused to sit at the Kings table, and eat of the Kings meat,
because of the evil humors of his body: So, so long as the old man is not cast
off, though the soul stand in never so much need of grace, though it sees
and judges of it self damned without it, yet sin puts the soul out of
taste, it cannot desire it: Sin is like grease to the horses teeth, it takes
away his stomach, though there be never so much meat in the rack, he has no
mind to eat: Wherefore when the Apostle exhorts men to desire the sincere
milk of the word, 1 Pet. 2. 2. he first exhorts them to lay aside all malice,
guile, hypocrisy, envy, and evil speaking, for except a man first lay aside
these corruptions, he cannot desire grace, for thereby the devil greaseth thy
teeth, and takes away the edge of thy soul from the desire of grace. When a
man desires to sleep, he desires to hear no noise; so when a man does desire
to sleep in sin, he desires not to hear the voice of grace disturbing him,
and the Devil like a diligent Chamberlain draws the curtains of darkness
and security about him. David professes to God, Psalm. 119. 18. that his eyes
failed for his promise, When will thou comfort me? he had no comfort in his
crown or Kingdom, or any other thing, and therefore he prays, Oh, when will thou comfort me? but alas! men suffer themselves to be filled with this and
that lust, with some corruptions or other. Now when a man's purse is full of
stones, there is no room for silver; so when the heart is full of sin, there
is no room for grace; Joh. 8. 37. My Words, says Christ to the Jews, have no
place in you. As a great Inn filled with guests, all the room is taken up, so
as there is no room for others; and by reason of the noise they cannot hear
what others call for: so it is when the soul is filled with sin continually
bawling for tendance, and accomplishment, there is no room for the Word of God
to enter, all the rooms are taken up, there are guests in every corner, all
the faculties are filled. Therefore the Apostle James, Jam. 1. 21. exhorts
them, Wherefore lay aside all malice, and superfluity of naughtiness, and
receive with meekness, the ingrafted Word, which is able to save your souls:
all superfluity of wickedness, sin, and evil, though it be never so small
or little, it is superfluity, and therefore if ever you would take physic take
it fasting, if you desire it should do you most good, so there is no taking of
the Word of God, or any means of Salvation, to have any profit by them upon a
full stomach; as when the heart is filled with sin, with pride, envy, malice,
hypocrisy, earthlinesse, deadness, untowardnesse to godly duties.

If thou would desire grace, consider the want of it; were thou never so
graceless, yet if thou did but know the want of it, thou would desire it:
without grace thou art child of hell, a brat of the devil, and an heir to
the curse of the great God; better had it been for thee, that thou had been
borne a dog, or a toade, a serpent, or any thing else, than to be borne to
live and dye without Grace. Art thou proud, and have not grace to be humbled?
know, God will know thee a far off, and then woe, woe, damnation is thy end;
Live thou in any sin and have not grace to mortify, and in time to kill
it? better had it been for thee that thy cradle had been thy Coffin, and thy
mothers womb thy grave, than that thou should live to sin, and dye without
repentance. O cursed art thou, there are not so many letters in Gods book, as
thou have curses for thy portion, it would burst thy heart with grief, if it
were sensible of the 100000. part of that woeful grief.

My heart breaks for the longing for thy judgment: Psalm. 119. 119, 120.
the Prophet considering what a fearful thing it was to be without the
comfort of Gods word, it breaks his very soul. True desire of grace is
sensible of the want of it; I say not therefore that it is without grace, for
there is difference, between being in want of a thing, and being without a
thing; a man may be in want of full health and strength, and yet not without
health and strength: so a Christian seeing in himself, not to have attained to
the full degree of grace, desiring after it, is sensible of the want of it. A
dead man ye may carry to London, or whither you will, he never desires to
bait in the way, he feels no hunger nor thirst, whereas a living man cannot
travail long, but necessity of nature calls for refreshment; a fearful sign
that men are dead in sin, and in the state of eternal death, seeing they can
travail up and down their whole lives, and yet feel no want of grace.



This fear is a mark of true repentance, 2 Cor. 7. 11. Where there is most
fear, there is most desire: What is the reason that women are most subject to
desire, but because they are most fearful? What is the reason that Stags and
Hearts (as King James excellently notes) are so thirsty after revenge, but
because they are timorous and fearful by nature? Who desire most to be
exalted, to this and that honor, place, and office, of credit and preferment,
but such as fear they shall never have honor enough? Who are more covetous
than they that fear they shall never have riches enough? Would I urge you to
the desire of grace, I think I can bring such motives out of the Word of God,
as will either leave you in the gall of bitterness, or else make you to desire
grace.

Solomon speaks of in Eccles. 9. 15. who when a King had besieged a City, yet
he by his wisdom delivered it, but no man remembered this poor man, though
they had been all dead men had not he by his wisdom delivered them, yet no
man accounted or esteemed of him. So it is with grace, were it not for grace,
we should all be damned; and albeit that grace does bring Salvation among us,
yet where is the man that truly accounts of it even so as to desire it?

Psalm. 4. Many say, who will show us any good? some good or other all seem to
aim at: but it is a wonder, what wide aims men take, some think it is in
pleasure, and therefore aim only how they may spend the time merrily, in
eating and drinking, in hawking and hunting, in carding and dicing, and the
like; some think it in honor, and some in riches, some in learning; some in
one thing, and some in another; but alas! thou may eat and drink, and yet
be damned when thou have done; thou may desire much gold and silver, and yet
perish in hell, after thou have got it; thou may desire honor and promotion,
and yet be damned when thou have attained it; these are true, but vain goods,
outward and temporary, good only in reference to a further good, so that if a
man should rest on them, he should lose all his good. Our Savior Christ puts a
base Pronoune upon them, calling them these things, as if they were not worthy
the naming, Mat. 6. 33. Seek first the Kingdom of God, and the righteousness
thereof, and all these things shall be added unto you: Where our Savior
forbids his Disciples the seeking of earthly things. In the first place talk
not of these things, neither let your thoughts be troubled about them, for
they are not what they seem, or as many judge them to be, but if you would
have the true good, first secke the Kingdom of heaven. So in James 5. 1, 2, 3.
Go too now ye rich men, weep and howl, for the miseries that shall come upon
you; your riches are corrupt, and your garments moath-eaten, your gold and your
silver is cankered, and the rust of them shall be a witness against you. Weep
and howl ye great men, Knights, Lords and rich men; if you have no other
treasure, your portion shall be damnation and destruction in the day of Gods
wrath. It is grace alone that is true good, inward substantial good, and the
last good of the soul; all other goods they are but finite, but grace
inestates a man into the Lord Jesus Christ, an infinite full and perfect good:
riches, honor, and wisdom, these things are good, but thou must give account
for them, and if thy account be not good, thou shall be damned for the
unprofitable use of them: those things are not like fat Parsonages, which it
may be bring 100. or 200. pound into the Parsons purse yearly, and yet may be,
they are but 10. or 20. pound in the Kings books: it is not so with grace, but
every pound is a pound, every shilling is a shilling, yea every farthing is a
farthing in Gods book: so that if God has given thee wisdom, knowledge,
riches, houses, honors, or any other talent, know that God has set it down
to a farthing, and thy account shall be as strictly demanded of thee, if thou
have not grace. Grace would discharge a man of all these; when all other goods
are but as burdens to men to sink them to hell.



the dishes, they might cut them, and yet rise a hungry, and starve for all the
nourishment they would give. So men cut the meat, and when that is eaten they
cast away the dishes; Prayer, Preaching, Sacraments, they must cease, if
therefore thou have not gotten meat out of those dishes, if thou have not
received the grace offered unto thee by them, thou art never the better: thou
have heard the word, but have thou received the spirit? thou have prayed, but
have thou gotten grace? thou have received the Sacraments, but have thou
received Christ, and his graces also? otherwise thou have nothing. O what a
strange thing is it, that men should feed upon dishes, and not seek after the
meat in them, and so starve their souls! Did the Prodigal, Luke 15. feed
upon his fathers dishes? No, but on his fat calfe; What though I have a golden
key, if it will not open the door? What good is it for a man to have brave
gally pots about him, if there be no physic in them to heal his sickness? A
boat, a boat, cries the passenger, when he would go over the water; what, is
it the boat he desires? No, but that he may pass over the water. We cry out
a Sermon, a Sermon, a prayer, a Sacrament, but to what end? we should desire
them as a means whereby God conveyeth grace, using them as boats carrying us
unto holiness, to faith, love, meekness, humility, etc. otherwise thou will
be never the better: for if a man have a hundred boats, yet if they cannot
carry him over the water, what is he the nearer for them? if a man have heard
an hundred Sermons, and have as many prayers, and Sacraments, yet if thereby
he have not grace, nor be carried to holiness and Sanctification at the day
of Judgment, he shall be at the farthest part of the River, of the Haven of
blessedness.

Eccles. 1. 8. All things are full of labor, the eye is not satisfied with
seeing, nor the ear filled with hearing: suppose the eye should see all the
brave and beautiful things in the world, yet the eye is not satisfied with
seeing of them: suppose a man should hear all the melodious music, yet would
not the ear be satisfied. The woman that came to draw water at Jacobs Well,
John 4. 13. our Savior tells her, Whosoever drinks of this water, shall
thirst again, these things may allay for a time, but not quench a man's thirst.
For give a covetous man never so much wealth and riches, yet his thirst is not
quenched, but there is room for him to covet again. Give Alexander one world
and he will ask for another. Thou art sick and desire health, thou have
health, yet thou desire something else: thou art in Prison, thou desire
liberty; when thou have it, do thou leave off desiring? No, but thou would
have some other thing. Suppose a man were worth ten pound, he desires to be
worth twenty; and when be has that, he desires an hundred, and so a thousand
pound. All the goods in the world is like Alehouse Beer, which the travailor
drinks of, but it does not quench his thirst; a man can never satisfy his
desire, with any worldly good. If thou would have that which will satisfy
thee, then desire grace, for grace is the proper object of the soul. Suppose
thou had all the brave sights in the world, yet thou could not see them
with thine eyes; suppose thou had all the sweet Music in the world, yet
thou could not hear it; for the sights are the objects of the eyes, and
Music of the ears. So all the good things of the world are but for the body,
not for the soul; riches, honors, pleasures, and the like, are the objects of
the body, and not of the soul, and therefore the soul can never be satisfied
with them. A father in his meditations speaks thus, Lord thou have made my
soul for thy self, and it can never be at rest, till it can find rest in
thee. The soul is like Noah's Dove which could find no rest (the waters
overflowing the earth) till she returned to Noah in the Arc again: so unless
thy heart has found God, and be drawn up to him the center of it; thou may
wander up and down the whole world, and yet never have content. Could thou
get wealth, honor, wisdom, learning, health, and the like, yet without grace
the soul is empty, and has not satisfaction. They are all transitory, and
therefore cannot give content. Suppose a man could have the world, and yet lose
it again, it would more vex him and disquiet him than if he had never had it.
Hence it is that a poor beggar, that has always endured want, can bear it
better than a broken Gentleman that has lived in wealth and pleasures in
former time, want and necessity is a hundred times more grievous to him: Will thou (says Solomon, Prove. 23. 5.) cast thine eye upon that which is nothing?
for riches takes her to her wings, as an Eagle that flies to the Heavens: he
does not say that riches flies like a hawke which by a whistle or some other
means will come to the Faulkoner again; but is like an Eagle, which no Art
under heaven can bring back again; all thy riches, all thy honors, have thou
never so much of them, they cannot continue long with thee; for either they
will leave thee, or thou must leave them at the hour of death, then out goes
the soul, and God knows whither; it may be the more honors thou have, and
riches, pleasures, preferments, etc. the worse thy case is, and the greater thy
condemnation.

Thirdly, suppose they were permanent, yet they are unnatural to the soul;
Can a horse feed upon flesh, or a Lion upon straw? so my beloved, can a man's
soul feed upon shillings and pounds? can a man's soul feed upon lusts, and
pleasures and vanities? No, the soul is of a spiritual substance, and
therefore cannot be satisfied with worldly contentments: as it is with the
body, so it is with the soul in this, the necessity of the body, and
emptiness thereof is not filled with spiritual things, but with earthly; so a
spiritual emptiness must have a spiritual replenishment: Can a man fill a
house with grace? No, a house is a body, and therefore must have household
stuff, and the like, which are bodies to fill it: so the soul which is
incorporeall is not filled with bodies, with silver and gold, or any thing in
the world; for all the honors, pleasures, and the like, in the world, are
bodily honors, bodily pleasures, and bodily delights, and therefore cannot
fill a spiritual emptiness; the fool, that our Savior speaks of Luke 12.
showed himself to be a fool indeed, in that he said to his soul, Soul
take thy ease, thou have much goods laid up for many years, verse. 19. whereas
al those goods did only concern his body, for notwithstanding all them, his
soul was miserable, empty, and wicked; his body indeed had much goods, much
silver and gold laid up for many years, but his soul had never a ragge.

Lastly, the soul it self is unsatiable, and therefore nothing can satisfy
it. The souls of men ever since the Apostasy of the soul from God, by Adams
fall, have wandered up and down like Devils, men run one after this lust,
another after that, one after this profit, that preferment, yet find no rest
in any thing. It is the curse of God upon man's soul, because it would not rest
on God, that therefore it should not rest on any thing else; the soul shall
never have satisfaction, unless grace bring it back again to the same God,
from whence it has fallen, and so set it upon God and Christ: A wicked man may
say he is contented, and he thanks God he has enough; but the reason is,
because he thinks he has grace too, and that enough to carry him to heaven: for
if that wicked men knew that they had no grace, or that they had not enough to
free them from hell, were they never so rich, honorable, etc. yet they could
have but cold comfort. Why, says the Prophet Esaias 55. 2. do you lay out your
silver, and not for bread, and your labor without being satisfied? Why do you
bestow all your thoughts and meditations, all your pains and labors to get
the world, to get gain and preferment, to satisfy your lusts? Know this is
not bread, it is a Scorpion; it is not fish, but a Serpent; will you feed your
bodies with them for a while, and starve your souls for ever? Suppose thou
had got all that thou can desire of these goods, and thou come to lie
upon thy deathbed, afflicted with many pains and aches of thy body, and
troubled with the stings of an accusing conscience in thy soul, some man would
tell thee of thy great honors and preferments, of thy large revenewes, and
present thy golden coffers, and should say; Sir why do you complain of
pains, and aches, and agonies? think of these things: alas, they cannot give
ease to the least of thy torments, they cannot shelter thy soul from that
fearful doomes sentence, Go ye cursed into everlasting fire: it is not gold
nor silver, nor all the wealth in the world, that can deliver a sinner from the
wrath of God: would thou have true good? God is only good; he is good in the
highest perfection, he is an absolute good without evil, all other good has
its mixture of sorrow, grief, and hatred, with love, delight, and joy. But God
is the only good, Prove. 11. 23. The desire of the Righteous is only good, he
desires God, and Christ, and the eternal love of God in Christ to be
manifested unto him, and therein he roules and rests himself, but the hope of
the wicked is indignation, he only desires the base pelf of the world, but
the wrath of heaven is with it, and he shall bewail his own soul, that for
such base things he should refuse the eternal good and neglect it.

Secondly, God is eminent in all goodness, all other good has for the most
part but one good in it, or three at the most, meat will not cloth a man, nor
cloth will not feed a man, but in God there is all good, infinitely greater
than man's soul is or can be capable of. Do thou desire Riches? go to God,
and then thou shall have all that thou can desire. Do thou desire honor,
and length of days, even eternity? go to God. When a man goes to one place
for food, they must go to another place for clothes; should thou go to
the Drapers shop for clothes, then thou must go to another place for meat.
Thou take an hundred ways in vain that seek after the things of this
world; if thou would go to God, thou might have all thy desires
accomplished, and all thy wants supplied at once in him.

Thirdly, God is such a good that without him nothing is good, when thou
desire gold, thou desire not the earth, but the good of it; if thou could
have the good use of it, thou would not desire the earthen matter of it: the
good of gold and silver, of apparel and the like, is from God; whatsoever good
it be, if God be not in it, it is not its self; thou have money in thy purse,
if thou have not God also in thy heart, it is not treasure, but canker; thou
that art clothed with never such costly garments, if withal thou art not
clothed with Christ's Righteousness, they are not garments to cover thee, but
badges of thy loathsomenesse, and nakedness before God; the gold, of thy gold;
the honor, of thy honors; the pleasure and delight of thy delights; the
garment, of thy garments; is Gods love in them all. In joy God, and thou have
good of them all, Psalm. 63. 1. O God thou art my God, my soul thirsts after
thee, my flesh longs greatly after thee, in a barren and dry land without
water; a barren good, the Juice and sap of the heart, and the root of all good
is from God alone.

Lastly, God is such a good, that if thou have him not for thy great good, who
is of all infinite goodness to his people, who have chosen and preferred for
their only good; The same God will be a God of infinite terror and wrath to
all such as have rejected him, and chosen false Gods to themselves. Is God
become this evil? justly may thou tremble, and fear all; all the devils in
hell, without the wrath of thy God, whom thou have rejected, the flames of hell
would not be terrible, but the Lords wrath as a fire, and a River of Brimstone
does kindle it. Our God (says the Apostle) is a consuming fire: the very hell
of hell, the fire of fire will God be to thy soul without grace. Wherefore if
thou would desire any thing to do thy soul good, then desire grace; grace,
or else thou perishest; grace, or else thou dyest; get grace, or else thou art
damned in hell for ever.

FINIS.

