THE FABLE OF THE Sun and Frogs, IN ELEGANT LATIN VERSE, Applied To the present
State of Affairs BETWEEN THE FRENCH and DUTCH. WITH Three several TRANSLATIONS
in ENGLISH, by three several Hands.

The first nearer the Latin; the other two allowing themselves a greater
Liberty of Fancy.

LONDON, Printed for William Gilbert Bookseller, at the half Moo^ in Paul's
Churchyard. 1672.

Appendix ad Fabulas Phoedri ex Bibliotheca Leidensi.
Servare potui, Perdere an possim, rogas?

Sen. Med.
SOL and RANAE.
RAnae Paludis Incolae, ambiguum Genus,
Limoque cretum, Res in immensum suas
Favore Solis auxerant: Etiam Boves
Vicina circum qui tondebant Gramina,
Ipsasque Ripis pepulerunt Metu Feras.
Quinse profundo credere ausae Gurgiti
Facto, Siluros atque Thynnos, Agmine
Et provocarant saepe, and saepe Vicerant.
Hinc Fastus illas cepit and Superbia,
Majusque Crimen Gratiarum Oblivio.
Patroni Solis invidere Gloriae,
Ingrata Gens occepit; and liventibus
Oculis tueri Mundo adoratum Jubar;
Nec se protervis abstinent Convitiis.
Nam sive ad Indi Littora obvertit Rotas;
Equos Ibero sive lavit Flumine;
Sive arduam Leonis ascendit Domum;
Lunaeve Radiis Cornua aspersit suis;
Ranae coaxant, and Clamore incondito
Queruntur omnia perdere: Ultrices simul
Minantur Iras, ni stet immotus Polo.
Pergenti Curru flammeo non segnius
Lustrare Terras, perfidae tentant Viam
Obstruere: Fundo ab imo Caenosos Lacus,
Vlvasque putres, and Solo resides Aquas
Pedibus petulcis commovent. Coelo Vapor,
Consurgit ater; and Diem Caligine
Extinguit almum: Risit Astrorum Parens;
Et ista Vestrum Tela recident in Caput,
Procaces, inquit, Bestiae! Ergo colligit
Radios, Viresque totas; inque Fulmina
Vapores nubilos densamque Grandinem
Momento vertit, and miseras tristi opprimit
RANAS Procella. Frustra Juncis Corpora
Certant opacis tegere: frustra sub Luto
Defossae sperant publica Strage eripi.
SOL Radiis haurit Cuncta; and ipsas Ignibus
Absumit Vndas. RANAE semiustae crepant;
Milvisque and Corvis dulce praebent Pabulum.
Quarum una fertur caeteris Consultior
Dixisse Moriens: Jam Poenas exsolvimus,
Quae been de nobis meritis reddidimus, Mala.
At vos, Nepotes, discite Vereri DEOS.
Juxta Exemplar Editum Amstelodami ad Insigne Josua.

The first Translation.
An Appendix to Phoedrus his Fables, as it was lately taken out of the Library
at Leyden.
I could preserve ye; do ye doubt
Whether I now can root ye out?
Sen. Med.
The SUN and FROGS.
THe Frogs, those Fennish People, as from Earth
And Water mixed in Mud, deriving Birth,
So in both Elements Commerce maintain,
From this to that, from that to this again.
Persia's old God, and France's new Device
The Sun, with friendly Beam these multiplies;
Nor their Estate augments less than themselves,
Till high and mighty grow the amphibion Elves,
Dreadful at Sea and Land: Here, round their Lakes,
Fear tame Beasts wild, and wild Beasts wilder makes:
There Tunnies they and Whales often set upon;
Tunnies and Whales as often they overcome.
Hence swelled with Pride, and a vain self-conceit,
Their noblest Benefactors they forget:
Yea, from- blew. Eyes dart envious looks upon
The glittering Grandeur of their Patron SUN:
And like base Mud, in terms of vile Disgrace,
Throw vile Aspersions in his glorious Face.
For whether he to the Rich Indies drive
His flaming Chariot, or his Horses dive
In the Iberian Flood; or else resort
Unto the Princely Lion's Royal Court;
Or last of all, his native Shine display
Upon the growing Moon her borrowed Ray:
These croaking Creatures, in their uncouth strain,
That all before him he destroys complain.
Bidding his Sunship threatened Vengeance fear,
Unless with speed he stop his swift Career.
Such threats no checks are to his Steeds, but spurs,
To hurry on his fiery Chariots course.
This seen; these treacherous Vermin strive in vain,
Themselves to give stop to his whirling Wain.
With busy Feet their muddy Ponds they trouble,
And make foul Water every where to bubble
Among the putrid Reeds: straight to the Skies,
From pudly Marshes does a dark Fog rise
Effacing Day. Sol, laughing at their Toil,
These weapons, says, shall on your selves recoil,
Poor peevish Animals! Then Arms he all
His strongest Beams, which in full Bodies fall
Among those Fogs; so in a trice transforms
(Such power have Gods) all to impet'ous Storms
Of sulph'ry Thunderbolts, and rattling Hail;
Then does with these the wretched Frogs assail.
In vain they shade and shelter, at this need,
From broken Bulrush seek, and battered Reed;
In vain in Water dive, delve into Mud,
Which nor such suppliants, nor themselves, long could
Preserve from Ruin, by such raging heat
Wherewith the incensed King of Stars then beat
In upon both. Their own, or other Men's.
The Dutch never dreyn'd, as Phoebus these Frogs Fens.
So's the House ruined where the Traytor's found;
Stormed (...) to ground.
A Feast of Boiled, Roast, Bakt, now smell't, invites
(Lips for such Lettied) Ravenous Crows and Kites.
When a grave Frog, much wiser than the Rout,
Midst her expiring Kindred all about,
Was heard to fay, This, this, just Heaven, we feel
For so much good repaid with so much ill.
You of our Tribe, who in remote Abodes
Survive this Day, learn to revere the GOD'S.

According to the Copy Printed at Amsterdam, at the Sign of the Josua.

The second Translation.
High and Mighty I who made ye,
From that Height can now degrade ye.
Sen. Med.
The SUN and FROGS.
THe speckled Tribe, sprung from the womb of slime,
Their Parent SUN proclaim in croaking rhyme;
Their Birth and store own from his gentle Ray,
And to his dance about the World they play.
They play, and sing with golden Throats an Ode
To the proud Persians, and their common God;
Whose kindly influence raised their daring Heads,
From no less mean and low, than loathsome Beds:
Raised 'em so high, that when Alarms they sound,
Tame and wild Beasts are scared from neighboring Ground:
And the Goliahs of the watery Field,
To their puissant sholes often forced to yield.
Hence swelling less with Venom than with Pride,
Their mean Original they fain would hide:
Creatures of Sun and Slime, proudly forget
The one, ungratefully the other treat.
Croak in harsh numbers from their noisome Seat,
Till hoarse with wrangling at indulgent heat;
If unconfined to their impoyson'd Streams,
They vye not circuit with those heavenly Beams.
Let but the SUN wheel to the Indian Brine,
The large Iberus, or the parched Line;
The Prince of Stars visit that Lion's Den,
That Is King of the best Beasts, and bravest Men;
Or let him proudly drown the Turkish Moon,
With vaster Torrents of his Lustier Noon;
Loudly they clamor, that he does none good,
(Because not shining only on their Mud.)
Nay, Tyrant like, merely to make him sport,
That with insulting Beams he does all hurt.
With spiteful Taunts, revengeful Threats they mix,
Unless in unmoved Poise his Chariot fix:
But finding Threats provoke him, and his Speed,
To stratagem and force they straight proceed:
Attempt to trash his Wheels, and plunge his Steeds
With unexpected Bogs, and heaped up Weeds.
Mud too their Dam (unnatural Brats) provoke
To rise against their bright Sire in slimy smoke;
In smoke so thick and dark, they nothing doubt,
The Day and the Day-maker 'twould blot out.
The angry God, to punish this proud Shoal,
Burns, where he warmed, with his Celestial Coal.
Sulphurous Thunderbolts their Vapors prove,
And on themselves in stony Tempests move.
In vain they lurk in hopes the Storm would cease;
Or in course Croaking Language sue for Peace.
Sol deaf to all round in bright Triumphs hurld,
Consumes their Floods, and conquers their low World.
Frogs now and Toads like hiew'd, alike both fare;
Both Boiled, Roast, Bakt in their own Mud-paste are;
Both carbonabed, and both you might see,
For Crows and Kites, cooked into Frigacie.
One graced in Front with Wisdom's Jewel too,
At last bespake thus her expiring Crew.
We now ungrateful find our Doom and Curse;
A Plague to Princes, to our Selves a worse.
Punished for Crimes great as our Patrons grown;
Let Us dread the Height and Vengeance of their Throne.
The third Translation.
Rise and Support to Me ye ow;
And so shall do your Ovorthrow.
Sen. Med.
The SUN and FROGS.
THe Fenny Folk from noisome Slime and Dung,
Mixed Excrements of Earth and Water, sprung,
Through the rich Bounty of his kindly Ray,
Who rules the spacious Empire of the Day,
Enlarge, like hi^, the Bounds of their Command,
Than he more dreadful grow at Sea and Land.
At Land even Beasts, Strangers till then to fear,
Tremble, when they their horrid croakings hear.
Their Hunger, which they dare not satissie,
Forget, and from best neighboring Pastures fly;
Wild to their Dens, seeking Protection there,
And finding it from Danger, not from Fear.
Tame to their Thickets, and there trembling lay 'em,
Fearing their trembling too, least it betray 'em.
At Sea their numinous Shoals more dreadful grow,
There often they fight, as often there conquer too.
Nor common Enemies alone engage;
Tunnies and Whales too feel their Martial Rage;
Whales that of long unquestioned Right make Claim,
As the sole Sovereigns of the liquid Main.
Here Erogs now Lording it, ingrate become
To their first Parent, and best Patron Sun;
Behold his Glory with invidious Eyes,
And his fair Beams smut with foul Calumnies.
If Indian Brine his Rising Forehead Laves;
If he dive setting in Iberian Waves;
If to the Royal Lyon's Den he bring
The choicest Tribute of his flowerie Spring;
Or if he last from his exalted Noon
Dim the pale Visage of the Horned Moon;
Which way so e're he move, the Frogs complain;
Croaking they fret, and fretting croak again:
As if his fiery Beams about he hurled,
To burn and waste, not warm and cheer the World.
Then in full Period charge him stop his Race;
Threatening Revenge if he but change his Place.
Hearing, not heeding Threats beneath his fear,
On still he drives, drives on in full Carreer.
Does then the Sun our Threats thus slight, say they,
Too high to stoop, and too proud to obey?
In this blind Rage with restless Feet they stir
Water and Slime, and putrid Reeds, and Mire;
Till a thick sullen Vapor does arise,
And with substantial Darkness blacks the skies.
What, ye ill Natured Vermin, what, quoth he,
Can such poor pievish Spleen, think ye, reach me?
Can your dark Fogs me of my Luster spoil?
(This speaks with half a Frown and half a Smile)
Your selves below ye cloud^* I still enjoy
Above my Native and Essential Day.
But so with Envy has it used to fare,
To drink of its own Poison the best share:
And so shall yours: The Weapons you now form
Their fatal Points on your own Heads shall turn.
With that, he calls home all his fiery Rays:
And violent Cold the Ai'r's mid Region sways:
Which over that new made Cloud does straight prevail;
Condenses first, then moulds it into Hail:
And in a Trice a smart swift stony show*
Does on those base ungrateful Vermin pour;
Who now their Wounded Bodies hide in vain;
In vain seek shelter from the pelting Rain,
Whether they dive in Mud, or sculk in Weeds,
Or crawl from Danger under batterr'd Reeds:
The SUN now glowing with revengeful Ire.
Their nastie Ponds dreigns with his fiercest Fire;
Till boild and roast the Vermin each where lay
To Crows and Kites a sweet and easy Prey.
When a grave Matron, that might well have been
For her sage Wisdom their illustrious Queen,
Had they not been Free States; 'midst all the Frogs,
That now lay gasping round the parched Bogs,
Her last breath forming in fit dying Tone,
Was heard their so sad Fate thus to bemoan.
How Just the Gods are! how ungrateful We!
How well deserving such our Destiny!
Who War would wage against such both Friends and Ods:
Oh henceforth learn to fear, not dare, the GODS.
FINIS.

