Gulielm. Fabricius Hildamus, HIS EXPERIMENTS IN CHYRURGERIE: Concerning
Combustions or Burnings, made with Gun powder, Iron shot, Hot-water, Lightning,
or any other fiery matter whatsoever. In which is excellently described the
differences, Signs, Prognostication and cures, of all accidents and burning
themselves. Very necessary and useful for all Gentlemen, and Soldiers as well
of the Trained Bands, as others; especially upon sudden occasions. Translated
out of Latin by John Steer, Chyrurgeon.

London, Printed by Barnard Alsop, living in Grubstreet, 1642.

A TABLE CONTAINING The Contents of each several Chapter in this Book,
CHAP. I. Fol, 3. OF the Definition and cause of Combustions and Burnings. The
degree and distinction of Combustions, declared in three particulars, as also
from whence the directions curative are to be taken. Chap. 2. The signs by the
which those three Degrees of combustions may be known and distinguished, Chap.
3. The Sign or Prognostication of Combustions, Chap. 4. Of a twofold Method of
curing combustions, chap. 5. The curations of the first Degree of combustions,
chap. 6. The curation of the second Degree of combustions, Chap. 7. The Cure of
the third and last Degree of combustions, Chap. 8. Of the Combustions of the
Eyes, chap. 9. Of Combustions of the Groynes, Chap. 10. Of Combustions of the
Joints, Chap. 11. Of Pain, and the cure thereof, Chap. 12. Of the imbecility
of the Sight, Chap. 13. Of the deformity of Scarres and their Remedy Chap. 14.
Of the retracted Nerves and crooked Juncturs after Combustions, Chap. 15. Of
Lightning, and how those that are stricken with it, are to be succored, chap,
16.
The end of the Table.
CHAP. I. Of the Definition and cause of Combustions or Burnings.
ALthough Combustions be very well known from other effects, yet for the
better explaining of the Doctrine, before we enter any further, we will thus
describe it.

Combustion is the solution of continuity of Epidermis or the outward skin of
the body, sometimes of Cutis or the true skin, and oftentimes of the Musculi,
Flesh, Veins, Arteries, Nerves, etc. marked with the strength of the Fire; Now
there follows after this Combustion vehement pain, inflammation, pustels,
etc. and if the Combustion be deep, the body will be foul, and will easily
produce a filthy and malignant Ulcer, for as soon as ever the fire or the fiery
substance has touched the skin, the radical moisture is presently dried from
the part; hereby the skin waxes hard, and is drawn together. The rest of the
Humor which remains within the skin and the parts adjacent, becomes very
hot, and gets the nature of the Fire: Furthermore, that hardness of the
skin which the parts circumjacent have drawn together, as also the Ebullution
of Humors and solution of Continuity do raise intolerable pain, which draws
unto it many humors from the parts adjacent, which (if the Combustion be but
light) does run together under the upper skin, and hardneth the same, by reason
of the strength of the Fire; and not admitting transpiration they are lifted
up, and hereby come pustels; but if the Combustion be great, so that the true
skin be also hurt, it will be hardened unto an Escarre, then the Humors which
are engendered and whatsoever else is retained and imprisoned under that hard
skin will still flow thither by reason of the pain, whereby not only the heat
which they have received of the Fire is increased; but also what blood or
Humors sover does flow from the body and the parts adjacent, do also wax hot
and burning, and do get a certain sharp and biting quality: Hereby it
comes to pass, that the Humors do crode and know the place affected, and
do cause a great Ulcer.

Furthermore it is to be noted, that as there are many things with the which
the Fire does imprint his strength and quality, which as they do differ in
substance, so one much more vehemently burns then the other; therefore how
much hard or solid the wood or mettle is, so much the more ardent heat is
retained therein: Also the heat of Oil, Fat, wax, pitch, new wine boiled unto
the third part, as hereafter we will declare by an example; and those which do
lightly stick are much mor hotter then hot water; For experience teaches that
Lead will be dissolved in hot Oil, which will never be done in water, although
it be in the height of heat. When Lyme is quenched then it is so heated, that
not only it exulcerateth and burns the skin and the flesh, but also it most
violently draws together the skin, nervs, and junctures. But the most
vehement and dangerous Fire of all, is Heavenly Fire, or Lightning, for it
contains supernatural Faculties, as hereafser in order shall be declared.

CHAP. II. The Degree and distribution of Combustions declared in three
particulars, as also from whence the Directions curative are to be taken.
ALthough Combustions be made of diverse matters, as with mettels and liquors,
as we have before declared, yet that little or nothing profits to the cure;
for even as Combustions made with red hot Iron is like unto Combustions made
with Gold or Silver being hot, so also Cembustions whether they be made with
hot Oil, wax, pitch, etc. among themselves (according to their snbstance) do
not differ, neither do they require a particular Method in curing; Even as that
most worthy D. D. Laurentius Faubertus, a singular man, and well practiced in
Surgery, does testify. Now as the Cure may be rightly instituted, we will
divide all Combustions, of what fiery matter soever they are made, into 3.
divisions, to wit, into a Small, Indifferent, and Great; For if the thing which
burns does not long stick unto the body, or be but light as straw, flax,
hemp, or any kind of light or dry wood, or any thing which quickly falls off,
they are but only pustels raised, and this is the first degree or particular:
But if the substance do something longer stick, or shall be induced with a
more violent heat, then not only the Pustels are raised, but also the true skin
is made destitute of Radical moisture from the part, and it is something dried
and drawn together, but not as yet any Escar made.

Thirdly, if the fiery matter do stick very long, and does contain in it a most
violent heat, then not only the true skinn, but also the flesh, veins,
arteirs, Nerves etc. are burned, drawn together, and dried into an Eskar,
because the natural moisture is consumed, with the strength of the fire:
wherefore there are Medicines which are to be changed and applied, according to
these differences, as hereafter is declared. The second Iudication is taken
from the part affected, for not one and the same Medicine does agree with the
Eye Members, generative, nerves, Iunctures, musculous, flesh, etc. Also women
and children, who are endued with an exquisite sense, do require more gentle
Medicines, but contrary those of a hard and rustique flesh, and which are
strong men, require more stronger Remedies, as Galen rightly admonishes.

From this description, and distribution of Combustions the Method of curing
easily appears, which we (God willing) will declare in three Chapters, like
as we have distributed Combustions in three Species or Particuculars.

CHAP. III. The Signs by the which those three Degrees of Combustions may be
known and distinguished.
SEeing that we have divided Combustions into three degrees or species, and
further, have prescribed a proper remedy unto every particular, it is necessary
to declare how they are distinguished by signs and notes; Therefore the signs
of the first particular or small Combustion are these, redness of the skin, a
sharp and pricking pain, like as though the skin were rubbed with Nettle-sced;
by and by (except there be fit remedies applied) the place is inflamed, and
pustles do arise, in the which is contained clear and white water, as also
the upper skin is separated. A light combustion is known by the Circumstances,
to wit, that the fiery substance was gentle, as Straw, Flax, Hemp, and the
like; or that did fall off, as hot water: or that the part touched it but a
little moment of time, on the contrary in the other species, the fiery substance
did touch the part a longer time, or it retained some greater heat in it, as
hot iron, or any liquid mettle hard wood, Pitch, Oil, Wax, and the like: From
hence it comes, that the place does presently inflame, waxes red, painful
and burns, and in the very same moment pustels are elevated, in which are
contained thin water, and waxes yellow and is sore by reason of the stretching
of the skin, which is stretched and drawn together by the stanch of the fire.
Now in the last Species, even in the same moment when the fiery substance does
stick to the body, there are pustels elevated, but presently they fall again,
and chiefly in same place where the Combustion is great and vehement, and the
under skin seems black and wanne, and hardly feels, though it be
pricked with a Lancet, for there is a hard and dry crust, which when it falls
off, there remains a deep and profound Ulcer, from the nature of the fiery
matter, and the space how long it has stuck unto the body, a great Combustion
may be known. Furthermore Combustions does speedily require a Surgeon, and let
him inquire to what Species it is to be referred To wit, whether it be light,
indifferent or great, if it be light, let it be helped with the remedies
declared in the 6. Chap. least pustels be raised; if indifferent, then tune
unto the 7. Chap. but if it be vehement and great, poceed; as we have declared
in the 8. Chapter.

CHAP. IV. The Sign or Prognostication of Combustions.
A Light Combustion, where the the skin is only hurt, although it be something
painful, yet it may easily, and in a short time be cured, and there will
scarce any scarre be perceived, if the cure be rightly instituted, and
according to Art: But contrary, a great Combustion is hard to be healed, which
also leaves behind it a filthy and withered scarre, by reason of the
perdition and contraction of the skin, if pustils do not appear in the
beginning. The many humors do concur together unto the offended part, which
do putrify and get a kind of a sharp and knawing quality, so that they do
deeply crode the skin and flesh, and do cause a rotten ulcer and naughty Scar:
Therefore the pustels are presently to be cut, that the sharp and hot water may
flow forth.

In wholesome and well-tempered bodies Combustions is healed with a little
labor: Contrary in foul and plethorique bodies, it is hardly cured, and does
easily grow to a putred ulcer.

For pain does continually draw unto it Humors and blood from the Body,
hereby the part affected, waxes hot, and it flamed, and diverse and naughty
Symtomes do follow.

Combustions of the head and face do leave behind them smooth scarres, for the
skin is so dried and contracted with the fire, and the pores so shut, that the
hair will never after come forth, nor grow.

Combustions of the Eyes and the Eyebrows, and of the members Adnata and
Cornea although they be light, yet are they dangerous, and there may easily
follow a deprivation of sight, or at the least a great imbicility, and the
eyelids may be turned inwards.

Also Combustions of the Groyne are very dangerous, and hard to be cured, for
these Members near unto the privy parts are moist, weak, and easily hurt by
flux of humors.

Combustions of the Belly is always dangerous and hard to be cured, for the
muscels of Abdomen are in perpetual motion, by reason of inspiration
expiration and extention, which is mad with meat and drink, excretion of
excrement, laughing, crying, as I have observed in my Country of Hildane in a
certain Child of three years old, for he being affected with a dangerous
burn in the belly procured us much business the space of eight months.

But if an intestine or gut in any part be burnt, it is mortal, as also the
burning of Lightning is mortal, as it is declared in its proper place.

Combustion of the great vessels of the Arteries and Veins are dangerous,
chiefly if it be deep, for the heat contracteth and shuts those vessels
whereby the spirits and blood cannot flow to give life and nourishment, and
then follows Gangrena and Atrophia, as we have showed in our Tract De
Gangrena and Sphacelo. Burning also of the Nerves and Articuls do easily draw
together the junctures: Therefore it is needful that the Surgeon do use great
diligence in these kind of Burnings, and that he study presently from the
beginning to soften the hardness and roughness of the skin with fit
medicines, and to draw away and disperse the violent heat of the fire.

CHAP. V. Of a twofold Method of curing Combustions.
ALthough there be an infinite number of Medicines in use both among
Practitioners and the vulger sort of people for burnings, whether they be
Plasters or Ointments, juices, or distilled water; nevertheless, that all do
tend to the same end, to wit, that they do either choke, resolve, or dissipate
the corrupt matter or heat, which is left in the part, now the suffocating or
choking of corrupt matter is done, either with cold and moist mndicines, as
with the juices and waters of Houslike, Lettice, Henbane, Nightshad, and the
like, or else with cold and dry things, such as are bale armeni Terra sigillat,
Ceruse, Potters Clay, and such like plasters, which do shut the pores, so
that the outward heat which is left by the fire, may be choked and quenched
like unto fire, which is shut into a close place.

The other way of quenching hot humors consists in this, that the outward
heat and sharp humors be resolved and scattered, even as we see coals to be
quenched if they be scattered hither and thither, which is done by hot
Medicines, as we will show in the next Chapter, it shall not be needful to
enquire what Method is to be used.

They which do follow the first Method, do think themselves to be sufficiently
authorized with this general rule of Hipocrates. Contrary Medicines are made
of contrary things.

For seeing Combustions is a hot accident, we ought to cure it with his
contrary, which is with cold things, which may extinguish the hot and burning
humors left by the fire: I do confess those sentences of Physicians to be
very true, but in my opinion refrigeration in Camb. ought to be done by
abating: for it is fitly rejected from the first Method of curing, seeing there
do many times arise diverse Symtomes, as hereafter we will show, for it does not
suffice only to prevent corrupt humors, but chiefly many other accidents, as
grief, retraction and roughness of the skin, and inviron of the pores, which
do all require hot remedies. But that these things be well understood, let us
look unto the properties of heat, the which Hipocrates does thus describe,
heat is biting in Ulcers, hardneth the skin, causes intolerable pain, it
ingendreth vehement fears, Convulsions, and distentions. And Galen says, that
the substance proper to draw together and thicken, is always proper to cold,
which is known to be in oil, fat, and other things which by their coldness
do thicken and harden; in which it is shown, that cold things are plainly
adversaries to Combustions, and do cause diverse and naughty accidents, for the
skin being contracted and hardened by the fire, by the much use of cold
Medicines is hardened, and pain is increased; hereby humors do gather together
which are not only retained under the hard skin, but by the use of cold
Medicines is forced downwards, and there they do more heat, hereby comes
inflammation, impostimation, and diverse times Gangrene, for the humor
included, because it wants breathing, it presently putrifieth, as Galen
witnesses; or because the heat which chanced whilst it is included in the
affected part, has dried up the radical moisture, in which the natural heat
consists, as we have showed in our Tract of Gangrena; For this cause
Hipocrates admonishes that it is not good to turn Erisipilas from the outward
parts unto the inward, and there oftentimes does follow (if great burnings be
dressed with cold Medicines) Herpes or knawing wilde-fire for the Humor being
included under the Skin does breed a certain sharpness and malignity. Anno
1594. there came unto me a certain young man from Colin whom Hirpes or wild
fire had invaded his whole leg from the foot unto the thigh, by reason of a
simple Combustion: By what method, and with what Medicines we cured the same
the Reader may understand by my observations Chirurgicall.

Therefore when I did consider, that as coals when they are carefully covered
under the ashes do retain their heat a long time; so corrupt humors, which
in Combustions do flow to the affected place, are by the use of cold medicines
retained; I have therefore more rather chosen to my self another Method, which
hitherto I have used with great benefit to the Patient; For even as coals do
quickly squench if they are scattered about; so hot Medicines do quickly cool
(yet by evacution) by discussing and extracting corrupt humors, as Galen
witnesses.

For as heat (as Hipocrates witnesses) foftneth the skin, extenuateth, eases
pain, mittigateth Convulsions, and brings Ulcers to supperation: So such
kind of Medicines are applied to those parts which are molested with blood,
(but they must be those which do moderately heat) to make thin the humors,
and to dilate the passages and pores: The same Galen also writes, for cold

But that there might be a right and Methodicall curation of Combustions
instituted, all effects and accidents of burnings are to be diligently examined
and looked unto, so that remedies may be changed and applied and according to
their natures; but first of all, because pain follows, by reason of the
solution of continuity and sudden mutation which violently draws humors and
blood from the body. It is necessary to use repellent Medicines, to wit,
defensives, and clouts wet in Vinegar and water lest such like humors and
blood do follow to the offended place: Then let there be used and observed,
diet, purgations, blood-letting, cupping, and other revultions, that the
humors and blood may be drawn and evacuated to the other part, as
appertaining to Topics; in the first species of Combustions, if pustels be not
risen, let the corrupt and sharp humors be drawn forth with an Ointment made
of Onions and the like, but if the skin be drawn together and hardened, we
ought to use all diligence that it be softened and made red, which ought to be
done with Medicines which are hot and moist, as the Chapters following we will
declare at length.

CHAP. VI. The Curations of the first degree of Combustions.
THe first and chief work which is required in Combustions, is, that the
Chirugion do prevent the rising of pustels; for if he can do that the Patient
need not fear any further molestion; Therefore if any one be burnt with fire,
water, hot Oil, or any such like thing: If the Combustion be light, presently
let the place be madified with water or spettle, and then held to fire as long
as may be suffered, or let the burnt place be dipped in hot water, or if that
will not be conveniently done, let a sponge or clout be wrung out in hot water,
and applied to the place, for that outward heat does draw unto it Empyruma,
that is, heat left by the fire in the burned part, as Aristotle and experience
teaches; for as a Scorpion being applied to the bite of a Scorpion does draw
to it his proper poison; so does heat draw heat: hereby Onions being mixed in a
mortar with a little Salt and applied to the burnt place, does draw forth the
corrupt humors, and suffers not the pustels to arise, it may be spread on
little pleggets and applied, until the whole burnt place be covered. Also
this following Ointment does violently draw forth corrupt humors, and will not
suffer the pustels to arise.

Caepae Crudae. 1. ss. Salis. Saponis ulbi veneti, ana.. ss.
Let them be mixed in a Mortar, and make an Ointment with Oil of Roses and
sweet Almons. Anno 1604. as my beloved wife was boiling of New Wine in a great
skellet, and stirring it with a spatter, she unadvisedly thrust her hand unto
the wrist into the boiling wine, when it was boiled even unto the very height
and thickness, whereby there presently arose a vehement pain, not only in
the hand, but also in the whole arm, the wine being washed away with hot
water, we applied the Ointment lately prescribed (which as then was most
fittest unto my hand) I anointed the whole arm with Oil of Roses, and rolled
about Rowlers dipped in water and Vinegar, and did oftentimes renew them all.
Thus (by Gods favor) of so great a Combustion there followed no ulceration of
the skin, but only two pustels, the one in her thumb, the other by her middle
finger, which with a little trouble, with Vnguentum Basilicon were cured.

Now in universal Combustions proceed as is declared in the following Example.
In the year 1605. The Servant of one Mr. Ioachim, a Dyer, by chance fell into
a great Chaldron full of hot Die, from whence there followed a Combustion of
the whole body; but because the Die was not very much hot, those parts were
chiefly burnt which clave unto the dregs of the Die in the bottom of the
Chaldron, in which the heat was longest contained; for the hands and face were
only burnt; wherefore I being sent for, I anointed the whole body, the face
only accepted, with this following Ointment.

Saponis liquidae lb ss. Caepae crudae ij. Salis. i ss, Oleum de v tellis
onorum j. Amigdasar. dulc. ana. iii. Musilag. Sem. Cydon iii. Mix them and
make an Ointment.
For the eyes I used this Anodine Colerium as follows: Aque Rosar, iii. Aque
Plantag, i Sem. Cydonor and Foenogreci, ana, ss misce,
Let them remain upon hot ashes, the space of an hour, then let them be
strained, and add thereto a little woman's Milk, and drop it hot into the
eyes, unto the other parts of the Face I applied an Ointment of new Wine boiled
to the third part, which was solid and thick, lest it should flow unto the eyes
and hurt them: The description whereof is thus: Gum. Elemni i. Oleum de vit.
ovor, Rosar. ana. iii. Saponis Albi and veneti ii.


Let the gums be dissolved with the Oil, and all diligently mixed in a Mortar,
and make an Ointment, which being spread upou a linen cloth, apply it all
over the Face, and every four hours renew the emplaister, but the Colery
every hour; Also the same day, the belly being first emptied by a supposition,
I opened the Basilica vein in the right arm, and took forth ten ounces of
blood for he was a strange and plethoricke man, and the day following I
administered this purgation following.

Electuar. Diacatho, vi. Ele, de Succo rosar. ii. Syrupi Resat, solut.. i.
With water of Cicorie and Buglosse make a potion, give it in the morning
fasting, observing a good diet. The next and third day I anointed the whole
body with the foresaid Ointment, and to the face I applied the Ointment which I
prescribed for the same purpose, and in the eyes I often dropped the Colerium,
but because that in diverse places, espeeially in the veins the Combustions
penetrated deep, we followed the same Method of curing which we have declared
in the 7 and 8 Chapt. And by these remedies (by the Grace of God) he was
perfectly cured of this Combustion in 14. days.

Furthermore the Ointment of Onions does little or nothing profit to
Combustions of the face, for by it the eyes may suffer much hurt and damage;
therefore this following Ointment is used in place of the other.

Saponis Veneti. 1. olei Roser and Amigdalar dulcium. ana. ss misce
Make an Ointment in a Mortar, adding a little quantity of the Musilage of
Cydon seeds extracted with Rose Water; It is to be noted, that although the
wine thin is not to be rejected in Combustions, yet to the face we ought by no
means to apply it so, for it moistneth, and penitrateth, and offends the
eyes; wherefore we ought to take great heed that this foresaid Ointment be not
too liquid: Many, that they may keep the pustels from rising, do presently
apply clouts dipped in the gum of the Juniper Tree, others do apply pleggets
of Larde about the burnt place.

Paulus Egineta does counsel to dip doubled clothes in Brine, and apply them
in Lie and water, wherein Lime has been squenched, is good for the same
purpose; but these kind of Medicines are to be often repeated and applied
lukewarm, lest the Linen being dry should raise pain in the affected part.
If the face be burnt with Gunpowper, and that any of the grains or corn of
the powder do stick in the skin, presently it must be gotten forth with a
Needle or some other sharp Instrumenr, afterward heed is to be taken that
pustels do not rise; by this means the powder which is in the skin may easily
be drawn forth, and the skin mundified, but if a Surgeon be not sent for in
the beginning, and that the skin be already cicumtrised, it is necessary that
the skin be again blistered, which may be fitly done with this following
Ointment.

Cantharidum number. vj. Fermenti ss.
Mix them in a Mortar with a drop or two of Vinegar, of the which make a little
plaster and apply upon the spots, but you ought to take great heed that this
Ointment come not unto the eyes, when the pustels do first arise, let them be
cut with cizors, then let the powder be taken away either with a Needle or some
other sharp instrument, and then apply this following Ointment.

Butiri sine sale. 1. Vng. Basilic. clei Lillior albor, De vitell, over, ana..
ii. misce Fiat Vnguentum.
As often as the Surgeon shall handle the sore, he shall diligently take
notice how the blackness of the powder spends away, and shall wash it either
with a Decoction of Foenegreeke or Melelot flowers, afterward apply the said
Ointment and so proceed until the* Ulcer be sufficiently mundified. I have in
this Cause used the powder of precipitate, to the profit of the Patient, but to
ease pain apply this Anodine Medicine about the sore.

Olei migdal. dulc. Rosacei Cerae allae ana,. j.
Dissolve and mix them, and then add Camphire j. the musilage of Cydon seeds a
little, mix them and make an Ointment; but if the powder be blown into the
eyes, let them be washed with woman's Milk or Rose water warm, but especially
we ought to use all diligence, that the flowing of humors be prevented, and
pain be eased, as we have declared in the Eleventh Chapter.

Now if the powder be not blown into the skin but that the skin be only burnt
with the flame of the powder, then presently apply the afore-written Ointment
of Soap, Oil of Sweet Almonds and Roses. In the mean time whilst the effect
is thus handled, the offensive humors and blood are to be diminished and
drawn out by other places, lest by reason of the solution of continuity they
should flow to the hurted part, and should cause inflammations and other
dangerous symtomes, which may be fitly done by purgation, blood-letting,
cupping, as we will show in their proper place,

CHAP. VII. The Curation of the second Degree of Combustions.
FVrthermore, if the Combustion do penitrate more deep, so that not only
pustels or blisters are raised, but that also the skin be burnt dead and
contracted, then neither Onions, soap, salt, neither any such kind of
Medicines are to be applied, much less those which are before said to be cold
and dry, but those which do mollify the skin and cause redness, are to be
used, for they are of temperature hot and moist, therefore proceed after this
manner.

First of all let the blisters be all cut with cizors whereby the hot and
sharp water may flow foith and wheresoever the upper skin is separated, let it
be peeled off, lest matter should gather together under it, and because humors
and blood do presently flow to the affected place, it is needful to prevent
them with defensives; therefore apply one of the following defensives, about
the breadth of the palm of ones hand upon the burnt place: Pull. boli armeni.
Sanguis draco. Gallar. Croci martis. Accatiae ana. ss. Olei Rosar. iij. Cerae
novae i. ss.
Make an Ointment according to Art, adding a little Vinegar, or else Farina
hordei. Argillae fornac. ana. ij. Let them be boiled with Vinegar and water to
the form of a Cataplisme, and in the end mix therewith the whites of two
Eggs. This defensive is to he reiterated two or three times every day, lest it
should dry upon the affected place, and should cause pain.

But to the places round about, apply this following Ointment.

Vngunt. Basilicon.. 1. Ol. Rosar. and hillior. albor. ana. ss. Vitel. ovor
nam. ij. misce.
This following Ointment does also very much profit for Combustions, it eases
pain, softneth the skin, and resolves the Humors flowing to the part: Butyri
Sine sale Pinguedinis gallinae necent. Ana, j. Caerae novae. Ol. Lilior, albor,
ana, ss,


Let them be dissolved together, and afterward add unto them Croci j.
Muselag, Sem, Cydon, j. Let them be mixed in a mortar, and make an ointment; If
the pain be so vehement, that the sick can very little take his rest, then
mix with the said foresaid ointment Opii dissoluti ss, or else Butiri recent,
ii. Ol, Amigdalar, dulc. de vitellis ovor. ana. Croci ^pii ana ss Caphorae i.
Muselag. sem. cidon, i. misce.
make an Ointment and apply it.

The Defensive being applied, and one of the foresaid Ointments, the affected
part is to be rolled in rowlers madified in water and Vinegar, and if the
offended part be the arm or the leg, beg in at the infirm part, for by this
means the humors are repressed, which are prepared to flow unto the hurt
part; but if the Combustion be any part that may not be rolled, apply linen
clothes, madified in water and vinegar 3. or 4 times a day, or also water
wherein Colworts have bin infused (which should be of vinegar, water and salt)
in which linen clothes he wet and applied, it does mightily repress the
Humors, eases pain, and is an enemy to corrupt Humors; notwithstanding in
the Face such kind of Medicines are not be applied be reason of the eyes, the
skin being softened, and sufficiently rubified, diverse do apply drying
Medicines, as Vngunt ex calce tota Diap^mpholigos Album Rasis, and the like,
but because such drying Medicines do contract the skin, and cause filthy
skarres, I do not allow of the use of them, therefore I use emolent Medicines
to the end of the Also I prepare an Ointment for all Combustions whatsoever,
after this manner: Butiri recent and tot. in aqua. Rosar,. iij. Ol. violatii de
vitel* ovor. Amigdalar dulc. ana. ss. Farinae hordii i. ss. Croci j. Musilag.
Sem. Cydon. i. Cerae q. S. Make an Ointment in a mortar.


This Ointment mollifieth, eases pain, and by little and little induces a
Cicatrice; but because Combustions, especially those which are in the upper
part of the skin flame with vehement sense, the Chirurgions ought to have a
great care that they do gentle cleanse them; I, lest I should cause pain by
clensing of Ulcers, do cover the burnt part about with fine linen cloth, as
with Cambricke or Lawne, and I remove it not until the Ulcer be whole, by this
cloth the matter may easily flow forth, and the virtue of the Medicines may
come unto the Ulcer; now whilst that the Ulcer is a curing, diet, purgation of
humors, and Phlebotomy is not to be neglected; let the Patient abstain from
all things that are vehement, falt, hot and sharp, and those things which are
hard of disgestion, let him use pottage made of flesh new killed, in the which
Sorrill, Endine, Lettice and Borage has been boiled; let his drink be phtisan
or Ale not very strong; if the body be full, open the Basilica or Mediana
vein, and take out as much blood as strength will suffer; if it be needful
for him to purge, let him purge according to the nature of the humor
predominating, concerning which it were good to have the opinion of a Learned
Physician; if the Combustion be in the face, it were good to apply Cupping
Glasses to the shoulders, that the blood and humors may be drawn back.

CHAP. VIII. The Cure of the third and last degree of Combustions.
THis third and last Degree of Combustions is very dangerous, for that very
often it ingendreth Gangrena and Sphacetus; For first by reason of the vehement
heat, the Radical moisture and natural heat is dried up: Secondly, the skin
Musculous, Flesh, Veins, Arteries, etc. be dried and drawn together, so that
the blood cannot flow to the offended part: Thirdly, the Humors and blood, by
reason of the Solution of Continuitie and pain do gather together, and
increase the burning heat, hereby by reason of want of nourishment, and
choking of the natural heat, the affected part mortifieth, as is declared in
our Tract of Gangrena and Sphasetus.

In the year of our Lord 1592. there lighted into my hands a very honest
Matron in Hilden, who being weary, by reason of her domestical business, and
sitting by the fire alone, of a sudden fell into a swound down to the hearth,
and her right leg lay on the burning coals, whereby the calfe of her leg
was so burnt, that a little after, (by reason her body was foul) she was taken
with Gangrena and Sphaselus, wherefore the Escarre being separated, and
Medicines applied which pertain to Gangrena, she recovered her health:

First of all therefore, the blisters are to be cut, and the water that flows
by reason of the Combustion, to be dried with a clout or sponge; then the
Escarre is to be separated, or at the least to be cut away almost as close as
the flesh, whereby the humor which is retained under the hard crust may flow
forth, the Medicines may enter, and whatsoever is inducerated and hardened by
reason of the heat may softened, the Escarre ought to be separated the first or
second day before the part be inflamed, and in the beginning this following
Ointment is to be applied.

Butirs. rec, et tot. in aquaros. iii. Vngunt Basilioon. i. ss Ol. Lilior.
albor. Amigda. dulc. ana. ss Vitel. unius ovi. misce et appli.
Afterward doubled clothes wet in this following Emulsion, is to be applied
hot, for it eases pain mollifieth and stays flux of humors.

Medullae sem. Cucurb. ii. Sem. Cidon, Foenogr, ana. i.
Let them be mixed in a mortar and strained out with lb vj. of pure water, and
make an Emultion, in the which dissolve Saponis veneti albi ss Caphurae j. But
if the Combustion be in the Face, the Soap is not to be nsed by reason of the
eyes, but in the place add the waters of Roses and Plantaine. Defensives also
in the beginning are to be applied, and Rowlers wet in water and vinegar, that
the violent flux of humors may be stayed; But if the affected part be
inflamed, and chiefly if the Veins, Arteries, are contracted by the fire,
then Defensives are not so well approved of, except they have some power to
resolve, viz. such as are these, Bean Flower, Flower of Lupins, of wheat, and
the powder of Camomile Flower, etc. mix them, let the Patient, and let the body
be purged with fit purges, according to the nature of the humor predominating;
also open a Vein and apply Cupping glasses, concerning which take the counsel
of a Physician.

When the Flowing of Humors and blood is stayed, then Defensives are left off,
whereby the spirits and nutriment may the better pass to the affected part,
and to divide and separate the Escarre: Wherefore the learned Surgeon which
is the Handmaid of Nature, ought every day, as much as possibly he can,
without pain to separate some of the Escarre, and afterward let him apply the
forewritten Ointment of Sweet Butter thereto: Also this following fomentation
has no little power to ease pain, mollify the skin, and help digestion.

Radicum altheae ii. Sem. Cidonior. Foenograeci ana. ss. Flor. Chamon. Meliloti
ana. M. 7.
Let them be boiled in water, or if there be vehement pain, in Milk; then wet
a Sponge therein and apply it hot* and afterward mix a little Oil of white
Lillies, but if the burn shall be so great then it grows to Gangrena, or
Sphacetus, then proceed according to the cure of Gangrena.

But because these kinds of Combustions, of the which we have spoken, do
oftentimes grow to a Gangrene, therefore they ought to be carefully and
judiciously handled, and always something ought to be applied, which may
resist corruption, In Children diverse times do happen Combustions of the hands
and feet, in the which the extremities of the fingers and toes are clean burnt
off; In these, great diligence is to be used, that that which is so burnt may
be quickly separated, lest the corruption do invade the sound parts; therefore
if the flesh and the bone be so burnt, that the joint may be saved, the bone in
the same joint is to be separated with a Raizor, not with cizors, as some would
have it; if the Joint it self shall be also affected, let the skin behind the
joint be taken away with a Raizor, but the bone with a little Saw; but why this
abscision ought not to be done with Inscision knives we have showed in a Tract
De Gangrena, in the which also is showed the manner of cutting off of fingers.

As soon as ever the Escarre is separated, it is good first to mundifie the
Ulcer, wherefore if it shall be rotten and stinking, the Patient strong, and
the affected part not very sencible, in such causes I was wont to apply
Egyptialum, but if the Patient be delicate, and the affected part very
sencible, then mix with the foresaid Ointment Honey of Roses, also the powder of
precipitate washed in Rose water, is an excellent Medicine against all rotten
Ulcers, or else Pulueris Praec pitati Radix Aristoloch. rot. Farinae hordei
ana. i.


With Honey or Roses, and a little Turpentine make an Ointment.

If the Combustion be in the head or face, add a little Gumma Lemnia dissolved
in Oil of Roses, also a mundificative of the juice of Smallege does very much
cleanse putrid Ulcers when it is mixed with Mel. Rosarum and Aquavita and
applied; Also these Medicines spread upon Cotton or fine Lint, and applied to
Ulcers, is profitable, or fine Linen cloths doubled, or let the part affected
be rolled in a soft sponge, for these linen clothes and sponge do draw thin
humors, which do hinder consolidation; to Ulcers already mundified, it is best
to use Incarnatives, such as are Vngunt Aurium Nicotiane, or this following
powder: Pulvis Aroes. Sarcocollae. Myrrh. ana. ii. Miso. f. pull.


This following Viscus does mightily mundifie and incarnateth all sorts of
corrup ulcers: Herbar. Centaurii et Hiperici. Cum toto, Diapensiae,
Alchimellae, Beat Silvest. Folior-arnoglossae maioris, Ana M. iiij. Radic.
tormentille, Aristolocbie long ana.. iij.
Let them all be cut and beaten together, after let them be put in a Glass
vessel and power Wine thereon until it do only swim, and set it in the
Sun the space of three days, then let it be boiled with a slender fire,
until the third part be consumed, and when it is strained with a strange
expression; in a Glasen Limbecke and in Balneo Marea make a Viscus or
Bird-lime; Then cause a Cicatrix, but not with those things which do
vehemently dry, as Chirurgions use to do in other Ulcers, for vehement dryers
applied unto Burns do cause a rough and filthy scarre; Therefore apply this
following Ointment: Emplast. Palmei i. Pinguid. Gall. Et anser ana. ss.


Let them be dissolved together, and then mix with them Alumines Vsti, Saturni
Calcinati, Lythargirii aurei, Lapidis Calum. naris.
And in a Leaden Mortar make an Ointment adding of the Musilage of Cydon seeds
and Foenogreeke, as much as is expedient, with the which make an Ointment most
excellent for all Combustions whatsoever; Also I have used an Ointment of
Aliblaster in this cause with great profit, whose description is as follows:
Lapidis Alablastratis Calc. i. ss Pumicis albi Calcionat. ss
Make them into a very small powder, afterward Caerae albae Ceri Cervini Ol.
Amigdalar. Dulc. Lilior Albor ana. i. Ol. de. vitell. ovor. ss.
Make an Ointment according to Art, this Ointment mollifieth, eases pain, and
produces a fair Cicatrix.

If the Combustion be in the eyebrows lips, or in the fingers, there ought
to be great care taken that these parts be not contracted and fastened
backewards rolled in a soft sponge: therefore Linen clothes or Lint, or thin
Leaden Plates finely beat and used, are to be put between the parts where
conglutination is feared: In great Combustions which are in the great vessels
of the Veins and Arteries where Atrophia is feared, by reason of little
nourishment, all the affected part are the first days to be anointed with Oil
of Roses, to repress the humors, and afterward with this following Ointment.

Cucci lumbricor ij. Pinquid. humanae Callinae. Vrsi ana. i. Aquavitae ii.
misce.
This Ointment mollifieth, resolves, corroborateth, and opens, if any veins
or arteries, by reason of the violence of the fire, be contracted or stopped;
and it stays Atrophia.

CHAP. IX. Of the Combustions of the Eyes.
BY how much the more noble one part of our Body is more then the other, so
much the more care is to be taken thereof when it is ill affected; therefore
because the Eye, of all members is the most Noblest and very sencible, it does
require a certain particular cure: First of all therefore, the Surgeon
shall endeavor himself in this whole work, that he eases pain, and stays
the flux of Humors; wherefore presently from the beginning let him apply
defensives to the temples; and our all the pustels or blisters, that the sharp
and hot water may flow forth, but drop into the eyes now and then woman's milk
mixed with Rose water luke warm, in which let a little Saffron be macerated;
Also doubled clothes madified in this Milk should be applied, and let it be
reiterated as often as it is dry; Or else Aqua. Rosac. iij. Sem. Cydonior. and
Foenogr. ana. ss, Croci Integri. ss. misce.


Let them remain in infutione the space of 4. hours, then let them be
strained, to this Musilage mix a little woman's Milk, and then let it be
dropped warm into the eyes, and let them be applied thereto with doubled
clothes warm; it there be any great pain, then add thereto a grain or two of
Opium dissolved in Rose water, also Pigeons blood being dropped warm into the
eyes, eases pain, then apply this following Cataplasma: Pulpa malor. dulc.
suh. prunis decoct. ss. Farine Foenogr. et Hordei ana. ss.
Boil them in Milk to the form of a Powltice, and in the end mix thereto
Croci ss. vitellum unius ovi, with a little Oil of Roses, and let it be
applied hot, but round about the eyes, if the burn be but light, some Ointment
of soap may be applied, which must be of a reasonable hard body lest it
offends the eyes.

This process is not to be changed unless the Parient be quite free from
inflammation and pain, after that apply this following Colerium, for the better
exiccation and corroboration of the sight.

Aquar. Euphrasia. Foeniculi, Rosarum ana. i. Tutie Preparat, Sief Sive opio
ana.. i. Misce fiat Colerium.
Now know (gentle Reader) that a Colery, into the which woman's Milk enters,
is in the Summer every day to be changed, but in the Winter every other day,
for the Milk quickly turns and waxes sour, and then it eases not pain,
but dries; for this cause, those sharp things which we have prescribed in
other burnings, as Lie, brine etc. are not be applied to burns in the face,
Stupifactive Medicines are to be resisted as much as possible may be, except
great pain be present, for they (by reason of their great coldness) do
thicken the Humors and visible spirits of the eyes; but if the skin shall be
hardened to the eyes, it may be softened and made supple with the foresaid
Ointments, but grear care is to be had that the Ointment or fat enter not into
the eyes, for that stireth pain; In the mean time whilst the skin is
mollified with the aforesaid Ointments and Oils, let the Colery be dropped in,
and the Cataplasme be applied, as we have already spoken of.

Generally let the Patient use a sparing diet, let him abstain from all hot
things, salt things, Ginger, Pepper, Cloves, Garlic, Onyons, Radishes, and
the like: And also from all things that are hard of Digestion, also Wine and
strong Ale does much hurt, let his drink be phtisan, in the which Coriander
seeds prepared, and Anniseeds have bin boiled; If the Patient by reason of his
age can not abstain from Wine, let him drink white win that is not very
strong; In his pottage let those herbs be boiled which do cool, and that
do purge Choler, as are these, Sorrill, Borage, Cicory, Chernill, the Roots
of Parsely, Fennel Mariory, Rosemary, and Eyebright: Let the patient take a
little Syrup Cydonior, Symplex or old Conserve of Roses, that the elevation of
vapors unto the head may be hindered, if he be very thursty, let him use his
decoction of Parley, in the which dissolve the Sirrup of the Juice of Sorrel,
Limons or Pomgranuts, also Confections of cherries, Barberies, and such like
are convenient.

Furthermore before I make an end of this Chapter (for the benefit and further
experience of the Reader I will declare an excellent Example of Combustions.

There was a Maiden child, of the age of two years or thereabouts, which was
the daughter of Mr. Samuel Gaillard a most vigilant Schoolmasters of
Neocoments, and my most Reverend Godfather, whom by chance sitting by the fire,
fell among the burning coals, whereby not only her forehead about the eyes,
but almost all her whole face, especially in one place was grievously burnt, I
being called just at the instant, I applied this following ointment upon the
whole face in the form of a Plaster.

Saponis veneti i. Ol. de vitel. ovor. et Amigdal. dulc. ana, ii. Gumi elemi
dissolut. Cum Oleis i. misce.
Make an Ointment adding a little of the Musilage of Cydon seeds.

But always into the Eyes drop a little of the Colerium made of woman's Milk
and Rose water and apply it also with fine linen clothes, the first I renewed
the Plaster every four hours, hereby the greatest part of currupt humors
were culled forth, and the second day I prescribed him pottage made of new
killed Flesh, in the which was boiled the powder of the Root of Mechoacan i.
and to the affected place I applied this Ointment following: Ol. de vitellis
ovorum, Ol. Amigdalar. dulc, Pinguid vrsi and Pinguedinis humana ana ss. Gum
Elami dissolut cum oleis ii. Caerae novae i. Croci i. misce.
Make an Ointment, with the which I almost finished the Cure, except that in
the end of the Cure I mixed with the foresaid Ointment a little of the Flower
of Lentils, and I anointed the whole burnt part with this following Emolent
Ointment: Gum Elemmi ss. Ol. de vital ovor and Lilior albor ana ss. Pinguid.
humanae. ii. misce.


In the mean time whilst that the skin is mollifying, I use to extend it with
both my hands, like as the Felmongers do there skins when they can them up;
and thus by Gods favor she was cured, and there was no sign of a Combustion
left, except it were one little one in her upper lip, in the which place, by
reason of the Child's unpatience I could not make the Medicine stay.

CHAP. X. Of Combustions of the Groynes.
THe Groynes, because they are rare, laxe, humid members, and apt to flux of
humors, whereby they do easily putrify; They do also require a particular
care and method of curing: First of all therefore (because by reason of the
vicinity of the Emunctiories, humors do quickly flow unto them) Defensives
are to be applied to the bottom of the belly, upon the Combustion, also cut a
vein in the Cubide, and if it may conveniently be done, provoke vomitting; but
if it be not convenient, let the Patient be purged downwards, and prescribe
him a slender diet; let him abstain from strong Wine, and from meats hot and
sharp, as we have showed in the former chapter; because the Groynes are
Members rare, laxe, humid, and apt to corruption; therefore if there be no
blisters risen, presently apply some Ointment prepared of soap and Onions, but
if they are risen, let them be cut, whereby the sharp water may flow forth,
then apply this following Ointment.

Vngunt rosati i. ss Ol. de vitel. ovor. et Amigdal. dulc. ana. ss.
Dissolve them, and then mix thereto Mirrhae Aloes ana. i. Mix them and apply
them with Linen clothes, and then let the whole part be covered, with this
following Cataplasme: Farinae hordii et Fabar. ana. iii. Pulv. Rosar. rubar. ss.
With a little Vinegar and Honey make a Powltice, and apply it hot: But if the
Combustion be great, so that it makes a hard crust, then let it be separated
by little and little, with an Incision knife or at the least scarified in
diverse places, then apply this following Ointment to cause the escar to fall.
Superior is ungunt ij. Pull. Scordii. i. Unguent. Egiptiaci ij.
More or less according to the quantity of the putrefaction and the strength
and weakness of the Patient, and apply it on linen clothes, afterward.
Farinae lupinor. Fabarum. Lollii ana. i. ss Let them be boiled in Barbers lie,
and then mix to them. Pull. Scordii. Aloes. Mirrhae ana. ss. Mix them and make
a Powltice, and apply it hot, after the Escar is fallen, mundifie, incarnate,
and cicatrice the Ulcer, as we have declared in our 8. Chapter.

CHAP. XI. Of the Combustions of the Joints.
IN Combustions of the Joints defensives ought to be applied, the body purged,
etc. Medicines made of soap, Onions, etc. are naught; wherefore anoint the
whole member twice a day with Oil of worms, Man's grease, Hens grease, with an
Ointment of Marsh, Mallows, and the like. The rest is to be learned in the
former Chapters.

CHAP. XII. Of Pain, and the Cure thereof.
Pain is a grievous Symtome as well in Combustions as in all other effects
whatsoever, for it scatters and consumes the vital spirits, and causes
unquietness and Fevers, hereby follows a defect of the mind, it draws a
flux of humors, and thereby arise Inflammations, Convultions, and other
grievous symptoms, therefore it is to be eased as much as possible may be, now
the general curing of pain, is to take away the cause thereof.

But because that in Combustions there are two several causes, to wit, sudden
alteration, and solution of continuity, there shall be a twofold scope of
Curing: First, that the corrupt humors caused by the fire be drawn forth, and
the part affected refrigerated and brought to his proper temper, as we have
sufficiently declared before.

Secondly, that whatsoere be disjoined and burnt be united and consolidated;
but because the corrupt humors cannot be drawn forth, much less the blisters
and ulcer cured, except the hard and contracted skin be first molified and made
supple; Therefore it is necessary that the Surgeon do bend his whole study,
to supple and soften the skin, with those hot and moist Medicines which are
before rehearsed, whereby those sharp and subtle humors may be exhallated
and drawn by the pores of the skin; but although such kind of Medicines are
hot, yet they cool, notwithstanding by accident, that is as Galen witnesses,
by resolving and scattering sharp humors; therefore if there be great pain,
and that it be not eased with those Medicines which we have prescribed in our 7
and 8. Chapters (the body being first purged, and a vein opened, if age and
other things will permit) apply this following Foment.

Radic. Altheae i. Florum Chamomil, Meloloti Rosarum Absynthii ana. M. ss. Sem.
Foenog. Anethi ana. ss. Ol. violar. iij.
Let them be boiled in Milk, in the which wring out a sponge or else doubled
clothes, and apply it oftentimes to the painful place, hot as it may be
suffered. This following Powltice is also very good, and eases pain
marvellously.

Micarum panis Albi lb ss

Boil it in Milk to the form of a Powltice, then mix thereto Oil of sweet
Almonds, new Butter of each i. Oil of Eggs ss. Saffrom i. the yeolke of one
Egg, make therewith a Cataplasme and apply it hot three or four times a day,
but first foment the place affected with the following foment; if you have any
man's grease in a readiness, mix it therewith, for it is a singular Anodine.

Also apply Defensives, and prescribe a Diet, and let the body be purged
according to the nature of the Humor predominating; also open a vein and
apply Cupping-glasses; if the pain be not eased with these things, proceed to
stupifactive Medicines, for it will not be in vain, because they are cold,
even in the fourth degree, and being done with heedfulnesse and wisdom, they
are not dangerous, especially in the outward parts, but begin with those which
are gentle.

CHAP. XIII. Of the imbecility of the Sight.
SEeing that diverse times after Combustions there follows an imbecility of
the sight, and a great rheum in the Eyes, therefore it will be necessary to
declare how they may be helped, that they grow not into Lachrimale Fistilo. S.
Opthalmia, and to a pin and web, or else clean perish the sight: Wherefore
the Cure shall be performed by three intentions, that is, by Diet, purgation,
and stupifactive Medicines; and because that in Rheumes of the Eyes the Brain
sends forth Humors and the eyes receive them, it is necessary that they be
not altogether hindered, lest naughty Humors should engender in the Body and
the Brain, but rather that those which are already engendered and flow to the
eyes, may be dried and drawn backwards, likewise the eyes are to be defended
lest they sustain a flux.

There are three things to be observed in the administration of diet, to wit,
the quantity, the quality, and the use; For first all excess, as well of meat
as of drink is to be avoided; Secondly, because the flux of the Eyes is
always caused by superfluity of humors. The third thing to be observed, is,
that the Patient never eat, except the meat be first well concocted, that he
have a natural appetite thereto, and that he do avoid multitude of meats at
one meal, which differ in substance and in quality, let his bread be of the
best wheat well boiled and levened, let him abstain from salt meat, and that
which is dried, but especially from Hogs Flesh; the Flesh of young Bullocks,
Capons, and of Birds that live in woods is profitable for him; also boil with
his meat and other pottages, Hisope, Mariorum, Sage, Rosemary, Eyebright, the
Roots of Parsley, Pimpernill, and the like: But if the flux be caused of thin
and sharp humors, then boil with his meat and pottage, and other warm
things Borage, Buglosse, Sorrill, Chernill, Celendine, Eyebright, Fennel, and
Purslow seeds, with many other things.

Other pottages are also very hurtful, as those of Letrices, Purslow,
Colworts, as also of Milions, Onions, Leekes, Garlike, Musterd-seed, Radishes;
as also Pepper, Ginger, Cloves, pease, and white meats instead of Butter, all
which are naught for Fluxes of the eyes.

Strong wine and strong Ale do also hurt, let him use Ale that is not very
strong, but well boiled, or else Pthisan drink, wherein Agrimony, Eyebright
and Pruens have been boiled, then let it be a little sweetened with Sugar and
spiced with Cinnamon; but if the Patient cannot abstain from wine, by reason of
Age or Imbecility of the ventricle, let him choose old white wine which is not
very strong: Sleep and rest are very convenient in Diseases of the eyes, but
watching and study is very hurtful, especially presently after meat, to which
may be added Venus Sports.

Secondly, let the hurtful humor which flows to the eyes, be digested,
prepared and evacuated and if the flux be caused by a hot and sharp Humor, let
it be digested with this following Julip: Aquar. Bitonicae. Euphrasie.
Borragini: Acitoce ana. i. ss. Syrupi de nymphea Violatia et de Cicorio ana, ss
misce.
Make a Iulip for two mornings, and then purge him with this following potion:
Electuar. diacathol. iv. Diaphenic ij. Syrupi ros. solut. cum Rhabar. et
Agaric. ij.
Make a potion with the water or decoction of Betony or Eyebright, or else
administer these Pills: Mass pillular de quinque generibus myrobolonor Pil.
agregativar ana. ss. Diagridii grana iiij.
With water of Eyebright, form fine pills unto Children you may administer
them from i. to ii or iii. according as age and strength does permit; also let
them be purged with Manna, or the powder of Machaocan, the body being purged
use this following Electuary: Conserve Flor. betonicae Euphrasie et Rosarum
ana. misce.


Unto Children give a dram or two; the body being purged, use this following
Electuary.

Conser. Flor. beton. et Euphrasie ana. ii. Salvie et Rosmarini i. misce.
Let the Patient take of this Electuary, the stomach being empty, the quantity
of a nut, the Decoction of Guiacum, the roots of China sarsa Parilla
Sassaphras, is very good to dry up evil humors and to strengthen the sight:
Also the stomach ought to be looked unto because of his vicinity with the
brain, for a weak stomach sends many vapors unto the brain which do after
descend unto the eyes; therefore let the Patient abstain from all things which
do clog the stomach, and are hard of digestion, let him also take twice a
week i* of this Mass; Pil. hiere pigr. simpli. gal. mass pillul. Assaieret.
Rhah. opt. triti pulveris seen ana.. i. Gariophiller. Macis. Cinamoni and. ss.
With Syrup. Rosar. lenit, make a Mass of Pill.

Or else this following powder; Sem. Coriandri preparat Sem anisi ana. i. Flor.
betonicae Rosar. rubr. Euphrasiae ana. ss. Cinamoni electi macis ana ii.
Pellicular, interior, ventriculi, Galinarum ss. Sacchari rosat, ad pondus
omnium.


Mix them, and make thereof a powder.

Now follows the 3 Intention which consists of Medicine Chirurgicall,
therefore if there be great pain, apply to the forehead some defensive out of
the 7. Chap. but drop into the eyes this following Colery, and apply it with
doubled clothes wet therein.

Aquar. plantaginis Rosarum Euphrasiae ana. i. Caeruse lotae Tutie preparat.
Olibani subtilis. pulv. ana.. i. misce.
But if the flux of the eyes be of cold humors, then apply this Colery
following: Aquar. Euphra. Foeniculi Rutae ana, ii. Olibani, Masticis, Myrrh,
Aloes, Tutiae preparat. Sacocollae ana.. i.


Make a Colery according to Art.

If the flux be of blood and of hot humors, then open the Cephalica vein in
the arm; if age do give way, unto children apply Leeches unto the Caphalica
vein in the arm, or unto the jugular veins in the neck, also apply
Cupping-glasses with great flame unto the shoulders; also apply this following
Viscatory behind the ears.

Canthar. in Pulv. redact. number. vj. Fermenti acris ss misce.
With a drop or two of strong Vinegar,

The inner Bark of the black Grape tree, if it be bruised and applied, has
the same quality.

Also let the Patient use twice or thrice a week this following Masticatory:
Masticis Radic. Pyretri. Summitat maioranae. Nucis Muscate ana. i.
Make thereof trochisqs in a mortar, about the bigness of a Lupine: Also
Mastique being chewed and kept a good space in the mouth, does draw much
humidity from the brain, also Rasons and Damasine Pruens, moistened in Oil of
Fennel, and chewed, although they do not altogether so much draw Humors from
the brain, yet they do corroborate the brain and sight.

I do not allow of sneezing powders in diseases of the Eyes, for by drawing of
humors unto the nose, they fill the Nerves Optiques therewith, and so weaken
the sight, also strew this following powder upon the Head: Flor. rorismarini,
Salvie, Betonice, Stoechados, Rosar. rubr. Summitatum maiorini ana. M. ss.
Coriand. Prepar.. i. Ligni aloes, Mistieis, Thuris, Diam. dulc. Nucis moscate
Granor. Alkermes.
Cut them small, and beat them together in a mortar according to Art.

If the sight be weakened, by reason of a continual and long flux, let it be
corroborated with this following distilled water: Euphra. cum toto Anagal.
flore Purpureo. Henbar foenic. ana. M. X. ii. Rute M. vi. incidantur.


Afterward power upon them of Rose Water lb /. ii. set them in the Sun in a
glass vessel well stopped, the space of a day, and then distill them in
Balneo Marea, with a gentle fire, it is good for the sight.

CHAP. XIV. Of the deformity of Scarres and their Remedy.
THe chief causes of the deformity of scarres, after the cure of Combustions,
are first, that the skin, flesh, veins, etc. are drawn together and hardened
with the force of the fire; Secondly, because that the radical moisture (by
whose benefit all Ulcers are cicatrised) is by the force of the fire dried and
consumed, whereby it comes to pass, that even as dry and barren ground
brings forth weeds, Cockel, and all other imperfect things; but on the
contrary the fat and moist ground brings forth all things perfect; so also by
the defect of the natural heat and radical moisture, there comes filthy
scarres; also the use of cold Medicines causes naughty scarres, as Hippocrates
witnesses in these words, Cold things are biting in Ulcers, hardneth the skin
causes intolerable pain, blackness, etc. Wherefore, that we may avoid these
hurtful things, we ought presently in the beginning to apply emolent
Medicines, as we have before instructed: Now, as appertaining to the cure,
first of all let the hardness of the skin be softened and made supole with the
far of Bears, Hens, Capons, Oil of Lillies, and of the yeolke of Eggs, or
else with this following Ointment.

Pinguid. galine Vrsi Piscis Thymali. Liliorum. De vitellis ovorum ana. ij. Ol.
Myrrh i. Succi lumbricor ss. misce.
Make an Ointment, with the which anoint the scar, every day three or four
times: Then apply thereon a thin plate of Lead rubbed over with Quicksilver,
but before the affected part be anointed with the fore said Ointment, let it be
washed with water, in the which Bran and a little Myrrh has bin boiled, but
if the scarres be so much elevated, that they require greater mollifying,
foment the place with this following Decoction: Radicum althe cum toto, Ralic.
brione and Lilior Albor. ana. i. Flor. Chammomille Mel. loti ana. M. i. Sem.
Foenogr. lini. ana. ss.
Let them be boiled in water, or else in the Decoction of the head and feet of
a Weather, and apply it with sponges, or clothes dipped therein; after the
fomentation, anoint with this following Ointment, and apply thereon a Cerot of
Oesope, or a plaster of Frogs with Mercury, and reiterate it every day, until
the cicatrix be sufficiently mollified, that it may be pressed down with the
plate of Lead. And as often as the Surgeon shall anoint the scar, let him
endeavor to stretch the skin that is contracted, with both his hands, as the
Glovers do their skin. Then let the wound which was before contracted, be
dilated, which may be fitly done with linen clothes spread over with glue, as
is expressed by this following figure.



A The wound of the scar being cut. BBBB these are four linen clothes spread
over with glue, two whereof shall be placed to both sides of the wound so that
there remain some space between them, as appears by the Figure. CCCCCC
these are six strings to be tied in knots, which may be more or less,
according to the magnitude of the wound; furthermore, as soon as the glue is
dry, so that the Linen clouts do stick fast, which will be within the space
of four or five hours, then let the string be tied fast together, and so the
skin which is between the clouts will be drawn and forced together and the
wound will be dilated; In the mean time, hasten to cure and cicatrice the
wound as fast as you may, and remove not your clouts until the wound be cured,
let your Glue be made of astringent and clammy things, and of healing
Plasters, as Farine volitatis i. Masticis Rosar. rub. Sanguinis dracon. ana.
ii.
Make thereof a fine powder and mix it with the whites of Eggs and Gum.
Tragacanth. to the thickness of Honey.

CHAP. XV. Of the retracted Nerves and crooked Juncturs after Combustions.
IN great Combustions of the Joints, the sinews are diverse times retracted and
drawn together, and the junctures are made crooked, and especially if the
Surgeon was not very diligent in the beginning, and applied not the splints
and other instruments, concerning which we have written in our 11. Chapter,
wherefore we must institute a new cure; but first let the body be purged
according to the nature of the humor predominating; for which these things
following are very convenient, Pil. de hirmodact. and Pil. Agrag. also Elect.
Indiur. et benedict. taxatina.

If the body be full of humors open a vein, and draw blood acording to the
magnitude of the strength concerning which take the counsel of a Physician.

The body being purged and prepared, as we have even now showed, the affected
part is to be mollified and supplied with this following Decoction.

Radicum Altheae cum toto Radic. Briconiae Lillior albor Malvarum ana. ii. Fol
violarum. Flor. Chamomillae Meliloti. Hyperici Cham. ana. M. i. Sem. Eoenogr.
Sem. Lini. ana. i.
Boil them in the Broth of the head and feet of a Weather, for a Fomentation,
then anoint the whole Member with this following Ointment, Unguent. de Althea
Auxungie humane. Gallinasum Anseris Vrsi ana ss. Succi lumbricor ss i. Aque
vitae ss.


Afterward apply a Plaster of Musilage, Hysope, or Melilot spread upon a
clout, the finewes, ligaments, and junctures being well molified, we must use
extention, which may be fitly done without pain, with fit Instruments; if the
disease be in the knee or Elbow, then those Instruments are very convenient
which are drawn by Gualtherus Reyff in his Surgery.



Or else this following Instrument of our invention which you may prepare with
a little trouble, and it may serve as well to the Elbow as the Knee.



AA notifieth a little Casket made of wood, as well in the first figure as in
the second.

BB is an Iron plate made in the fashion of a Ring being of such breadth, that
it will compass the whole knee; but that in the first-figure is open, and the
other is shut and compasses the knee, but that it may the better be fitted, it
is necessary that part which belongs to the rowndell of the knee be made
hollow.

CC. Shows a skrew, by whose benefit the Ring is drawn downwards, or when
need requires, is lifted upwards.

DDD As well in the first as in the second Figure, in one part it notes a
haspe, and in the other part it shows holes, by whose benefit the ring is
made straight, or slake, according as need requires.

E. Notes henges; in the first Figure with the which the ring is opened and
shut; therefore the ring being opened, and the leg being placed in the
Casket, ye shall fit the ring about the knee, and defend it with pleagets and
linen clothes, then haspe it close with those haspes and holes which are noted
with DDD. Furthermore, it has two Buckels noted thus FFFF. and two thongs
signified with GGGG. by whose benefit the leg is bound into the Casket:
therefore the skiew being turned from the right hand toward the left, the ring
and the knee are drawed toward the Casket, and the leg may be extended as
much as the Surgeon shall see fitting: Furthermore, that the skrew may
easily turn about in the ring, it is necessary, that it have a knobe which is
noted with H.

1. Is an iron plate which is annexed to the Casket, between the two Buckels,
that thereby the skrew may the more easily be turned about.

But if the Combustion be in the Fingers, an industrious and witty* Surgeon
may invent Fit instruments for the purpose: I have restored all the Fingers
except the Thumb of the right hand, which by a Combustion were drawn and
conglutinated to the back of the hand, which kind of cure, although we have
already touched in our observations, yet lest any thing should be here desired,
which may fit to this purpose, I will here again annex it, Reader do thou
favorably judge of them all.

Anno 1596 Isaacke Gotteran of Perr^y, brought unto me Michael his son, which
was of the age of 14. months, who at the age of six months, fell with his
right hand into the burning coals, whereby his forefinger, middle-finger,
ring-finger, and little finger, were so burnt together with the back of the
hand, that the fingers fell down even unto the first articulation; but because
his Father did commit the Cure to unskilful people, all his fingers except his
thumb were compact together with the skin of the back of his hand, as it were
in the form of a Globe as is seen by this following Figure:



After seven months, when the cure was perfectly finished, the parents of the
foresaid Child brought him unto me, pitifully desired my help, wherefore
when I had parged his body with Manna, being given him in his broth, I did
prepare Chirurgicall Medicines, as follows; First I used this following
Decoction and Ointment for certain days together: Radic. althaee cum toto
Radic. Bryon. Lilior alb. ana. i. Flor. Chamomil. Meliloti. Chamedr. ana. M. j.
Sem. Foenogr. lino ana. i.
Let them be boiled in the broth of the head and feet of a Weather for a
fomentation, then anoint the whole hand and arm with this following Ointment:
Vngunt dialtheos i. Auxungue humane Gallinarum Anseris, Vrsi, succi lanibricor
ss.
Mix them and make an Ointment, then roll the hand in a plaster of Mufilage,
when the Nerves and the Callosity of the wrinkled skin of the back of the
hand, and of the fingers, were with these things sufficiently mollified; I cut
away that hard skin between the back of the hand and the fingers, with an
incision knife; and I also separated the fingers, then I strewed thereon my
powder, to stanch blood, and I appleed thereon the whits of Eggs mixed with the
waters of Roses and Plantaine and Oil of Roses; also I laid a defensive to
the wrist, the next day I applied this following digestive with soft plegets
upon the incisions, as before with Oils.

Terebinth. lot. in aqua. plantag. et Rosar. i. Olei rosac* et de vitel ovor
ana.. ii. ss. Vitel. Vnius ovi misce.
The 5 day I used this following Instrument, and I endeavored by little and
little to bring the fingers to their natural order:



A is a Splint of the breadth of three fingers, so long, that it may reach
almost from the wrist to the elbow.

B is a round stick of the thickness of the thumb, which is fixed to the
Splint, and in the middle of this stick are four wodden pins, noted with
CCCC. Also the splint has two Buckels noted with DD. and two thongs signified
by EE. by whose benefit the Instruments is bound to the arm: Therefore when
the Instrument was well bound to, and every where wellbow lstered with linen
clothes, I had in readiness fingerstalls made of Leather, which put upon the
tops of the Fingers, and with the strings that hangs to them. I drawed the
Fingers downwards, and bound them to the pins noted with CCCC. and every day I
tied them straighter.

Which that it might the easier be done, I anointed the arm with the aforesaid
Ointment, as often as I dressed the wound, and lest that the Fingers should
again conglutinate, I put between them leaden plates, and so by little and
little the Fingers were reduced to their proper functions; In the mean time I
consolidated and cicatriced the wounds, but not with those things which do
greatly dry, but those which have also an emolent faculty, with such Medicines
as we have showed, and so by Gods help we restored the hand to his proper use.

CHAP. XVI. Of Lightning, and how those which are stricken with it, are to be
succored.
BEcause that of all Fires, the Fire from Heaven is most vehement and
dangerous, and contains in it certain supernatural faculties, with which a
man may soon be destroyed; therefore I will make no long stay to what should be
done therein: For this cause I have thought good (for the benefit of the
Reader) briefly to show how those who are stricken with Lightning are to be
handled and I do admonish all Chyrurgions, that if they possible may, they
take a Physician with them to such kind of Patients.

Now seeing this heavenly Fire (as experience teaches) contains in it
certain supernatural qualities, we may also perceive it to have an adjunct
quality and matter, very hurtful and venomous, which is easily perceived by
that horrible stincke and pestiferous odor which comes as well from men as
from other creatures that are stricken with Lightning: Hence it is, (as diverse
learned men do testify) that Bears, Foxes, Conies, or other creatures using
such places, which are stricken with Lightning, by reason of the filthy smell
they cannot stay in their dens; and dogs also will not eat of the Flesh that
has been stricken with Lightning.

By these things we may perceive how dangerous it is to use herbs which grow
in such places: and the Earth (as Oulaus witnesses) is perceived as it were to
bestrewed with Brimstone, wherefore it is no marvel, that men do without any
manifest cause fall down dead.

Now this Fire, as Seneca witnesses, is subtle; hence it comes, that
inanimate creatures, as Trees, and the like, are also hurt; Also besides that
subtilty it has in it a most dry substance, and earthy; hereby it comes to
pass, that it penitrateth and hurts the soft parts of the body, but those
which are more hard it breaks, which I have observed not only to chance to
animate creatures, but also to those which, are inanimate.

If there be any pustels, wounds, or spots, then apply onions mixed with salt,
or the leaves of rue powned with Treacle, and also apply Cupping-glasses and
Leaches, the Bladders being first cut; those things which do cause
putrefaction and the falling of the scar, in this cause are not to be used;
therefore cut off the Escarre with a pair of cizors, and then apply this
following mundifying Ointment: Mellis Rosacei ij. Futuerisradic. vincet and
Angeli. ana, Fol. rutae cum pull. qussatpii Theriacae ii. Aqua vitae ss misce.
Make thereof a Mundicative, when the Ulcers are mundified then strew on this
following powder: Pulveris radic. Vincitcvici and Angelicae ana. ss i. Myrrh,
Masticis, Olibani, Fol. Scordii ana. iv.
Make them all into a small powder, with the which with a sufficient quantity
of the juice of Sanicle or of pears, make thereof Trochicqus and dry them in
the shade, then make it into powder

If any bones be broken, they are to be reduced, but the Surgeon ought to
have a great care that he apply not such aftringent and cooling plasters, as
he uses to do in other fractures. for they do hinder the expiration of the
venom; wherefore apply this following Cataplasme: Farinae Fabar. Lupinor, ana.
i. ss. Pull. radic. vincitexici and Angelicae ana. ss. Polior. cutae M. ss.
Boil them with Oximel. unto the form of a powltiee, then mix therewith or
Triacle or Mithridate z i. and let fracture be once every day new bound up, and
let the powltice be renewed, but first wash the member with wine in the which
the roots of Angelica has been boiled, and a little Triacle dissolved in
vinegar of Roses, which ought to be done presently whilst the fear of the
venom is present; also apply a Defensive about the broadnesse of the palm of
the hand, about the fracture, that the elevation of the venom may be turned
from the noble parts:

Ye ought also to look, that the belly be kept soluble, which if it be not so
by narure, then use Suppositories and Clisters, abstain from purging and blood
letting, except there be any particular occasion to the contrary, in the which
take the counsel of a Physician.

FINIS.

