THE ANSWER OF THE Emperor of GERMANY TO THE Letter sent from the King of
Scots, by the Lord WILMOT, for supply of Men and Moneys against England.

With the Resolution of the Christian Princes, Dukes, Marquesses, Earls,
Lords, Noblemen, and Agents, at the great Meeting at Regensburgh; And the King
of Denmark's Proceedings in reference thereunto.

Also, the putting forth of the Dutch Fleet to Sea; the advance and motion of
the English; and 35 sail brought into Yarmouth, Alesborough, and Harwich.

Likewise, the great and terrible Earthquake in Natolia, the casting up of
great Mountains, the covering and overwhelming of Towns; and the burying of
ten thousand men, women, and children in heaps of Earth.

Licensed and published accoiding to Order.



London, printed for George Horton, 1653.

THE DECLARATION AND Resolution of the Emperor of Germany, touching the King of
Scots; and the Debates and Proceedings of the Christian Princes, Dukes,
Marquesses, Earls, Lords, Noblemen, and Agents, at the great Meeting at
Regensburgh: With Their Answer unto His Message, for Supplies against England.
HIs Imperial Majesty the Emperor of Germany having received a message from the
King of Scots for a supply of men and money communicated the same to the
General Assembly, consisting of the chief Princes, Dukes, Marquesses, and
Nobles in Europe, who after several Debates upon the Propositions presented by
the Lord Wilmot, returned Answer, That no moneys could be raised, for that
their present condition was such, being brought very low by the late wars,
they were not in any capacity to a^^ist their friends, neither with men and
moneys, the present exigency of their own Affairs requiring timely and speedy
preventions of future Insurrections and Commotions; yet so far would they
condescend, That at his own Charges they would give liberty to raise a number
of men, if desired.

The like Answer is returned by the King of Denmark to the Lord Wentworth; who
having represented these sad Tidings, by way of Aviso, to His young Master, his
Majesty of France was earnestly solicited to supply his great wants and
distressed condition with a considerable sum of money, and other Utensils of
war, etc. But Cardinal Mazarine declared, That it was no ways feasible for the
Crown of France, to be aiding or assisting him in the least, during their
present Distractions and Commotions; for that it might prove a Design very
pernicious and destructive to the great work in hand, by reason that the enemy
were very potent, and his Maj^stie not in a condition at present to fight them.
For indeed certain it is, that Conde is chief Master of the Field, and that he
has besieged the famous City and impregnable Garrison of Roeroy, and that he is
likely to carry it, by reason that General Turene dares not give him battle,
being far more n^^erous then the Kings party, and consists chiefly of old
forces, bravely resolved, and well disciplined. And several Challenges has his
Highness sent to the Kings General, daring him to an Engagement; but refusing
to answer him, the said Prince sent word by a Trumpeter, That seeing he would
not come out of his Trenches to fight that before it was long he would see him
in the Plain of Saint Denis near Paris, where he doubted not but to be with his
Army very suddenly, consisting of 27 resolved horse and foot, no ways
inferior to the valiant and approved English Red-coat.

To which Gen: Turene replied, That it might easily be discerned, by his high
and lofty language, with what people he had lived, and held correspondence of
late days. But the Duke of York, so called by the Monsieurs, not being
satisfied herewith, returned this Answer, That for the prevention of further
effusion of blood, he desired that they two might dispute the Quarrel; but not
permitted.

A Letter from Holland.
SIR,
THe English fleet, by reason of the foul weather, are gone off this Coast, and
Dewit taking an opportunity thereby, sailed out of the Texel with sixty men of
War to convoy their Fleet into the East Country, and to endeavor getting home
the East India ships, who still remain at Copenhagen. We hear that young
Vantrump is before Leghorn with the Bonadventure and seven men of War, and that
he has blocked up Mr. Elger an English Merchant. Since which time; it is
advertised, that diverse others are joined with him, so Report makes him 35
sail, and that he intends to divide into two Squadrons, the one to ply at
Leghorn; the other, up to Barcelona; so that keeping in the Trade way it is
very difficult for any shipping either to pass up and down the Straights; yet
we do not hear of any more then one English ship taken of late, which was
purchased at a dear rate; for she fought it out to the last man, and buried
within the curled Ocean above 200 men before she was taken.

But our Letters from Malaga the 7 dito advise, that the ship called the
African was safely arrived there; notwithstanding, in her way, she met with a
whole squadron of the Hollanders; but it pleased God she brake through them
all, and safely arrived at her wished for Harbor, though she received above 100
shot in her sails and tacklings, and yet not one man either killed or wounded.

Bril September. 10. 1653. We have received ^dvertisements, That part of the
English Fleet are attending the motion of Dewit, and that the rest are designed
upon another excellent Achievement. Withal, that 35 Prizes are brought into
Yarmouth, Alesborough, and Harwich Roads, lusty Vessels, but their lading not
so considerable, being for the most part laden with Salt, French wines,
Brandies, and some Vinegar, all homeward bound from Nantes and Rochel.

From whence, we hear, that there has been a very great Earthquake in Natolia,
where a Mountain had overwhelmed a whole Town, to the loss of much Treasure,
and above ten thousand persons were buried in that heap of Earth, to the great
astonishment of many hundreds in those parts.



FINIS.

