A TREATISE OF THE AFFECTIONS; OR The Souls Pulse.

Whereby a Christian may know whether he be living or dying.

Together With a lively description of their Nature, Signs, and Symptoms.

As also directing men to the right use and ordering of them.

By that Reverend and faithful Minister of Gods Word, M. William Fenner,
sometimes Fellow of Pembroke-Hall, and late Rector of Rochford in Essex.

Finished by himself.

DEUTERONOMY. 6. 5. Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all
thy soul, and with all thy might.

LONDON, Printed by A. M. for J. Rothwell at the Sign of the Sun and Fountain
in Pauls-Church-yard, near the little North-door. 1650.

To the Reader.
GOd made man (as all things else) for himself, Gods glory is the end for which
man was made; the fruition of God is the happiness to which he was appointed;
that he might be subservient to this end, and obtain this happiness, he
bestowed on him a reasonable soul, consisting of an understanding and a will,
that by the one he might contemplate and behold the beauty of the Lord by the
other he might embrace him. The understanding as the eye of the soul to discern
truth, the will as the feet of the soul to carry it to good. The understanding
(though furnished with excellent knowledge in things natural) was chiefly
enriched with the knowledge of God the first Truth; the will (though let out to
the desire of good natural) was especially enamored with God the chiefest
good; and whilst these faculties continued in those postures, man continued in
the happy and holy condition of his primaeve creation; the corruption and
misery of the soul is the aversion of these faculties from this object, the
corrup^ion of the understanding, the ignorance of God; the corruption of the
will, the abhorring of God; man lost not his faculties by his fall, but their
integrity; he has an understanding still, but in regard of heavenly things
blind and vain, quick-sighted in other things, he has a will still, but
averse from God, and pursuing with eagerness things terrene; the reparation of
the soul is the resetling of these faculties on their proper objects, and this
is that which is required, My son, give me thy heart, give me thy understanding
to know me, give me thy will to cleave to me, by loving and fearing me, by
delighting and hoping in me. These acts of loving, fearing, etc. commonly
called by the name of Affections (I speak with submission to better judgments)
are only the motions of the will, by which it goes forth to the embracing of
its object which is Good; which considered in the general nature is loved,
considered as in the fruition is delighted in; considered in the future as
attainable, if with ease, is desired; if with difficulty, is hoped for. If the
will or these Affections be fixed on their proper object, there is no danger in
the excess; God cannot be loved, or feared, etc. overmuch; the only danger in
them, is either in misplacing upon a wrong object, or their loose adhering to
the right; both these the Apostle rectifies, Be not drunk with Wine, in which
is excess, but be filled with the Spirit, Covet the best gifts. Thus Christ
invites his Church, Drink ye, be drunk, O my beloved. This drunkenness, says
Ambrose, makes men sober: And this the subject of this ensuing Discourse
published for thy benefit. Read, consider, pray, and the Lord give thee
understanding to conceive of it, and a will to conform unto it.

The Table.
THe right use and ordering of the Affections. Page 1. Doctr. A natural man
cannot set his affections on God, or upon things above. 3 What the affections
are, ibid. 1 They are motions. ibid. 2 They are motions of the will. 4 3 They
are forcible motions of the heart. 5 4 They are sensible motions. 6 5 They are
according to the apprehensions of good and evil. 7 Reasons 1 They are the
wings of the soul. ibid. 2 They are the inclination of the soul. 8 3 They are
the passion of the soul. 9 4 They are the perturbation of the soul. 11 Nine
degrees wherein the affections may be wrought on: In 5. of them a carnal man
may have his affections wrought on, but in the last four he cannot. 13 1 The
heart is enticed by them. ibid. 2 The heart is somewhat touched therewith. 14 3
The heart is somewhat bowed by them. ibid. 4 The heart is stolen away with
them. 15 5 The heart is inflamed upon them. ibid. 6 The heart is overturned
from what it was. 16 7 That the heart be engaged for God. 17 8 The heart is
glued to a thing by them. ibid. 9 The heart may be quite given up to the thing
it affects. 18 Affections of the wicked cannot be set on Christ, but may be
raised toward Christ. ibid.
Proved by five Arguments.
1 By the sparks of right reason. ibid. 2 By the knowledge out of the Word. 19
3 By knowledge and conscience quickened. 20 4 By the horror of their estate. 21
5 By self-love. 21 Affections may work the wicked to do some special duties,
as appears in five instances. 27 Fourth Reason, though a carnal man's affections
be wrought on, yet they are not kindly wrought on. 28 First, they are not 1
kindly, 2 judiciously, 3 regularly, 4 universally, Examine whether your
affections are right or no 31 Demonstrated by four signs. ibid. It stands us
infinitely in hand to have our affections set right, proved by eight arguments.
35 It is a Christians duty to set his affections on God, two reasons. 45 The
necessity of it for three Reasons. ibid. All the good of the creature is not
thy good; proved by 4 arguments. 48 It is best to set our affections on God for
3. reasons. 52 Use. It is a blessing to have affections. 54 Affections not
sinful for three reasons. ibid. Affections are necessary, and why. 57 Four
impediments, our affections are not set on God. 62 Two grounds to set our
affections on God. 67 Means to set our affections on God. 69 Means to get up
the bottom of the affections. 85 Ministers must labor to stir up the
affections of the hearers. 90 How a Minister must stir up affections. 95 It is
a great sin to set our affections on earth, proved by 4. arguments. 105 The
degrees of the affections. ibid. The extremity of the affections is zeal. 118
Zeal what it is, in five demonstrations. ibid. Zeal is due only to God for five
reasons. 122 God demands the zeal of the affections. 127 Very dangerous to deny
God the zeal of the affections in holy duties. 132 It is a lamentable condition
we are in, when our affections run contrary to God, by eight arguments. ibid.
Seven signs whether the zeal of our affections be set on God. 145 Zeal cannot
abide any sin. 147 Not in any person, child, wife, rich, etc. ibid Five means
to make us zealous. 170 Be exhorted to be zealous against thy worst enemies,
Sin, Satan, etc. ib. Without zeal thou must never do good to others. ibid. Nor
encourage the Ministers of God. ibid. Nor can you be excellent. ibid. Zeal
makes us like Angels. ibid. Zeal as fire against coldness and lukewarmnesse.
ibid. Seven motives to set your affections on God. 175
A TREATISE OF THE AFFECTIONS.
The I. Sermon.
COLOS. 3. 2. Set your affections on things that are above, and not on things
which are on the earth.
THe subject of the Text and this Treatise is the affections, showing the right
use and ordering of them, which is a thing of continual and great concernment:
for they will never be idle, but still running out and bringing into the soul,
either healing or hurtful objects, and so authors either of our woe or
welfare: and certain signs either of our happiness, that we are risen with
Christ: or misery, that we are still dead. -- And concerning these the Apostle

First, Implies a disease and distemper: that they are disjoined from God, and
that desperately.

Secondly, Applies a medicine, a way to cure them, to bring them back, and
place them upon their first and right object, God, and things above.

The first he intimates to us in three things.

First, By calling them inordinate affections, and such as can never be set
right without they be mortifyed. Mortify your earthly members, Fornication,
Uncleanness, Inordinate affection, etc. ver. 5. He terms them inordinate and
masterlesse affections, and he commands us to mortify them.

Secondly, By showing they are buried in the things of the world, and never can
be raised up again, but only by the power of the resurrection of Christ, If ye
be risen with Christ, seek those things that are above, ver. 1. Ye can never be
able to make your affections seek upwards, unless ye be risen with Christ.

Thirdly, By supposing they are naturally (as Solomon says of a fools wrath)
as heavy as a stone; the affections are so naturally, as heavy as a stone,
which falls down to the earth, and cannot ascend, except it be heaved up: Set
your affections on things above, and not on things on the earth. They naturally
sagge downwards on things that are earthly, but let them not do so: no, heave
them up, and set them upon things that are heavenly, If you be risen with
Christ.

These words are to be construed with all the exhortations Saint Paul does here
give, If ye be risen with Christ, seek those things that are above, If ye be
risen with Christ, set your affections on things that are above, If ye be risen
with Christ, mortify your earthly members, and your inordinate affections,
etc. If ye be not risen with Christ, it is but a folly for me to bid you do
this, ye cannot mortify your affections, nor raise up your affections to God,
ye cannot possibly do this, except ye be risen with Christ. The point then is
this, which I will handle by way of coherence,

A natural man cannot set his affections upon God, Doctr.
or upon things above: For our more intelligible proceeding in this Doctrine,
as likewise in the whole treatise of the affections, which I desire to go
through: let me tell you,

First, What the ^ffections ^re.
What the affections be. The affections are the forcible and sensible motions
of the heart or the will, to a thing or from a thing, according as it is
apprehended to be good or to be evil. There be four things to be considered
herein.

First, 1. The affe^^ions are ^otions. (...).
The affections are motions. They are the motions of the heart. The motions of
sin, says Saint Paul, Romans 7. 5. that is, the affections of sin, for so it
is in the original: so that then are a man's affections set upon God, when the
heart has its outgoings to God, and therefore the Scriptures call the
affections the feet of the soul: for as the body goes with its feet to that
which it loves, so the soul goes out with its affections to that which it
loves. I thought upon my ways, and turned my feet unto thy testimonies, Psalm.
119. 59. that is, I turned mine affections to thy Testimonies: Look to thy feet
when thou come into the house of the Lord. I have refrained my foot from
every evil way, Psalm. 119. 101. Their feet are swift to shed blood, Romans 3. 15.
The Soul has no other way to come at that which it loves, but only by its
affections: can the muck-worm bring his bags and his coffers to his Soul? can
the voluptuous man bring his dogs, and his hounds, and his bowls to his Soul?
No, though his Soul loves such vanities as these, it cannot move to them but
only by its affections, L. 6 de vero cultu cap. 17. By faith Noah warned of God
moved with fear, etc. H^b. 11. 7.
Currui similes sunt and equis pernicibus affectus, says Lactantius. The
affections are the Souls horses, that draw her as it were in a Coach to the
thing that she affects: a man is moved by his affections. By Anger he moves out
to revenge: by Desire he moves out to obtain: by Love he moves out to enjoy: by
Pity he moves out to relieve: the affections are the motions of the Soul. When
the unbeleeving Jews had an affection of envy at Saint Paul, the Text says,
They were moved with Envy, Act. 17. 5. so the Soul of the godly is moved with
affection to God. This is the first thing, the affections are motions.

Secondly, 2. The affections are motions of the Will. Stoici vocant (...)
Simolicius in Epictetum
As the affections are motions, so they are the motions of the will. I know
Aristotle and most of our Divines too, do place the affections in the
sensitive part of the Soul, and not in the will, because they are to be seen in
the beasts. But this cannot be so, for a man's affections do most stir at a
shame or disgrace; which could not be, if the affections were in the
unreasonable sensitive part: the unreasonable sensitive part of a man is not
sensible of credit or esteem: call the desires of the appetite greedy and
gluttonish; the appetite is senseless of any disgrace, and therefore the
affections must needs be in the heart: the Scripture places the affections in
the heart or the will. Being affectionately desirous of you, we were willing. 1
These. 2 8. Saint Paul couples his affections and his will together in one, and
his affection that he had to the Thessalonians, he seats in his will. How could
the Apostle command us to set our affections on God, and the things that are
above, if the affections were in the sensitive and unreasonable part? can a man
make his material stomach to hunger after God? or the thirst of his sentitive
appetite to thirst after Christ? alas the sentitive part is not capable of a
command or precept. No, if the affections were only in the sensitive and
material part of the soul, then how could they be in the Angels? the good
Angels have affections, all the essential parts of the affections, and so have
the bad. The good Angels, Which things the Angels desire to look into, 1 Pe. 1.
12. The evil Angels or Devils, The Devils believe and tremble, Jam. 2. 19. I
confess there be certain animal and analogical affections that are in the
sense: there is grief for torment, and fear to touch a serpent or a toad;
delight in meats that are pleasant, and hatred of them that are noisome. But
the Lord does not call for these sensitive passions to be seated upon him and
on heaven, they are seated aright as they stand, so a moderation be kept they
have no need to change objects: The affections of the heart, these are the
affections the Lord does call for; the outgoings of the heart: as the sense is
afraid of a Lion, so is a godly heart afraid to sin against God; as the sense
is joyful to have ease after trouble, so a godly heart is joyful with a good
conscience in Christ; as the sense loves that which does feed it, so a godly
heart loves God that does nourish it: and therefore Austin, and Galen, and
Scotus, and why say I them? the Scriptures say, the affections are motions in
the heart, Mine Eye affects my heart, says the poor Church, Lam. 3. 51. that
is, when she beheld the lamentable distresses of the daughters of Sion, 3. They
are forcible motions of the heart. (...) est impetus, ut Salm^sius vertit.
Motio animi qu^ ad aliquid fertur sive sponte sive aliunde incitata (...)
vo^atur Stoicis.
this stirred up the affection of pity in her heart.

Thirdly, As the affections are the motions of the heart, so they are the
forcible motions of the heart; every little motion in the heart is not an
affection, but only the forcible motions of the heart; a man is then said to
set his affections upon God, when his heart goes with force unto God; for as
God appoints every creature his task, and to seek out its own good, so he gives
it a force for to do it; the stone, its nature is to fall downwards, and God
gives it a weightinesse that it may fall downwards with force: the stomach, its
nature is to take food when it is empty, and God gives it a hunger that it may
take it with force: every creature has not only its motion to move it to its
own good, but it goes to it with force; so God has given affections to the
heart, as weight to the stone, and hunger to the stomach; so God I say has
given affections to the heart, that it may seek out its good with a force, so
that then does a man set his affections upon God, when he sets all his forces
to Godward. When David had given 847 millions 382 thousand 500 pound in silver
and gold of his own charges to the building of Gods house, for so the learned
may gather out of two Chapters in the Chronicles, you may well think he
employed all his forces thereto; but what says the Text, I have set mine
affection to the house of God. 1 Chronicles. 29. 3. Thus ye see when ^ht sets his
affections to Gods house, he put to his forces: the affections are the forcible
motions of the heart; when a child of God prays with affection he prays
with force; when he stands for God with affection, he stands for him with force.

Fourthly, 4. They are the sensible motions of the heart.
As the affections are the motions, and the forcible motions of the will, so
they are the sensible motions too. For the will stirs up the inferior
faculties of the Soul, and they stir up the humors and parts of the body, to
make the greater resistance to that which it disaffects, or the greater
embracement of that which it affects.

This is one reason why the affections are called passions, for they make the
soul to suffer, and the body to suffer. The affection of Joy makes the spleen
for to suffer, and anger makes the gall for to suffer, and fear makes the heart
for to suffer; yea, the affections make humors, blood, spirits, members, even
bones and all the body for to suffer. Hence it is, when a man sets his
affections upon God, his fear the fear of God makes him tremble; his Love, the
love of God makes him to weep for his sins; the shame of it that he should
dishonor his God, makes him to blush before Christ; Grief for his sins many
times dries up his moisture; and Zeal for his glory consumes his flesh: so was
it with the Psalmist, when he was full of affections toward God, and saw how
men did disobey his Commandments, see what sensible motions were in him, Mine
eyes gush out with rivers of waters, because men keep not thy Law, Psalm. 119.
139. Ezra was so affectionate for God, that knowing how the people
transgressed, it made the color to come in his face, and to blush before
heaven, Ezr. 9. 6. as Demetrius blushed for his father Philips offenses; the
Orator that pleaded King Philips defense, did not do him so much service, as
the blushing of Demetrius his son. This was the effect of his affection to
his Father, it showed it self in his blushing for the offenses of his Father:
Thus the affections are the sensible motions of the Will.

Fifthly and lastly, 5. They are such motions as are according to the
apprehension of good or evil.
They are such sensible motions as are according to the apprehension of good or
evil. For when there is but small apprehension of good or evil, the affections
are weak, and may hardly work on the body at all; but when there is a great
apprehension of either, not only the soul is deeply affected, but also the body
is mightily compatible. Nay, if the apprehension be deep indeed, the affections
break out into raptures, as dancings and leapings of the heart, which are the
raptures of joy: ravishments and enamorings, which are the raptures of love;
meltings and bleedings, and breakings of spirit, which are the raptures of
grief; astonishments, amazements, which are the raptures of fear; confusion and
the like, which are the raptures of shame; the affections burst forth into such
raptures as these, when the apprehension is deep. Judith 16. 9. Genesis 37.
Olofernes his eyes were ravished with the slippers of Judith, because he was
deeply in love with her: Jacob shooken almost dead at the sight of his sons
bloody coat, because he was deeply affected thereat. The Roman Senate were
affrighted with the sight of the Carthaginian green figs, that Cato did show
them: such raptures have the Saints very often in their prayers to God, being
helped with sighs and groans that cannot be uttered, Romans 8. 26. because they
have a deep apprehension of the corruption that is in them. Thus ye see what
the affections be, they are forcible and sensible motions of the will, to a
thing or from a thing, according as it is apprehended to be evil or to be good.
Reasons. The Affections are the wings of the soul Affections not subdued (...).
Simplicius in Epictetum A^s^l^us.


In the next place let me show that a carnal man cannot set these his
affections upon God or upon Grace, which may appear by Reasons.

First, Affectus sunt alae animae, as the Proverb goes, The Affections are the
wings of the soul. If the birds wings be lime-twig'd and glued to the ground,
she cannot fly up; now a carnal man his affections are glued and lime-twig'd to
the things of the world, or the things of this life; and therefore it is
impossible he should fly up unto God I read in the life of good Anselm,
walking in the fields he saw a shepherds boy that had taken a bird, and tied a
stone to her leg, and as the bird would be offering to mount, the stone
pulled her down; she had such a weight on her leg, she could not fly up: this
good father fell a weeping, to consider, that so it was with men, carnal men;
though perhaps they think to fly up to God by many good purposes, they are
still born down with their sins, their affections are clogged, security,
deadness of heart, self-love, and love of the things here below, like
milstones made fast to their heels, their affections cannot mount up to God.
Have thou more affection to a game then a Sermon? more affection to sit
drinking in Alehouses, then to be reproved for thy sins? more affection to a
good booty, then a good duty? alas! how can thou set thine affections upon
God? thine affections are earthly affections, and therefore they cannot be
placed upon God, Rom 1. 26. there read of vile affections. God gave up the
Heathen to base and vile affections: so these are base and vile, and carnal
affections, that thou art given unto: thine affections are malice, and envy,
and revenge, which cannot be set upon God: they are worldly fears, and worldly
sorrows, and worldly joys, and worldly pleasures, and worldly delights, these
are thine affections, these can never be placed upon God. They are vile
affections, too base and dishonorable to God. Thine affections are lime-twig'd
by Satan, they cannot sore up unto God. This is the first reason, why a carnal
man cannot set his affections upon God, They are the Inclinations of the Soul.
because his affections, which are the wings of his soul, are glued to the
earth.

Secondly, Affectus sunt inclinationes animae, The affections are the
inclinations of the Soul: as a man is affected so he is inclined; and therefore
the affections in Scripture are called the bent of the soul, My people are bent
to backsliding from me, Hos. 11. 7. that is, their affections to me are
unstable, unconstant and fickle. How stands such a one bent? as we say; that
is, how stands he affected? A man is bent to that which his affections are on;
now then is it possible that a carnal man should set his affections on God,
when his heart does not stand bent unto God? the muck-worm, his heart stands
bent to the world, the voluptuous his heart stands bent to his pleasures; the
proud man, his heart stands bent to get credit and be well thought on; the
natural man stands bent to be carnal and earthy, and how can such men set their
affections on God, when their hearts stand that way bent? are thy affections
bent? that way that thy bent goes, that way do thine affections go: Thou art
merry and jocond, and joyful to day, tell me what is it for? is it because God
is glorified by thee? No, No, thy mirth and thy joy stand otherwise bent. Thou
have been angry and revengeful, what was it for? was it because God is
dishonored, and thy lusts have been violent? Alas no, thy anger and thy wrath
stand otherwise bent: thine affections are the bent and inclinations of thy
heart, and therefore if thou be inclined to things that are earthy, thou can
not place thine affections upon God; nothing can go against its own bent and
inclination, unless by the omnipotent power of the Spirit of Christ. David
knew this well enough, that his affections could never be to God and his
righteousness, if his heart did not that way stand bent; and therefore he
prays God, Incline not my heart to any evil thing, Psalm. 141. 4. Let not mine
affections be on any evil thing, for then I should be that way inclined. 3.
They are the passions of the Soul. Elias was ^u^ject to like passi^ns as we
are. Jam 9. 17 That is, subje^^ to like af^ctions with us.
This is the second reason why a carnal men cannot set his affections upon God,
because the affections of the heart are the bent of the heart.

Thirdly, Affectus sunt passiones animae, says Damascen, The affections are
the passions of the Soul. When the heart is affected with a thing, it lets in
that thing, and it suffers a change by that thing; when a man is affected with
anger at a wrong or an injury, we say he is in a passion; that is, he lets in
the wrong, and there does his heart bite upon the wrong, and chafe at it; thus
he is passionate: When a man is affected with love to a pleasure, he lets in
the pleasure, and suffers it to prevail on the heart: now then a carnal man
cannot set his affections upon God nor his Grace, because he cannot let it in
to prevail over his Soul, he will not suffer it to enter; can he be in a good
passion for God? can he be angry and choleric to see how Gods Spirit is
grieved? can he be grieved at the lusts of his heart, which he joys in? can he
be zealous for Gods truth, and for the beauty of holiness? Alas, alas! no, He
cannot let in these things into his heart, nor Christ, nor grace, nor
holiness, nor humility, nor self-denial, nor any saving grace that is Christ's,
can get entrance into his heart; and therefore he cannot set his affections
upon God. When the Apostle had exhorted the Hebrews, and now was concluding,
that he could exhort them no further, he concludes on this manner: And I
beseech you brethren, suffer the word of exhort ation, Heb. 13. 22. He labors
to work on their affections, that they would let in his exhortations into their
hearts, he does not say, Suffer me to exhort you, for he had exhorted them
already, and had taken their leave, but suffer it to enter into your hearts;
now if you be carnal, thou will never suffer Gods counsels to enter; you will
never suffer the word of reproof, neither will ye suffer a resignation: Suppose
we should pull down all the unnessary Alehouses in the Parish, would ye suffer
it? Suppose we should root out all your game-houses and the like, would ye
suffer it? Suppose we should make every man pay his 12. pence a day for every
time he is absent from Church, and have all disorders punished in the Town,
would ye suffer it? Suppose we should come to your houses and exhort you, and
reprove you, and tell you of your sins, and labor to reform you and your
families, alas! would ye suffer it? No, your passions will rise, ye would be so
far from affecting these things, as that your affections would be against
them, nay, ye would be in passion against me; carnal hearts cannot set their
affections upon God, why? because the affections are passions, as I have proved
already, and the soul does suffer its affections. The affections do alter the
heart, but a carnal heart will not be altered by the word, nor by Christ; nor
suffer his graces to enter.

Fourthly, 4. They are the perturbations of the soul.
Put the case a man set himself wrong, Affectus sunt perturbationes animae, The
affections are the perturbations of the Soul; if once they go wrong, and the
reins be laid on their necks, they are like wild horses to the soul, to carry
her whether she would not; they are the disturbers of judgment, and violent
tyrants over the soul, they make a man walk as they list; and therefore the
Apostle calls them, the lusts of concupiscence, wherein a man walks, 1 These. 4.
5. in the original it is the affections of concupiscence, (...).
they are cruel and masterlesse misleaders of a man; now a carnal man, his
affections are such, they are disturbances and perturbations unto him, they
will so trouble him, and toss him up and down, from lust unto lust, from sin
unto sin, that he shall never be able that is carnal, to set them upon God.
Iambiychus calls them the nayls of the soul, whereby it is nailed to the things
of the body; would a carnal man repent? alas! his affections disturb him; would
he pray and hold out in that duty? his affections are importunate to be
otherwise occupied; would he exhort and reprove, and be rebuking his neighbor
for sinning against God? his affections they are against it, he is ashamed for
to do it, he is afraid he shall have a flout for his labor; would he forsake
his coveteousnesse and drunkenness and company? O his affections are so strong
to them, that he is not able to draw his heart from them. The very Heathen
brings in all the world thus speaking of themselves, nitimur in vetitum semper
cupimusque negata, so headstrong are the affections when they are wrong: as
Medea in the Poet, video meliora proboque, she saw the good and she liked the
good, but her affections transported her quite to the contrary; thus it was
with Herod the king: when he heard there was another king of the Jews born in
the world, and that Wise men from the East were come for to do homage to that
new King; the Text says, he was troubled, Matthew. 2. ^. fear and shame, and
grief, and vexation, and all his affections, they were all up in arms, and
would not let him be quiet: they troubled him, says St Matthew. Yea, they made
such a disturbance in Herod, they did so baffle his judgment, and busy his
thoughts, and torture his mind, that they drove him to murder God knows how
many scores of poor Infants: before they would be quiet, they made him a mad
man. Thus the affections are grievous perturbations, when they are once come to
be mis-placed; and if they be such perturbations as they are, alas! how can a
carnal man set his affections upon God? they are masterlesse wild horses, and
he cannot subdue them: they are bedlams and frantic misleaders, and he cannot
overcome them: they are desperate things, his affections are so giddy and
unruly, that he can never be Christ's, as long as his affections are alive;
unless they be set upon the tenters, and put upon the wreck, and tamed
perforce, they will never be right: and therefore says the Apostle, Those that
are Christ's have crucified the flesh, with the affections and lusts, Gal. 5.
24. Those that are Christ's have done so, or else they could never be Christ's,
because the affections are perturbations and disturbances, most woeful
perturbations they are. And this is a fourth reason why a carnal man cannot set
his affections upon God, because his affections are perturbations, and like a
company of wild horses, that will not be ruled.

The II. Sermon.
Colos. 3. 2. Set your affections on things that are above, etc.
THus I have shown you First, what the affections be: Secondly, how a carnal
man cannot set his affections upon God. But here it may be objected: Cannot a
carnal man have good affections to God and to grace? The people were so
affected with John's preaching, and with his baptism, that they would have been
angry and zealously affected against that man, whoever he was that should have
said it was not of God; they would have stoned such an one to death, Luke 20.
6. the people most of them were carnal, yet they were thus affected with his
preaching. Certainly a carnal man's affections may be marvellously wrought on.
For the clearing of this doubt: Let me show you nine degrees, wherein the
affections may be wrought on: in five of them, a carnal man may have his
affections to be wrought on, and in the last four of them he cannot. First, I
will name you these nine degrees of the affections of the heart.

The first is, 1. The heart is enticed and allured by them.
when they are so far wrought on, that the heart is enticed and allured much
by them. Thus the eloquent Ministers in Corinth, it seems they wrought upon the
peoples affections exceedingly, their words were so drawing, and their speech
was so enticing, that they came flocking to them. Saint Paul confesses he
would not preach so, with the enticing words of men's wisdom, 1 Cor. 2. 4. what
good should I do, if my preaching were such? it is true I might allure you and
move you, and entice you, and stir your affections; but alas! this would
never bring you to faith and repentance with power: this might tickle your
hearts peradventure a little, but not soundly comfort you.

The second is, when the affections are wrought on so far, that the heart is
somewhat touched therewith. As a man when his affections are moved with any, at
a disgraceful word, he says, this touches me indeed. When God turned the
affections of Israel unto Saul, indeed some of them had no affection to Saul,
How shall this man save us? say they, they despised him in their hearts, but
God turned the affections of the rest upon Saul, for to follow him: The Text
says of them, The Lord has touched their hearts, 1 Samuel 10. 26. That is, he
set their affections upon Saul, that they might follow Saul up and down. As
when the Needle is touched with the Loadstone, then it will turn it self
presently to the North; their affections were touched, and therefore they
followed after Saul. So many men, their affections are touched at a Sermon;
their affections are not only allured, but receive a touch from the Word: there
is some virtue goes out of the Word, as some went from Christ to the Woman that
had but a touch of his garment; so their affections have but a touch from the
Word, and some virtue goes to them, for the affections are termed the touch of
the heart. It Is good for a man not to touch a woman, 1 Cor. 7. 1. That is, not
to set an amorous affection of the heart upon a woman Thus far a wicked man's
affections may be to the Word, they may be touched by the Word.

The third is, 3. The heart is somewhat bowed by them.
When the affections are wrought on so far, That the heart is somewhat bowed
thereby; this is another degree of working on the affections, to bow the
affections, as ye may read; David bowed the heart of all the men of Judah,
even as the heart of one man, 2 Samuel 19. 14. that is, by his kind speeches,
and friendly message he sent, he inclined and bowed their affections unto him.
So a wicked man may have his affections bowed unto good, whereas his affections
stood sturdy before, or may be they were bowed another way before, now they be
bowed the contrary; as wicked Ioabs affections were so bowed to Godwards, and
for the good of his Church, that he was willing to die in his defense. Be of
good courage (says he) let us play the men, for our people and the cities of
our God; and the Lord do what seems him good, 2 Samuel 10. 12. See how he
rowzes up his valor, and his generous affections to fight for his God, his
affections were somewhat bowed unto God, and yet he was a wicked man.

The fourth is, 4. The heart is stolen away with them.
The affections may be wrought on so far, that the heart may be stolen away
with them: this you may find in the story of Absalom, who with his beauty and
the propernesse of his person, and the flattery of his lips, and his courteous
complement with the people of the land, he did so win their affections, that
the Text says, He stole the hearts of the men of Israel. 2 Samuel 15. 6. So
grace is so beautiful, and the Word of God has such kind promises and kind
speeches with it, not complemental, as Absal^ms, but real and truly amiable,
that it may steal the affections of a carnal man, as the Israelites stole from
the Egyptians and they knew not how, so grace may steal thine affections and
take them with its beauty, and yet thou be a wicked man for all that. As Paul
with his preaching did so steal away the affections and the hearts of the
Galathians, that for a need they would have plucked out their eyes and given
them to Paul, they were so strongly affected with him, and the Gospel he taught
them, Gal. 4 15. Nevertheless Saint Paul says they were foolish and carnal.

The fifth is, 4. The heart is enflamed by them.
The affections may be wrought on so far, that the heart may be hot and
inflamed by them. That this is another degree of the affections, you may gather
from the avenger of blood; when any had unwittingly and unwillingly killed his
brother, the Lord commands him to fly quickly to a City of refuge* lest the
avenger of blood should kill him in fury and anger. The words go thus, lest the
avenger of blood pursue the slayer, while his heart is hot, Deu. 16 6. While
his heart is hot, that is while he is in the heat of his passion, while his
anger and the affections of revenge are hot: the affections may be raised so
high, that they may set the heart in a heat upon a thing which it affects, So a
carnal man may have his affections heated and inflamed toward God and toward
grace. Saul had a great zeal to Gods Church, 2 Samuel 21. 2. Iehu was zealous for
God, Come with me (says he) and see my zeal for the Lord, 2 Kin 10. 16. Zeal
is the heat of all the affections, and therefore Iehu was heated in all his
affections for God; his affections were hot to root out Idolaters, his
affections were hot to cut off Gods enemies, and to reform abundance of sinful
abuses in the Kingdom: he was zealous, his affections were heated toward God,
and yet Iehu was no better then a carnal man for all that. Thus far may a
carnal man's affections be wrought on for grace; and this is no argument that he
has set his affections upon God as shall afterward appear. Therefore there be
four further degrees which are only to be found in the godly.

The sixth then is, 6. The heart is overturned from what it was before,
The affections may be wrought on so far, that the heart is quite overturned
from that it was before; I say the affections may be wrought on so far, that
the heart may be turned upside down by them. So it was with the godly; they
were even overwhelmed in affections for God with the fear of the Lord, and
their hearts turned upside down with grief for their sins, Behold O Lord, for
I am in distress, my bowels are troubled, my heart is turned within me, for I
have grievously rebelled, Lam. 1. 20. Her soul was even battered with
affections of repentance and humiliation; her soul was distressed with
terrors; her bowels were troubled and contracted with fears, and her heart was
turned upside down with sorrows, and all for her sins, for I have grievously
rebelled, says she. No wicked man under Heaven had his affections ever so
wrought on, that was not converted upon it. As Job says of his birth, Job. 10.
10
He was curdled like Cheese: so here in the second birth, her heart was curdled
like Cheese, etc. My heart is turned in me, says she. This is a higher working
on the affections, then any carnal man has.

The seventh is, 7. The heart is engaged for God.
The affections may be wrought on so far, that the heart be engaged for God. As
a woman's affections toward a man may be so deep, as that she engages her
heart unto that man, and resolves to have none other husband but him. So when
the affections are so deep in love with grace and with Christ, that the heart
is once engaged for Christ, to be a widow for ever, unless he will be pleased
to count her his Spouse: the world shall never have her heart more, the flesh
shall never have her heart more, nor devil, nor lust, nor any other sin shall
ever have her heart more, she is so far in love and affection with Christ, as
her heart is engaged for Christ, this is a godly soul. Who is this that
engages his heart to approach unto me? says the Lord, Jer. 30. 21. If
pleasure come, saying, set thine affections on me; no, says the heart, mine
affections are engaged already; if her old lusts, and her old lovers, and her
old acquaintance come, saying, set your affections on us; no, says the heart,
I am engaged for another, even for Christ and his graces: this is a deep
working on the affections indeed, when they are engaged for Christ.

The eighth is, 8. The heart is glued to a thing by them. De vita Pythag.
The affections may be wrought on so far, that the heart may be glued to a
thing by them. Iamblychus the heathen has a pretty phrase to this purpose: a
wicked man he calls him (...), bound in and nailed in his affections, he is even
nailed and glued to the things of the world, his heart does even stick to them
like pitch and Tarr to the Ship. So it is with a godly soul, his heart sticks
fast unto Christ, and the commandments of Christ. I have stuck unto thy
Testimonies, says David to Christ, Psa. 119. 31. How came his heart to stick
to Christ's testimonies? His holy affections were the glue, his affections clave
to Gods Law.

The ninth is, The heart is quite given up to that which it affects.
The affections may be wrought on so far, that the heart may be quite given up
to the thing which it affects. Solomon had such affections to wisdom that he
gave his heart to seek it, Eccl. 1. 13. As we use to say, he has my heart,
what can he have more? all mine affections are set on him, if he have my heart
and all. So a godly heart is so deeply affected with Christ and his
righteousness, as that Christ has his very heart and all. He gives up all
that he has unto Christ. It Is true, no wicked man in the earth has his
affections thus far wrought on: but it is mavelous to think how far a man's
affections may be wrought on for Christ, The affection may be thus raised.
and yet be a carnal man. It Is proved already, he cannot set his affections on
Christ, but he may raise up his affections a good way toward Christ, and now I
will prove it.

First, 1. By the sparks of right reason that regulate the affections.
the ignicles and embers of right reason, that God has made natural to his
heart, may regulate his affections to be chaste, and sober, and kind, and
liberal, and just, and morally humble, and patient, and merciful, etc. and to
observe the things contained in the Law. Natural reason directs men to love
their parents and their children, and one another: thus the very Heathen
themselves guided their affections with Religion as it were, the virtues of
morality says Aristotle, they do (...), They find out a Medium or a golden
mean in the affections, Lib. 2. Eth. cap 6.
and hold them unto it. And therefore S. Paul knows thus much, and how that
some of the Heathen were so wicked, that they would put out the light of their
own reason, and be drunk and lustful, and proud, and merciless, and
disobedient to parents, he condemns them especially for this, that they were
without understanding, and without natural affection, Romans 1 31. that is,
because they put out that natural reason, and that natural affection that were
in them. Because their affections might have been naturally set upon those
things. Their very natural reason might have ruled their affections, and set
them upon virtues of morality. So that thus far thou may go, and yet be a
carnalist, thine affections may run to be civil, and morally honest, and the
like natural reason may raise up thine affections from drunkenness and lust,
and from natural injustice, and from swearing and lying, and filthiness of
speaking, and the like. I say, natural reason may raise up thine affections
from these. Indeed it may be thine affections are violent and greedy, and
sensual to tempt thee to some of these sins, but natural reason may take them
off from such sins as these. Are thine affections so vile as to follow thy
blowzing and thy company-keeping? we need not quote Scripture to convince thee:
thy material stomach cries out it is a sin, for it grumbles at it. Thine eyes
and thy legs, and thy heels cry out, its a sin; for they do betray it.
Look upon thy purse, it cries against thee, for it thou have emptied. Look upon
thy Children, and thy Wife, they cry against it, for them thou have beggard.
Look upon thy fields and thy land, and thy inheritance, they cry against it,
for them thou have morgaged and impaired. Look upon the stinking dunghill, it
bids thee hold thy nostrils at the stinkingnesse of this sin, for there is
thy spewing and thy vomiting, and so of the rest of these sins: natural
reason may easily raise up thine affections from these. Which if thou have done
already, and art civil and moral, thou art yet gone no further then a Naturian
may go. Thou may do that, and yet be a Carnalist.

Secondly, 2. By knowledge out of the word that raises up the affection.
Because thou have more means then the means of bare nature, thy knowledge out
of the Word, may raise up thy affections exceedingly: knowledge may awe the
heart, and move it with the affection of fears, that it go not against its own
knowledge. Herod feared John, knowing that he was a just man. Mar. 6. 20. Herod
his affection was stirred with fear at the hearing of John; why? he knew he was
a good man, and he knew it was just as he preached; he knew it was God Word.
And therefore he feared, not to obey him, he was afraid to go against him. Nay,
his affections were more raised then so; he heard John gladly and did many
things. He was affected with joy at his Sermons, and his affections were
wrought on to break out into act, and to do many things. I do not read he
struck at any thing but only his darling corruption. His affections were so
wrought on, that it should seem he reformed many sins in his Court and many of
his Courtiers; he began to set up some worship of God in his Palace. All this
was by reason of knowledge; he knew John was a good Preacher, he knew he
preached the truth, and the truth overpowred his affections. Now he had no such
elbow-room for to sin, as he had in his ignorance. Now he fears to do many
sins that before he feared not, why? because his knowledge was enlightened.
This is no argument that thou art a child of God, because thou reformest many
things: Alas thy knowledge is convinced thou must so: the very devil himself
was overpowred by his knowledge; when the devil knew Christ was Christ, ^e
could not but confess, We know thee who thou art, the holy one of God. Mar. 1.
24. Happily thou fear to go flatly against the Sermons thou hear, thou
fear to live so bad as thou did; happily thou rejoycest to hear the Bell
ring to a Sermon, and art glad to hear the preaching of a Minister; happily
thine affections are so wrought on, that thou art moved to do many things, not
to suffer such potting and cupping in thy house as thou usedst, not to endure
such disorders in thy family as thou were wont; alas! alas! this is good yet;
and O that others were proficients thus far, this is further then many do
go, but this thou may do, and yet be a Carnalist. Thou know this is the
truth of God, and this stirs thine affections a little.

Thirdly, 3. By knowledge and conscience quickened.
God may be, he has quickened thy knowledge a little, and quickened thy
conscience, and made it tell thee the horror of thy sins, and this may raise
up thine affections many steps higher; not only to mourn for thy sins, and be
full of the affections of sorrow, but also to go mournfully and sadly up and
down, to pull down thy proud looks, to take on lamentably, because of thy
former iniquities* As Ahab. Thus the word made Ahab rend the very clothes off
his back, and fling off his royal robes, and put on sackcloth in their room, it
made him have no mind to his meat, but to fast, yea, to go softly too, says
the Text: 1 King. 21. 27. When Ahab heard these words, he tore off his clothes,
he abstained from his meat, and went softly. Ambulabat demisso capite; E^estro.
that is, he did not go so proudly up and down with such a carere in the
streets, as before: No, he hung down his looks, he went sadly and softly up and
down as he went. Thus far too thou may go in raising thine affections, and
yet be a Carnalist. Thou may be smitten in thy soul for thy sins, as to go
softly and sadly, and mournfully up and down, to have little lust to eat thy
meat for thinking of thy sins, to go poorly and meanly, and have little mind
to go bravely: I say, thine affections may be so quickened, as to go sadly all
along as thou go, so that all that knew thee before may wonder; good Lord,
what ails yonder man, how is he changed? he was a Ruffian, a Royster, and who
but he the other day? what is the matter with him? he goes so sadly up and down,
and so pensively along. But why do I speak against thee, when there be few that
are a quarter so well affected as thou? but alas! I tell thee, thou may go
thus far, and be thus deeply affected, and yet be a Carnalist.

Fourthly, a deep apprehension and sense of the horror of thine estate: 4. By a
deep apprehension of the horror of their estate.
this may wind up thine affections many steps higher; thou may be afraid to
be damned, and afraid of the judgments of God, and this may fetch tears from
thine eyes, sighs and groans from thy heart. This may even melt thy affections
into weepings, and abundance of weepings for the sins thou have done, and yet
be a Carnalist. The Prophet brings in the carnal Jews so doing, This have you
done again, covering the Altar of God with tears, with weeping and crying out;
insomuch that he regards not the offering any more. Mal. 2 13.
Mark, they offered their prayers unto God, and cried, and cried outright,
yea, they powered out many tears, they covered Gods Altar with tears, and yet
says he, God regarded not their prayers and their offerings for all that:
should we see a man come to Gods house, and hear him at the hearing of the
Word, or calling upon God, make an outcry of his sins, yea, weep and weep
abundantly, cover his Pew with his tears, we would wonder at the repentance and
the good affections of that man, yet so far thou may go, such good affections
thou may have, as to cover thy Table with tears, yea, and Gods Altar with thy
weepings, and yet be a Carnalist. (...), Good men (says Homer) are weeping
men. Nay, I say a man may be a less weeping man, and yet be a good man. O how
mightily may a man's affections be wrought on, and yet be a stranger from grace!

Fifthly, 5. By self-love.
Self-love: look how high self-love may wind up thine affections for thy
sins, so high may thine affections be wound up. Self-love may make thee
wondrous affectionate. No natural affection can possibly be raised uphigher,
then self-love may. S. Paul being to reckon up all the sinne-ful affections of
men in these last days, he names self-love for the foremost. In the last days
perilous times shall come, why? for men shall be lovers of themselves: then he
names eighteen more, but this he places in the front of the Catalogue, for
self-love is strongest of all, 2 Timothy 3. 2. I cite this text only to show how
our affections may be raised to God, namely, as high as ever self-love can
clamber. Self-love will make a man be very affectionate. When a man knows he
cannot be saved, unless he do thus and thus; O how affectionate may he be for
to do it, when he knows he shall perish for ever, if he be not religious and
godly; if he do not bewail his iniquities and strive against sin, and labor to
do good unto others: how mavelous full of affections may this make him to be,
to do abundance of things!

First, It may scrue up his affections so high, that he may be loath to commit
sin: Which may First, make a man be loath to commit sin.
peradventure he does often commit it, but fain would he leave it. O he is
unwilling to do it, he wishes affectionately, O Lord, how shall I leave it? O
that I might leave it: yea, he seeks some means for to leave it; he does it I
confess, but fain would he not do it; his affections may be wrought upon thus
far, and yet be a Carnalist. Such an one was Darius, he had made a Decree, and
writ it, and signed it, and sealed it. Well, Daniel would not do according to
the tenor of the Decree: and therefore the Decree was, he should be cast into
the Lions Den. The King did cast him in indeed, but lo, how unwilling he was to
commit this sin: He fasted, he waked, he could not sleep a winks sleep: He
wished, In vitus feci, as ^e said in the Comedy.
O that I might safely deliver him! O that thy God, O Daniel, would deliver
thee. True, he thought I must needs now do this sin; alas my Decree, and what
may the Lords think of me? If I should not do it, all the Country would think
me too blame, nay, they would rebel against me out right, for breaking the Laws
of the Medes and the Persians. Alas! I must do it; but it appears though, how
unwilling he was for to do it, he could neither eat, nor sleep, nor be merry,
nor quiet, till he might hear Daniel was safe. Many a King but a quarter as
great as he would have scorned to have troubled his thoughts about such a
Puritan as Daniel was esteemed to be: nay, he rises early in the morning,
before the time was expired, he runs in all post to the den of Lions, and
there he cries lamentably, O Daniel, thou servant of the living God: O Daniel,
he screecht it out dolefully; and when he heard that Daniel was alive, he
rejoiced exceedingly, Dan. 6. 23. These subsequent circumstances show how
unwilling he was in the punishment of committing the sin, if he could have
helped it, and saved his honor with his Lords and his Nobles. Thus he was
unwilling to commit the sin, yet a wretched man for all that. Men imagine they
have a good Christian plea, when they can say this for themselves; it is true, I
do rap out an oath in my choler, I do pray coldly and with many by-thoughts,
but God knows I am unwilling to do so, I would very fain have it otherwise; I
am sorry I am drawn so away. Alas! so thou may be, and yet be a Carnalist:
thou may pray, and be unwilling to pray carelessly, thou may repent in some
manner, and be sorry thou repentest no more; thou may be loath to commit an
offense, and yet be a mere natural man, no jot of saying grace in thee. Was not
Pilate sensibly unwilling to condemn Jesus Christ? Was not Herod unwilling to
behead John the Baptist? it spoiled all his mirth at his feast, that he was
compelled for to do it, for so he counted it a compulsion, otherwise he would
not have done it: was not Saul unwilling to transgress the commandment of the
Lord? He forced himself; he had abundance of gain-sayings in his heart*
abundance of wishes in his breast, O I would not do it, I would to God I were
not put upon such importunate circumstances as I am, fain would I not do it; he
forced him self, there was a kind of pitched field in his bosom, a battle in
his soul: fain would he do it, that way went his lusts; fain would he not do
it, that way went his conscience: So he forced himself, 1 Samuel 13. 13. and yet
God did reject him. Thus felf-love may wind up a man's affections exceedingly,
to be loath to commit a sin.

Secondly, And vomit up a dear sin, committed by himself, and be sorry that
others should commit it.
It may so draw up ones affections to God, as to make one vomit up a dear sin
ones self, and be sorry that others too should commit it; he may be vexed to see
other men drunk, vexed to see them break the Sabbath, vexed to see how slack they
come to Gods house, vexed to hear any body swear, or curse, or take on: he may
be driven to make restitution himself. Thus it was with Micah, he had stolen a
11. hundred Shekels of silver from his Mother; well, this man, as it appears,
hears his Mother curse, and swear, and take on, she had lost so much silver,
some body had stolen it from her; when he heard his Mother curse and ban on
this fashion, he was so deeply moved to hear it, that he could not abide it:
nay, it made him be willing to confess he had stolen it from her, and to make
restitution of all, yea, so far as his mother did think, O what a blessed
convert was her son! he was now converted to be of so honest a mind. Blessed
be thou of the Lord my son, says his Mother. He said unto his Mother, The
eleven hundred shekels of silver that were taken from thee, about which thou
cursedst, and spakest of also in mine ears, behold, the silver is with me, I
took it: and his Mother said, Blessed be thou of the Lord, my son, Jud. 17. 2.
He had stolen the silver from his Mother, and yet when he heard his Mother
curse and swear, and take on in that wise, it should seem his affections did
burn him. What, shall I hear my Mother curse in this sort? and rather then he
would let her stand swearing and cursing, he would vomit up his sweet gettings.
Nay, she thought him so religious as passes, because he did so. Blessed be thou
of the Lord, my son: but she was deceived, for he was a wretched Idolater; the
Lord calls him an Idolater, verse. 5. Beloved, this is a strange thing indeed;
yet thus far may a Carnalist go: he may be zealous against other men's sins, and
grieved to hear others transgress, and vexed to see others offend. When David
would sin and number the people, it vexed the soul of Ioab to see it. O my Lord
the King, why will thou be a cause of trespass to Israel? 1 Chronicles. 21. 3. So
thou may be vexed to see others offended, and yet notwithstanding no better
then a Carnalist.

Thirdly, 3. And not dare to venture upon a sin, though he lose by it.
It may so raise up his affections to God, and to be so set against sin, as to
be willing to lose hopes of getting housefuls of silver and gold, to lose the
favor of Kings and of Princes, to lose preferment and all, then venture on a
sin. This was Balaams case, If Balak would give me his house full of silver
and gold, I cannot go beyond the commandment of God to do less or more. Numb.
24. 13. He durst not go beyond the commandment of God a jot, no, not for a
house full of money, which is more then a thousand can say, that will go beyond
it, and beside it, and against the commandment of God for a handful of Barley,
yet he though a Reprobate, durst not go beyond the commandment of God to do
good or bad of his own mind, not for a house full of coin. Know thou not,
says King Balak unto him, know thou not that I can promote thee to honor?
yea, he knew it well enough, and yet for all that Balaam would not yield to
him. Balaam, if he would have hearkened to carnal arguments, he might have found
many. The Israelites are a people of another Nation. I am a Moabite, and they
are of another generation: and what though they be better people then they, yet
I am a Subject to the King of Moab, and I must be true to my Sovereign, and
count them mine enemies which are the enemies of my Country, and are come to
lick up the land. If I do obey my King, I may have money by housefuls, I may
have preferment as much and more then I can wish. Thus flesh and blood might
have reasoned; but see how his affections were better rectifyed then thus; he
durst not do it upon any terms, because it was against the commandment of God.
Thou think thy cause to be happy, O thou caust be willing to pass by the
wages of sin, though thou could get by a sin, yet thou dare not commit it:
thou think certainly mine affections are to God and to grace. I might get
this, and I might get that, if I would but go against my conscience a little,
but I will not for money, nor favor, nor any thing. Well said yet; better then
millions can say: but this thou may do, and yet be a Carnalist.

Fourthly, 4. And to be forward in Religion, run to persecution.
It may elevate his affections so high, as to be so forward in religion and
godliness: so strict in his ways, as to be persecuted too for the truths
sake, and for Christ's sake: he may endure persecution a good while: indeed if
it go too far, he will warp: but persecuted he may be, and suffer a good while
he may, and yet be a carnal man. This you may see in the stony-ground hearer,
He hears the Word and receives it with joy, Mat. 13. 20. Mark, his affections
are raised, he receives the Word and the Gospel with joy, he is affected with
the Word, nay, says our Savior, he endures a while, and persecution arises
against him, then he is offended, ver. 21. Its true, he is offended at this,
that he should suffer persecution; he would be glad to be a professor of the
Word, so he might profess it in a whole skin, as we say: he does, and he will
warp then, that is certain: that is all one; nevertheless ye may observe in the
mean time what a great way he goes in religion, he trades so far in it, that
others will persecute him for it, and yet but a carnal man for all that. Now of
the good ground.

Fifthly, 5. And to be ravished with the joys of the Spirit.
It may lift up his affections so high, as to ravish him and enamour him with
joys of the Spirit, He may be in some ecstasies of spiritual joy: as many
examples might be named. Were not the Galathians enamoured with the Gospel that
would have plucked out their eyes and given them to Paul? were not the people
over-joyed, when they cried out in the open Congregation, Lord, evermore give
us this bread: O then, set your affections, etc.

The III. Sermon.
Colos. 3. 2. Set your affections on things that are above, etc.
THe last thing that I told you was, what a great way a carnal man may go in
this point. His affections may be wrought on exceedingly. I promised to show
you that this was no argument that his affections are set upon God. The Apostle
does not say, let the things that are above work on your affections, for so
they may do, and ye be carnal for all that; but he says, Set your affections
on things which are above.

There be four reasons to prove, Reasons 4.
though a carnal man's affections be so wrought on as ye have heard, that they
are not rightly wrought on.

First, 1. The carnal man's affections are not kindly wrought on.
Because they are not kindly wrought on. They are chafed and heated very much,
but they are not kindly wrought on. The affections must be kindly wrought on,
otherwise they are not wrought on aright; they may be violently and
passionately wrought on, there may be a great deal of pudder wrought in the
affections, but never are they rightly wrought on, unless they be wrought upon
kindly. Be kindly affectioned one to another with brotherly love, says St
Paul, Romans 12. 10. The Galatians that would have plucked out their eyes for
Saint Paul, they were strongly affected with Saint Paul, but they were not
kindly affected. If they had been kindly affected with him or his Doctrine,
they would not have hearkened to false Apostles, as they did. A carnal man,
natural reason, and knowledge out of the Word may work on his affections, his
conscience, and self-love, whereby he is loath to be damned, and glad to be
saved when he dies, these may work on his affections, and cause him to weep for
his sins, and give over many corruptions, and to be strongly affected, but alas
he is not kindly affected. It Is only the love of God shed abroad in the heart
that kindly affects one. But it is self-love, and not love of the Lord Jesus
that affects him: he is not kindly affected.

Secondly, 2. They are not judiciously wrought on.
A carnal man's affections are not judiciously wrought on. They are wrought on
in a fit at it, but they are not wrought on with judgment, they have not the
true beginning of working, which is sound judgment. S. Hierom says of the
affections of Christ, respectu Christi semper sequuntur rationem, Christ's
affections had always the right beginning, which was true reason and
judgment. And therefore S. Matthew notes especially the beginning of his
sorrow, He began to be sorrowful and very heavy, Mat. 26. 37. He had a right
beginning of it. The natural beginning of the affections is this, when the
judgment is first poysed, and the heart is first fired, this is the natural
beginning of the affections. So that the heart must first be wrought on, and
the spirit moved, before the affections can be judiciously wronght on. And
therefore says S. John, Christ troubled himself. He groaned in spirit, and he
troubled himself, Joh. 11. 33. He was exceedingly affected with sorrow for
Lazarus his death, and his kinsfolks sorrows and distrusts they were in, and he
troubled himself: we translate it, he was troubled, but in the original it is,
(...), he troubled himself, his own judgment, and his spirit, and his heart
stirred up his affections to be troubled. His affections were wrought on
judiciously. A carnal man's affections though they be much wrought on, yet they
are not wrought on judiciously. Now he is in the mind to be strict and to be
godly, now he weeps and takes on, can ye wonder? his conscience now jerks him,
and is quick: but when a few tears and a few labors and endeavors that way
have contented his conscience, as his conscience is apt to be satisfied, the
man is of another judgment then quickly. He is of the judgment then, tush,
what need I be so strict and precise? Thus he is affected, not upon sound
judgment. Affected he is, and strongly affected too for the while, but he is
not affected judiciously.

Thirdly, 3. They are not regularly wrought on.
A carnal man's affections are not wrought upon regularly. His affections may be
are wrought upon by Gods justice and judgments, because God is a consuming
fire against sin, because God is severe against the works of iniquity, because
he has made heaven-gate to be straight. These are the grounds of his work. His
affections are wrought upon this way; therefore he weeps, and therefore he
prays, and therefore he reforms, and therefore he is affected. But this is not
regular affection: he is affected with fear, but it is not the fear of Gods
goodness, not Gods mercy and goodness, were there no other attribute in God,
he might look long enough, before he would fear his mercy: that is a ground of
presumption to him, but he fears Gods judgments and his justice; he does not
tremble and quake to consider that God is a merciful God, and a good God whom
he has sinned against. The true Israel of God, They fear the Lord and his
goodness, Hos. 3. 5. their affections are regular, they are affected with fear
of Gods goodness. But a carnal man is not affected with the fear of Gods
goodness. He is affected with the fear of Gods justice, his affections are
wrought on irregularly.

Fourthly, 4. They are not wrought on universally.
A carnal man's affections are not wrought upon universally. Some affections are
wrought on, and others are not. No, he has a contradiction of affections. He
has some good affections to God and to grace, and he has some affections that
are contradictory to these. Some sins he grieves under, some he is glad
under; some commandments he delights to be doing, and some he delights to be
breaking. I do not mean part flesh, and part spirit, for so the best godly
souls under Heaven have a contradiction of affections: they have some
affections of the spirit, and some affections of the flesh, contradicting and
opposing one another. I do not mean this. But a carnal man has such a
contradiction of affections, as that his carnal affections give the other the
lie. He is affected with sorrow for his sins, but he is not troubled for his
usury. He is affected with desires to leave his sins, but not to leave his
sinful dependances. As Esau, he was affected with weeping for his missing of
grace and the blessing, but not for his pleasures and sensual delight. Is not
this a contradiction of affections! He found no place of repentance, though he
sought it carefully with tears, Heb. 12. 17. He was affected with weeping after
repentance, (...) says the Text.
but he could find no place to bestow it in. There was not elbow-room enough
for repentance in his heart. He made some room in some part of his heart for
repentance, but not in all. He found place for it in some of his affections,
but not in all. He is affected, but he is not affected universally. He has a
contradiction of affections in his soul; so that a carnal man's affections,
though they be wrought on, they are not wrought upon universally.

It is true, a carnal man's affections may be exceedingly wrought on, then I
pray examine your selves; Two persons I would have to examine themselves

First, We must therefore examine our selves, especially those.
Them that think their affections are set upon God. For as for them that are
absolutely carnal, whose affections are buried in the things of the World, and
have no affection at all unto grace or unto holiness, speak not to them, their
own consciences condemn them to be rotten, and are as good as a thousand
examiners. I do not speak to them. If they will not hear their own
conscience^s, much less will they hear me. I speak to them that think t^eir
affections are set upon God.

Secondly, That think their affections are set on God.
Them that though their affections be set upon Christ, yet they think they are
not affect^d aright: for many Christian souls are rightly affected, and do not
think so. Examine your selves whethe^ (...) be r^htly affected or no.

First, 1. He that truly affects grace affects nothing so much as grace.
He that is truly affected with grace and with Christ and his Word, He affects
nothing so much as he does grace. A carnal man may be greatly affected with
grace, b^t there is something he affects more. He affects his vanities ^ore,
and his profits more, and his pleasures more. Herod it is ^rue, he affected
John Baptist, he knew he was a just man, and ^e feared him: he affected his
preaching, for he heard him ^^ladly, he affected the practice of his doctrine,
for he did many ^^ings, he was affected greatly with these good things, but
there was some things he was affected with more. The daug^ter of Herodias
affected him more. She pleased Herod, says ^e Text, Mar. 6. 22. he was not
only affected with her dancing, but affected to content. She pleased Herod.
John Baptist did not please him, he had not content in his Ministry. Nay, her
dancing affected him so much, that he was willing to part with half of his
Kingdom to gratify her. Verse. 23.
Whatsoever theu shall ask of me, says he, I will give it thee, to the one
half of my Kingdom. This was more affection then ever he showed to John's
Doctrine. He never said to John or his Doctrine, I Will part with a quarter of my
Kingdom, nay, he would not part with his whore no^ his lusts for that. Nay, he
would rather see John dead, a^ well as he affected him, then miss of his
pleasures, or not gratify his Lords. I Will give thee, says he to his damosel,
I Will give thee one half of my Kingdom. Give me then, says she, John Baptists
head in a Charger. The foolish King had no^ wit enough to say, John is dearer
then all my Kingdom. No, he affected his teaching well, but his pastime better.
Examine thy soul by this mark: thou art affected with grace, but is there
nothing thou art affected with more? thou art glad to hear a Sermon, but may we
not see thee g^adder at thy sports? thou art glad to part with an hour a Gods
worship, but art thou not gladder to part with two at thy profits? a child of
God is affected with grace most* let credit fly, let profit fly, let carnal
relations fly, let life, let living, let all that he has fly, rather then
le^ a good duty of grace fly away: he is most affected wit^ grace, there is
nothing he affects more or so much.

Secondly, 2. He must needs have expressions of grace.
He that is affected with grace and godliness aright, m^st needs have
expressions of grace; he cannot but show it; ^e can as easily carry fire in his
bosom and hide it, as co^^eal grace. Can a man be deeply affected with
sorrows, and not show it in his face; can a man be deeply affected with
passions of anger and of wrath, and not show it in his ^ountenance? hands,
feet, lips, nostrils, eyes, forehead ^ yea, and all a man's gesture and carriage
will show wha^ affections are in him, Proverb.
Affectio taciturna nulla est affectio. Every passion has its proper dialect.
Concealed affection is no affection at all, or but small and as good as
nothing. So if thou be affected with grace, 'twill show it self in thy
speeches, in thine actions, in thy ways, 'twill show it self in thy calling,
'twill show it self in thy company, 'twill show it self at the table, 'twill
show it self in the market; thou can not be affected with grace, but thou will be an open professor of grace. Can a man take fire in his bosom, and his
clothes not be burnt? Prove. 6. 27. If fire be in thy bosom, all that come near
thee will feel the very smell of it in thy clothes. The affections (...) a
fire, The fire kindled, says David, Psalm. (...) that is, (...) affections did
kindle, he strove for to hide them, but he could not; can you not be religious
but you must show it? says the mocker of all goodness. No, it is a sign thou
have no affection to holiness, because thou will not (...): Thou can hear
God dishonored with Oaths, and no^ show thine affection against them: thou
can come in company and suffer unprofitable language* and not show thine
affections to holy discourse, a sign thou have no affections that way; thou
may say thou art affected with grace, but ^ow does it appear? It appears not
(...) thy prayers, little or no affec^^on in them; it appears (...) the
Sabbath, little or (...) to the sanctifying of it: Like the stupid fool in the
Comedy, who being willing to be thought to be angry, he knew not how to show
it, but only by saying, Irascor, I am angry, says he; one would think if he
were angry, he needed not to say he was angry; the affection of anger would
have expressed it self, but he had no other reasons to be thought to be angry,
but only his saying, I am angry. So thou have no other expressions of affection
at the word, or at grace, but only thou say, I am affected therewith.
Concealed affection is no affection, De non apparentibus and de non
existentibus eadem est ratio, its a good rule in Law. There is the same reason
for things which appear not, that is for things which exist not. Certainly here
it is most true, I may be confident to say, if thine affections appear not,
thine affections are not.

Thirdly, 3. He is troubled with any interruption.
He that is affected with grace or with holiness, if he be never so little
interrupted, he is troubled, it is like the stopping of a watercourse, the
water swells and is troubled exceedingly that it cannot pass; like the Woman in
the Gospel, whose affections were to Christ to anoint his head, when his
Disciples had cast in a rub in her way, that it had been better bestowed on the
poor, why trouble ye the woman? says Christ, Mat. 26. 10. Christ knew it
troubled her affections to be hindered from their course; he that is truly
affected with Christ or his Spirit, if he light not on Christ the sooner, he is
even sick of love. I charge ye, O ye daughters of Jerusalem, if ye find my
beloved, that ye tell him I am sick of love, Cant. 5. 8. her poor soul was even
sick at heart for her Love, because she could not come at him: examine thy self
in this point. I am sure thou have been long enough without Christ, thou art
20. or 30. years old, and all this while thou have been without Christ: thou
say thou art affected with a Christ, O thou would fain have Christ, thou
would fain have him live in thee ever; answer me now, art thou sick of love
for a Christ? Hope deferred makes the heart sick. Pro. 13. 12. Thou say thou
art affected with hopes after grace, thou hopest for grace, and for strength
against sin, and thy hope is deferred, thy hope comes not yet, thou art not
able to withstand thy corruptions, not able to subdue such a lust; no, if thou
be affected at all with any hope, thy hope is deferred as yet: but has it
made thy heart sick? were thou ever sick at heart for this grace? if it have
not made thy heart sick, it is a sign thou were never rightly affected with
hope, for if thou were, it would make thy heart sick to be so long without it,
as thou have been. May be thine affections are so strong set on the world, that
thou have been world-sick, and crosse-sick, and trouble-sick, and anger-sick,
and revenge-sick, and coveteousness-sick; as Ahab was sick, because he knew not
how to get Naboths vineyard, 1 King. 21. 4. May be thou art crossed and sick of
vexation; may be thou art incensed, and sick of revenge or impatiency: but art
thou sick after grace? Aristot.
Aristotle calls the affections Aegritudines animi, they are the sicknesses of
the soul; if the soul be affected indeed, she is sick if she speed not.

Fourthly, 4. He has his conversation in heaven whence grace descends. Hereby
only are we marriageable to Christ* l. de sacrif, Abel and Cain.
He that is truly affected with grace has his conversation in heaven, whence
all grace does descend. Animus est non ubi animat, sed ubi amat, the soul is,
not where it animates, not where it sojourns, but where it affects; and
therefore thou live in heaven, if thou be truly affected with heavenly
things: he that is truly affected with grace, is most affected with the
fountain of grace, which is God. God is the fountain of all grace, and if thou
be affected with it, thou art chiefly affected with God. Alas! thou may
have a good memory, a good wit, and good parts, and be affected with them, and
rejoice that thou have them. But all the question is this, art thou affected
with God the fountain of grace? a wicked man may be affected with grace in the
bucket, and yet have no love to grace in the fountain: it affects him well
enough to have some, but he does not so like it to have much, Omne nimium
vertitur in nigrum monachum, thinks he. It Is the property of the godly to be
affected with God, Rejoice in the Lord O ye righeeous, Psalm. 33. 1. Be ye
affected with God himself, says the Psalmist. One, he is affected with
pleasures, another, he is affected with honor and respect, another, he is
affected with profit, another, he may be affected with grace too, but it is the
godly man only that is affected with God himself. Examine your affections, are
ye affected with God himself? are ye affected with his glory?

It does infinitely stand us in hand, to have our affections set right; which I
will prove by these 8. arguments.

First, Hereby only are we marriageable to Christ, When a man goes a woing for
a wife, all his care is to get her affections, he will never marry her if he be
wise, if he may not have her affection, (...), says Philo, The affections are
the womanhood of the soul, he will never marry her, if she be nor a woman for
him, much less will he marry her, if she be not a woman at all, he will not
have a man for his wife, she shall be a woman certainly, if he ever mean for to
marry her; she is not marriageable, but only for her affection; what a
miserable soul then is thy soul, if thy affections be not right? thou art not
marriageable to Christ. This is the rule of all wives and of all Spouses, thy
desire shall be to thy husband, Genesis 3. 16. Thine affections shall be to him,
or thou caust not be his wife. He is a monster in nature that will have a wife,
whose affection is set on another. What, do thou take Christ for a monster,
that thy soul should be married to him, when thine affection is forestalled? If
thine affections be to the world, and to the strumpet-like things of the world,
Christ cannot abide thee. Know thou not that the love of the world is enmity
with God? Out thou filthy strumpet-like soul, betrothest thou thine affections
to the world, and yet hopest to be married to Christ? thou art not marriageable
to him: if gains and pleasures and vanities, and such like base paramours be
welcomed to thy heart, thou can not be married unto Christ, thou art the
worlds Spouse and the devils Spouse, when thine affections be inordinate.
Uncleanness and inordinate affection, the Apostle puts them together, Mortify
your members which are on the earth, fornication, uncleanness, inordinate
affection, Col. 3. 5. So that thy soul is a filthy and an unclean soul, that
have these inordinate affections unmortified in thee, thy soul is a fit Spouse
for the unclean spirit, and not for Christ, and therefore it deeply concerns
you to have your affections set right, 2. Hereby only does the soul set
favorites in the heart.
because thereby only are ye marriageable to Christ.

Secondly, Hereby only does the soul set up favorites in her heart: those are
the hearts favorites whom the heart most affects. Now if Christ be not thy
hearts favorite, what a woeful condition art thou in? It has been the undoing
of many a Prince, the having of ill favorites; and that soul must needs be for
ever undone, that has ill favorites in her heart. As soon as Joseph was in
favor with the Keeper of the prison, Joseph presently had all at command,
nothing was done but Joseph was the doer of it, Genesis 39. 21. He was no sooner
in favor but he was Dominus fac totum, as we say; he ruled all then. Look what
thy heart does affect, that is in favor with thy heart; that is dominus fac
totum. If thy pleasures and thy vanities be once in favor with thy heart,
Christ can have no command of thy heart, no further then thy lusts will give
leave: thou can not reform any thing that is amiss, no further then thy lusts
will give leave: would thou repent, or stand for Gods glory? thou can not
unless thy lusts do give leave: would thou be reproved, or well counseled?
thou can not unless thy lusts will give leave: as long as thy lusts are in
favor with thy heart, they govern all, they command all, thy mind goes as
they tend, thy thoughts come as they call, thy courses are as they will. I will
give this people favor in the sight of the Egyptians, and they shall spoil the
Egyptians, Exo. 3. 21, 22. When they were once in favor with them, they might
spoil them, and rob them, and borrow Jewels of them, and never pay them again;
they might do any thing, when they were in favor with them. O the misery of
the soul, when the world, or pleasure, or sin, or the like are in favor with
it, they spoil it, and rob it, and bereave it of all the jewels it has; Christ
can do nothing to any purpose with that soul, that favors other things
besides Christ. Now if thine affections be not set right, thy favor is not
right set: this is the reason why thou art wedded to the world, and wedded to
thy lusts, that thine affections cannot be unto Christ. When Hadad had great
favor with Pharaoh, Pharaoh even married his own wives sister unto Hadad, 1
Kin. 11. 19. He made him his brother, he brought him into the nearest relation
he could, whenas his favor was set toward him. So if thou favourest the
things of this life, thou weddest thy soul to them. What an infinite indignity
is this unto Christ, that such base and sordid things should be in favor, and
Christ not be thy souls favorite!

Thirdly, 3. Hereby the soul is conver^ible and reconcilable to God.
Hereby the soul is convertible and reconcilable to God. Be a man never so
cross and crooked, never so cruelly and implacably bent to transgress, yet as
long as there be affections in him to be wrought, his heart may be won. Though
a Kings wrath be as the roaring of a Lion, though he be never so fallen out
with a man, yet as long as there be affections in the King, patience, wisdom,
and humbling ones self, and the like, these things may persuade him: by long
forbearing is a Prince persuaded, Pro. 15. 15. Without a man have any
affections in him, he is not capable of persuasion, R^et. c. 1.
(...), says Aristotle. The affections are they whereby a man is mutable. For
though it be a weakness to be mutable, yet when a man is evil and wicked, it is
a blessed weakness that he is mutable from that wickedness. Now if a man be
grievously set upon mischief, though he be an enemy of all grace and of
goodness, yet as long as there be any affections left in him, he is not an
implacable enemy: no, his affections are a possible subject to be wrought on,
the Word and the Spirit may persuade him; and therefore what a care should we
have of our affections, because thereby we are placable and reconcilable to
God? The Apostle yokes these two together, without natural affection,
implacable, Romans 1. 31. for a man as long as he has any natural affection
left, he is never implacable: still he may be persuaded, unless he degenerate
in his affections, and prove to be unnatural: if the affections depend on this
fashion, he is not only wicked and an enemy to grace, but he is an implacable
enemy: think then what wrong ye do to your own souls, so unnaturally to set
your affections, to let them degenerate as you do, and wander after vanity.
Beware how ye do so, ye go about to divert all possibility of conversion, and
provoke the Lord to count you implacable enemies to grace and to the scepter of
his dear Son.

Fourthly, 4. The affections are the hands of the soul.
It may appear how infinitely it stands you in hand to set your affections
aright, because the affections are the hands of your souls. Ye cannot take hold
of any thing in the world to do you any good, but by your affections. For as
hands are to the body, so the affections are to the soul. Will a man be so mad
as to put his hand and his fingers out of joint? alas! he cannot take hold of
so much as his meat for to eat it. So the affections are the hands of the soul.
He that has clean hands and a pure heart, Ps. 24. 4 that is, he whose
affections are clean, and heart pure. I will wash my hands in innocence, and so
will I compass thine Altar, Psalm. 26. 6. that is, I will purge mine
affections, and so I will pray. I will that men pray every where, lifting up
holy hands without wrath, 1 Timothy 2. 8. that is, lifting up holy affections,
without the distempered affections of wrath or anger or the like: the
affections are the hands of the heart, whereby it takes the word or the
Commandment, or any thing to it, Now what a horrible thing is it that these
hands of thine should be put out of joint? as long as thine affections are to
the things here on earth, they are all out of joint; thou can never take
grace. Ye cannot take hold of a promise, nor of the word, unless your
affections be right. I know that Faith is the right hand of the soul, whereby
it takes hold of that which is good. But alas! the hand of Faith is clumbsie
without the affections. Such a one had a cross, how did he take it? say we:
that is, how is he affected under it? ye take it ill to be reproved of your
sins: ye take it ill to be warned and admonished either in public or private.
Ye take it ill to be told of the judgments of God against your lusts. Alas!
how can ye do otherwise? ye cannot take it well, when your affections that
should take it well are set upon vanity? will thou bind up and hamper thine
affections in the things of the Earth? alas! thy hands are quite bound, thou
can not take hold of Christ or of Heaven. Thou do even pinion thine own
soul and shackle it for Hell. What does the Devil when he shackles a man like a
prisoner for hell and damnation? Mat. 22 1^.
he binds him hand and foot, and so casts him into utter darkness; he binds
up his heart and affections, that he cannot weep, nor he cannot repent of his
sins, he cannot rejoice in grace, nor in goodness, he cannot delight in the
word, he binds up his affections which are the hands and feet of the soul, and
so fits him for hell and destruction: above all things then be sure that thy
hands be loose, and thine affections at liberty to set them upon Heaven.

Fifthly, 5. The affections are the handles of our hearts.
It may appear how infinitely it stands you in hand to set your affections
aright, because they are not only the hands, but the handles of your hearts, as
your hearts can catch hold of nothing that is good, unless your affections
take hold, so nothing can take hold of your hearts, but by your affections. If
ever the word do convert you, it must catch hold of you. Jesus said unto Simon,
henceforth thou shall catch men, Luke 5. 10. that is, the preaching of the
Word, it shall catch men, when thou preachest. Now one of the first holds that
it catches, is by the affections. Men are affected with the Word, and so it
comes to convert men; now beloved, had you not need to have a care of
affections, seeing they are the handles of your hearts? were it not for them,
the word could never catch hold on you. There is no hold to be had of such a
man, as we say; that is, his affections are slippery. Beloved, here you come to
Gods house, miserable wretched souls, in your sins, alas! how is it possible
that ever Gods Ministers should catch hold of your hearts? your affections are
the main hold that we can catch of you. If your affections be not here, but run
after the things of this life, we can have no hold of you, you have nothing
that we should take hold by. Indeed we may catch hold of your understandings:
that is nothing unless we take hold of your affections, they are as slippery
Eels, we can scarce ever hold them. O could we take hold of them, it were well:
they are fair handles for us to take hold by. O if we could but truly affect
your hearts with the truth, then we might have some hope to convert you. As
Epictetus says of wrongs, and of injuries, and all things in the world, Epist.
every thing has (...), Every thing has two handles, O says he, if a man
could take hold of every wrong at the right handle, then he would bear it
patiently: so I may say of your haarts. Your hearts have two handles. I pray
God the Word may take hold at the right handle of your hearts. The true
affections of the heart, if ever the Word take hold of them, it has taken hold
of the right handle; Is it not then a lamentable thing that men's affections are
misplaced? alas! they are the hold of the heart, and the heart can never be
taken, unless they be set right.

Sirthly, 6. Affections are the souls stomach.
It may appear how infinitely it stands you in hand to set your affections
aright, because they are the souls stomach: that which the soul does affect,
that reedeth and fills the soul, as meat does the stomach. Is it not
necessary to be careful what meat we do eat? if we eat trash it will kill us,
if we feed upon poison, it will poison and infect us. Now that is the food of
thy soul, which thy soul does affect, and thine affection is thy souls stomach
to hunger after it, thine affections are (...), says Aspasius, L. 3. ad Nico.
c. 3.
they are the appetite of the soul. Such then as your affections are, such is
your food. Should you see a man feed upon dirt, and upon Bricks, and upon
carrion, certainly you would say, unless he be broken therefrom, it will kill
him. No remedy but it will kill him without doubt. And will thou feed thy soul
with vanities, and with trash, and with poison? Every thing is trash besides
Christ, every thing is poison besides Christ and his graces; if thou feedest
upon any thing besides Christ and his spirit, thou feedest upon trash and upon
poison. Now, if thou set thine affections here below, thou feedest upon trash.
Thou murderest thy soul with such food, its rank poison, and yet thou feedest
upon it. That which thou affectest, that is thy souls food. As new born babes
desire the sincere milk of the Word, that ye may grow thereby, 1 Pet. 2. 2.
milk, you know, is the babes food: if it have not its food, it cannot possible
live. But the word is the milk and the food of the soul, and that the Apostle
would have you to set your affections upon. Desire it, or affect it, says he:
where note your affections are the stomach of your soul. The Word is your food.
All other food is but trash, and it feeds you accordingly. O ye poor souls that
feed upon poison all the day long, that diet your souls with nothing but trash
and filth, and froth, how long will you do thus? O set your affections on
things that are above, these are the wholesome food of your souls, etc.

Seventhly, 7. Affections are the main m^tter of ^race. Arist.
it may appear how infinitely it stands you in hand to set your affections
aright, because they are the main matter of grace. They are (...), They are the
materials of grace: as Aristotle says of the virtues, they are nothing but the
right ruling of the affections, so may I say of grace with a little alteration,
the main work of grace is the ruling of the affections aright, it takes them
off from the things here on earth, and lifts them up to the things that are in
Heaven. When grace does convert a man, it does not take away the affections,
but it rules them. Thou were angry before, grace does not take away thine
anger. No, oportet virum bonum esse iracundum, says Cicero. A good man must be
angry, I say grace does not take away thine anger, but it rules thine anger,
and teaches thee to turn it against sin, and against the dishonor of God.
Thou were merrily disposed before, of a cheerful constitution, grace does not
come to take away thy mirth, but to rule it. Whereas thou were merry with
vanity, and ever laughing at jests and at fooleries, now grace makes thee merry
in Gods service, and to rejoice in the Lord. Thou were of a sad spirit before,
but perhaps it was for crosses and losses, and discontents and the like: grace
comes not to take away thy sorrows, but to rule them, to make thee weep and
mourn at thy deadness and unthankfulness toward the Lord Jesus Christ.

Gratia non tollit, sed attollit naturam. Grace does not take away nature, but
it takes it up. The affections are natural, grace turns them into spiritual;
this I say brethren, that ye may see how that grace runs along in the
affections, as water in the pipe. The affections are the matter of grace. As
the soul is in the body; the body is the matter; and the soul is in it, and so
makes up a living creature. A man had need look to his body, for it is the due
matter of his soul; so it is with the affections, thou have need to be careful
of them, for they are the matter of grace: and therefore the Apostle calls the
affections the members; yield your members servants unto righteousness, Romans
6. 19. that is, as expositors expound it, yield your affections thereto.

For they are your souls members, and the materials of grace: is not fear the
matter of the fear of the Lord? and love the matter of the love of the Lord?
and sorrow the matter of repentance from sin? now, if the affections be the
materials of grace, what a desperate condition are ye in, that set your
affections upon the things here below? you throw down all the matter of grace.
How can ye have any grace, when ye cast away in the kennel all the matter for
grace. Grace requires the affections for its matter, and thou have no matter
for this grace. Thou hurlest away all thine affections upon thy pleasures, and
thy profits, and thy vanities, thou art so far from all grace, as that thou
have no matter for grace.

Eighthly, 8. Affections are arguments what we be.
It may appear how infinitely it stands you in hand to set your affections
aright, because they are arguments what ye be. According as your affections
are, so are your souls: if I could see what your affections run on, I could see
what ye all be; whether Saints or wicked, whether of God or the Devil. The
affections are the arguments that a man is a man. When the people of Lystra
took Paul and Barnabas for gods, and would have sacrificed to them, Sirs, says
Paul, Why do ye thus, whereas we are men of like passions with you? Act. 14.
15. that is, affections: we have fear, and joy, and grief, and love, and the
like passions with you. Now if the bare having of affections be the arguments
that a man is a man, then surely the goodness or vainesse of these affections
are the arguments that a man is a Christian man, or an ungodly man. I beseech
you consider what a woeful distressed condition ye are in, if your affections be
vain and earthly, ye carry a brand in your hearts that ye are not of God, that
ye are yet the slaves of Satan and the servants of unrighteousness, and your
end is no better then eternal death and destruction. Affectus virum indicat.
Your affections show you what men and women ye be, etc.

The IV. Sermon.
Colos. 3. 2. Set your affections on things that are above, etc.
HItherto it suffices to have spoken of the coherence of the words, wherein ye
^ave heard.

First, What these affections be.

Secondly, That a wicked man cannot set his affectious on God.

Thirdly, How far forth a wicked man may have good affections, and how they
differ from the godlies.

Fourthly, How they may examine themselves, and find that their affections are
not set right.

Fifthly, Eight several arguments to convince them, what a woeful condition they
are in, till their affections are set upon God.

Now for the words, It is a Christians duty to set his affections upon God.
they contain a special duty, that a Christian is bound to, namely, to set his
affections upon God. The Apostle presses it strongly.

First, Because it is an infallible mark of our being or not being in Christ.
If ye be risen with Christ, etc. set your affections on things above. 1 Reason.
Because it is an infallible argument of our being or not being in Christ.
As if he should say; Ye say ye are risen with Christ, come then and
demonstrate it now that ye are risen with Christ. If ye be risen with Christ,
this will infallibly follow. Ye will set your affections above; it cannot be
otherwise. If your affections be not set above, doubtless you are not risen
with Christ. Those that are Christ's, says St Paul, have crucified the flesh
with the affections and lusts, Galat. 5. 24. He takes it for granted, that if
they be Christ's, they have crucified the flesh and the affections to the
World-ward, and set them upon God.

Secondly, 1 Reason Because it is a matter of reasonable equity.
He presses it as a matter of reasonable equity; the competition stands but
between two, Either things in heaven, or things on earth. One of them ye must
set your affections upon, ye cannot set your affections upon both; if ye set
your affections any where, ye must needs set them upon one of these two. Mark
the competition. Set your affections on things that are above, not on the
things on the Earth; now there is a necessity of reason, that election should
be made of the best, that we should set our affections on the better of the
twain; to wit, the things that are in Heaven, which are infinitely better then
the things here on Earth. Set your affections on things that are above, and not
on the things on Earth. Yea of necessity.
So that hence ye may see the necessity of this duty. We must set our
affections above, or which is all one, upon God. The strength of this necessity
will the better appear, 1. Because God is the principal object of our
affections.
if we consider these four things.

First, That God is the principal object of our affections: as the eye is made
to be set upon colors, and the ear is made to be set upon sounds, and the
smell is made to be set upon odours; so the affections are made to be
principally set upon God. The affections are so naturally due unto God, that if
it be not God the souls affections are set on, it makes it a God or an Idol.
And therefore the Apostle bids us mortify our inordinate affections, evil
concupiscence, and coveteousness, which is Idolatry, Col. 3. 5. when our
affections are set upon gains, and upon profits, and the things of this life,
the Apostle calls this coveteousnesse, and this coveteousnesse he says it is
Idolatry; because the soul makes Gold a god, and silver a god, and profit a
god, by setting its affections thereupon. As the eye does either see colors,
or else it sees a thing under the likeness of a color: color is the
principal object of the sight, and therefore if it be not a color which it
sees (as the eye may see light, as the light of the fire, the light of the Sun,
but it sees it under the likeness of redness or whiteness, or some other
color.) It appears by a color, or else it cannot see it: So beloved, it is
either God our affections are on, or we idolize it as a God. Indeed we may
affect other things as mediums and in reference to God, but look where we set
our affections, that is our God. Only fear the Lord, and serve him with all
your heart, 1 Samuel 12. 24. We must set our affection of fear only upon God. The
affections are the souls attendants. Does not a servant wait only upon his own
Master? whom he gives his attendance unto him he makes his Master, and whom
should the soul wait on but only upon God? the affections are the souls
attendances; upon whomsoever she bestows them, she waits upon it as true God.
My soul, says David, my soul wait thou only upon God, Psa 62. 5. Give thine
attendance to none but to him. Thine affections of love, and of joy, and of
hope and desire, these must wait upon God for to worship him. Thine affections
of fear and of care, these must wait upon God to provide what ever may please
him. Thine affections of hatred, and of grief, and sorrow, and the like, these
must wait as a guard to keep off what ever may offend him; thine affections are
principally for God; this is the first ground, the affections were made for God.

Secondly, 2. Nothing but God has that which the affections look for: Because
nothing is good but God. Chrysoft.
As the affections were principally made for this purpose, to be set upon God,
so nothing but God has that which the affections look for. It is God which the
affections look for, and where can the affections find it but only in God?
there is none good but one, that is God, Mat. 19. 17. The young man would have
thought he sought for good in a right place, when he sought for it in Christ.
But as Chrysostom observes, (...), when he looked upon Christ as a mere man,
Christ tells him he was mistaken in calling him good, there is none good but
one, that is God. Christ himself, as near as he was unto good, as he came
nearer to it then any creature in heaven or in earth, yet if he had been a
creature, and men had set their affections on him as their good, being a
creature, they had set their affections amiss: why call thou me good? says
he; so much more does every creature answer, Thou think riches, honors and
pleasures are good. Why call ye me good? may they all say, there is none good
but one, that is God. Will a man seek for the Sun in a pale of water? Indeed,
if the Sun shine on the water, there may you see it. But if the Sun do not
look on it, you may look over all the waters in the world, and never find the
Sun in them all. So will you set your affections on the things of the world?
it is good your affections look for, can ye find any good in these things?
alas! alas! thou may have all the things of this world, yet if God do not
show thee his face, and his grace in the same, stultus ad cribrum, thou runnest
to them as a fool to a sive. The sive seems to hold a great deal of water, but
by pulling the sive from the water, the fool lost all the water. So riches, and
wealth, and pleasures, as long as thou have them in grace and in God, they are
like sives in the water, full of water as long as they are in. So these are
full of good, as long as they are in God and in grace; But if thou do not set
thine affections upon God, thine affections are befooled, and therefore thou
must set thine affections upon God, because nothing but God has that which
thine affections look for. It is Good which the affections look for, and thine
affections can find it no where but in God.

Thirdly, 3. Because nothing is my good but only God.
As nothing but God has that which the affections look for, nothing is good
but he, so nothing is my good but only he, for if it be good, and not my good,
this discontents mine affections; mine affections look at my good. I know
compassion, and mercy, and love may look at the good of another; but then they
consider some kind of propriety in that other, either as my brother, or
friend, or my neighbor, still the affections have an eye unto my good, thine
affections to thy good Now nothing in the world can so truly be said thy good,
as thy God. Other goods are called this worlds goods, 1 John 3. 17. They are
the goods of this World rather then thy goods: But God is thy goodness: Thou
art my goodness, O Lord, says the Psalmist, Psalm. 144. 2. Thou can not say
of thy pleasures, this is my goodness, nor of wealth, this is my goodness;
nor of any thing in the world, this is my goodness: the good that is in it, is
the goodness of the thing, not thy goodness; if I should say, this is thy
goodness, it is all one as if I should say, thou have no goodness, for that is
none of thine, but only by possession, it is not thy goodness. And therefore
how can thou set thine affections upon it?

First, 1. The good of the creature not thy good, because but the good of the
body.
It is only the good of thy body, it is not thy good, Anima hominis est homo,
says Plato. The soul is the man rather then the body. If the things of this
life be the goods of the body, then how can thou set thine affections upon
them? Thine affections are the affections of thy soul. Meat is good, let thy
body hunger after it, and thou sinnest not: drink is good? let thy body thirst
after it, thou errest not; but will thou set thine affections upon it? when it
is not thy good, but only the good of thy body, it is not thy good: means and
maintenance is the good of thy body, house, and lands, and livings, these are
the good of thy body, let the desires of thy body be to them, this is well yet;
but if the desires of thy soul be thereto, if thou set thine affections upon
them, thou art a beast, because they are not thy good. As Theophylact well
observes upon the rich man in the Gospel, Soul, thou have much goods laid up
for many years, Luke 12. 19. take thine ease, eat, drink, and be merry; see the
baseness of this fools affections, says Theophylact: to eat, to drink, and to
be merry: these were the goods of his unreasonable part; to rejoice in Gods
Law, to rejoice in holy thoughts and meditations, these are the goods of the
soul, of the reasonable soul of a man. Now the fool he had none of these goods
laid up; and yet he says, Soul, thou have much good laid up for many years,
whereas that very night he died and was damned for ever; the things of this
life then are not thy good, and therefore thou must not set thine affections
upon them.

Secondly, 2. Because not so long as thou art.
It is not thy good, because it is not as long as thou art. Thou must live for
ever in heaven or in hell. Now all the goods of this life last but this life,
and when thou die, thou must leave them to others, and therefore they are not
thy goods. Were they thy goods, thou might carry them away with thee when
thou die; but this cannot be. Can thou carry thy barns and thy houses to
heaven or to hell with thee? can thou carry thy dogs and thy hounds, and thy
pleasures, and thy preferments to another world with thee? No, no, and why then
do thou set thine affections upon them, when they are not thy goods for to
carry with thee where ever thou go? if thou would set thine affections
upon grace and upon God, thou should set thine affections upon thy goods;
these are thy goods as long as thou live, and these are thy goods when thou
dyest, and these thou may carry with thee whithersoever thou go. Will thou
set thine eyes upon that which is not? says Solomon; for riches certainly make
themselves wings, they fly away as an Eagle, Pro. 23. 5. will thou set thine
affections upon that which is not? Wealth is not, and pleasure is not, and all
the things of this world are not, they make themselves wings: now may be they
are a bird in the hand, but by and by they are gone, there is a wing of
prodigality, a wing of change, and of mishaps and of casualties, wings of
losses and other occurrences, and though thou could clip all these wings
with thy wisdom, yet the wing of death and mortality will carry them all away
in a moment, and then whose shall they be? thy pleasures, then whose shall they
be? thy gains and thy comings in, whose shall they be? sure it is, they shall
be none of thine, and therefore set thine affections elsewhere, thou must set
them upon God.

3. They are not thy good, 3. Because they will not take thy part.
because they will not take thy part. Will any man set his affections on him
that will not take his part? how can I affect him that will not affect me? if
he will leave me in the lurch, I can never affect him as my friend. Alas! all
the things of this life will leave thee in the lurch, thou may perish and be
damned for all them. They will never deliver thee from the hand of hell; when
thom come before the tribunal of Christ, do thou think it will profit thee
to say, Lord, I have hunted and hawked, and gamed and sported, and I have been
merry; will it benefit thee to say, Lord, I have builded and purchased, and
increased my livings and my rents, I have a good house, and a good farm, and
good friends, Will this advantage thee? No, miserable comforters are they all;
can thou say, Lord, I have built up thy Church and thy worship, I have
purchased zeal and holiness, and pureness, and glory to thy name, I have been
persecuted and hated of all men for thy Name sake, and I am in Christ, etc. If
thou can say thus, this would be thy good indeed; but if thou can not say
thus, Iuv. Sat. 13.
though thou be Gallinae filius albae, thou may perish with the devils and
cursed fiends for evermore for all the blessings of this life. Set thine
affections then upon God: truly God is good to Israel, says the Psalmist,
Psalm. 73. 1. He is good, and he truly is good; thou can not say so of all the
things under Heaven; thou can not say, truly riches are good to me. Pleasure
truly is good to me; peace and plenty and liberty truly is good to thee; they
are good, but they will never be good to thee; when thou have most need of
good, then they will leave thee in the lurch, these do thee no good then. This
is the third; as nothing but God is good, so nothing is thy good, but God.

Fourthly, 4. Nothing can rest the soul but only God.
As nothing is thy good but God, so nothing can rest thine affections but God.
When thou affectest any thing, wherefore do thou affect it, but only to rest
contented therewith when thou have it? and therefore thou must set thine
affections upon God, because nothing can rest thy soul, but only thy God. Rest
in the Lord. Psalm. 37. 7. Return unto thy rest O my soul, Psa. 116. 7. God is
the rest of the soul; if the soul ever get him, it rests content; the
affections are in a maze, if they be not set upon God, like a man in a
quagmire, he sinks deeper and deeper, so a man sinks deeper and deeper in
desires and in wishes, that has not his affections upon God; there is nothing
can give the soul rest, if the soul rest not in God. Will meat in a dream, and
drink in a dream give satisfaction to our hunger, and our thirst? So are all
the good things in this world, Is. 29 8. Go to all the wicked men in the earth,
let them desire and have their desires, still they desire and further their
desire, and yet they desire after millions of desires, their affections are as
far for to seek for rest, as if never they had sought. All the things in the
world are like some Ale-house-beer, which will never quench the poor Travelers
thirst, like the eating of salt neats-tongues; the more they do eat, the more
they are athirst: hungry meat, He that desires silver, shall never be
satisfied with silver, he that affects pleasure and vanity, shall never be
contented nor satisfied therewith; give him ones, he affects tens, give him
tens, he affects hundreds; give him hundreds, he affects thousands; give him
them, he affects millions; thou can never get rest, till thine affections
are pitched upon God. Quo plus sunt potae, plus sitiuntur aquae. It Is God only
that rests the affections. Now if these be so, is it not our best way to set
our affections on God, where we may have rest for our souls? nothing besides
can give us any rest.

First, 1. Because nothing but God is all good.
because nothing but God is all good. Every good besides God has but one or
two goodnesses in it. None but God has all goodnesses in him; what is meat
good for, but only to feed one? when thou have it thou must desire again to
have raiment, for meat will not cloth thee; what is raiment good for, but only
to cover one? when thou have it, thou must desire again to be fed, for raiment
will not feed thee; what is money good for, but only to buy with? when thou
have it, thou must desire again to be recovered of thy sickness, for money
will not cure thee of the Fever: thus no good thing in the world can give
thine affections a rest, because they have but one or two goodnesses a piece in
them, but the Lords goodness is infinite, he is all good; if thou have him,
thou want no manner of thing that is good. They that seek the Lord shall not
want any good thing, Psa. 34. 10. for every good thing is in him. He is bread
to the hungry, and drink to the thirsty, and health to the sick, and liberty to
the captive, all in all to them that set their affections on him. Frustra fit
per plura quod fieri potest per pauciora. If thine affections go to any
creature, thou fetchest but a little good at once, thine affections will be
fain to go a thousand and a thousand times over and over, thou gettest so
little at once, that thou shall be tempted to be affecting the oftener; but if
thine affections go to God, thou go to the fountain, there thou have it by
drops, 2. Nothing but God is the ultimate good
never enough, here thou may have it at once. Who would be so mad to fetch
water at a Cock that runs by drops, when the Fountain is by?

Secondly, because nothing but God is the ultimate good. Thou affectest the
things of this life, alas! they will never giverest, for still there is
something beyond them, but God is the utmost of all goods, when the soul is
once settled on him, it has no further to go, like a stone when it is come to
the center, it has no further to go. I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and
the end, the first and the last, says Christ, if the soul be in Christ, Christ
is his last, the soul is at rest; why? it has no where to go: whether should
we go? says Peter to Christ, thou have the words of eternal life, Joh. 6.
Christ first, and Christ next, and Christ last; Christ is the utmost and
ultimate good of the soul; the soul has no further to go: and therefore here
thou must fix thine affections, fix them upon Christ.

Thirdly, 3. Nothing is it self without God.
because nothing is it self without God, the things of this life, they are good
I confess, but they are not themselves without God; if God be not in them, the
very good that they have is not in them. When thou affectest pleasure and
delight, answer me, why do thou affect it? is it not for the good that is in
it? when thou affectest profit, or health, or peace, or friends, or credit, or
whatever thou affectest, tell me in thy conscience, why do thou affect them?
is it not for the good that is in them? they are good, therefore thou affectest
them: but if thou have not Christ, and God, and his Spirit, and his grace, if
thou have not the Lord in these things, they are not themselves, neither have
they the good that is in them. Riches is no riches without grace, but a snare:
health is no health without Christ, but a curse: peace and pleasure are not
themselves without God, but poison: thy good parts are thy bane, thy money is
thy vengeance, thy goods are a witness against thee without Christ. If thou
be not in Christ, if not a new creature, one day thou shall curse that ever
thou were born, and therefore much more shall thou curse that ever thou had
means, or maintenance, or life, or health, or any thing; the more thou had of
these blessings, if Christ be not with them, as he is not, if thou be not a
new creature: I say, if Christ be not in them, the blessings are not
themselves: they have not the good that is in them without Christ. David had a
Castle, and a Buckler, and a Horn, but they were not themselves without God.
Lord, thou art my Castle, and my Buckler, and the Horn of my salvation. David
had a servant to make his bed in his sickness, but to let us know that this
blessing was not it self without God, he puts the phrase upon God, who made his
bed in his sickness; no blessing is it self without Christ, or without God. He
has all the goodness that is in it. The Heathens have a pretty phrase,
whereby they set out a happy man, Vndecunque Deus, When God is every where
about him; about him in his means and his riches, about him in his house and in
his goods, about him in his friends and acquaintance, about him in his pleasure
and mirth: he is not happy unless God be in every thing that is about him;
they are but the carcasses of good, if God be not in them. Thus you see we must
set our affections on God.

Here then we are taught, Use. It is a blessing of God that we have affections.
Apud Cic Tuscul. 4. The affections are not in themselves sinful.
That it is the blessing of God that we have affections implanted in our
hearts. For how could they be set upon God, if it were not a blessing that we
have them? There is a main controversy between the Philosophers, the Stoics,
and the Peripatetiques, concerning the affections: the Stoics do stiffly
maintain, that it is an evil to have any affections at all: and therefore Zeno
defines the affections to be unnatural stirrings of the heart, averse from
right reason, which is false; for this is the definition of affections, as they
are corrupt, and not as they are affections; the affections in themselves are
not sinful.

First, 1. Because Adam and Eve had affections in innocence.
Because Adam and Eve had affections in innocence, If the affections were all
sinful in themselves, Adam and Eve in their innocence could not have had them,
for they were created without sin: but they were created with affections, as
love, and joy, and delight, and hope, and fear, and the like. Before Eve ever
sinned, we see plainly she was afraid to eat of the forbidden fruit; indeed
when the devil had-ripened his temptation, then she went fearlesly on for to
eat it; but when the devil assaulted her at the first, O says she, We may not
eat of it, lest we die, Genesis 3. 3. Lo, she was afraid for to eat it at first. I
confess before the fall, may be they had not all the affections in act,
because there were no objects for all the affections to work on; they had
nothing to grieve for, nothing to be angry at, nothing to despair of; but for
my part, I think they had distinct objects to work on, though not in
themselves, for they had not sinned as yet, yet they had distinct objects in
the world for all their affections to work on, for should they not grieve to
see God dishonored by the fall of the Angels? should they not hate and abhor
backsliding from God? though there were none in themselves, nevertheless the
affections of fear and hatred were given them to keep away sin and apostasy
from God. Now if the affections were in Adam in innocence, they could not be
sinful in themselves.

Secondly, 2. Because Christ took our affections upon him.
Because Christ took our affections upon him. If the affections were sinful in
themselves, he could not take our affections upon him; for he was made like
unto us, sin only excepted: and therefore if the affections were sins, he could
not have taken our affections; but he did take them, as the Gospel does
abundantly show. He had our affection of joy, Jesus rejoiced in Spirit, and
said, I thank thee, O Father, etc. Luke 10. 23. He had our affection of sorrow,
My soul is exceeding sorrowful unto death, Mat. 26. 38. He had our affection of
anger: He looked round about on them with anger, being grieved at their
hardness of heart, Mar. 3. 5. He had our affection of desire, with desire I
have desired to eat this Passover with you before I suffer, Luke 22. 15. And
so of the rest. If Christ took our affections upon him, our affections are not
sinful in themselves. Nay, he did not only as the Son of man take our primitive
affections, as we are men, but he was Ben En^sh, he was the son of frail man,
Psa. 8. 5. And he took out miserabiles affectiones, our affections of infirmity
upon him; I do not mean the affections of sinful infirmity, for he knew no sin:
but I mean the affections of our frailty and infirmity, as fear, and
fellow-feeling, and the like. We have not a High Priest, which cannot be
touched with the feeling of our infirmities, but was in all points tempted like
as we are, yet without sin, Heb. 4. 15. This then is an undeniable argument,
that the affections are not sinful in themselves, because Christ did assume
them.

Thirdly, 3. Because God does command the use of the affections.
Because the Lord does command us to be angry. Be angry and sin not, says he,
he commands us to grieve and be sorry for our sins. Therefore also now says
the Lord, turn ye even to me with all your heart, and with fasting, and with
weeping, and with mourning, Joel 2. 12. He commands us to fear. Work out your
salvation with fear and trembling; pass the time of your sojourning here in
fear. Be not high-minded but fear, I will forewarn you, says Christ, whom ye
shall fear; fear him which after he has killed, has power to cast into hell,
yea, I say unto you, fear him. Luke 13. 5. He commands us to be ashamed of our
evil doings, and is offended if we be not; thou have a whores forehead, and
refusest to be ashamed, Jer. 3. 3. If the affections were sinful in themselves,
the Lord would not command us to show our affections on this wise; it is true,
they are sinfully used, and corruptly perverted among men, the more is the
pity, but they are not so in themselves. Neither do I deny but there be some
natural affections that are naturally now, (...). vol. Ar^^^* Eth. l. 2. c. 6.
as corrupt nature does stand, that be sinful in themselves, as envy and
malice, and the like; which never can be regulated, nor guided by any
moderation, but are quite to be rooted out: but these affections are not
properly natural, they are no otherwise natural then lice and vermin are
natural to Carrion, then filthy and noisome weeds are natural to a cursed
ground; these must be utterly rooted up and stubb'd out of our hearts, because
to speak properly they are unnatural affections and sinful in themselves, but
our natural affections are not sinful in themselves. Reasons why affections are
necessary.
Nay more, let me tell you, the affections are not only not sinful, but it is
an infinite blessing of God, that God has given us affections.

First, 1. Because without affections we should be like stocks.
Because if we had no affections at all, we should be like stocks and like
senseless stones. The Philosopher was in a doubt, whether Brutus were not a
block or a brute, because he had no affection at all to his own children, whom
he could see murdered before him with dry eyes. The Lord himself counts that
man a very block that has no affection in his heart. Have ye no regard, all ye
that pass by? behold and see if there were any sorrow like my sorrow, Lam. 1.
12. ( q. d.) What are ye such blocks and stupid stocks, that ye can show no
affections at my sorrow? And therefore it is reckoned among the symptoms of a
heart that is desperately hardened, not to be affected with any thing: to hear
the Word, and not to be affected therewith, to pray unto God, and not to be
affected with Gods presence; to be in affliction, and not to be affected with
remorse. I say, this is a symptom of a hard heart. And therefore it is a
blessing of God that a man has affections within him. 2. Because without
affections we should be lazy and idle. l, de virtute morum, in fine
Secondly, because as Plutarch the very Heathen observes, were it not for our
affections, our nature would be lazy and idle, (...), Like a Pilot at sea
without wind: alas! the ship would go slowly, were there no winds stirring
to drive it. So the affections, says he, are to the soul, as the wind to the
sails of the ship; as the ship could not sail apace without winds, so the soul
would go slowly about any thing, if the affections did not carry it. When
David's affections were hampered about with worldly fears, fears of his enemies,
and griefs at his persecutions which he suffered, he went slowly on in
obedience, but as soon as his sails were up, then he ran like a ship in the sea
with a great wind, I will run the way of thy Commandments, when thou shall
enlarge my heart, Psa. 119. 32. As soon as God would help him to spread the
sails of his heart, and enlarge his affections, then he would run like a Fleet
pinnace in the Seas. I will then run the way of thy Commandments, says he;
this is an infinite mercy of God, who seeing how dull we are unto good, how
slack to good duties, how slow to holy performances, vouchsafes us these winds
and these sails for to carry us, Plutarch. ubi supra.
(...), says the same Philosopher. The affections are like wheels, and like
Chariots unto reason. If a man's reason be never so good, he knows he is bound
to repent, and be godly, and obey; yet if he have no affections thereto, he
goes like a chariot without wheels; he goes without force, he cannot go at all;
but if he have affections thereto, the affections are like wheels, and like
horses to carry him amain. Draw me, says the Christian soul unto Christ, draw
me, and I will run after thee, Can. 1. 4. She prays that Christ would draw her
by the affections of love, for she speaks of love; the virgins love thee, says
she, ver. 3. Draw me with thy love too, and then I shall run after thee, like
the Chariots of Aminadab, that is, drawn by quick Horses: she would run as with
wheels unto Christ, if her affections did once carry her. As Cicero says of
the affections of anger, it is cos fortitudinis, it is the whetstone to valor;
so I may say of all the affections, they are all whetstones to good, if a man
have any grace. Have thou love? It is a whetstone to obedience; have thou
grief? It is a whetstone to repentance; have thou anger? it is a whetstone to
zeal, etc. What is the reason men come so slowly on unto good? the reason is
this, because their affections stand another way. Men repent but slowly, and
amend their lives but slowly, increase in grace but slowly; why? this is the
cause, their affections are to the world; they run on in their pleasures and
their vanities, they run on in their earthly employments and businesses; why?
their affections are thereto. O beloved, it is an infinite mercy of God, that
we have affections given us of God, for these may quicken our dullness unto
grace. 3. Because affections are the channels of grace.
Thirdly, Because the affections are good channels for grace to run downin: Be
there never so full a fountain of good water, yet if it have not a channel to
run all along in, the fountain may be ever a bubling, but it choaketh it self
for want of a channel. So though God should put never so much grace into thy
heart, yet if it should have no channel to run down in, it would smother it
self. Now God has given thee affections like channels, for grace to run down
in. Art thou covetous and full of desires? what a fine channel is that for
grace to run down in? it is the easier for thee to covet the best things: art
thou of a choleric and angry constitution? what a fine channel is that for
zeal to Gods glory to run down in? it is the easier for thee to be zealous in
Gods worship: art thou melancholy and of a sad disposition? what a fine channel
is that for repentance to run down in? it is the easier for thee to despise the
vain pleasures of the world, and to sorrow for sin: art thou merry and of a
cheerful nature? what a fine channel is this for delight in the Lord to run
down in? it is the easier for thee to joy in the holy Ghost; art thou fearful
and of a timorous spirit? what a fine channel is that for fear of Gods
judgments and truth to run down in? it is the easier for thee to tremble
before God, and fear to offend him. Solomon was full of the affections of love,
it is true, he let lust after women, and uncleanness a while run down in that
channel, but when grace and repentance recovered his soul, what an excellent
channel was it for love unto Christ to run down in? Never was there such a
lovesong to Christ, as the Canticles, since the creation of the world to this
day; and therefore it is called Canticum Canticorum, The Song of Songs, Cant.
1. 1. Certainly Jeremy was a man of a sad constitution, but see what an
advantage this bent of affection was to him, it was a channel for spiritual
sadness to run down in. Oh that my head were waters, and mine eyes a fountain
of tears, to weep day and night for the slain of the daughter of my people.
Jer. 9. 1. The woman in the Gospel which was a sinner, a whore in plain terms,
one bewitched with the affections of love to her lovers; as soon as ever any
grace did look into her heart, see how these affections of love did advantage
her. She loved our Savior more affectionately then Saint Peter himself, She
loved much, says the Text, Luke 7. 47. Before no question but she was full of
her whorish and strumpetlike tears; now the channel was turned, she washed
Christ's feet with her tears, and wipt them with the hair of her head: and she
loved much, says the Text. It is such an admirable advantage to be full of
affections, that the Lacedemonian Schoolmaster thought that if he had a young
scholar full of affections, full of shamefastness, and full of fear, and full
of cheerfullnesse, (...), etc. He thought it was easy for him to make him
ashamed of all filthiness, and delighted in goodness, and fearful to do evil,
I am not of his mind, but this I am though, he has an exceeding good
advantage to do it. If a man have spent his affections upon sin, and eaten out
the heart of his affections upon vanity; or if a man have no affections at all,
as some have but few, a man shall as soon work on a beast as such a man. Nay,
if grace should come in into such a man, alas! he shall never be able to come
to much good; if best come to the best, he shall have infinite ado to do any
duty without woeful dullness and senselessenesse; it is an admirable blessing
that God gives unto men, to give them affections, and therefore the Stoics are
infinitely too blame to cry out of the affections as if they were evil in
themselves. To speak truly and rightly of the Stoics, I do not think the
Stoics were ever so sottish as to mean so; but their intent as Austin says of
them was, to pare off the affections that are evil, and to rule the affections
that are natural: and therefore it was that they declaimed so bitterly against
the affections. You see now by this Text I have chosen, that the affections are
great gifts of the Lord, for how could the Apostle command us to set our
affections upon God, if the affections were evil in themselves? Nay, it follows
from hence, that it is a great blessing of God, that we have any affections at
all, that we may set them upon God.

The V. Sermon.
Colos. 3. 2. Set your affections on things that are above, etc.
THe Christians of the Primitive Church had learnt this lesson very well, to
set their affections on Gods Kingdom, they were often thinking of it, often
speaking of it in the companies they came in, they would be discoursing of it,
insomuch that the foolish Heathen, hearing them talking so often of a Kingdom,
took them for affecters of Kingdoms, and accused them of aspiring to be Kings,
Just. Mar. Apol. 8. pro Christ. ad Ant^^.
(...), (...), says Justin Martyr. Ye hear, says he, that we expect for a
Kingdom, Ye imagine we look after humane Kingdoms. No, No, says he, we mean
the Kingdom with God and with Christ in Heaven above. Their affectious were
much there; Ye have heard beloved, the necessity of this duty, that we must set
our affections upon God and his Kingdom and grace. Ye have heard the reasons
why we must do so; for the use of the point, ye have heard a confutation of the
Stoics, that teach a vacuity of affections, and say the affections are all
evil in themselves. They cannot be evil in themselves, because we must set them
upon God; were they evil in themselves, it were unlawful to set them upon God.
But it is not only not unlawful, but also it is very necessary to set our
affections upon God. O this is a hard duty to our corrupt flesh, and so ye
shall find it, to set your affections on God. There be many lets that hinder
us from so doing.

First, The first impediment that hinders the setting the affections on God,
because it is an hard thing to turn an antipathy or sympathy.
Because it is a very hard thing to turn an antipathy or a sympathy; our hearts
are so deeply affected with the things of the world, as that they have a
sympathy with them, and an antipathy against a removal therefrom. When the
affections are deep set with or against, they prove to be sympathies and
antipathies, which are infinitely hard to be changed. The Philosophers call
them occultae qualitates, hidden qualities, no reason can be given of them. No
man can give a reason why the lodestone should be so deeply affected with
iron, as to draw it unto it. It has a sympathy with it; the wild Bull has a
sympathy with a figgetree; nothing can tame him but it; the Elm has a sympathy
with the Vine: the Vine has a sympathy with the Olive. No man can give a
reason why it should be so. So beloved, our deep affections are the sympathies
of our hearts, and therefore seeing they are set to the things of the world,
they are hardly removed. No reason, scarce any reason can sever them. Demas
when he set his love upon the world, the text says he forsook Paul, and he
embraced this present word, Demas has forsaken me, and embraced this present
world. 2 Timothy 4. 10. We translate it, he loved this present world, but the word
signifies, and so other translations render it, he embraced this present world;
that is, the affections of his heart had a sympathy with it, as the Ivy with
the Elm, he embraced it. S. Paul could not hold him, no reason could withhold
him, he had a sympathy with it. Now when the heart has a sympathy with the
things of the world, it must needs have an antipathy at grace; the proud man
has an antipathy at the parting with that which he prides in; the revengeful
man has an antipathy at the putting up of an injury. The stubborn man has an
antipathy at a sound reproof, he cannot endure to be sharply rebuk't for his
sins. As some men (suffer a homely similitude) I say, have an antipathy with
Cheese, they will go out of the room where it is. As the mullet has an
antipathy with the Pike; the Coleworts have an antipathy with the Vine; they
will die rather then grow together. So men are vexed to be curbed of their
lusts. The affections are the sympathies and the antipathies of the heart, and
therefore it is very hard to remove them, it will cost thee a mighty deal of
labor to pull off thine affections from all the things in the world, and to
set them upon God. 2. The 2. impediment. Because affections are the bewitchings
of the heart.
Secondly, it is a hard thing to work on the heart, when the heart is bewitched.
The affections are the bewitchings of the heart, when the heart has once set
its affections on the things of the World, it is even quite bewitched
therewith. Foolish people talk much of bewitchings; Brethren let me tell you,
here is a bewitching ye little consider. Your affections bewitch you. O foolish
Galatians, who has bewitched you, that ye should not obey the truth? Gal. 3.
1. (...), says S. Chrysostom. this is the bewitching of the devil; the false
Apostles had wrought upon the Galatians affections, and drawn them from the
truth, and now when their affections were set on it, the Apostle says they
were bewitched. The affections when once they are up about a thing that is
earthly or carnal, they are like a company of devils in hell to bewitch one:
there be abundance of bewitchings in nature. The bird Galgalus, Plutarch,
sympos. l. 5 c. 7. Heliodor. lib. 3. Hist. 2. Del-Rio Disq. mag. lib. 2. c 3.
if she see a man that is sick of the Jaundies, the man recovers, and she is so
bewitched therewith that she dies. If a Toad be seen by the Wesil to gape, the
Wesil is so bewitched, that she gives up her self to be devoured: but of all
the bewitchings in the world, the bewitching of the affections are the most
dangerous. Eucilides was in so deep an affection to his own beauty, that he was
bewitched with it: were not Sampsons affections bewitched with Delilah? were not
Herod's affections bewitched with Herodias? were not Judas his affections
bewitched with the gain of thirty pence, that for it he should deny his own
Master? S. Paul tells the Galatians their affections were bewitched. S. Hierom
thinks verily the devil was in them. The Drunkard is bewitched with his cups:
the Adulterer with his whore, the angry man with his choler, the vain man with
his vanities, the carnal man with his flesh; that they will damn their own
souls, rather then be new creatures. Beloved, are not ye bewitched in your
sins, when all the preaching and teaching and warning ye have had, cannot yet
turn you from your sins unto God, to set your affections above? this is a
grievous let that sends millions to hell, their affections bewitch them. Ye
need no Devils to tempt you to sin: if your affections be once set on it,
they will bewitch you as bad as any devil can bewitch you. Nay, the devil
cannot bewitch you to sin, but only by your affections. If ever thou save thy
soul, thou shall find it a great task to unbewitch thine affections, to set
them upon grace.

Thirdly, 3. The 3. impediment. Because affections are the estimations of the
heart.
Another let is, that as the affections are the bewitchings of the heart, so
they are the estimations of the heart, If the thing be not good enough to be
affected, which the affections are set on, they esteem it worthy to be
affected. Quisquis amat ranam, ranam putat esse Dianam. Many of you know the
old Proverb, If a man should set his affections on a frog, there is little
goodness in a Frog, why it should be affected; but if a man should set his
affections on a Frog, he would esteem it as comely, as another would Diana. The
affections if they be set upon vanity, they do utterly besot one. Look upon the
Drunkard, he thinks it is a fine life to be potting and piping in the Alehouse:
which a man in his wits knows to be base and brutish, and hellish. Look upon
the vain Gentleman, he thinks it a fine life to be hunting and gamballing and
bragging and flanting, and challenging, and to be sird and to be worshipped at
every word. Which a wise man knows to be foppish, and foolish, and devilish.
The affections blind the judgment, and befool the understanding, and make a
man to defend himself in a course which in very deed will lead him to hell.
When the children of Israel had set their affections on their lusts; Moses thus
speaks to them. Do ye thus requite the Lord, ye foolish people and unwise? Is
not he thy Father? etc. Deuteronomy. 32 6. Natural affection would lead a child to
be obedient to his father, and seeing their affections were cross set, the
Lord calls them a foolish people. Their sinful affections did besot them and
befool them. Chrysostom. hom. 7. in Job.
Samosatenus was so besotted with the love of a certain woman, that he forsook
his faith and religion for her. I read of a pretty parable to this purpose.
When Ulysses had left his men with Circe the witch, she changed them all into
diverse sorts of beasts, Dogs, Swine, Lions, Tigers, Ulysses complained she had
done him great wrong for changing his men into beasts on that fashion: wrong?
says she: I have not done thee nor them any wrong. Do but ask them now
whether they do not like the condition they are in. So Ulysses demanded first
of the Hog, whether he would be a man again or not. He answered no, by no
means; For now he could fill his belly, and lie down on the dunghill and sleep.
And so he demanded of the rest, and they all save only the Elephant, they all
replied they had rather be beasts as now they were. This parable is made to
show how the carnal affections besot one, to esteem the pleasures of sin, the
gains and profits and beggarly things of the World, and prefer them before
holiness, and righteousness, and pureness, and strictness of living. One,
his affections besot him in a love-lock* or long hair, that he cannot be
persuaded to shave it off: another, his affections besot him in a Tobacco-pipe,
another in a filthy gotten custom, another in some other base haunt of the
heart, all the preaching under Heaven cannot dissuade them, therefore they do
so esteem them and prize them, and think they are so pleasing: a noble minded
Christian would wonder how it is possible they can so.

Fourthly, 4. The affections are the most natural temperaments of the heart.
Another let is, that as the affections are the estimations of the heart, so
they are the most natural temperaments of the heart. Spiritual and heavenly
affections are the good temper of the heart, and carnal or earthly affections
are the evil temper of the heart, and therefore it is hard to change ones
affections, because the heart it self must be taken a pieces as it were, if one
would alter his affections. An earthly heart is not a right soil for the
spiritual plants to grow in. Gardners have daily experience what a coil they
have to keep an herb from dying in their gardens, when the garden is not a
right soil for it: they are fain for to dig it, and dress it, and water it,
and tend it, yet scarce will it grow there when it is not a right soil for it.
Men must get themselves new hearts and new minds, if ever they would have
their affections renewed. Fashion not your selves to the world, says the
Apostle, but be ye transformed by the renewing of your mind, Romans 12. 2.
Unless your mind be renewed, ye can never spy a pleasing fashion of the
world, but O your affections will be to it. When David had misplaced his
affections on Bathsheba another man's wife, and his affections had been mad upon
adultery, and on murder, what does he do? He goes to God in prayer for a new
heart, he could never have new affections else; Create in me a clean heart, O
God, and renew a right spirit within me, Psa. 51. 10. He could not get new
affections, till he had gotten a new heart. This is a miserable impediment that
lets multitudes of men and women from setting their affections upon God;
because their hearts are not a right for such affections as these. May be they
trim their affections, as the very heathens have done, with morality; as a
Barbor trims and shaves a man's head, but the hair grows again, because the head
is the hairs soil. So the carnal affections will grow again: spiritual and
heavenly affections will not grow there, for the heart is not a right soil: and
this is a shrewdlet, and you must labor continually to remove it.

And therefore, before I help you with means how to set your affections on God,
let me give you these two grounds.

First, 1. Ground We cannot set our affections on God, unless we have a new
heart.
You must have this same new heart, otherwise ye cannot set your affections on
God. For there is a heart that will set its affections on God, and there is a
heart that will not. The Lord wishes his people to have the former kind of
heart, the heart that will set its affections on God. O that there were such a
heart in them, that they would fear me, and keep my Commandments always, Deuteronomy.
5. 29. There is such a heart beloved, O that we had it; I say, there is such a
heart that will fear God, and set all its affections on God; and such a heart
ye must get, or else it is in vain to command you this duty: all the Sermons
(ye see) are in vain that ye have heard to this day; all the exhortations and
admonitions ye have had since ye were, ye see plainly they are in vain to many
of you: as your affections were earthly twenty years ago, so they are still; as
they were carnal and worldly heretofore, so they are still; your hearts are the
same hearts, your hearts are stark naught, and therefore your affections cannot
sore up unto God. Ye can have no quick affections in prayer, no melting
affections at the word: The Sabbath comes, but your affections are not on it: a
Sacrament comes, but what poor affections you have to it, your consciences may
witness. Ye sit in your shops, or ye follow your callings, or ye go about your
earthly employments, and your affections are below; (...), says Maximus, the
Sparrows foot is bound with a cord, she cannot fly up unto God. Your hearts are
not spiritual, and this is the cause your affections are so carnal.
Peradventure ye lop off now and then some part of your carnal affections, as
Tarquinius lopt off the heads of his poppies, but ye do not cut up the roots.
Estsimill tudo Angeli Poli^ia^^, de ira, sed paulo secus applisat.
It may be ye go about to heave up your affections in good duties sometimes, as
the key lifts up the spring in the lock, but the key is no sooner turned but
down goes the spring, so down go your affections presently again. And therefore
I premise this as a first ground, ye can never set your affections on God, till
ye have gotten new hearts.

The second ground is this, 2. Ground Nor unless we feed on Christ.
Ye can never set your affections upon God, unless you feed upon Christ by
faith. If ever the soul feed upon Christ by faith, it cannot but set its
affections upon God. I remember an invention of Queen Artemesia, who when her
husband Mausolus was dead, not knowing how to keep him fresh in her affections
as long as she lived, she caused her husband Mausolus his body to be turned
into ashes, and mingled them in her drink; so she buried her husband in her
bowels, and this way she took to keep her affections fresh unto him. This
indeed was unnatural in her, to eat and drink her own husband; but faith
teaches us to feed upon the Lord Jesus Christ: this will take off our
affections from the world, we shall never hunger after the world more, nor
thirst after the things of this life more, if ever we feed upon him I am the
bread of life, says Christ, he that comes to me shall never hunger, and he
that believes on me shall never thirst, Joh. 6. 35. If ever we believe the
sweetness of the promises of Christ, the pleasantness of the commandments of
Christ, the preciousnesse of the graces of Christ, and the love of Christ, and
the benefit of Christ, our affections will be to him. Nothing can take off thy
affections from the world but faith in Christ. He that believes in Christ
cannot set his affections upon the world. Can a man set his affections upon the
world, when he verily believes it to be dross and dung in comparison of
Christ? Can he set his affections upon earthly pleasure, that believes it is
madness? It is certain, men never believed in Christ since they were born,
that set their affections upon the things of the world; they have not one dram
of Christ. Christ is altogether lovely, Cant. 5. 16. He is all love, one that
commands the affections. Thou beleevest in the world and not in Christ, if thou
set thine affections upon any other but Christ. Thou beleevest thou can have
pleasure and delight in something beside Christ, profits and gains in something
beside Christ; ease, and content, and comfort in something beside Christ; if
thou set thine affections upon any thing beside Christ. Alas! thou can never
set thine affections upon Christ, as long as thou beleevest not only in Christ.
If thine earthly affections transport thee to be earthly, fly under the wing of
Christ, as Chickens under the wing of the Hen, lest the Kite devour them. These
are the two Grounds that I give you. First, ye must have new hearts: and
secondly, ye must be believers in Christ, or else ye cannot set your affections
upon God.

The foundation being laid, Means to set our affections on God.
let me now help you with some means to set your affections on God. I could
help you to abundance of means, but I desire to help you to such means as are
easier to use, then to set your affections on God. For if they be not easier
then this duty, they cannot properly be said to be helps to this duty.

The first then is this, 1. Pray to God to gether up your affections from the
things of the world.
Often pray to God that he would gather up our affections from the things of
the world, and unite them unto him. Our hearts are divided and scattered up and
down among the things of the world. Carnal friends have some of your
affections; our gains, and our livings, and our maintenance, have other-some:
our pleasures and delights, and fleshly refreshments, have other-some: our
earthly businesses, and cares, and employments, our credit, and the like: these
have abundance of our affections. Thus our hearts and affections are scattered
up and down among the things of the world; if ever we would have them set upon
God, we must be frequent in prayer; that God would unite together our scattered
hearts, to set our affections upon God. This was the practice of David, O Lord,
says he, unite my heart to fear thy name, Psa. 86. 11. His heart was scattered
up and down in a thousand pieces. Some pieces of his affections run after one
thing, some after another. And therefore he prays God to unite his heart
together, to fear his Name. If God would once gather up his heart from all its
vain haunts, and unite it together; then he could set his affections, his fear,
and his love, and his delight, and the rest, upon Gods Name: Iejunio passiones
corporis, oratione pestes sanandae sunt mentis, says Hierom; Hierom in Marcum.
as the affections of the body are to be healed by fasting, so the affections
of the soul are to be healed by prayer: as long as they are carnal, they are
the plague and pestilence of the soul, and prayer must heal them. As Father
Latimer said to good Ridley, pray, pray, O pray, pray; so may I say, Pray,
pray, I beseech you, pray unto God evermore, again, I say, pray. I have not
time to pray so often, I do pray in the morning and evening, but my businesses
are so many, etc. This may be thou objectest. Not time enough, say thou?
Find out some odd times besides morning and evening: steal into some corner
or other, belabour thy heart before God. O say thou, I find it a hard thing
to stir up mine affections, I am a very Stoic, (...), I have no affection, I
cannot compel mine affections to God. Can thou not? but thou can compel thy
heart for to pray; thou can tug and pull at thy heart in thy prayers, and
this will fetch up thine affections. Prayer is not only a mouth to beg Physic,
but also it is Physic it self, whereby Christ cures the affections of the
heart. The poor beggar, the more he is driven to beg, the more affectionate he
is in describing his miseries: you shall see some beggars to set forth their
misery, and cry so lamentably, as it would burst a man's heart with pity and
compassion, ones bowels would even yearn but to hear them. I do not mean your
lazy canting beggars, but distressed Lazars indeed. So beloved, pray; if ever
thou be used to it, it will scrue up thy heart, and raise up thine affections
exceedingly. I do not mean that lazie-hearted and canting kind of praying of
most wretches, that has no more affection in it, then there is savor in the
white of an Egg. But set thy self to prayer indeed, and by it Christ will
quicken thine affections. Alas! thy heart is divided and scattered up and down
among the things of the world, and therefore strive with God that he would
gather up all the pieces into one; thou must have all thine affections and all
the pieces of thy heart gathered up into one, if thou would set them upon
God. I will give them one heart that they may fear me for ever, says God, Ier.
32. 39 your heart and the affections of your heart are divided and scattered up
and down into a thousand pieces, one upon one thing, another upon another; and
God has promised that he will gather up your hearts into one, and give you
this same one heart, that ye may fear him and set all your affections upon him;
will ye miss such a gracious promise as this for want of asking it, and
begging it, and praying for it? this is the reason why men have such earthly
affections as they have, because they are not frequent in prayer to God to be
helped! Prayer is an excellent help to wind up your affections to God. This is
the first, Often prayer to God.

The second is this, 2. Light up 2 Candle in thy heart.
Light up a candle in thy heart, that it may see what to set thine affections
on in God. Get knowledge of God: Ignoti nulla cupido, unknown unaffected; thine
affections are unruly, and thou can not rule them to Godward, yea, but thou
can get knowledge. Knowledge will help thee exceedingly. The affections we
see plainly that come nearest to reason, are soonest of all ruled. And the
affections that are remotest from reason, are more hard to be ruled. A man
commonly will sooner rule his affections aright, then a woman or a child,
because a man has more reason. The Philosophers show this by the example of a
Horse or a Bull. A Horse is sooner tamed then a Fish, because a Horse is more
capable of knowledge and of reason; as natural reason and knowledge can
naturally rule the affections, so spiritual reason and knowledge can
spiritually rule the affections. And therefore if thou would rule thine
affections aright to set them on God, labor to know God, every one that loves
God knows God, 1 John 47. He must must needs know God that loves God, for
how can he set his affections of love upon God, if he do not know God? knowing
therefore the terror of the Lord, we persuade men, 2 Cor. 5. 11. S. Paul
persuades the affections of the people, why? because he knew the terror of the
Lord, and he was able to make them to know it too; and therefore hereby he
endeavored to persuade their affections to fear God and to serve him. They
that know thy Name, will put their trust in thee, for thou never forsakest them
that seek thee, Psalm 9. 10. David speaks peremptorily, they that know thy Name,
they will place their hope, and their trust, and their confidence and all their
affections on thee. They will so certainly, if they know thee, if once they
know what a good God thou art, how true of thy promise, how gracious to thy
children, how sure a friend thou art, never forsaking them that seek thee. He
concludes it positively, they that know God will set their affections on God.
Can a coverous man know a rich purchase, and not have an affection to it? can a
beggar know his alms is a hundred pounds, and have no affection to take it? as
long as the woman of Samaria did not know Christ, she stood prattling and
wrangling and jeering at Christ, she had no affection neither to him nor the
water of life that he could give her, she had more mind of her well, and her
water-pot: though she were in Christ's company, yet because she did not know,
she never asked him a drop of grace, nor would she give so much as a draught of
her water to Christ. But what answer did he make to her? If thouknewest, says
he, who it is that says to thee, give me to drink, thou would have asked of
him, and he would have given thee living water, Joh. 4. 10. If thou had known
who I am, thine affections would have been eagerer then they be. Beloved, ye
hear the word, and have no affection to tremble at it. Ye hear Gods
Commandments, and have no affection to do them, ye live in your sins, many of
you poor damned souls to this day, and ye have no affection to be humbled.
Alas! alas! ye are blind, and ye know not. But if ye had known what a damnable
case ye are in, what a word it is ye reject, whose Commandments they are which
ye break, whose blood it is ye contemn; if ye had known God and the truth that
is of God, ye would have been otherwise affected then ye are. Suetonius.
Occultae musices nullus respectus, says Suetonius. Be the music never so
pleasing, yet if it be not known, none is affected therewith. You Will say ye do
know God; what do? and have no more affections to obey the Commandments of
God? ye lie in fiat terms, says S. John. He that says I know him, and keeps
not his Commandments, is a liar, and there is no truth in him, 1 John 2. 4. I
confess thou may know many things about God, and never have thine affections
set upon God to obey him; but this knowledge is in a reprobate, there is no
truth in this knowledge. The truth is not in him, says the Text. Knowledge may
be in him, but the truth of knowledge is not in him. And if thou do not know
God, no marvel though thine affections be not set on him. Incognitum non
amatur, Unknown unkist, as we say. This is the second help to set our
affections on God, to know God.

The third is this, 3. Occasion thine affections this way.
Occasion thine affections this way, Be it never so hard to (...) corrupt
nature to set thine affections upon God, it is easier a great deal to give them
frequent occasions to be set upon God. A theevish companion, may be, is afraid
for to steal, lest he should be taken, yet if a booty do ever and anon offer it
self pretty handsomely and fairly and covertly unto him, then he will steal it.

Occasio facit furem, O^casiones faciunt latrones.
Occasion makes a filcher; the postern door makes a thief, as the Proverb is.
That gives him an occasion for his villainy; as it is in evil, so also in good.
Occasion thine affections always to good, at last they may take hold of it. Be
often thinking, and meditating, and remembering of God, let thy thoughts and
meditations give occasion to thy heart, in the end it may take it. The Apostle
gives this as a reason why Titus was so well affected with the good people in
Corinth, namely, because he thought of and remembered their obedience to God.
His inward affection is the more abundant toward you, whilst he remembers the
obedience of you all, 2 Cor. 7. 15. if we would often busy our thoughts and
remembrances of God, this might win our affections to God. Thou give thine
affections so many thousand occasions to be set upon the things of this life,
thy tongue is accustomed to speak of little else, thine ear accustomed to hear
little else, thy mind and thy memory accustomed to think of little else, thou
give thy heart so many occasions to set its affections on the things of this
life, that I wonder not thine affections are not set upon God. This is the
reason why men are so touchy and so choleric, and revengeful and envious and
malicious; this is the reason why they are so apt to be overtaken with
inordinate pleasure, or covetous desires, or carnal sorrows and griefs and the
like, they give their hearts occasions to be so; they are not choice of their
company, they are not wary of the beginnings of sin, they entertain too many
thoughts of injuries and crosses, and afflictions, and profits, and vanity in
the world, many occasions they give to their hearts to set their affections
thereon. The heart when it ha^^ an occasion to sin, is like the wild ass in
the Prophet: in her occasion who can turn her away? Ier. 2. 24. The wild ass
if she have an occasion of lust, no body can turn her away from her lust, as
Tremellius observes: occasion is a main thing in matters either of sin or of
grace. If Peter had not given his heart an occasion to be tempted by being in
the Hall, doubtless he would have been better occupied then in denying his
Master; if David had not give occasion to his lusts by looking carelessly from
his roof, for all that I know, he had been at his prayers, when he was a
whoring with Vriah his wife. If Lot had not given occasion to his flesh by
drinking of Wine, he had been a blessing of God for his mercy the while he was
committing of incest. Capillataest occasio, Occasion has a foretop, how easy
is it to be taken hold of? The Galatians are commanded, that their liberty be
not used as an occasion to the flesh, Gal. 5. 13. for as soon as the flesh has
an occasion offered, presently it is likely to take it. Women must not give an
occasion to the Adversary to speak reproachfully, 1 Timothy 5. 14. Let no man put
a stumbling block or an occasion to fall in his brothers way. Romans 14. 13.
Occasions to evil are all dangerous, as the flesh is ready to take all occasion
to sin, so the spirit to take an occasion to good. And therefore if thou
would set thine affections on God, give thy heart as many occasions that way
as thou can; keep such company as may occasion thy heart to be affected with
Christ. Compose thy self to be often thinking and meditating of the Word, and
of such things as may occasion thy heart to set its affections above. And when
thy heart has such occasions as these offered unto it, press it and urge it
to take hold of the occasion. Horat.
Premenda occasio, says Horace; good occasions are to be pressed upon. If thou
would make conscience of this duty, to occasion thine affections aright,
they would be set quickly upon God. This is the third help, to set thine
affections on God, give thine affections often occasion that way.

The fourth is this. 4. Let thine affections be often wooed to God*
Let thine affections be often woed to God, never miss, if thou can choose,
the preaching of Gods word: there is never a godly Minister but is Christ's
paranymph, he is a friend of the Bridegroom, Joh. 3. 29. Whenever he
preaches, he comes on Christ's errand to woo thine affections to Christ. Christ
does as a great Prince, that minding to marry a wife out of a far Country,
sends over his paranymphs to woo for him, to get her affections, if it be
possible. So beloved, we that are Gods Ministers, we are Christ's paranymphs, we
preach to woo your affections to Christ. And therefore never miss the
preaching of the Word, it is the wooing of your affections to Christ; they say,
women love to be much wooed. Love then the preaching of the Word, that wooes
thee and wooes thee again and again. O what infinite need have thou of coming
continually to the Word; thine affections are infinitely coy; this they must
have, and that they must have. Like a vain Damosel, she must have her geegaws,
and her fashions, she must have her pleasure and her will, and her ease, and
thus it must be, and so it shall be, if she marry him, she will not have the
man else, He has such ado to get her affections, either he is too homely, or
too base, or too strict, or too ill-favored, or too poor, or somewhat. Now may
be he has her, and then her thoughts change, then again she is inclined, and
then her affections are off. My brethren, so it is with our souls; our
affections are to this and that and I know not what. If Christ will not let
them have their pleasures, and their ease, and their profits, and their
vanities, Christ is not for them. They must have the credit in the world,
they will not be mocked at for puritans and for hypocrites, they will not deny father
nor mother, nor self, nor any of these things, they are loath to be held in so
strictly, as Christ does indent. But Christ will not marry us, unless our
affections be wholly upon him. Blessed is he that is not offended in me. Many
are offended at the preciseness of his word, many at the bitterness of the
Cross, many at the shame of the world, they are offended in Christ, their
affections are quite against these things. They are unwilling to be always a
talking of Sermons and of Heaven, to be always a wracking their thoughts about
their sins, and about repentance and faith, to be hated of all men, to go
through tribulations and persecutions for the Gospels sake, to part with their
customs, and their own natural inclinations and their lusts, their affections
are against these conditions. O it is wondrous hard to woo the affections of
the heart unto Christ. And do thou think that Christ will marry thee till
thine affections come down to his conditions? (...).
will a man marry a woman whom he sees is contrary-hearted unto him? Mulier
inquieta tempestas in domo, A cross wife is a tempest and a storm in a house.
Come then continual to the preaching of the word, if ever thou desire to have
thine affections wrought on. Gods Ministers are Christ's paranymphs, they preach
for this purpose to woo thine affections to Christ. If there be any one Sermon
that thou refusest to be at when thou may, thy conscience tells thee thou
may be at it, and wilt not, if there be any one Sermon, I say, that thou will
not be at, thou rejectest Christ's paranymphs. Like a cross maid, that when her
suitor comes to her, he shall have no speech with her, She will not be spoken
with. O what a provoking is this unto Christ? if thou will not be spoken with,
take heed least the Lord Jesus abhor for to own thee. Nay, if she be so
strange forsooth, let her keep her affections for who is will, I scorn to woo
her any more. How long has Christ wooed your affections! beloved, and yet he is
pleased to woo you. Bring hither your affections, that here they may be
wrought. Frequent the Lords house, for here be Christ's paranymphs: if ever your
affections can be gotten, here they may be won some time or other. Many other
means may be used to help you in this task, namely, to set your affections on
God. But these may suffice for the present. Set your affections on things that
are above, and not on things that are on the earth.

The VI. Sermon.
Colos. 3. 2. Set your affections on things that are above, etc.
THe fifth means to set our affections on God, 5. To be sober and temperate in
all things.
is to be sober and temperate in all things. For if we be not, our affections
cannot steadfastly settle upon God. And this is the reason why the Apostle joins
sobriety with prayer. Prayer is a duty that requires most freedom of affections
for God, and if it be not backed with sobriety, will soon be affectionless and
deadish, Be ye sober and watch unto prayer, 1 Pet. 4. 7. Titus must exhort
young men to be sober minded, Tit. 2. 6. Young men's affections, ye know, are
more unruly then others, and therefore they had need of sobriety, otherwise
their affections will be grievously exorbitant. If thou take any recreation
take it very soberly: one little game at bowls, one hours play at a
shovel-board, or at Chesse, or the like: if thou do not take heed, it is
strange how it will dull thine affections to good duties; if thou follow thy
business in the world, follow it soberly, be not over-eager upon it, lest it
blunt thine affections to Godward. If thou eat, and if thou drink, if thou
sleep, or if thou talk, whatever thou do, be sure to do it soberly. A man may
be drunk with any passion.
Beware of the least excess, lest thine affections be suddenly tickled
therewith.

If thou let thine affections ramble upon too much in this kind, they will
quickly be mad. Either to make thee drunken with the cares of this life, Luke
21. 34. Or to be quite drunken with pride, Isa. 28. 1. Drunken with pleasure,
drunken with fury, and so forth. All drunkenness is not drunkenness with
drink, Hier. Com. in Ezekiel. cap. 34.
says S. Hierom. Amore and odio men's inebriatur, says he. A man's soul may be
drunken with a passion, drunken with love, and drunken with hatred, and drunken
with any other affection. Thus civil men, and sober men, as we call them,
though they will never be drunk with wine, or with beer, yet they are drunkards
in this sense, they are drunk with affections to other things in this life. A
man may be drunken with sorrow. says the Prophet, Thou shall be filled with
drunkenness, and with sorrow, Ezekiel. 23. 33. That is, thou shall be filled with
sorrow, till thou art drunk with it again. So a man may be drunken with fear,
drink and be drunken, spue and fall, and rise no more, because of the sword
which I will send among you, Jer. 25. 27. That is, ye shall be drunken and reel
too and fro with fear. A man may be drunken with delights and with pleasures,
and drunken with security: they are drunken, but not with wine, for the Lord
has powered out upon them the spirit of a deep sleep, Isa. 29. 9, 10. That is,
ye are so secure, and so fast asleep in your lusts, as if ye were dead drunk
with security. Thus all the affections may be drunk with the things of this
life. And therefore if ever we would have our affections to be right, let us be
sober in all the things of the world. Ye desire food and raiment, there bound
thine affections with sobriety, and be content Ye love the world for the use
that ye have of it, there limit your affections with sobriety, and use it as if
ye used it not, Buy as if ye bought not, go to the Markets and your Fairs, as
if ye went not. Sow, and reap, and gather in, as if ye did it not. And ye will
needs be merry and harmlesly jest now and then, O be marvellously sparing and
sober. Eating must be and drinking must be, and sleeping must be, and providing
for your selves, and your family must be: if ever ye love your own souls and
salvation, be sparing and sober in these things, lest supersfluity of
affections step in in a moment: the devil is always a catching for his
opportunities to deceive you; he is ever as a roaring Lion seeking by all means
to devour you, Be sober then and vigilant, for your adversary the devil walks
about seeking whom he may devour, 1 Pet. 5. 8. When a man is to fight with a
stout enemy, will he go and make himself drunk, that his enemy may set upon him
drunk? Ye had need to be sober, if it be to fight with the devil; if ever ye be
never so little overtaken, never so little giddy, then is the devil most busy.
Temperance and sobriety has a very good name in the Greek tongue, the Spirit
of God calls it (...), that is, the keeper of the mind safe, or the keeper of a
man in his wits. Do so, otherwise thou shall never be able to set thine
affections on God. This is an admirable means to keep our affections in tune,
to be sober in all things: to be sober-thoughted, and sober-hearted, and
sober-minded, and sober-mouthed, and sober-meated, and sober-clothed, and
sober-employed. This is the fifth means to set our affections on God, To be
sober in all things.

The sixth is this, 6. To clip the wings of our affections, by abstaining from
much of our lawful liberty Vid banc regulam apud Greg l. 5. moral. and hom. 3.
super Evang.
when we see how apt our affections are to fly out upon vanity, to clip their
wings of much of their lawful liberty; not only to abstain from things that are
evil and unlawful, but also to abstain from many things that are lawful. There
be a thousand lawfuls that thy heart does affect, which if thou do not abridge
thy self of, thou shall never be able to set thine affections upon God. This
rule Socrates the very Heathen observed; no man can be safe from falling into
unlawfuls, but only this man, says he, that abstains from many things that are
lawful. It Is lawful to drink strong drink, but for thee that art apt to
over-desire it, it is dangerous. It Is lawful to go finely; but for thee that
art apt to be proud of it, It is not safe to go to the utmost of what is
lawful. If thou usest the utmost of a thing that is lawful, one step further is
unlawful. It is not wisdom to go to the utmost ridges of a rock, just at the
brow of a high cliff; though the ground thou go on be sure, yet thy going is
not sure: how soon may thou slip with thy foot? how soon may a giddiness in
the head come upon thee, and then thou break thy neck? Perhaps thou may go
steady, yea, but perhaps not, but topple down on a sudden and be dashed to
pieces. It was lawful for Dinah to go forth, and to see the daughters of the
land, but thus she fell to be ravished and used like a whore, Genesis 34. 1. It was
lawful for Iehoshaphat to visit King Ahab, but his using this lawful visitation
drew him to partake in some measure of his sins. It was lawful for Daniel to
eat the portion of meat that the King gave him, but he would not, Dan. 1. 8.
That very lawful thing if he had used it, it would have defiled him. All these
things are lawful for me, say thou, yea, but all these things are not
expedient; because if thou take thy liberty in all things that are lawful,
thou will quickly be a slave to thy lusts, and under the power of inordinate
affections. All things are lawful for me, says the Corinthian, yea, but I will
not be brought under the power of any, says S. Paul, 1 Cor. 6. 12. As if he
had said, all things of this nature are lawful, but I count it not expedient to
use them for all that: why? because if I should take liberty in this kind, I
should be brought under the power of my sinful affections. Cavendi sunt
affectus, ne illius nos ipsos subjiciamus, Pet. Mart.
says Peter Martyr, Take heed of thine affections, they will instantly inslave
thee. Follow not thy pleasure so much as thou may, nor thy profits and
earthly employments so much as thou may; drink not, and sleep not, and jest
not so much as thou may, for if thou do, thine affections will be caught or
ere thou art aware. Many men and women, they will be enquiring and questioning,
what? is not this lawful? and is not this lawful? Is it not lawful to have a
little recreation every day? Is it not lawful to be merry, and to tell a merry
tale, and to break a jest now and then? Is it not lawful to sell Ale, and keep
a victualling house? Is it not lawful to wear such a geegaw? or to plat ones
hair after such or such a fashion? These questions sound like the speeches of
fools that are likely to be gulled in their affections by Satan. For what
though they be lawful? I do not deny they are lawful; but the question is this,
Be they safe and expedient for thee, when thine affections are sure to be
needlessly agog upon these things? O do not needlessly endanger thine affections,
if ever thou may remedy it, (...), says Chrysostom. Chrysostom. in 1 Cor. 6.
1.
Look thou be not a slave of thine affections: thine affections itch after this
and that, look thou do curb them: if thou do not curb them of many things
that are lawful, thou will never be able to set them upon God. This is the
sixth means to set our affections on God, to clip their wings from flying upon
the things here below.

The seventh is this, 7. To be abundant in the exercise of godliness.
to be abundant in the exercises of godliness, We must be abundant in prayer,
and in all other exercises of godliness. When Paul had exhorted good Timothy
to be exercised in godliness, 1 Timothy 4. 7. in the next verse, he gives him a
reason why he so exhorts him. Because says he, godliness is profitable unto
all things, If godliness be profitable for all things, then certainly its
profitable for this, to set our affections upon God. Abound then in good
duties, abound in good conference, abound in good and gracious acquaintance,
abound in godly meditations. This was David's means whereby his affections came
to be earnest upon God. O how I love thy Law, it is my meditation continually!
Psalm. 119. 97. his affections were even wrapped up in his God, O how love I thy
Law! he was not able to express how his affections were wrapped. O how love I
thy Law! How came they to be so? the reason was this, He was abundant in godly
meditations; It is my meditation continually, Abundance in any thing, causes
the affections to abound. The voluptuous man is abundant in his pleasures, he
abounds with his hunting, and hawking, and gaming, and merriments, and
therefore his affections are abundantly set hereupon. The covetous man his
mind abounds in thinking of the world, his memory abounds with remembering the
things of the world, his tongue abounds in talking of such matters, his labors
and his cares abound in this kind, and therefore his affections are abundantly
set upon these things. There is nothing makes the affections so excessive as
abundance, Abound then in the exercises of Gods worship, if thou would have
thine affections to be abundant that way. Never think thou can pray enough;
hear enough, speak holily enough, examine thy soul enough, nor sanctify the
Sabbath enough, never think thou can reform enough, or do any duty enough.
Men serve God as little as they dare, they pray and hold out in their prayers
as little as they dare, they show themselves for God as little as they dare,
these men's affections can never be upon God, because they love not to be
abundant in good duties: thy heart is a great deep, Psa. 64. 6. It is not a
little winding, or a little turning will fetch up a Bucket out of a deep Well.
So the heart I say is a great deep, a little praying, and a little hearing, and
a little amending will not fetch up the affections from this great deep unto
God, no, Thou must be abundant in goodness and in the duties of goodness, if
thou would have thine affections set upon God; provided always that thy
heart be renewed and quickened, otherwise abundance will cloy thee. The more
thou prayest, the less affections thou will have: the more thou hear, and
the more thou speak of Religion or of grace, the more formal thou will be,
thine affections will be less set hereupon. O my brethren, this is a cursed
crasis and disposition of soul, to be spiritually cloyed in this manner; abound
and abound right, else its to small purpose; if thou abound in good duties, and
abound right, this will set their affections upon God. Abound in a thing, and
be the thing never so bad, it will soon command thine affections. Let a man be
abundant in playing, drinking, or abundant though it be but in the taking of
hot waters, I have known some their affections were so to it, that it killed
them. Beloved, abound then in good duties, this will take off thine affections
from the world, and set them on God. This is the seventh means, to set our
affections on God, to be abundant in the duties of holiness.

The eighth is this, 8. Dive down to the bottom of thine affections.
Labor to dive down to the bottom of thine affections: the sweetest is at
bottom as we say. So the affections that are sweetest to the heart are at
bottom. And therefore dive down to the bottom and get up the bottom of thine
affections, and set them upon God; thine affections are never set upon God,
till them at the bottom are set upon God. A man may set the shallow of his
affections upon God, when the bottom is set upon the things of the world. There
is many a close hypocrite, he thinks his affections to the world are now dead;
but they are not dead; the Fox seems often to be dead, to seize the more
cunningly on his prey. So the affections will seem to be dead to the world,
that so they may be the more cunning to feed upon the things of the world; they
seem to be dead, that is, the shallow of them seems so, but the bottom still is
alive to the world, that is not set upon God. Beloved, a man may set the
shallow of his affections upon a thing, which the bottom of his affections does
hate. See this in Ammon, his affections were to Thamar, and he loved her. O he
would seem to be sick for her. I, the shallow of his affections were to her,
but anon, out comes the bottom: when the bottom of his affections once did come
out, then he did hate her. He hated her worse then he loved her, 2 Samuel 13 15.
dive down then to the bottom of thine affections, and labor with all might to
get up the bottom, and set them upon God. Here Is a man, he has good affections
to repentance and amendment, good affections to be godly and have grace; he
reforms much, and he professes much; you would wonder to see this man a year
hence to persecute the Minister, and to oppose Gods people and make a mock of
the power of Religion: but this you may see, if the bottom of his affections be
not got up and set upon God. Get up the bottom, and set that upon God, or it is
nothing.

There be three means to get up the bottom of thine affections, Means to get up
the bottom of the affections.
and set them upon God.

First. Be humbled after all thy turning unto God, this will get up the bottom
of thine affections to God. A wicked man before he is turned unto God may be
humbled; 1. Be humbled after thy turning unto God.
as Ahab was humbled, and Judas was humbled, and Pharaoh too, and many other
sinners they are humbled before ever they have turned from their sins. When
once they have turned from their profaneness, and their impieties, then they
begin to think well of themselves, now they are well, think they: indeed before
ever they are turned, they may be humbled. Thus a drunkard and a whoremonger
may be humbled, thus a mocker and a profane person may be humbled, their
consciences may pull them by the throat as long as they live in these sins, and
then their affections are stirred exceedingly: they may weep, and sigh, and
groan, and tremble, and be ashamed of their doings; they may be humbled thus
before they are turned: but when they are once turned from these sins, then
they begin to be quiet and secure, and to hope well, Alas! alas! the bottom is
not up yet. But if thou would get up the bottom of thine affections, be
humbled after all thy turnings to God. So it was with good Ephraim: Surely
after that I was turned, I repented: and after that I was instructed, I smote
upon my thigh, I was ashamed, yea, even confounded, Jer. 31. 19. Ephraim was
humbled after that he was turned. It was not before he was turned, but after he
was turned, he repented and was humbled. This got up the very bottom of his
affections and all unto God. See how full of affections he was. He smote upon
his thigh, he was in a holy rage at his own soul, he blushed, he was ashamed,
yea, he was even smitten with confusion of face before God. All the bottom of
his affections was up, his zeal his sorrow, his shame, and the whole bottom of
all came up then, because he was thus humbled.

Secondly, 2. Keep no close lust unmortified.
Keep no close lust, no corruption in secret unmortified: As this is a means to
get up all the bottom of our affections, and set them upon God, so it is a sign
too whether we do so or no. For when a man is willing to be searched, who may be
was suspected of stealing, if he be willing to be searched, to have his pockets,
and his house searched, and his coffers searched, and all his haunts searched;
Search me, says he, I have it not: he that is willing thus to be searched, it
is a sign he has not stolen it. So it was with the Psalmist: for having said
that his affections were set upon God, and against them that were against God:
he bids God search him, and see if he could find that it was contrary. Search
me, O God, and know my heart, or as some translations have it, and try the
ground or the bottom of my heart, see if there be any way of wickedness in me,
Vid. v. 21, 22.
Psalm. 139. 23, 24. As if he had said: If I have any secret corruption that I
favor my self in, I confess the bottom of mine affections is rotten; but I am
willing to be searched; Search me, O God, and try the ground, or the bottom of
my heart, and see if it be not so as I profess it to be; I say, as this is a
means, so it is a sign too. A means it is to get up the bottom of the
affections, and set them upon God. For as long as a man has any secret lust,
any bottom corruption which he favors himself in, he can never set the bottom
of his affections upon God.

Thirdly consider, 3. Consider God will shame thee one day, if the bottom be
not sound.
God will shame thee one day, if the bottom be not sound; thou may have good
affections for the while, and be held for a very good Christian, and a forward
Professor: but if thine affections be not solid and sound at the bottom, God
will shame thee. Though the Apple look never so well, yet if it be not sound at
the core, at last it will be manifest. Though the Egg look never so lovely,
yet if it be addle within, at last it shall appear. God will unmask thee one
day, and make it appear thine affections were never right at the bottom. This
David used as a means to provoke him to get a sound heart at the bottom. Let my
heart be sound in thy statutes, that I be not ashamed, Psalm. 119 80. The
affection of shame a man would be loath to be put to, and he knew he should be
put to it one time or other, if he were not sound at the bottom: And therefore
he labors with God, that his heart might be sound in his statutes, he was not
content to have good affections that way, but he labors to have sound and
solid affections that might be sound at the bottom. That I be not ashamed,
says he, What a shame will it be to see thee a damned Goat at Christ's left
hand, that now art esteemed a good Christian? If thou be not right at the
bottom, so it will be. Give me leave to tell you one thing that occurred in an
experience of mine own. I was once a saying to a Gentleman who was exceedingly
affected at the Word, and professed great love to my Ministry, and that he
would defend it, and make much of the Word: O (said I) there be many that yet
seem very forward to approve of the Word, and to defend it, etc. that when the
Word comes to meet with their bosom sins, and gives them no rest in their
consciences, I fear me will set against Minister, and Word, and all ere it be
long. O no, God forbid (says he) I were unworthy to live, if I should do so:
Well, well (said I) I pray God it may not be so as I say: but mark it, and
peradventure you shall see it with your eyes. Within one fortnight, this
Gentleman that seemed to be such a friend at my first coming to the Parish,
being met with in a Sermon, and feeling his sin (a sin I little imagined he was
guilty of) to be reproved and condemned in the Pulpit, he never would be known
to me more, but opposed me as long as I stayed there: he was affected, but his
affections were not sound at the bottom, and therefore he came to this shame;
God grant it have humbled him by this time, if now he be alive. It is a good
rule in morality, Regula moralis.
Affectus mendaciter se subjiciunt rationi: The affections will fain a
submission to right reason. It is true in Divinity, the affections will seem to
submit unto grace, when they do not. For as long as the bottom is not sound,
they cannot be set truly upon God: they are nothing but flashes, like plushes
of water after a shower, that are dried up quickly. This is the eighth means to
set our affections on God, to get up the bottom of our affections, and set them
on God.

Beloved, It concerns us to use all these means.
these are the means whereby ye may set your affections on God: now see how
nearly it concerns you to use all these means, and to make conscience of this
duty: and this will appear, if ye consider these two things.

First, 1. Because the affections are the bonds of the soul.
The affections are the bonds of the soul, that is, wicked, whereby it is fast
bound unto sin: thou can never repent nor be saved, as long as thine
affections are not turned. Can a prisoner go that is fast bound in the stocks?
Thine earthly and carnal affections fast bind thee in sin, if these bonds be
not broken, thou can never go to God. When Peter saw a carnal affection in
Simon Magus the Sorcerer, presently he tells him, I perceive thou art in the
gall of bitterness, and in the bond of iniquity, Act. 8. 23. He does not say
only, in iniquity, but also in the bond of iniquity: for his carnal affection
was a bond, and he was fast bound in his sins. The Prophet preaches hell and
damnation against such men, and such women: for alas! how can they get out,
when they are bound and corded to their pleasures, and the things of the world?
Woe unto them that draw iniquity with cords of vanity, and sin as it were with a
cart-rope, Isa. 2. 18. Great carts are drawn by the cart-ropes; so all a man's
sins are drawn to him by these cords. Chrysostom.
Chrysostom expounds these words, both of their sins and their woes; they
draw both them. The cords of our affections are the hearts tyers to sin, they
do even tie the soul unto sin, that it cannot get loose. Woe is to them, says
the Lord. Be the affections all like unto bonds, and cords, and cart-ropes, to
tie the heart to sin? What a woeful case are ye in, till your affections are set
right! look what ye tie them unto, that do ye draw after you; if you fasten
them on the things of this life, them ye draw after you; if ye fasten them on
Grace, and on Christ and his Word, them ye pull after you. Never was Sampson so
fast bound with Delilahs withs, as he was with his affections to Delilah, says
Gregory. Ah poor slavish soul, thou art in the Devils stocks: as long as thine
affections are not fastened aright, thou art heart-bound, and soul-bound, and
conscience-bound, thou art fast bound in his cage. How nearly then concerns
it you all, to get your affections to be set upon? Ye are even the slaves and
bondslaves of hell: and therefore as ever ye desire to fly from the vengeance
to come, use all these means with all conscience, that ye may set your
affections on God.

Secondly, 2. Because earthly affections are the fore-stallers of the heart.
Earthly affections are the fore-stallings of the heart, the heart is
prepossest already with the things of this life, and is prejudicate against the
things that are above, and therefore there is no hope to persuade you, as long
as your affections are set upon the things of this life. When our Savior
Christ perceived how the Pharisees affections hawkt after credit and honor
from men, being prepossest with desire of humane applause, he tells them plainly
they could never believe, nor seek the honor of God. Ye cannot believe, says
he: how can ye believe which receive honor one of another, and seek not the
honor that comes from God only? Ioh. 5. 44. It is a grievous thing to be
prejudicate and prepossest with another good beside God. It is a miserable task
to be to reason with a prejudicate man, he will not yield, no, by no means will
he yield, when once he is prejudicate. As long as our affections are set on the
world, our hearts are prejudicate: and therefore go we about the means
prescribed, whereby our affections may be set at rights; never till then can we
hope to convert you, or to work any good on your souls.

The VII. Sermon.
Colos. 3. 2. Set your affections on things that are above, etc.
ARe the affections the motions of the heart, Ministers must labor to stir up
the affections of their hearers. L. 1. de invent. c. 1.
and must we set them on God? this may teach us one lesson by the way; we that
are Gods Ministers must take notice from hence how to qualify our preaching,
namely, to stir up the affections of men's hearts. Every man says Rodolphus
Agricola, that has any learning at all, is able to teach; but concutere
affectibus audientem, to shake men's affections, and turn men's hearts; he is an
extraordinary man that can do this: after this manner was the preaching of our
Savior, he did so move the affections of his hearers, that the Text says,
they were astonished at his doctrine, Mat. 7. 28. Why so? the Exangelist makes
answer in the next verse, for he taught them as one having authority, and not
as the Scribes: that is, Keck. Ecc. Rhet. l. 1. c. 3.
non ita frigidus ut Pharisaei, he was not such a frigid and cold Teacher as
the Pharisees and Scribes were; the people sat like immovable stocks in their
seats, when the Scribes were a teaching, they were not moved a jot; but our
Savior was a powerful Teacher, he taught them as one having authority, and not
as the Scribes: his Sermons were moving and forceable. John the Baptist wrought
strongly on the affections of his Auditors, they could not possibly hold, but
cried outr^ght, as they heard him. The people asked him, What shall we do? the
Publicans cried out, Master what shall we do? the Soldiers also, whose
affections are as hard to be moved as any, yet they cried out too, and what
shall we do? Luke 3. 14. This use is plainly grounded on my Text. Gods
Ministers ye know are Gods Instruments to bring men to faith and repentance,
and reconcile them to God: and therefore if this be your duty, to set your
affections on God, we must labor to work on your affections to provoke you to
do it. The reasons of it are these.

First, Reasons.
Because the Word is full of affections; full of affections of love to woo a
man to God, 1. Because the Word is full of affections.
full of affections of pity to yern upon men in their misery, full of
affections of terror to terrify the wicked; and therefore that Minister that
preaches not affectionately, preaches but one half of the Word, he preaches but
the dead corpse of the Truth, as I may call it: he does not preach the life and
the soul of the truth. The affections of a speech are the soul of a speech,
both make up the whole of the Word. Is not my Word like unto fire, and like a
hammer that breaks the rocks in pieces? Ier. 23. 29. If the Word be a fire,
he that delivers it coldly, delivers the Word otherwise then it is. Would you
not say that a man were ridiculous, who when his neighbors house is on fire,
should go and coldly advise the Parish in this manner; O my dear neighbors,
you should do well to look to your houses, lest fire fall upon them, as now of
late I understood it has done; I pray let me persuade you to provide water,
otherwise all your goods and mine too will be consumed to ashes: it is true
that this man says; but would not men deem him a fool? the truth, is the truth
of affection, and he leaves out the affection of the truth. Nature has taught
us another course in such a case, He would run crying into the street, fire,
fire, help, help, for the Lords sake; water, water, in all haste, alas! alas!
we are undone, quickly, speedily, run for ladders; pull down this rafter here,
cut down that beam there, untile the house, what mean you? stir hands, arms,
legs, hie thee for water, run thee for iron crooks, crows, hooks, buckets,
haste, haste; we are all undone. Here now is the affection of the truth: the
like must a Minister do, who knowing his people wallow in sin, in the state of
hell and damnation, as many as go on in their courses, he ought not with filed
phrases and mellow-mouthed words, nor with cold exhortations admonish his
hearers, but he must put in the affection of the Word in his Sermons: he must
cry fire, fire, the fire of hell is among you, the fire is kindled, sin is
entered into the soul: O the water of tears, tears, repentance, repentance, help
your selves for Gods sake: the devil stands ready to devour you, death watches
unawares to strike you, hell-mouth gapeth to swallow you; look about you,
stir your selves and consider, or ye perish in a moment. Leave off your
ryots, down with your pleasures, away with your vanities, put on Christ
quickly, work out your salvation with fear and trembling. See ye not men die
daily before you on a sudden, falling to hell, haste, haste, flatter not your
souls, time is uncertain, the danger is too certain, the punishment eternal,
damnation is intolerable. Thus must a Minister preach this truth, It is a truth
full of affection, the affection must be delivered as well as the body of the
truth. All the imaginations of the thoughts of man's heart are only evil, etc.
Gen 6. 5. As this is a truth, so there is a great deal of affection in this
truth, the affection of loathing. Do we think when the Lord said it, he said it
coldly and nakedly; all the imaginations, etc. No, he said it with a great deal
of affection, of loathing, etc. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, etc. O that thou had
known, etc. As this is a truth, so there is a great deal of affection in this
truth, affection of pity. There is a great deal of affection in every
threatening, a great deal of affection in every command, a great deal of
affection in every promise, in every truth. Christ does not bid us preach the
letters, and syllables, and propositions of his Word, but his Word. Now my Word
is like fire, says God* fire is the stirringest element of all elements, and
therefore if there be any feeling at all in you, the Word is able to stir you,
even as if ye had a fire in your bowels. Beloved, either we that are Gods
Ministers are unskilful to handle the Word, or else ye are senseless and
stupid, if ye do not sit upon hot coals for to hear it: it will make the
drunkards heart ache to hear what this Word says to him: it will make the
worldlings heart ache, and the secure Christians heart ache. The Word is fire,
Did not our hearts burn within us, while he opened to us the Scriptures? Luke
24. 32. The Word did so inflame their affections, that their hearts burned to
hear it. Does not the godly heart burn to hear the sweetness of Gods promises?
and burn when the Scriptures are opened to direct thee? And so on the other
side, does not the Usurers heart burn, when the Scriptures are opened that rip
up his sins? Does not the carnal professors heart burn now and then as he sits,
when the Scriptures are opened to show him his rottenness? there be such
scorching texts in the Word; texts of death, texts of judgment, texts of hell
and damnation, they may well make a wicked heart burn for to hear them; and
therefore the Word being so full of affection, a Minister that preaches it,
must needs be an affectionate preacher, if he be a true preacher, otherwise he
does not preach the whole Word.

Secondly, 3. The word looks to be obeyed with affections.
As the Word is full of affection it self, so it looks that a man should be
full of affection that obeys it. God loves no other obedience, but obedience
with affection; he loves a cheerful giver. 2 Cor. 9. 7. So God loves a cheerful
obeyer, a cheerful repenter, a cheerful believer; whatever we do in his
service, he loves we should do it with affection* Should a Minister preach
without any affection, happily he may reason men out of many of their sins, and
prevail with them to take up the duties of religion, but all would be
formality, without any affection. It is a good saying of Austin, the godly must
have affections in obedience, otherwise they are not obedient.

There be two things in every Commandment of God.

First, The duty commanded to be done, Fear God and keep his Commandments. This
is the whole duty, Eccles. 12. 13. That is, there is never a duty that a man
has commanded him, but it is within the compass of the Commandments of God. So
that in every Commandment there is a duty.

Secondly, The strength of affection wherein the Commander commands it, and
therefore the Commander commands it, and therefore the Commandment is called
Gods will. Teach me to do thy will, O God, Psa. 143. 10. It is called Gods
pleasure, Bless the Lord ye Ministers of his that do his pleasure, Psa. 103.
21. It is called Gods desire, Thou desiredst truth in the inward parts, Ps. 51.
6. Because the strength of Gods will and desire, and pleasure, and affection
lies in it. These two things being in every Commandment of God, it follows of
necessity, that a man must have his affections in obedience, otherwise he is
not obedient. As God does not only command me, but also with affection he
commands me: so I must not only do the thing he commands, but with all
affection I must do it, or else I never obey him. Virtuti immitte furorem,
says Homer, Add affections to thy virtue, Virtue is no virtue without the
affections, prayer is no prayer without thine affections be in it, repentance
is no repentance without thine affections be in it. Whatsoever duty thou do,
if thou do it not with all thine affections, it is abomination to God: and
therefore the Minister that preaches must stir up affections: if he do not stir
up affections, the religion he begets in the hearts of his hearers, is likely
to be little better then wretched formality.

Thirdly, 3. Men are very dull in affections to embrace the Word.
As the Word is full of affection it self, and requires affection in them that
obey it, so men are very dull in affection to embrace it; they are dull of
hearing, Heb. 5. 11. They have dull ears, and dull hearts, and dull affections:
tell them they shall perish because they do not repent; they will be damned
because they will not obey: they shall be saved that will; they are like
Gallio, they care for none of these things; and therefore now we that are
Ministers, must strive to make them ^are whether they will or no. Cry aloud,
says God, spare not, lift up thy voice like a Trumpet, show my people their
transgressions, Isa. 58. 1. Do not only say a Sermon to them, but cry it: nor
only so, but cry aloud, they are deaf: spare not, thou will never stir them if
thou sparest. Spare not, spare neither rich nor poor, neither great nor small,
lift up thy voice like a Trumpet, that is, preach so, that if it be possible,
thou may move their affections. It is a similitude taken from the Trumpet in
battle, though the Soldier be faint-hearted, it will stir him up with
affection to fight. Great Alexander was so stirred up at the trumpetting of one
Antigenida an admirable trumpetter, that all his courageous affections were up,
and his fingers did itch to be fighting. So lift up thy voice like a Trumpet,
stir them up, if by any means thou can. O they are very dull and
senseless, and hard to be affected, and therefore we must study how to work on
their affections.

If ye ask me how must the Minister stir up affections? I answer.

First, A Minister must not stir up affections by the enticing words of man's
wisdom.
Negatively, not with the enticing words of man's wisdom, 1 Cor. 2. 4. Some men
indeed out of these words do gather, that S. Paul condemned all eloquence and
affectionate preaching. But this cannot be, that he should condemn that which
he most showed himself, most of all the Apostles of Christ. He was such an
eloquent golden mouthed man, that the Lycaonians thought he had been another
Mercury, he was such a sweet speaker, Act. 14. 12. He was such an affectionate
Orator, that he made Agrippa's bowels even earn to be a Christian, and Felix to
tremble. S. Austin conceived him to be gifted with such an admirable power this
way of Almighty God, that it was one of his three wishes, if he might have it
for wishing; namely, to hear S. Paul to preach in a Pulpit; and therefore he
does not condemn all affectionate and eloquent preaching; but he condemns that
flattering kind of affected Rhetoric, whereby men that preached themselves,
tickled men's ears, and delighted them with luscious phrases of Oratory;
handling such points as might please the fantasies of their hearts, rather
then to convince them of their sins: thinking it too precise, too base to
preach of men's damnable estate and condition in sin, the curse of the Law that
all men are under till they be new creatures in Christ; the taking up of
Christ's Cross: to be hated, and mocked, and persecuted of all men, for Christ's
sake and his Gospel. These points, they either thought to be too rustic, and
burly, and austere, or they sugared them over with their comments, and tickled
the people with more velvet-like passages of mercy. I say, this kind of
eloquence, and this kind of preaching, with the enticing words of man's
wisdom, does the Apostle condemn, and therefore I do not mean this. How then
must a Minister stir up affections? I answer, he must stir up affections five
ways.

First, 1. A Minister must stir up affections by preaching to the life.
By preaching to the life, As a Painter then paints a man well, when he paints
him to the life; he paints it so to the life, as if it were a living man indeed
So then does a Preacher preach affectionately, when he preaches to the life;
when he preaches of hell, he preaches to the life, as if hell were before men's
eyes; when he preaches of heaven, as if the people did see it with their eyes
as it were. As King James said of a good preacher in this Kingdom; A saying of
K. James
this Preacher, says he, preaches as if death were at my back: so a good
Preacher preaches to the wicked, as if vengeance were at their backs, as if
hell were at their backs; he preaches to the godly as if Christ were at their
backs, and heaven at their backs. If this kind of preaching will not work on
men's affections, their affections are bewitched, O foolish Galatians, who has
bewitched you, that ye should not obey the truth, before whose eyes Jesus Christ
has been evidently set forth, crucified among you? Gal. 3. 1. Paul among them
had preached Christ to the life; so evidently, and so plainly, had he preached
Christ crucified, as if they had seen him crucified before their eyes.
Certainly thought he, these peoples affections are bewitched, that are no
better wrought on. When Galba would persuade the Spaniards against Nero for his
cruelty, he set out so visibly his cruelty, that they might even see it with
their eyes. Lycurgus so expressed the difference of good education and of bad,
that the people might even see it with their eyes. Not as though preachers
should do as they did, or as some that I have read of, have done; who brought a
dead skull into the pulpit, that the people might see death even with their
eyes. We have no such warrant in Scripture; but they must do it with the lively
teaching of the truth. And therefore the Apostle says, that true preaching is
in the demonstration of the spirit, 1 Cor. 2. 4. When the truth is demonstrated
with evidence.

Secondly, 2. By being full of affections himself.
By being full of affections himself: Affection in the speaker is likely to
beget affection in the hearer. It cannot be otherwise, says Cicero. Cicero
being an excellent spokesman, whenever he pleaded before the people of Rome, to
beget any affections in them, he would be sure to put on those affections
himself. If he would move them to grief, he would be full of affection of
grief. When to pity he would be full of affections of pity, Summa movendorum
affectuum in eo est, ut prius ipse sis molus. Quin Hor. de art. Poet
when to anger, his countenance would be full of anger. The highest point of
moving the affections in another, is to be endued with those affections thy
self, says Quintilian. It is an old maxim in Oratory, and in all moving of
the affections of others, Pectus est quod facit disertos. It is a man's own
breast that makes him to be affectionate and eloquent. If a man's own breast be
piteous, and full of compassion and bowels, that man is an e^oquent perswader
to pity. If a man's own breast be loving, and kind, and full of affections,
that man is an eloquent speaker to move love: Si vis me flere, dolendum primum
ipse tibi, If thou would have me weep, weep thy self first. What mean you to
weep and break my heart, Com. in 1 Cor. 2. 4 Call. Mult^ sunt clamosi
reprehensores, qui in vitia deciamitando vel potius fulminando mirum zeli
ar^orem prae se ferunt, interea ipsi securi ut videantur per lusum latera and
guttera ^xercere vesle: at Christiani ^astorus est flere secum priusquam alios
ad fletum provocet, and plus apud se retinere doioris quam aliis faciat. Dabis
voci tuae vo cem virtutis, si quod suades, prius ipse tibi persuasisse
cognoscaris Bern.
says the Apostle, Act. 21. 13. it burst his very heart to see others stand
weeping about him. There be many clamorous Preachers, says Calvin, who declaim
against the sins of the people, and thunder against the iniquities of their
Parish, and make as though they had a great deal of zeal, that never move a
jot; the affections of the people are not stirred up a whit; because the people
see plainly, through all their actings and vehement enforcements, that such
Ministers are not affected themselves, but only exercise their sides and their
throat, as if they would act it on a stage. But O, says he, labor to mourn
for their sins in thine heart, before thou labor to move them. Be thou more
affected thy self, then thou undertakest to affect them. S. Paul did so move
the affections of Dionysius and Damaris, and others at Athens, that the Text
says, they clave to S, Paul. Certain men clave to him, and believed, Act. 17.
34. He preached so movingly, that their affections did even cleave to him as he
preached. How came it about that he stirred up affections in them? look into
the 16. verse, and there you shall see he was greatly affected himself. His
spirit was stirred in him, says S. Luke, when he saw the city wholly given to
idolatry. He could not have stirred up affections in them, if he had not been
filled with affections himself. O beloved, our hearts are grievously
straightned, and our souls are woefully stopped, that we are not more affected our
selves at your miseries then we be: would it not fetch tears from our eyes, and
groans from our bowels, to see how desperately ye are hardened, but that we are
too little affected our selves? you know the damned abuses in your Parish, the
cursed sins that reign in your houses, and the stupid security ye are in, yet
nothing can move you. Your consciences cannot be ignorant ye are carnal, and
are not yet Saints, nor born again many of you; your consciences can tell you
ye are Saints, or else ye are hell hounds, and if ye die as ye are, ye have no
evidence for heaven, but ye may be damned ere long for all that ye know. Ye can
hear this every time ye to Church, and yet no reformation, no show of
humiliation, no show of grace nor repentance nor any thing, Simonides apud
Arist. Epiced
(...); what weeping Simonides can weep sufficiently for these things? Paul
knowing some abuses among the Corinthians, that many of them were like to be
damned for ever, out of much affliction and anguish of heart, says he, I wrote
unto you with many tears, 2 Cor. 3. 4. pene quot syllabas, Haymo.
tot lacrymas, as Haymo speaks, that is, he shed as many tears as he wrote
syllables, he could hardly write for wetting the paper with tears which he
wrote on. O that we who are Gods Ministers could be so affected! the Lord lay
it not to our charge that we are not: Jer. 9. 1.
but O that our heads were water, and our eyes were a fonntain of tears, that
we might weep day and night for these things. Ye think your souls are safe,
alas! we know they are desperate. We know that your drunkenness will damn you,
and your swearing and lying and company-keeping will undo you. We know your
pride and your hardness of heart are symptoms and infallible marks of such as
are yet no better then reprobates. Ye hope your crying God mercies will help
you, we know they cannot. Ye hope that Gods mercies will relieve, we know they
will not, unless ye be new creatures. Ye trust God will not be so strict as we
say, we know he will. Ye imagine ye are not led by the devil, though ye sin
thus and thus, we know ye be, and the devil the God of this world rules in your
minds and your consciences. Neither are ye able, unless ye be Atheists and
devils incarnate, to deny God to be God, and his Scripture to be Scripture, ye
are not able to deny it. O that we would sigh, and sob, and groan in our
pulpits. O that we could even wet our cushions with tears, and yearn over your
souls as we preach; I beseech you consider, will you never believe nor be
affected till ye feel it? Lord, when thy hand is lifted up they will not see,
but they shall see and be ashamed, and the fire shall devour them, Isa. 26. 11,
I protest unto you, I could find in my heart to fall down on my knees to every
one of you all, were it profitable to beseech, you to consider this, now Gods
hand is lifted up, and he calls to you and ye will not hear, he shows you your
sins, and ye will not see, you shall see, says he, and be ashamed, and the
fire of hell shall devour you. Take heed ye see not too late. O that ye had
known at least in this thy day, before they be hid from thine eyes. God will
hide his grace from thine eyes, and his spirit from thy heart, if nothing can
move thee. I pray God affect our hearts with these things, that we who are your
Ministers may be more touched our selves. This is the second means whereby we
might move you, if we were affected our selves.

Thirdly, 3. A Minister may stir up the affections of others by being godly
himself. L. 1. Rhet. cap. 2. Quis tulerit Gra^chos, etc. Iuvenal.
By being godly our selves. As we must be affected our selves, so if ever we
mean to stir up affections in the heart, we must be godly our selves. Aristotle
requires this in an Orator, that he be a good man, (...), the good manners and
the life of the speaker have the greatest power to persuade the affections.
Hence is that usual saying of the vulgar. He that preaches well, and lives ill,
pulls that down with one hand which he built with the other: Nay commonly a man
loathes a good saying out of a foul mouth. Let a drunken Minister exhort to
sobriety, for the most part the people do loath it. Let an adulterous or
covetous Minister exhort to be godly and religious, for the most part they
abhor it. Let a loose Minister preach of strictness of life and
conversation, and zeal and purity, Solomon says it is like a lame man's legs,
when one is shorter then the other, Prove. 26. 7. that is an ill sight: A wicked
Minister can never stir up the affections of the people aright. Gregory
Nazianzen would have a Minister (...) Either not preach at all, L. 1. Sent.
Spiritual. Tetrast. 4.
or preach by a good and godly life. Otherwise the people will have little
affection to hear him: nay, which is lamentable, it is usual in the world, not
only to set their affections against a wicked Ministers preaching, but also to
loath the very ordinance it self: when Eli his sons were wicked, and sons of
Belial, the Text says, the people loathed Gods offerings. The sin of the
young men was very great before the Lord, for men abhorred the offering of the
Lord, 1 Samuel 2. 17. At the best, the people, though never so greedy otherwise
for to hear, yet if the Minister do not as he says, they have small affection
to hear him: Christ knew this by his Disciples, who were willing to hear him
whenever he preached, but he knew they had little affection to hear a Sermon
of the Pharisees, who said and did not, And therefore he was fain to command
them not to be offended at that, but to hear them. It was not then in vain,
that the Apostle exhorts Titus to look to his own life. Tit. 2. 7.
In all things show thy self a pattern, says he, a pattern of good works. For
if the Minister that preaches be not a good pattern to his people, his Sermons
will not be so able to stir up affections in their hearts. Pasce verbo, pasce
exemplo, Gregory.
says Gregory: we must feed them by doctrine, and feed by our example: this is
the way to stir up affections in our hearers. It is true, the people ought to
be stirred up by the Word, in whose mouth soever it be, and it is their fault
that they be not, but yet it will never be so: the Ministers contrary life in
any particular, as it is cursed of God, so likewise it is a scandalous thing
unto others, and an infinite occasion of offense, and takes off the edge of the
Word. Yea, commonly it does more hurt then all the preaching can do good. For
thus men will argue, If it be necessary to live as he says, then why does not
he live so himself? He has more learning then I, and the like: nay, they call
the Word into question, and hoodwink their souls with presumptuous pretenses.
Thus millions of souls are gone to hell with their Minister for company: Malus
Minister est nisus Diaboli, It is a true saying of a Father, An evil Minister
is the devils Gos-Hawk or Sparrow-Hawk. He goes a birding for hell. But why
speak I of these things among you whom it concerns not? Yea, it concerns you
much every way. For as it is a curse to a Parish that a Minister is wicked, so
is the Parish tied as ever they love their own souls, to pray unto God that he
would sanctify their Minister more and more, that the Word may run and be
glorified, for the life of the Minister has a great hand in moving the
affections. The holiest Ministers move most.

Fourthly, 4. A Minister may stir up affections by his voice.
By the due carriage of their voices, when the Minister is affected himself: I
do not say it is always so, for some have not the same command of themselves
through accidental reasons: but commonly when the Minister is affected himself,
the inward affections of his own breast dispose the voice into some gracious
manner of expressing the same. As Paul that was full of grief and sorrow for
the peoples sins, he for the most part preached with a weeping voice, Many
walk, says he, of whom I have told you often, and now again tell I you even
weeping, they are enemies of the Cross of Christ, whose end is destruction,
etc. Phil. 3. 18, 19. and truly if we consider the iniquities of the times, and
the sins of most men, how lamentable their conditions be, no other affection
better suits then this. Loquere flebiliter, says Bucolcerus to a preather,
speak mournfully, and sorrowfully, the very voice it self will somewhat
mollify the affections of the people. Certainly it is an ordinance of God, and
very moving, to speak according to the point in hand. To speak compassionately
in points of pity, to speak rejoycingly in points of comfort, to speak most
terribly in points of terror. As Cato advised that soldiers should terrify
their enemies with terrible voices. Neither is it amiss, that when the Minister
threatens the judgments of God against rebellious sinners, he should compose
his voice accordingly. I know not what hidden occult influence the voice has
into the affections, says S. Augustine, but a great influence it has. When a
Minister goes dreamingly on, the people sit carelessly and regard it not, and
let him say never so good matter, they heed it not; let him threaten, or
comfort, or command, or reprove, they respect all alike, for they see no
difference in the Minister, I know the people should not do thus, but such is
the corruption of men, thus they will do; now God has given many of his
messengers more wakening voices, as petty instruments to provoke men's
affections somewhat the more. And truly we are bound to make conscience
thereof, that our very voice may be a comment upon our matter; 'twas a pretty
story of Demosthenes, Plutarch. in Demost.
when one told him that he was beaten and misused exceedingly by such a
companion. It seems he told it so by rote as we say, showing no affection at
all in his telling: Why? says Demosthenes: has he beaten thee? I do not
believe he has beaten he. No? says the man: he was much troubled to hear him
deny it, and so he spoke eagerly and in a chafe, I am sure he beat me, thus he
did, and thus he did, and do you not call this beating? now I believe, says
Demosthenes, I believe now he has beaten thee indeed, now I hear the voice of
a man that was beaten. So if we should dreamingly utter our voice, and reprove
our hearers, they scarce believe they are reproved, because they do not hear
the voice of a reprover. Let us deliver uses of terror to them, they hardly
believe any terror in it, because they do not hear the voice of terror. But
when the Minister is affected aright, and his affections direct the carriage of
the voice along, the voice it self does more significantly express the matter;
and this no question is very moving.

But then let me tell you, if this be it ye look for, and if ye can be carping
at a Minister for the want of this, what the Lord accounts of you. He sets it
as a brand upon the wicked Jews that they were affected with the Prophet
Ezekiels pleasant voice, when they were affected with little else, Ez. 33 32.
even a rare and a worthy Moses may be defective in this case, and woe is the
people that finds fault. But however, be the voice of a godly Minister never
so mean, yet there will be ever some hidden grace in it, whereby more or less,
it appears unto the consciences of them that have ears to hear. This is the
fourth thing whereby a Minister may stir up affections, by the due carriage of
his voice.

Fifthly, 5. By a decent action.
I might add by a decent action. For my part, I have little reason to name it,
but verily, it is a blessing of Christ to them that have it, for they have a
great advantage over the affections of their hearers. Cicero says, some were
esteemed viri diserti, eloquent and moving men, but for want of action they
could not put their gifts in practice, habiti sunt infantes, they were esteemed
infants in this profession, says he. Action we see is much employed in the
preaching of the Prophets and the holy men of God. Ezechiel was commanded to
stamp with the feet, Isaiah commanded to go naked, Jeremy commanded to put a
yoke on his neck. John Baptist was tota vox, he was all-voice; the voice of a
crier in the wilderness, Mat. 3. 3. his eyes spoke, and his face spoke, his
hands spoke, and his body spoke, yea, his life, and diet, and all spoke, he was
all-voice. The Prophets streched forth their hands to the people in fullness of
affection. I have spread forth my hands all the day unto a rebellious people,
Isa. 65. 2. S. Paul set his eyes upon Elymas the sorcerer, Act. 13. 9. O full
of subtlety, and all mischief, thou child of the devil, thou enemy of all
righteousness, will thou not cease to pervert the right ways of the Lord? the
Lords hand is upon thee, and thou shall be blind, etc. It is counted a grand
sin in old Eli, that he did not frown on his sons, 1 Samuel 3. 13. why does the
Text express Elies not severely threatening his sons, by this action of
frowning? but only because they that do severely threaten, do use to frown,
Thus ye see how that Gods Ministers have used action to move affections.

The VIII. Sermon.
Colos. 3. 2. Set your affections on things that are above, etc.
MUst our affections be set upon God? It is a great sin to set our affections
on the earth. Four Arguments to convince this truth.
then this reproves them, who set their affections on the earth. The matter is
reduceable to four heads.

The first is the multiplicity of the affections, they are very many in number.

The second is, the (...), or the Checker-wise order of the affections. As they
are many, so they are complicated and platted one within another, that look
what they are set on, they knit the heart to it.

The third is, the degree the affections are in, in regard of other acts of the
soul.

The fourth is, the extremity of the affections, which is zeal. From all these
four heads I will show you the woeful aggravation of this sin, not to set our
affections on God.

First, 1. If a man sets his affections on the earth, he sets all his
affections on it.
From the multitude and multiplicity of the affections: a man cannot set his
affections upon earth, but he must set them all upon earth: the affections they
all go together, and are many. Not only four, as Boethius does count them: nor
only five, as Galen does reckon them: nor only eleven, as Aristotle does number
them: nor only twenty, as Cardan does sum them; but they are like a swarm of
Bees, as Laelius Peregrinus does compare them for multitude. Plato says they
are innumerable, without question they are many. Now, what a woeful aggravation
is this of this sin, to set thine affections on the earth! Thou set all
thine affections thereon, if thou set one thou set all; for they all go
together. Like the Angels that sinned, they all fell together, So when the
affections fell off from God, they all fell together. Like the two eyes of the
body, they both look one way; like the two ears, one does not hear one sound,
and another another. If thou love those things that are carnal, it is certain
thy desires are all carnal, thy joys, and delights, and thy hopes are all
carnal, thy fears, and thy griefs, and thy sorrows are all carnal; if one of
them be set on the things here on earth, all are: were there but one affection
that way, it were the less; but if thine affections be set upon these things,
not one, nor two, nor ten, but numberless multitudes, whole swarms of
affections are all earthly. Thou art altogether brutish and foolish, Ier. 10.
8. That is, thine affections are altogether brutish and beastly, altogether
filthy or stinking, for so the word signifies, Psalm. 14. 3. That is thine
affections are altogether stinking and noisome affections. I proved before,
that when the affections are carnal, Gal. 3. 1.
they all like so many devils do bewitch thee. O foolish Galatians, who has
bewitched you? It is grievous enough to be plagued with one devil, He must
needs run whom the devil drives: one devil will drive thee fast enough to hell.
One affection if it were single, will hurry thee fast enough to hell, what then
are the whole legions of affections? they are like the legion of devils that
entered into the Swine, the herd ran violently down a steep place into the sea,
Luk 8. ^3. They ran with all violence to be drowned, when a legion of devils
did drive them. So thou must needs run with all violence down into the lake,
when a legion of affections, like a legion of devils does hurry thee, S^
acuique Deus fit d^ra cupido, says the Poet. The very heathen man saw this,
that every man's evil affection was his devil, and therefore the whole legion of
affections are a legion of devils. Do ye not see how ye are tossed up and down
all the day long, tanquam pila diaboli, as the devils tennis-bals, as Odo
speaks: from worldly delights unto wordly desires, from desires unto fears,
from fears unto melancholies, from melancholies to angers and vexations, from
them again unto carnal comforts? these are all like a legion of devils that
hurry thee up and down till thou art hurried to hell, etc. If thine affections
be carnal, they are a legion of devils to drive thee. It is a merry devil that
makes thee so greedy of pleasure and of mirth; a surly devil, that makes thee
so choleric and touchy; a giddy devil, that makes thee so fearful and
timorous; an unclean devil, that makes thee so desirous of drinking and
company-keeping. Anger and wrath is a devil; Let not the soul go down upon thy
wrath, neither give place to the devil, Ephesians. 4. 26, 27. That is, do not give
way to thy wrath, when thou give way to thy earthly desires, thou give way
to the devil. When thou give way to thine earthly delights, and thy sorrow,
and thy melancholy, thou give way to the devil. Look how many earthly
affections thou have that thou give the way to, so many devils are in thee.
Do thou think thou art a child of God, when thy conscience tells thee, that
such and such earthly affections have way in thy heart? alas! thou have a
devil. Be sober, for your adversary the devil, 1 Pet. 5. 8. mark, every giddy
affection is a devil, our adversary the devil comes with it. Yea, so many
earthly affections, so many devils, and will thou set thine affections upon
things that are earthly? if thou do, thou have a legion of devils within,
This is the first head, the multitude and the multiplicity of the affections,
the affections are many.

The second head is taken from the (...), 2. Affections h^mper and entangle the
soul.
or the checkerwise order of the affections. As the affections are many, so
look where they are set, there they are platted, and woven, and hampered
together. God that first created man upright and good, he gave him affections
so to twist and hamper his heart upon good, that it might be the harder to
loosen it. He gave him the affection of love to embrace good. If the good were
wanting, he gave him the affection of desire, to hunger after it. If the good
were possible to get, he gave him the affection of hope to expect it: if the
good were once gotten, he gave him the affection of joy to delight in it. If
there were any danger to lose it, he gave him the affection of fear to be
afraid of it. If the good were once lost indeed, he gave him the affection of
grief and of sorrow to lament it. If he should meet with any thing that would
hinder him in the prosecution of good, he gave him the affection of hatred to
oppose it, etc. Thus God embroydered the affections, and wove them together,
that still man's heart might be knit by the affections to good and to God. And
will thou now set thine affections on the things of this life? thou little
think how thou twistest and hamperest thy soul about these things, thine
affections will make thee live and die a carnal wretch. He was in love with his
Noverca. L. de ludo parvae sphaerae
Had not Erasistratus cured Antiochus of his carnal affection, it had cost him
his life, for he was sick of it unto death. Galen says, he met with many sick
patients, if he had not cured their affections, he had never recovered them.
The affections hamper the soul unto death. So if thou set thine affections on
the things here on earth, they will so hamper thy heart, that unless thine
affections be cured, thy soul is desperately incurable; they entangle thy soul,
thou can not get free. And therefore S. Peter calls falling into earthly
affections, he calls it, entangling. If after they have escaped the pollutions
of the flesh they are again entangled, 2 Pet. 2. 20. That is, if after they
have once gotten out, they fall in again; because they cannot fall in again,
but their lusts and affections will not entangle them again. Be not entangled
again with the yoke of bondage, Gal. 5. 1. Paul knew if the Galatians were
addicted to the Ceremonies of the Law, they would affect them more then the
Commandments of Christ. And therefore he gives them advice no further to use
them, because their hearts would be entangled if they did; No man that warreth,
intangleth himself with the affairs of this life, 2 Timothy 2. 4. A soldier had
not need to have a new married wife, or a newborn child, or a new-purchased
ground, a new-planted vineyard, a new suit at Law in the Chancery: Alas! then
his affections would be a gadding, when he should be fighting* O my wife at
home, and O my child at home, and I would I might taste of my vineyard at
home, and O that I could follow my cause in the Court, this were to entangle
him in war, he could not fight valiantly. Thus the affections do entangle a
man. So if thine affections be earthy, they will entangle thee, thou can not
be free for the seeking of heaven, or of Christ; thine affections are so
complicated and hampered, thou can be in no place, in no estate nor
condition, but some affections or other will entangle thee. Thou love thy
land and thy living, and thy things in the world; O how are thine affections
entangled, what case soever thou art in? thine affections lie checker-wise and
will have thee. If thou be rich, the affections of pleasure or delight, or
security, there they will have thee. If thou be poor, the affections of
desire and discontent; this thou desire, and that thou would fain have,
there thy wishings, and wouldings and carkings will have thee. If thou be
crossed, or troubled, or afflicted, the affections of grief and of sorrow, and
of melancholy, these there will have thee. If thou be injured, abused, or
provoked, which falls out very often, the affections of anger and revenge, these
then will have thee. If thou be in danger of sickness or distress, or
loss of this or that, the affections of fear and the like, they lie in ambush
to catch thee. If thou come to the Word, and there thou art told thou art a
damned man as long as thou live as thou do, the affections of vain hopings
and trustings, they lie in scout for to take thee: thus thou art entangled when
thine affections are earthy, in what case soever thou art in, they entangle
thee. Sometimes thou art merry and jocond for a pang, anon thou art melancholy
and sad for a fit. Sometimes thou art angry with a servant, or a child, or a
wife, or a neighbor, anon thou art pleased. Sometime a danger comes, and fears
thee, anon it is gone, and thou art secure. Sometimes one affection, sometimes
another, Sometimes a hating, and sometimes a loving, sometimes desiring, and
sometimes hoping. Thus thou live, and thus thou die, and perishest for ever
through the intanglements.

The third head is taken from the degrees the affections are in, 3. The
affections are in a high degree in regard (...) the acts of the soul.
in regard of other acts of the soul. And here is a subdivision of heads.

1. The affections provoke thoughts, and therefore if the affections be earthy,
the thoughts are all earthy.

2. The affections increase lusts, and therefore if the affections be carnal,
the lusts are all carnal.

3. The affections infer purposes and resolutions, and therefore if the
affections be to the things of this life, the purposes and resolutions of the
heart are so too.

4. The affections infer devisings and contrivings, and therefore if the
affections be vain, so are the devices. From all which thou may see the
infinite misery thou art in, if the affections be set here below. First,
Because if thine affections be set here below, so are thy thoughts. When Saul
had a treacherous affection unto David, he made as though he did affect him so
well, as to make him his son in law; it was a treacherous affection: but the
Text says, so were his thoughts. Saul thought to make David fall by the hand
of the Philistims, 1 Samuel 18. 25. As his affections were treacherous, so his
thoughts were in like manner treacherous. The affections are the feet of the
soul, as I told you; now when these feet run to evil, so do the thoughts. Their
feet run to evil, their thoughts are thoughts of iniquity, Isa. 59. 7. So that
look what thine affections are to, to that are thy thoughts. You may remember
what was proved to you of the thoughts: if thou do habitually set thy
thoughts upon the things in this world, to be thinking of thy sports and thy
pleasures, thine apparel, and thy fashions, thy meat, and thy drink, thy
means, and thy living; if thy thoughts be set hereupon, thou art a man that
never have repented since thou were born; thou have yet no part nor interest in
Christ, thou art yet no better then a damned wretch, heir apparent of hell and
everlasting destruction. Thus it is with thee, if thy thoughts be habitually
thus set; but if thine affections be set here below, so without question are
thy thoughts.

1. Because if thine affections be earthy, 1. As the affections are, so are the
thoughts.
so are thy thoughts: the affections provoke thee to be thinking of such things
as thou have most mind to. Haman did mightily affect honor, and therefore his
thoughts ran upon his honor and promotion. The King had no sooner said, what
shall be done to the man whom the King delights to honor? but presently his
thoughts were agog. Haman thought in his heart, whom would the King honor but
me? Esth. 66. When Haman was affected with wrath against Mordecai, instantly
such were his thoughts. He thought scorn, says the Text, Est. 3. 6. David
speaking of his enemies that were ill-affected against him, he says that their
thoughts were against him, (...) Mac^r. hom. 6.
all their thoughts are against me for evil, Psalm. 56. 5. So that if thine
affections be carnal, thy thoughts are carnal, and thou can not think
seriously of the good of thy soul. Come and let me think seriously, how do I
think to be saved? may not a reprobate pray as well as I pray? hear the Word as
well as I hear it? believe as well as I believe? Did not wicked Esau that
sought a place for repentance, carefully with tears repent as well as I? Had
not cursed Balaam as good meanings as I? he would not for a houseful of silver
and gold go beyond the commandment of God. Alas! alas! your carnal affections
will not suffer you to think seriously of your souls. Have thou ever thought
seriously whether thou be a new creature or no? whether Christ be in thee
yea or no? what if I should die now? have I evidences for Heaven yea or no? The
Scripture says thus and thus, so and so they must live that look to be saved,
do I live so? God says, such and such shall be damned, namely, all that live
in any known sin; God cannot lie; Is there never a sin I know I live in? poor
woeful soul, thy carnal affections have not suffered thee to think seriously of
these things since thou were born. May be now and then thou have some loose
thoughts of some such matters, straggling thoughts, glancing, running thoughts
of thy soul, and of heaven, and of death, but thou never do seriously think
of them. No, thine earthly affections do provoke thy thoughts otherwise,
(...). Macar. hom 16. Thinking is (...). Pla. Sophist.
thy affections have such influence into thy thoughts, that Macarius calls them
affections. Is not this then a pitiful condition to set our affections here
below? to be drawn away from thinking seriously of our souls; they drive thee
to hell, and will not permit thee to think seriously whither thou go till
thou art there. O grievous condition! will a prisoner that is condemned to be
hanged to morrow, be thinking how he may get him new clothes, and a new suit?
will he be thinking how he may purchase? how he may have a good supper? If he
be thinking on such things when he shall be hanged to morrow for all that he
knows; he is sure he is condemned, and the gallows is built, and the halter is
provided, and if he get not a pardon, it is certain he shall be executed, and
he knows not yet whether ever he shall get it; may be he may if he seek hard,
if he now be thinking of pleasures and profits, and the like, when his life
lies at the stake, you will say, he is woefully affected with these things: and
will thou be so affected with the things of this life, when thou may be in
hell to morrow? thou art sure the sentence of damnation is upon thee yet, and
thou shall surely be damned being as thou art; will thou I say be thinking of
eating, and drinking, and playing, and buying, and selling, and trading, and
the like? alas! thou art yet but a damned man? Take no thought (says Christ)
what ye shall eat, and what ye shall drink, but seek ye first the kingdom of
God, Matthew. 6. 33. Let not the condemned prisoner take thought for a supper,
but take thought how he may save his neck from the rope. This is the first: if
thine affections be carnal, so are thy thoughts.

Secondly, 2. If thy affections be carnal, so are thy lusts. They are like
stirpi^ fibrae, as Chrysostom compares them, like the strings at the roots of
the Tree. Apud Damascen. ^ par c. 7.
Because if thine affections be carnal, so are thy lusts. It Is true, a godly
man has carnal lustings, for he is partly flesh; but then he has good
lustings too, for he is partly spirit; the flesh lusts against the spirit, and
the spirit against the flesh, and these two are contrary the one to the other,
so that he cannot do so well as he would, Gal. 5. 17. he has sinful lustings,
but he has spiritual lustings to crucify them; but if thine affections be
earthy, thy lusts be all earthy, nay, thy lusts they are ripened and
strengthened. The carnal lusts properly and especially are the first offer of
the heart unto carnal affections. So that when they are come to be carnal
affections, they are ripened. And therefore the Apostle does usually call the
carnal affections by the name of lusts. The Gentiles walked in lusts, excess
of wine, revellings, etc. 1 Pet. 4. 3. that is, they walked in their carnal
affections; because the lusts are then strengthened when they come to be
affections. Now beloved consider what a hideous condition it is, to set our
affections on the earth, it strengthens our lusts. We give a knife to a
cutthroat to stab us, cherish a company of vipers in our bosom to poison us.
We encourage fierce enemies to battle against our souls. So S. Peter can tell
us. Dearly beloved, I beseech you as strangers and pilgrims, abstain from
filthy lusts which war against the soul, 1 Pet. 2. 11. they war against the
soul, they are the devils Infantry, yea, Chivalry too, they are his Soldiers
to murder the soul with spiritual death and eternal damnation. If ever thou
lovedst thine own soul, thou would kill sin in the cradle, supplant it and
take it by the heel, as Jacob did Esau in the womb, thou will never overcome it
else. Deny it the first entrance, as the Angel shut the door upon the
Sodomites, cast out the bondwoman with her brat too, as Sarah did Hagar and
her little one, Gregory.
as Gregory speaks. Thou will never be able to subdue it otherwise. Thou
would crucify thy lusts, and mark the first risings thereof, thus thou
would do, if thou had a care of thy soul. But will thou let thy lusts grow,
and get armor to kill thee? will thou let them gather strength and ripeness
to damn thee? there is not a lust of them, but it comes like an armed man to
fight against thy soul; now if thou set thine affections too on the things of
this life, thou do strengthen it and weapon it yet more. What a wretched
misery is this! thy lusts war against thy soul to undo it, and yet thou do
strengthen them; yea, thou do increase them, helpest their forces. O fools,
when will ye understand? do we not see how we are overpowred by our lusts? do
they not every day conquer us in the open field? There is not a prayer we make,
but deadness of heart gets the day like a Conqueror. Not a duty we perform,
but lukewarmnesse proves victor. Nay, our lusts do not only overcome us, but
they lead us in triumph. Some of our lusts carry us up and down from gaming to
fretting, from fretting to revenging, from revenging to swearing, from swearing
to lying, from one sin to another, as they list. And our lusts are so strong
that war against our souls, that we are not ashamed to lay down our bucklers
and say, we cannot resist. I was angry, alas! it is my nature, and I cannot
master it. I rap out an oath now and then, alas! I was provoked, and I cannot
help it: I must say and do as such an one would have me, he is my friend, I
cannot deny him. Thus our lusts have given us mortal wounds, and have murdered
our souls, and all this is, 3. If thine affections be carnal, so are thy
purposes.
because our affections are earthly, for they increase all our lusts, and make
them more able to vanquish us.

Thirdly, If thine affections be carnal, so be thy purposes: Men purpose
according as they affect. He that affects such a good bargain, will purpose to
make it: He that affects pleasure, will purpose to take it: He that affects any
thing, will purpose to have it. First, men conceive a thing to be good, then
they affect it, and then they spend thoughts of it, and then they purpose to
have it if they can. Barnabas exhorted them all, that with purpose of heart
they would cleave unto the Lord, Act. 11. 23. He joins these two together,
their purpose and their affection to God: because they could never cleave unto
the Lord, but it must needs be with the purposes of the heart. Well now,
consider what enemies we are unto God, what enemies too to our own souls, that
set our affections here below, we can never have real purposes to amend or
turn unto God. We may purpose and purpose a thousand times over, but still we
are broken off from our purposes, they all come to nothing, as long as we
affect the things of this life. Can the fire have a purpose to freeze? can the
stinking dunghill have a purpose to smell well? can a Swine have a purpose not
to wallow in the mire? No, how can this be, when they are affected with
contrary qualities? there is no counsel in such purposes as these. Without
counsel purposes are disappointed, Pro. 15. 22. If thou do purpose to do this
or that, and not consult whether thou be able to do it yea or no, no wonder
though thou be disappointed of thy purpose. Thou art carnal, and have a
purpose to be spiritual: thou art full of earthly desires, and have a purpose
to hunger after Christ. Thou art a company-keeper, a worldly and a proud fool,
thou have a purpose to be otherwise: Alas! such purposes as these will surely
be disappointed, because they are purposes without counsel: thou should first
take counsel how to crucify thy affections; if thus thou would do, thy
purposes would stand. What an egregious sin is this then, to set thine
affections on things that are carnal! thou art vain, and have no purpose to be
otherwise; thou secure, and have no purpose to shake off securiry; no purpose
to give over thy carnal appetites, and thy customs, and the lusts that thy
conscience does know of: thy own conscience can point thee out many lusts that
thou live in, and thou have no purpose to leave them, O how does this provoke
the Lord Jesus to wrath! Which of us does thus purpose in his heart? I
absosutely purpose henceforth to use all the means under Heaven for the saving
my soul, I have gulled it to this day, now I purpose to do so no more; now I
will every day examine my conscience, every day keep company with the godly; I
will never sort with my old company more, I have used my body like an Idol, now
I purpose to mortify it, etc. Alas! our affections will not let us. It is
certain, thou never have a good purpose to God for thy soul, as long as thine
affections are earthly. All thy purposes are instar paleae, Car. in Pro. 15. 22.
says a Divine, they last for an hour, or a day, or a health, like the chafe
which the wind drives away.

Fourthly, 4. If thy affections be carnal, so are thy devices.
Because if thine affections be carnal, so are thy devices and contrivings.
When a man sets his affections on any thing, as he spends many thoughts
thereupon, and purposes to have it if he can, so he devises with himself
whereby to attain it. David's enemies whose affections were set against him,
they devised how they might cross him. All that hate me, against me do they
devise my hurt, Ps. 41. 7. What a company of devices has the glutton to
satisfy his palate? the revengeful person to satisfy his wrath? the covetous
person to scrape himself maintenance? it is endless to recount what innumerable
devices men have to compass what their heart does affect. Phalaris devises
new torments: Nero devises new cruelties; Sardanapalus propounds a reward by a
crier to him that could devise out new pleasure, the wicked Lawyer and
troublesome Parishioner devises new quillets and put-cases to fetch over his
poor neighbor: the proud minion devises new paintings of the face, new
washings of the body, new curlings of the hair, new deckings of their neck,
newfangled attires, and the like; the covetous deceiver devises new
cousenages, new conny-catchings, pollings, rackings, gullings, etc. The Usurer
new usuries, new covenants and reaches. It were long to rehearse what devices
are in men to fulfill their unruly affections. These wretches are abhorred of
the Lord. Solomon says there be six, yea seven things, which the Lord hates
and abhors, Pro. 6. 16. And in the next verse save one, he says, that a heart
that devises wicked imaginations is one of them. Qui praeter us^^ata mala alia
excogitant, ^asil Theodoret. and alij in loc.
The Lord numbers these men among the damned crew of the Heathen, inventers of
evil things, Romans 1. 30. Woe unto them that devise iniquity, says the Prophet,
Mic. 2. 1. Now see thy woeful condition whoever thou art, whose affections are
carnal, thy devices are all carnal, thou do not devise how thou may best
serve Almighty God, how thou may best overcome sin, how thou may best
glorify Christ. Which of us does set his head a work every day, how he may
best pray, and best repent, and best hear, and best do every good duty? alas!
there is little such devising among us, because our affections stand not this
way. If our affections were set upon God, we would be studying and contriving
how to purge all our families, how to propagate the glory of God in the Parish,
how to exhort, and reprove, and provoke one another to godliness. A liberal
man devises liberal things, Isa. 32. 8. he devises how he may releeve Gods
poor Saints, how he may set the poor on work, how he may help forward the
Gospel with his purse, if he can find how: An humble man devises humble
things, a peaceable man devises peaceable things, a holy man devises holy
things: if our affections were set right, we would all lay our heads together
how the Parish may best be reformed, how our scandalous houses may best be
removed, how the Word that we hear from Sabbath to Sabbath, may best be put in
practice among us; thus it would be, if our affections were set upon God; but
because our affections are not set so, hence it comes to pass our devices are
carnal.

The IX. Sermon.
^ol. 3. 2. Set your affections on things that are above, etc.
THere remains the fourth head, The extremity of the affections is zeal and it
is due only to God.
which is the extremity of the affections, and that is zeal. Zeal is due only
to God, and the things of his worship: and therefore hence we may see, how
infinitely they sin, that set their affections on things here on earth, because
they rob God of his due; zeal, which is the extremity of the affections, is due
only to God and the things of his worship. Phinehas was zealous for his God,
Number. 25. 13. he gave the zeal of his affections to no other but God. Now, what
is zeal?

Zeal is a high strain of all the affections, Zelus quid 5. Things in zeal.
whereby the heart puts forth all its affections with might upon that which it
absolutely affects; five things therefore there are, which concur to the
making up of zeal.

First, 1. A high measure of affections.
A high measure of the affections. Every measure of the affections is not zeal,
a man may affect a thing coldly and lukewarmly, that is not zeal. As a covetous
man may have lukewarm good affections to the word. But this is not zeal, I say,
zeal is a high measure of the affections. Zeal is a metaphorical word in the
Original, it is taken from the seething of water over the fire. (...).
Every measure of heat in the water is not seething. No, seething hot is a high
measure of heating. The Apostle confesses how the false Apostles affected the
Galatians. They zealously affect you, says he, Gal. 4. 17. he confesses they
did affect the Galatians, and he confesses they did highly affect them, in a
very high measure, if it had been as well, as it was high: they zealously
affect you, Clavasius says, it is fervor Divinae charitatis.
that is, they highly affect you. Clavasius a Casuist for the Pope, having run
through all the Alphabet of questions, in the end of his Book concludes with
zeal. Zeal, says he, is a high measure of heat of affection, such an one,
says he, as I have shown unto Christ in writing this Book. It Is a most
devilish saying, for his Book is little else then a hellish rhapsody of
blasphemies to Christ, and magnifyings of his holy father the Pope. But therein
he says right, that zeal is a high measure of the affection.

Secondly, 2. Zeal a high measure of all the affections. In prol. s^n. dub. 3.
As zeal is a high measure of the affections, so it is of all the affections. I
do not say any one of the affections alone, or of sundry together. But it is a
high measure of all the affections. Bonaventura and other of the School make it
only of love; Ludovicus Vives makes it to be compounded of two affections,
indignation and pity. Others to be mixed of anger and love: this is not so: for
zeal is a high strain of all the affections. And therefore the Apostle sets it
as a general height of the affections in general. It Is good, says he, to be
zealously affected in a good thing, Gal. 4. 18. he does not only say, it is good
to be zealous in love, or zealously angry, but generally it is good to be
zealously affected in a good thing. Sorrow for sin is good, and therefore it is
good to be zealously affected with it: Desire of grace is good, and therefore
it is good to be zealously affected with it. So that then we may be said to be
zealous for God; when our love to him is earnest, our desire of him is earnest,
our joy in him is earnest, our indignation against whatever may dishonor him
or dislike him, is earnest: when we think nothing too good, nothing too dear,
nothing too much to bestow upon him. A man may love God in a lukewarm measure,
hate sin in a lukewarm measure, grieve for his corruptions, desire faith and
repentance, delight in good duties, pity the miseries of others, fear to
transgress Gods Commandment, a man may have all these affections thus in a
lukewarm measure: as this is displeasing to God, so it is not zeal. Zeal is a
high measure, the highest strain of all the affections.

Thirdly, 3. With all the might of the soul.
As zeal is the highest measure of all the affections, so it is with all the
might of the soul. For, when a man does zealously affect any thing, his
affection is mighty upon it. Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy
heart, and with ^ll thy soul, and with all thy might, Deuteronomy. 6. 5. that is, thou
shall love him zealously. Nimrod was a mighty hunter, Genesis 10 9. that is, he
was zealous at his hunting. Woe unto them that are mighty to drink wine, Isa.
5. 22. that is, that are greedy and zealous in the pursuit of their appetite in
that kind. David danced before the Lord with all his might, 2 Samuel 6. 14. that
is, he did it zealously. Zeal is when the heart raises up its affections with
all its might on a thing. And therefore lukewarmnesse is called negligence in
the Scripture: Cursed is he that does the work of the Lord negligently. As he
that fights negligently, shows not all his might in his fighting, so he that
goes about any duty of the Lords service negligently, his heart does not show
all his might in it. It puts not forth all the might of its affections upon it.
Lukewarmnesse then is the negligence of the affection, and cursed is the man
that does the work of the Lord negligently, says the Text. But zeal is the
might of the affection.

Fourthly, 4. The putting forth of all the affections.
As zeal is with all the might, so it is the putting forth of all the
affections. When the heart affects a thing, and puts forth all its affections
upon it, reserving no part of its affections for any thing else, this we call
zeal. Herod affected the preaching of John, but he did not affect it zealously,
he did not put forth all his affection upon it, he reserved a main part of his
affection for his pleasure. And therefore he was not zealous in hearing. Hence
it is that the Scripture calls lukewarmnesse deceit fullness, as Divines do
observe; Cursed is the deceiver, Mal. 1. 14. that is, cursed is the lukewarm
person that offers God less then he has; offers somewhat, and reserves back
somewhat, that puts not forth all his affection upon God and his Service. Zeal
is the putting forth of all the affection. As when the heart affects God, and
affects nothing in competition with him, this is to be zealously affected
toward God. When the Jews had crucified Christ, and persecuted Paul, and
forbidden him to preach, the Text says, the wrath of God was come upon them to
the utmost, 1 These. 2. 16. That is, the zeal of Gods fury, and anger and
vengeance was on them. He kept nothing back; he was not angry a little, nor
wroth a little, but he put forth the affection of his wrath to the utmost upon
them. So when the heart puts forth the utmost of its love upon God, and the
utmost of its delights upon his Word, and the utmost of its fear on his Name,
and the utmost of its affection on his Commandments, then it is zealous; But if
he keeps back ought to bestow it elsewhere, it is a deceiver and a lukewarm
heart.

Fifthly, 5. Upon a thing that the heart does absolutely affect.
As zeal is the putting forth of all the affection, so it is upon a thing which
the heart does absolutely affect. A man may affect a thing, when he does not
affect it absolutely. He affects such or such a thing, but he affects it not
absolutely. He affects it perhaps with a degree of affection, as far as
twelvepence will go, he places may be a groats worth of affection upon a quire
of paper. If he be asked five pounds of silver for a quire of paper, he does not
affect it at that rate, and therefore he does not affect it absolutely. But if
a man have a true zeal of affection to a thing, he affects that thing with
absolute affection, let it cost what it can, he affects it, let it cost him all
charges, and all pains, and all difficulties, yea, though it cost him his life,
he will have it, then he does absolutely affect it. So that then is a man
zealous for God and for grace, when his affections stand absolutely that way.
May be he will be glad so he may get it at an easy rate; but if he cannot,
alas, he must have it, he concludes upon that, though it cost him sighs,
groans, every days strivings, every days labor, praying, meditating,
repenting, parting with all his lusts, although never so dear. O his soul does
affect it on that manner, he must and he will have it, rather then life. This
man is zealously affected toward grace, and toward God, because he affects it
absolutely. Thus Job was zealous in affecting Gods Word, he esteemed it above
his necessary food, Job. 23. 12. He does not say above his daily food, for so
he might do, and not be zealously affected therewith; but he affected Gods Word
above his necessary food, above all food absolutely, without which his life
could not confist; without which a man dies: such food as this comes nearest of
all outward things to be absolutely affected. A man affects it above lands, and
above livings, above his silver and his gold, above all his pleasures and his
gamings, a man will part with them all, rather then part with his necessary
food. Yet Job affected Gods Word above it. And therefore he affected it
zealously. This is the last thing in zeal. It is upon that which does
absolutely affect.

Albeit, Zeal is due only to God.
now it may partly appear by the very definition of zeal, that it is due only
to God, a man must not be zealous about any thing, nor zealously affected with
any thing, but only with God and his worship. Nevertheless we may yet further
prove it.

First, 1. Because it is the religious part of the affections.
Because Zeal is the religious part of the affections of the soul. Now the
religious part of them are due only to God.

I profited in the Jews Religion, being zealous of the traditions of my
Fathers, says Paul, Gal. 1. 14. he makes zeal the character of his Religion.
See thou a man zealous then after profits, and most earnest to get means and
maintenance and the things of this life? that man makes gain his Religion See
thou a man zealous after any thing? that is his Religion. Zeal is the religious
part of the affections, and therefore it is due only unto God.

Secondly, 2. Because zeal is the most of every affection.
As zeal is the religious part of our affections, so also it is the most of
every affection, and therefore only due unto God. Zeal is the most of every act
that a man does. That which the mind minds most and studies most, that it
minds zealously; that which the memory remembers most, which the heart wills
most, it wills zealously. That which a man fears most, and loves most, and
desires most, that it does zealously. Now if zeal be the most of every act of
the soul, it must needs be idolatry to place it any where else but in the
service of God. Do thou meditate most, and think most of the world? thy
thoughts are idolatrous: Do thou talk most, and confer most of the things of
the world? thy words are idolatrous. Do thou cark most, and care most? do
thou love most, and rejoice most in any thing of this life? thine affections
are idolatrous. Do thou sorrow most for crosses, and losses, and disgraces,
and the like, more then thou grievest for thy sins? thy grief is idolatry.
That Is the hearts Idol which it does affect most. How often is God in Scripture
called the most High? the most High, Act. 7. 48. if he be the most high, then
the most high of every act and of every affection must be for him. The very
Heathen call God, Deus optimus maximus, God the most good, and the most great:
so likewise he is the most terrible, and the most holy, and the most just; and
therefore the most of our affections must needs be due unto him. Zeal is the
most of every one of the affections, and that only is suitable to God. The
affections must be suitable to the thing we affect; 3. Zeal is the peculiar
pitch of every affection.
but nothing of all the affections is suitable to God besides zeal: for zeal is
the most of every one of them.

Thirdly, As zeal is the most of every affection, so it is the peculiar pitch
of every affection. There cannot be two mosts. The superlative degree cannot be
two; Doctissimus properly is a term peculiar to one body: the most learned man
in the world is a peculiar word peculiar to one There may be ten learned, a
thousand learned, there may be many learned, but most learned is a peculiar
title. So zeal being the most of the affections, it must needs be peculiar to
some one thing, which cannot be any other but God. Christ gave himself for us,
that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purchase to himself a peculiar
people, zealous of good works, Tit. 2. 14. Those people that are zealous of
good works, ye see they are people peculiar to Christ. They can be no other
people but Christ's people that are zealous of good works. No people under
heaven are truly zealous of good works, but only his people. This is peculiar
to Christ to have such people: because zeal is peculiarly due unto him. Thou
can not possibly be one of Gods people, if thou be not zealous for God. A
zealous believer, and a zealous repenter, and a zealous professor, zealous in
praying, and zealous in hearing the Word. Zealous people are peculiar people to
Christ. Under love, and under joy, and under hope, and under fear, are not
peculiarly due unto God. For I may love my health too, and I may delight in the
blessings of this life, and I may fear a temporary evil. I may lend mine under
affections to some things else besides God; but my zeal being the most of my
affections, must be given to God, zeal is peculiar to him. Thou art a worldling
then, thou art none of Gods if thou be not zealous for him. Thou art of thy
father the devil, thou art none of Gods, unless thou be zealous to him. Zeal
is his peculiar.

Fourthly, 4. Zeal is the most spending part of the affections.
As zeal is the peculiar pitch of every affection, so it is the most spending
part of the affections: A man must spend himself upon nothing but God; nothing
else will quit charges. Now zeal is the spendingest strain of every affection:
It most spends the spirits, it most busieth the body: you may gather what a
spending thing zeal is, by the passage in the Psalmist. David says thus, My
zeal has consumed me, because my enemies have forgotten thy words, Psa. 119.
139. David was so zealous for God, that he did even spend himself to see how
his enemies dishonored his God. A child of God is like a faithful servant to
his Master, he is willing to spend himself in his service. So he is content to
spend himself in his employments for God. Paul when God employed him for the
souls of the Corinthians, he says thus, I will gladly spend and be spent for
you, why? what was the reason? I abundantly love you, says he, 2 Cor. 12. 15.
that is, he was zealous in his love to their souls, God had employed him for
the good of their souls, and he was so zealous in this employment, that he
could even spend himself, and be spent for them. And indeed zeal it self is a
very spending thing. Thou art the devils Martyr that spendest thy self upon the
things of this life; thou art so wedded thereto, that thou spendest thy parts
and thy wits hereabouts, thou spendest thy thoughts and thy time hereupon, thou
spendest thy self and thy spirits this way. The voluptuous man spends himself
as much at his sports, as a Minister spends himself in a Pulpit, as a godly man
spends himself in good duties. As for Gods Service, thy prayers are so cold and
so negligent, that thou spendest thy self not at all in them. Thy repentance is
so overly, it spends thee never a jot to go through it: thou art so eager after
thy pleasures, they spend thee; so earnest after the world, that spends thee,
because thou art zealous about such things. But it is otherwise with thee in
the Service of God. This is another strong reason, why zeal is due properly to
God, because a man must spend himself upon nothing so much as upon pleasing of
God, and doing his will, and seeking his glory. It is true, he may spend
himself in his calling. But the greatest part of the spending lies in this,
that he may walk with God in his calling. He spends himself in be laboring
his heart to work in obedience, to follow his businesses with faith, to go
about his earthly employments as before God, to glorify God in all his ways.
A man may ground himself upon nothing so much as upon God. Zeal to God makes
him a kind of Martyr for Christ.

Fifthly, 5. Zeal is the impatient part of the affections.
As zeal is the spending part of all the affections, so likewise zeal is the
impatient part of all the affections. It is true, we may desire a good report
among men, but our affections must not be impatient; if we cannot have it
without bating an inch of a good conscience, our desire must be patient without
it. We may grieve for a loss or a trouble, but our affection must not be
impatient: if we see Gods providence has sent it, our grief must be patient
under it. We may affect these outward blessings of God, but our affections must
be patient of a privation, but our affections must be zealous to God; because
zealous affections are impatient of the contrary. We must so hate sin against
God as to be impatient to endure it: so fear to offend him, as to be impatient
of any boldness that way; So love the glory of God as to be impatient of any
dishonor to his Name: so zealous to reprove sin in a neighbor, as not to
suffer sin in him. Thou shall rebuke thy neighbor, and not suffer sin on
him, Lev. 19. 7. that is, thou shall be zealous in rebuking. A high look and a
proud heart I will not suffer, Psa. 101. 5. that is, I will be zealous against
it. I have not suffered my mouth to sin, Job. 13. 30. that is, I have been
zealous in the ruling of my tongue. Zeal is the impatient part of all the
affections, look what thine affections do zealously affect, they will not
suffer the contrary. And therefore the zeal of thine affections must be unto
God. Indeed if thine affections be lukewarm to God, thou may wish that God
might be glorified; but if he be not, thou can endure it: Thou may pray to
God for grace to heal thee of thy deadness; but though he do not, thou can
bear it. But if thine affections were so far hereto, as to be zealous, they
would be impatient, thou could never endure it. Zeal is the impatient degree
of the affections, whereby when the soul does affect a thing, it is impatient
without it. And therefore zeal is due only to God. Thus ye discern the evidence
of this truth, that the zeal of our affection is due properly to God.

The X. Sermon.
Colos. 3. 2. Set your affections on things that are above, etc.
THE Uses of this are these.

First, Use 1. God demands the zeal of our affections.
Hence we may learn, that God demands the zeal of our affections: If the zeal
of our affections be due unto God, I beseech you take notice that God demands
his due. Give unto the Lord the glory due unto his Name: and so God demands
his due in our affections. If I be a Father, where is my honor? if a Master,
where is my fear? Mal. 1. 6. he does not only call for some honor, and some
love, and some fear, but he calls for his part, where is my part? says he.
Where is my fear? Gods part of thy fear, as I have showed, is the zeal of thy
fear, Gods part of thy love, and thy joy, and thy hope, and the rest, is the
zeal of the same. This now God demands of thy soul; Where is my fear? may be
thou love him a little, and his Commandments a little, may be thou fear
him a little, to offend him and disobey him thou fear a little; this is not
Gods part, the zeal of thine affection is Gods part, and he calls for his part,
Where is my fear?

Secondly, 2. We are bound to give God (...) affections.
Hence we may learn, that we must upon pain of Gods infinite displeasure, give
him the zeal of our affections: whenever we pray, to pray to him zealously,
bleeding for our sins, and melting under our wants, and yearning for his
graces. Whenever we praise him, to praise him thus zealously, rejoicing in
his mercies, and admiring his goodness. Whenever we enter his Courts, to
enter with zeal, reverencing his footstool, trembling at his Word; in all our
ways seeking how we may be most zealous of his glory: for if God demand the
zeal of our affections, there is no keeping back. Jer 48. 10.
Ananias was smitten dead for keeping back a little piece of money, when God
did demand it. Cursed is he that keeps back a blow, when God does call for it:
God demands our zeal, and woe is us if we keep back.

Thirdly, 3. On pain of damnation.
Hence we may gather that we are in the state of damnation, if we do not give
God the zeal of our affections: if God require it upon pain of damnation, and
we are bid to give it him upon pain of his everlasting displeasure, then
certainly we must needs be in a state of damnation if we do not give it. Now
this is proved by four Arguments.

First, 1.
That man is in the state of damnation that never repents. I need not prove
that, ye know it well enough; he is sure to perish that never repents. Though
thou have taken up all the outward duties of religion, thou never repentest
unless thou be zealous; if thou be zealous, then thou have drawn out of Christ
wine-seller, as Bernard observes on the Canticles, In Cant. Sermon. 49.
Introduxit me rex in cellam vinariam, the King has brought me into his
wine-seller, he expounds it of the souls drawing of zeal from Christ; but if
thou be not zealous in repentance, thou never repentest. Be zealous and
repent, Rev. 3. 19. First, he says, be zealous, and then he says repent.
First, thou must resolve to be zealous, or else thou do not repent: If a man
have wronged a neighbor though never so mean, he must be sorry for it, or else
he does not repent of it: if a man have wronged a Nobleman, he must be more
sorry: for as the wrong is the greater, the greater the party wronged is, so
the greater is the sorrow that is required to repentance. If a man have wronged
the King, it must be greater sorrow yet, till the sorrow be somewhat answerable
to the greatness of the King who is wronged. But if a man have wronged a God,
this must be the greatest sorrow of all sorrows, otherwise thou do not
repent. Repentance is the rending or breaking of the heart, so says the
Prophet Joel, it is not a lukewarm, or a little grief that will break the
heart. Repentance is the humbling of the soul, says David, it is not a little
bowing and a little bending will humble it before God. Repentance is the
mortifying or the killing of sin, as Paul calls it: alas! sin is like the
heart of Oak that will be a hundred years a dying, so sin will be long a dying,
it is not a little pricking and a little compunction will kill it Repentance is
called repentance unto life, in the Scripture; it is not a little chafing, and
a little rubbing, and a little Aqua-vitae will fetch a man from death unt^
life: No, no, beloved: thou never repentest unless thou be zealous. And
therefore the Apostle makes zeal a part of repentance, 2 Cor. 7. 11. No zeal,
no repentance: no repentance, no salvation.

2. That man is in the state of damnation that is not a believer in Christ: If
a man be not in Christ by a lively faith, he cannot be saved. The Prophet
prophesying of Christ, says thus: Unto us a child is born, and he shall be
called wonderful, the Prince of peace: and the zeal of the Lord of hosts shall
perform this, Isa. 9* 6, 7. Never is Christ conceived in any man under heaven,
but the zeal of the Lord of Hosts does perform it: Does he enlighten the mind,
or purge the heart, or cleanse the conscience? zeal does perform it. Can I be
so in love with Christ, as to deny my self for him, and not be zealous to him?
Can I count all my parts, and, all my gifts, and all that I have, as Paul did,
to be dross and dung for the worth I find in Christ, and not be zealous of
him? Can I hunger after him, and pant for him, and be sick of love till I have
him, and not be zealous toward him? Thus we must do, otherwise we are not in
Christ. And therefore Moses confounds faith and zeal, as if they were all one,
and both in one. Phinehas was zealous for Gods sake, Numb. 25. 11. That is, he
was zealous and faithful both, for so the Psalmist expounds it, that was
counted to him for righteousness, says he, that was, speaking of his zeal in
executing of judgment, that was counted to him for righteousness. Now ye know
nothing can be counted to a man for righteousness, but only faith, and
therefore by zeal there is meant faith. This is an undeniable argument, If a
man have faith, he is zealous, otherwise he has no faith. If he have no faith,
he cannot be saved.

3. That man is in the state of damnation that loves not God. He that loves not
the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be Anathema Maranatha, that is, let him be
accursed and accursed, for it is the greatest curse in the world, it is the
curse of the Gospel, Let him be accursed, and double accursed, that loves not
Christ. Now a man never loves God, if he be not zealous: qui non zelat, non
amat: He that is not zealous in love does not love, love is termed zeal in the
Scripture. Iehu, indeed the truth was, he had no love to God, he thought he had
though; and therefore when he would tell Iehonadab he had love to God, he tells
it in these words, Come and see my zeal I have to the Lord of Hosts, 2 King. 10
16. That is, see the love that I bear to the Lord of Hosts, Zelus debet esse
non modo in affectu, August.
verumetiam in intellectu, is a saying: zeal must be in the mind, and zeal
must be in the affections, both are required to this zeal that I speak of. If
thou be not zealous, it is most certain, thou have not a jot of true love
Zeal is more seen in that affection then any, if there be any; and therefore if
there be no zeal in thee to God and his ways, there is no love, thou art yet
under wrath.

4. That man is in the state of damation, that was never taught of God: Christ
promises that all that are his shall be taught of God; taught of God to be holy
as he is holy; taught of God to love one another; taught of God to walk in all
newness of life. Every man look what he is taught in, Sa^it unus. quisque quod
didiclt.
therein he is zealous. Paul before he was converted, he was taught in the
ceremonies and his Fathers, and therefore therein was he zealous. I was
traditions of taught, says he, according to the perfect manner of the Law of
the Fathers, and was zealous, Act. 22. 3. Alas! poor soul, had he been better
taught, he had been better zealous. I do not speak of the outward teaching of
the ear only, but also of the inward teaching of the heart; his very heart,
such was the policy of Satan, his very heart was taught in those things, and
therefore he was zealous of them. The covetous man's heart is taught to be
earthly, therefore he is zealous for the world. The proud man's heart is taught
to be proud, therefore he is zealous for his credit and esteem. The voluptuous
man's heart is taught to be vain, therefore he is zealous of his pleasures Alas!
such were never taught of God. The devil teaches them, and their lusts teach
them, and the examples of others teach them. Alas! if thou be not taught of
God, how to walk in newness of life, thou can not be saved; it is better to
be unborn then untaught; Proverb.
and this as you see, cannot be without zeal unto God.

5. That man is in the state of damnation, that cannot yet be pitied. If thou
be zealous for the things of this life, and not zealous for heaven: zealous
for thy pleasure, and not for Gods glory, thou art not to be pitied; and thou will have pleasures, take them, and thou will to hell, go, who will pity thee?
Deformitas sceleris aufert misericordiam: It is true, it would pity a man's
heart to see a poor soul weeping and howling for his sins, and yet go to
hell. It would pity a man to see a blind Papist whipping himself, praying on
his Beads, giving all his goods to the poor, confessing his sins to his
Confessor, fasting and afflicting his body, zealous in his blind superstition,
and all to save his poor soul, and yet go to hell; it would pity a man's heart I
say, to see such a man go to hell, as how can he otherwise? yet it would pity
a man, because he is zealous for God, in the blindness of his zeal: As it
pitied the Apostle to see his brethren go to hell, that were blindely zealous
for God. Brethren, my hearts desire, and prayer to God for Israel is, that they
may be saved; for I bear them record, they have a zeal of God, but not
according to knowledge, Romans 10. 1, 2. It pitied him that such as were blindely
zealous for God should perish. But whom will it pity to see thee go to hell?
thou have no zeal at all that way, No, no, thou art zealous after the things of
this life, and after thy lusts, as God told Jerusalem, Who shall have pity upon
thee, O Jerusalem? Thou have forsaken me, says he, Ier. 15, 5. Who will pity
our drunkards and our whoremongers? who will pity you that are zealous in your
sins and abominations? ye are not so much as the objects of pity.

Is it so, that the zeal of our affections is due only to God? Is it so, that
God does demand it? and that we are bound upon pain of death and damnation to
give it to God? Is it so, that we never repented, we never believed, never were
in Christ, never loved God, never were taught of God, never can be pitied,
unless we give the zeal of our affections unto God? Then, O then, let us
consider the lamentable condition we are in, as long as the zeal of our
affection runs otherwise. I beseech you consider these eight things, which may
convince you what a woeful condition ye are in.

First, 1. Zeal is the fir^^ of the soul.
Zeal is the fire of the soul. Look what thou art most zealous upon, that sets
thy soul in a fire. Every man and woman in the world is set on fire of hell or
of heaven. Now if heaven have not set thee on fire, hell has set thee on fire,
thou art set on fire of one of these two. As it is the blessedest thing that
can be to be set on fire of heaven, to be zealous for the glory of God, and the
saving ones soul; zealous for the getting of grace, and zealous in the duties
of religion: so on the contrary, it is the cursedst thing that can possibly be,
to be set on fire of hell. Thou which art a swearer, a liar, a filthy speaker,
whose mouth talks of vanity, thy tongue is set on fire of hell; the tongue is
set on fire of h^ll, says the Apostle, Iam. 3. 6. Thou which art a voluptuous
man, that love thy pleasures, and delightest in vanity more then in better
things, thy heart is set on fire of hell: thou which yeeldest to the
temptations of Satan, the devil tempts thee to go proudly in thine apparel,
and thou yeeldest: the devil tempts thee to smother thy conscience, and thou
consentest. The devil tempts thee to put off thy better obedience till another
time, and the temptation takes hold; there is never a temptation of Satan, but
it is a fiery dart, the fiery darts of the devil, Ephesians. 6. 16. Well does the
Apostle call them fiery darts of the devil, says Saint Chrysostom, Chrysostom.
(...); for such, says he, are the sinful lusts and affections; they are all
fiery, set on fire of hell; this is one misery, and this not a small one; zeal
is the fire of the soul, and if it be not set upon God, it is set on fire of
hell.

Secondly, 2. Zeal is the running of the soul
Zeal is the running of the soul. If thou be not zealous for God, thou
runnest away after the things of this world; thou do not only go after
vanities, but thou runnest; not only go after thy pleasures and thy profits,
but thou runnest. As the affections are the feet of the soul, so zeal is the
swift running pace of these feet. I will run the way of thy Commandments, says
David, that is, I will be zealous in it. It is a long way to heaven, especially
now since the fall, it is a very long way to heaven, and death will overtake us
before ever we can get there, unless we run; and therefore Saint Paul commands
us to run fast enough, lest we never get there. So run that ye may obtain, 1
Cor 9. 24. Now had we not need to set our zeal right? for that way we run, that
way our zeal stands. If the zeal of our affection stand to Godwards, we run
onwards to heaven; but if it stand to the things here below, we run onwards to
hell. I read of Tiberius Nero, Tiberius Nero.
who when his brother Drusus lay sick in Germany, he ran two hundred miles in
twenty four hours to visit him. But we may find tanker runners then so in
sin; some in drunkenness and good fellowship, as they call it; others in
security and hardness of heart; others in one sin, and others in another; and
as they run themselves, so if there be any that are stricter then themselves,
they wonder that they run not with them to the same excess of riot, 1 Pet. 4.
4. Mark, run not with them, where note, themselves run into riot. May be
sometimes they have sudden and violent affections to good, as if they were all
on a fire for the present, like the young man in the Gospel, he came running to
Christ, and kneeled down to him, says the Text, Mar. 10 17. O he was all upon
the haste, he does not go to him, but he runs; as many men and women have very
good moods and violent pangs of goodness now and then, but alas! it was
nothing but a flash, for by and by he was as ready to be gone, as ever he was
hasty to come; and then he ran on in his security and coveteousnesse of mind.
Do ye not see how fast many of you run on in arerages with God? If we could see
Gods debt-book, might we not there read. Item, ten thousand oaths thou have
sworn. Item, millions of millions of filthy words thou have spoken* Item, a
hundred millions of millions of wicked thoughts thou have thought. Item, a
thousand lazy prayers thou have made. Item, 20. hundred Sabbaths thou have
profaned. Item, forty Sacraments thou have unworthily received: Thus ye have
run on, as if ye thought every day seven years till ye are in hell Thus it is
with you, 3. Zeal is the predominant element in the soul.
when your zeal is set any where else then on God.

Thirdly, Zeal is the predominant element in the soul. Look what the soul is
zealous unto, that is the predominant temper of the soul: if thou be zealous
for God, Christ is predominant in thee: if thou be zealous for the things of
this world, the world is predominant in thee, Non datur temperamentum ad
pondus, says the Philosopher, there is no temper but something is predominant.
You never heard of a soul that had as much of the world in him as of Christ,
and of Christ as of the world: No, as he is zealous to one thing, so one thing
or other is predominant in him. Menpleasing is predominant in one, pride
predominant in another, and pleasure predominant in a third. Whatsoever a man
is zealous unto, that is his predominant element: Now if thine affections, if
the zeal of them be not set upon God, then something or other in the world is
predominant in thee O what a misery then is it to be less zealous for God then
for the world! the world is predominant in thee, this is the character of one
that yet is no better then a reprobate; Lovers of pleasure more then lovers of
God, 2 Timothy 3. 4. when pleasure is predominant and not God. He that loves
father or mother more then me, is not worthy of me, etc. says Christ, Mat. 10.
37. when carnal relations are predominant, and not spiritual, this I say is an
evident character of a wicked man: for what difference is there between a godly
man and wicked man? both have sin in them; this is the difference: a godly
man has sin in him, but grace is predominant, and therefore he is called a
godly man: A wicked man has many good graces in him, but sin and wickedness
is predominant, and therefore he is called a wicked man; the denomination is
from the part that is predominant. The beasts of the earth, because the earth
is predominant: the fishes of the Sea, because the water is predominant; a
brick-house, not as though there were no wood in it, but because brick is
predominant Mark all thy thoughts which is predominant in thee, the world or
Christ: mark all thy speeches, which is predominant, earth or heaven; mark all
thy cares, which is predominant to busy thee most: O what a woeful estate art
thou in, when sin and corruption is predominant in thee: If thou be more
zealous after the things of this life, then after grace and holiness, without
which no man shall see the Lord: Thou can never enter into Gods kingdom,
because sin is predominant in thee.

Fourthly, 4. Zeal is the self-cruelty of the soul.
Zeal is the self-cruelty of the soul: If thou be most zealous to God, thy
zeal is a holy cruelty to thy self. Master, spare thy self, says Peter to
Christ, Get thee behind me Saran, says Christ; he was zealous for the
redemption of the world, and he would not spare his own life. Zeal is a holy
cruelty of the soul, it will spare nothing, nor life, nor credit, nor living,
nor any thing. M. Fox that was zealous in his love to the poor, he was in a
holy manner cruel to himself, to give the very clothes off his back, rather
then the naked should not be covered. Love is as strong as death, and as cruel
as the grave, Cant. 8. 6. Durus sicut inferi zelus, as Ambrose expounds it:
zeal is as hard as the grave. A man that is zealous is a hard man to himself,
that he may be free unto God; not as though true zeal were hard and cruel
indeed unto his own soul, but I mean, to his own fleshly desires and respects,
he is the mercifullest man to his own soul under heaven. Now then see what a
woeful estate thou art in, if thou be not zealous for God: for if the zeal of
thine affections gad any where else, thou art the cruellest man to thine own
soul in very deed, and in truth, as possibly can be: Thou squandrest away Gods
mercies, thou treasurest up Gods wrath, thou live in those sins which thine
own conscience can tell thee are sins, thou bestowest thine affections upon the
things of this life, which should be given to God, thou damnest thine own soul.
That time which God vouchsafes thee to get grace in, thou wastest it away upon
vanity; thou art more earnest for the good of thy carcass then for the
everlasting weal or thy soul; thou partest with Christ, rather then with thy
lusts* O thou art durus ut inferi, thou art as cruel as, hell to thine own
soul. Thou know that whosoever comes to the Sacrament unworthily, or
unpreparedly, or not a new creature, he eats and drinks his own damnation: thou
know this well enough, thou know that the Lord says so in his Word. Yet
thou art so cruel to thy own soul, that for all this thou will venture: thou
know, that he that comes to this supper without a wedding garment shall be
cast into utter darkness, where is weeping and gnashing of teeth; thou know
this full well, and thou can not deny it. Yet thou art so cruel to thy own
soul, as to come hither without it: thine affections are so eager after the
things of this life, the very zeal of them all, that thou art even cruel to
thine own soul, Durus ut inferi, as cruel as hell it self to thy self. O the
cruelty of thine earthly zeal; it makes thee fearlesse and witless to sin
against God, which the Angels of heaven durst not do for a thousand worlds. It
makes thee sin against Christ, and cast off his yoke, without which thou
can be never saved; it makes thee choke the motions of Gods Spirit, and
strangle thine own conscience, Durus ut inferi zelus, may we well say; this
zeal is as cruel as hell, and yet it is in every one of us all, that is not
zealous for God.

Fifthly, 5. Zeal is the brand of the soul. Ambros.
Zeal is the brand of the soul: When a man is zealous in any passion, whatever
it be, we see it sets a brand upon a man; we call him a choleric man, that is
zealous with anger; he is very touchy, say we. We call him a fretful, envious
man, that is zealously given thereunto. We call him a melancholy man that is
much in his sadness. Zeal which is the Much of every affection, it sets a
brand upon a man. So when a man is zealous for good, it sets a good brand upon
a man, as Aemilius for his goodness, was called Aemilius the good. Antoninus
for his piety was called Antoninus the pious: Act. 1. 23.
so in Scripture one Barsabas was called Iustus the just. So it should seem
too, that Simon was a noted man for some passionate and affectionate
forwardness, and therefore he was called Simon Zelotes, that is, Simon the
zealous, Luk 6. 15. And so we see though it be counted a mockage by the
ignorant world, it is observed by them which are without, that Gods people are
zealous. Look whatever a man is zealous in, that is able to brand him. Now if
thou be zealous for the world, or zealous after thy pleasures or any thing
else in the world, it brands thee in the forehead for a carnal wretch: as
Elymas the sorcerer, Judas the traitor: It stigmatizes thee for a worldling, or
a drunkard, or a company-keeper, or voluptuous, or whatever it be thy zeal is
most in. Every man is more zealous for one thing then he is for another, either
for God, or something else in the world; the. Question is, whether art thou
most zealous for? if thou be more zealous for any thing else then thou art
for God, it brands thee for a wretch. Such an one a very worldling; such an one
a very muck-worm; such an one a very spendthrift; such an one a very gamester
and a royster; such an one a very tatler; such an one an Orlando Furioso: such
an one a hard man; Look where thy most is, that does truly brand thee before
God and good men that are able to discern thee.

The XI. Sermon.
Col. 3. 2. Set your affections on things that are above, etc.
THe sixth is, 6. Zeal is the transporting of the soul out of it self.
Zeal is the transportation of the soul out of it self. When a man is zealous
in a passion, he is transported out of himself, the passion has command of
him, and not he of his passion. As a man that is all on fire with anger, or
with choler, it transports him out of himself, and he is under the command of
his anger, his anger rules him; it is well for him now if his anger be good;
but if it be carnal, what a woeful condition is he in! If a man's zeal be good
and for God, he is happy. As David was zealous for God, he was transported out
of himself, he was not his own man. No, says he, I am thine, Lord save me, for
I have sought thy precepts. Psalm. 119. 94. he sought Gods precepts with such
zeal. that he was not his own man, he was under the command of his zeal, his
zeal was to God, and it did captivate him to God, I am thine, says he. He was
at Gods dispose, not at his own, for his zeal transported him out of himself.
Himself would transgress, but his zeal would not let him. Himself would be
careless, but his zeal would not suffer him. He must do as his zeal would have
it. He had not the command of himself. No, he was at the command of his
gracious zeal. It was well for him it was good: for now on the contrary, if a
man's affections be set upon the things of this life, he must have pleasures,
and he must have his living and his maintenance, and he must have this, his
affections are set on it, he is zealous after them: this man is not his own
man, he is a servant of his lusts. As David said, I am thine, Lord: so he may
say on the contrary, I am thine, World, I am thine Pleasure, I am thine Satan,
I am at thy command and thy service. As the Text says, Paul a servant of Jesus
Christ, Jude a servant of Jesus Christ, for they were zealous for Christ, and
their zeal made them not their own men: so I may say of a wicked man, Esau a
servant of sinful pleasure and delights, Demas a servant of this present world,
Diotrephes a servant of his own ambition; for they were zealous of these
things, and their zeal made them slaves thereto. Whosoever commits sin is
the servant of sin, Ioh. 8. 34. says Christ to the Jews; servant? say they, we
were never servants, we are free: servants, says he, yea, ye are the servants
of sin, ye go about to kill me, says he. Are not ye the slaves of sin,
when ye will be obedient to your lusts, to do such an ill office as to murder
me? I know there be two kinds of slaves and servants; some that are in arcta
custodia, close prisoners; Such servants of sin are they, that are kept so
close, that they cannot go one step beyond profaneness. Some in libera
custodia, are false prisoners. When a man's lusts hold him in a longer chain,
like birds in a larger Cage, which may be is free to be a professor, and come
to Church, and hear, and pray, and be civil; and when he is once at the length
of his chain, his lusts pull him back: the former are affections Gallislaves,
chained to their seats and their oars; the latter are their sluggish
messengers, to go up and down of their errand. And therefore the devil which
takes all advantages of a man's affections, is said to hold him captive at his
pleasure, 2 Timothy 2. 26. O say thou, I am not the devils captive at his
pleasure, I will not swear, nor swagger, nor be drunken as some will; alas,
alas! it is not the devils pleasure to have thee a drunkard or a swearer, it is
his pleasure to use his servants some for one service, some for another: it is
not his pleasure to employ thy tongue in swearing; No, he will employ thy tongue
only in talking civilly of the things of the world. It is not his pleasure to
use thee for drunkenness and whoredom, but to go on in security and formality,
and presumption. (...). ^ayes Aristotle, servants have no leisure.
O what a hideous case art thou in, the zeal of whose affections is not set
upon God! What will not thine affections command? and then if they command thou
art not thine own man, thou must obey. Let coveteousnesse command; how will thou curtail thy prayers to God in the morn? how seldom will thou be thinking
of God all the day? how will thou cark, and pinch, and spare? Let mirth and
jollity command thee, how will thou jest, and fool, and hoit, and play, and
giggle, and mock, any thing for pastime? Let revenge command thee, how angerly
will thou look? how snappishly wilt* thou speak? how churlishly will thou bend
thy fist? or how basely will thou study to do a displeasure? how apt to
misconstrue what thy neighbor does? how ready to entertain any flying rumor
of him? thus thou art not thine own man, but harased, and hurried up and down
by thine unruly affections, till they have undone thy soul for ever. O consider
then the woefulness of this thy slavery, when the zeal of thine affections is
thus disjoined from God. Consider quickly if thine affections keep thee in
service long, they will keep thee ever; the longer a man stays in service, the
more fool he is. Alterius ne sit, qui suus esse potest: In the Law of God it is
written, that if a servant after seven years bondage did still love his Master,
the Law says thus, let his Master boar his ears, and make him serve for ever,
Exodus 21. 5. well, take heed; thou love to live on as thou do, and thou
likest thy slavish courses too too well, take heed, I say, lest thine ears be
nailed to thine affections, and thou be made a slave for ever, I fear me, we
have many of such slaves, their ears boar'd with an awl, and their souls then
bound pren^ice for ever to the ways of Death.

Seventhly, 7. Zeal is the strength of the soul
Zeal is the strength of the soul, zeal carries all the strength of the soul
with it, leaves none behind. And therefore the Scripture puts these two things
together, ones zeal and his strength. Lord, where is thy zeal and thy strength?
says the Prophet, Isa. 63. 15. If he ask where his zeal is, he asks where his
strengh is? for zeal is the strength of the soul. Ye know Jacob wrestled with
God for a blessing, and his effectual fervent prayer prevailed, but how does
God express it? he expresses his zeal thus. By his strength he had power with
God, Hos. 12. 3. his prayer was a zealous prayer, and therefore it was a prayer
with strength, by his strength he had power with God. He prayed, and he prayed
with strength, he laid all his strength that he could on the duty, and by his
strength he had power with God. Look what a man is zealous unto, all his
strength goes to it, he leaves none behind. O the misery of a carnal heart,
that is not zealous for God, he has no strength at all left for God, or the
saving of his soul. Would he pray? alas! he has no strength to pray with. His
prayers are as weak as bul-rushes. Would he resist sin? he has no strength to
resist it with. His striving to resist it is nothing able. O how hardy is be to
commit sin! the charges and the cost that is in drinking does not terrify the
drunkard from his drunkenness, the cost that is in garish apparel does not
terrify the proud from their vanity in clothes. The disgrace that is in sin
does not terrify the Adulterer from his lust. The fear of fathers and mothers
displeasure does not terrify the spend-thrift from his riot. No, wicked men
are hardy that way, because their zeal goes that way. But to that which is
good, how weak is thy heart? Ezekiel. 16. 30. nihil metuendum vidit, metuit tamen:
the least cross look of a father, or a mother, or a great man, scares him. One
twelve-penny charges affrights him: One petty difficulty damps him, because his
zeal stands toward another point; take him at the plough, there he can be
strong to labor, he will toil, he will sweat, he will hold out. Take him at prayer, he
is as weak as water; take him at a Tale or a Story, he will remember it well, and
repeat it after you, his memory is strong; take him at a Sermon, his memory
fails him; take him in a business to manage, his wit is strong, his parts
strong, he has an excellent reach; but take him in mortification, he is as
weak as a man without understanding. This is the misery of thy soul, when thy
zeal is not set upon God. The devil is the strong man, Mat. 12. 29. and thou
have no strength to encounter him; thy lusts are strong to inthrall thee, and
thou have no strength to be free, and yet thou pishest at these things: Men
think nothing of the devil, as though he were nothing but a scarecrow, they
defy him every hour in the day, they jest at him, saying, the devil is a fool,
they will paint him on their walls, and call for him as though they would give him
a challenge. I remember a pretty Proverb, that I read the Germans have, Non
pingendus est Diabolus in pariete, quia sponte sua venit. Paint not the devil
on the wall, he will come soon enough of his own accord. I am sure, he comes too
soon to beguile men, too soon to bewitch and befool men, too soon to disarm men
from all strength to that which is good. If he can once set thine affections on
the things of this life, he has gotten the victory, and thou art not able to
recover.

Eighthly, 8. Zeal is the confidence of the soul Sperant omnes quae cupiunt
nimis, says Lucian.
Zeal is the full confidence of the soul: that does a man chieflyest trust to,
which he is zealous upon. He that is zealous for the world he trusts to the
world, otherwise he would not be zealous for it. He trusts to have pleasures,
and he trusts to have goods, and he trusts to be esteemed that is zealous about
them. What, do you trust to bear all before you? as we use to say, when we see
a man hot and zealous upon any thing, the soul would not be zealous but that it
verily trusts to prevail. Thus shall ^ine anger be accomplished, and they shall
know that I the Lord have spoken it in my zeal, Ezekiel 5. 13. God was confident
of the fullfilling of his wrath, why? because he had spoken in his zeal. Indeed
God may well be so, were he neverso little angry: but the words do express the
nature of zeal. It Is the full trust of the soul to speed. A wise man will not
be hot upon any thing, unless he trust to go through stitch. If zeal then be
the full trust of the soul, what a mad man art thou not to be zealous for God.
Thou trustest to the world, and trustest thy pleasures, and trustest thy
passions, thou do not trust God. If thou trustedst the Lord God, thou
would be zealous for God. Alas, alas! thou can not trust God, thou never
labourest to please him. He that depends on a man, and must be for to trust him
for help and assistance, he will not offend him. Alas! what trust can he have
to him, if he offend him continually? when the Sydonians and the Tyrians had
offended K. Herod, their country being nourished by the Kings country, Act.
12. 20. they labored to please him again. So if thou would trust Almighty
God, thou would labor to please him, and to be zealous for his Name; and not
make him thine enemy by thy sins and iniquities, Thou which blasphemest his
Name with thine oaths, and abusest his creatures with thine intemperance, and
prophanest his Ordinances with thy carelessenesse and neglect, and displeasest
him all the year long. Alas! how can thou trust him? thou make him thine
enemy; can thou trust one that he will befriend thee, that vows he will hang
thee? can thou trust he will help thee at all hands, that is provoked to undo
thee? thou art a damned man, if God do not pardon thee. Thou art a woeful
wretch, better thou had never been born, if God give thee not grace. And
can thou trust God he will be good to thee: what and displease him day by
day? offend him every foot? No, no, thou may trust him, he will confound
thee. Thou which art a liar, thou may trust him what he says in the
Apocalypse. Rev. 21. 8.
All liars shall be cast into the lake of brimstone. Thou which art a swearer,
may trust him, he will never hold thee guiltless. Thou which art a drunkard,
and a company-keeper, and a whore-monger, may trust him, thou shall never
inherit the Kingdom of Heaven; thou which talkestidlely and improfitably, may
trust him, he will call thee to an account at the day of judgment. Thou which
hardenest thy neck against the reproofs of the word, may trust him, he will
destroy them without remedy; this he has past his word he will do, and herein
thou may trust him: thou can never trust him for mercy or grace or any good
thing; thou displeasest him daily, and make him thine enemy. And how can
thou trust him? what think thou? does not he know how little thou carest for
his Commandments? how little thou respectest his Ordinances? how basely thou
usest him in thy ways? indeed if thou were zealous for his glory, and zealous
to please him in holiness of life, and zealous to obey him, and seek him, then
thou might trust him. Thou can never trust him otherwise. By this time
thou may see what a woeful condition thou art in, if the zeal of thine
affections be not set upon God.

But many poor souls may demand, Signs whether the zeal of thine ^ffections be
set on God, 1. Sign. If thine affections be notable to Godward.
how then shall I know whether the zeal of mine affections be set upon God? I
answer thee: There are seven signs whereby thou may know it.

The first, If thine affections be notable to Godward: a man may have a little
hope, and a little grief, and a little joy, and a little pity, and no body see
it. But if it be zealous, it will quickly be notable; every one, when once it
is zealous, every one will note it. When Epaphras was zealous to save souls in
Colosse, what says Saint Paul of him? I bear him record, he has a great zeal
for you, says he, Colos. 4. 13. Paul could not but note it in him, he saw so
many strong expressions of it.

This holiness and forwardness is very remarkable. But if on the contrary
there be no notable expressions of grace in you, alas! there may be some
goodness, some pity, some grief, some motions; but this is no zeal, it is not
remarkable. If a man be zealous for the world, his scraping and sparing is
notable, his toyling and studying, and talking that way is very notable. I will
bear him record, he is a worldling; the world is so much in his speeches the
world is so much in his courses, and so much in his face. Look upon his ways,
he is so combred with thoughts of the world: Look into his family, there be so
few good duties of grace, and so many tokens of the world: Look upon his
meetings, his discourses of edifying are so scarce, and of the world are so
copious, I will bear him in record, he is a worldling. Were we zealous for God,
there would be diverse signs and expressions of our zeal unto God. Saint Paul
when he would make it plain to the Corinthians, that he was an Apostle to them,
he tells them, truly the signs of an Apostle were wrought among you, 2 Cor. 12.
12. If we were zealous for God, ye might answer, Truly the signs of true zelots
are wrought among us: ye that profess Christ, what signs of true zelots are
there in you? if your brethren be secure and grown-dull, do ye labor to
quicken them? If the Gospel do not thrive, do ye labor to further it? if grace
be little stirring in the Parish, does Heaven ring with your groans and your
prayers? if zeal were existent among you, it would be notable and remarkable
among you, we might say, I bear you record it is so, nay, the wicked without
would observe it, we bear them record, they keep a great stir about heaven, our
lives would convince them. May be they would hate us and reproach us the more:
but this is certain, our lives would convince them, as Christ's did the
Centurion, doubtless this is a righteous man, Luke 23. 47. So your lives would
convince all their consciences; doubtless they are strict men, doubtless they
are humble, and meek, and religious. Thus it would be, were we zealous. But if
our religion be not notable, hardly notable to our selves, we can hardly tell
whether we have true faith and repentance, and zeal at all, yea or no: much
less notable to others, it is to be feared ye are not zealous for God.

The second sign of zeal toward God is, 2. If thou be impatient of sin.
to be impatient of sin. Zeal, as aforesaid, is the impatient part of the
affections: if a man do affect a thing but a little, he can be patient without
it; but if he affect it very deep and with zeal, O his affections are set on
it, and he is impatient if he speed not. So that if thou be zealous against
sin, thou art impatient of sin, thou can not suffer it. Zeal is impatient of
whatever is contrary to it. That this is the nature of zeal, you may see by the
poor blind zeal that was in Paul before his conversion: he was zealous to God
as he thought, and thinking that the Church of Christ were contrary to all men,
enemies to God and man, therefore now in the blindness of his zeal he
persecutes that way unto death: Concerning zeal I persecuted the Church, Phil.
3. 6. It was a woeful kind of zeal to persecute the Church, but yet there you
may gather the nature of zeal, it cannot abide that which is contrary: and
therefore if thou be zealous against sin, thou can not abide sin; better
journey, riding, studies, prayers, exhortations, any course thou will use,
rather then abide it: thou can never abide any thing that is displeasing to
God, but resist it to the utmost, and this resisting will be,

First Universal: 1. Zeal cannot abide any sin.
If thou be zealous, there is no sin thou can possibly abide. Nothing is
cold but the fire does resist it; so nothing is sin but zeal does resist it to
the utmost. I esteem all thy precepts concerning all things to be right; I hate
every false way, Psa. 119. 128. This is zeal indeed, there is never a false way
that a man can abide that is zealous. To be zealous against one sin, and
lukewarm against another, this is not zeal.

Secondly, 2. In any person.
General, in all manner of persons.

First, In a friend as well as in an enemy: If thou be zealous, thou will
find fault with thy friends when they sin, as well as observe a fault when
thine enemy offends. 1. In friend.
Men are apt to observe when their enemy sins, O how unconscionable is he!
thus he has done, and so he has done; but if thou be zealous, when thy
friend does transgress, thou will not abide it. Fire will not only labor to
consume the water that comes to put it out, but also the wood that comes to
maintain it. So it is with zeal, Do not I hate them that hate thee? says David
to God, Psalm. 139 21. He could not abide to count them his friends that were
not friends unto God, though otherwise they were very friends unto him, and may
be saved his life, and were patrons and benefactors unto him, he could not wink
at their sins, because they were his friends: though thy friend be a swearer or
a carnal wretch, yet if he be thy friend, and thou dependest upon him, thou
can see it and not see it; but if thou be zealous, all his sins thou will
count discourtesies to thee.

Secondly, 2. In child.
In ones child as well as a servant, you shall have many, they are angry at
every sin a servant commits; but if their children do sin, they connive; it was
no such great fault, alas! he did it unwittingly, and what would ye have a
child do? say they: they can excuse it in their children, and lessen it; but
if thou be zealous, thou can not abide sin in thy son any more then a
servant, thou will correct him, and curb him, and threaten him, and counsel
him, and never endure he should sin, if thou can possibly help it. What, my
son, and be wicked? what do I love God, and shall I suffer my loins to
dishonor him? Son, know thou the God of thy father, otherwise I count thee a
bastard, and no son. This brake old Elies neck, because he suffered his sons to
be wicked, when he by godly severity might have remedied it. A zealous man when
his son has committed things worthy of death, will not spare him, Zech. 13. 3.

Thirdly, 3. In wife or husband.
In ones own wife or husband, or father or mother, as well as in a neighbor,
zeal cannot abide it; husband thou do not love me as long as thou live
thus; wife, thy heart is not with me as long as thou do thus; how can thou
love me when thou do not love God nor thine own soul? this is the meaning of
our Savior: If any come to me, and hate not father and mother, and wife, and
children, and brethren, and sisters, yea, and his own life, he cannot be my
Disciple. Luke 14. 26. A zealous man cannot abide to yield to sin, for the best
of them all.

Fourthly, 4. In a rich man.
In a rich man as well as in a poor man, if thou be zealous, thou can not
abide sin, neither in the rich, nor in the poor: if poor men offend, and if
beggars be idle and ungodly, then thou will complain; Oh, the poor are so
wicked, they break down our hedges, who would releeve them? they will not be
orderly, they lie drinking in Alehouses, and spend it away on the pot,
therefore who would releeve them? But if the rich be keepers of company, and
vain in their pleasures, thou art not so zealous against their sins, alas! this
is no zeal: but let a wicked man be as great as King Ahab, Micaiah will deal
roundly with him. Nehemiah will not spare Lords nor Nobles when they sin, Neh.
13. 17. For a Magistrate to punish poor Malefactors, and not the Gentry, when
they do transgress, is this zeal? no it is cursed partiality.

Fifthly, 5. In ones self.
In ones self, rather then in any body else; true zeal is more zealous against
sin in ones self then in all the world besides; otherwise, says our Savior,
it is hypocrisy and not zeal. Thou hypocrite, first cast out the beam out of
thine own eye, and thou shall see clearly to cast out the mote out of thy
brothers eye, Mat. 5. 7. Zeal I say, is like unto fire, it is hot it self
first, before it heat others: may be the fire meets with many other things that
it is not able to heat it, as the bottom of a kettle of water, the fire cannot
heat it, nevertheless the fire will be sure to be hot of it self. So it is
with thee: if thou be zealous against sin, thou will be like unto fire,
rather suffer cold to be in any other, then suffer it to be in it self; so thou will rather suffer sin in any body else, then suffer it in thy self: thou will
not suffer sin any where else by thy good will, but above all things thou will
not suffer it in thy self. This is the second sign of zeal toward God, it is
impatient of sin.

The third sign of zeal toward God is, 3. It cannot be quiet without assurance
of Gods favor.
it cannot be quiet till it be assured of Gods favor, and of Christ. Thou art
never earnest for God, if thou can possibly be quiet without assurance of
Christ and of Heaven: the reason is plain, I need not express it. I know many
a child of God is not assured hereof, but there is never a child of God under
heaven, but he is restless till he be, Alas! he is never zealous for God, if
he be quiet without assurance of Gods love in Christ Jesus. Can I zealously
love him, whose love to me I am not assured of? for all that I know he will cut
my throat, he will turn the sorest enemy I have, I cannot zealously love him.
No more can thou zealously love God, as long as thou art quiet without the
assurance of his love. For all that thou know God does not love thee, God he
may damn thee and cast thee to hell for ever, and turn the sorest enemy in the
world to thy soul, for all that thou know, and therefore thou can not
zealously love him; if then thou be a zealous lover of God, either thou art
assured of his love, or thou can never be quiet without it: give diligence,
says the Apostle, to make your calling and election sure, for if ye do these
things, ye shall never fall. 2 Pet. 1. 10. ye shall never fall, if ye make it
sure, but if ye can be quiet without the assurance of election and Gods love,
ye may fall, and for all that I know, break your necks for ever, and perish for
evermore. Go to then, examine your selves, what does your conscience tell you,
ye are not sure of Gods favor, nor your election to life? ye hope well ye say,
but ye are not assured of it, neither does it break your sleep a jot, nor
hinder your sports, and your pleasures, and your mirth, it is certain ye were
never zealous for God. What a woeful thing is this! have thou but one soul, and
art thou no more careful of it? art thou to live either for ever in heaven or
hell, when thou die, in all torture and torment world without end? and art
thou no more diligent to make sure before hand? perhaps thou may be saved,
yea, but perhaps thou may be damned. And have thou no more love to thy soul,
then to be quiet with uncertainties? O how many be there among us that have no
assurance from God, what he means to do with them? whether to save them, or to
destroy and to damn them? how many go blundring on in an uncertain opinion, and
conjecturall hope of Gods favor, and have no certainty at all of the same? how
many that are haunted with fears and terrors, and doubts this way, and never
labor to be sure? how many that have had pretty assurances a good while ago,
and now they have lost them, and yet they sit idly, and go dreaming on in the
duties of religion, as if they could shift well enough, though they never
recover again? this is no zeal: if thou be zealous, thou can never endure
to be under uncertainties, never to be quiet till thou have gotten the
assurance of Gods love.

The fourth sign of zeal toward God is gladness to further and to be
furthered in the ways of God. 4. Glaadness to further and be furthered in the
ways of God.
If thou be zealous, thou art glad to be reproved, and told of thy sins;
glad that the Minister should meet with thy corruptions, and rip them up in the
Pulpit: as a Patient is glad that the Physician should hit right on his
disease. When Peter had met with those three thousand in the Acts, and told
them plainly they were murderers of Christ, as ye may read in the Chapter, the
Text says, they gladly received the Word, Act. 2. 41. Peter laid a greater sin
to their charge, then we have unto yours. We have told you that some of you are
adulterers, and some of you drunkards, etc. which is bad enough, and ye are
offended hereat; but Peter told them they were murderers of Christ, and they
gladly received the Word; they were not angry with Peter but with themselves,
and were glad to be told of it, a sign they were zealous. A zealous man is glad
to further, and to be furthered in all goodness, he is glad to meet with the
godly, that so he may be quickened by conference; glad to hear news of a Sermon,
that so he may go to it and be edifyed; glad of every opportunity both of doing
and receiving good; glad to go to a Sacrament which is Christ's feast; so were
the good Israelites, glad at the Sacrament of the Passover, they kept that
feast with great gladness, 2 Chr. 30. 21. Glad that there was one, glad that
they were at it, they were very glad, says the Text If thou be zealous,
thou will be glad of a Communion, and glad to be at it. When thou have been at
a Sermon, thou will be glad that ever thou were at it: O the Word does thee
such good, that thou go home with all gladness of heart, yea, though the
Word did never so much contradict thy corruptions. As the good people in
Nehemiah, when they had been reproved and rebuked in the Congregation, and told
of their sins, and made to cry out unto God, they went home and ate their meat
with all joy, glad that they understood the words that were told them, Neh. 8.
12. Thus thou would to if thou were zealous toward God; but if thou go
about the duties of Gods worship, as sorry pieces of business, if thou do
not delight in prayer, and in hearing the Word, if thou can sit wearisomely,
and when will the Minister have done? a man may see it in thy countenance, thou
art not joyful to hear, this is a sign thou have not one scruple of zeal
toward God. The poor impotent man in the Acts, when Paul was a preaching, he
looked so merrily and so greedily upon him, as if he would fain have it faster
then Paul could deliver, he was a faithful hearer: The same heard Paul speak,
and Paul steadfastly beheld him, and perceived he had faith to be healed, Act.
149. He perceived he had faith, how did he perceive it? he perceived it by his
countenance, he could give a shrewd guess by his looks: while Paul was
preaching, 5. Rejoicing to see the ^orwardnesse of others.
he looked so cheerfully, and so greedily upon him, as if he drunk in every
point that he said. The man without doubt was zealous to hear.

The fifth sign of zeal toward God, is rejoicing to see the forwardness of
others: I rejoiced greatly, says John to the elect Lady, I rejoiced greatly,
that I found of thy children walking in the truth, 2 Io. 4. Nay, if you be
zealous, though it may seem a disparagement to thee, that others should be as
gracious and famous as thy self, yet thou will joy in it: it seemed to be a
disparagement to Moses, that Eldad and Medad of low rank in the Church, that
such as they should prophecy in the Camp. Before Moses was counted the only
Prophet of the Lord, but now Eldad and Medad prophecy as well as he: this I
say might have seemed a disparagement to him, yet he was so far from repining
thereat, as that he was glad for to hear it; would God that all the Lords
people were Prophets, Number. 11. 29. I confess a good man may be discontented
hereby at the first, flesh and blood was stirring in good Joshua himself at
that time, Moses, forbid them, says he. But a godly soul will check himself,
and pull down his spirit, and force his heart to be glad, and rejoice in the
goodness of others, though it be a seeming disparagement to him. A good
Minister rejoices to hear of another Ministers gifts, that out-strips him. A
good man rejoices to see others that are better and better beloved then
himself, though younger and inferior, and meaner otherwise. But if thou do
not joy to see men zealous for God, it is certain thou art a wretch: may be
thou think much, thine eye is evil, because they are so good and so godly,
and the like; this is an argument of a graceless heart: may be thou art apt to
judge hardly of such and such, because they are holier and preciser then thy
self, O but if thou were zealous, thou would rejoice for to see it. Have
thou a better gift then another? thou art bound to help him: has he a better
gift then thou? he is bound to be helpful to thee. Camment, in Job.
It is a good saying of Austin, Toll invidiam, and tuum est quod habeo: tollam
invidiam, and meum est quod habes. Take away envy, and look wherein I excel
thee is thine: I will take away envy, and then look wherein thou excellest me
is mine. If thou be zealous, thou will rejoice howsoever. Be he a child, thou will rejoice that he is better gifted then thy self; nay, for that may a carnal
heart do, and be proud, he may rejoice that his child is better-memoried,
better-witted, better-gifted then himself. O thinks he, this is my child, this
is my son, this is my daughter, never a father or mother hereabouts can say
they have such a child. This is nothing but pride. But be it a servant, yea,
be it a stranger, be it one whom thou countest thine enemy, thou will rejoice
in his gifts; so God may be glorified, no matter though I be disgraced, yea, I
count it my honor, that my shame in the world may be the stirrup for Gods
honor to get up: thus thou will reason, if thou have a spirit of true zeal. It
is greatly to be bewailed how many symptoms of Atheism are amongst us in this
regard: For men are so far from rejoicing in the forwardness of others, that
they grumble, and they thunder at nothing so much, as that any should be
forward and zealous for God; they had rather have an hundred boon-companions
then one zealous man, rather be acquainted with twenty that are carnal, then
one that is holy in his ways. I thank God, says one, we have never a Puritan
in our Parish. I am glad we can say, we have none of these singular fellows in
our town, says another. I speak not of such as the Law does count Puritans,
enemies to the State and the Church, it is a blessing indeed there be none
such: but of the godly that are called Puritans by the impure tongues of the
wicked; the State has no better friends under heaven, the Kingdom no better
Subjects in the world, then are they: for these are they that pray away Gods
judgments from the Land, that are earnest with the Lord in prayer for the King
and Council, and the Church, while the men of the world by their drunkenness,
and whoredoms, and coveteousnes, and security, and contempt of Gods Word, are
pulling down vengeance on the Nation, and provoke God for to plague us. But
these are they that most people have little joy in. O my brethren, where we
have ten or twenty such Puritans in our Parish, I would to God we had an
hundred. I tell you, the day will come, that the worst drunkard in the Town
would give a world, if he had it, he were such a Puritan. In this sense the
very Heathen man says, that every good man is a Puritan: Integer vitae
scelerisque purus, An entire man of life, and a pure man, pure from the sins
that others do live in. Had ye any zeal toward God, ye would be glad that all
the Country were such Puritans.

The sixth sign of zeal toward God is, zeal to Gods Church and his people. 6.
Zeal to Gods Church and people.
Paul before his conversion you may know his zeal was not right, because his
zeal was against the Church. Concerning zeal, says he, I persecuted the
Church, Phil. 3. 6. His zeal was against the Church, and therefore not right:
but after his conversion he had a zealous care of all the Church, his zeal was
then to the Church. If the Church were not well, O how it troubled him! If the
Church were well, O how it comforted him! If the Church were any where
persecuted or infected, with error and doctrine of devils, then he was
frequent in prayer for it, often would he labor, and sigh, and mourn for it,
and be writing for the good of it. Now the Saints and the people of God, these
are the Church. Unto the Churches of Galatia, Gal. 1. 2. that is, unto Gods
people in Galatia. To feed the Church of God, Act. 20. 28. that is, the people
of God. Greet the Church that is in their house, Romans 16. 5. that is, the
Saints that are in their house. In all Churches of the Saints, 1 Cor. 14. 33.
these are the Church of God. Now if thou be zealous for God, thou will be
zealous for Gods Church Examine thy self. Do thou mourn for the troubles and
disquietments of Gods Church, that the Church is so afflicted in all parts of
the world? Does it prick thee to the soul? Do thou go to God, and put him in
remembrance? Remember the Children of Edom, O Lord, how they said, down with
it, down with it, even to the ground: remember Lord the Tobiahs and Sanballats
of these times, remember Lord how they cry, down with thy people, down with
them, root them out, etc. This is an infallible sign to try thy heart by. If
thou be zealous for God, thou will zealously affect the Church of God. Nehemiah
cannot smother his grief, but it would show it self in his face, even at the
Kings elbow, when Jerusalem lay waste. Vriah cannot find in his heart to eat
and drink freely, or take the pleasure of his own house, as long as the Ark of
God, and Israel, and Judah abode in tents. Thou must needs be affected with the
Church, if thou be zealous for God. If thou be zealous for God, thou must
needs love there where God loves. God loves the very gates of Sion, he loves
his Church better then he loves all the world besides. And so will thou, if
thou be zealous for him. The Church is the whole company of his Saints upon
earth. One Saint is dearer then a million of other men. It is a good saying of
Syracides, (...), Eccl. 16. 3. One just man is better then a thousand others.
Though he be a beggar in the world, he is better then a thousand wicked, though
they be all Lords and Nobles. Because he is one of Christ's redeemed; and so
thou will love him, and affect him. Thou will love him, if thou be zealous
to Godwards, I say, thou will love a child of God, albeit in a leathern-coat,
more then father and mother, wife and children, friend or patron, so they be
not Saints, I mean, with more spiritual love then thou love them all. And
therefore much more the Churches of the Saints.

The seventh is, The 7 sign showing most zeal, when the Lord threatens to be
going away.
If thou be zealous for God, then thou will be most zealous when the Lord
threatens to be going away. If ever men will buy any thing at the Fair, they will
buy when they are all breaking up standings, taking up their wares, and packing
away. If ever they will be forward to buy, then they will. God is now perchance
shutting up shop-doors, is now packing up his commodities, and his graces to be
gone. The doors of his Sanctuary have been open a long time, and the
Shop-windows of Heaven have stood broad open this many a year. And we see
plainly the dead of the market is come, no body buys almost; How long has he
preached, and scarce any converted? How many Sermons and Market-daies have we
had? we can hardly see one drunkard converted, one adulterer converted, one
worldling converted, one unprofitable professor converted. O that we could see
it! but alas! we cannot; our commodities stick upon our hands, we can have no
vent for grace, nor Gospel, nor Christ, nor mercy, nor any thing. The dead, the
dead of the market beloved, the market is dead. God is now shutting up to be
gone; and as we may justly fear, to remove away his Candlestick, to take away
the power of his Ordinances, and to withdraw his Spirit from striving any more
with us, our stubbornness is so great. We are grown to despise his reproofs,
to be incorrigible under his word, to be malicious against his rebukes, what
encouragement has he to stay? Now if ever ye will be zealous, now ye will;
Ferrum quando calet, cudere quisque valet.
now ye will come in, and be wrought on, or never; now your proud hearts will
stoop, or never. Now ye'l cry hard, and pray hard, and beg hard, or never.
(...). It Is grievous to come a day after the Fair, as we say. I mean, now is
the last pinch, in all probability it is so, either now let us look to it or
never. It will be grievous to come a day after grace. No man can repent without
grace of God, and therefore if he come a day after grace, he cannot repent,
vid. Eze. 24. 13.

The XII. Sermon.
Col. 3. 2. Set your affections on things that are above, etc.
IT may be demanded, Means to make us zealous.
what means may we use, to make us to be zealous? I answer briefly.

First, 1. Frequent Meditation.
Frequent meditation, Meditate of the infinite misery thou art in by nature,
and by reason of sin, and this will make thee zealously humbled. Meditate of
thy grievous iniquities whereby thou have dishonored God; meditate of the
unutterable mercy of God, that has not consumed thee: meditate of the
admirable patience of God, that has spared thee thus long, and not damned thee
in hell: meditate of the inconceivable goodness of God in Christ, that he should
give up his own Son unto death, rather then that thou should perish for
ever, these truths are all fiery truths. While David was meditating, I cannot
tell now what truths they were that he meditated of, but it seems they were all
fiery truths, they set his soul all afire, as he mused and meditated. My heart
was hot within me; and while I was musing, the fire kindled, Psa. 39. 3. The
very sight of a fire will warm a man a little, Let thy heart look upon God and
his ways, let his commandments be ever in sight, they will heat thee:
whenever thou prayest, meditate with thy self; if I pray lukewarmly, God will
spue me out of his mouth. Whenever thou hear the Word, meditate with thy
self, I must take heed how I hear, otherwise my hearing is abominable.
Whenever the Sabbath is coming, meditate with thy self, O I must call it my
delight, and spend it in Gods worship public and private, or else God will
consume thee. While I was musing, the fire kindled, says the Psalmist: what is
the reason thou art so lukewarm in good duties, as thou art? the reason is
plain, thou usest not to meditate, thou can be content to hear the Word at a
Sermon, and let the Minister warm thee for an hour, thou can talk of the
Word, but when thou art alone thou do not meditate of the Word; if thou
would put the Law of God in thy thoughts, and meditate of it, when thou art
solitary, it is a fiery law. From his right hand went a fiery Law, Deuteronomy. 33. 2.
Gods law is a fiery Law, and his Gospel too is a fiery Gospel; were it often
in thy thoughts, it would heat thee. Know it for a certain, we can never have a
jot of saving grace or of zeal, if we be not frequent in this duty: thou make
a Christ of the world, if that can have more room in thy thoughts then Gods
word; thou can never be zealous nor gracious at all, if thou be not used
to meditation, thou art carnal and earthly; why? because thy thoughts are of
that sort; the thoughts are incentiva vitiorum* Hier. Ep. ad Deem triadem.
says Hierom, they are the incentives and igni^les, and the bellows to kindle
sin in thy heart, whereas were they heavenly, they would kindle zeal in thy
soul.

The second means is, 2. A constant practice of godliness. Philos.
a constant practice of godliness. Motus est causa caloris, says the
Philosopher, Motion is the cause of heat. Be ever in action, if thou would
be zealous, be always stirring in the works of religion and godliness: you
shall see men labor and toil naked in their shirts in frost and cold, and be
hot for all that. Labor stirs up the spirits, and heateth the blood: labor
will not suffer a man to be cold; if Peter had been rowing in his boat, when he
stood still in the Highpriests Hall by the chimney-corner, he had had little
need of that fire to have heated him; and therefore if thou desire to be
zealous, labor in reading of the Scriptures, labor in hearing and applying
the Word to thy heart, labor in examining thy conscience, and repenting of thy
sins, and labor in praying and calling upon God, this will kindle the heat of
zeal in thee, Ask, and ye shall receive, that your joy may be full, Joh. 16.
24. mark that, your joy may be full, your comfort may be full, your love may be
full, and your hope may be full, that is, that it may be zealous; for zeal is
the fullness of every affections in its kind. O, says one, I am so dull, and
so dead, I pray indeed, but my prayers are dead; and I hear, but my hearing is
dead; I see my corruptions, abundance of vanity in my heart, abundance of
vanity in my thoughts, abundance of vanity in every thing that I do, and I am
so dead, Lord what shall I do? Dead art thou? and do thou wonder thou art
dead? thou will not labor to be quickened, thou art loath to be at the pains to
be quickened, thou go idly to work, Seneca.
Otium mors est, and vivi hominis Sepultura, as Seneca speaks: Idleness is
death, idleness is the burying of a man alive. Thou art idle, and wilt not
labor with God to be quickened. When David was poring and blundring, and
looking upon the vanity of his mind, O he was as dead as a timber-log, it
deaded his soul quite and clean to see his corruptions, but what does he do? he
labored with God against it; he labored with fasting and meditating, and
praying again and again, that the Lord would be pleased to quicken him, Psalm.
119.
nine times in one Psalm, Turn away mine eyes from beholding vanity, Ver. 154.
and quicken thou me in thy way, Psalm. 119. 37. Quicken me, O Lord, according
to thy Word, in one verse. Ver. 156.
Quicken me according to thy judgments, in another verse. Ver. 149.
O Lord quicken me according to thy judgment, in another verse. Ver. 159.
Quicken thou me according to thy lovingkindeness. Ver. 88.
Again, Quicken thou me after thy loving-kindnesse. Again, Ver. 107.
Quicken me, O Lord, according to thy Word, in another verse. He never would
let his heart alone, till he had gotten life and spirit, and quickening again.
As long as thou art lazy in good duties, no wonder though thou be dead,
laboring and striving in good exercises will heat a man's soul, and make it
more zealous.

The third means is keeping good company, as Cleopas was heated by being in
Christ's company, Did not our hearts burn within us, says he, while he talk
twith us in the way? Luke 24. 32. As the bawdy Poet said of his sweetheart,
Accede ad ignem hanc, Come to this fire: a whore inflames an adulterer, one
wicked man heats another unto lust, and to sin. So every child of God is a
fire for to heat thee. Would thou be zealous? sort with Gods people, keep
company with the Saints, and such as excel in grace and virtue. Two are better
then one, for if they fall, the one will lift up his fellow; but woe to him
that is alone when he falls, for he has not another to help him up. Again,
if two lie together, says the Wise man, then they have heat, but how can one
be warm alone, Eccl. 4. 9, 10, 11. Do thou complain, I have no zeal, I would
be glad to be zealous, but I am exceedingly lukewarm; do what I can, so I am,
and so I am likely to be: alas! do thou ever look to be otherwise, as long as
thou can company with vain persons, such as may be will talk of heaven now
and then, but there is no heat nor warmth in their speeches, they are
deadhearted themselves, and so are their speeches, dead and without life. O but
I live in a place that is wicked, and there is scarce one godly man in the house
where I dwell, and I can find none for to warm me. Do thou so? so did
Obadiah in Ahabs Court, there was never a good Courtier to converse with, and
therefore what did he do? he made use of Gods Prophets in private, 1 Kin. 18.
4. and though he might not be seen in their company for fear of losing their
lives, he bid them in a cave, and there he would have a bout with them in
secret. Thou which neglectest the society of the Saints, never expect to be
zealous. Thomas was very faithless, and full of his doubtings: One reason was
this, the Disciples of Christ had meetings together, and Thomas was not with
them, says the Text, Ioh. 20. 24. The coals that lie together in the hearth,
you see how they glow and are fired, while the little coals that are fallen
off, and lie by, separate from their company, are black without fire. If ever
thou desire to be zealous, make much of the fellowship of the Saints: thou
can hardly come where two or three Saints are met together, but thou shall
find Christ in the midst of them.

The fourth means is, 4. Shunning the occasions of sin.
Shunning the occasions of sin: Moses would not leave so much as a hoof behind
him in Egypt, Exodus 10. 26. that there might be no occasion for the people to
turn back into Egypt; had he left but a hoof behind there, that were an
occasion to go thither to fetch it. Abraham would not take so much as a thread
or a shoelatchet of the King of Sodom, when he offered him, lest there should
be any hint to the flesh, to distrust in God, Thou can never be zealous, Genesis
14 23
unless thou shun the occasions of sin: If the heart have but an occasion once
to be vain, it is a thousand to one, but so it will be, deadness will steal
on it upon the least occasion. Give a thief but an occasion of having a booty,
his fingers cannot hold. When David had given occasion to the enemies of the
Lord to blaspheme, Nemo diu tu^us periculo proximus.
the Lord told him he would punish him, 2 Sa. 12. 14. Why? because if they had
but an occasion they would be sure for to take it. Let no man put an occasion
to fall in his brothers way, Romans 14. 13. Alas! if the flesh have no occasion,
it will lay hold on it; it is not enough to keep out of a sin, but thou must go
far from it, not only from sin, but also from all occasions of sin. Keep thee
far from a false matter, Exo. 23. 7. One thinks I may go so far and not
sin. Thus far I may do, and so far is this lawful; but let me tell thee, if
thou go so far, thine own heart will have occasion to go further, and then
thou art undone: Nimia licentia sumus omnes deteriores, Terent.
says Terence. We are all the worse for taking too much liberty: if once it be
an occasion to the flesh, thou art gone. Zeal cannot abide the occasions of
evil; the least occasions will choke it.

The fifth means is, 5. Means to eschew the beginnings of sin.
to eschew the beginnings of sin; Peter did but begin to rebuke Christ, Master,
spare thy self, he began to rebuke him, says the Text, Mat. 16. 22. but Christ
did so hate the very beginnings of that sin, that he said, Get thee behind me,
Satan. The devil was in that beginning of sin. The Scribes and the Pharisees
began to reason, saying, Who is this that speaks blasphemies? Vigilandu^ est
maxim tentationis initio. Greg.
And Jesus condemned these beginnings of reasonings, Luke 5. 21. Those that
were invited to the Feast in the Gospel, they came not, but fell to excuses,
and were cast into utter darkness for their labor. But how came they to fall
into that sin? the Scripture shows plainly, because they did not eschew the
beginnings of the sin; they all with one consent began to make excuse, Luk
14. 18 principiis obsta, set thy self against the beginning of sin; if thou
suffer thy heart to begin once, it will be sure to go farther. The Spirit of
God has a good phrase, fall into sin. He that stands, let him take heed lest
he fall: A man that stands upon a high rock, if he do not look to the beginning
of his fall, he cannot stop himself till he is quite fallen down to the bottom,
and if not by mere hap he catch hold somewhere, which it is a thousand to one if
ever he do, if he do not, I say, it is a wonder if he break not his neck. Thou
can never have the life of grace in thee, unless thou take heed of the
beginnings of sin.

Be exhorted all ye that fain would fear God, Exhortation to be zealous.
to be zealous.

First consider, Ye can never be revenged on your worst enemies, 1. Else you
can never be revenged on your worst enemies.
unless ye be zealous; ye would be glad to be revenged on your sworn enemies.
Sampson begged hard of the Lord, that he might be revenged on the Philistims
for his two eyes; but thou have worse enemies then the Philistims were to him.
Sin, the World, the Flesh, and the Devil, these are the worst enemies that ever
mortal man had, it is good to be revenged on them; thou can never be
revenged on them, except thou be zealous; there is no enemy besides that it is
lawful to be revenged on, but only upon these, on these thou may lawfully:
these have done thee much spite, they have brought thee into the estate of
wrath and damnation, they have made thee accursed, and liable to hell torments
for ever, they have plucked out the two eyes of thy soul; now if thou would
be zealous, thou may be revenged upon them. The Apostle puts zeal and revenge
together, yea, what zeal, yea, what revenge, 2 Cor 7. 11. If thou be
zealous, thou may be revenged upon sin that has done thee so much mischief:
it has troubled thy peace, defiled thy conscience, disabled thee from
worshipping of God, hindered many good things from thee. Never had thou any
hurt, or any sorrow, or any evil, but thou may thank sin for it: Just cause
have thou to be revenged upon sin, there is an imbred desire of revenge in a
man upon those that wrong him: the Heathen could say, Est vindicta bonum vita
jucundius ipsa.

Revenge is sweeter then life it self: Iuvenal. Sat. 13.
Here it is true, and no where else. All other revenge is a damnable praemunire
against God, vengeance is mine, says he, and who is he that revengeth himself
to entrench upon Gods right? but here revenge is commanded, yea, it is sweeter
then life: here revenge and spare not, and this is the way: get zeal, and be as
hot as a furnace in anger against sin, and beat it as Moses did the
Israelites calf, into dust and powder; has thy filthy cousening heart deceived
thee so often? hereby thou may be revenged on it, be zealous to search it,
and curb it, and tame it; have thy lusts been greedy, and proud, and sensual;
this humor they must have, and this fashion they must follow, and this
pleasure they must take, and this liberty they must use. O if thou would be
zealous, thou may easily be revenged on thy lusts, hereby thou may be
revenged on the devil, and spite his kingdom to advance Christ's; hereby thou
may be revenged on thy flesh, that has played the traitor so often with
thee, thou may afflict it, and master it, and block it, and subdue it; hereby
thou may tread upon the world, that has so often ensnared thee, thou may
scorn it and contemn it, and all the glory of it, and count it as dross and
dung in comparison of Christ: hereby thou may trample Satan under thy feet.
It is a strange thing how little men study to be revenged on these enemies; let
our own brother give us but a crosse-word, we are at daggers drawing to be
revenged; but the devil may baffle us, and the devil may tempt us, and beguile
us, we put it all up; Let a servant but anger us a little, and offend us but in
a piece of service, or an errand, O we are so revengefull, and ready to make
them smart for it! but sin may cross us in our souls, and rob us of Christ,
and deprive us of grace, and mercy, and peace, and all; yet we are good friends
with it, we take nothing amiss; alas! these men are monsters and mad men, one
day thou shall see that sin, and thy lust, and Satan, whose temptations thou
have been led by, etc. they are the worst enemies in the world; and if ever
thou desire to be revenged upon them, O endeavor to be zealous.

Secondly, 2. Zeal enables us to do good unto others.
Consider thou will never be able to do good unto others, unless thou be
zealous. When men go dreamingly on in Religion, they can never do good upon
others: what do others think? they think basely and meanly thereof, as if it
were a matter of nothing; but when they see a man zealous, this affects them
indeed, if any thing will do it. When a man is zealous at a game, he laugheth
exceedingly, he is as merry as he can stand on his legs: another man that shall
see it, will be apt to demand what fine merry pleasant game is that? so it is
with ambitious men, when a man is zealous for a living, he rides through thick
and thin, through frost and snow all the night long, this friend he seeks to,
and that Noble man he flies to, to help him in his suit: what will folks say?
certainly he is going about some great living or other, he is so eager about
it. So if thou would be zealous for God, and fervent in religion, men would
be compelled to conceive better of godliness, and of Christ, then thou
might provoke others to godliness. Zeal is a provoking grace. Your zeal
has provoked very many, 2 Cor. 9. 2. As zeal in charity provokes, so does zeal
in every good work provoke Where Theodoret observes the wisdom of Paul,
Theodoret in locum.
for he provokes the Macedonians by the zeal of the Corinthians, and the
Corinthians by the zeal of the Macedonians; for zeal does mutually provoke one
another. O what a deal of good might thou do in the house where thou
dwell, in the Parish where thou live, in the Country where thou art, if
thou would labor to be zealous! I knew an old man, whether he be dead now or
alive, I know not, that used constantly to go to the laboring men in the
field, and catechize them, and pose them in Religion, as they were reaping and
working, he would go to men's shops where he was acquainted, and stir them up to
have care of their souls, and by this means brought above forty men and women
to seek out for Heaven, that before had no more care that way, then if they had
been like a company of beasts. Would thou not be glad to do good? thou will
never be able to do it, except thou be zealous. Paul had women, and sundry
private Christians, that are said to labor with him in the Gospel. This, this
beloved, would cause Religion to thrive here among us.

Thirdly, 3. Peoples zeal encourages Ministers.
Consider I pray you, thou will discourage us that are Gods Ministers, except
thou be zealous. If men would be zealous in hearing, and zealous proficients,
it would make us go cheerfully on in our callings. When Titus told Paul the
fervent mind of the Corinthians, it encouraged the Apostle; when he told us
your fervent mind we rejoiced the more, 2 Cor. 7. 7. (...), so it is in the
Original, when he told us your zeal. Saint Paul was cheared to hear that. What
greater discouragement to a Schoolmaster, then that his scholars should be dull
and not profit? What greater disheartning to a Captain, then that his soldiers
should be fainthearted, and without life? and what greater grief to a Minister,
then that his people should be senseless and livelesse? It made Jeremy weary
of his life: Mic. 7. 1.
It made the Prophet Micah lament bitterly. Woe is me, I am like the Grape
gleaners: It made the Prophet Isay cry out, I have labored in vain. On the
contrary, when the people are zealous and forward, and drink in the words of
eternal life with all greediness, and bring forth fruit with abundance, this
makes a Minister go merrily on in his function. Ambros.
Zelo Ecclesia Dei congregatur, says Saint Ambrose: It is zeal that does
gather a Church, the zeal of the Minister, and the zeal of the people; the Lord
quicken us in his mercy, that we may encourage one another daily. Let us be
encouraged by you, when ye are reproved be not offended. You think the Minister
spights you, alas! we have no reason to wish any of your fingers to ache, much
less to wish that your souls should perish. When S. Paul commanded that the
incestuous Corinthian should be delivered to Satan did he wish him any hurt?
No, Deliver him unto Satan, says he, for the destruction of the flesh, that
the spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus, 1 Cor. 5. 5. (...), etc.
Chrysostom.
says Chrysostom. No mortal man loved that offender in Corinth more then Paul
did, says he, when he would have him delivered unto Satan. It was only that he
might know he was a damned wretch, unless he amended, and that the devil
should have him unless he were humbled. What was his reason? his reason was
this, that his soul might be saved in that day. O the Minister preaches
damation so often, he is unmercifull to our souls. O my brethren, we intend you
the greatest mercies of heaven in so saying, it is that ye may not run into
damnation, but may repent and believe the Gospel. Do not thus discourage us
whom God has sent to you as his Ministers to labor in the word and doctrine
among you, but stir up your selves to be zealous in hearing and obeying, that
we may give up an account of your souls unto God with all cheerfullnesse.

Fourthly consider, 4. Zeal makes a man excel. Proverb.
You can never be excellent, if ye be not zealous. A Christian should strive to
excel: aut Caesar, aut nullus; nothing but the best should suffice a
Christian. Would thou then be excellent? get this same zeal: zeal runs
after the best things, Covet earnestly the best gifts, 1 Cor. 12. 31. The Word
in the Original is (...), be zealous after the best things: Would thou be
excellent in prayer, and excellent in the duties of religion? be zealous
therein. A Christian is like fire: fire mounts up absolutely aloft, and ascends
above all. So does a Christian: he is better then all the men of this world put
them all together: like Job, there is none like him in all the earth. Every man
else fain would be excellent, a worldling strives to excel others in wealth, a
politician to excel others in wisdom, a scholar to excel others in learning,
a tradesman to excel others in his profession. He is of a base spirit that
does not desire to excel in some thing: and shall not a Christian then desire
to excel in grace?

Fifthly, 5. Zeal makes men like Angels.
Consider I pray, who ye may be like if once ye be zealous; ye may be like unto
the Angels of heaven, they are spirits and flaming fire, says the Apostle,
Heb. 1. 7. if thou art zealous for God, thou art a bodily Seraphim; though thou
can never be without sin as long as thou live in this world, Gregor.
yet as Gregory speaks, in the mouth of zeal thou may swallow up thy sins;
nothing will devour and consume sin so well as true zeal. O get a coal of this
fire then from Gods Altar, and heat thy heart with it, and while thou may be
like the blessed Angels of God, be not like the brutish sons of the old Adam.
Zeal is it that makes an Angel to be an Angel. Angeli sine zelo nihil sunt,
says Ambrose, Ambros.
the Angels are nothing without zeal. If thou had zeal unto God, then thou
might be like unto Angels.

Sixthly, 6. We have greatneed of zeal.
Consider what infinite need thou have of true zeal. Suppose a great frost, and
a tedious cold winter were a coming, and then no firing were to be had, would
not men buy as much fuel as they could get, and stack it, and store it, that
they might have it at their need? otherwise they were not able to live, nor to
dress their own sustenance, they would certainly starve if they should have no
firing in such a cold time. Beloved, I speak to such as have ears to hear,
there is a cold time of religion a coming, and the wrath of God is ready to
break forth, to plague men's souls with key-coldnesse this way, because they
have despised the zeal of the Lord, and no firing to be had then, God knows how
soon the power of Gods Word may be taken from us. You who love your own souls,
look about, lay up some firing, and be not slothful in all this business; do
all diligence to store up grace for your selves, this will help you to zeal,
not slothful in business, fervent in spirit. Romans 12. 11. (...), so it is in
the Original, zealous in spirit. If ye will not be slothful in business, ye
shall quickly be zealous in spirit. O get quickly the spirit of prayer, to be
zealous in prayer by faith, it will be the best string to your bow, it will be
your only thing left, nothing left you but prayer in secret unto God, had not
ye need to be diligent for that? When a poor cripple has nothing to trust to
but only his begging, he will ply that When a poor day-labourer has never a
foot of ground, nor any thing, but only his fingers end to maintain him and his
family, he he will be sure to employ them; alas, if he should have a wound in
his hands, or he should lose the use of his fingers, what shall he do? when a
man's house leans mainly upon one pillar, he will look to that pillar. Thus it
is with thee. Thou shall have little else besides prayer, thou must get it out
of thy fingers ends. Now we that are Gods Ministers study all the week long to
quicken you here when ye come to Gods House, while ye are thinking of other
matters; but if God should once take away us from you, all the work lies upon
your backs, and ye have little else besides Prayer and Gods Word for to help
you. O therefore be not slothful in this business, get a sure hold in Christ,
that ye may be able to hold in the evil day. No matter though the world do
deride you; for if ye have true zeal, says Chrysostom, ye will fear praise or
disprase no more then if you were all alone in the world, and no man besides
you. If no persuasions can prevail with thee to the trading for this zeal that
I speak of, hear what the Lord Jesus does peremptorily threaten: It shall come
to pass that I will spue thee out of my mouth.

The XIII. Sermon.
Col. 3. 2. Set your affections on things that are above, etc.
HItherto I have shown how the affections must be set upon God, In the context
are these motives to set our affections on God.
and especially the zeal of them. I have shown the woeful estate of that soul,
that does not set its affections this way, together with sundry uses of the
point. Now let me persuade you with motives to this duty, 1. Because else we
deny our interest in Christ's resurrection.
namely, to set your affections on God. The Apostle in this place uses five
strong persuasions hereto, as the words may also be construed.

First, by a strong obtestation, as a mother persuades her child, as ever thou
art my child do this for me. If ye then be risen with Christ, seek those
things that are above: If ye be risen with Christ, set your affection on things
above, (...) as ever ye be risen with Christ, do it, as he beseeches the
Philipians. If there be therefore any consolation in Christ, if any comfort of
love, if any fellowship of the Spirit, if any bowels and mercies, fulfill ye my
joy, Phil. 2. 1, 2. q. d. as ever ye acknowledge any comfort in Christ, as ever
ye believe any communion of the holy Ghost, any mercies and bowels in God,
fulfill this exhortation: this is a strong persuasion indeed, for if this
cannot prevail with you, ye deny all the comforts of Christ, ye deny all
communion of the Spirit, ye deny all the mercies of God, and therefore it is
strong; as a mother counts it a strong entreaty to her child; as ever thou art
my child, as ever thou take me to be thy mother, obey me in this; for if her
child will not yield, he must needs deny the womb that bare him, and the paps
that gave him suck. Will thou deny the Lord Jesus? will thou deny his
resurrection, and all interest in it? if thou will not deny it, set thine
affections on God, as ever thou art risen with Christ, be sure for to do it.
Will thou set thine affections upon the things of this world, when Christ
entreats thee as ever thou art his, to set thine affections on him?

Secondly, 2. Because we are dead to the things of this world.
The Apostle here persuades by a strong argumentation; for ye are dead, says
he, verse 3. Set your affections on things above, not on things on the earth,
for ye are dead, ye are dead to the things of this life; will ye set your
affections to those things ye are dead to? ye are dead to the things of this
life, if ye be Christ's, and therefore set not your affections on them; mortui
non mordent, as we say, dead men bite not one another with slanders and
reproaches; did ye ever see a dead man go up and down drinking and bowzing,
whoring and gaming, and carking and caring? I Will as soon believe that a dead man
can do this, as a true Christian. I confess that corruption may carry a good
Christian into sin, but he is dead to these courses, he cannot set his
affections hereon, he is dead; and will ye set your affections on the things of
this world, now ye are dead? Bring a child of God to your drinkings, and your
whiffings, his affections are dead, he has no heart to them: bring him to your
sportings, and your vain merriments, and your fooleries, you shall see him so
dead to them, that ye shall have no delight in his company. S. Paul makes this
an argument ab absurdo. How shall we that are dead to sin, live any longer
therein? Romans 6. 2. How is this possible? I shall as soon believe it, as that a
dead man should walk along your streets in a winding sheet: What? know you not
this, says he, what a Christian, and yet his affections on such courses as
these? this is impossible, how shall ye? So that this is another strong
persuasion, because ye are dead, therefore set not your affections below.

Thirdly, 3. Because Christ is our life. Vt vitam redimas. Horat.
The Apostle here persuades by a strong reason, Christ is your life, ver. 4.
Life is sweet, it is true, and a man's affections are strong to his life, vestes
ac omnia vendes, thou will part with clothes, and part with moneys, and part
with lands, and part with all for thy life: thine affections are strong set to
life. Now Christ is thy life, or else thou art but a damned wretch: if thou
be a true Christian, Christ is thy life, and wilt not thou set thine
affections on thy life; his Commandments are thy life, his Word is thy life,
his ordinances are thy life, his promises, his favors, his blood, are thy
life, and will thou not set thine affections on thy life? If thou be a true
Christian, thou will pray for life, and repent for life, and sanctify the
Sabbath for life, and put up an injury, and be obedient to God for life, all
thine affections conspire together for life: thou love thy life and thou
desire thy life, and thou rejoycest in thy life, and thou fear that which
is hurtful to life, and hate that which is contrary to life, all thine
affections will be to thy life; 4. Because Christ will bring us to glory.
and therefore set thine affections on Christ, for he is thy life.

Fourthly, The Apostle here persuades by a strong deduction. When Christ shall
appear, then ye also shall appear with him in glory, ver. 4. this is an
excellent motive to set thine affections on God, because he will bring thee to
glory, every man affects glory. Now all the glory of this world is a blaze, as
our Proverb is, a good Proverb it is, it is but a blaze, and not worthy thine
affections, none but base hearts will affect this; thou art the child of wrath
and damnation from the cradle to the coffin, thou art going to hell and
confusion, if thou be not a new creature in Christ: and will thou affect to
be a Gentleman, affect to be a Knight or a Lord? will thou affect to get credit
and honor, and repute among men, to be praised by men's mouths? this is even as
if a thief should affect credit as he is going to the gallows. Set thine
affections then upon God and upon Christ, when he appears he will help thee to
a kingdom of glory. Christ is the King of glory; Who is the King of glory? it
is the Lord of hosts, he is the King of glory; set thine affections on him
then. The vulgar have a pretty saying, He that is in favor with the King, is
half a King. What may not such an one do, what may not such an one have, if he
be in favor with a King? potens potentum amicitia, Potent is the favor that a
man has with him that is potent. And therefore set thine affections upon
Christ, let thine affections be in favor with Christ; what is that then thou
can not have? thine affections are potent, if they be in favor with him; all
power is given to me in heaven and earth, says Christ, Mat. 28. 18. Christ is
very potent: if thine affections be not set on him, he is potent enough to damn
thee; if they be, he is potent to save thee, and when he appears, then shall
thou appear with him in glory.

Fifthly, 5. If our affections be not let on Christ, they are out of order.
The Apostle here persuades by a strong illation or inference. Mortify
therefore, says he, mortify your earthly members, inordinate affection, etc.
verse. 5. mark, he calls the affection, when it is not set aright upon God, he
calls it inordinate affection; if thine affections run more after the things of
this life, then after Christ and his Word, and his Commandments, and his
Ordinances, thine affections are disorderly, they are all out of order. Order
is to be observed in all things, and will thou suffer disorder break in upon
thy soul? disorder turns all topsie turvie; disorder will undo a whole
Kingdom: if a Kingdom be out of order, it must needs go to wrack. If a family
be out of order, it must needs be brought to naught; nothing can stand without
order, no art can consist without order: and certainly thy soul cunnot stand
without order; if thine affections be out of order, thy soul is in civil wars,
and cannot stand but must perish. Now if thine affections be not set upon God,
they are all out of order. What Is the reason that men are so forgetful of
their souls? if their bellies do hunger, they remember to fill them; if their
backs be naked, they remember to cloth them; if their markets be not made,
they remember to dispatch them; but their souls may perish and be damned, they
do not remember them: What Is the reason of this? their affections are out of
order. Ordo est matter memoriae, Order is the mother of memory; a man can never
remember his businesses, if all be out of order. Saint Paul rejoiced to behold
their order in Colosse, Col. 2. 5. he was glad to see that all their affairs
were in order, why? then he hoped all would go well with them: David prays God
to order his steps: Order my steps in thy Word, and let not any iniquity have
dominion over me: Psa. 119. 133. He knew that his lusts would be like
masterlesse hounds, he should have no hoe with them, if his soul were out of
order. Order my steps in thy word, says he, and let not any iniquity have
dominion over me. If thine affections be out of order, alas, every lust will
domineer, every corruption will be like a masterlesse hound, as we say. Job
says, that death is out of order, Job 10. 22. And Aquinas and other Divines
thence do observe, that hell is out of order; and will thou suffer a disorder
to come among thine affections? alas, they will be so busy about the things of
this life, that thou shall find no while for better employments, no while for
repentance and amendment, no while for bethinking thy self of thy ways to
provide for thy soul. Disordered persons are busybodies, says the Text. We
hear there be some among you that walk disorderly among you, and are
busybodies, 2 Th. 3. 11. If thine affections be disorderly, they will be so
busy, that thou shall never find leisure to trafick for Heaven, or the
salvation of thy soul. Beloved, this must needs then be a strong persuasion to
set your affections above, because otherwise thine affections are all out of
order. Thus far the Apostle here helps us with motives expressed in the context.

That which the Apostle begins, Other motives to set our affections on God.
let the theme of my Text go further in the same. Many and sweet motives there
are that we may be stirred up to this duty by, to set our affections on God.

The first motive is taken from the easiness that our affectiput us in to
prosecute any thing we affect: 1. Because it is easy to prosecute that we
affect.
if our affections be set on a thing, they make it easy to prosecute; if thou
affect the things of the world, thine affections make it easy to labor and to
toil, easy to rise early, easy to sit up late, easy to travel, and go
through any other difficulty: the covetous man thinks his labor to be easy,
so he may gain and get profit; the voluptuous man thinks it easy to hunt and
to hawk, and ride himself out of breath, so he may have pleasure and delight.
Take thine ease, says the rich man in the Gospel, take thine ease, eat, drink,
and be merry, Luke 12. 19. He thought it easy to pull down, and to build up,
easy to gather in his harvests and his wealth, easy to be an Epicure and a
drunkard, and voluptuous, why? because his affections were set hereupon: is it
so that thine affections are able to make any business easy, O set thine
affections upon God, repentance will be easy, mortification will be easy, and
self-denial will be easy, and to suffer all the reproaches of Christ will be
easy, if once thine affections were settled that way; knowledge is easy to him
that understands, Prove. 14 6. The scorner seeks it, says Solomon, and he
cannot find it; the worldling seeks it and he cannot find it; it is hard,
says one, to know how to pray and be holy, it is hard says another, to know
how to repent and give over my sins, and be strict, and I cannot do it. No?
that is, because thine affections are bent another way? but if thine affections
were set upon Heaven, this knowledge were easy. Come unto me ye that labor,
says the world, I will make it easy to travel, and cark, and care; come unto
me, says pleasure, I will make it easy to be merry and to laugh: come unto
me, says the flesh, I will make it easy to be revenged on him that does wrong
thee; I will make it easy to obtain this and that. So says the Lord Jesus,
Come unto me ye that labor, and I will give you rest, my yoke is easy, Mat.
11. 30. Whatever thou affectest, come to it, and thou shall find it to be
easy. A man would wonder how the laboring man will sweat and work till he is
faint, to get a little maintenance, the reason is this, he affects it. One
would wonder what dangers Alexander did run through, to enlarge his kingdom and
his power, the reason is this, he affects it. One would wonder how Baals
Priests cut themselves after their manner with knives* and with lancers, till
the blood gushed out upon them, 1 Kin. 18. 28. the reason was this, they
affected will worship. Any thing is easy when a man does affect it: would
thou persuade a man to any hardship under heaven? L. 4. c. 12. de doctr. Christ.
do but turn his affections unto it, and thou have prevailed: Flectere est
victoriae, says Austin, do but bend a man's affections, and thou have prevailed
with him. O say thou, I find it so hard to be heavenly, so hard to be
zealous, so hard to depend upon God; what is the reason of this? thine
affections are earthly; if thine affections were set right, it would be the
easiest of ten thousand My heart has such a haunt, and I find it so hard to
break my self of it; I am choleric, and I find it so hard for to bridle it; I
am poor and afflicted, and I find it so hard for to bear it; alas, alas, it is
the easiest thing in the world, if thine affections were to it. Would thou
not be glad to count it to be easy to serve God, easy to walk in all
holiness; no such treasure as to live at ease, as we say. I know thou would
be glad to find it easy to abandon thy corruptions, and please God better
then thou do, O labor then to set thine affections on God, and all things
are easy. Should we persuade thee to part with thy geegaws, thou art so loath,
it is a hard task to persuade thee, that is, because thou will be proud still:
should we persuade thee to discard wicked company out of thy house, thou
keep an Alehouse, and thou art loath to thrust them forth of thy house, that
is, because thou would fain have their custom, thine affections are that
way, and therefore it is not easy to persuade thee, but set thine affections
aright, and every difficulty is easy.

The second motive is taken from the shamelessenesse of the affections: 1. A
man is not ashamed of what he affects. Agesilaus. Philopaem.
If thou be once deeply affected with any thing, thou will never be ashamed
of it. See a proud fantastical fool that affects his long locks, and his
lovelock. Every one that is sober-minded and sees him, is ready to say, what a
humerous fool is yonder man, what a ruffian he is! how like a Mastiffe or a
Bedlam does he look! yet the fool is not ashamed thereof, because he affects
it. See a lightheaded wretch that is ever a fooling, and ever a jesting, and
ever a toying, and playing, and this sport, and that sport. Every grave man
that beholds him is apt for to say, what a vain man is this? I never saw such a
lightheaded sot in my life; yet the wretch is not ashamed thereof, because he
affects it. The swearer swears, and is not ashamed: the worldling covets, and
is not ashamed; the mocker mocks, and is not ashamed; though every man in his
wits that does view them, marvels at their madness, and how desperate they be:
all cry shame on them, yet they are not ashamed because they affect it. Thou
have a whores forehead, thou refusest to be ashamed, Jer. 3. 3. The whore whose
affections are set on her lovers, and her adulterers, cannot be ashamed, but
she dares go on for all the shame of the earth; why? because she affects them.
Nero was not ashamed of his villainies in the open market of Rome. Vespasian was
not ashamed of his stinking coveteousnesse by urine. If it be thus, O why do
thou not set thine affections on God, and on Christ, and his laws? thou
could never be ashamed hereof, if once thou did truly affect them. When
David's affections were stirred to dance before the Ark of God, and put off his
garment to do it the better, fie upon thee, fie upon thee, says Micol fie for
shame, what art thou not ashamed to make thy self vile on this fashion? I will
be more vile yet, says he, if this be vileness, to rejoice before God, if
this be esteemed a vileness, I will be more vile yet: he could not be ashamed,
because his affections were set upon Gods Ark. Out you Puritan, you are a vile
companion, to be so precise as you are; you must be reproving and talking of
the Scripture upon every occasion, out you hypocrite you, are you not ashamed
to do thus? No, no, he is not ashamed, he can never be ashamed: if this be to
be a Puritan, to be holy and strict against sin, I will be more a Puritan yet;
If this be to be an hypocrite, to be laboring to draw others from their lusts,
I will be a more hypocrite yet. If this be singularity, not to do as the men of
this world do, I will be more singular yet; I will speak of Gods testimonies
and it were before Kings; and I will not be ashamed, Psalm. 119. 46. Impudence,
and not to be ashamed, is a very great matter; if it be in sin, it is
desperate, it is a sign a man is desperately affected toward sin; but if it
be in good, it is admirable; it is a holy kind of impudence, it is a sign a
man is deeply affected toward good, so affected that nothing can make him
ashamed. Never will a man be ashamed of that which he affects; fie for shame,
will you be rich and take in such profits? will you be in such credit? fie,
will you be a Lord and a Nobleman in such honor? will you be learned and gather
so much knowledge? He conceives they are all fools that say so, though
peradventure they do not affect such things, yet he does, and therefore he will
not be ashamed of them. So if thine affections be set upon Christ, thou will
never be ashamed of his cross, never ashamed of his badge, never ashamed of
his Word. The children of the devil are not ashamed of their abominations; they
can drink and be drunken, and vomit, and reel, and not be ashamed; they can be
proud and carnal, and have no more religion in them then the stock, and not be
ashamed. Agesilaus will not be ashamed of his halting, Philopaemenes will not
be ashamed of his deformednesse, when they hold it their credit to be thus as
they were. O therefore set thine affections on God, and thou shall never be
ashamed of his ways.

The third motive is taken from the hankeringnesse of the affections. 3. What
the ^ffections be upon, they will hanker after that.
Look what thou set thine affections upon, that thou will hanker after. If
thou set thine affections on the things of this life* thy heart will so hanker
after them, that they will haunt thee whatever thou go about; they will
haunt thee at prayer time, and haunt thee at Church time* they will haunt thee
in the Sabbath, and haunt thee at the Sacrament; like the Fly in Albertus, that
was ever hankring after the bald head: though he flapt it off again and again,
yet still it would be hankring, he could never be rid of it, it would still be
a hankring. Who would be thus troubled with his affections? he cannot go by an
Alehouse, but his affections water to go in: he cannot see a pair of Tables,
but his affections hanker after a game: he cannot meet with an injury, but his
affections itch to revenge; he cannot speak well nor do any thing which is
commendable, but his affections must be swelling with pride. Who, I say, would
be thus troubled with his affections? Though God had forbid Lots wife to look
back upon pain of his heavy displeasure, nevertheless her affections did so
hanker after her house, and her country, and her ancient acquaintance, that
she looked behind her, Genesis 19. 26. Her carnal affections did so haunt her
every step she took, that they never lind till that she looked back. They are
greedy dogs, they look to their own way, Isa. 56. 11. Thine affections if they
be not set right, they are like greedy dogs in the Kitchen, that are ever
looking to the platters, be the Mistress eye never so little off, they are
licking instantly. So thine affections are ever hankering after that which thou
affectest: and therefore thou art best to set thine affections on God: for look
where they are set, there they will be hankering. If ever thy heart be turned
to God, and thine affections converted to him, they will ever be hankring and
looking after God. At that day shall a man look to his maker, and his eyes
shall have respect to the holy one of Israel, Isa. 17. 7. At that day, that is,
when God shall convert them, then their hearts shall ever be hankring and
looking after God. O then set thine affections on God, if thou desire thy
heart should hanker after God. Thou art yet no better then a wretch, till thus
it be with thee. If thine affections be ever hankering after thy pleasures and
thy copesmates, and thy vanities, thou art never well but when thou art at
them. The Sermon is quickly tedious, and prayer tedious, and godly discourses
are tedious unto thee: why? because thy mind hankers about othergates matters;
as long as it is thus thou can not be saved. Look unto me, says Christ, and
be ye saved all the ends of the earth, Isa. 45. 22. Ye can never be saved,
unless ye hanker and look after me, says the Lord; as the Heliotrope or the
turn-sol that ever looks toward the Sun, so a gracious heart does after the
Lord. God counts it an honor unto him, that the soul should be ever a
hankering and ever a looking after him; Seneca de tranq.
Aestimari nos put amus toties, quoties aspici, says Seneca; it is a true
saying; we think we are esteemed when men do look after us; So God counts it an
honor to his Majesty, when our souls do hanker and look after him. It is true,
the things of this life may chance to draw away our minds now and then, and
make us look after them: but if we have any grace, so much as a grain of
mustard seed, our souls will ever be hankering and looking after God. So it was
with Jonas, though his corruptions had made him to look off from God,
nevertheless he could not abide to be in that case, his heart is again looking
and hankering after God: oh for the light of his countenance, oh for his grace
and his Spirit, oh for power and strength yet to be resolute for God, Yet will
I look again toward thy holy Temple, Jonah 2. 4. Let God afflict me, I cannot
but look to him; let God fling me into the Whales belly, I cannot but hanker
after him, let him cast me into the belly of hell, yet will I look again says
he: his affections were set upon God, and therefore did his heart ever hanker
and look after God. This is a sweet motive to persuade us: if we would once set
our affections on God, our souls would ever hanker and look after God.

The fourth motive is taken from the spurrings of the affections, 4. Our
affections spur upon to what we affect* Melan. in Ethic. Lud Viv. l 3 de anima.
they spur a man to that he affects: they are animi calcaria, as Melancthon
does call them, they are as it were the spurs of the soul. What is the reason
that men go on in any business like lazy jaded Asses, says Vives, because
they have no affection to it. What is the reason they go so sluggishly on to
good duties, they sit so senselesly still in seats at a Sermon, they kneel so
lumpishly and dead-heartedly in prayer to God? because they have no spurs in
their sides, they have no affection to these things. Now if we would set our
affections on God, we would feel in our bosoms a certain spur that spurs us to
every good word and work? a gracious heart is said to stir up it self, Exodus
36. 2. God counts those prayers no prayers, that are not full of these
spurrings and stirrings; there is none that calls upon thy name, that
stirs up himself to take hold on thee. Isa. 64. 7. Do thou call upon God,
and have thou no spurrings nor stirrings in the duty? do thou not spur up thy
self to pray with good life? the Lord says* thou do not call upon his name
at all. As ever thou desire to be stirred up and spurred on to good
exercises, set thine affections on God, they are the spurs of the soul: the
soul goes cheerfully on, when it goes with affection.

The fifth motive is taken from the heartinesse of the affections; 5.
and therefore the heart is many times and often in Scripture put for the
affections. My heart, says Deborah, is toward the Governors of Israel, Iud.
5 9 that is, mine affection is toward them. O ye Corinthians, our mouth is
open unto you, our heart is enlarged, 2 Cor. 6. 11. that is, our affections are
enlarged. Look whatever thou affectest, thy heart is set upon it; this motive
is strong to persuade, for if the affections be in a manner the very heart of
the soul, this may well move us to set our affections upon God; will thou
settle thy heart any where else but only upon God? O how hainously does the
Lord take it at thy hands, that thou have no more heart unto him? He gives thee
his Word, and thou have no heart to it; he gives thee his Sabbath, and thou
have no heart to it; he gives thee his Sacrament, and his Ordinances, and his
Sanctuary, and his Commandments, and thou have no heart to them. O the Lord is
so angry with thy soul, that he calls thee a fool and a sot, and he repents that
ever he has vouchsafed these things to such wretches as thou art. Wherefore is
there a price in the hand of a fool to get wisdom, seeing he has no heart to
it? Prove. 17. 16. Wherefore, says God, and to what end is a price put into
your hand to get wisdom? Ye might have gotten wisdom a long time or ere now,
how to be new creatures and in Christ, how to get grace, and peace, and mercy
with God; ye have had abundance of prices put into your hands, a price of
abundance of Sacraments, and Sabbaths, a price of abundance of Sermons and
exhortations, many mercies and favors, many threatenings and warnings, health,
strength, life, liberty; ye have had a fair time to get grace and holiness in
Jesus Christ; prices have been put into your hands, but ye have had no heart
nor affection to them. The Lord is exceedingly wroth with you, he casts the
fool in your face, and repents that ever he has lent you these things;
wherefore is a price put into the hand of a fool, seeing he has no heart to
it? no heart nor affection to make use of it? Wherefore? says he, to what end?
wherefore is a price put into a fools hand, that sees not the worth of it?
better he had been sent to hell quick and never heard Sermon: better he had
been damned many years since and never had the means. What, will ye be
drunkards in spite of preaching? and adulterers, and fornicators, in spite of
Gods threats? mockers and despisers of them that are good, lovers of pleasures
more then lovers of God, in spite of the Lord Jesus? O this does woefully
provoke God, that ye should have no more heart nor affection to these things
then ye have. Set your affections then upon God, if ever ye will be wise to
escape the vengeance to come; your affections are your heart, be not so
rebellious as to deny your heart unto God.

The sixth motive is taken from the softnes of the affections; 6. Affections
are the softness of the he^rt. Phi. Iud. l. de sacrif. Ab. and Cain
the affections are the softnes of the heart, Affectus sunt foemineus animae
partus, says the Philosopher, they are the feminine and softly brood of the
heart. They heart is a soft heart where thine affections do stand; if thine
affections be set upon the things of this life, thy heart is a soft heart
thereunto, thy heart is sensible of every profit, sensible of every vain
pleasure: the things of this life can easily sink down into thy heart, if thine
affections be to them. O let thine affections then be set upon God: what will thou have a soft heart to the world, the things of the world may easily work on
it? and will thou have a hard heart to God, that he may not work on it?
Hardness of heart is an argument that a man is damnably and desperately
impudent, and will neither obey God not his Ministers. So God tells Ezechiel the
house of Israel will not hearken to thee, says he, for they will not hearken
unto me; for all the house of Israel are impudent and hard-hearted, Ezekiel. 3. 7.
When their hearts were once hardened, they were so impudent that they would not
hearken and obey the Ministers of God, nor God himself. This is a lamentable
condition then thou art in: if thine affections be earthly and carnal, the
heart is quite hardened to Godward. Now then my brethren, we see here the reason
why ye can refuse to obey, and be divorced from your sins: we see the reason
why ye neither yield to God, nor his Ministers; this is the reason says God,
ye are impudent, and your hearts are desperately hardened. And this is the brand
the holy Ghost sets upon you; when your hearts are thus hardened, he calls you
plainly, wicked men and wicked women. A wicked man hardneth his face, Prove. 21.
29. Is it not a pitiful thing that a man should go to hell, and have no remedy
to deliver him? to be damned, and have no remedy in the world to escape it? in
such a case is thy soul, whose heart is thus hardened. He that being often
reproved hardneth his heart, shall be destroyed without remedy, Prove. 29. 1.
Have thou not been often reproved? I know thy conscience can tell thee thou
have been often reproved; have thou not hardened thy heart? I know thy
conscience can witness that thou would not leave off thy courses; but have
hardened thy heart to this day, thou know I say true; well then, read what a
piteous condition thou art come to, there is no remedy for thee to avoid the
damnation of hell: thou shall be destroyed without remedy, says God, I
confess there is a remedy, but he shall be destroyed without it. The remedy
that God uses to deliver men from hell, is to reprove them for their sins, but
thou put off reproofs, the preaching of the Word, but thou do disobey it,
the blood of the Lord Jesus, but thou do defile it, and wilt not lay down thy
corruption for it, there is a remedy but thou will not use it; no, thy heart is
hardened and thou shall be destroyed without remedy: assure thy self of it, for
the mouth of the Lord has spoken it. I speak to you who speak evil of the
good way, and call it all to naught; your hearts are all hardened on this
manner: when diverse were hardened, says the Text, and spoke evil of that way,
Act. 19. 9. They that speak evil of the ways of God are all hardened. O say
thou, I do but speak against Puritans and Hypocrites, God forbid I should speak
evil of the ways of the Lord: God forbid, yea, God forbid indeed; but does not
thy conscience witness thou speak evil of the ways of the Lord? Thou
know the Lord commands exhorting and reptoving one another, and thou
speak evil of it: what has he to do to reprove me? say thou. Thou
know God has commanded us to walk strictly, and precisely, and purely, and
thou speak evil of it: what must we be so pure sorsooth? and so precise,
and so strict? Thou speak evil of the way of the Lord, and the Lord says
thou art the man that art hardened. I speak to you that break the limits of God.
God has commanded you a great while ago to repent and believe, and cast away
the evil of your doings. Many days are past since ye were called hereto;
yesterday, and to day thou art called, and thou amendest not, thou art the man
that is hardened. Again, he limits a certain day after so long a time, as it is
said, to day if ye will hear his voice, harden not your hearts, Heb. 4. 7. thou
have broken this limit, and thou art not converted to this day, thou art the
man that is hardened. I speak to you who refuse to amend your lives: ye do not
only not amend, but also ye refuse to amend, ye are the men that are hardened;
they have made their faces harder then a rock, they have refused to return,
Ier. 5. 3. When men refuse to return, they have hardened their hearts like a
rock, and more too, says the Text. Ye have refused, and it is not unknown to
your consciences that ye refuse, therefore ye are the men that are hardened; ye
are the men that shall be destroyed without remedy. I pray God help you with a
remedy, and awaken your souls, that ye may be hardened no longer; for if ye be,
ye shall be destroyed without remedy. I beseech you consider your poor souls,
and understand, if perhaps ye may find mercy. Schola cuj ^sque ordinis homines
admittit, says Quintilian, Quint.
the school admits all sorts of scholars. So I may say of you, the School of
Christ admits all sorts of sinners among you. There is never a wretch among you
all, but if now ye will be content to go to Christ's school, ye shall be
admitted to learn. The Lord give you hearts so to do. O then set your
affections on God; the affections are the softness of the heart, and this is
the way for to soften them.

The XIIII. Sermon.
Col. 3. 2. Set your affections on things that are above, etc.
A Beginning has been made to persuade you with motives that ye would set your
affections on God. Five motives have been noted that our Apostle handles in
this Chapter: and six motives that the theme it self does afford you. Give me
now leave to go on in the same point, and to help you with more. For if this
point be not copious with motives, no point can be copious. All persuasion is
by moving the affections, whatever the theme be; now when the affections
themselves be the theme, Other motives to move the affections.
the matter of necessity must be copious and abundant: other motives remain to
set your affections above.

The first is taken from the everlastingnesse of the affections, 1. From the
everlastingnesse of the affections.
Our affections are everlasting in our soul, especially some of them, and those
that are not, when the soul is in hell, the very want of them are a little hell
to the soul, for there shall be no joy, no delight, no hope, no comfort, no
love; and as the Stomach when it wants its meat, it devoureth it self: so
these affections, when the matter is wanting, they shall eat up, and devour up
the soul. There Is no matter in hell to joy at, no matter in hell to delight in,
no comfortable matter to hope for, no amiable thing for to love, and this shall
vex the soul with weeping and gnashing of teeth: nevertheless, many of the
affections, whether a man go to heaven or to hell, are everlasting affections,
joy and delight, and love, and all the liking affections shall be everlasting
in heaven: fear, and horror, and hatred, and grief, and despair, and shame
shall be everlasting in hell, there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth,
says the Text, he does not say there shall be love or joy, etc. Now are the
affections everlasting in the soul? know this, nothing but God can hold the
soul tack, as we say, everlastingly. It Is true, we may affect meat for a while,
and raiment for a while, and maintenance for a while, and houses, and wives,
and husbands, and recreations for a while, till we die, but when death comes,
death takes off these objects for ever. If thine affections were mainly set
upon these things; when these are all gone, alas, where art thou then? thou art
at a loss for ever and ever. As Zophar says of the wicked, though he had the
world at will while he was living, yet says he, he shall perish for ever like
his own dung, they which have seen him shall say, where is he? Job. 20. 7.
Before, he was at his pleasures, and his profits, and his businesses in the
world, there he was where his affections did run: but now when his pleasures
are all gone, his house, and his lands, and his markets are all gone, alas!
where is he? He is now at a loss, Zophar knew well enough where he is when he
dies, he is in hell to be damned and tomented for ever; but he expresses it
thus, to show that now he is at a loss. Set thine affections then upon grace
and upon the fear of the Lord; for though thou die, this cannot die with
thee. It was a good answer of Stilpon, when he lost his country, Stilpon Plat.
(...). Sen, in Epist.
and his children, and his wife, and his house, and Demetrius said to him, How
now Stilpon, where art thou now? art thou not at a loss now? (...) (...), at a
loss? says he, No, no, I have virtue still, and righteousness still: so if
thou should lose means and maintenance, friends, stays, hopes, health and
all, thou could not be at a loss: were thine affections set upon Christ,
thou would have thy faith still, thy comfort still, thy peace of conscience
still, assurance of heaven still. Thine affections are everlasting, and
therefore set thine affections upon such things as are everlasting, otherwise
thou shall be at a loss one day for ever and ever.

The second motive is taken from the infiniteness of the affections, 2. From
the infin^t^nesse of the affections.
the affections are infinite, and therefore nothing in this whole world is able
to satisfy them. He that loves silver shall never be satisfied with silver,
nor he that loves abundance with increase, Eccles. 5. 10, give him tens, he
would be glad with twenties, give him them, he could afford to have hundreds;
give him them, he could desire thousands: when he has thousands, he is never
the nearer, nothing satisfies him. Give Alexander a world, he desires another.
Take me a silly man, give him a Curateship, he desires a Vicaridge: give him
that, he desires a Parsonage: give him that, he desires two Benefices: give him
that, he desires a Prebendary, an Archdeaconry, and then a Bishopric, and if
he were Pope of Rome, he were not satisfied. Take a voluptuous man, give him
pleasure to day, he desires more to morrow, from Cards to the Tables, from them
to Bowls, from them to huntings and hawkings, and so on, he is never satisfied
till he dies, (...) (...), Ca. 7. l. 10 Ethn. ad Nicon.
says Eustratius, the affections are infinite even as the fire: all the
forests and all the woods, and all the fuel under heaven can never satisfy
the fire; give it faggots, it could burn logs, give it logs, it could burn
whole trees: give it trees, it could burn whole houses; give it them, it could
burn the inhabitants: Nay, Solo compares the affections to the fire of hell,
and the mouth of the grave, that can never be satisfied. Hell and destruction
are never full, so the eyes of man are never satisfied, Pro 27. 20. The eye is
never satisfied with seeing, the ear is never satisfied with hearing, still it
desires further, what news? Pro. 30. 15. he compares them to the Horseleech,
give, give, says the Horseleech, it is ever sucking, more and more, and more,
it is ever desiring: the affections are infinite, there is nothing in this world
can ever satisfy them; did ever any meals meat so satisfy the stomach, that
it should never hunger more? did ever suit of apparel so satisfy the back,
that it should never wish to be clothed more? did ever Rent so sarisfie the
Landlord, that he should never desire another day to receive more? The
affections are infinite, nothing in the world can ever satisfy them. What good
reason then is there to set thine affections upon God? God is infinite, and he
can satisfy them He fills the hungry with good things, Luke 1. 53. If the
affections hunger after God, he will fill them, and satisfy them. If thine
affections be set upon God, thou shall have all satisfaction: Has a neighbor
wronged thee? thou need not seek after revenge, Christ will make thee
satisfaction. Have thou had losses in thy estate, and disgraces in thy name, or
troubles in thy mind? thou need not disquiet thy self, Christ will make
thee satisfaction. He that complains is not content, as we say, thou need
not complain, saying, O I have but a poor house to dwell in, poor diet to feed
on, poor apparel to put on, poor friends to rely on: if thine affections be set
upon God, look what they want, Christ will make it up, he will satisfy thee.
My people shall be satisfied with goodness, says the Lord. Ier. 31. 14. thou
openest thy hand, and satisfiest the desire of every living thing, Psalm. 145.
16. Oye poor souls, that have gone on in your drinkings and carowsings, and are
never satisfied, that have followed your pleasures, and your vanities, and to
this hour ye are not satisfied, what mean you to lose your selves in the things
of this life? what mean you to befool your own souls as ye do? Hear what the
Lord Jesus says to you, Ho, every one that thirsts, come to the waters, and
he that has no money, come ye, buy and eat; yea, come, buy wine and milk
without money, and without price; wherefore do ye spend money for that which is
not bread? and your labor for that which satisfies not? Hearken diligently to
me, says he, and eat ye that which is good, and let your soul delight it self
in fatness, Isa. 55. 1, 2. Ho, every one that thirsts, come ye to the
waters. What? when ye are athirst will ye go to broken cisterns? they cannot
hold water to satisfy you, here be waters indeed, that Christ's does afford
you: when ye have money in your purse to buy food, will ye buy that which is
not bread? stones in stead of bread? will ye spend your strength and your
health, and your wits, and your pains, and your souls too upon the things of
this life? alas, they can never satisfy you. If the fountains should run wine,
the people would not be content, Horat.
as the Proverb is. Nemo sua sort contentus est, says the Heathen. Had ye all
the beer in the barrels, all the bread at the Bakers, all the corn upon the
ground, all the wealth, and riches, and honor in the earth, they can never
satisfy you, your souls shall die beggars for all these, and go to hell
notwithstanding all these; alas, ye buy them all at a dear rate: do ye not know
what they cost Ahab? they cost him himself, he sold himself for them. Come ye
hither, says Christ, set your affections here, here is mercy for nothing, and
grace for nothing, and goodness for nothing, and the holy Spirit for nothing:
can ye desire it at an easier price? though ye have not one single groat of any
worth, not only single farthing or a brass token of any righteousness of your
own; yet come hither, says Christ, ye may make as good a market as the best;
Come and buy without money, here ye shall have enough for to satisfy you.
Boeth.
Been est cui Deus obtulit, says Boethius: it is happy for you, can ye but see
your own happiness, that God gives you such an offer as this. Here ye may have
the pardon of your sins, will that satisfy you? here ye may have deliverance
from hell and condemnation, will that satisfy you? here ye may have grace
against your sins, and power to subdue them; here ye may have the love of
God, and the favor of Christ, and the communion of the Spirit, will that
satisfy you? I will promise you here is enough to satisfy you, be ye never so
unsatisfiable. Here ye may have every manner of thing that is good; comfort
against all troubles, sure promises against all doubtings, strength against all
weaknesses, stays and props under all sicknesses, assurance of Heaven and a
Kingdom as soon as ever ye die, we will warrant you ye shall be satisfied here.
Old Simeon as soon as ever he had Christ in his arms, Lord, let me now die,
says he, q. d. Lord, now I have enough: I care for no more in the whole world
now, Luke 2. 28.
Lord, now let thou thy servant depart in peace: I am well satisfied now I
have Christ. O then set your affections upon God and his Christ, and this will
then satisfy you: your affections are infinite, and nothing can give them
satisfaction but God that is infinite.

The third motive is taken from the cloyednesse of the affections: 3. From the
cloyedness of the affections.
as the affections are infinite and can never be satisfied with the things of
this life, so they are soon cloyed* with any of these things: sometimes
affecting, sometimes disaffecting. Nothing can give a man's affections full
content but only their God. If thou do not set thine affections upon God,
thine affections can never have content: the things of this life were never
made for our affections to be set on; if thine affections were made to be set
upon the things of this life, they could never be cloyed with them. Is the fire
ever cloyed with burning? Is a stone ever cloyed with lying on the ground? Is
the Sun ever cloyed with shining? no, it is made for this end: thou were never
made to eat and to drink, for thy stomach will be cloyed with meat, and cloyed
with drinks: the sweetest meats under heaven, if ye burden your stomach
therewith, they will cloy it: thou were never made to hunt and to bowl, to
dice, and to card, because thou may be cloied with pleasure; thine affections
are subject to a cloy, if they be set upon the things of this life; they are
monsters and devils incarnate, that are never weary with swearing, and lying,
and playing, and company-keeping. I say, these men are all monsters: for if a
man be a man, and he be not a monster, he will be cloyed and wearied with his
ways. They are bad enough that the Prophet does speak of, I am sure they were
cursed wretches, yet they were not such-damned wretches as never to be weary
with their sins; they have wearied themselves to commit iniquity, Ier. 9. 5.
They were weary with sinning, and cloyed with their ways, and yet they would
on: on they went, but it seems they were not quite monsters to go on and never
be wearied, there is nothing in this life thou can set thine affections upon,
but it will weary and cloy thine affections, and therefore without doubt they
are not the true objects of thine affections. What base Proverbs have the
wicked, when they come from their sports? sometimes ye shall hear them say, I am
as weary as a dog; when the drunkard has barreld himself with his liquor, he
is as sick as a dog otherwhiles, as we say; such filthy-mouthed speeches we
have, which show they are cloyed now and then with these things; as the Poet
says of the Horse and the Ox, Hor. Ep. 14
Optat ephippia Bos piger, optat arare caballus, the lazy Ox that is toyling
at the Plough, he is weary with it, he could wish he were used like a Horse to
the saddle, that would be less wearisome he thinks then the Plough; the Horse
that is toyled with its riding, O he is weary with it, he could wish he were
used to the yoke, that would be a far easier life. Thus men's ways do weary and
cloy their affections: the proud Minion is wearied and cloyed with such an odd
fashion, O she must have another; the gamester is wearied with such a kind of
sport, he must have another; the delicate palate is cloyed with such tasted
meats, it must have others, Certainly thine affections are wrong set, when they
are apt to be cloyed on this manner. O therefore set thine affections on God,
there thou shall never be cloyed. I know a man may set his affections to
Godward, and be weary, but then they are not right set when he is weary. They
served God amiss when they said, behold, what a weariness is it: Mal. 1. 13.
If they had gone a right way to work, they had never been weary nor cloyed with
serving of God. But ye brethren, be not weary with well-doing, 2 These. 3. 13.
that is, set your affections aright upon, and so be never weary with it: the
affections will never be cloyed when they are truly set upon God: the flesh
will be weary, but the spirit cannot be weary. God gives the soul full absolute
content; the soul is at rest when it is set upon God. As the stone is never
cloyed with lying on the ground, because there is its rest, so God is the rest
of the soul. The greatest glutton in the world will come at last to say, In
omnibus rebu^ magis offend^^nimium quam parum. Cic.
I have eaten too much; the greatest drunkard, I have drunken too much; the
greatest spend-thrift, I have spent away too much; his affections are cloyed:
but set thine affections upon God, thou can never come to too much, never be
godly too much, never be heavenly too much, never be in Gods favor too much,
never in Christ too much, thy spirit can never be cloyed: too much of one thing
is good for nothing, say people, it is not needful to be too much pure and too
much precise, less would serve the turn: whosoever thou art that can say or
think so, it is sure thou never knew the meaning of grace, O say they, does
not Solomon say, a man may be too much just, Be not righteous overmuch, neither
make thy self overwise: for why should thou destroy thy self? Ecc. 7. 16. Is
it not enough to be weary of goodness, but ye must misconstrue and blaspheme
the Word of God too? This is the meaning of Solomon. Solomon never said so
himself, but he brings in thy filthy blasphemous mouth thus saying, Tush, be
not thou righteous overmuch, why should thou destroy thy self? why should
thou be so precise, to be called a Puritan, to be hated and reviled, to destroy
thine own credit, and thy pleasure, and thy liberty? Indeed as it follows, we
would not have thee overmuch wicked, etc. ver 17. A little pleasure will do
well, a little vanity, a little liberty, a little revenge, a little gainesse of
apparel, a little mirth at the pot will do well; but be not wicked overmuch.
I say, these are thy hellish speeches, and none of Solomon's. Solomon does but
bring thee in speaking, as the Prophet Isay does such as thou, Let us eat and
drink for to morrow we shall die. O beloved, if ye would set your affections on
God, your affections could never be cloyed.

The fourth motive is taken from the preciousnesse of the affections: 4. From
the preciousnesse of the affections.
the affections are the precious motions of the heart, the heart counts that
precious which most it affects. Now what a shame is this, to set thine
affections then upon the things of this life? thou have a base heart to do so.
Have thou a Kingdom to set thine affections upon? Have thou a God, and a
Christ, and a Crown for ever and ever, all glory and honor to set thine
affections upon? and will thou set thine affections upon dross and dung, and
such base things as these? do thou not know that all thy vanities and thy
pleasures are base in comparison of Christ? all thy silks and thy sattins, all
thy gentility and thy pomp in the world, are vile in comparison of grace and of
glory? Do thou not know how God scorns all these things in comparison of the
excellency of his grace and favor? thou have a very base and a vile heart, if
thou will set thine affections upon these things. So every wicked man is called
a vile person, Psalm. 15. 4. The vile person will speak villainy, Isa. 32. 6.
Great Nineveh, the Prophet calls it vile, Nah. 1. 14. The vilest men are
exalted, Psa. 12. 8. If we should see a Lords son keep company with them that
are meaner then is fitting, will ye not say he is base? If we should see how
Sadernapalus a King, would sit spinning and wheeling with the Maids; and
Domitian the Emperor sit catching of flies, and hanging them up, would ye not
say they are base? they do things unworthy themselves: themselves should be
Noble and Honorable, and Royal, and yet should so vilify and debase their
own selves on this fashion. What, a Christian be gaming, and hoyting, that
might have joys unspeakable and glorious? a Christian going to Alehouses, or
oother base places, that might go into the Courts of the Almighty? a Christian
complain of the frown of a man whose breath is in his nostrils, that might have
the favor of Heaven? a Christian angry at a trifle? a Christian not able to
endure the loss of a little earthly silver, that might have all the riches of
glory? what a base man is he? what baseness is this in thee? Ah, thou think
basely of God, and basely of Christ, and basely of grace, and basely of the
Kingdom of Heaven, that set thine affections more on the dirty and beggarly
things of this life, then on him The Proverb of a fool is, He is penny-wise and
pound-foolish: So thou art penny-wise and pound-foolish: wise for the things of
this world, and foolish to the things of God The best things of the earth
compare them to grace, are no better then a penny to a pound: what a strange
thing is this that we should be thus basely foolish? not affect a Sermon more
then a Play; not affect the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ more then an earthly
bargain. There is a homely saying, but it is a most true one. A Fool will not
give his bawble for the Tower of London: his affections are more on his Hat and
his Feather, then on any thing else, (...), He is very serious about ridiculous
things. Fie for shame brethren, let us not be so profanely conceited of grace,
so basely minded as to set our affections here below, when we are called to set
them on God.

The fifth motive is taken from the instability of our affections: 5. From the
instability of the affections.
if our affections be set upon the things of this life, they must be fain to
repent of it at last, whatever come of it: whether we be saved or damned, it is
certain we shall repent of it: if ever thou go to Heaven, God will make thee
repent that ever thou have been so vain, so carnal so voluptuous, so proud,
God will make thy heart ache for it. I abhor my self, says Job, and repent in
dust and ashes, Job 42. 6. O I could even spit in mine own face, I could even
be content to gnash my teeth at mine own soul, that ever I sinned thus and
thus, now I repent it in dust and ashes, O that I had never done so; were it to
do again, I would never do it for a thousand worlds: thus if thou go to heaven
thou will be fain to repent it. And if thou go to hell, thine own horror and
thine intolerable torments and plagues will force thee to repent it too, that
ever thou have set thine affections on earth; then thou will curse thine own
self, and ban thine own thoughts, and fret and stamp at thine own madness,
that thou should set thine affections upon the things of the world, when
thou might have had a Savior, and a God, if thou had been wise and
would have been ruled. Magni emitur poenitentia, alas, such repentance
costeth thee dear. When it has cost thee thy soul and brought thee to hell,
and utterly undone thee for ever, then thou learnest how to repent. When Dives
was in hell, then he repented that ever he was so hard-hearted to Lazarus: Send
Lazarus, etc. O he would now ask him forgiveness; send such a poor wretch now,
I will make him restitution. Lord send now thy commandments, and now we will
obey them; Lord, now send thy Ministers unto us, and we will hear them; send us
one Sermon more, and now we will do it. As sure as God is in Heaven, you will
repent it another day, that ever you set your affections thus on the things of
this life. Beloved, were it not better by ods, not to set your affections thus
at all, then when ye have done it, repent it, when all comes to all? Non
admiseris cuius postea paeniteat. Do not commit that if ye be wise, which ye
must repent when ye have done it. This very Sermon, if ye will not hearken now
to obey it, I say this very Sermon your consciences will be sure to vex you
withal. Such a Sermon I heard, and there I had a warning, then I was told of
this vengeance I endure, but I would not listen. O woe is me and my rebellion,
that I did not. I beseech you consider it, set your affections otherwise then
ye do, set them graciously on God, or else ye will be forced to repent for
ever.

The sixth motive is taken from the ^ealousie of the affections: 6. From the
jealousy of the affections.
Beloved, when a Husband suspects his wives affections are not to him, there is
an affection of jealousy arises in his heart to revenge it: a man cannot abide
that his wife should give her affections to another. So beloved, God is a
jealous God, when he sees he cannot have thy affections to him: he has made
thee his creature, he has hired thee for his servant, nay he espoused thy soul
as a wife and a Spouse to his own Son; and if he may suspect that thy
affections are otherwise set, he will be jealous against thee. This will be the
grievousest revenge of all revenges that are possible. No revenge like the
revenge for the turning ones affections awry. Let a man be wronged though never
so much, nothing but anger and choler does arise to revenge it; but if he
suspect the want of affection in his own wife, then it is not an anger alone
that arises to revenge it, but a jealousy. Do thou not know what jealousy
is? I tell you, it is the revengefullest passion that ever arose in the breast.
Jealousy is the rage of a man, therefore he will not spare in the day of
vengeance; he will regard no ransom, neither will he rest content, though thou
give many gifts, Pro. 6. 34, 35. We have a good Proverb, From jealousy the
good Lord deliver us, (...), says Oppia, The heart of jealousy is wild and
all savage. A man is not only angry, but directly in a rage, that is jealous,
So God expresses himself by a fury and a rage, saying, my fury shall break out
against them, and I will not pity them. When thine affections go a whoring from
God, he will be revenged on thee deeply; he will take no ransom; no ransom by
Christ, no ransom in the world: could thou give him a whole world for the
sin of thy soul, he will not accept it. What says the Husband when he is
jealous, what have thou defiled my bed and played the whore? and so forth. I
will make you an example: he eats himself up, till he is revenged: he will mark
every cast of her eye, every gesture of her body, every tread of her foot,
every thing now shall be matter of suspicion: she shall not speak to any man in
the street, but he will suspect it is wantonness* She shall not be able to go
one step out of doors, but he will suspect it is to her base lovers. So if we
set our affections wrong upon other things besides God, God will never put it
up at our hands. He will then be extreme to mark whatsoever is amiss; not one
idle word, but he will be precise to observe it; not one vain thought, but he
will be curious to note it; not one foolish fashion, but he will set it down in
his note-book, he will then be extreme with thee. Ye have read and heard the
Ten Commandments often and often. Ye know what is said in the second
Commandment, Thou shall not do thus and thus, For I the Lord thy God am a
jealous God, and visit the sins of the fathers upon the children. If thou set
up these Idols in thy heart, to affect the things of this life, take heed of
this jealousy, I the Lord thy God am a jealous God, etc. He will visit not
only thy sins upon thee, but he will look what thy father has done, and thy
grandfather has done, and thy great grandfather has done. If any of them have
been drunkards, he will visit it on thee: if any of them have been swearers and
worldlings, and wicked, he will visit it on thee. From his jealousy the good
Lord deliver us. 7. From the tyranny (...) affection^, (...).


The seventh motive is taken from the tyranny of our affections if they be not
set right. If our affections be not set upon God, they are the sorest Tyrants
that can be to tyrannize over us. Philo compares the tyranny of our affections
to the four hundred years bondage of the Israelites in Egypt. Ye remember what
woeful and slavish bondage they were put to in Egypt, insomuch that they
groaned under it, and cried out unto God. Pharaoh played the Tyger-like Tyrant
over them, and made them weary of their lives: so do the affections tyrannize
over a man that is carnal and earthly, they do so besot him, and befool him,
that he knows not how to come out of his sins; they do so harden him and
obdurate him, that no preaching nor counsel can convert him; they do so
occupy and task him, and busy him, that he can find no while to save his own
soul, or bethink himself of escaping of hell and damnation, he is in hell
before ever he thinks on it seriously; they plague him like Tantalus, says he,
and leave his soul in the lurch after all his vain hopes, he can never be free
for God. The Apostle speaking of the lust and affections of the world, how they
allure men into vanity; he says they promise men liberty, but they are the
servants and slaves of corruption. 2 Pet. 2. 19. A man would wonder how one
should be in bondage with a pot or a pipe, with a bowl or a game, with a
carnal friend, or an use he has gotten; but so it is, that nor Minister, nor
Sermon, nor warnings from God, nor any thing can free him: still he is
enthralled. Now consider, are our affections such tyrants, when they be set
upon the things of this life? O let us set them upon God. If they can captivate
us to God, and bring us into a golden bondage with grace and with goodness, we
are happy. See thou how the wicked are tied to their sins, and their lusts?
so if thine affections were set upon God, thou would be tied unto God. O
it is an admirable tie, this, to be tied unto God. This is it that the wisest
man in the earth advises us to, My son, says he, keep thy fathers
commandments, bind them continually upon thy heart, and tie them about thy
neck, Pro. 6. 21. Thine affections are these stay-bands, and these typers: if
thine affections be set upon the Word, they will tie it to thy soul; if they be
set upon grace, and love to Gods Ordinances, his Sabbaths and his ways, they
will tie them to thy heart: if thou will not set thine affections upon God,
thou art a very slave, a very slave unto Satan and to sin; thou art not only
in a woeful condition, as thou art, but they tie thee fast to it; and if God
may not be so much beholden to thee for thine affections to himward, he will
entrap thee, and take thee by them, as a Bare is taken by a Collar, and hale
thee to judgment. Thou have little affection or none at all to the Word; may
be thou come not to be reproved and amended by the Word, but thou come to
have some knowledge, and some pretty sentence to talk on, or some fine story or
passage to speak on: As I live, says the Lord, I will answer thee according to
thy thoughts: may be thou come that thou may scrape up some hopes to have
mercy, and heaven at the last; may be thou come to snatch up some sentence or
other that may secure up thy conscience: if there be ever a passage of mercy,
that thou would fain have; As I live, says the Lord, I will answer thee
according to thy thoughts, and thine own vain heart: Vid. Ezekiel. 14. 3, 4, 5.
etc.
that which thou came for in the Word, as I live says the Lord, thou shall
have it. Thou do not come to learn how to be holy and be stricter then thou
art, but though thou be no stricter then thou art already, yet to have some
hopes to be saved for all that.

FINIS.

