THE DANGER Of deferring Repentance, Discovered By that reverend and faithful
Minister of the word.

William Fenner.

London, Printed for Jo. Stafford and are to be sold by Richard Button at the
Horse-shooe in Smithfield. 1654.



William Fenner Rector of Rochford B^ D^ Somtims Fellow of Pembrooke
Hall^Aetatis 45 A 1648

portrait of William Fenner

A SERMON of Mr. William Fenners at Maidstone, September. 25, 1629.
PROVERBES. 1. 28. Then shall they call upon me, but I will not answer: they
shall seek me early, but they shall not find me.
THere is a good English Proverb amongst us, that he that neglectes the
occasion, the occasion will neglect him. Solomon wisely begins his Proverbes
with it: for he brings in the Wisdom of his Father in these five
particulars: first, making a general Proclamation in the 20. verse, Wisdom
cries without, she utters her voice in the streets. He compares God unto a
crier that goes up and down the City from street to street, and from door to
door, crying his commodity, even the richest yt ever was, which is a Christ, a
Christ for redemption, a Christ for sanctification, a Christ to enlighten those
that walk in darkness and in the shadow of death. Ho, every one that
thirsts, here is a Christ for you.

Secondly, here is a merciful reprehension, in ye 22. verse, O ye foolish, how
long will you love foolishness, and you scornors take pleasure in s^orning?
Foolish indeed to be without Christ foolish to be without grace, foolish to
chafer away our souls for sin. How long ye scorners will you take pleasure in
scorning? will you still persist in your wickedness, and never have done with
your sins? will you never turn back again, but damn your souls for ever? O
ye foolish, how long will you love foolishness?

Thirdly, here is a gracious exhortation in ye 23 verse: Turn you at my
correction: lo, I will pour out my mind unto you, and make you to understand my
words. As if he should say, Do you not see how you are going a pace to
confusion* and that the way you take, leads unto destruction? turn ye
therefore, turn ye back again, for there is a Christ behind you; Oturn ye; for
if ye go on in your sins, you perish for ever.

Fourthly, here is a yearning promise made unto the world, in the end of the
23. verse; Lo, I will pour out my spirt upon you, and cause you to understand
my words. As if he should say, return back again with me, and you shall have
better welcome then you can possibly have if you go on in your sins, the devil
will never let you gain so much by your living in your lust as you shall do by
repentance for them, and forsaking of them. For behold I will pour out my
spirit upon you, whereby you shall be far greater gainers, then you shall be by
your sins.

Fifthly, here is a grievous threatening against the world, even all those that
have loytered out the day of grace. As time and tide stays for no man, no more
does the day of grace: Because I have called, and you refused; I have exhorted,
but you have not regarded; I have denounced judgments against you for your
sins, but you have hardened your hearts; now a day of woe and misery shall come
upon you, a time of vengeance and desolation shall over take you: there will a
day come wherein there will be weeping, and crying Mercy (Lord) mercy, but I
tell you beforehand what you shall trust to: let this be your lesson, now I
call, and you will not hear; now I stretch out my hands, but you will not
regard: you shall seek me eraly, but you shall not find me: and shall cry, but
you shall not be heard.

The words are a thunderclap against all those that procrastinate their
repentance, and returning home unto God. Wherein note, first, the parties
themselves that do prolong this time of grace, they: that is, they who when God
calls on them, will not hear; when God invites them by his mercies, patience,
and forbearance, by his Ministers and servants, by his corrections and
judgments, by all fair means, and fowl means, yet withstand ye means of
grace: they are the men, they shall call, but God will not answer.

Secondly, here is there seeking after God; they shall call upon me.

Thirdly, here is their earnest and diligent seeking unto G^d; they shall not
only call, but seek to, and not only seek, but seek as to labor to find: nay
they shall seek me early, even strive to go about it with all have, and fly to
repentance, but they shall not find me.

Fourthly, here is the unseasonablenesse of the time of their seeking, then:
that is a demonstrative, then: even a time which ye Lord points at: as if he
should say, you shall see then these men will be of an other mind, then they
will be glad to be converted, then they will be glad to come out of their sins,
then they will be glad to get grace and seek reconciliation with God: but alas!
they saw not this then, but God foresaw it well enough, then shall they call
but I will not answer, they shall seek me early, but they shall not find me.

Lastly, here is the frustration of their hope, which has two things in it.
First, in regard of their selves, in regard of the flaw of their seeking, it
being not aright. Secondly, in regard of the justice of God, who rewards every
man according to his works. but I will not hear them. Whence observe this point
of Doctrine.

DOCTRINE..I
These that will not hear God when he calls them, God will not hear them
when they call upon him. Those that will not hear the Lord when he calls
upon them by the ministry of his Word, and voice of his Spirit, the Lord will
not hear them, when in their misery they call upon him.

Thus the Lord dealt with the people in Ezekiels days; the Lord called them to
repentance and obedience: but when they stood out, and neglected the
opportunity of grace, and seasons of conversion, see how God deals with them:
though they cry in mine ears with a loud voice, yet I will not hear them
(says the Lord,) When men have gone beyond the time of Gods mercy, and
out-rowed ye tide of Gods forbearance and will not return, ye Lord sets it down
with him self, that his wrath shall return upon them, he will no longer
forbear: they had a time wherein ye Lord did pity them, and offered grac and
mercy unto them, but they neglecting this season, and withstanding this proffer
of grace God resolves with himself they shall never have it again. There was
a time wherein God did pity them, but now he will not pity them any more;
twenty five years he called unto them, and sought to bring them home: but
because they stood out and refused, the Lord says; I will love Ephraim no more.

Beloved, there is a double day, a white day and a black day; there is a day of
salvation, Isa. 49. 9. this is the day in which ye Lord said to the prisoners,
Come forth: and to those that lie in their sins, repent and believe. Now if
any man will come forth and humble his soul before ye Lord, let him come and
welcome, for it is a day of salvation. But there is another day of damnation,
which is a dark day, a black and a duskie day, wherein ye Lord will visit the
sins of the world, and revenge the quarrel of this Covenant. Hos. 9. 7. The
day of visitation is come, yea the day of recompense, the people shall know it;
the Prophet is a fool, and the spiritual man is mad. Beloved, we are fools
and all ye spiritual men under heaven are mad that lay not this day to heart.
For the day of the Lord is a day of visitation, and all the world shall rue it,
though now men sleep in security. If once mercy be rejected, and God turn away
his ear from a man, then grace shall be no more the door of life shall for ever
be shut up against him: and when once this day comes, he has lost his own
peace, and deprived himself of eternal happiness.

Now there are three Reasons of this point; the first is the law of
retaliation, of rendering like for like, which is ye justrest law that can be
made with man, for to give unto every man according to his works, to make him
take such as he brings, (as the heathen call it) to give a man quid for quo.
Now if God call upon thee, and thou will not hear; it is righteousness with
God, yea equity with God (that is more) that when you call on him, he should
not hear thee for thus runs the tenor of Gods Word, Prove. 28. 9. He that turns
away his ear from hearing the Law, even his prayer shall be abominable. He
that turns away his ear from Gods Law, God will turn away his ear from his
prayer. He that turns it is spoken in the present tense, that is, that now
turns away his ear, his prayer shall be abominable (in the future tense) yt
is, the Lord marks what master or servaunt, what father or mother, what husband
or wife, what man or woman it is, yt turns away the ear of his head, or the
ear of his heart, from hearing his will, and obeying of his Commandments, the
Lord takes special notice of it, and sets it dowue in his Calender, and
records it in his Memorial; keeping a strict account thereof: as if God should
say, Well, is it so? I now call, and will not this man or that woman answer? Do
I now stretch out my hands, and will not they take care to obey me? Well? let
them alone (says God) there is a day coming that I shall be a hearing of them;
times of sorrow and misery will take hold of them, and then they in their
aflictions will cry unto me, but I will not hear, they will beg for mercy, but
I will not regard: they will seek me early, but they shall not find me.

It was on of the Articles of high Treason brought in against Cardinal
woolsey, that he had the Por, and a stinking breath and yet durst come into ye
kings presence: So it will be an article against thee of high treason before
the King of heaven, if thou come into his presence with the stinking breath of
thy sins, living in thy lusts, and wallowing in thy filthiness; all thy
Prayers are but as so many stinking breaths in ye nostrils of the Lord, and
every duty yt thou performest unto the Lord shall be as so many articles of
high treason against thee, for to condemn thee, because thou live in
Rebellion, and a traitor against God.

His prayer shall be abominable, he does not say I will turn away mine ear from
hearing his prayer, which turns away his ear from hearing my Law, (that is the
true exposition of the words) no, like for like is sometimes injustice, for if
a man should strik a Magistrate a box on the ear, it were not justice for him
to give him another: for it is a greater sin to strik a Magistrate, then any
other common person, and therefore a greater Punishment the Law requires; So
God does not say he will turn away his ear from hearing his prayer, but will
serve him in a worse kind, he will count it abominable yea abomination (in the
abstract) it shall be loathsome, yea loathsomeness it self in the worst
manner. Gal. 6. As a man sows. so shall he reap; if thou sow sparingly, thou
shall reap sparingly; if thou sow a dull ear to Gods Word, thou shall reap a
dull care from God to thy prayer: For God will reward every man according to his
works.

Secondly, because of the time of Gods attributes both me^cy and justice have
their season in this life; and when mercy has acted her part, then comes
justice upon the stage, and acts her part: so that God with have his
attributes manifested to all the sons of men, yea to the face of ye whole
world. There is no Market, nor Fair-day yt lasts always: if the Country
will not come in, ye Tradesmen will put up their Wares, and he gone: but if
they come in time, they may have a pennyworth otherwise if they come too late,
they will have none. For ye Merchant will not always dwell in Tents, but away
he goes, and will not stay for them. Beloved, Gods standing is now open, and
his shop is set wide unto ye sonns of men; if men will not come in, cheapen and
buy without money, whiles God offers his Wares, he will put them up and be
gone. For the Merchant will not lose his Wares, which he should do, if he
should always remain in the open Air with them; if he always continue in
the fields expecting Customers, his Wares would spotle and rot. So it is with
God, how many sweet Counsels does he lose? how many sweet Exortations? how many
blessed Sermons and holy Sacraments, and Sabbaths, does he lose? how many
checks of Conscience? how many days of Grace and motions of his Spirit have
been suandred away in vain? do you think that God will lose all these, and
let them rot upon ye stall, with staying for you? No, no, the day of grace and
mercy will have an end? and then ye day of wrath and vengeance will step up, To
day if ye will hear his voice, then harden no^ your hear^s: then they hardened
their hearts, and would not be led by Gods mercies to forsake their sins;
Therefore he swear in his wrath that they should never enter into his rest. If
it be so with you as it was with Israel in the Wilderness, in the day of
tremptation, you do not know but yt your sins may now begin to pluck
vengeance upon you. I tell you, if you harden your heart this day, you do not
^now but this very day ye Lord may clap an Oath upon your beads, that you shall
never enter into his rest. For vne and the selfsame occasion last not a^waies:
as every day is not a Market day, nor every week in the year a fair week, nor
every season in ye year a time of Spring or harvest so every day of a man's life
may not claim to be ye day of grace Therefore if a man fore-slow it now he
foresloweth his own happiness, and puts off his own peace for ever.

Excelent is that annotation of Gregory on Job. 27. 9. will God hear his cry
when trou^le comes upon him Beloved, now Gods patience is troubled, wilt not
you repent? Now G^ds Spirit is troubled, wilt not thou obey? Now Gods justice is
troubled wilt not thou relent? Now Gods word is troubled, will thou ^efuse to
harken? will God hear his cry? He speaks interrogatively, as if he should
say? Art thou so mad, so vain, so foolish, to promise to thy self being an
hypocrite, that God will hear thy prayer? Oh no, then justice comes to take
place.

Thirdly, it is Gods use to do so in other things, even upon the contempt of
temporal blessings; and therefore much more in matters of grace and salvation.
Thus God promised to give Israel the land of Canaan, Numb. 12. 22. but the text
says, they tempted God ten times that is (as some Expositors expound) many
times, or (as others) ten several times. But whatever the meaning of the text
be, certainly it was very many times; so long till at last, he swear in his
wrath, that they should never enter into his rest, Beloved, though there be
many a hot swearer yt regards not an oath; yet certainly if the Lord swear we
may believe him: the word of God is as strong as oaths: if he say i^ upon his
word, we are bound to believe it: how much more then, when he confirms it with
an oath? Therefore if the Lord swear thou shall not, how dare thou? how can
thou hope o^ think ever to enter into his rest? This was almost forty years
before he died, that ye Lord made this oath against them: and God know^ how
many thousands of them fell short, no^ only of the Land of Canaan but also of
the Kingdom of heaven.

So God took Ismael an hundred and seventeene years before he died: twenty
years God offered him grace and repentance, but he would not take warning; a
mocker he was, and a mocker he would be, for he mocked Isaac when he was a
child six years old; and no means would reclaim him, before he heard the
voice, Cast out the bond woman and her son: Out with him, (says God) for he
shall never be heir with my son: this was an hundred and seventeen years
before Ismaels death.

And so God took Saul, five and thirty, or six and thirty years before he
died, according to Josephus Chronology, (if it be true;) nowsoever, he took
him diverse years before his death: for so the Scripture makes it plain 1 Samuel
15. 29. The strength of Israel will not lie nor repent; for he is not a man
that he should repent. Therefore because thou have rejected the word of the
Lord, the Lord also has rejected thee from being a King. And do not think
that thou by thy prayers, and crying God mercy, can ever alter him: for his
counsel is immutable, and he is strong in his decree, and cannot change.
Hitherto Orace and Mercy have been offered thee, which if thou had embraced,
thou might have found Mercy from the Lord, and the Kingdom should have been
established and confirmed unto thee: but now it is too late: for the strength
of Israel cannot lie.

God took Esau fifty years before his death: for so long he lived, after he
sought the blessing with tears: but he was a hunting when God was a calling:
he was following his prophainenesse when God was wooing him to Repentance. At
last when he called for Repentance, and sought it earnestly, yea his Soul was
careful for to get it; yet he could never obtain it, though he sought it
earnestly with tears of fifty years before he died.

Now if the Lord so severely punish contempt of temporal blessings, O how will
h^ punish the contempt of proffers of Grace and Salvation! I tell you, God will
be more strict in revenging of this sin, then of any other sin: he will
come with Martial law against all those that contemn his Gospel, Ioh. 3. 18.
He that believes not, is condemned already, Does Christ preach repentance and
salvation, and the Kingdom of God; and will thou not repent and believe?
Martial Law (beloved) martial Law, hang him up; for he is condemned already.
Even like a Soldier that revels against his General, and forsake his Colors,
they do not cast him into prison, and stay for the Assizes or Sessions, but
give him Mattiall Law, even hang him up: So if the Lord sound his Gospel in
thine ears, and offers thee conditions of peace, knocking at the door of thy
heart by his Spirit; and thou refuse to open to him thou art condemned already:
for the strength of Israel cannot lie, nor repent. Oh therefore take heed now
whiles his word sounds in thine ears, While his Spirit secretly whispers in thy
heart to thee, open to him, for else thou art condemned for ever.

Take notice then, that God does commonly give men a day, and no man or Angel
does know how long this day lasts. To some it lasts to their lash gasp; to
some, to their old age; and to some it is cut off in their childhood. God gave
the Angels a day, the which because they neglected, they are reserved in chains
of darkness until the great judgment day. God gave Cain a day, Genesis 4.
During all the time of this day, though Cain sinned again and again, and went
on in his sins a great while, yet heard nothing but a still voice, If thou
do well Cain, shall thou not be accepted? but if thou do ill, sin lies at
the door, But when no means will prevail, but Cain will go on adding sin to
sin, and murder unto all the rest of his sins, and so let go the season of
mercy, the Lord tells him from heaven, that the day of grace is past, the gate
of mercy is shut against thee: for thou art now accursed from the earth. As if
the Lord should say; Before I gave thee a day of salvation, and offered thee
mercy, but thou would not accept of it; but now I have clapped a curse upon
thy soul, that thou shall never claw it off. So God gave Niniveh a day to
repent, Ionnah 3. Yet forty days and Niniveh shall be destroyed. God gave the
Fig Tree a day, even three years, before he would have it cut down. God gave
the old world a day of an hundred and twenty years; during this time God sent
unto them Noah, a Preacher of Righteousness, to call upon them to repent, and
so set it down also, that his Spirit shall not always strive with man, but his
time shall be an hundred and twenty years: yet one writs that the Lord cut off
twenty of the hundred and twenty years, because of their iniquities which were
so grievous, and provoked him so much, that they hasted him to come before he
would have done. In all this space if they had Repented, they should have found
Mercy from the Lord: but when his time was gone and the day of grace was out,
the deluge came in upon them, and God by his judgments overthrew the whole
World.

Object. You may ask me when this day or season of grace does end, or cease.

Answ. I answer, that neither men nor Angels can tell; but this I say, it may
be yet this day of grace lasts unto thee; now it may be God speaks whom to
thy soul, now it may be God warnms thy heart, and gives thee good purposes and
resolutions: now it may be the Lord Jesus passes by thee in a good thought and
desire, lay hold on it; for thy day may cease this very night, for ought thou
knows. Luke 17. 22. The time shall come (says Christ) when you shall desire
to see one of the days of the Son of man, and shall not see it. Now is the
day of Christ upon you, now is Christ offering and preaching himself to you;
but if you let this day pass thou may desire to have one of the drops of
that Blood that has been offered to thee, and yet never have it: thou may
desire to feel one rap of that Spiret that has knocked at thy heart, and yet
go without it, thou may entreat for one dram of that mercy that has been
offered, and thou have rejected, but it shall never be granted to thee: God may
clap that fearful sentence upon thee, Now henceforth never grow fruit more on
thee. never Repentance come into thy heart more. If now thou will not repent
and be converted, the Lord may set it down in his decree from this day forward,
that thou may fumble about thy sins, but shall never get victory over them:
thou may ever be mourning for thy corruptions, but never mourn aright for
them; thou may blunder about Repentance, but never do the work.

Ezekiel 24. 23. You shall not mourn nor weep, but you shall pine away for
your iniquities, and mourn one toward another. There is many a soul for
contemning of God, and not taking up Repentance while they may have it, this
plague of God is come upon them, that they are ever repenting, and are never
able to Repent, ever poring upon their sins, but never able to come out of
them: they pray and pray against them, but their prayers moulder away under
them: for they shall pine away for their iniquities. What is the reason? He
shows in the 13. verse: Because I would have purged thee, and thou wast not
purged, thou shall not be purged any more. Because I gave thee line upon line,
precept upon precept, motion upon motion, Sacrament upon Sacrament, Sabbath
upon Sabbath, and Ordinance upon Ordinance, because. I used all fair means and
foul means; I awaked thy conscience and stirred up the motions of Grace in
thee; but because I would have cleansed thee, and thou wast not cleansed, thou
shall never be cleansed. A fearful sentence it is, if men's hearts were soundly
oppened to consider rightly of it.

And as there is a Personal day, so there is a National day; if the Nation
turn unto God during that time, then that Nation shall find mercy; but if they
neglect that day, then God will hide those things from their eyes that belong
to their peace, as Christ says of Jerusalem. Luke 19. 42. O Jerusalem! if that
thou had known in this thy day, the things that did belong to thy peace! but
now they are hid from thine eyes: in this thy day; if thou had known it
during that day it had been happy for thee; but now the day of grace is gone,
the Lord has concealed it from thee, and thou shall never perceive it more.

Some men's day of grace God ends even in their very childhood; therefore if
there be any little ones, any Children here in this congregation, that are of
age to know what belongs to an exortation, to them I spoke, that they take heed
how they rebel against the commandment of a Father or a Mother, or Master,
against the teaching of Gods word, for though you be children, yet God may
inflict judgments upon your heads; for not only the day of grace, but also the
day of lfe may be cut off from children, as 2 Kings 2. 24. Four and twenty
children were torn in pieces for mocking the Lords Prophet. Some men's day of
grace is not shut up until their youth; some not until their old age. some
not until they are a dying; and if they refuse then, they are like, yea sure
to perish for ever; I know the day of grace may have several returns, but at
last Gods Exchequer will be finally shut up.

Object. May not a man be called at the eleventh or twelfth hour of the day?
The day of grace lasts always: and does not the Apostle call the day of
life, the day of grace? 2 Cor. 6. 2.

Answ. It is true, the Lord calls men at the eleventh and twelfth hour; but
yet look and you shall see in the twentieth of Matthew, that they were not
called at the first hour, nor at the second nor third hour, nor at the sixth
and ninth hour, he does not say he found the same men that he found at the
first, and third, sixth and ninth hours, but he saw others standing jdle: No
those that were called at the first hour, came in at the first hour; and they
that were called at the third hour, came in at the third hour; and they that
were called at the sixth and ninth hour, came in at ye sixth and ninth hour.
Well, does God call thee in thy childhood, in thy youth, or in thy middle age;
now at the first or sixth, or ninth hour, now come in and labor in Gods
vineyard, and work out your salvation with fear and trembling, and make use of
the season of grace; now whilst it is upon you: for if thou be called at the
first hour, the sixth is for another, and not for thee; if thou be called the
sixth hour, the ninth hour is for others and not for thee; if thou be called the
ninth hour, the eleventh hour is for others and not for thee; The text says,
He came and found others standing jdle in the market place, and said unto them,
Why stand ye here jdle? and they say unto him, no man has hired us; as if they
should say, We never had any means of salvation, we have had no Ministers to
preach unto us; but now God calls upon thee to come in, this is thy hour, look
unto it. If God call thee, see thou come in, whether it be at the first or
third hour, at the sixth or ninth hour, lest the Lord in his wrath clap
hardness of heart upon thy soul.

Object. But you will say, that the day of life, and the day of grace are
paralleld, and likened one to another; and therefore there is hope so long as a
man remains in the congregation of the living.

Answ, I answer, it is true indeed, that the day of grace lasts as long as
the day of life, 1. In regard of others; for others are so to esteem of it;
the Minister is to look to his people, as to a people to be converted as long
as they live.

2 In regard of a man's own self, he is so bound to believe; sor the
commandment of faith stands in force on a man, so long as he lives and
therefore infidelity and despair cease not to be sins, till a man is
actually in Hell; when he is in hell, then they are no sins, because then he
is not commanded to believe, but are part of the punishment of the damnes; but
whilst a man lives it is a sin, for men are now bound to lay hold upon Christ
and to believe, at what hour of their life soever.

3. It may be said to last all a man's life long, because it is bounded within
the compass of life: for no man has a day of grace after this life.

But what is the meaning of all those Scriptures which show how God does
deliver up men unto the Spirit of guidinesse, and unto the Spirit of slumber?
And what means the hardening of men's hearts, and searing of men's consciences,
but only to show that the day of grace may end unto a a particular man, ten,
twenty, thirty, nay forty years before his death;

1. Because God may harden a man's heart, Jerem, 13. 10. and deal with them as
with Israel in the Rocks, so shut up their hearts that they shall never melt at
any Sermon, never be wrought upon by any judgment, God having closed them up in
a rocky heart, that he says of them. Can the blackmore change his skin, or the
Leopard his sports? then may they do good that are accustomed to do evil. The
blackness of the blackmore is only in the outside of the skin, yet all the art
under the heavens cannot blot it out: So if once hardness possess thy soul,
all the preaching of the Ministers, and all the means of grace in the world,
can never bring it unto that frame, and temper, as to make it melt under the
hand of God: I tell thee, thou that usest to come unto Sermons day after day,
and refusest to repent, living still in thy sins, there is no hammer nor
beetle in the world more hard then thy heart: as those men and women that sit
under the preaching of the word, and hear ye doctrine of life, like rain from
above, beating and knocking on their consciences, and on their hearts, to
awaken them out of their sins and yet notwithstanding will not repent at last,
they prove to be deaf Adders, that stop their ears against the word, charm
the charmer never so wisely.

2. God may fear men's consciences; Does thy conscience tell thee thou art a
luke-warmling, and will thou not be reformed? Does thy conscience tell thee,
that thy prayers and all thy religion is rotten and unsound, and that thy
Repentance is hypocritical and naught; and that for all thy vain hopes, thou
art but a dissembler, and yet remainest in thy sins, and will thou not be
bettered hereby? Take heed; for that man that runs on in sin against the
voice of his own conscience, that man sins the sin, of Saul 1 Samuel 13. 8.
God bid him stay seven days until Samuel came: Saul stays full seven days
within one hour; at last his lust began to bawl: What? shall I stay for a
Prophet thus long? Stay, says his conscience; Why? (says Saul) I waited for
him so long, even seven days lacking but one hour, Stay (says God to his
conscience) for the word of God bids thee stay so long; he stayed one day, and
two days, and six days, and seven days but one hour; Stay (says his
conscience) no, he would not but I forced my self (says the text) as if he
should say, I hardened my heart to do it, though the word of the Lord bid me
stay and not do it, yet I forced my self to do it: What was this man's sin?
Was it his offering of sacrifice, and calling upon God by prayer? No, the Lord
commands us to call upon him in time of distress; and being commanded it was
lawful. Was it his sin to meddle with the Priests office? No: for he did but
appoint the sacrifice, the Priest offered it. What? was it the breaking of one
hours time? No: for he had sinned more against God, then so: but this was his
sin, that he went against his own conscience, when God stood in the way: when
conscience stood in the way, conscience said stay, but he would not stay: God
bid him stay, but he would not stay, and this is the sin of many thousands
amongst us; men's consciences tell them that they must not be drunkards, men's
consciences tell them that they must not be worldlings, they must not be
swearers, they must not be lukewarm professors; they must pray better then
they do, and have other faith then yet they have, if ever they mean to be
saved; will thou yet against thy conscience force thy self to go on in thy
sins from day to day, and never be reformed? take heed lest the Lord be
provoked to set thy sin upon thy head, and shut up thy heart, and conclude
thy eternal destruction.

Object. Suppose I go one in my sins, and follow my wicked courses now; what if
I seek him hereafter, and humble my soul before him with fasting and prayer,
and when I lie upon my deathbed, I send a ticket unto my Minister to pray for
me, will all this do me no good?

Answ. Surely no, (says God, Jerem. 15. 1.) Though Moses and Samuel stood
before me, yet my affections could not be toward this people; cast them out of
my sight. Do thou lie sick upon thy deathbed? were Samuel, Job, or Daniel,
the Minister of thy Parish, and thou should send thy ticket unto them,
desiring them to remember thee in their prayers; if Noah stood in the Pulpit,
and Job and Daniel were here before the Lord for to plead for thee, yet he
would not hear thee.

Object. But, suppose I humble my self by fasting and prayer, will not God
hear that?

Answ. No, if thou neglect the day of grace Ier. 14. 12. when they fast, I will
not hear them: and when they offer oblations, I will not accept their cry: but
I will consume them by the sword, by famine, and by pestilences you may set up
your fastings, prayers, and humiliations, you may lament and mourn, and pine
away your selves in your sins; but it is not all your prayers and fastings; it
is not all your lamentation and mourning, that will do you good, so long as the
counsel of the Lord is rejected. Because I called, and ye would not answer,
therefore you shall call, but I will not hear, thy thought that the Lords ears
would always be open, and that when they called the Lord would have answered,
and that the day of grace would ever remain; but God says, I will not hear
them; they would never have sought if they thought the Lord would not hear
them, but all their seeking was in vain:

Ob. You will say at what time soever a sinner; repents, he shall have mercy.

An. It is true, if thou repent from the bottom of thy heart, but thou may
come with many a degree of repentance, and yet never repent whilst thou
live: if thou repent from thy heart, and root out thy sins, then God will put
away thy sins; but thou may go on in repentance and calling upon God, and
performing many duties of Religion, and yet is hardened; look how much
Religion will stand with self-love, so much thou may have after the day of
grace is gone, self-love may make a man fly to prayer, and run after Sermons,
and go on in many holy duties, and give over many sins; look how far
self-love may drive thee unto holy duties, so far thou may go, and yet
notwithstanding remain hardened. O therefore let us not delay, nor put off the
time of grace, nor let go salvation while it may be had, then shall they call,
but I will not answer: he does not set down when this time is; it may be (...)
is now, it may be not this seven years, it may be not till thy death.

Doct. 2. It may be this very day, even this very Sermon, this very hour may
be thy day that art now in thy sins, that if thou repent not at this very one
Sermon, thou neglectest eternal life for ever; lose the benefit of this Sermon
at this time, and thou may lose eternal Salvation, and never have it more.
The theife that robbed this day, how does he know but this one robery may bring
him to the gallows? So the man that sins this day, how does he know but that
this very days work may bring him to hell? Deuteronomy 32. 35. To God belongs
vengance; their feet shall slide in due time. Therefore if a man sin against
him, he may stand to day, and to morrow, and many days; but when the due time
comes, even the time which God has set, then up goes his heels, he shall slide
and break his neck: thy houre-glasse runes in heaven, and thou see not when
the sand comes to the bottom, but when it is out, then down thou go to hell
for ever.

There was one resolved to kill Julius Caesar such a day; the night before, a
friend sent him a letter to acquaint him with it: but being at supper and
busy; I will not look upon it now, (says he) to morrow is a new day. The next
day when he should have read his letter, he was stabbed; Whence this proverb
came in Greece To morrow is a new day. God sends thee a letter and a message
from heaven to day; repent and come out of your fins, or for ever to hell; to
day he converted and sanctified, or for ever be hardened. Do thou refuse to
harken to day, and put it off until to morrow? it may be to morrow may be
a day of Gods wrath, and then thou may be hardened, seared, and bound over
unto the great day of Gods vengeance: to morrow God may set the decree upon thy
soul, that thou shall never repent. Therefore if thou refuse this, thou
refuses all; for what know thou, but this very day may be thy day?

The reason is, because Gods patience is in his own breast; and who can tell
how long it will last? Have thou Momus his glassewindow, to look into Gods
secret counsel? have thou a keyhole to look into Gods treasury? can thou
stand on tiptoe, to look over Gods shoulder, to look into Gods decree, to see
how long his patience will last? It may be God has suffered thee till this
day, thou art guilty of ten thousand sins, and yet he is patient toward
thee. God has stayed thus long for thee, that have sworn I know not how many
oaths; God has born thus long with thee that have told I know not how many
lies, profaned I know not how many Sabbaths, contemned I know not how many
Ordinances, and slighted I know not how many Judgments; yet Gods patience is
in his own breast, it is the long sufferance of God. Thou may say I would
feign have it to morrow, and this seven years, but alas it is his long
sufferance and not thine: and how do thou know when he will conclude it? it
may be this day as well as to morrow, Joel. 2. 13. Rent your hearts, and not
your garments, (says the Prophet) for the LORD he is gracious and merciful.
This word [ for] has a great deals of force in it.

First, it is a descriptivum [for] he is gracious and a merciful God:
therefore rent thy heart, and let thy Soul burst within thee, that thou have
sinned against him, for he is a merciful God, and it may be he will pardon all
thy sins and heal all thy rebellions committed against him.

Secondly, it is an upbraiding (for,) upbraiding thee for thy sins: rent thy
heart therefore; why? he is a patient God? will thou go on in thy sins against
such a patient God? and rebel against such a loving Father, that has loved
thee with so much compassion? ^ent thy heart for he is patient.

Thirdly, it is a comfort and encouraging [for:) rent thy heart; for there is
encouragement for thee to repent, give over thy sins, and go to the Throne of
grace. For there is much mercy to welcome thee, and great patience for to bid
thee come home, and abundance of grace for to encourage thee; therefore rent
thy heart and come home unto the Lord, for he is patient and longsuffering.

Fourthly, it is a forewarning (for:) rent your hearts, for the Lord is
gracious and merciful, slow to anger, and of great kindness; yet his mercy
lasts, yea his patience endures, yet he has all his attributes, and yet he
is pleased to manifest the same, still tendering grace and mercy unto thee. Oh!
turn unto him while these endure, or else thou shall perish for ever.

Fifthly, it is a threatening [for:] now he is gracious, now he is merciful; but
his mercy will end, his patience will end, and then if thou have not rent thy
heart before, it will be too late then. Therefore as ever thou love thine own
soul, now rent thy heart, and turn unto God.

It is Gods own proclamation; The Lord, slow to anger, and of great mercy,
forgiving iniquity and sin. Yea what man soever he be, that humbles his soul
before him, he shall find grace and mercy with him, yea abundance of mercy,
pardoning iniquity, transgression and sin: yea any thing.

Let but a soul come prostrate before him, humbling his soul, he will pardon
his sin. But as it follows in the words; He will by no means clear the
guilty; if notwithstanding all Gods patience and mercy, thou go on in thy
sins, the Lord will never forgive thee, but will visit thy sinues upon thee
unto the third and fourth generation, because thou have withstood the day of
grace.

Beloved, men run on in their sins, as if so be an Augel from heaven should cry
unto them, and tell them, yet God will be good unto them, yet God will show
them mercy, and forbear them. Beloved, let your consciences answer, if you
ever heard the Lord God say to any of you, thus long I will forbear you. No,
Gods patience is in his own breast, and therefore no man knows how long it will
last.

Reas. 2. A second reason is, because Gods patience gives no marks or inkling
of it, before it ends: commonly when God strikes a man with death, he gives
some signs, or warnings of it before, as sickness and pains, and gray hairs,
and many sorrows, etc. Now because thy life is in Gods hands, thou carest not
for it, but venturest to go on in thy sins, hoping to have some warning though
thousands be cut off without it; but the day of grace may come to an end, and
yet thou never have any inkling or warning of it beforehand: commonly when God
strikes a man with death, he tells him of it beforehand by aches and pains, as
if the Lord should say, Now thou shall die, now will I take thee out of the
world, But when the Lord takes away the day of grace from a man, though the
spiritual man may take some notice of it, yet there is no sensible apparition
of it, but after the day of grace is set upon a man, he may be as strong and
lustrie as before, he may come to Church as well after as before, perform
religious duties, and do many good things, as well after as before; as Saul
went on in duties of Religion, as well after Samuel had pronounced the Lords
doom upon him, how many times was he offering sacrifice unto the Lord after
the Prophet told him, that he was a man rejected? how many good speeches came
from him? as when Samuel met him, he salutes him with these words; Blessed be
thou of the Lord, I pray thee turn again with me, that I may worship the
Lord. A man would have thought that Saul had been a good convert. No, no,
before all this his judgment and doom was set upon him; God steals upon him
and says nothing; he claps his plague upon their souls and holds his peace.

Isaiah. 42. 14. I have a long time held my peace, I have been still, and
refrained my self; now will I cry like a traveling woman, I will destroy, and
devour at once. The Lord shows here how he deals with men, they go on in
their sins, but the Lord holds his peace; they provoke him every day, but the
Lord refraines his anger: but now all at once his wrath breateth forth upon
them, Psalm. 64. 7. God will shoot an arrow at them suddenly, their stroke
shall be at once, The Lord suddenly shoots a swift arrow at thee? no sooner it is
shot, but it enters into thy bowels. When the Lord comes upon a man, he comes
suddenly; when he ends the day of grace upon him, he does it suddenly. He ended
the day of grace on the Scribes and Pharisees even in the very Sermon time,
While Christ was preaching unto them, they were delivered up to hardness of
heart: so many were delivered up to hardness of heart in the time of Hosea's
prophecy, Hosea 4. 17. Epharim is joined to jdols, let him alone (says God:)
as if he should say, Sermou, let him alone; Preacher, let him alone; Spirit,
let him alone; Christ, let him alone, let him alone; Beloved, if we stand out
against God, and reject the day of grace, the Lord may say, Word, let such aman
alone, and never convert him; Christ, let such a man alone, and never redeem
him; Spirit let such a man alone; and never sanctify him; Sacraments, let such
a man alone and never seal up any comforts unto him; a fearful sign that
men are come to this hours; do we not see that men come to the Word; and the
Word lets them alone in their sins? do not men come to the Sacrament, and the
Sacrament leaves them still in their filthiness? men come unto good dtuies,
but good duties let them alone, and do them no good: and this is the condition
of many thousands in the world. Therefore oh think upon this you that have
made a league with your sins, and an agreement with hell; hear this delivered
to you this day, that the day of grace may be ended, and God may come and clap
his curse upon men, and never give them any inkling of it at all.

A third Reason is, because God reckons upon every hour, if God kept not a
strict account of time, how many Sermons you have had, how many mercies you
have enjoyed how many crosses he has warned you by: if God kept not a true
talle and account of every hours time; you might rub on many days, and
months, and years, and spend much time in fulfilling of your lusts, but God
keeps a reckoning of these things. yea of every hour, and of every minute.
Act. 17. 30. The times of ignorance God regarded not; but now he admonishes
all men to repent. Alas when men live in their sins through blindness and
ignorance, and know not God, the Lord takes no such strict notice of them, but
lets them go on longer and longer; but when the Lord send them his Word and
Gospel, and affords them the means of grace, he does the more strictly look
unto them, and takes the more exact account of them before they had the means
of grace, the Lord winked at them, and did not so narrowly watch them, but
looked over men's ignorance, (as the original has it) but now God sends his
Word and Gospel, he admonishes all men to repent, he winks at never an hour,
but sets down how often thou have had exhortation from thy Minister, how often
thou have had warning by sickness and afflictions, how often thou have had
cheeks from thine own conscience, how many admonitions thou have had from thy
friends, how many times thou have had the sound of the Gospel to sound in thy
ears to bring thee home unto God, John 2. 7. 11. This is the first beginning
of miracles that Jesus did, John 4. 58. This is the second miracle that Jesus
did, says the Text, God sets down, this is the first, this is the second
time: This is the second Epistle I wrote to you says Paul. Oh this is the
third time I wrote unto you, 2 Cor. 13. that when I come I will not spare: so
God sets it down in his catalogue, this is the first time that I have warned
this man, this is the second time, this is the third time, that when I come I
will not spare; the Lord counts how long he has sought unto thee, and
entreated thee by his mercies, how long he has allured thee by his Word, how
long he has warned thee by his judgments, how often he has smote thy heart
with fears, and thy conscience with terrors. Now if for all this thou will
not return, just is it with God to cast thee down to hell for ever.

The fourth Reason, and last: it is a Wonder that the day of grace is not ended
already, and that thou art not now in hell, When a thing in this kind is looked
for to be done, it is a wonder that it is not done: it is a wonderful mercy
of God unto this Kingdom that yet the day of grace is continued amongst us, in
regard of our long fear and expectation of the contrary. For from the highest
to the lowest we have highly revolted more and more, and provoked God to his
very face. What contempt of Gods Word? what neglect of Gods Ordinances? what
profanation of Gods Sabbaths? what scoffing and deriding of Gods servants? how
does wickedness and profaneness stand up into the highest room, climb up
into the highest chambers? But as a whore condemned to die being with child is
reprived for a time, until her child be brought forth: so this Land has
gone a whoring from God, yet so long as God has some children to be brought
forth, which are not yet come unto the birth, he lets his grace and Gospel
continue until these children be brought forth. Therefore now (beloved) if we
stick at the birth and come not forth, an hundred to one but we shall miscarry.

When Christ comes first to thy soul, he witnesses grace and mercy to thee,
if thou will repent and amend; yea he witnesses forgiveness of sins,
redemption, and salvation, if thou will believe; but if not, he will be a swift
witness against thee, Malachi. 3. 5. if thou continue and go on in thy
sins: Agree with thine adversary, while thou art in the way quickly, Matthew
5. 25. Now God is in the way with thee,, Christ and his Spirit are in the way
with thee; thou need not now say, Who shall go up to heaven and bring down
the Spirit to thee; Christ's Spirit is now knocking at thy heart, and now God
offers this mercy to thee, now thou art in the way, now he calls unto thee to
accept of his mercy, now he commands thee to take Christ, now hear him,
calling to thy heart, now he tenders, grace unto thee embrace it; now receive
Christ and make up thy peace with him: remember the saying of the Apostle 2.
Corinthians 13. 5. Examine your selves whether you be in the faith prove your
selves. Know you not your own selves, how that Jesus Christ is in you except
you be reprobates? As if the Apostle should say, I have been an Apostle to you
this year and half. I have preached thus and thus long unto you, I have wrote
one Epistle to you to reform those abuses that were among you? and now I write
this second Epistle, to declare the whole will and counsel of God to you. Now
cast up your reckoning, examine your selves, and make up your account: see if
you have gained Christ. O! I have Christ, (says one) I have Christ, (says
another,) I but prove it, says the Apostle, and try your selves: know ye not
that by this time Christ in you, or else you be reprobates? As if he should
say, if yet Christ be not in you, and grace wrought in your hearts, if yet you
lie festring in your sins, and go one in your wicked ways, it is to be
feared you are reprobates: either you or we are reprobates, you for not obeying
or we not for delivering the truth of God unto you: But I trust that ye shall
know that we are not reprobates: verse 6. God forbid that this Word should be
ever spoken unto any soul in this congregation: but this let me say, is there
any man here that goes on in his lusts, and in his carnal course of life, in
pride, security, hardness of heart, and impenitencie, that has not the
soundness of grace? he has a fearful sign and brand of a reprobate, whose
conscience is stifled: it is a fearful sign, if he be not a reprobate before
God, yet he is one that is not approved, but for the present in a wretched and
miserable condition. Now is the time of grace wherein God has spoken to your
souls, remember that vengeance that is coming toward you, if it be rejected,
now the Lords fatlings are ready; his Oxen and Sheep are slain and laid upon
the board; Christ is sacrificed, and his blood is shed, and the grace of the
Lord Jesus Christ is tendered to you; you that have grace, get more grace, you
that have no grace, get grace and Christ, and take heed of neglecting any
opportunity of grace; for that may come unto thee in one hour, that will never
come again.

FINIS.
Christian Reader,
I Am desirous to let thee understand, that there are diverse other Godly
Books, (which are very useful for thy Souls health:) the Titles of them are
as follows.

1. A DIVINE MESSAGE to the elect Soul. By the same Author, M. William Fenner.

2. The LIVES and DEATHS of the Modern DEVINES. By M. Thomas Fuller.

3. GODS Love, MAN'S Unworthiness. by M. John Quarles.

4. CONJUGALL COUNSEL. by M. Thomas Hilder.

5. The WARS of the JEWS. newly corrected of sundry Errors.

6. A BRIFE INSTRUCTION concerning the Holy SACRAMENTS.

7. DIVES and LAZARUS.

8. The CHRISTIANS Mourning GARMENT.

9. A JEWEL for the EAR.

10. ENGLANDS Afflictions.

11. ENGLANDS Gentle Admonition.

All of them are to be sold by John Stafford* dwelling in George-yard, near
Fleet-bridge.


