AN ENQUIRY INTO, AND DETECTION OF THE Barbarous Murder OF THE Late Earl of
Essex.

Or a Vindication of that Noble Person from the Guilt and Infamy of having
destroyed Himself.

Whose Hatred is covered by Deceit, his Wickedness shall be showed before the
whole Congregation, Prove. 26. 26.

The Land cannot be cleansed of the Blood that is shed therein, but by the
Blood of him that shed it, Numb. 35. 33.

Erit vobis locus querendi apud Senatum, invocandi leges, quod insidiis
circumventus, vitam pessima morte finierim.

Germanicus ad Amicos apud Tacit. Annal. lib. 2.. 71.

Anno 1684.

Upon the Execrable Murder Of the Right Honorable ARTHUR Earl of ESSEX.
MOrtality would be too frail to hear
How ESSEX fell, and not dissolve with fear;
Did not more generous Rage take off the blow,
And by his Blood the steps to Vengeance show.
The Tower was for the Tragedy designed,
And to be slaughtered, he is first confined,
As fettered Victims to the Altar go.
But why must Noble ESSEX perish so?
Why with such Fury dragged into his Tomb,
Murdered by Slaves, and sacrificed to Rome?
By stealth they kill, and with a secret stroke
Silence that Voice which charmed when e're it spoke.
The bleeding Orifice o'reflow'd the Ground,
More like some mighty Deluge, than a Wound.
Through the large space his Blood and Vitals glide,
And his whole Body might have past beside.
The reaking Crimson swelled into a Flood,
And streamed a second time in Capel's Blood.
He Is in his Son again to Death pursued,
An Instance of the highest Gratitude.
They then malicious Stratagems employ,
With Life, his Dearer Honor to destroy,
And make his Fame extinguish with his Breath;
An Act beyond the Cruelties of Death.
Here Murder is in all its shapes complete;
As Lines, united in their Center, meet;
Formed by the blackest Politics of Hell:
Was Cain so devilish when his Brother fell?
He that contrives, or his own Fate desires,
Wants Courage, and, for fear of Death, expires.
But Mighty ESSEX was in all things brave,
Neither to Hope, nor to Despair, a Slave.
He had a Soul too innocent and great
To fear, or to anticipate his Fate;
Yet their exalted Impudence and Guilt,
Charge on himself the precious Blood they spilt.
So were the Protestants some Years ago,
Destroyed in Ireland without a Foe.
By their own barbarous Hands the mad Men die,
And massacre themselves they know not why.
Whilst the kind Irish howl to see the Gore,
And pious Catholics their Fate deplore.
If you refuse to trust erroneous Fame,
Royal Mack-Ninny will confirm the same.
We have lost more in injured Capel's Heir
Than the poor bankrupt Age can e're repair.
Nature indulged him so, that there we saw
All the choice Strokes her steady hand could draw.
He the old English Glory did revive,
In him we had Plantagenets alive.
Grandeur, and Fortune, and a vast Renown
Fit to support the Luster of a Crown.
All these in him were potently conjoined,
But all was too ignoble for his Mind:
Wisdom and Virtue, Properties Divine,
Those, Godlike- ESSEX, were entirely thine.
In his Great Name he is still preserved alive,
And will to all succeeding Times survive.
With just Progression, as the constant Sun
Does move, and through its bright Ecliptic run.
For whilst his Dust does undistinguished lie,
And his blessed Soul is soared above the Sky
Fame shall below his parted Breath supply.
AMong all the Sins which are said to cry for vengeance, there is none to which
a louder voice is ascribed in the ears of God as well as Men, than that of
Murder. For as it is the destroying a Creature, which carries the stamp and
impress of the Divine image, and therein a defacing the most visibl'
representation, which God has vouchsav'd unto, and left of himself in
sub^unary Beings; so it is a most daring insurrection against the Authority of
the Supreme Lawgiver, who designed his inhibition for a sufficient Fence about
our Life's. Nor does any Crime more audaciously control the End of Divine
Wisdom in making us sociable Creatures, and furnishing us with faculties and
powers by which we are enabled as well as instructed to help and shelter one
another. And therefore in proportion to the heynousness of the guilt of the sin
of Murder, are both the denounciations of God in the Word, and his vindictive
dispensations of providence against it, wrote in more legible Characters, than
those wherein we find his displeasure recorded and testified against other
Crimes. Profane as well as Sacred Story's are filled with instances of Gods
inquisition after the shedding innocent blood, and of the wr^thful severity
which he has shown against Families as well as persons in whose skirts it has
been found.

And as no Transgression is more provoking to God, so none does so much incense
and exasperate mankind. The destroying one innocent person, is construed as a
threatening of all; nor can we hear of the cutting our Neighbors throat, but we
judge our selves alarmed and bid look to our own. Nor is it only by the
instinct, but by the Authority of the Law of Nature, that Murderers have in all
places and ages been pursued with an Universal hatred. He abandon's his own
life to the will and pleasure of the next assailant, who esteems it not his
duty not only to wrest the weapon out of a murderers hand, but to bring the
malefactor to public punishment.

And tho there is no person so dignified or privileged, in whom assassinations
and murders are not highly detestable, and to be prosecuted with the utmost
impartiality and zeal; yet they deserve the greatest abhorrency, when
perpetrated by those, whose duty it is to defend our life's instead of invading
them. For if it be criminal in a very enemy to kill the person whom he reckons
himself most injured by, unless empowered thereunto by a judicial Sentence or a
legal warrant; how infinitely more enormous is it, for those to be Author's of,
or instrumental in our ruin, to whom the care of our preservation is committed
and entrusted. And by how much any are vested with the Administration of the
Law, to avenge themselves and the community upon offenders; by so much does
their crime and guilt become enhanced, if when they can not gratify their
indignation in the person and quality of Magistrates, they espouse the work and
character, and assume the weapons of an assassinate. And who know's, but that
as the Attorney General had the boldness in print to call the accusation and
commitment of the Earl of Essex, Braddons Trial p. 4.
a convictment for high Treason, but that others upon that conviction might
have the impudence to give order for his Execution. What more hateful sight can
there be to heaven, or more enraging spectacle to men, than to find those, who
by the places they are advanced unto, and the Trust that is reposed in them,
ought to watch for our safety, conspiring our ruin, and what they have not the
courage themselves to execute, tempting and hiring others to commit?

As it will be easily allowed, being indelibly engraven in our Natures, that
every Murder is to be registered amongst crimes of the deepest die; so it cannot
be denied, but that one may be of a more heinous nature than another, and
receive aggravation from the worth and quality of him that is assassinated. For
as the value of kindnesses grows in proportion to the meaness of the persons on
whom they are bestowed; so crimes receive an increase of guilt, from the
dignity and usefulness of those against whom, they are committed. By how much
higher the station of any one is in the Commonwealth, and by how much through
his wisdom, power, bounty and influence, he is beneficial to the Nation; by so
much is the destruction of such, a person attended with the higher
aggravations, and to be resented as a most enormous crime. Nor are we only to
esteem ourselves injured and threatened in and by the example of such a person's
ruin, but we are to account our selves wronged, and ought to demand
reparation, answerably to the benefits we reapt by him, and which we are robbed
of by the loss of so useful and worthy a person. Our Law in making that against
a Peer liable to an Action of Scandal, which it takes not so much as cognizance
of as an offense against little and inferior people; could not be so
improvident in reference to the life's of Noblemen, as not to set a stronger and
higher hedge about them, than those of Mechanics are fenced and defended by.

Nor is it only from the quality of (...)erson against whom a crime is
committed that it receives an aggravation, but there accrues a new addition of
guilt thereunto, from the obligations which the person destroyed, may have laid
upon those who were instrumental in and accessory to his ruin. To see one
perish by the hands of those, whom he may have injured either in their persons,
reputations, or interest, is no more than what we may sometimes find instances
of among the ^^rully and degenerate part of mankind; but to hear that a person
is assassinated by those whom he served with the utermost zeal and fidelity, is
a villainy which none but prodigies of ingratitude, and monsters of humane
Nature, can be guilty of. But there is a certain great man in the World whom I
shall forbear to name, whose temper is to bestow his Favors upon such as have
been his Majesty's greatest enemies, as well as the most proffligate and basest
among men, and in the mean time recompense such not only with neglect but
hatred, whose parents as well as themselves had shed their blood and ventured
their fortunes in the behalf of the King and the Royal cause. How true is that
of Tacitus, lib. 4. Annal. Beneficia ^ousque laeta sunt, dum videntur exolvi
posse, ubi multum antevenere, pro gratia odium redditur: Kindnesses are
acceptable while they may be repaid, but when they exceed all possibility of
recompense, they meet with hatred instead of acknowledgment. There is no other
way to be secure from the malice of some sort of people, than in the place of
obliging them, to keep them at defiance. For whereas they are altogether
incapable of being won and impressed by courtesies, they are either to be
chained up or menaced from doing mischief.

And as all I have suggested, makes but too suitable an introduction into this
following Discourse of the Assassination of the Earl of Essex; so it is no
small reflection upon the honor of the Nation, and proclaims the execrableness
of the Fact, and impudent boldness of the Actors, that they durst perpetrate
this horrid villainy not only in the Royal Prison, where the Government in the
account of the Law is responsible and pledge for the safety of the captive, but
in one of his Majesty's Palaces, where the King himself is to be esteemed
security for the preservation and forthcoming of all who come under his roof.
This honorable Gentleman being the Kings Prisoner, and deprived of all means
and advantages of defending himself; these trusted with the administration of
the Government, and particularly the King, were to be responsible for him in
case he miscarried. Nor can his Majesty's best friends, and these who are most
zealous for his honor, think otherwise of that villainous Fact, than that they
who where the contrivers of it, intended at once to rob the King of one of the
best and ablest Ministers he had ever employed, and to give a mortal wound to
the Royal reputation, by perpetrating the bloody crime in such a place. And
whereas the Queen had lain under an imputation of reproach, upon the account of
Sr. Edmond Bury Godfrey's being assassinated in Somerset House, they might hope
to involve the King under the like dishonor, by cutting the Throat of this
Noble Peer in the Tower of London.

Nor ought any man whom the providence of God has furnished with means and
advantages of detecting so horrid a murder, be judged either officious, or held
for dissaffected to the Government, if he reveal what he has attained to the
knowledge of, and publish those evidences, which as they have satisfied himself,
may be sufficient to convince all the unbyaz'd part of mankind, of the truth
and reality of this barbarous assassination. And as it is impossible he should
be a good Christian, so he ought not to be esteemed a good Subject to his
Majesty, nor a sincere friend to his Country, who shall more value his own ease
and safety, than the delivering the throne from guilt, or saving the Nation
from that vengeance, which the cry of innocent blood barbarously and
treacherously shed, is ready to derive and bring upon it. And it is no small
evidence by whose countenance and authority this murder was committed, that
such discouragements have been given to the discovery of it, and that an honest
Gentlemen has been so severely proceeded against, in defiance of all Law as
well as without President, for but offering to represent what he had learned in
relation to the destruction of that honorable person. But as we shall have
occasion to speak more fully of that afterward, I shall only add here, that
the barbarity expressed to Mr. Braddon, is so far from deterring others to
pursue this affair, that his ill treatment at the Council Board and Kings
Bench, was one of the motives of my undertaking this Province. And as by reason
of the retirement I have confined my self unto, and the privacy I have used in
following these researches, I labor not under the inconvenience of dreading a
sine or prison which does so much frighten others; so I dare boldly affirm that
the terror of these things, (were I to encounter them) would not so affect me,
as to make me neglect what I reckon a necessary as well as an important duty.
Patriae deesse quoad vita suppetat, aliis turpe, mihi etiam nefas, was the
saying of Camillus in Livy. And tho I be not so vain and ambitious, as to
desire the world should know who I am, yet I judge it absolutely needful that
they should understand who I am not, least others come into trouble for that
which ought not to be charged upon them, and which none but my self can with
any equity or justice be made accountable for. And seeing Mr. Braddon has been
singled forth as the object of some men's indignation, for the service he was
willing to have done his Majesty in the detection of this Murder; I reckon my
self bound to publish to all the world that I know not the Gentleman, and that
to the best of my remembrance I never saw him, much less have ever conversed,
or had any communication with him. I will not deny, but that he is a person
whom I do infinitely esteem for his integrity, zeal, and courage in this
matter; yet I will not be so far injurious to him, as to commence an
acquaintance with him during the transaction and dependence of this affair, and
while he is under the power of those that will be ready to declare him
criminal, for the least intercourse with a person that is likely to become so
obnoxious to the rage of St. James' and Westminster Hall as I may come to be
for this service to the King and Kingdom.

But besides the common ties, which I lie under equally with the rest of
mankind for endeavoring to detect so horrid and barbarous a Murder, there are
some special obligations upon me, by which I esteem my self more particularly
bound than others are, to do all the right and justice I can to the memory of
this massacred Lord, and to redeem his Name from the infamy with which they
have aspersed him of being Felo de se. For I had not only the honor to be
known to him, which Mr. Braddon pretends not unto, but besides the favoring me
with diverse Testimonies of his respect, he did me the kindness to own and
befriend me at a juncture, when I was in no small hazard from the malice of
very Powerful as well as considerable persons. And seeing that honorable Peer
has been so unhappy, as to find nothing but ingratitude as well as injustice
from those of the highest and sublimest quality whom he had most effectually
served and infinitely obliged; it is not amiss that the world should understand
there are some remains of virtue and gratitude among the mean and little
people, and that tho their condition does not enable them to recompense favors
conferred upon them by great persons, yet they have that ingenuity which others
want, viz. to sense and acknowledge them.

And as I reckon it no small honor to have been known to the deccased Peer, so
I thereby enjoyed an advantage which others wanted, namely an opportunity of
learning the principles and observing the Temper of that excellent person. Whom
as I found to be one imbued with the most virtuous and religious, as well as
heroic and generous principles of any Noble Man in the Kingdom; so I observed
him to be a Gentleman of the greatest sedateness of mind, least subject to the
undue agitation of unruly passions, and most under the conduct of a calm,
steady, strong, clear and well poised Reason, of any Man of Quality, I ever had
the happiness of access unto. And if either the succors of Nature, Education,
or Grace, were sufficient to fortify and preserve a person from such an
enormity and crime, then must the Earl of Essex above all men be acquitted from
the guilt of so execrable a fact, as being contrary to the Frame and
constitution of his Nature, as well as to all the intellectual and moral habits
of his Mind. So villainous a Deed, was inconsistent with his Temper, as well as
repugnant to his virtue. As he was an excellent Christian, he durst not allow a
thought that might give encouragement to so heinous a sin; and as he was a well
accomplished Gentleman, he scorned to render himself guilty of a thing that was
so mean and base. Nor was the folly of the Assassinates less, in hoping to
obtain credit to a report, that the Earl of Essex cut his own throat, than
their wickedness was, in contriving and perpetrating themselves, that bloody
murder upon him.

Yea as if it had not been enough, to have first cut the throat of this
innocent tho unfortunate Earl, and then to have fastened the guilt and infamy of
their own Fact upon his untainted virtue and spotless Soul; they have sought to
gain credit to their calumnious accusation, and to reconcile unthinking people
to their opinion, by assuming that he used to commend and justify self Murder,
in case there remained no other way to escape a capital punishment, and the
being made a spectacle to the little and gazing part of mankind. And to give
the better gloss to this malicious fiction, they report that he used to extol
the action of his Ladies Grandfather the Duke of Northumberland, who being
prisoner in the Tower for Treason, shot himself in the head with a Pistol. Put
as the Earl of Essex, had he entertained so ungedly and corrupt a sentiment,
was more prudent and discreet than to publish and avow an opinion so contrary
to the Rules of Religion, the principles of honor, and the common sense and
persuasion of mankind; so it is enough to detect the falsehood as well as the
malice that is in this report, that the Authors and dispersers of it, either
dare not declare the persons to whom the Earl should have discovered and
revealed his mind in this matter, or else such as they have named for vouchers
of the truth of this story, have not only denied their having at any time heard
him express the least word in favor of self murder, but do affirm with all the
sacredness imaginable, that he used to speak always of it with the utmost
abhor^ency, and to brand it as the greatest and most heinous sin. For whereas
they have had the impudence to affirm that this report either proceeded
originally from his own Lady, or was at least assented unto and attested by
her; she has upon application to her La^^ship for the knowledge of the truth
or falsehood of this Story, not only with all the solemnity requisite in a
matter of this importance, vindicated my Lord from having ever spoken a word
that might induce the Lawfulness of self murder, or give countenance to a
person's being Felo de se, but she has further assirmed that he used to speak
against it with an emotion beyond what was customary to him, and that he has
often declaned that no circumstances whatsoever could extenuate the guilt, or
lessen the infamy of so unnatural and wicked a Fact. So that this Story, which
has been so maliciously and industriously spread, to gain, belief to the
Report of my Lords having murdered himself, may upon this detection of its
Falsehood, be very justly improved for the establishing an Assurance that he was
assassinated by others. For it is impossible to imagine upon what other Motive
it could be invented, unless to palliate the Crime of those who had destroyed
him.

But should it be granted that the late Earl of Essex used to speak with all
Candor and Respect of the Duke of N^^thumberland, who slew himself in the
Tower; it was no more than what might be expected from a Gentleman of Civility
and good Breeding, partly out of Decorum and Complacency to his Lady, whose
Grandfather the said Duke was, and partly out of respect to that Noble Man's
Personal Merit and Worth, being upon many accounts a truly great Person. For is
it not enough to condemn a Fact, without heaping Obloquy and Reproach upon him
that has been guilty of it? It is sufficient to represent the Evil of a Thing
in Thesi, and to demonstrate the Sin as well as Dishonor in committing it; but
it neither agrees with the Rules of Religion, nor the Measures of Conversation
among Persons of Quality, to be over severe in Hypothesi, and to pronounce this
or that Man wicked and infamous, though upon the score of that which we have
doctrinally, and in way of Argumentation censured and condemned. Nor was the
Earl of Essex's Case parallel to that of the Duke of N^rthumberland, that the
latter should make the former a President. For whereas that Duke was not only
accused, but condemned for High Treason when he committed that Fact; the Earl,
though accused and committed, not only knew himself innocent of the Crime
wherewith he was charged, but was well assured that there was no Evidence upon
which they could proceed to try, and much less to condemn him. For of all the
Witnesses who had undertaken the Drudgery of swearing Men out of their Lives,
there was only my Lord H. that could pretend to so much as acquaintance with
him. Whose Testimony being but that of one Man, and a very infamous one too, it
could not found an Indictment of Treason, much less be esteemed a sufficient
Proof in Law for the Conviction and Condemnation of the meanest Subject.

And this leads me to another Topic, that the Earl of Essex did not destroy
himself, but was murdered by others. For whereas it is not only sworn, that he
cut his own Throat, but Braddon's Trial, p. 45. 55.
that he had ordered his Servants two days before, to provide a Penknife for
him, on pretense of cutting his Nails; but with an Intent, as Bomeny insinuates
in his Deposition, of committing that fatal and tragical Act: I doubt not but
to make it appear, that he was so far from any previous Intention of that
nature, that he took all imaginable care, in reference to his Safety, and being
fully secure, as to any hurt he might do himself, was only apprehensive and
jealous of what might be attempted upon him by others, and was accordingly
solicitous how to prevent it. And therefore he had the very day before his
Murder, appointed his Servants to bring up out of the Country, several Vessels
of Silver, necessary for the preparing and dressing of Victuals, with an intent
to have them brought into the Tower, not so much because he would have his Diet
provided and prepared by his own Cook, by reason of being curious in what he
eat, but because he was jealous of his Safety whilst his Meat was made ready by
any of the Officers of the Prison, and was not without Suspicion that some
violent and illegal means would be used toward his Destruction. Nor is it
unworthy of our further remark, that he was so far from having abandoned
himself to despair, or having entertained the least thought of being his own
Executioner, that the very day before the perpetration of the barbarous and
horrid Fact upon him, he had ordered a considerable quantity of the best sort
of Wines to be bought and brought into his Lodgings for his own Drinking,
resolving out of a Regard to his Safety, rather than his Health, to taste none
that was sold in or about the Tower. And whereas he knew that they had no
intentions at Court of bringing him to a Trial, nor indeed could, having but
only one Person that pretended to be a Witness against him, he had accordingly
appointed the providing such a quantity for him, as would have sufficed some
Months for his own drinking, till he could have been delivered in a due Course
of Law. Nor can unbiassed and impartial Men, make any other Inference and
Deduction from these Circumstances, than that the Earl of Essex, instead of
having designed any Violence upon himself, was only suspicious of what might be
attempted against, and perpetrated upon him by other Hands.

But if we will allow our selves leave to observe, what Ends the violent Death
of that Earl has been improved unto, and what Designs his Majesty's Justices
and Ministers have studied to serve by it; we shall both let our selves and the
World into a fuller view and knowledge of this hellish Mystery of Darkness, and
be able to detect the Contrivers of it, and by whose encouragement and
Authority that excellent, though unfortunate Person was brought to an untimely
and bloody Death. In order whereunto, we are to recollect, how that after
diverse Contrivances and Essays of involving Protestants in Sham Plots against
the Person of the King and the established Government, they were at last
possessed of a Pretense of a Conspiracy of this nature, and had furnished
themselves with some Witnesses, who undertook the swearing the best and
chiefest men of the Kingdom into a conjuration for levying war and destruction
of his Majesty. But being conscious that their witnesses were not of a
reputation to win belief to what they had prepared in charge against the
principal Patriots of our Religion and Laws, they resolved to murder the Earl
of Essex, (being one of these they had committed upon an accusation of being
guilty of that pretended conspiracy) and then to give out that he had destroyed
himself from the shame and horror of being concerned in so treasonabl' a
design. This they judged to be the most effectual way to support the credit of
their witnesses, and gain over the Nation to give faith to the truth and
reality of the plot. For as his Mejesties Ministers knew what infamous persons
most of the witnesses were, and how far from deserving that any thing should be
received from their Testimony; so they were very sensibl' that the generality
of the Kingdom were not over inclinabl' to believe a Protestant plot, there
having been so many endeavors before, of imposing upon them in this way and
kind. This was the design in order to which the murder of this honourabl' and
innocent person was contrived and resolved; and to this end did the Attorney
General and my Lord Chief Justice with all the Eloquence and Artifice as well
as all the malice they are Masters of, endeavor to make it useful and
subservient. The Lord of Essex being committed to the Tower for the Plot, and
killing himself there, was more, says the Attorney General, than a thousand
witnesses to open the eyes of the people, and confirm the belief of the
conspiracy. Braddon's Trial p. 3. ibid. page 63.
There was Digitus Dei in it, says my Lord Chief Justice Jeffryes, and enough
to satisfy all the world of the Truth of the conspiracy, that the Earl of
Essex being conscious of the great guilt he had contracted in being concerned
in it, did rather than abide his Trial, and for the avoiding the methods of
justice in his own particular case destroy himself. The improvement of the
Murder of that noble Peer to the establishing the belief of a plot, gives no
small ground to suspect who were the contrivers of his death, and upon what
design they did first assassinate, and then endeavor to cast and divert the
infamy and guilt of it upon himself. But I hope they will from their own way's
of argumentation, allow us the liberty of inferring, that in case my Lord of
Essex was not Felo de se, that then there was no such Protestant plot as they
have filled the world with the noise of, seeing the only motives upon which
they suppose and alledg' his having committed that unnatural fact upon himself,
were the reproach and horror of that conspiracy. Nay we doubt not, but that all
the honest and disinterested part of mankind, will upon conviction of their
having destroyed that innocent Gentleman, become fully satisfied, that there
has been no such Treasonable combination, as his Majesty's Ministers have
endeavored to impose the belief of upon the Nation, but that all his Court and
Popish Sham, and only devised and framed for subverting our liberties and
Religion, by cutting off those that had the integrity and courage to espouse
the protection and defense of them.

And as the end whereunto the unnatural death of my Lord Essex is applied and
improved, shows by whom it was contrived and effected; so the Tim'ing of that
murder, does further evidence and demonstrate, where the guilt of it ought to
be charged, and what service it was calculated for the promoting of. For as if
it had not been enough to murder one innocent person in a way of the most
barbarous violence imaginable, they resolved to adjust it to such a juncture of
time, as that it might serve to facilitate and compass the ruin of an other
Noble Person in the way of their Legal Form's And therefore no sooner was my
Lord Russel entered on his Trial for life, upon an indictment of being guilt of
that pretended conspiracy for which the Earl of Essex stood committed, but they
assassinated the one in the Tower, and immediately dispatched away the news of
his having murdered himself to the Old Bailey, thereby to amuse and prepossess
the jury, and byaz them to convict that other virtuous, noble and innocent
person. And with what satisfaction in themselves, as well as malice and
artifice against the prisoner at the Bar, did his Majesty's Council lay hold
on the tyd'ings, and apply them toward the begetting a belief of the guilt of
that admirable person who stood then arraigned, and whom they were at that very
time harrangu'ing and pleading out of his life. As if it had not been enough to
impress the minds of a jury sufficiently prejudiced, and which to all men's
knowledge was grossly partial, for the Attorney General to say, My Lord Russels
Trial, p. 38.
That my Lord Russel was one of the Council for carrying on the Plot with the
Earl of Essex, who had that morning prevented the hand of justice upon himself;
Sir George Jefferys comes after him, and adds in the winding up the evidence to
the jury just before they went from the Bar, and without all doubt the better
to mould and determine them to find the arrained person guilty, Ib. p. 59.
That there was nothing could be said in favor of my Lord Russel's innocence
as to what he was accused of, but what might be more strongly alleged in
behalf of the Earl of Essex, who nevertheless from a conciousness of being
guilty of that desperate conspiracy, had brought himself to an untimely end, to
avoid the methods of public justice. Yea so evident was it to all impartial
persons, who were then present at the Trial, that the Murder of the Earl of
Essex was not perpetrated by himself but by others, and that it was time'd and
adjusted to that season, in order to influencing the jury to give up my Lord
Russel with the more ease as a sacrifice and victime to the rage of the Court;
that a very noble Lord, who was always in the interests of Whitehall, and who
was then very zealous in the prosecution of those accused for the Plot, being
at that time on the Bench, did upon the hearing of my Lord of Essex's death,
and who were then walking in the Tower when it fatally fell out, and upon
observing with what diligence, care and artifice the news was brought into
Court as my Lord Russel was at the Bar, and how the Kings Council thereupon
acted their parts, rise up in great consternation from the Bench where he sat,
and pulling his hat over his eyes press out of Court, saying he plainly saw the
bottom of the business, and all the Mysteries wrapped up in it. And indeed such
influence and success had the news of the Earl of Essex's having murdered
himself, from the shame and horror he was under for being concerned in the
Conspiracy whereof my Lord Russel stood then arraigned, that diverse of the
Inquest have confessed and acknowledged, that the Report of the Earl's death,
especially as improved and managed by the Kings Council, had greater power over
their minds for the convicting him, than all the other evidence which was
given, and that they do really believe they should never have sound him guilty
without the intervention of that fatal stroke, and the crafty application which
the Kings Council at Law made of it. But so far was the Earl of Essex from
entertaining any foregoing thoughts of murdering himself, or from calculating
the perpetration of it to that unhappy season, that the very day before my Lord
Russel's Trial, (being also the day before his own Throat was cut) he gave
private directions to his Steward, to place himself with all the convenience in
Court which he could at the said Trial, the better to take the evidence in
short hand, instructing him withal how he might afterward convey it to him
for his perusal and to be made use of as he should have occasion And as the
Earl of Essex was a person of that sedateness, honor and virtue, that no
rational or good man can believe he would commit so horrid a crime upon
himself; so such was the entire friendship between him and my Lord Russel, that
we must renounce common sense and reason, before we can admit that the Earl of
Essex would be guilty of so heinous an injury to his dearest and best Friend,
as to calculate and adjust the murdering himself to such a season, which he
must needs know would be too probable a means, to derive the destruction of a
person whom he infinitely valued and loved after it.

Having now shown the end unto which the murder of this incomparable Earl was
designed and adapted, and the improvement which was made of it, not only
through endeavoring to establish thereby the belief of a Protestant Plot in
general, but to compass and facilitate the ruin of that religious and noble
person my Lord Russel in particular; we shall as a further inducement to
persuade and convince the inquisitive part of mankind, that some about St.
James's and Whitehall where the contrivers and authorisers of that barbarous
assassination, lay open and unfold the motive and pique upon which it was done,
and what it was which gave the original rise to some men's implacable malice
against that loyal as well as virtuous person. And as it cannot be denied but
this late Nobl' Earl had received Titles of honor, and places of Trust,
interest and advantage from his Majesty; so it will be acknowledged that not
only his Father but himself, had laid all the obligations upon the Crown, which
it was possibl' for Subjects in way of Acting or Suffering to do. Nor is it
less evident, that notwithstanding both the Father my Lord Capel's Laying down
his life for Charles the First, and the English Monarchy, and his Son Essex's
manifold sufferings and services for Charles the Second and the Royal Family;
yet this honorable Person instead of quietly possessing any longer the just
rewards of his own and Fathers merits, or enjoying any more the wonted signs of
his Princes favor, was not only debarred from, and deprived of the respect
and confidence which his Majesty had used to show him, but was become the
object of a great man's implacable hatred and boundless malice For though the
Earl of Essex was a person, whom nothing could corrupt from his loyalty to the
King and the Established Government: yet he was also a sincere and zealous
Patriot of the Laws and Liberties of the Kingdom, and a courageous Defender as
well as owner of the Protestant Religion. And as he was none of those
mercinary, base, and timorous Lords, who would either connive at, or concur in
the introduction of Slavery and Popery; so he was one of the principal of those
heroic and generous Peers, who had been active in detecting the Popish
Conspiracy, and who had labored with the greatest industry to prevent the
effects of that hellish conjuration of the Valican, Louvre and St. James's, for
the extirpation of the Reformed Worship, and the subversion of the ancient Laws
and Privileges of England. And as he was known to understand more of the
nature and extent of the Popish Conspiracy, and who were concerned in it, and
to what degree, than most persons in the Kingdom either were or ever had
oportunities for; so nothing can be more certain, than that as hereby he became
the most dangerous man in the whole Nation to the Papists, but that he must
consequently be the most special object of their jealousy, fear, and hatred.
(...) as his public Station in Ireland, as well as his having been long a
Member of His Majesty's Privy Council in England, furnished him with manifold
advantages, which others wanted, of knowing the tendency, and penetrating into
the bottom of all the Designs and Counsels which have been carrying on against
our Religion and Legal Government; so his scorning and abhorring to sacrifice
his Conscience and Honor by either falling in with the Conspirators, or by
avoiding to withstand and oppose them in their attempts for the introduction
and establishment of Popery and Arbitrariness, made them to think of all ways
and means how to destroy him And besides these forementioned advantages which
he had above other men, of knowing all the dimensions of the Popish Plot; he
received no small accession of light in that affair, by having been always a
Member of those Secret Committees, which had the Examination of Persons, and
Inspection of Papers, concerning that devilish Conspiracy. Nor was the Earl
insensible of the danger* he was in upon this account, and accordingly was wont
sometimes to say to his intimate friends, that as generally all the Papists,
and more particularly such of them as make the greatest figure in the Kingdom
dreaded him by reason of the detection he was able to make of their horrid
Machinations; so he could not be without apprehension, but that they would seek
to destroy him in order to prevent it. Alas poor Essex, thy respect to some
whom I forbear to name, made thee wanting to save the Nation and thy self, by
revealing that while we had ParlJaments, the knowledge whereof would have been
a means to have prevented our ruin; and as thou art now ill rewarded for thy
tenderness to those ungrateful men, so we are at once unhappily robbed of the
great Instrument that could have unmasked persons and things, and denied
ParlJaments, from whose legal Authority as well as united Counsels and Wisdom,
we can only, under God, hope for the preservation of England from becoming the
Seat of Popery, and the Theater of Tyranny. Nor ought it to seem strange that
the malic^ of the Papists, and of those who have conspired against our Rights
and Privileges, should transport them to that measure and degree of rage
against a person, who had not only faithfully served his Majesty and the Crown,
but from whom they could expect no opposition but what was founded in the
authority of our Laws, and promoted in a ParlJamentary-way, and which the King
himself is bound by his Oath as well as the duty and trust reposed in him, to
second and give countenance unto. For besides diverse Gentlemen of that temper
and character, whom they have destroyed or condemned by and under a Form of
Law, but indeed contrary to all the Laws of the Land, and against the worst
presidents even in the most absolute and despotical times; there may be several
Gentlemen mentioned whom they have cut off without the Form of any Process,
merely because they either thought themselves prejudiced and withstood by them
in their designs, or were afraid of them by reason of the discovery which they
were able to give of their conjurations against the Kingdom, and of the
villainies they had committed in subserviency to the establishment of Popery and
Tyranny. For not to mention either the Condemnation of that most Honorable
Person the Earl of Argyle, nor the Condemnation and Execution of that gallant
Gentleman Colonel Sydney, nor the late Barbarity used against their ancient
Servant Sir Thomas Armestrong, all which were directly repugnant to the Laws of
the respective Kingdoms, and contrary to all proceedings in other criminal and
capital Cases; were not my Lord Lucas, Sir Robert Brook^, and Sir Edmondbury
Godfrey, without being so much as arraigned or accused, murdered by them, only
because they either found them opposite to their Romish and Arbitrary designs,
or knew them capable of revealing their hellish Counsels and Actions against
the Nation, the established Government, and the Reformed Religion? What Family
in England had done or suffered more for Monarchy, and for his present Majesty
as well as his Father, than that of my Lord Lucas, some whereof had sacrificed
their Lives, and all lost their Estates and Fortunes, upon the alone score and
account of their Loyalty; and yet notwithstanding all this, my late Lord Lucas
could no sooner declare his jealousy concerning the entrenchments which were
making upon the Laws of the Land, and with zeal and courage avow his integrity
in the Protestant Religion, and his resolution to assert by all legal ways the
ancient Rights and Privileges of England, but the Conspirators against our
Religion and Laws, contrived and resolved the death of that worthy Patriot, and
found means to poison him by suborned and hired instruments. And for Sir Robert
Brooks, though he had not been called to that service for the Crown, nor had the
misfortune to suffer in that degree for the Monarchy, which the former noble
Person had; yet he was never wanting in Loyalty to his Majesty, but always
served him with faithfulness in his capacity, and upon all occasions expressed
the utmost readiness to maintain and promote the greatness of the King and
honor of the Throne; Nevertheless that worthy Gentleman had no sooner ravelled
into the burning of London, and traced that execrable deed to St. James's,
which as Chairman of the Committee that was appointed to inspect and search
after the Authors of that dreadful conflagration, he had both occasion and was
justified by his place to do; but the Romish Faction who had perpetrated that
horrid villainy, took up a resolution to cut him off, partly in revenge of his
zeal and service to the City and Kingdom in that matter, and partly to
discourage others from meddling in a point which so nearly touched some of the
greatest, as well as to prevent the publication of the researches and
discoveries he had made And whereas Sir Robert upon an entertainment of
apprehensions and jealousies in himself, as well as upon the warnings and
informations he had received from friends, of a design against his Person and
Life, did on the Prorogation of the Parliament withdraw the Kingdom to avoid
their fury; yet these implacable and blood-thirsty men, who never pardon either
those that actually have, or are in a capacity to injure them, hired
assassinates to dog and pursue him whithersoever he went, who at last taking
him at an advantage drowned him in a river where he was about to wash and
refresh himself. And for Sir Edmondbury Godfrey, all that are not wilfully and
perversely ignorant, are so fully instructed both of the barbarous murder
committed upon that Gentleman, and from what motives and inducements, and by
whose countenance and authority he was assassinated, that I shall not trouble
my self or the Reader by enlarging on that villainous fact, which we have
hitherto wanted the courage to make a person at St. James's answer for. Upon
the whole, it can be no surprise to thinking and observing persons, to hear
that the Earl of Essex was, by the Authority of a great Man, murdered and
assassinated; seeing it is no more, than what he and our Arbitrary and Popish
Ministers, have practiced upon several others, whose opposition, power, wisdom
and interest, they did not so dread and apprehend, as they did the zeal,
courage, integrity, prudence, and figure as well esteem in the Kingdom, of that
truly, great and honorable Peer.

As the Topics which we have already insisted upon, administer sufficient
ground to believe that the Earl of Essex did not murder himself, but was
villanously assassinated by others; so it is rendered more plain and evident
from the Reports which were spread abroad both of his death and the manner of
it, before that barbarous Fact was committed, or at least before the Fame of it
could reach the places where it was told and related. It has been always
esteemed a rational ground of accusing the Spaniards and Jesuits of the
assassination of Henry the Fourth of France; See Mezerny's Life of Henry 4.
that the news of his death was not only reported in Spain, Millan and Flanders
some days if not weeks before the miscreant Ravilliack gave him the fatal stab,
but because a Courrier passing through Luxemburgh both related the news of his
death a week before he was murdered, and had the impudence to declare that he
was carrying the Tidings of it to the Princes of Germany. See the Information
exhibited to the Committie of ParlJament p. 5. (...). 13.
The Committee of ParlJament that had the examination of the burning of London,
Anno 1666. judged it no small evidence that the City was burnt on design, and
through the treachery of the Papists, that the news of it had not only been
reported in diverse parts of England before that fatal conflagration fell out,
but written from beyond sea as the discourse which the Ie(...)s entertained
their favorites and privado's with. Nay it was both one of the first means of
discovering by whose contrivance Sir Edmundbury Godfrey had been murdered, and
was also urged, and allowed upon my Lord Stafford's Trial as a proof of the
Papists being guilty of that assassination, that the news of Sir Edmund's being
killed was related sixty or seventie mile off in the Country before it was
known at London what was become of him. Nor indeed can it be imagined how
matters of Fact, should come to be told, before they are acted or committed,
but by granting that such things were resolved upon and designed, and that they
came to be vented and talked off by reason of the blabbing humor either of
some Persons accessory to the contrivance, or entrusted with the knowledge of
what had been agreed unto and determined in more secret Cabal's. So that we may
rationally hope, the ingenuous part of mankind will esteem themselves much
enlightened in reference to the manner of the Earl of Essex's death, and enabled
to conclude who were the contrivers and perpetrators of the villainous
assassination of that renowned person, if we represent unto them, with all the
distinctness we can, the reports which went of it, both in City and Country
before the Commission of the abominable Fact, or at least before the tidings
could reach the places where it was spoken and discoursed. Nor will it be unfit
to begin with that which a Woman of Quality has related to diverse persons,
and which she is ready to swear in the presence of any Magistrate when called
thereunto, namely that being the day before the Earl of Essex's death bestowing
a visit upon some of her acquaintance, and there happening in that conversation
a discourse concerning that unfortunate Gentleman Sir Edmundbury Godfrey, who
because of the intelligence he had received from ^olimun, as well as the
Deposition made before him by Dr. Oat^, about the Popish Conspiracy against the
King and the Government, was barbarously murdered Anno 1678. a Gentleman then
in company took the freedom and boldness to say that there would appear on the
^norrow another S. Edmundbury Godfrey. This though the Lady could not at that
time fathom and comprehend, yet being surprised with the expression, she
related it to her Sister, that evening when she came home. And upon hearing the
next day that the Earl of Essex was murdered, and how it was reported. That he
should have cut his own Throat; the poor Lady, tho strangely alarmed with the
News, could not but immediately make this reflection, That what she had looked
upon overnight as a Parable and Mystery, was then deciphered and unriddled, and
that the Earl must needs have come to that untimely end, by the Treachery and
Villainy of others. To this we shall subjoin what Mrs. Mewx, a Gentlewoman, who
also lives in London, was ready to Depose upon Oath, relating to a previous
report of this nature, at Mr. Braddon's Trial. For being on Thursday the 12th.
of July (which was the day before my Lord of Essex death) traveling with her
Daughter in a Coach from the City down to Berkshire; she is ready to swear that
her Daughter then told her how she had heard it reported, That one of the Lords
committed for the late Plot had cut his Throat in the Tower. Which fully
evidenceth, That there was a discourse not only of his death, but the manner of
it, antecedently to his Fatal and Tragical end. But the Daughter being with
Child, and near her time, and therefore not daring to venture abroad, much less
into the Court at Mr. Braddon's Trial; my Lord Chief Justice would not suffer
the Mother (tho she was there and sworn) to be examined, alleging, That
because she could not Depose on her own knowledge, but only on the report of
her Daughter, it was no evidence, and therefore against all judicial forms to
admit it. But as Mr. Wallop well replied, See Braddox's Trial p. 48.
It was evidence there was such a talk, previous to my Lord of Essex's death,
so I may add, That by consequence he did not murder himself, but was
assassinated by others. Nor was it only in and about the Town that my Lord of
Essex was reported to have cut his Throat, at least a day if not more before he
came to his untimely end; but the same was discoursed of at a considerable
distance in the Country, and related after the same manner and with the same
circumstances For one Mr. Fielder, a Shopkeeper, in Andover, a Town removed
from London above fifty Miles; positively swears that it was talked there the
11th. and 12th. of July, That the Ea^l of Essex had cut his Throat in the
Tower, whereas he was not killed till the 13th. nor could the news arrive so
far in the ordinary way of conveying Intelligence before the 14th. And the said
Mr. Fielder further avers, That this was to commonly discoursed of, from
Wednesday night till Friday noon, that he fully expected the confirmation of it
by the Post-Letters, which were to arrive that day. But finding no mention in
those Letters of any such thing, tho they all agreed in the relation of the
Earl of Essex's commitment to the Tower, he concluded there could be no truth
in the report, but withal wondered how such a thing came to be talked of. And
therefore when the certain news of my Lord's death was brought to Andover about
Saturday noon, by some Cloathiers that came out of London on Friday at twelve
of the Clock, he could not but be amassed at the report which had been current
among them two days before. But my Lord Chief Justice was pleased to ridicule
all this when it was deposed at Mr. Braddon's Trial, Bradd. Trial p. 38. 39.
as a contrivance to deceive the King's Subjects, and to set us together by the
ears, stiling it stuff, raked out of Dunghills, and picked up on purpose to
kindle a fire, and set us all into a flame. But can his Lordship think that his
blustering, his impudence, and the huffing the World with foaming wrathful
speeches, are enough to take off the positive testimony of an honest and
credible person, and who had spoken of this report long before he thought any
improvement would be made of it? Nor is it sufficient to blast the reputation
of the Man, or detract from the Truth of what he swore, that he could not
particularly name the persons that had reported it; because as he never
expected to be called into question about it, so he had no occasion to
recollect it, till he was served with a sub poena to appear at Mr. Braddon's
Trial, which was above five Months after the time of the said talk and
discourse. And besides how many things are there, which a public Skopkeeper,
as this person is, may hear his Customers speak of, which he would be nonplust
to give an account of the Authors of at a weeks end? Nay by how much a Report
is common, (as he says this was at Andover) by so much are we apt to neglect by
whom it has been particularly related. And the more our understandings are
struck with the horror of a matter declared to us, the less do we advert by
whom it is spoken, and the more unprepared are our memories to treasure up the
names of the reporters. Nor was it at Andover only, that it was reported the
Earl of Essex had cut his Throat, the day before he was killed; but the same
story and clothed with the same circumstances, was discoursed of before his
death in diverse other places. For I am not only credibly informed, That the
Earl of Essex's having cut his Throat, was reported on Thursday, being the day
before his death, at Warmister in Wiltshire, which is distant from London about
eighty Miles; but there is one Thomas Cox, who lives near Bruningham, that did
positively declare, That the same was told him in that Town the 12th. of July,
whereas my Lord was not killed in the Tower till the 13. And besides all this
to evidence a Report of that Noble Person's being Murdered, previous to the
commission of the (...) there are two Informations more delivered upon Oath Mr.
Braddon's Trial, (...) (...)miah Burg^s, that lives at Marlborrough, who swears
that he heard it at From, a place 90. Miles from London, the very day that the
Earl of Essex died; and another by one Jews that lives at Marleborrough, who
deposes, That being riding on the Road within three or four Miles of Andover,
on Friday in the Afternoon, the same day that the Earl of Essex was murdered,
he was told by a person, whom he fell in with on the way, That the said Earl
had cut his Throat in the Tower. And notwithstanding all the affronts and
discouragements put upon those two Witnesses whilst they were giving their
Testimony, and notwithstanding all the scorn and contempt wherewith See
Braddon's Trial p 37, 49, 50, 51.
Sir George Jeffery's endeavored to expose and ridicule what they Deposed; yet
I dare venture their Informations upon the Faith of all indifferent and
ingenuous Men, whether they do not abundantly prove that there was such a
Report spread abroad antecedently to my Lord of Essex's death, or at least
before the tidings of it could reach so far, as that he had cut his Throat in
the Tower. Only I shall crave liberty to make two or three reflections on these
Depositions, and they shall not only be natural and easy, and far from being
wrested and exported out of what was said, but they shall be such as must
necessarily beget and strengthen a belief that my Lord of Essex did not murder
himself, but was through the contrivance and malice of others barbarously
assassinated by the hands of Russians and execrable Villains. And the first is,
That it ought to be reckoned as a wonder, and ascribed only to the overruling
Providence of God, that will not suffer a Crime so hateful to Heaven, and so
ruinous to Humane Society, to fall out without leaving some prints and
footsteps by which it may be traced and detected, that a Crime so enormous in
it self, so provoking and exasperating to Mankind, and which the Authors of,
and Actors in, would be loath to bear the ignominy, and undergo the punishment,
that so horrid a guilt subjects them unto, should be communicated to so many
and so commonly talked of before the Fact. But by how much Revenge is one of the
sweetest passions, and most grateful to depraved nature, by so much has it a
power and virtue in it, to cause Men to open and unbosome themselves, from the
satisfaction which it yields, and the delightful gust that it affords them. And
tho the Papists were at that time exceedingly transported with joy, partly
through their having shamm'd a Plot upon the Protestants which they supposed
would extinguish the remembrance of their own, and partly from the hopes they
had, of appeasing the Ghosts of their Tyburn Martyrs, with the Blood of English
Heretics; yet they could not but be uneasy in their minds, to think that the
Earl of Essex, whom they so peculiarly hated, and whose ability to unma^k their
designs, as well as interest in the Nation and resentment for being committed,
they so much apprehended and feared, should be able to escape their hands,
through want of evidence against him, which made it needful for the heads of
the Romish Faction, to let their little clamours and talkative votaries know,
how they had resolved to use and employ force and violence for the destruction
of that so much dreaded Enemy, whom mercenary Judges and suborned and pick^t
Juries would not serve to cut off in the way of Legal and judicial Forms. Nor
is it improbable but that the Contrivers of this Noble Man's death, might have
resolved the execution and commission of the Fact sooner, and that the reason
of adjourning it, was to adjust it to the season of my Lord Russels's Trial,
thereby to make the murder of the one subservient and useful to the death of
the other; but that those acquainted with the first Resolution, had from a
forwardness of obliging their friends, too hastily given them intelligence of
the thing as already done, when it was not as yet perpetrated, nor committed,
by reason of the later Resolution. The second observation I would make upon the
forementioned reports, is, That though they were vented by several persons, yet
they not only agreed in the matter of the Earl of Essex's death, but they
accorded also in the way and manner of it namely, that he had cut his Throat.
Which plainly shows that it was not vulgar Tattle vented at random, but that it
had its foundation in a previous and fixed resolution that he should undergo
that unhappy fate. Nothing but a steady and determinate cause, can produce a
steady and determinate effect. Had the report taken its rise in the jealousies
of his friends, or owed its birth to the fearful apprehensions of the common
people; they would have rather dreamed of his being poisoned, as being more
safe for the Actors to perpetrate, and requiring the accession of sewer hands,
than have ever imagined that his throat should be cut. It is impossible to
conceive that the Reports of so many several persons, should not only agree in
the matter of his death, but all harmonise and center in the very circumstance
of the manner of it; unless it had originally proceeded from such as had
contrived and determined both the murder it self, and the way wherein it should
be committed. For when reports have their foundation only in men's fancies, they
will always vary according to the different tempers, passions and complexions
of the Reporters. The third deduction which I would infer from the premised
Reports, is, That they could not be fictions and forgeries of Liars and People
Romantickly disposed. For how could so many persons, and at such distances from
one another, and betwixt whom there was never any correspondence, agree and
combine together to impose upon the World and to abuse the Faith of Mankind?
And as they all seem to be persons who abhor tricks, and who would not be
guilty of spreading, much less of raising a false Report? so it is beyond the
wit of man to declare, how it should come to be the interest of Gentlewomen,
and Country Tradesmen to be the Authors of such a Story that my Lord of Essex
had cut his throat before it was done. And for any to imagine that the
Fanatics were the framers of it, is to represent them not only wicked but
foolish, and to suppose they would disserve themselves, as well as slander and
reproach their noblest and best friend.

And what clearer evidence, or greater confirmation can there be, of the Earl
of Essex's not having been Felo de se, but treacherously murdered by others,
and that they who were the Authorisers of that horrid assassination, are
persons of great power and interest at Court; than that there have been Letters
sent and proposals made to some noble Lords near the King, that his Majesty
will but grant a pardon to two or three men who shall be named when that grace
is indulged, and that then the whole intrigue and mystery of that hellish
contrivance shall be discovered, and the contrivers as well as perpetrators of
it particularly detected, with a full account of all the circumstances of its
execution. It Is true I dare not affirm, that those Letters have been shown to
his Majesty, or any intercession used with him in pursuance of that overture
and proposal; but this I may justly say, that if they have neglected it, they
must needs either know or suspect, that there are persons of too great power as
well as quality interested and concerned in that execrable villainy. For we can
suppose no other motive, upon which men of honor would decline a service so
acceptable to God, and whereby they might avert wrath not only from the Throne
and Kingdom, but from their own persons and families, through bringing enormous
offenders and execrable assassinates to punishment. But alas! that
apprehension they are under, of deriving trouble and destruction upon
themselves, instead of being able to expose the Malefactors to justice,
frightens them from the discharge of that duty which they owe both to God and
Men. The having heard what a Great Man should say in reference to Mr. Braddon,
namely, that he was ravelling into such a business, but that he was resolved to
ruin him if all the Law of England would do it; makes every man afraid as
well as sensible what he may encounter if he have the boldness to interest
himself in this affair. O degenerate off spring of brave and heroic ancestors!
were it not much more eligible to run hazard by acquitting your selves as
persons of honor in discharge of your duty, than to seek for safety by
involving your persons and posterity under the guilt of that abominable and
villainous Fact. And besides, can they otherwise hope, than that through
conniving at so horrid a murder committed upon another person, and one who was
of a rank and condition equal to themselves, they shall at last undergo the
same or the like fate, whenever they have the unhappiness and misfortune to
fall under the wrath of a certain Gentleman at St. James's. But over and above
the two Letters that were sent to noble persons very near the King to be
communicated to his Majesty, there was another Letter addressed to the Countess
of Essex, and in order to the being conveyed to her Ladyship, directed to be
left with one Mr. Cadman a Bookseller in the New Exchange in the Strand; the
Tenor whereof was, that if her Honor would prevail with the King for a pardon,
to one that would discover how my Lord came by his death, or obtain of his
Majesty a proclamation, assuring forgiveness to any who should come in and
detect by whom and after what manner my Lord was murdered, that upon either of
those securities, the way of the Earl of Essex's assassination, should be
revealed, and laid open with all its circumstances. This Letter was in August
last brought by a young woman to Mr. Cadman's Shop, who finding him sleeping on
the inside of his Counter, told him that she had brought him a Letter directed
to my Lady Essex concerning my Lords death, which she desired he would read,
being to that end left open and unsealed. But Cadman being drowsy and still
inclined to sleep, instead of taking notice what she said, thrust her from the
Counter as an officious and troublesome person, and commanded her to goabout
her business. Yet having after his being thoroughly awake both perused the
Letter, and considered the importance and consequence of it, he judged himself
in prudence obliged to carry it to a Magistrate, which accordingly he did to
one Hinton a Justice of Peace in Covent Garden, who as I have been credibly
informed went with it to one of the Secretaries of State. This Letter as is
most justly conceived was written by Bomeny; forasmuch as he not only seemed
about that time to be under some Remorse in reference to the death of my Lord,
but because some of Bomeny's handwriting being showed to Mr. Cadman, it
appeared to him according to the best of his remembrance and judgment, to be
the same hand, or at least very much like unto that which the letter was
written in. This much is plainly evident that it must have been written by one
that was willing to be known, seeing it was both sent open and by a person that
was able to declare of whom she had received it. For had the writing of this
Letter been only a contrivance to avert the infamy of my Lord's death from
himself, and deliver those Gentlemen accused for the Plot, from the
consequences unto which the Earls imagined murdering himself was improved
against them; it would never have been left unsealed for Mr. Cadman to read,
nor seat by a person that was acquainted with the contents of it, as it plainly
appears the bearer was; but would both have been sealed, to prevent Cadman's
looking into it, and conveyed by a porter or some such hand, that would have
been less liable to be questioned either about the contents or the Author of
it. Nor does any thing more amaze and astonish thinking people, than that
notwithstanding the many Reports, as well as Universal jealousies, of my Lord
of Essex being murdered in the Tower. yet all this time his Majesty has not
published one word to encourage an inquisition into the manner of his death, or
to secure a pardon to such as shall be able to discover whether he was
assassinated, and by whom and after what manner he was brought to an untimely
End. For considering the obligations which the King and the Royal Family lay
under to the late Earl of Essex, as well as to his Father my Lord Capel, and
considering the many aspersions thrown upon the Court in relation to the death
of the said Earl; it has been expected that his Majesty as well in justice to
the Family of the Capels, as in vindication of his own honor from the infamy
of having a person of my Lord Essex's merit and figure assassinated in his
Majesty's prison and Palace, would have issued out a proclamation ascertaining
forgiveness to any that should be able to prove his being murdered by others,
and that he did not destroy himself as some people have been industrious to
give out. And that which increases the surprise and wonder, is the
consideration of the forwardness which the King has expressed in some other
cases, for the detection of murders of this nature. For besides the tender of a
pardon, there was the promise of 500. l. to any who should discover the murder
of Sr. Edmondbury Godfrey and reveal the miscreants by whom he was
assassinated. And I would be loath to think, that his Majesty's proceeding so
differently in that case, from what he has done in this, was rather to be
ascribed to his apprehensions of a ParlJament which was then in Being, than to
his love of justice or the desire of delivering the Nation from the guilt of
innocent blood. But I am willing to believe that the reason why the King does
not encourage the discovery of this late murder of my L. of Essex, arises from
the fear he is in of the persons that were accessory to it. For in case he
would authorize the detection of the Assassinates of this Noble Earl, he will
find himself obliged, not only to bring the Earl of S. -- and my Lord F. -- but
his Royal and dearly beloved Brother I -- D. -- of Y. -- to punishment. And who
knows but that he dreads left in calling these Gentlemen to account for cutting
the E. of Essex's throat, He too much hazard and expose his own? Nor is it at
all surprising, that the King who had not courage to resent the poisoning his
own Sister by her husband the Duke of Orleans, at a juncture when He might have
made France feel the effects of his justice and displeasure; should not have
the boldness to question his Brother and other principal persons of the Popish
Faction for the assassination of Essex, especially at a time that he has
divested himself of all power to hurt them, and by seeming offended may only
stir up their wrath against himself. For I remember, that when the late Sr.
Thomas Armstrong had come post from Paris, to give his Majesty an account how
Orleans had poisoned the Princess Henrietta, that he only replied, Orleans is a
Rascal, but pray thee Tom do not speak of what he has done. Yet that his
Majesty may not excuse himself hereafter from causing further inquisition to be
made after my Lord of Essex's death by saying he never heard otherwise but that
he murdered himself, I do therefore tell his Majesty, and publish to all the
World, that if he will grant an indemnity and protection to three or four
persons, we shall fully and evidently prove a Great Man, the Earl of S. -- my
Lord F. -- etc. to have been the contrivers and Authorisers of it, and shall
name the Ruffians in particular, who were employed to perpetrate the hellish
and execrable Fact, with an account of the several sums of money which they had
for the execution of it. Nor ought his Majesty to be displeased, that I arraign
his Brother and principal Ministers of so enormous and bloody a crime; for as I
write nothing but what I can fully justify, so I take the boldness further to
tell both him and them, that if ever there come a ParlJament in England, this
matter shall be laid fully open, and justice demanded against these impudent
and enormous Offenders.

And as if it were not enough to evidence the E. of Essex did not murder
himself, but was barbarously assassinated by others, that no encouragement has
been given for the discovery of the Authors of that villainous Fact,
notwithstanding all the rumors and Reports which have run to and fro, both of
the Manner of his death and the Actors in it; it receives both a further and a
very convincing accession of proof from this, that all means have been used to
deterr men from enquiring into that matter, and to prevent their detecting what
they may know of it. The passages to this purpose would fill a volume merely to
relate them, and therefore I shall confine my self to two particulars, which I
shall endeavor to deduce and represent, with all the brevity as well as
clearness I can. Nor can it in the first place, but astonish the world, to find
the Judges, with whom the administration of law and justice between the King
and his people is trusted, I say to find them, contrary both to the nature and
End of their office, and the Oaths they have taken of acting impartially, to
brand the meddling in the matter of the E. of Essex's death, as a Reflection
upon his Majesty, an Affront to the Government, and a design to involve and
embroil the Nation in trouble. For not only the Attorney General stigmatiseth
the report and belief of the Earl's being murdered by villainous hands, as See
Braddons Trial, p. 3, 20, 6^.
the throwing that ill thing upon the Government which he had committed upon
himself, but my Lord Chief Justice Jefferies is pleased to style it a libelling
of it, and to have been forged in order to beget heart burnings and jealousies
in the Kings Subjects against the Government, and to raise Sedition. Whereas
the Government would never have been charged with this horrid Guilt, tho some
at the head of affairs might possibly have been accused of it, had not these
Gown-men involved the Government under the infamy and aspersion of it, and done
all they can to teach others to lay the barbarous Fact at that Door. For as it
is not the first time, that a Prisoner has been murdered in the Tower, so it
was never till now called a Reflection on the Government, to endeavor to prove
that such or such a person was destroyed by ^iol^nt and bloody hands, even of
whose death the Coroners Inquest had upon their inquisition given an other
verdict. Nay when the chief Favorites of our Princes and first Ministers of
State, have been accused as guilty of murdering a Gentleman imprisoned in the
Tower, whom the Coroners Jury had on their Inquisition declared to have died a
natural death; yet it was not thought to be an impeachment of the Government,
or a devolving the guilt of that bloody crime upon the King. Of this we have a
famous instance in Sr. Thomas Overbury, who being committed Prisoner to the
Tower in the Reign of King James, and there poisoned by the contrivance and
instigation of the Earl of Sommerset, etc. (that was then chief Minister as
well as principal Favorite) was brought in by the Coroners inquisition to have
died a natural death. And yet it was thought no dishonor to the Government, to
have the death of that Gentleman afterward enquired into, and to find it
proved contrary to the Coroners Inquisition, that instead of dying a natural
death, he was basely and treacherously murdered by Villainous hands, through the
accession and contrivance of him whom he had faithfully served, and with the
consent of those to whose care, trust and custody he was committed. Nay, was it
not a great Vindication of the honor of the Government, and an eminent
Declaration of the Justice of the Nation, to have the Lieutenant of the Tower,
and four or five meaner persons executed, and the Earl of Sommerset and his
Countess convicted and condemned for that bloody and barbarous Fact, which the
Coroners Inquest had acquitted and absolved all the world from the suspicion as
well as the guilt of? And what an injury will the Judges of the Kings Bench,
and his Majesty's Council at Law, be found to have done the King and the
Government, by their foolish as well as wicked expressions, if at any time
hereafter it come to be proved (as certainly it will) that the Earl of Essex
did not murder himself, but was assassinated by a company of hired Russians. We
should be loath in that case to claim the right of their way of Argumentation,
and to infer that because my Lord of Essex was murdered in the Tower, and at a
time Braddons Trial p. 4. 60.
when the King was walking there, that therefore not only the Government ought
to be charged with it, but that the King himself had a hand in, and had
designed it. Tho I must say that according to their method of reasoning, it
will be impossible in that case to avoid such a deduction. However it is a
convincing proof, that the ignominy and guilt of this Noblemans death, ought to
be ascribed to others than himself, that the Judges and the men of the long
Robe, can find no other way to stifle the suspicion, and silence the clamor of
the People, but by interposing the Government as a Skreen to shelter
Malefactors from Accusation, and abusing the Authority of the Kingdom, to deter
men from the duty which they owe to God and his Majesty in discovering so
execrable a murder. Nor is this the only way and method they have taken to
frighten and discourage Persons from discoursing of the Earl of Essex's being
destroyed by others, without any accession or contribution of his own to his
death, but they have laid their commands and injunctions upon such as they have
power and authority over, and whom they thought conscious either to the manner
of that Noble Peers fatal End, or capable of detecting any circumstances which
might let in light upon that affair. And therefore knowing that the Soldiers
who were upon Duty in the Tower, that morning when the Earl of Essex was
killed, had not only taken notice of several Persons, and made Observation of
diverse things, from which both the murder of that virtuous Lord might be
inferred and concluded as well as by whose hands it was perpetrated, but that
diverse of them had talked too freely and lavishly of it abroad as well as among
themselves; accordingly on the Saturday morning (being that which immediately
succeeded to the day of the Earls death) did a Military Officer after They and
other Soldiers were called together, charge them with the highest threats and
menaces, that they should not dare to speak of what they had seen or heard the
day before, adding that whosoever should be known to divulge what had passed in
the Tower on the Friday in the forenoon should severely suffer for it. This
diverse of the Soldiers have confessed and related to their friends, who are
willing to testify it when occasion serves. And among others, one Robert Meak
(of whom I shall afterward have occasion to say somewhat more) declared the
whole of this passage to two men that are ready to swear it, whenever their
Depositions may be of advantage to the public, and can be made without
exposing themselves to ruin. It will not be denied by rational men, but that
the Soldiers who were then upon Duty in the Tower, had advantages of knowing
more in reference to the Earl of Essex death, than most other persons can
pretend unto; seeing that as some were so posted as both to see all that went
into his Lodgings, and to hear the noise and bustle which was made in his
Chamber upon his resistance, and the force and violence which the miscreants
used toward him; so others were placed in that manner, as to observe whence
and from whom they came, and whither and to whom they returned, that were
employed to commit the Hellish and Tragical deed. Nor can any suspect, that men
who march under the Ensigns of his Majesty, should forge a story so much
tending to the dishonor of a great man, and the Kings Ministers, and so likely
to displease persons that had power to cashier, and otherwise punish them as
this of my Lord Essex not cutting his own Throat, but being Assassinated by
others, was adapted unto, and would infallibly do. Yea, I do affirm with all
the Sacredness which becomes a Man and a Christian in a matter of this weight
and importance, that this is no Calumny imposed on the Soldiers and their
Commander, in order to traduce the Government, and inflame the Kingdom. but
that whatsoever is here affirmed, is built upon the greatest moral certainty,
that an Affair of this nature is capable of. And all I do desire in order to
the justifying what I have now related and declared, is only that his Majesty
would cause order a writ of Revieu, or melius Inquirendum, to be issued out,
with an assurance of pardon to such as shall be willing to come in and be able
to testify by whom and after what manner this Noble Lord was Assassinated and
Murdered. Nor can his Majesty's Ministers escape this Dilemma, either of lying
under the infamy of being conscious of, and accessory unto the assassination of
that Honorable person, or of being obliged to obtain a Revieu of this matter,
with a promise of indemnity to those who shall appear witnesses and be able to
give evidence in the case. And I shall take the liberty further to say, that it
is not only the duty, but the interest of those very Ministers who may not be
directly concerned in the Guilt of my Lord of Essex blood, to promote and
second this overture and proposal, and that not only for the Honor of the
Government, but for their own Vindication from being accessory to so enormous
and detestable a Crime. For the time may possibly come, that their mere
connivance at the concealment of this murder, may rise in judgment against
them, and render them more liable to punishment, than they seem at present to
apprehend. Our Laws which expressly requires the least Officers in the
Commonwealth, to pursue Robbers, Fellons, and Murderers with Hue and Cry, or
otherwise makes them obnoxious to penalties; never intended that privy (...)
who^ by the duty of their place are to watch and advise for the (...) and (...)
of the Subject, as well as the preservation, and honer of the King, should be
esteemed Innocent and not be liable to any punishment by Law, tho they be found
to connive at the destruction of his Me(...) people, and at the involving his
Person and Government, under an inde^^ble reproach and infamy. And therefore
tho it cannot be supposed that those of his Majesty's Ministers, who are
directly criminal, by contriving and c^mmanding this Murder, should countenance
or encourage an inquiry into and a detection of it; yet it may not only be
exspected, but ought to be claimed of the Marquis of Hallisax, the Earl of
Radnar, my Lord Fall(...)ridg, and some others, who have still the privilege of
being in the public manage of Affairs, and admitted to sit in his Majesty's
Council, that they would not both to their own danger and dishonor, as well as
the prejudice of the King in his reputation and safety, continue to connive at
this Excrable and Barbarous Murder, but that they would apply themselves, as
becomes the duty of their places and the regard they ought to have for their
own honor, to obtain of his Majesty what is here desired, in order to the
detection of the assa^^ination of my Lord Essex, and the bringing the
Male^actors to undergo that severity which the Justice of the Law subjects them
unto.

But as if the precedeing T^pick did not administer sufficient Evidence, that
the E. of Essex was assassinated by others, howsoever his memory comes to be
branded for cutting his own Throat; there is a further proof arises in
confirmation of it from this, that they have not only discouraged and frighted
such as might be willing to lay open the whole Mystery of that divelish work of
darkness; but they have beyond all law and president, persecuted and ^ppressed
those, who were either found inclined to inquire into the manner of that
honorable persons death, or to have vented what they had heard which might give
suspicion of his being brought to his End, by the treache(...) villa^y of
bloody misereants. Nor shall I here enlarge on the proceedings against old Mr.
Edwards the Custom-house Officer, who besides his ^^ing shamefully upbraided
and standered by my Lord Chief Justice at the Trial of Mr. Bradden, was
afterward turned out of his place where he had served for 39 years, and for no
other crime but affiring his Boy had said he saw^a bl^^^^ Raz^^ thrown ^ut of
^he E. of E(...)ex 's Window immediately before the (...) of (...)s Death. But
that which I shall more largely insist upon, is the course and method that has
been (...)red toward (...) Trial p. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17.
Mr. Braddon himself, which as it is without all president, so it has been
extravagant and arbitrary in the highest degree. All who understand any thing
of the Law of England, know that in all Cases and Indictments of Murder, except
upon Appeals, the Charge and Accusation not only runs in the Kings Name, but he
is according to, and in the sense of the Law, the proper Plantiff. And there is
this reason for it, because as others through the death of the person
destroyed, may have lost a Relation, Acquaintance, or Friend, so the King
alway's loses a Subject from whom he was to have Allegiance and Service, and
whom by virtue of his Office he was trusted with the care and protection of,
and in the Sense and esteem of the Law made responsible for. It was upon this
account that the Conspirators against the life, and Authorisers of the
Assassination of this late Peer, and to prevent the advantage and benefit,
which Mr. Braddon would have had in bringing an Indi^^ment of Felony and Murder
against B^meny and others, took the start of him and caused an Information to
be preferred against him, of subornation and spreading false Reports, whereby
to bring the Government of the King into hatred, disgrace and contempt. And by
this means they did not only obstruct, the Kings ^^^^ders Trial, p. 1, 2.
being made Plantif and party against the murderers, which he must have been in
case way had been given to Mr. Braddons getting any of them Indicted, but they
commence an Action against that poor Gentleman, wherein they make the King
party and Plantiff against him, and in effect no less than Advocate und
Voucher, for the Innocence of those that were to have been Indicted for a most
execrable and barbarous Assassination. Which as it was a most divelish
Artifice, for the oppressing an honest Gentleman, who had done nothing, but
what he was bound unto, in Conscience to God, and duty to his Majesty; so it
was a most villainous and enormous crime against the King through making him to
be the Skree^ and Patron of those, of whom he should have been the prosecutor
and pu^isher, and at the same time to be the pursuer and ruiner of a w^rthy
person, whom he was bound to have countenanced, encouraged, and protected. It
would fill a whole Volumn to relate the severities which Mr. Bradden has
encountered; and upon no other score, but because he was willing in order, to
delivering the Throne and Kingdom from the Guilt of Innocent Blood, to gather
up such Informations as might have served to convince the King of the murder
committed upon the E. of Essex while he was in a special manner under the
protection of his Majesty and the Law, being not only a Prisoner, but standing
committed to the T^wer of London, wherewith respect to the quality of the
place, Captives ought to be supposed more safe from violence than in other
Prisons. But as it is not yet a season to present the world with a History of
the Sufferings of this Honest and Ingenious Gentleman; so it were but to
en-tangle and perplex the affair I am upon, to interweave it with a large
narrative of another man's troubles, tho they all sp(...)ng from his being
concerned in enquiring and discovering, how and by what hands and means this
noble Man was brought to so fatal and untimely an End. I shall therefore only
briefly intimate some few things, which may serve to enlighten and confirm the
T^pick and Head which I am now disco^^ing from. And whatsoever proves the ill
treatment of those, who keeping themselves within the bonds of loyalty and
modesty have endeavored to detect the Assassination of that honorable person,
does by consequence demonstrate that he was not Felo de se, but that he was
Murdered by the malice and violence of other men. The first unexpected
entertainment which this Gentlemen Mr. Braddon met with, was his being taken
into Custody, and carried before the Council, on his having gone to White Hall
to wait upon my Lord S. in order to inform his Lordship what a certain Boy
(whom he took thither along with him) had reported concerning a Razor, which he
saw thrown out of the Earl of Essex Window, immediately before the noise and
report of his Death And not to mention what other Treatment he met with there,
which some of the Honorable Menbers of that Board themselves, have declared to
have been very unbecoming his Majesty's presence, and no way's agreeable to the
gravity, wisdom and honor of such an assembly, he was required to give 2000 l.
Bail to answer an Information, for having suborned the Boy; a thing very
unsuitable to the service he had been performing for the Honor of his Majesty
and the Government, and very surprising to all indifferent persons that heard
of it. And tho this poor Gentleman was discharged at that time and, restored to
his liberty, upon giving the forementioned 2000 l. Bail, to answer the said
Information; yet his troubles did not end and terminate here; but this was
rather only a commencement and beginning of the hardships and oppressions which
he was to meet with, for having had the honesty and courage to appear in a
business, which so nearly affected a great man, and so many of his Majesty's
principal Ministers of State. For though they had laid him under a necessity of
making all the provisions he could, for Vindicating himself from being the
Author and Forger of that Report, concerning a Razor's being thrown out of the
E. of Essex window just before the cry and noise of his death, being that which
gave the suspicion of my Lords being murdered by violent, treacherous and
bloody hands, and that he did not destroy himself, as was endeavored to be
obtruded and imposed upon his Memory and the Faith of the Nation; yet Mr.
Braddon was no sooner gone into the Country to enquire into the truth of an
other Story, which very much strengthened and confirmed the suspicion and
jealousy that my Lord was not Felo de Se; but this poor Gentleman fell into
new troubles, and found persecution and oppression awaiting him whithersoever
he went. For having received intelligence from a friend, that on the very day
on which the Earl died, it was reported at Marleborough, that my Lord of Essex
had cut his Throat in the Tower; he judged it very useful and subservient both
to the acquitting himself from the Slander of being the first Author of the
Report that my Lord was murdered by others, and also to the evidencing and
clearing up that he really was so, to search into the truth of that Information
which his Friend had given him, and to learn out the persons to whom that News
had been told, and know if possible the names of those who had related it. But
while he was going in the search and pursuit of this, which his being obliged
under the Penalty of 2000 l. to answer an Information of Subornation, had made
an act of Justice to himself as well as a duty of God and his Country, behold
the poor Gentleman was apprehended and committed to Fisherton Goal in
Wil^shire, by a Warrant the most illegal for the Form as well as the Matter
that ever any man was sent to Prison upon. For what could be more extravagant
and illegal than to seize and commit a Gentleman travelleng peaceably on the
road, without an Oath or deposition of any witness against him, merely upon a
groundless and naked suspicion of being a dangerous and ill affected man to the
Government, and for having two Informations about him, relating to a Razors
being thrown out of my Lord Essex VVindow before the news of his death was
divulged, and for carrying two Letters, whereof the contents of one he knew
not, and the contents of the other could administer no just offense. But the
Form of the VVarrant was more extravagant, arbitrary, and illegal than the
matter, carrying in express words this order and command to the Jailer, namely,
That he should Lawrence Braddon safely keep, till he should receive further
Order from the King and Privy Council. Which VVarrant had the Jailer been as
mad and foolish to obey, as the officious and doting Justice was to write, the
poor Gentleman for any foundation of relief that was left him in the Mittimus,
might have lain in Prison all the days of his life, unless the King and Council
should have ordered his Release and Discharge. But Mr. Braddon knowing both his
own Integrity as to the Business he was going upon, and his Innocence as to any
crime the malice of his Enemies could charge him with, sued out a habeas corpus
to be brought to London before some of the Judges, in order to be Bailed. But
alas! being arrived there, none of the Judges of either Bench, nor Barons of
the Exchecquer were in Town, so that he was necessitated to desire the Jailer
to carry him before my Lord K. which the Jailer having accordingly done, his
Lordship instead of admitting the Prisoner immediately into his presence, and
allowing him the benefit of the Statute, was pleased to adjourn the seeing him
till the next day, with a command that he should be then brought to the Council
Chamber at Whitehall. Whither being in obedience to the said Order carried, he
was after an hours waiting called in before my Lord, and sound together with
him my Lord Priey Seal, my Lord Duke of Ormond, and Mr. Secretary Jenkins. It
would be both to enlarge these Papers beyond the bounds allowed to them, and to
depart too far from the essential part of the subject I am upon, to relate the
whole entertainment, which I have been told Mr. Braddon did there meet with.
Only it may not be amiss, to reminde my Lord K. of a Verse that he quoted out
of Juvenal, and to subjoin the Translation of it into English, as a certain
author has rendered it. For having upbraided the poor Gentleman as one that had
a design to raise and advance himself by sinistrous courses (which God knows
the endeavoring to detect the Earl of Essex Murder, was not as the present
posture of Affairs stands, a very likely method unto) he quoted that of the
Poet to give an edg to his Irony and Sarcasm:

Aude aliquid brevibus Gyaris, and careere dignum,
Si vis esse aliquis.
Dare once but be a Rogue upon Record,
And you may quickly hope to be a Lord.
But his bitter and contemptuous Language, with all his other ungentile as well
as illegal Treatment, might have easily been dispensed with; had not his
Lordship refused him the benefit of the Statute of being admitted to be Bayled,
unless he would procure Sureties who together with himself might stand bound in
12000 l. for appearance. A thing so exorbitant, considering the quality of the
Prisoner, as well as unjust considering the nature of that which they styled
his offense, that he had both acted unwisely should he have engaged himself and
Friends in Bonds so much above what he was able to discharge, and injuriously
to others should he have condescended to so illegal a demand, and which might
afterward be improved into a president. Whereupon finding after diverse
Applications, that this Lordship was not to be wrought to a mitigation of the
12000 l, and that he would not be prevailed on to take the 6000 l. Bail, which
was offered; the Gentleman rather than be remitted again to Prison in the
Country, was forced to comply to stand committed to the Messenger, Mr.
Atterburys, where he continued for five Weeks at the charges and rate of 4 l. 1
s, 8 d. per week. During which time he applied himself by way of petition to
his Majesty in Council, but alas without that success which he hoped for, which
most Men are apt to aseribe to the King's being prepossessed by my Lord K.
concerning his case, so that despairing both of all Justice from my Lord K. and
of all Favor from the Council Board, and groaning as well under a close
Confinement, as the excessive charges he was at in the Messenger's House; he
judged it the best method he could take, to endeavor the geting himself turned
over to the Kings Bench Prison in Southwark, reckoning that he should not only
live there at a more moderate Expense (which the Narrowness of his Fortune
obliged him to consult) than was extorted from him at Mr. Atterburies, but
likewise expecting, that upon giving Security for his true Imprisonment, he
should have the Liberty of the Rules, and thereby enjoy a more open and free
Air, than he did in the place where he was before. But as it was with some
Difficulty and after earnest Application, as well to my Lord K. as to my Lord
Chief Justice, and the Attorney General, that this small Kindness was obtained;
so after his removal to the Kings Bench by virtue of a Habeas Corpus from my
Lord Chief Justice, and after his having given 10000 l. Security for his
faithful and true Imprisonment, yet he was by an order from my Lord Chief
Justice to the Marshal of the said Prison for his close Consinement, denied the
Freedom of the Rules, which he had not only promised himself as a thing that
was in course allowed, but what the Keeper of the Prison had consented unto,
and without the granting whereof he could not according to Law demand Bayl and
Security for his true Imprisonment. Yea, so arbitrary and illegal were they in
all their actings against this poor Gentleman Mr. Braddon, that notwithstanding
his Imprisonment, yet they refused to discharge him from the 2000 l. Bayl,
which he had given at his first Appearance before the Council to answer an
Information of pretended Subornation; and also notwithstanding his close
Confinement, they withheld from him, and positively denied to give up the 10000
l. Bonds, which he and his Sureties had entered into for his being a true
Prisoner, nor would they so much as restore him the Fees he had paid upon the
sealing of them. And it being now the long Vacation, and there remaining no way
of helping and relieving himself till the Term, he was forced both to continue
a close Prisoner under no less Expense than two l. Sterling. per week, and to lie
under the Weight and Terror of the 12000l. Bayl which they had wrested from
him. But tho he was denied the Succor and Benefit of the Law, and sound
neither Justice nor Mercy in Men; yet he could not be robbed of the Comforts of
a good Conscience, nor deprived of the Refreshments and Supports which the
Knowledge of his own Integrity and Innocence administered unto him. And I have
been fully informed by credible Hands, that neither the troubles and
oppressions which he lay then under, nor the further Persecutions and
Sufferings he was in prospect of, were able to give him any Discomposure, or
create him any vexation, Grief in himself, nor yet to transport him to a
behavior in word or deed that could furnish his Enemies with an advantage
against, or yield them matter of insulting over him. In this state and
Condition he contin^^d till Michaelmass Term, which being come, and the
Westminster Courts begun to fit, he caused move the Court of Kings Bench the
very first day for a Rule to the Marshal to bring him up the next morning, in
order to discharge the Bayl he had given by Appointment of the Council Board
about the answering an Information of pretended Subornation. Which Rule being
granted by the Court, and obeyed by the Marshal; his Appearance was recorded;
and his Bayl discharged. Now having succeeded in this which my Lord K. had
refused in the time of the Vacation to grant him, the next step he took was for
the obtaining his own Liberty, in order to which he did on the fifth day of the
Term move the Court for a Habeas Corpus to be brought up and bailed. Which
being also immediately granted, he was after a few days, and a little delay,
which I shall not complain of the occasion of, brought up to the Court of the
Kings Bench, and there discharged from his Imprisonment upon he giving 3000 l.
Bayl, whereof himself stood ^ound in a Bond of a 1000 l. and his four Sureties
in 500 l. a Man. From all which we may not only collect the Hardships and
Oppressions which this honest and worthy Gentleman met wit, merely for
enquiring into the Truth of some Reports, which if admitted, do clearly prove
that the Earl of Essex was assassinated by others, and did not murder himself,
but we may also observe and infer after what an arbitrary and illegal manner
his Majesty's Subjects are treated by some of his judicial Officers, as well as
prime Ministers, for attempting to discover a most execrable and barbarous
Murder, wherein a great Man, and the chief Heads of the Popish Faction would
have been found deeply concerned and involved. Nor did Mr. Braddons troubles
upon this account issue here, all these things being only Praeludiuars to what
he was further to encounter from the Rage and Malice of St. James's, and
therefore the next Scene that opened, was the bringing him to a Trial for
endeavoring in the Earl of Essex's Death, to cast Aspersiens upon the
Government and defame the King. And all I would desire of any unprejudiced and
impartial Person, is only to read the said Trial, being fully confident that he
will thereupon not only acquit the Gentleman from the Guilt of any such thing;
but that he will find himself obliged in conscience to acknowledge that there
was barbarous villainy used in bringing my Lord of Essex to that Fatal and
untimely End. And the first thing remarkable as an Introduction to that Trial,
is, that my Lord Chief Justice was not only that morning for some time at
Whitehall before he went to Westminster, but was attended upon by Lord F. (whom
we have reason to accuse of being one of the Contrivers and Authorisers of the
Earl of Essex murder) at the lighting out of his Coach in Westminster, and
discoursed with both as he was conducted through the Hall, and in a corner near
unto the Court before his Lordship ascended to the Bench. Which has given many
men ground to suspect, that his business at the first place was to receive such
Instructions as he was to follow and attend unto in the work of the day, and
that the reason of the others according and discoursing him where he did, was
to impress him with a fresh sense of the business that was to be before him,
and to represent the dreadful consequences which would ensue to a great Man and
His Majesty's Ministers, in case Mr. Braddon should come to be acquitted. And
whosoever did either observe the behavior of the Bench at that time, or has
since read the Trial, (where tho what was said on all sides may be related, yet
the Gesture, Countenance, Passion, Heat and Air with which many things were
spoken, cannot be represented) must be forced to acknowledge that my Lord Chief
Justice and his Brethren, were rather sworn parties against the Defendant, than
equal Judges in a Cause betwixt the King and him. I should be obliged to
transcribe most of the Trial, did I undertake to give an account of the
ungentile, slanderous, and malicious language vented against himself; or the
interrupting, menacing, and hectoring of his Counsel, or the imposing upon,
prescribing unto as well as byassing the Jury against him; and therefore
instead of that, I entreat and desire the world to do both themselves, and Mr.
Braddon that right as to peruse the Trial, and if in their hearts they
subscribe not to what I say, I am contented to undergo the character both of a
person that understands nothing of the Rules and Measures which ought to be
observed in Courts of Judicature, and of one who is not sufficiently regardful
of his Credit and Fame in the things which he delivers. And if I be not
wonderfully mistaken, there is nothing more needful, but an impartial reading
and weighing of that Trial, for the vindication of Mr. Braddon's enquiring into
the Reports which seemed to imply that the Earl of Essex had not killed
himself, nor to justify his innocence as to the crime whereof he was accused,
namely Braddons Trial, p. 2. 70.
of maliciously conspiring and endeavoring to defame the Government; and, as
Justice Withins was pleased to express it, of charging the King with taking
away an innocent man's blood, and of murdering an innocent man, and as it was
laid in the Indictment, of his procuring and suborning false Witnesses to prove
that the Earl of Essex was not a Felon of himself, but was killed and murdered
by unknown persons. For admit that all which was sworn concerning a bloody
Razor's being thrown out of my Lord Essex's window immediately before the news
of his death, and that all which was deposed concerning a Report in City and
Country about his having cut his Throat before it was done, were false and
only invented by the Informers; yet, as it is evident by the Oaths and
Depositions of the Witnesses, that Mr. Braddon was not the Forger of these
things; so it is demonstrable that they were in their nature of that weight and
importance, upon which a wise as well an honest man, might suspect that my Lord
had not murdered himself, but was destroyed by others. Nor could the Gentleman
have ever been found guilty, but by means of Mercinary Judges, and an overaw'd
as well as a picked and prejudiced Jury, who will boggle at nothing tho never
so unjust that may but gratisy a great Man, and oblige His Majesty's Ministers
of State. And the reason, as I have said before, upon which Mr. Braddon came to
be convicted and found guilty, was plainly to skreen a great Man, and some
other persons from coming to be involved in the guilt of that Noble Man's
death, and to keep up the belief of a Protesiant Plot, Braddon's Trial, p. 2,
70.
which (as Justice Withins phraseth it) was likely otherwise to lose its
credit, and to be esteemed a Sham Plot for the taking away Innocent Protestants
Lives. Nor was the whole Trial against this Worthy and Virtuous Person, more
extravagant, arbitrary and illegal, than the Sentence against him, upon the
Juries finding him convict of the Indictment, was unjust and severe. For
besides the condemning him in a Fine of 2000 l. which is more than his whole
visible Estate amounts unto, and expressly contrary to the Law of the Land,
which requires no man shall be fined but with a salvo contenemento. i. e. the
leaving him as much as may support him in some degree answerable to his
quality, they have over and above ordered his finding Sureties for good
behavior during life, which as I question whether it be lawful by the ancient
and Common Law (tho it has been sometimes practiced) any more than it is to
condemn a person to perpetual Imprisonment; so I am sure there is no President
to be found for the like in a matter that was not of a more criminal and
heinous Nature. But all serves to prove, that whosoever has the courage or
honesty to ^avel into the Earl of Essex's death, are to be persecuted,
oppressed and ruined, and by consequence serves to demonstrate, that there is a
villainous mystery in the manner of his coming to that Fatal End, which they are
afraid to have searched out and detected.

And as if it were not enough in the judgment of all rational men, to acquit
and vindicate the Earl of Essex from the guilt and infamy of having destroyed
himself, that those have been prosecuted with the utmost s^verity, and
oppressed in their Estates and Liberties, who with all imagin^ble modesty
toward the Government were willing to inquire into the manner of his death,
and to declare their just suspicions, with the grounds of them, to persons
trusted with the administration of affairs, that he did not murder himself, but
was assassinated by others: Behold, that as one Crime is not to be concealed
but by the perpetration of more, so the Conspirators and Authorisors of that
Noble Man's death, have proceeded to the murdering several other men, who as
they had a perfect knowledge and comprehension both of the manner of the Fact,
the villainous bloody Agents who were immediately instrumental to commit it, and
the Persons who employed, rewarded, and encouraged them, so they had been
guilty of what some will call indiscretion, to communicate to others what they
had seen and observed, and too fully understood themselves. Among others who
partly saw, heard, and observed themselves, and partly learned from others,
several circumstances relating to the matter of my Lord's death, there was one
Meak a common Sentinel, who had stood on duty all that morning ^^er unto the
place and house where the Earl of Essex was confined. For whereas on other days
the Sentinels used to stand but two hours at a time on duty, there was care
taken that morning, that those who were on duty when the King and Duke came
into the Tower, which was about six of the clock, should not be changed till
both after the time of the Earl of Essex's death, which was about nine, and
till after the King and Dukes departure from thence, which was about half an
hour after. And the reason of this is obvious, namely, that tho it was
impossible to keep all persons from seeing who walked to and fro, and what was
transacting, yet they resolved to preserve it in as narrow a compass as they
could, and to admit as few to an opportunity of observing persons and things as
might be. Whence it came to pass, that those Soldiers who entered upon Duty at
Four, and should according to course have been relieved at Six, were suffered
and obliged to stay on till Ten. Now this Meak having an advantage from the
post he was in, of observing the several persons that went that morning to my
Lord Essex's Lodgings, and having par^ly himself seen, and partly learned from
others, diverse material particulars, relating to the manner of the
Assassination of that Noble Person, it will be easily acknowledged, that he was
as capable as any to detect it, or at least of letting these, who should have
the honesty, courage, and zeal to enquire after my Lord's death, so far into it
as to be able to unravel that whole villainy, and to trace it not only to the
Instruments, but the original Authors and Contrivers. This poor fellow both
abhorring in himself what he had seen, and conceiving the greatest detestation
imaginable against all the Villains who had been accessory to it, was neither
able to conceal his knowledge of what he had seen, nor his resentments of so
horrid a Fact, but at the same time had not the prudence to distinguish betwixt
persons, who without damage to the Author, might be entrusted with so
important a Secret, and those who at first would seem forward enough to hear
it, but would withal make their advantage by revealing it to such as would
reward them, and destroy him. Whence it unhappily came to pass that this poor
foolish man, not only related it to such as were honest and faithful to him,
and who will be ready in due time to testify the whole of what he acquainted
them with, but to others who conveyed it to St. James's as a piece of important
intelligence, and of wonderful consequence to his Royal Highness. And tho it be
not yet seasonable to recount the several particulars relating to that
barbarous Murder, which he declared upon his own knowledge, as well as the
confirmation of others; yet I may take the liberty to digest and branch them
into their several heads, and to let the World know that some of them were such
as preceeded his death, others accompanied it, and one or two came after it.
Wherefore that he might tell no more stories, nor rise up as a witness against
the Assassinates, this poor unfortunate Fellow was secretly murdered and thrown
into the Tower Ditch. And there are several particulars relating to his Death;
which are not unworthy to be known to the World, but it were to advantage the
Conspirators, and to prejudice our selves to mention them at present. Only this
is remarkable, that as this Robert Meak was for some time before his death,
very apprehensive of the danger he went in of being privately destroyed for
what he had declared concerning the E. of Essex being murdered, so he had a
greater dread of it the morning before he was killed, than he had been
possessed with at any other time. And therefore from that allarm which his mind
suggested to him of his impendent danger, he begged of an Acquuaintance and
Friend that morning before he died, that he would have accompanied, and kept
with him for that day. But such was the poor fellow's fate, that tho he told
that person the apprehensions he was in of being murdered, and he from a sense
and belief of it, had left his work with a resolution to attend him, yet
whether from a jealousy he might have of his own safety, or upon what other
motive I shall not enquire, he stole away from, and forsook him before Twelve
of the Clock. But tho the Conspirators and Assassionates had thus by a second
murder delivered themselves from the apprehensions they were in of being
detected for the first; yet there arose an other person, who as he had better
opportunity of knowing the whole Mystery of the Lord of Essex's death, than
Meak the Sentinel had; so from remorse of Conscience for what he had been
accessory unto, and from an abhorrency of that bloody Fact, which he so well
knew the Authors and Perpetrators of, he begun to discourse and communicate it
with shame and loathing to others. The person whom I mean was Mr. Hawley, a
Warder of the Tower, living in Winchester-street, being a Person both for
Reputation and Estate far above that Hawley, in whose house the Earl of Essex
was then Prisoner when his Throat was cut, and therefore one without whose
knowledge, consent and contribution, it cannot be supposed to have been done.
And by how much he was not only more capable than others to detect the whole
villainy of the Noble Man's death, and lay open the enormous crime in all the
parts and branches of it, but was of better credit than the Sentinel, and more
likely to obtain belief from the World in what he should declare, by so much
was he to be esteemed for a most dangerous person to the Conspirators, and to
be treated as one from whom they might dread the most fatal mischief to
themselves as well as their cause. Hence the intelligence was no sooner
conveyed to a great Man and the rest of the Juncto, that Hawly had been talking
such things concerning the Earl of Essex's death, which it concerned them no
less than both their Lives and Honors to have concealed; but they resolved to
destroy him, and thereby prevent his prating for the future, and being able to
tell any tales. And being informed that he was inquiring where he might
purchase an Estate, they employ one to tempt him out of Town, under pretense of
his seeing a parcel of Land that was to be sold. For they thought, that should
they cause him to be murdered in or about the City, it would fill all men with
jealousies of their being guilty of his death, especially considering the
Reports which went of them, and the suspicions that they lay under of having
caused Meak to be killed. And therefore in order to the getting him destroyed
with the more secrecy, and the administering the less apprehension about the
Authors of his death, they prevailed on him by the bait and temptation which I
have mentioned, to take a journey into the Country. Whence having resolved
that he should never return, they employed some to dog, and others to way-lay
and murder him. And with that Secrecy as well as Obedience, were their Orders
and Decrees executed, that it was a considerable while after his Death, before
he could be heard of, or his Body found. But when after long search and enquiry
after him; his Corpse were at last found, there were all the marks and Symptoms
of a most barbarous Assassination prepared upon him, which malicious wit could
invent, or enraged jealousy and revenge act or commit. For besides diverse
con^usions in the head, face and breast from the blows he had received, it
appeared plainly that he had been also strangled. And as he had never
administered cause to any other persons save the Conspirators and Instruments of
the Earl of ^ffex's death, upon which we can with the least shadow of reason,
fancy his being murdered upon a personal and private Revenge; so there are
proofs ready to be produced, whenever either a ParlJament comes, or a fair
Trial can be obtained before upright and impartial Judges, not only by whom he
was destroyed, but by whose Command and Authority. Nor was his Wife unsensible
and without apprehension even before the Body was discovered, both that he
might be murdered, and upon what motives and inducements it was done, so that
she told some Friends how she dreaded the consequences and effects of his
having so often discoursed about the Earl of Essex's death. Yea there is one
Glover, who is a Servant to His Majesty, being at present a Warder in the
Tower, who being in conference with some people about the Earl of Essex and Mr.
Braddon, was pleased with more than an ordinary emotion to say, Hawley also
has been prating, but he was fain to walk for it. But the same person being
asked after it was known that he had been murdered, what he thought of Mr.
Hawley's walking, appeared exceedingly disturbed, and said he knew nothing of
it, nor would he have the patience to hear any thing spoken about that matter.
So that we have here an other evidence that the Earl of Essex did not, as he
has been defamed and slandered, cut his own Throat, but that this Person of
incomparable Merit and Virtue was Massacred by wicked and suborned Ruffians;
seeing to prevent the discovery of that heinous and execrable Fact, two other
men who had advantages of knowing both the Actors in, and manner of his death,
and had talked somewhat freely about it, and seemed inclinable to reveal it,
were barbarously killed.

And as the destroying as well as oppressing those from whom the World might
receive light about the murder of that Noble Peer, plainly shows by whose
Councels, and by what means, he came to his faral End; so the countenancing,
protecting and preferring those, who are justly suspected to have been deeply
instrumental in it, and who long ere this would have been publicly indicted
for it, (had it not been partly for the discouragement given by the Court, His
Majesty's Ministers of State and Officers of Justice, and partly not to expose
men to that hazard which they must necessarily run by engaging in this affair)
affords us a new proof of my Lord's innocence from being Felo de se, and that
the infamy and guilt of his death ought to be devolved upon others. There are
cases wherein suspicion of guilt may so wait on some men, that others tho never
so well persuaded of their innocence, cannot without forfeiture of discretion,
and becoming Sharers in the reproach and dishonor which attends them, give
them either the least countenance, or yield them any Testimonies of Favor and
Kindness, till they have vindicated and acquitted themselves from that whereof
they are suspected, and which common Fame accuses them of. And as all persons
pretending to wisdom, or who are regardful of their reputation, will account
themselves obliged to act under the conduct and guidance of this Rule and
principle; so of all men, those in Authority are most concerned not to take
upon them the sheltring of those that are aspersed with infamous crimes; nor to
countenance and advance such, whom the cry of a Kingdom charge with a
barbarous, enormous and execrable Fact. But to that impudence in Villainy, as
well as contempt of honor and credit are the Gentlemen of the Popish Juncto
and Cabal arrived; that they not only cause secretly Murder, such as would
discover a great and heinous offense against God and Mankind, but they dare
openly and in the face of the Sun, both protect and prefer the chief Miscreant
and Ruffian, whom all sober and impartial persons have in suspicion for it. It
must necessarily be acknowledged, that in case my Lord was assassinated by
violent and and bloody hands, his Valet de Chamber Romeny the only Servant who
attended him in the Tower, save a Footman, must be acquainted with it, and
accessory to it. And so many, as well as weighty, were the arguments of his
being guilty of his Earl and Master's death, that he was justly suspected for
it both by the rest of my Lord's Servants, and all the thinking impartial
people about the Town. And tho I shall have occasion hereafter to mention
diverse particulars and recount several circumstances, which not only serve to
lay him under a suspicion, but to convict him of being accessory to the death
of his Lord; yet I care not if I relate one at present, namely the apprehension
he was in, and the trouble he expressed to one of the Lady Essex's Gentlewomen,
upon a Report which he had heard that my Lord's Murder was to come under a
second Examination, and that the Body was to be taken up in order to a review.
Nor was the Countess her self, for all the impressions which some great men had
endeavored to possess her with, of my Lord's cutting his own Throat, without
strong apprehensions to the contrary; nor void of jealousy of this French
Fellow's being guilty of her Husband's death, which made her discharge him her
service, and dismiss him out of the Family. And as no Gentlemen in England
would have after this done so foolish a thing, or so unworthy of himself, as to
cherish and entertain such a Rascal; so it least of all became the honor of
the Court, unless there were a further mystery in it than the world is aware
of, to take him both into their protection, and to advance him to an employ and
place. Let us therefore a little observe and recount what favors this Rascal
under all the suspicion and infamy of being accessory to his Lord's death, has
met with both from his Majesty's Ministers of Justice, and from the principal
persons at Court, and chiefest Officers of State. Can it be less than a
reflection both upon the honor of the Government, and an insinuation that great
men were concerned in that horrid fact whereof Bomeny is so justly suspected,
that my Lord Chief Justice at Mr. Braddon's Trial, after he had been
affronting, interrupting and hectoring all the Witnesses for the Defendant,
steps in not only to assist and rectify Bomeny in his Deposition, guiding him
to say a Razor when the Rogue had said a Penknife, but durst represent the
Villain under the character Braddons Trial, p. 55, 61.
of one whose integrity and fidelity to my Lord, was confirmed by six years
experience of his service, and that he was not an upstart and wandering fellow.
Yea, the esteem that this Ruffian was in with our Grandees, and which by
consequence proves that there is a Mystery in the manner of the Earl of Essex's
death, which is not yet fully discovered, seeing these who are deservedly
suspected to have been accessory to it, are favored and befriended by them,
may be further enlightened and confirmed from the correspondence which Bomeny
had with the Secretary of State, when he lay concealed from others, and the
readiness he expressed to converse with any that pretended to enquire for him
in Sir Lionel Jenkin's name, when he was denied to every body besides. For a
certain person having occasion to call at his Lodging in order to Subpaena him
to Mr. Braddon's Trial, and being positively told that there was no such man
there, took the boldness to say he came from Sir Lionel; upon which Bomeny
immediately appeared, and he who was said not to be there before, stepped forth
with all imaginable readiness to receive the Secretaries Messenger, and to know
what his Honor's pleasure was. And if these two passages which I have related,
be not enough to evidence the kindness which his Majesty's Ministers had for
this little and Infamous creature, I shall subjoin a third importing the care
which the greatest about the Court took of him, and the respect they show him.
For when he seemed to be abandoned by all others, and knew not where to be
admitted into a service, by reason of the suspicion he lay under of being
either an instrument that murdered his Lord, or who had consented to the doing
of it, behold a great man, and the Officers of his Majesty's Forces, embrace
him under all that ignominy and reproach, and list him to ride in one of the
Troops of Guards. Nor is it possible for any man without renouncing his Reason,
to imagine, that that Great Man; as well as diverse other persons of Figure and
Quality, should expose themselves to the censure of the world in entertaining a
Fellow judged guilty of so enormous and abominable a crime, unless they
themselves had been accessory some way or other to that execrable wickedness,
and except they judged the Rascal to have merited by the Fact.

But to put it beyond all possibility of any rational contradiction that the
Earl of Essex did not cut his own Throat, but that he was massacred by others,
I shall demonstrate the impossibility of it as the manner of his death is
represented in the Coroners Inquisition, and declared in the Depositions of the
Chyrurgions, who viewed the Body, and searched and examined the fatal wound.
And where there is a Natural Impossibility that a thing should be so or so
done, all the Informations of the world to the contrary serve to no other end
but to declare the perjury of the informers. A matter that is naturally
impracticable ought not to be credited, tho never so many should have the
impudence to swear they saw it done. But as the rage of the Conspirators and
Assassinates transported and hurried them to commit the barbarous Fact in such
a manner, that all who have not abjured common sense as well as Reason, must
acknowledge that it was not practicable in that way and manner, or a thing that
could be done by the Earl of Ess^x himself; so their malice corrupted and
blinded their judgments to that measure and degree, that the Instrument which
they have chosen and pitched upon as the Tool, Weapon and Mean by which it was
done, renders the doing it by my Lord impossible in it self, and unworthy to be
believed except by the grossest of Fools, or the worst of knaves, who never
consider how far a matter either is or can be true, but only what may conduce
to their profit, or gratify their malice to take up and admit. And how
conspicuous is the Wisdom as well as Righteousness of God, in infatuating
villainous men, so to accomplish and perpetrate their villainies, as that their
folly shall detect their guilt, and the Marks and Characters of stupidity as
well as rage left upon the Fact shall reveal the Authors of it, let them do all
they can to transfer and abdicate it from themselves, and to charge and fassen
it upon others. Now the Coroners Inquest in their Inquisition made the 14th of
July, 1683 concerning the Earl of Essex death, do upon their Oaths from the
Depositions of such witnesses as they thought fit to examine, give us this
account of the way and manner of it. That the Earl of Essex being the 13^h day
of July alone in his Chamber, did with a Razor voluntarily and feloniously cut
his own Throat, giving unto himself one mortal wound, cut from one Jugular to
the other, and by the Aspera Arteria, and the Windpipe to the vertebres of the
Neck, both the Jugulars being thoroughly divided, of which said mortal Wound,
the said Earl of Essex instantly died. And to this account so far as relates to
the Nature of the Wound, do the Informations upon Oath of Robert Sherwood and
Robert Andrews, two Chyrurgions called to view the Body of the said Earl fully
agree. For Robert Sherwood swears, That having viewed the Threat of the Earl of
Essex, he finds that there is a large wound, and that the Aspera Arteria or
Wind pipe, and the Gullet, with the Jugular Arteries are all divided. And
Robert Andrews deposes to the same purpose, namely, That having viewed the
Throat of the Lord of Essex, he found that it was cut from one Jugular to the
other, and through the Windpipe and Gullet into the Vertebres of the Neck,
both Jugular Veins being also quite divided. And as the first thing observable
in the Coroners Inquest about my Lords death, is that his Throat was cut with a
Razor, so it is needful the world should know that the Razor which Bomeny in
his Deposition before the said Inquest, swears to be the same wherewith he gave
himself the fatal and mortal wound, was a small French Razor of about four
Inches and half long at most, without any Spill or Tongue at the end of the
Blade, as all Razors of the English Form and Fashion have: So that the Razor
being of that make, proportion, and extent, it is as evident as any
demonstrated problem in Euclid, that it could not be used but upon holding it
by the Blade; and that in order to the holding it with strength and steddiness
requisite to the making such a wound, the Fingers and Hand must grasp and
fasten upon no less than two Inches of it. The second thing remarkable from the
Inquisition of the Coroner, and the Depositions of the Cbyrurgions refers to
the extent and dimension of this deplorable and deadly wound. Which as they all
acknowledge to have reached from Jugular to Jugular in length, and to the
vertebrae of the Neck in depth; so a certain Gentleman who saw the wound before
ever the Jury did, affirms that it begun at the side of the Neck Bone behind
the left jugular, and extended to the Bone of the Neck beyond the right, being
betwixt eight and nine inches in dimension from one side to the other, and that
it so nearly approached unto, and pierced into the vertebrae that had it light
on a joint it would have cut off his Head instead of merely cutting his Throat.
And I may upon what is here confessed and sworn, confidently say, That no man
could cut his own Throat after the rate and manner, and to that measure and
extent, that the Earl of Essex's was cut. Nor did I ever speak with Physician
or Chyrurgeon, who was so far above the dread of the Court and St. James's as
to dare venture the giving his opinion, but he would readily acknowledge and
confirm it with unanswerable reasons, that it was impossible the Earl of Essex
should have given himself that mortal wound, or cut his Throat in the manner it
appears to have been done? For the Razor being in the whole length but four
inches and a half, and two inches of these being necessary at the least to be
held and grasped in the hand in order to the using and managing of it; it is
not imaginable how with the other two Inches and a half both the Jugulars could
be divided at one stroke, and a gash made which extended no less than Eight
Inches from one side to the other. There is no man that is versed in Chyrurgery
or the Anatomy of the humane Body, but will find himself obliged to own, that
it is altogether impossible that after the cutting the one Jugular, there
should remain life and strength for carrying forward the wound to the dividing
the other. Nor can there be any thing more certain in Nature, than that there
would have been such an effusion of Spirits and Blood upon dividing the first
Jugular, that all life and motion would have immediately ceased, and that there
would have been no strength left to push forward the instrument to the second,
so as to dissect it. Besides there being no more of the Razor beyond the hand
which held the Razor, than about two inches and a half of the blade that could
be used and applied to the making the incision in the Throat; How is it
possible that a Gash or Wound of four Inches deep (for of that dimension it was
from the outside of the Gullet, where the hand must lie, to the Vertebrae of
the Neck where the incision terminated) could be made by an Instrument of two
inches and a half long? These being plain and direct impossibilities, it
necessarily follows that the Earl of Essex did not destroy himself, but that
this hellish Murder was committed upon him by the hands of bloody and hired
Ruffians. Nor indeed was a Razor the Instrument which they made use of upon
this villainous occasion, but it was done by one of another kind, as well as
form and figure, and which as they had prepared and provided on purpose, so it
was much more convenient for the perpetration of the Fact. But it would have
too palpably betrayed the Actors, to have suffered that to have lain by the
massacred Body, or to have let it be seen by any honest and indifferent persons
who might throng in among others to view and look upon the bleeding Corpse. And
of all the Instruments which they could have thought upon, a Razor, especially
of the fashion which that was, that they threw down by my Lord's Body after
they had Murdered him, was the most unfit for an incision in the Throat of
those dimensions, as the wound whereby they treacherously killed him evidently
appears to have been. A certain Gunner in the Tower, who may be supposed not
altogether a stranger to this affair, pitched upon a more convenient and proper
Instrument for the doing of it, when about Nine of the Clock that morning he
reported the death of my Lord in a place not-far distant from thence, saying,
the Earl of Essex had cut his Throat with a Case Knife wherewith he had been
carving a Pidgeon for his Breakfast. And had they not been infatuated, they
would have rather ordered such an Instrument to have been laid by the Body in
order to blind and deceive the World about the manner of his death, than the
small French Raz^r which I have described, and by which they have endeavored
to make men believe the gastful and fatal wound was made. But if a ParlJament
come to sit again in England, or if His Majesty will grant a Pardon to such
Witnesses, as we are ready to produce, and allow a Writ of Melius Inquirendum
concerning the death of this Noble Peer before equal and impar^^al Judges, we
shall both describe the Instrument he was killed by, and prove the truth of
what we say, by persons who saw the whole Bloody and Tragical transaction, and
are as Accessories too far concerned in that horrid Murder.

Nor want there proofs of my Lords being treacherously Assassinated by others,
and that he was not a Felon of himself, from the Testimonies of these very
Witnesses which were produced both before the Coroners Inquest, and at Mr.
Bradden's Trial, to Swear that the Earl of Essex had cut his own Throat. And
tho it may be pardonable in the Coroner upon the Inquisition into the manner of
my Lord's death, to have admitted the Depositions of Bomeny and Russel, there
being not then so just suspicions of their guilt in this matter, as afterward
there were; yet for my Lord Chief Justice to allow them as competent Witnesses
in that affair, when the presumptions of their being accessory to that Murder
were so strong, as they plainly appeared from the whole scope and tendency of
that which was sworn, said, and alleged in Mr. Braddon's behalf at the
foresaid Trial, was the greatest affront imaginable to Justice, and argued a
most criminal partiality. For with what equity could Bomeny's Testimony be
admitted to destroy either the Truth or probability of my Lord's being
assassinated by others, seeing it must be granted that in case the Earl of
Essex was treacherously Murdered, Bomeny being the only Servant who then waited
upon him, must be an Actor in, or at least an Accessory to it. And what is
this, but to admit a fellow under the highest presumptions of guilt to be a
witness in his own Cause, and to allow his Testimony as a sufficient
vindication from the most perfidious, as well as barbarous Crime that could be
committed; and which to have acknowledged, would have derived upon him the
severest punishment? And the same may be said of my Lord Chief Justice's
partiality and unreasonableness, in suffering Russel's Testimony to pass for
good and legal evidence in the matter and case that we are discoursing of. For
Russel being the Person who, that morning my Lord was murdered, attended upon
him as his Warder, must likewise have been either an Actor in, or Accessory to,
the cruelty that was committed on him. Nor can it be otherwise thought than
that he who contrary to the Duty of his Place, and the trust reposed in him
instead of assisting and defending my Lord, when forcibly assaulted, would
consent unto, or at least connive at the Violence committed upon him, should
also for the saying himself as well as others from the Punishment of the said
Crime, transfer the Murder from himself, and charge it upon my Lord. For as
Russel was set ^t my Lords door to prevent any endeavors which might have been
used by himself or others for an escape; so one main end of his being posted
there(...) was to see that no Violence should be committed upon the Prisoner.
B(...) to dismiss this without further enlarging upon it, I shall in proof,
that my lord of Essex did not Murder himself, but was ass^ssinated by others,
observe the Contradictions that are in the Informations of the Witnesses, about
the manner of his Death, and the Circumstances relating to it, and how they
disagree not only one with another, but gainsay themselves in their
Testimonies. It has always been admitted as a sufficient ground of
disbelieving Winesses, and of judging them to Swear falsely, when their
Testimonies instead of being either harmonious and coherent in themselves, or
consonant and agreeable one to another, do both interfere with, and contradict
themselves and each other. For as Truth is always uniform and consistent, so
Falsehood is contradictious and various. Now that this may the better appear,
and that all Men may see, I do neither impose upon the Witnesses, nor endeavor
to deceive the world, I shall transcribe the two Informations which were Sworn
by Bomeny and Russel before the Coroner and the Inquest, when they sat on my
Lords Body upon an Inquisition after the manner of his Death, and by what means
he came to his fatal End. Paul Bomeny in his Deposition made upon Oath the 14
of July, 1683. says, That when my Lord came to Captain Hawley 's, which was
the eleventh of that month, my Lord asked him for a Penknife to pare his Nails
as he was wont to do; to which the Informant answered, being come in have he
had not brought it, but he will send for one; and accordingly sent the Footman
with a No^e for several things for my Lord, amongst which the Penknife was
inserted; and that the Footm(...) went and gave the Bill to my L(...)ds
Steward, who sent the Provisions but not the Pe^knife, only told the Footman he
would get one the next day. That when the Footman was come, my Lord asked if
the Penknife was come, to which the Informant answered he should have it the
next day; and accordingly on the ^2. in the Morning, before my Lord of Essex
was up, the Informant sent the Footman home with a Note to the Steward, in
which amongst other things he asked for a Penknife for my Lord, and when the
Footman was gone, about a little after 8. of the Clock, my Lord sent one Mr.
Russel his Warder to the Informant, who came and asked him if the Penknife was
come; to which the Informant said no my Lord, but I shall have it by and by: to
which my Lord said, that he should bring him one of his Razors, it would do as
well; and then the Informant went and fetched one, and gave it my Lord, who
went then to pare his Nails, and then the Informant went out of the Room into
the Passage by the door on Friday the 13, and begun to talk with the Warder,
and a little while after he went down Stairs, and soon after came the Footman
with the Provisions, and brought also a Penknife, which the Informant put upon
his Bed, and thought my Lord had no more need of it, because he thought he had
paired his Nails, and then the Informant came up to my Lords Chamber about 8 or
9 in the Forenoon on Friday the 13 of July, with a little Note from the
Steward, but not finding his Lord in the Chamber, went to the Close-Stool
Closet-door and found it shut, and he thinking his Lord was busy there, went
down and staid a little, and came up again, thinking his Lord had been come out
of the Closet, and finding him not in the Chamber, he knocked at the Door with
his Finger thrice, and said, my Lord; but no body answering, he took up the
Hanging, and looking through the chink, he saw Blood, and a part of the Razor,
whereupon he called the Warder Russel, and went down to call for help, and the
said Russel pushed the Door open, and there they saw my Lord of Essex all along
on the Floor without a Periwig, and all full of Blood, and the Razor by him;
and the Deponent further deposes that the Razor now showed to him at the time
of his Examination, is the same Razor which he did bring to my Lord, and which
did lie on the Ground in the Closet by my Lord. To this Information I shall
subjoyn that of Thomas Russel one of the Warders of the Tower, who being
examined the 14. of July 1683. says, That on the 13. of the said July, about 8
or 9 of the Clock in the Forenoon he was present, when he did hear the Lord of
Essex call to his Man Mr. Bomeny for a Penknife to pare his Nails, and then for
a Razor, which Mr. Bomeny brought him, and then my Lord went up and down the
Room scraping his Nails with the Razor, and shut the outward Door; Mr. Bomeny
half a quarter of an Hour afterward not finding my Lord in his Bedchamber
went down Stairs again believing that my Lord was then private in his Closet.
Bomeny came up about a quarter of an hour afterward, and knocked at the door,
and then called, My Lord, My Lord, but he not answering, peeped through a chink
of the door, and did see the Earl of Essex lying on the Ground in the Closet,
whereupon he did cry out, that my Lord was fallen down Sick, and then the
Informant went to the Closet-door, and opened it, the key being on the outside,
and then did see my Lord lie down on the ground in his blood, his Throat being
cut. These are all the informations which the Inquest charged and sworn to
enquire when, by what means and how Arthur E. of Essex came to his death,
thought fit to take, and upon the Depositions of these two Fellows who in case
any violence were offered to my Lord must have been accessory to it, they bring
in and do say upon their oaths that the said Arthur Earl of Essex did
voluntarily and feloniously cut his Throat. It may indeed seem strange that
there being other persons at that time in the house besides Bomeny and Russel,
particularly the Maid servant, that they should neither be examined nor so much
as called to know whether they could say any thing in that affair. But it is
not improbable that the contradictions in the Testimonies of the two Witnesses
whom they had examined, to one an other, might discourage them from examining
any more, least they in what they might swear should contradict what both the
former had said. Now what I have to observe concerning the contradictions in
the forego'ing Depositions, they are either such, wherein these Informations
are directly contrary to the reports which themselves made to others about my
Lords death; or they are such, wherein the Testimony of the one, contradicts
that of the other, or lastly, wherein the Information of one and the same
person, gainsay's and overthrow's it self. For the first, whereas both Bomeny
and Russel do positively swear that it was not above a quarter of an hour and
half, from the time that Bomeny left my Lord in his Chamber pareing his Nails,
to the time that they found him dead in the Closet; yet this very Bomeny being
asked the Question by one of my Lords Family soon after his death, how long my
Lord might have lain dead before either he or the Warder discovered it, replied
that he believed he must have lain so above two hours for that when they first
found him the Body was cold and stiff. And whereas Russel deposes that the
Razor was given by Bomeny to my Lord after he was up and about eight or nine of
the clock in the forenoon, and that both he and Bomeny inform how they saw his
Lordship upon the delivery of the Razor to him apply to the pareing of his
Nails; yet this Rogue Bomeny having the property of liars namely the want of a
good memory, affirmed to a person of good credit and who is ready to depose it
upon Oath, that from the time of his sending away the Footman with a Note to
the Steward (which was about or before six) that morning on which the Earl
died, he did not see my Lord till the time that he found him killed and
wallowing in his blood in the Closet. And whereas there is not one word in
Bomenies Information concerning my Lords being used to be taken with sudden
Frensical passions and fitts, or that he was particularly taken with one that
morning before his death, but the contrary plainly insinuated in the whole
Information and also acknowledged at Mr. Braddon's Trial, where tho he says,
that Braddons Trial p. 45.
my Lord was melancholy, yet he adds they took no notice of it, nor had reason
to suspect any thing more than ordinary; all which directly contradicts what
the Villain told an Eminent Dr. of the Church of England, namely that his Lord
was frequently taken with sudden Frensical passions, and in particular with one
that morning just before his death. For said the perjured Rascal, when the Earl
of Essex saw my Lord Russel carried out of the Tower to be Tried, he struck his
Breast, and said himself was the cause of my Lord Russel 's misery, seeing had
it not been for him, my Lord Russel would never have admitted my Lord Howard
into his company. And that thereupon seeing my Lord Russel like to be ruined by
the Testimony of that person for whose integrity he had engaged his Honor, he
fell destracted. Now as this is directly repugnant, to the Testimony which his
own Lady and all other persons who had the advantage of being known to his
Lordship do justly give him, affirming that he was the most sedate, best
composed, and freest from passions of all men they ever knew, so there is not
one word of it in his information to the Coroners Inquest, though it would have
been a stronger evidence of my Lords murdering himself, than all that he
deposed or swore besides. Truth being ever the same, whosoever is called to
testify a Truth that falls within his knowledge, can give the same account of
it a thousand times over without the least variation from it, or from himself;
but a Lie having no foundation save what it has in the invention of the Author,
easily escapes the memory, and lay's the Reporter as often as he is called to
repeat and declare it, under a continual liableness of inventing either some
thing new that was not, or which is different to what was in his former report,
so that by the last Fiction he both detects and discredits the first. But
secondly, as the Informations of these two Witnesses, interfere with the
Reports which themselves gave concerning my Lords Death to other persons, so
the Testimony of the one does directly contradict and supplant the Testimony of
the other. For whereas Bomeny positively swears, that on the 12. of July in the
morning before my Lord of Essex was up, be sent the Footman home with a Note to
the Steward, in which among other things he asked for a Penknife for my Lord,
and that when the Footman was gone, about or a little after eight of the Clock,
my Lord sent Russel the Warder to the said Bomeny, who came and asked him if
the Penknife was come, to which Bomeny replied, no my Lord, but I shall have it
by and by, and that thereupon my Lord bid him bring him one of his Razors,
which he went and fetched and gave to his Lordship, who applied himself there
with to pair his Nails; Russel in a direct contradiction to this, swears, that
on the 13. of July about 8 or 9 of the Clock in the Forenoon, he was present
when he did hear the Lord of Essex call to his Man Bomeny for a Penknife to
pare his Nails, and then for a Razor which Bomeny brought him, and that
thereupon my Lord went up and down the Room scraping his Nails with the Razor.
So that whilst Bomeny deposed upon Oath that my Lord called for the Razor, and
had it delivered to him on the 12 of July being Thursday and the day before my
Lords death; Russel comes and swears, that it was on the 13 of July being
Friday, and the day on which my Lord was killed, that he asked for the Razor
and received it from his man. We may with the same ease bring the Time Past, to
be the Time present or Future; as make the 12 of July, upon which Bomenie
swears he gave my Lord the Razor, to be the 13 of July, on which Russel swears
it was delivered to him. And tho this be such a dissagreement in their
Testimonies, that no wise and unbiaz'd person can give credit to what either of
them says, but is in justice obliged to believe that both of them swore
falsely; yet it is not the only thing wherein their Depositions contradict one
another, there being a second thing, and as important as the former, wherein
the Information of the on lies in a full contrariety to the Information of the
other. For whereas Bomeny swears that Russel pushed the closet door open where
my Lord lay, which implies his using violence and force to get in; Russel comes
and deposes that being called by Bomenie, he went to the Closet door and opend
it the Key being on the outside. Nor it is possibl' to reconcile what the one
says in this particular, to what is declared by the other, unless we can make
the unlocking the door with the key, to be the same with the bursting it open
in a forcibl' way. Yea as if it were not sufficient to demonstrate the
falsehood of both their Testimonies, that they do expressly contradict one
another in two important and weighty particulars; there is yet a third wherein
their Informations do plainly cross and thwart each other. For whereas Bomeny
swears that upon looking through the Chink of the Closet door, he saw blood and
a part of the Razor, without making mention of his seeing my Lords Body or any
part of it; Russel comes and deposes that Bomenie upon peeping through a Chink
of the door, saw the Earl of Essex lying on the ground in the Closet, without
adding any thing of his having seen blood, and a part of the Razor. Now besides
that Russel swears a thing positively, which at most he could only swear upon
Bomenie's Info^mation; here is also a dissagreement between the account of what
Bomenie says he saw, and that which Russel affirm's him to have seen. The two
Elders who in the Apocryphal History are reported to have sworn falsely a
against Susanna, did not more evidently, nor in so many particulars interfere
with and contradict one another, as these two Fellows Bomeny and Russel appear
to have don'in their Testimonies concerning the Earl of Essex death. But alaz!
we have not been hitherto so happy as to have this pretended crime of my Lord
Essex's cutting his Throat, to fall under the examination and cognizance of
persons of that integrity and uprightness as well as wisdom, which the
calumnious accusation of uncleanness fastened upon Susanna had the fortune to
do. And as the Informations of these two Rascals do plainly contradict each
other; so in the last place we shall observe how one and the same Witness does
in his Deposition thwart and gainsay himself. For whereas Bomenie swears that
on Thursday the 12. of Iu'y he gave the Razor to my Lord, who thereupon went to
pare his Nails with it; he immediately adds without the least congrnity either
to Sense or Grammar, that he the said Bomenie having given my Lord the Razor,
went out of the room into the passage by the door on Friday the 13. Nothing can
be more aparent then that the for'go'ing part of the Information relates wholly
to Thursday; but at last without any regard in himself to what he said, or
relation in the next words to those which preceded, Friday is brought in
contrary both to all Rules of Syntax, and the for'going words of his own
Testimony. For what was antecedently deposed referring to what had fallen out
and was transacted on Thursday, his immediately subjoyning that Then he went
out of the Room into the passage by the door, ought by all the Rules of Speech
and the Measures of Sense to relate to Thursday also. But Friday being the day
on which the Earl of Essex was killed, and which as both Bomenie and Russel
swear was soon after his having received the Razor; it was therefore needful
that in order to the giving some gloss to that part of their Information
wherein they swear my Lord cut his own Throat, that Friday should be mentioned
tho with never so much incongruity and absurdness. How conspicuous is the
righteousness of God in suffering a villain who had first consented to the
murdering his Master, if not assisted in it, and then undertaken to transferr'
the crime and infamy from the Assassinates and charge it upon his innocent
Lord, so evidently to contradict himself in what he swears, as thereby to
afford the world an uncontroulabl' demonstration both of the falsehood of his
own Deposition, and of his Masters being guiltless of what he accused him.

And as the many contradictions of one kind and another, which occurr' in the
informations of the Witnesses, do as so many prints and Footsteps lead and
conduct us to other Authors and Instruments of my Lords death than himself, so
the many irregularities which were committed about the ^ody by those who had
the oversight and custody of it, before the Coroner's Inquest had sat upon it,
administer unto us new proofs that the Earl of Essex was not Felo de se, but
that he was treacherously and barbarously murdered by the hands of bloody and
suborned Ruffians. By the custom of all Nations which is equivalent to a
common and Universal Law, but most especially by the known and alwaise
practiced Custom of England, the Body of a person found dead and supposed to
have come to an untimely End, ought (if it be possibl') to lie in the place and
posture that it is found, till the Coroners Jury have sat upon the Body and
inquired into the manner of the persons death. Nor can we think that those in
the House, where my Lord was killed and found dead, could be ignorant of this
custom', seeing it is so well and universally known to the meanest and most
ignorant people of the Nation. Neither is there any thing more adapted and
proper, as well as needful toward a discovery whether a person have fallen by
his own hands or the hands of others, than this received custom and practice
is upon many frequent and repeated experiences found to have been. For how many
circumstances not only may but do often occurr' from an observation of the Site
and posture wherein the Body is found, from an inspection of the marks, tokens,
and impressions left upon the Clothes which the party destroyed wore, and from
a view of the Footsteps, Symtom's, and Signs, which the place where the Fact
was committed and the Body fell may yield and afford; all which may have their
usefulness and tendency to give light unto the Jury that is to sit upon the
Body, and whose Du'ty and Office it is to make inquiry into the manner of the
persons death. But least the Earl of Essex should have been found to have come
to his End after an other manner, and by other way's and means, than was safe
or convenient for some people to have known and believed, therefor' were all
things otherwise carried, and the custom' of the Nation in cases of this Nature
not only neglected and despised, but with the greatest impudence imaginabl'
violated and acted contrary unto. For besides their taking my Lords Body out of
the Closet where it was found and by consequence ought to have lain, they did
not only uncloath, stripp, and wash it; but also wash both the Closet where it
was found, and the lodging chamber into and through which we must suppose the
persons to have come, if any assassination was by the violent hands of others
committed upon him. Yea and as if all this had not been too daring in it self,
and enough to administer a just suspicion to all mankind of some villainy
perpetrated upon the person of this Nobl' Lord; they proceeded further even to
the carrying away the very Clothes which they would not so much as allow the
Jury to see, tho some of the Coroners Inquest had the wit and seeming ingenuity
as to call for them. I do not affirm nor would I have it thought, that all
these irregularities were committed before the Coroner himself saw the Body,
for I have been well informed and am fully satisfied to the contrary, and have
reason to believe that he was prevailed upon to consent and give way to the
do'ing of these absurd and illegal things. But that which I assert and which
will be proved if occasion be, both by the several members of the Jury it self,
and by diverse other persons who saw the Body before the time of the Coroners
inquisition, is that these irregularities were committed and done, ere ever the
Jury, who were to be the judges of the manner of my Lord Essex's death, were
admitted or indeed could be to the sight of the Corpse. For as the Coroners
Inquest neither sat upon, nor saw the Body till the 14 of July in the forenoon;
so all these irregular things had been don' the 13 being the same day on which
my Lord was killed. Now besides many other circumstances which the Jury might
have observed detective of and serving to discover the manner of my Lord
Essex's death, had all things been suffered to remain as they were at the
moment when his Body was found, and as they ought according to the custom of
the Kingdom and the practice in all cases of that Nature to have done, there
would have appeared three remarkabl' things to them, which had served to
convince all men who had a spark of Reason or degree of honesty, that this
great and honorabl' Peer did not destroy himself, but was Massacred by hired
and suborned Ruffians. The first whereof would have been the print of a bloody
foot upon one of my Lords Stockins, which seeing it could not be an impression
made by himself, must necessarily have been the effect of a most perfidious
cruelty exercised upon him by others. Nor is this a fiction of mine raised to
vindicate the memory of the E. of Essex from the guilt and infamy of so base
and enormous a Crime, nor given out to baffle and discredit the belief of the
late Plot, and deliver the Conspirators from the reproach and danger which that
pretended Combination had derived upon them, much less is it invented to defame
the King, cast an aspersion upon the Government and inflame the Nation, but
there are ey' Witnesses ready to swear it; and one as remote from all
likelihood of being the Author of a groundless and Romantic Fabl' as any man,
affirmed it before the Coroner and Jury when they sat upon an Inquisition into
the manner of my Lords death. For Samuel Peck a Servant of the Earl of Essex's,
and who had just brought the provisions which Bomeny by my Lords Order had
written to the Steward for, as the perfidious Rascal was running down Stairs
crying out that my Lord had killed himself, and that he had found his Body dead
in the Closet, did thereupon being surprised by Bomenies report run up into the
Chamber, where he saw his Master lying in the Closet with a great part of his
Legs reaching out of the Closet door, and the print of a bloody foot upon one
of his Stockins, which so far convinced this honest and unbiaz'd man of
violence committed upon the Earl of Essex's person, that he immediately cried
out they have murdered my Lord. Nor is Peck the only Witness whom we can
produce to testify this, but there are others also ready to confirm it upon
Oath, whenever his Majesty will be pleased to take them into his protection
and indemnifie them from the accession they are guilty of to that horrid and
bloody murder. But before I dimiss Peck, there is one thing further observabl',
namely that having among other things brought wine for my Lords own drinking,
Russel and others of that fellow's stamp and complexion who stood by, fell a
jeering the poor man, telling him the wine came too late for my Lord to drink,
but that he had brought it very seasonably for his Funeral. Nor is this the
only circumstance which would have affoorded the Coroners Jury matter of
evidence and light as to the manner of the Earl of Essex death, had not the
Body been meddled with, but suffered to continue in the place and posture as it
fell; but there would have appeared a second circumstance of as great
importance and signification in it self, and as serviceabl' as the former to
have discovered the barbarous violence committed upon this innocent and
excellent person. For not only Mary Johnson the woman who was then Servant in
the Warders house where my Lord was a prisoner, and who affirms that she saw my
Lords Body as soon as either Bomeny or Russel did, but several other persons
besides her, have confessed that the Neck or midd'l of my Lords Cravat was cut
in four pieces. Surely if my Lord (as Bomeny tells us) had taken off his
periwig and hung it up, because as the Villain would have the world believe, he
could not so conveniently have cut his Throat with the Periwig on, he would for
the same reason have much rather laid aside his Cravat, being no less than
three times about his Neck, and more apt to hinder the accomplishment of that
unnatural Fact which the infidous and perjured Rascal has endeavored to
father upon him, than the Periwig was. And therefor' as it is unreasonabl' to
think other wise, but that the Earl of Essex would have laid by his Cravat,
had he designed to commit that violence upon himself; so it gives just
suspicion that he was assassinated by others that his Cravat was about his
Neck, and c(...) thorough in so many places. And whenever this affair' of my
Lord of Essex's death comes to be admitted to a fair and indifferent hearing,
and a pardon vouchsafed to such as shall give evidence, it will be fully proved
that the bloody Miscreants came provided and furnished with an Instrument which
was able to conquer the resistance, which a Cravat, tho thrice rolled about the
Neck was abl' to give it. And whereas one Webster Bailiff of the Tower liberty,
being a person who assisted Mary Johnson in stripping my Lords Body, has
pretended to some that it was he who cut the Cravat as not being abl' readily
to untye it; this may be easily demonstrated to be a story purposely forged
toward the avoiding the suspicion, which the circumstance of the Cravats being
cut by the same Instrument and stroke that gave my Lord the fatal and deadly
wound, would have both begotten and cherished in the Minds of unbiaz'd Men. For
besides that Mary Johnson who in conjunction with Webster stripped the Body,
has often asserted the contrary to this which Webster reports and gives out,
it was not possibl' that the Cravat should be thrice about my Lords Neck when
the wound and Gash was made from the Neck Bone behind the one jugular to the
Neck Bone behind the other jugular; and not at all cut or touched by the
Instrument wherewith that large and deadly wound was given. And as my Lords
Cravat could not be tied harder than he tied it himself, without the
intervention of some violent hand that had endeavored to choke him with it to
hinder and prevent his crying out; so we cannot suppose that my Lord himself
had tied it so hard, but that it might have been easily loosed and untyed
without cutting of it. And as it was impossibl' that my Lords Neck should swell
after the Gullet and both the jugulars were cut, which if it could have don'
might have been a means and occasion of the Cravats being more strait' and
closs about his Neck, so no rational man can apprehend, but that had it been
never so strait', they would have taken pains and found a way to untye it,
especially having a prospect of enjoying it themselves, it being usual in
England that they who stripp a dead Body are recompensed with the gift and
possession of all the Clothes which they find about it. And therefor' as
Websters pretending to have cut the Cravat when he assisted in stripping the
Body, is both a confirmation that it was about my Lords Neck when he was
killed, and that it was cut into so many pieces as I have declared; so the
having made it evident that this pretense of Webster as to his cutting the
Cravat at such a time is a forgery and fiction of his own, I may from the whole
very justifiably conclude, that this Report was invented to suppress the
evidence and light which this circumstance would have given into the manner of
my Lord Essex's death, and to prevent the questioning such as might thereupon
have been suspected and apprehended for assassinating and murdering that
virtuous and Nobl' Peer. But besides the two forego'ing circumstances which
would have served to detect the manner of my Lords death, and the violence
which had been used to bring him to his untimely End, there was a Third of as
great weight and moment as either of them, which had the Body been suffered to
continue in the place, posture, and condition as it fell, would have clearly
discovered the perjury of Bomeny and Russel, and wonderfully contributed to the
unvailing and laying open the whole Mystery of this barbarous murder. For
whereas both Bomeny and Russel not only swear that the Closet door where my
Lord fell, was locked when they came up to it, but that upon opening the door
they found him lying all along on the Closet Floor; Peck the Servant that had
brought the provisions to my Lord just as Bomeny pretended to have found him
dead, and who upon Bomeny's meeting him on the stairs and telling him that my
Lord had killed himself, run immediately into the Chamber, is ready to depose
upon Oath that he saw the Earl of Essex 's Body lying in the Closset with a
great part of his legs without the Closet door. Which Testimony as it shows
the falsehood of those two Rascals Informations in swearing that the Closet door
was locked when they came first up to it; so it ought to have credit given
thereunto, as proceeding from one that could hope for no advantage by telling a
lie, nor fear any danger from declaring the Truth, while on the contrary Russel
and Bomeny were suborned and bribed to attest a forged story, and knew
themselves liable to be hanged for their accession to my Lord's murder, had
they related the matter as it really was. Yea this posture wherein Peck
declares he found my Lord's Body, namely, three quarters of it lying in the
Closet, and one quarter out of it, must have awakened the Ju^y had they seen it
in that condition, to suspect and apprehend, that some preceding violence had
been offered to his person near the Closet door. But as the removing and
stripping the Body, and washing both it and the two Rooms before ever the
Coroner's Inquest was admitted either to see it, or to view those places where
the Tragedy had been acted, deprived them of the knowledge of the fo^egoing
circumstances, (and possibly of many others as weighty and important) which
would have served to have led them into this Mystery, and enlightened them about
the manner of my Lord Essex's death, so nothing can be more convictive of some
violent and unlawful course and means, made use of to bring him to that
deplorable and untimely End, than the irregularities committed upon and about
the Body, before the Jury either sat upon, or so much as saw it.

That which we advance unto in the next place, as fresh matter of proof that
the Earl of Essex was not Felo de se, but that he perished by the violent hands
of bloody Assassinates, arises partly from the carriage of the Jury it self,
which was trusted with the Inquisition into the manner of his Death, and who as
men of little Sense or Reason, and of less Justice and Honesty, gave in upon
Oath, that he did voluntarily and feloniously cut his own Throat; and partly
from the behavior of others toward the Jury bo^^ in consining and abridging
them to a shorter time than was necessary to a s^itable and thorough Enquiry
into so great an Affair, and in denying and withholding from them those means
of being enlightened in that matter, which it was their Duty to require, and the
Duty of others to grant, and without which they could not judge themselves
enabled to give a t(...)e and just Verdict concerning the manner of that Noble
Man's death. And the f^r^^ thing that occurs in the carriage of the Jury, which
makes it suspected that even they did judge the manner of the Earl of Essex's
death a business of too much hazard to enquire narrowly into, was their
partiality in examining those few Witnesses which they called before them, and
their giving too hasty and undeserved credit to two Fellows of whom they had
reason to be jealous as interested in that murder, against the information of
an honest and unbiased person. With what not only coldness but apparent
loathness to be truly informed, did they examine Peck, as if they had dreaded
to hear any thing which might shake their belief of the Earl of Essex's having
killed himself, or which might oblige them to accuse and charge others with the
guilt of his murder, while in the mean time they greedily hearkened to
whatsoever Bomeny and Russel swore, though stuffed with all the inconsistencies and
contradictions imaginable? How little esteem and value did they set upon the
information of poor Peck, though they could not but know that he was a man whom
none could have endeavored to prepossess, and who was neither under the
influence of hope or fear to testify any thing but what he saw; while in the
interim they paid an implicit faith to the self and one another contradicting
depositions of Bomeny and Russel, whom they might easily have suspected not
only to have been prompted and taught what they were to say, but to have been
both deterred by the apprehension of punishment from declaring the Truth, and
swayed by Rewards to swear and publish a Falsehood? But there is a Second thing
wherein the Jury were partial and defective in their Enquiry into the manner of
the Earl of Essex's death, and which by consequence shows that if not all of
them, yet some, and they such as conducted the rest, did either know or were
jealous of a mystery in the way of that Noble Man's coming to his fatal end,
which they were not willing, and judged it not for their interest to dive too
far into. For albeit there were more persons than Russel and Bomeny then in the
house when my Lord's Throat was cut, yet I do not find that they did, or were
willing to examine any others. Now amongst those that were in Hawley's house at
that season when that bloody Fact was committed upon this honorable Peer,
there was one Mary Johnson, who amongst many other things which she declares,
affirms particularly that being just entered my Lords Chamber as Russel and
Bomeny were opening the Closet door, she saw the Body as soon as either of them
did; and yet this Woman, whom the Cor^ner's Inquest were bound by the ^aws of
Justice as well as the Rules of Prudence to have examined, was never so much as
called upon, nor asked a Question concerning that matter in a judicial way. And
we have the more reason to complain of the Juries neglect, and infidelity in
this particular, because she has often reported, and prosesseth her self ready
to depose upon Oath, diverse things, which are wholly inconsistent with what
Russel and Bomeny have informed. For while they depose that they found my
Lord's Body lying along in the Closet, and the Razor lying by him on the Floor,
this Woman, Mary Johnson, both has and does still report, that my Lord of
Essex was found kneeling on both his knees with his Body leaning against the
Wall, and that the Razor was in his hand, the blade being lying upon his
Forefinger, and the handle hanging down between that Finger and the Thumb. And
while they swear that it was not above a quarter of an hour and a half, from
Bomeny 's delivering the Razor to his Master, till the time of their finding
him dead in the Closet; She positively avers and affirms, that the Body when at
first found was cold and st^ff, which it could not be at that season of the
year in a much longer time than their Informations do specify and allow. I do
not say that what she affirms was true, no more than I believe that what they
inform was so; but I say the contrariety which (had she been examined) would
have appeared in her Testimony to theirs, might have served to convince the
Jury, and is sufficient to satisfy all mankind, that things were not as they
are declared by any of them, but that the manner of my Lord's death, and the
posture wherein the Body was found, being otherwise than was safe for them to
disclose and reveal, each of them in order to hide and conceal the Truth, and
for the sheltering both themselves and others from Justice, framed a story of
their own concerning that matter, whence it came to pass that they so widely
differed one from another in their several and respective Reports. And as the
carriage and behavior of the Jury in their Inquisition after the manner of the
Earl of Essex's death, does plainly show that there was a secret and hidden
villainy in that matter which some of them were either forbidden or afraid to
ravel into; so it serves to depress and take off the credit of that Verdict
which they gave in concerning his having murdered himself. But let us in the
next place observe and consider the behavior of other persons, and those
acting by no meaner Authority than of great men, toward the Coroner's Inquest
when they were met and sat upon the Body; and we shall from thence also be
furnished with new proofs and further evidence, that the Earl of Essex did not
destroy himself, but was brought to his unfortunate and untimely end, by
Instruments whom they would not have known, and by means which they durst not
admit to have narrowly searched into. For whereas according to the saying of
the Poet, which my Lord Chancellor Finch was pleased to quote at the Trial of
my Lord Stafford, Nulla unquam de morte hominis cunctatio longa est. Juven. Sat
6.
That we can hardly proceed slowly, nor search diligently enough in what
concerns the life or death of a man; so there were many singular and weighty
reasons, arising from the worth and quality of the person, the place and
condition my Lord of Essex was then in, the benefit or prejudice which were
likely to ensue to others, as his death should be found to be compassed by this
or that means, which should have influenced the Jury to use all the utmost
scrutiny and diligence imaginable in their Enquiry into the manner of that
Noble Man's death. But instead of this, the Jury was little sooner met (which by
the way was at a public house in the Tower, whither the Coroner had adjourned
them after they had seen the Body) than a Message was sent them to make haste
in their Inquisition, because one waited to carry it to the King. Not that I
would persuade the World they had any Authority from His Majesty to use such an
Expression, or that the King was not willing they should take time to examine
things thoroughly as well as with gravity and leisure, but that there were some
great men and very near his person who gave order to make use of his name, in
order to the preventing the reproach and public guilt, which a due, calm,
impartial, and leisurely Enquiry of the Jury into that matter, would have
subjected and made them obnoxious unto. Nor can I believe that Hawly the
Warder, who was one of those that sent the forementioned Message to the Jury,
either would or durst have done it, and much less have named the King, but that
he had express Command and Warrant from some in power for the doing of it, and
that there were some men of the first quality, who for reasons well known to
themselves, were exceeding backward and averse to the having the manner of the
Earl of Essex's death too critically searched into. But besides the method
which I have mentioned that was used toward the Jury to hinder a due
Inquisition into the matter they were met about, and to frighten and intimidate
them from tracing things too far, there was a second passage, and much more
astonishing than the former, in the behavior of some people toward the
Coroner's Inquest while they were assembled and sitting about the Earl of
Essex's death. For one of the Jury having observed, that though they had been
admitted to view the Body, yet they had not seen the Clothes which my Lord wore
when he was killed, but that they had been taken off, and were carried away,
did thereupon ask to see the Clothes which my Lord had on when that unfortunate
thing fell out, and in which he was found dead. One would think that a more
modest, just, and necessary demand could not have been made; and I take the
confidence to say, the Jury ought not to have proceeded to a Verdict till they
had been complied with in it, unless upon the denial of so righteous a Request,
and the refusal of a matter that was so necessary as well as useful to inform
them, they had proceeded as in duty and conscience they ought, to acquit my
Lord from having committed any violence upon himself, and have cast this horrid
Murder upon others. - For instead of being gratified in the demand of seeing
the Clothes, the Coroner was immediately called into the next Room, where some
Gentlemen were attending (and amongst others the person I have just now
mentioned) who having overheard what was asked for, severely checked and
rebuked him for suffering such Questions to be proposed. And this mercenary, or
at least cowardly Soul, Farnham the Coroner (if I may so call him, being but
the Coroner's Deputy) returning back to the Jury after he had received the
reprimand and rebuke, told them, they were called to sit on my Lord's Body, and
not on his Clothes, and that it was sufficient they had seen the Body, and
received an Account upon Oath how it was found. O faithless and nonsensical
Man! as if because they were to sit upon the Body, they might not be allowed a
view of the Clothes in which it was arrayed, when this noble Person received
his fatal and deadly Wound. But stupid Fool, whom if thy Place and Office had
not made an Esquire, thy honesty and wit never would; did thou think that it
was merely the Body of the Earl of Essex thou wast to sit upon, whilst thy
business, man, was to enquire by what means, and after what manner my Lord
himself came to that unnatural, violent, and untimely end. And therefore as
thou sat upon the Body merely in order to the receiving light and information
into the manner how my Lord's Person came to be destroyed, so if thou had not
renounced Conscience as well as Courage, thou would have desired a sight of
the Clothes in subservency and order to the same end. Nor can any rational
person otherwise judge, why the Body, was first stripped, and the Clothes
afterward with held from the view of the Jury when demanded by one of them to
be seen, but because something or other remarkable would have been found upon
and about them, which would have overthrown the Informations of Bomenie and
Russel, and made appear my Lord's being murdered by others, instead of
perishing by his own hands.

To all that we have hitherto said in vindication of the Earl of Essex from the
guilt and infamy of having been a F^lon of himself, and in proof that he was
most treacherously as well as barbarously murdered by others; we shall in the
next place give an account of some remarkable passages which were observed in
the Tower that Morning my Lord was killed, which will not only inform us there
was something requiring great secrecy then transacting, but will conduct us
home to the Authors and Authorizers of that villainous, and ever to be abhorred
Assassination. The first thing then remarkable was, That the Gate at the lower
end of those Apartments in the Tower where the Earl of Essex and all the other
Gentlemen committed for the late pretended Plot, were lodged and secured, and
which always used to stand open from Morning to Evening, was all that Morning
kept shut till after my Lord of Essex was dead, except that it was once opened
to let out my Lord Russel to his Trial, being immediately after he was gone,
locked up again. And as this could not escape the sight of the persons who were
then confined, so it gave that surprise to some of them, being a thing which
had not fallen out before, that one Gentleman in particular called to his
Warder and asked him the meaning of it, and received for answer, That there was
special Order given for it. Nor is it difficult to guess the reason of the
Order, and upon what Motives, and in reference to what end, command was given
for keeping the said Gate shut up all that Morning till after the Earl of Essex
was killed. For the Stage and Theater upon which the bloody Tragedy was to be
acted, being within that Gate, it was needful to keep people out as much as
they could, to prevent the discovery of the Actors, unless it were such as had
their parts in some of the Scenes, or would be sure to give their Plaudite to
the whole. A second passage very remarkable, which was observed in the Tower
that Morning, and which speaks as loud to the matter we are upon as the former,
was, that the King and Duke having been at the Lieutenant's house, which is
about the middle of the Alley where my Lord of Essex and the rest were
imprisoned; and having stood in a Balcony with a few attending them to see my
Lord Russel pass by to his Trial; the Duke did soon after, with several waiting
upon him, withdraw from the King down into the Alley the Gate whereof was still
kept shut. Surely it could not be the pleasure of the walk that made the Duke
leave his Majesty at that season, but he had something to give Order about, and
to see the managing of, which was of more moment than his Prince's company, and
which his heart was infinitely more set upon. The Third and last thing which
fell under the observation of diverse then in the Tower, was, That the Duke
having withdrawn from the King, there were several persons immediately sent and
dismissed from his very side toward the Earl of Essex's lodgings, wh^ returned
not till after the death of that Noble person, that they came and gave an
account of the obedience they had paid to his Highness's commands, and that the
Earl of Essex was killed, pretending he had cut his own Throat, thereby
murdering his Memory after they had assassinated his Person. It may be expected
that I should here mention the Names of those that were sent upon that
barbarous errand, but there being some of them who may be improved and made
serviceable to detect the villainous crime they were assisting to commit, it is
but Justice to our selves as well as to them to conceal their Names: And to
publish the Names of the rest, were but to set a mark upon the former, and
expose them to the rage and power of St. James's by not proclaiming them in
conjunction with the others. But this offer I renew again both to his Majesty
and his Ministers of Justice, that if a melius inquirendum into the manner of
my Lord Essex's death, may be ordered, and an Indemnity granted to such as
shall be willing and able to detect by whom and how he was murdered, then shall
the Names not only of the Russians who committed the bloody Fact, but the Names
of the Conspirators who were the Contrivers, Authors, and Encouragers of it, he
both discovered to his Majesty and judicial Officers, and published to all the
World.

The only thing which remains to be discoursed of, in confirmation of the Earl
of Essex's being murdered by others, and that he was not Felo de se, is that of
a bloody Razor's being thrown out of his chamber Window before any noise of his
Death, or the least intimation that he was killed. And indeed this of a bloody
Razors being thrown out of his Window, has already made a great clamor in the
World, and was the first thing which raised a suspicion that my Lord had not
destroyed himself, but that he was assassinated by others. For as it was
impossible that after his Throat was cut he should throw it out himself, so it
could not be cast forth by others before the body is pretended to be found, or
any declaration made that he was killed, unless it was by such as were present
in the Room when he was slain, and who were instrumental in his Murder. Nor can
any account be given why they did it, but that God infatuated them, thereby to
detect the villainy they had committed. And it seems they had no sooner
recollected themselves, but they were sensible it would not serve the end they
had designed it unto, namely of making the world believe he had cut his own
Throat, and in revenge upon the Instrument wherewith it was done, thrown it
away after the deed was performed, and therefore they immediately both caused
it to be taken up, and carried back into the Closet, and have had the impudence
ever since to deny that ever such a thing was done. Nor can the Story which a
certain Gentleman at Whitehal had formed for them, stand them in any stead,
viz. That Bomeny finding my Lord dead in the Closet, and the Razor which had
been the Instrument of his Death, lying by him, and that thereupon being struck
with Surprise and Astonishment at so unexpected and deplorable an Accident, he
took up the Razor, being acted by Grief and Indignation, and not minding what
he did, threw it out of the Window. For besides that the Razor was thrown out
of the Window before there was the least noise of my Lord's death; this Gloss
and Qualification was invented too late to serve the end it was designed unto,
seeing Bomeny's and Russel's Examinations with which it is inconsistent, were
public before. Now in proving that a Razor was thrown out of my Lord Essex's
Window before the news and tidings of his Death, I would not be thought to
acknowledge that it was a Razor wherewith the mortal and deplorable Wound was
given him, being well assured that it was with an Instrument much more proper
for the purpose than that would have been; but that which I intend by the proof
hereof is partly the overthrow and subversion of Bomeny's and Russel's
Informations, upon which the inquisition and verdict of the Coroner's Inquest
was built, and partly to establish and evidence that antecedently to the noise
and report of my Lord's death, there were some persons in the Chamber where he
was killed: Which last if once obtained, it will, I suppose, be thence readily
granted that they were not there to be idle Spectators of my Lords cutting his
own Throat, but that their business was to perpetrate themselves that barbarous
Fact upon him, though for the concealing their guilt, and avoiding the justice
and severity of the Law, they have endeavored to cast the reproach and infamy
of it upon that innocent and injured person. The first who reported and
divulged the Story of a bloody Razor's being thrown out of the E. of Essex's
Window before there was any news of my Lord's death, was one William Edwards a
Youth between thirteen and fourteen years of age, who having heard as he was
going to School that the King and Duke were in the Tower, went in to see them,
and continuing there sometimes in one place and sometimes in another all that
morning, came home about ten of the Clock to his Mother, and told the Earl of
Essex was killed; and that while he the said Edwards stood near the Earl's
Lodgings looking up toward his Chamber-window, he saw a Hand cast out a bloody
Razor, which being going to take up, there came a short Maid or Woman with a
white hood on her head cut of Captain Hawley 's House where the Earl lay, and
took up the Razor, which she immediately carried into the Captain's H^use, and
run up stairs, and that soon after he heard one cry out murder* All this the
B^y has frequently repeated and averred to his Father, Mother, Sister, and to
one Mrs. Burt, as well as to Mr. Braddon, as those four persons deposed upon
Oath at Mr. Braddon's Trial, yea, the very B^y himself did confess and
acknowledge in Court that he had said and reported it. It Is true, that after he
had often affirmed it, he was at last by the flatteries of some, and the
menaces of others, brought to say he saw no such thing as a bloody Razor thrown
out of the Earl of Essex's window, but that the whole which he had reported
relating thereunto was seigned and invented by himself. For having been told by
his Sister, that through persevering in his first Report he would not only
ruin his Father and the Family, but that he would bring both himself and his
Father to be hanged; he thereupon under the influence of dread and fear
retracted what he had before affirmed. But whether there ought not more credit
to be given to his Affirmation, than to his Denial, I dare refer it to the
judgment of all impartial men, who have either heard of the Methods used
toward the Boy at the Council Board, or who have read the carriage and
behavior of my Lord Chief Justice and the Court of Kings Bench in this matter
at the Trial of Mr. Braddon. And as I was amazed my self on the perusal of the
Trial, to observe with what impudence and barefacedness they not only
discovered the means used by others to influence the Boy to forswear himself,
but the arts and tricks in hussing on the one side, and cajoling on the other,
whereby the very Bench drew him into and cherished him in perjury; to I never
had the fortune to speak with a man that was wise or honest, but he was forced
to acknowledge that the Boy's first Report in saying he saw a bloody Razor
thrown out of the Earl of Essex's window, seemed natural, plain, candid, and
true, whilst his denying what he had so often affirmed to have seen, appeared
evidently to be wheedled out of him, or by reason of the dread and fear
wherewith they had possessed him, wrested and extorted from him. How gross as
well as unbecoming was it for my L. Chief Justice, when old Mr. Edwards had
upon his Child's being sworn, Braddon's Trial, p. 17.
charged him in the presence of Almighty God to speak the Truth, and nothing
but the Truth, I say for my L. C. Justice to bid the Child turn about, and say,
Father, be sure you say nothing but the Truth. For as the Father's command to
his Son does plainly intimate the jealousy he was under concerning the Boy's
being wrought upon to perjure himself; so the Reply which my Lord Chief Justice
advised the Child to make to his Father, did besides the irreverence toward a
Parent whereof it savoured, directly insinuate the apprehensions he had lest
the Father's Christian Counsel should fortify the Child to assert the Truth.
How palpably as well as shamefully did my Lord Chief Justice betray and reveal
their entangling the Boy to swear a lie, by the rage as well as
superciliousness wherewith he treated Mr. Wallop (a person not only to whose
age honor is due, but who in all the qualifications of a Gentleman, and the
accomplishments of a Scholar in all other Learning as well as the Law,
infinitely transcends and exceeds his Lordship) and for no other reason but
because Mr. Wallop would have asked young Mrs. Edwards Braddon's Trial, p. 43.
whether she had not told her Brother that the King would hang his Father if he
did not deny what he had so often affirmed to have seen. And though it was a
Question, the answering whereof would have unfolded and laid open the means by
which the Boy was wrought to retract what he had formerly declared, and would
have confirmed the truth of his first Report, yet my L. C. Justice instead of
suffering any Answer to be given to it, not only upbraided that ancient,
learned, and worthy Gentleman, as if he had intended to have charged the King
with a design of hanging men, or else of making them deny the Truth (both which
were far from his thoughts and the intention of the Question) but having huff'd
and hectored him, did threaten him with the animadversion and correction of the
Court for reflecting upon and aspersing the Government. Nor is young Edwards
the only one who has declared that he saw a bloody Razor thrown out of the
Earl of Essex's window before any noise or rumor of his death; but there is
also a Girl, one Jane Lodeman, of about thirteen years of age, who being in the
Tower that Morning the Earl of Essex was killed, and standing over against his
Lodgings, came home and told both her Aunt and others about ten of the Clock,
that it was reported the Earl of Essex had cut his Throat, and that she had
seen a hand cast a bloody Razor out of the window where the people said that my
Lord lodged. And as this Girl had no acquaintance with or knowledge of the
former Boy, and consequently they could not agree together to form and invent a
Romantic and fabulous Story, nor to concert the particulars which they were to
report; so it is observable that their Relations do harmonise and accord in all
the main heads, and only seem to differ in one thing, which the Girls
unacquaintedness with the several parts of the house where my Lord lodged led
her into a mistake about. For they both agree that there was a Razor thrown out
of the Chamber window before Murder cried out, and that this Razor was bloody,
and that immediately there came a short Maid or Woman out of the house with a
white hood upon her head, who went toward the place where the Razor fell;
which as they are all the material things requisite to the confirmation of the
Fact, so being wholly strangers to one another, they could not beforehand
concert them, nor agree the things they should report. Had one said it was a
Knife that was thrown out of the window, while the other had affirmed that it
was a Razor; or had one denied it to be bloody, while the other had reported
that it was so; or had the one mentioned a Man as having come out of the house
toward it, while the other spoke of a Woman, there would have been then some
reason for the Ridiculing it as a Fiction, seeing the contradicting one another
in the essential circumstances of the Report, would have detected the falsehood
of the Reporters. And it must argue great perverseness as well as strange
prepossession of Mind, to pretend to disbelieve the Story because the Children
seem to vary one from another in a little and minute thing, when in the mean
time there is the greatest harmony imaginable between them in all that is of
moment for the establishment and assurance of he realty of the Fact. And
therefore whereas toward invalidating the Girls Testimony, it was objected by
my L. Chief Justice Jeffreys that she should say the Razor was thrown out of
the Closet window, when the Boy had said Braddon's Trial, p 69.
that it was thrown out at the Chamber window; this pretended inconsistency
between the two may be easily removed to the satisfaction of all rational men,
and the eternal reproach and infamy of Sir George Jeffreys. For indeed she said
no such thing, nor did she know the Closet window from the Chamber window, nor
so much as which was my Lord's Chamber but as she heard declared by the
Standers by. All that the Girl did affirm was, that Bradd. Trial, p. 47, 48.
she saw a hand throw a bloody Razor out of a window, which as the people
discoursed belonged to the house where the E. of Essex lodged. Nor did the
objection arise from what the Child her self deposed in Court, but it was
started from the Deposition of one Glasbrook, who informed of the Girls having
told her Aunt that the E. of Essex had cut his Throat, and that she was sure of
it because she saw him throw the Razor out of the window, and that it was all
bloody. Now because the Closet was the place where my Lord was found dead, they
would infer that she meant the Closet window, and thereupon conclude the Story
to be false, both because of the impossibility that himself should throw the
Razor out, and the contrariety which they would have supposed to be in this
expression to what the Boy had reported. Whereas the phrase does only show the
simplicity of the Child, but does no ways argue the falsity of the Report. And
the account which She gave of the place where She stood, namely, Braddon's
Trial, p. 47.
in that part of the Tower called the Mount, plainly shows that she could not
mean the Closet window, but the window of the Chamber. And had the Court of the
Kings Bench had but the justice and integrity which became men in their places,
one Question of the Judges, and the Child's Answer to it, would have clearly
decided whether she meant the Closet window, or that of the Chamber. For had
they but asked her, whether the window out of which the Razor was thrown, stood
toward the Forestreet or the Back yard, the Objection would have immediately
vanished; seeing considering the place where the Child was then standing, she
must have answered, that it looked toward the Fore-street; nor was it possible
for her to see any thing thrown out of the Closet window, unless she had stood
in the Back-yard, which she neither did, nor was so much as ever there. But by
the asking such a question, Sir George Jeffreys would have lost the advantage
not only of ridiculing the whole matter about the Razor, and of devolving the
murder of the Earl of Essex upon himself, but of skreening the Malefactors from
Justice, and possibly of ruining Mr. Braddon, which were things of too great
concernment to St. James's, to let an occasion and pretense of compassing them
escape him, especially at the cost of a little Meekness, Patience, and Justice
in his Lordship in receiving a Deposition, and examining a Witness. Now this
Objection advanced by my Lord Chief Justice against the Truth of the Girls
Testimony, being fully and to the satisfaction of all impartial men removed and
taken off, all that absurd and nonsensical stuff, which through his having
wrested the Child's words, he superstructs upon his own Dreams and Fictions,
does of its own accord, and without its being needful for me to interpose any
thing by way of remark upon it, fall to the ground. Nor will any man of common
sense henceforth imagine that the Coach which the Child says she saw at the
Door, must therefore have been in the Back-yard, and consequently been droven
through the narrow Entry and Door of the House; seeing it is evident from what
has been here discoursed, that she meant the Fore-door and not the Back, and
to that there was no difficulty of access. Bradd. Trial, p. 58. 69.
And with the same ease may all that Captain Hawley and my Lord Chief Justice
declare about the height of the Pales, and the impossibility of throwing any
thing out of the Closet window over them, and especially of seeing it when
thrown over and lying upon the ground, be dissipated and blown away, because it
was not the Pales encompassing the Back-yard which the Girl's Testimony
referred unto, but those to which her Deposition related, are the Pales which
face and sense the forepart and front of the House. O the Chicanery and
fraudulency of a mercenary Lawyer, instead of the uprightness and integrity of
a just and impartial Judge! Nor could my L. C. Justice have taken a more
expeditious and effectual course to proclaim his own Villainy, than he has
done, by endeavoring to ridicule and expose this poor Child's Testimony in the
foregoing particular. And whereas Braddon's Trial p. 45.
Mr. Justice Holloway was pleased to except against the De^o^tion of the Girl
in another particular, namely, that whilst she swore the Razor fell within the
Pales, the Boy had said that it fell without them; I do return this by way of
Answer to it: First, that the Reports of the two Children are much more easy
to be reconciled, than the Observation of Mr. Justice H^lloway upon this point,
is to be reconciled with that of my Lord Chief Justice Jefferys concerning the
same. For whereas Justice H^lloway would have the contradiction between the
Informations of the Children to lie in this, Bradd. Trial p. 45. compared with
p 69.
That the Girl said the Razor fell within the Pales, and the Boy said it fell
without; my Lord Chief Justice will have it to lie in the Girl's saying the
Razor was thrown on the outside, while the Boy had said it was thrown on the
inside. I am sure one of these two Judges must be mistaken, seeing it is
impossible that two accounts of the same thing so clearly contradictory the one
to the other, can be true. And indeed the mistake lies with my Lord Chief
Justice Jefferys (whom passion had transported to that degree, that he neither
duly minded what himself or others said) in affirming that the Girl should say,
the Razor was thrown on the outside the Pales, when she had expressly sworn
that it was thrown on the inside of them. But then, 2. as to the inconsistency
between what the Boy informed, and that which the Girl deposed; I say that
young Edwards had both in words, and by imitating the posture and motion of the
hand out of which the Razor fell, frequently declared that it was cast on the
inside of the Pales. His Father, Mother, and several others are ready to
depose, that when he first told the Story of the Razor, he expressed it by
saying that it dropped out of a hand from the E. of Essex's Window, which did
plainly signify that he meant it fell on the inside of the Pales. And
whenever he used to imitate the motion of the hand from which the Razor fell,
he did put it into such a downright posture, as that all who observed his
imitating what he saw done, concluded that the Razor fell on the inside the
Pales. Nor was he ever heard to say that it fell on the outside of the Pales,
save only that time that Mr. Braddon took his information in writing, when his
Sister by endeavoring to threaten him into a denial of the whole matter he
saw, had put him into such a fright, that either he could not remember, or did
not mind every little circumstance of what he as well saw as had often reported
before. And it is remarkable that neither himself at Mr. Braddon's Trial, where
he repeated and acknowledged what he had formerly reported, nor any other
Witnesses who appeared at the said Trial to testify what they had heard him
say, did in the least mention his having at any time said that the Razor fell
on the outside of the Pales; but on the contrary his Mother does so word her
Deposition, as serves to prove that she believed he always meant the in side of
the Pales; for she swears, Trial p. 40.
that he said he saw a hand out of a Window and a Razor fall down. And as the
whole matter of a Razor's being thrown or let fall out of the Earl of Essex his
Window immediately before the noise of his death, will be attested by several
other persons when there is occasion; so the Sentinel Meak, whom we have
formerly mentioned, not only reported it to diverse persons both that Morning my
Lord was killed, and afterward, but he added two or three remarkable
Circumstances, some whereof the Boy had not taken notice of, nor the Girl
observed others. That which Meak then declared to three persons the very day my
Lord was killed, and which they are ready to swear when called thereunto, is,
That just before the Earl's death was publicly known, there was a bloody Razor
thrown out of his Chamber-window, which was seen by some of the Soldiers as
well as by others; and whilst a little Boy who had seen the Razor thrown out,
run toward it to take it up, a short Maid or Woman that came out of the house
where the Earl of Essex lodged, was to quick for the Boy, and snatched up the
Razor, and having run with it into the house, Murder was soon after cried out.
Thus we have not only a confirmation from a third person, that there was a
Razor thrown out of the Earl of Essex's Window before any tidings of his death,
and that a Boy went to take it up, but was prevented by a short Woman from
Captain Hawley's house, who took it up and run in with it, the last passage of
which the Girl had not observed; but we have also a ratification of a passage
the Girl swore, which the Boy gave no account of, namely, that there were
diverse other persons standing by who saw this bloody Razor thrown out of my
Lord of Essex's Chamber-window. Nor is it strange that every little thing
should not be equally minded by all, but it is enough to set this business
beyond the control of all rational men, that it has been declared by two
besides the Boy, whereof as none of them can be supposed under any prevalent
temptation to feign such a Story, so it was impossible that three persons,
altogether Strangers to one another, should at one and the same time, and in
three different places conspire and agree to report the same thing. But to all
these proofs drawn from the testimonies of several persons concerning a Razor's
being thrown out of the Earl of Essex's Window before the news of his death.
There is another evidence as convincing as any of them which may be derived
from the Razor of it self. And that is the several Gaps or Notches which were
sound in it when the Jury saw it, and had the account of its being found by my
Lord's Body, and of its being the Instrument wherewith, as they said, he had
cut his Throat. For besides one large Gap or Notch at the point, into which a
man might almost lay the end of his little Finger, it was for about two inches
toward the handle so gapp'd and notch'd, that the edge was wholly broken off,
and yet all that part of the Razor which extended from the Notch at the point
till within two inches of the handle, was so far from being gapp'd, that it
remained very keen and sharp. And this of the Notches in the Razor was so
remarkable, that some of the Jury not only observed it, but asked one of the
Chyrurgeons who was by, Whether my Lord by cutting his Throat could have made
these Notches in the Razor. To which the Chyrurgeon answered he might, but
whether it was from his being Fool or Knave, or both, I leave others to judge.
For I am sure the reason he assigned from the Tremefaction that was in the hand
by that time the Razor reached the Neck-bone, is ridiculous in it self, and can
satisfy no rational man. And had this ignorant or suborned fellow considered
the position and site of the notches, he would have both understood the
falsehood of his reply, and how absurd the reason was which he endeavored to
justify and support it by. For admitting at the present that the gap at the
point might have been so occasioned, which yet was impossible for reasons
assigned before; yet how was it possible that that part of the Razor which was
toward the handle, and which must be grasped or held in the hand, otherwise
the Razor could not be used, nor the wound given, should be most notch'd and
gapp'd, seeing all must grant that it was so far from approaching the
Neck-bone, that it could not pass beyond the skin and outward part of the
Gullet. Surely I, the same part of the Razor could not at one and the same time
be held fast within the hand, and be grating also upon, and against the
Neck-bone? This is so obvious to every child, that I know not how to ascribe
the Chyrurgeon's Answer to his ignorance, but must either impute it to the
Consternation which so Tragical an accident had put him into, that he remained
not Master of common sense; or it must be resolved into a worse cause, namely,
a fear of tracing the murder of that honorable person, to the true and real
Actors of it. Nor can the Conspirators against the life of that Noble Peer
avoid the strength and evidence of this argument, but that the Razor must have
fallen both from some considerable height, and upon some resisting sharp and
hard substance, or that otherwise it could never have been gapp'd and n^tch'd
as it was. And I dare upon this Theme challenge R^ger Lestrange to do his
utmost, though I know he has as good a faculty at ridiculing and ^af^ling
reasons which he cannot answer, as my Lord Chief Justice Jefferys has at
exposing and hectoring Witnesses, the truth of whose testimony he cannot
otherwise avoid.

Thus I have finished what at least I judge fit and proper at this time and
juncture to be said concerning the barbarous murder and unparalleled massacre,
as well as the violent and untimely end of that honorable and innocent person,
Arthur late E. of Essex: And do greatly rejoice that I have been able to do
this piece of service to God and my Country, as well as to the memory and
virtue of that excellent man. For though thy Friends, great Essex! were not so
happy as to prevent thy being murdered by the hands of execrable Ruffians, yet
it is some relief to them under all their sorrows for thy unfortunate and
tragical end, to be in a condition to vindicate thy Name from the infamy cast
upon thee of having destroyed thy self. And though we have all the light into,
and assurance imaginable of diverse other things, yet we do not here publish
them because that were both to expose diverse persons to the like fate and
destiny, and to deprive our selves of the benefit of their testimony at a Bar
against the Malefactors. We hope never theless that under all the disadvantages
under which welie, there is that account given of matters, circumstances and
persons, that none can reasonably doubt of the truth of my Lord of Essex's
being perfidiously assassinated. And to set this affair yet farther beyond all
question and control, I do challenge those who do think themselves injured or
agrieved, that for their own vindication, and the discovery of that murder,
they would put this matter concerning the manner of the E. of Essex's death,
into a fair, safe, and legal way of Trial, without danger to them who shall
appear as Witnesses, or damage to such as shall have the virtue and courage to
undertake to prosecute. But if instead of this they fall upon ruining men by
Actions of Scandalum Magnatum, or of assassinating such whom they shall suspect
to have detected this bloody and enormous crime, I hope it will be looked upon
not as a vindication of their innocence, but as an Argument of their Guilt. Nor
can any man be brought into trouble for having or reading this Book, but it
will be a fresh proof, that there is both a villainous mystery in the manner of
the Earl of Essex's death which they would not have known, and that there are
persons guilty of, and accessory to it, whom it concerns them to preserve from
the Infamy and Punishment thereof. Great Essex! how ungratefully were thou
recompensed for the Loyalty of thy Family, as well as thy own Sufferings and
Services in behalf of the Crown? Was this the Reward of thy Father's laying
down his Life on a Scaffold, and of all that thou thy self underwent and did
for the King and the Government? Is it the Fate of the Capels either to die for
the Royal Family, or to fall by the Treachery and Cruely of some of the Regal
Offspring? Virtuous Soul! when thou had not Crimes for which they could
destroy thee, thy Worth and Integrity became thy capital Offenses; When their
infamous and perjured Witnesses could not administer ground to those at St.
James's to reach thy Life; thy Love to England, and zeal for the Protestant
Religion, were sufficient Reasons with a great Man, and some others, to
conspire and compass thy Death? And thy declining to join with the Papists to
subvert the Laws of the Kingdom, and extirpate the Northern Heresy, was Motive
enough, first to hate, and then to destroy thee. And what they despaired to
effect by perjured Witnesses, and a packed Jury of Peers, they resolved to
accomplish by suborned and hired Assassinates. When they wanted the shadow of
Law to arraign thee before thy Peers in a public way, they found Men wearing
Stars and Coronets, who undertook to sit privately upon thee and sentence thee
to die. Having lived the Patron as well as Darling of thy Country, thou fell at
last, through the malice of the Nation's Enemies, a Victim and Sacrifice for
its Rights and Liberties. Nor was there any way for thee to have escaped their
rage, but either to have been less dutiful to God and thy Country, or less
tender to them, and more their open and avowed Enemy. Had thou, when time
was, unravelled the Popish Conspiracy, as thou both might and should have done,
thou could have prevented the misery that is fallen upon the Nation, and the
deplorable End thou have been brought unto thy self? But thy Zeal for the
greatness of the Monarchy, and thy Love as well as Compassion to a Great Man,
have, through the injustice and unthankfulness of that Man whom thou wast so
industrious to save, proved an unhappy occasion of our Slavery, and thy own
ruin. And tho none does more reverence thy memory than I do, yet I cannot but
observe how conspicuous the Righteousness of God is, in the injustice of that
ungrateful Man. Whilst his Associates are reserved by Heaven to fall with him;
they who knew his Designs, but out of pity to his Person as well as love lo his
Majesty, thought sit to conceal them, are by an unsearcheable, but holy
Providence, left and suffered to fall by him. Nor according to the measures of
Wisdom, or in consistency with the Principles of true Reason, can any Man be a
Friend to Religion and Natural Rights, without being an avowed Adversary to
that great Man himself, as well as to his Contrivances? But what do you think,
O ye Peers and Gentlemen of England! are not all your Lives threatened in the
destruction of this one Nobleman? The Laws that could not protect him, will be
as unable to defend you. If the Tower of London, which is his Majesty's Royal
Palace as well as the State Prison, could not secure the Earl of Essex from the
irruption and violence of Assassinates: Can you either hope for, or promise
your selves safety in your Country Dwellings? For if they want Pretenses of
destroying you by Persons in Ermine and Scarlet, they have no more to do but
commissionate and arm Russians and Banditti against you. And when it may not be
found convenient to assault your Lives by Strangers and hired Rascals whom you
do not know; they understand the Art of debauching your Valet's de Chamber, and
the Servants into whose hands you commit the care of your Persons, to stab or
poison you. Into what a deplorable condition are English Gentlemen reduced,
being exposed, if they stay in the Nation, to be either sworn out of their
Lives by false Witnesses, or murdered by bloody Assassinates; or if they
withdraw and retreat into Foreign Countries, made liable to be pursued to
Outlawries. And which was never known in any Kingdom of the World, till Sir
George Geffry's had given us a President, an Outlawry does as certainly destroy
a Man, if the outlawed Party once fall into their hands, as if he had drunk
Poison, or were stabbed through the heart with a Stilleto. Of this the
unfortunate Sir Thomas Armstrong is an Example of the first impression, who
albeit apprehended within the twelfth Month, which is the time the Statute
allows for a Person to come in and have the benefit of a Trial notwithstanding
an Outlawry, was yet executed by a Rule of the Court of King's Bench, without
being allowed a Trial, tho he most earnestly demanded it as a right of the
Subject, and what the Law of the Land gave him a just claim unto. And which is
worthy to be remarked, as showing the different treatment which Protestants
meet with, beyond what was measured out to the worst and most criminal Papists.
The same Attorney General who opposed Sir Thomas Armstrong's having the liberty
and benefit of a Trial, and who required a Rule of Court for his Execution upon
the bare Outlawry, did but a few Years before in the case of Levallian and Don
O Carney, two of the Ruffians, who in the Popish Conspiracy were to have killed
the King at Windsor, not only plead for the Reverse of their Outlawry (tho they
had been above two Years outlawed, and came not in till they knew there was but
one Witness could swear against them, Mr. Bedloe, the other Witness being dead)
but he withal told my Lord Chief Justice Pemberton, that there being an Error
in the Fact through their absence beyond Sea when the Outlawry was issued out
against them, the Reverse of it was a thing of course, which they had a Right
to demand, and which the Court was bound by the Duty of their Office and Place
to grant. Seeing therefore that those of you, O English Peers and Gentlemen,
who remain either faithful to God in the matter of Religion, or true to your
Country in the business of Civil Rights, can neither hope to escape the Malice
and Rage of your Enemies by staying at home nor by going abroad, is it not time
to be at last so far awakened out of your Lethargy, as to demand Justice upon
those bold and enormous Malefactors that were the Contrivers and Perpetrators
of this horrid Murder upon this Noble and Innocent Lord. Can you believe you
have discharged your Duty either to your Maker, your Prince, your Country, your
Selves, your Posterity, or to your murdered Friend, till you have filled the
Ears of his Majesty with a cry of innocent Blood barbarously shed? and till you
have demanded melius inquirendum into the manner of that Noble Man's Death, and
have brought the Authors and Instruments of his Assassination to undergo the
Justice and Severity of the Law? Let me tell you, O Peers and Gentlemen! that
this is both what Heaven and Earth do expect from you. And if you continue to
neglect it, you will, in the account of God, be reckoned amongst Accessories to
that Guilt, and in the Esteem of Men be held for a dastardly and degenerate
People. But if all Men shall either prove so intimid, or so supine, as to be
regardless of the Command and Authority of God, their own Personal Safety, the
Wrath that impends over the Nation upon the cry of innocent Blood: Awake then
and stir up thy self thou All-seeing and Righteous Lord, who beholdest Mischief
and Spite to requite with thy hand, and make thy Wisdom known in the Detection,
and thy Justice in the Punishment of this horrid Crime. For thou have not only
devolved the Inquisition after Murder upon those who are trusted with Rule
among Men, but have charged thy self with it, and have said, The Blood of your
Lives will I require at the hand of Man, and at the hand of every Man's
Brother, will I require the Life of Man: and whosoever sheddeth Man's Blood, by Man
shall his Blood be shed. And we do the rather make this Appeal unto thee, O
Lord, not only because they who are advanced unto the Seats of Judgment, are
either unaccessable, or Patrons of what they should search out and punish; but
because they who take upon them to minister in thy holy Things, have profaned
thy Name, made contemptible thy Ordinances, and deceived thy People whom they
should have informed, both by vindicating the Authors of this bloody Murder
from the Guilt and Suspicion of it, and by defaming and wounding the Memory of
an innocent and guiltless Person. While the Conspirators against our Religion
and Laws, have been like Wolves ravening to shed Blood, and to get dishonest
Gain; these Mercenary Men have daubed them with untempered Mortar, making the
King glad with their Wickedness, and the Princes with their Lies. It Is to them
that the Enemies of Protestancy and English Rights owe the success of all their
Attempts; and it is they whom the Nation ought to accuse, of being the
Instruments that have betrayed us to Popery and Slavery. For to omit their
other Villainies by which they have fought as well to ruin the Nation, as
oblige the Popish Faction; they have endeavored to ingratiate themselves with
that traitorous Party, by becoming Advocates for Assassinates, and Concealers
of Massacres. The aspersing this Innocent and Noble Person (whose Spittle some
years ago they were ambitious to lick up) with the Infamy of being Felo de se,
and they managing that wicked Fiction to the involving others in the Guilt of a
Plot, has been a Year's employment for some of the Clergy to exercise their
Talent upon, hoping thereby to pave their way to rich Benefices. Nor is there
any thing so base, which some of the Clergy will not prostitute themselves unto
and glory in, if it may but serve the Designs of St. James's, and prevent the
detection of the Crimes whereof a great Man is guilty. A Fresh example we have
of this in an Ecclesiastics turning Informer, and causing a Soldier to be
made run the Gantlet, and to be cashiered. For a certain high flown Tory being
viewing the Tower, did with a kind of pleasure, on the remembrance that the
Earl of Essex had there fatally ended his days, asked a common Sentinel where
the Chamber was in which my L. of Essex had cut his Throat. To which the
Soldier, who was neither a Stranger to the Reports that went concerning the
Death of that Noble Person, nor to diverse Circumstances importing by what means
and hands he had fallen) replied, pointing at the same time to the Room, that
is the Chamber where the Earl of Essex was killed. And because the honest
Fellow would not own to that inquisitive Person that my L. of Essex had
murdered himself, but persevered in saying he was killed in such a place,
therefore did the Divine inform against him, and brought him to suffer what I
have related. Which as it represents unto us the Principles of the present
Clergy, so it confirms the Assassination committed upon that Noble Peer. O
therefore thou holy One, to whom Justice belongs, show thy self, yea, lift up
thy self thou Judge of the Earth, cause their Mischief to return upon their own
Heads, and for the Violence of their Hands, and the Sin of their Mouth, let
them be taken in their Pride, that all Men may know God has not for saken the
Earth, but that he rules in Jacob, even unto the Ends of it.

FINIS.

