The Souls Looking-glass, lively representing its Estate before GOD: With a
Treatise of CONSCIENCE; Wherein the definitions and distinctions thereof are
unfolded, and several Cases resolved:

By that reverend and faithful Minister of the Word, WILLIAM FENNER. B.D.
Sometimes Fellow of PEMBROKE-HALL in CAMBRIDGE, and late Parson of Rochford in
Essex.

ACTS 24.16. I exercise my self to have always a conscience void of offense
toward God and toward men.

CAMBRIDGE. Printed by Roger Daniel, Printer to the Universitie; For John
Rothwell at the Sun in Paul's churchyard. 1643.

To the Christian Reader.
IT was the saying of Solon, That there were many good laws made, but there
wanted one law to make us put all those laws in execution: Ille vere Scripturas
legit qui verba vertit in opera.
The like may be said concerning the books that are written now adays, There
are many good books written, but there wants one book to make us to put those
good books in practice. Such a book were worth writing, and worth reading. And
I know no reason but that this book (if the Spirit of God write it in our
hearts) may have this happy effect: For it is a book that will teach us how to
get into the State of grace, and how to get and keep a good Conscience. And
whosoever reads a book with a good conscience will make conscience to
practice what he reads: For a good conscience is, as Aristotle says of
Justice, (...)
a Synopsis and Epitome of all virtues: It is a (...),a sanandis omnibus morbis.
Panacea to cure all soul-diseases: It is (...)
a medicine to digest all book-surfetting.

There are four sorts of Consciences: Some bad and unquiet, some bad and
quiet, some good and unquiet, some good and quiet. For a conscience to be bad
and quiet is the worst temper that can be: Better have a bad unquiet then a bad
and quiet conscience: better have a tormenting Tophet in the soul then a fools
Paradise: The best frame of Conscience is the good and quiet conscience: This
is a Laetitia bonae consci^ntiae paradisus est anim^rum, g^udium* angelorum
hortus deliciarum, ager benedictionis, templ^m Sol^m^m^, aula Dei, habitaculum
Spiritus sancti, Bernard.
Paradise upon earth, (...).
a pr^gustation and prelibation of heaven, a mansion for the Trinity to dwell
in. Now this ensuing treatise will teach us how to purchase this precious jewel
of a good and quiet conscience. A treatise very necessary in these
unconscionable days, wherein most people make no conscience to sin against
conscience; and some have sinned so long against conscience as that they have
lost all conscience of sin. As Multi Christianum nomen ad judicium habene non
ad remedium.
S. Augustine says of the name of a Christian, so may I say of conscience,
Multi conscientiam habent, non ad remedium sed ad judicium, Many have a
conscience for their condemnation and not for their salvatition. Conscience
Domus animae, Guil. Parisiens.
it is the house of the soul: But this house lies waste and is much ruinated
and decayed in these times, wherein Dum tempora superiora cum nostris comparo,
dicere consuevi plus illos conscientiae, scientiae minus babuisse; nos contra,
scientiae plus, conscientiae minus habere, Beza.
never more science but never less conscience. Conscience Prejudicium judicii,
Tertull.
it is a private judgement-day before the public day of judgment: And it is
an ill presage that most people will never stand upright in the court of
heaven, because they stand accused and condemned in the court of conscience.
Conscience is Gods preacher in our bosoms: And it is a most certain rule; That
that man that will not regard the preacher in his bosom will never regard the
preacher in the pulpit. And the reason why the preacher in the pulpit does no
more good, is because the preacher in the bosom is so much despised and
neglected. And therefore I doubt not but this book (these motives considered)
will be very acceptable to all those that have or desire to have a good and
quiet conscience. For as Unicuique liber est propria conscientia; and ad hunc
librum discutiendum and emendandum omnes alii invenli sunt.
S. Bernard most excellently says, Every man's conscience is his book; and all
books are written to discover and amend the errors of the book of conscience.
Let those that read this book of conscience look into the book of their own
conscience, and amend all the faults of that book by this.

The reverend Author of this book was a Minister very conscientious, and one
that had a great ability given him by God to preach unto and work upon the
consciences of people, to awaken the sleepie conscience, to inform the
erroneous conscience, to settle the doubtful conscience, and to comfort the
wounded conscience: his sermons were all dipped in conscience: And therefore a
subject of Conscience must needs be welcome from such a preacher. It is true
that this birth is Posthumum opus, and comes out after the death of the
Author: But I hope it will be the more pleasing, to revive the memory of him
whose life and labors were deservedly precious in the esteem of Gods people.
And if conscience, though for a while blind, and dumb, and seared, and put out
of all office, will notwithstanding at last be put into office, and made to
see, speak and feel, to the utter destruction of an impenitent sinner; why may
not a discourse of Conscience, though long ago preached, be suffered to revive
and live for the salvation of those that shall have grace to read it aright?
especially considering that these sermons were perfected by himself in his life
time?

Much I could say in commendation of this worthy Divine, both in regard of his
unwearisome pains in preaching, consuming his own body to save the souls of
others, as also of his learning and exemplarie piety: Praelucendo pereo.
but I forbear. All that I will say is this; They that fully knew him did love
and reverence him: and if any did disesteem him, it was because they did not
fully know him. He is now a shining star in the firmament of heaven. And
there are hundreds of people that will bless God to all eternity for his
pains. He needs not our praises, but our imitation.

All that I desire from you that read this short treatise is this, That ye
would either get a good conscience by the reading of this book, or bring a good
conscience to the reading of it. Labor to make an addition to the heavenly
joys of this faithful servant of God by making this book a means to bring thy
soul to those heavenly joys which are at Gods right hand for evermore: which
are joys unspeakable and glorious, so great that, Tanta est dulcedo coelesti^
gaudii, ut si una guttula difflueret in infernum, totam amaritudinem inferni
absorboret.
as S. Augustine says, If one drop of the joys of heaven should fall into
hell, it would swallow up all the bitterness of Hell. And that God would make
you heirs of this joy, is the prayer of your soul-friend

EDM. C.

A Table of the Contents.
An Enquiry after a man's estate before God. Coloss. 4.8.
WHat a man's estate before God is page 1 Ministers are to enquire after the
estate of their people 3 Every man is either in an estate of grace or sin 8
This estate may be known 11 Why every man ought to enquire after his own estate
14 Means whereby a man may come to know what estate he is in 15 Impediments
which hinder this knowledge 18 Motives to be diligent in this inquiry 19
2. A treatise of Conscience. Romans 2.15.
WHat conscience is 21
I. Proposition.
There is in every man a conscience 23 Why the Lord did plant a conscience in
every man 25
II. Proposition.
The light that conscience acts by is knowledge 1. of Gods law; 28 The light
that conscience acts by is knowledge 2. of our selves. 28 The great necessity
of knowledge 29
III. Proposition.
The office of conscience is to bear witness, accusing or excusing 33 1. Four
properties of this witnesse-bearing It is 1. Supreme 34 2. Impartial 35 3.
Faithful 36 4. Privy 37
2. The parts of this witnesse-bearing: I. Its single witnessing 1. What we
have done 38 2. What we intend to do ibid. 3. What is the bent of our hearts
ibid.
II. Its judicial bearing witness 42 1. About things to be done or omitted:
Where are considered 1. Its Office, 1. To judge 45 2. To counsel 46
2. Its Adjuncts: It is either 1. Illightned 51 2. Erroneus 56 3. Doubting 52
4. Scrupulous 58 5. Faithful 63. or 6. Unfaithful 69

2. About things already done or omitted: and here also 1. It is Office is, 1.
To approve 77 2. To absolve 78 3. To mislike 79 4. To condemn 80
2. Its Affections: It is either 1. Tender 83 2. Sleepie ibid. 3. Benumbed 84,
or 4. Seared 85


From all th^se proceed two other Adjuncts; I. A quiet conscience: concerning
which is considered 1. What it is 87 2. How that in the godly differs from
that in the wicked 90 3. How to know whether we have it or no 100 Where is
handled; Whether a child of God may fear death, and how far 105 Whether a
wicked man may be desirous to die, and in what cases 108 The great benefit of
peace of conscience 110

II. An unquiet conscience What it is, and the causes of it 114 The degrees of
it 117 The difference of it in the Godly and in the wicked 121 How a man may
keep peace of conscience 131 How it depends upon obedience 135 What manner of
obedience that is which peace of conscience depends upon? 139 What a man must
do to be freed from a burdened and troubled conscience 141 As conscience
bears witness of our actions so of our persons 146 It can and does inform
every man what estate he is in 147 How it does this 150 When it does this 153
Why many nevertheless are deluded about their estate 157 What a good
conscience soundly renewed is 162 What a weak and infirm good conscience is 168


IV. Proposition.
The bond of conscience is the law of God 175 1. The Primarie and supreme, is
Gods word 177 Gods law binds the consciences of the regenerate 184 2. The
Secondarie and relative, others, or our selves 194 1. Others may bind our
conscience, as Magistrates, Superiors; and how far ibid. 2. We may bind our
own consciences by lawful vows and promises 207 What vows are unlawful and
not binding ibid. Of the vow made to God in baptism, how great it is, and how
much to be regarded 209
An Enquiry after a man's Estate before God.
COLOSS. 4.8. Whom I have sent unto you for the same purpose, that he may know
your estate and comfort your hearts.


THE estate of a man before God is the relation that he stands in unto God,
What a man's estate before God is.
as God is the free fountain of all spiritual life and salvation, and the
determiner of men's everlasting conditions either in heaven or in hell: So that
when we question about a man's estate, we question, Whether he be in Christ or
not; Whether he have true grace yea, or no; Whether he be one of Gods children
or no, or whether he be yet no better then a reprobate.

There be three things to be considered in this definition of every man's
estate. First, it is a relation unto God; not as a man is in himself, it may be
rich, it may be poor in the world; but I speak here as he is in relation
toward God, Whether he be rich toward God, yea or no. I do not speak as a man
is in regard of others; it may be he is a father or a son, a master or a
servant, a king or a subject: but in relation to God, Whether Gods sevant or
no, Gods child or no. Salute Apelles, says Paul; Romans 16.1^
and he tells us in what estate Apelles was in before God, namely, in an
estate of approbation, approved in Christ. And the same Apostle speaks on the
contrary of the unconverted Gentiles, that they were strangers from the life of
God, Ephesians. 4.18,
Ephesians. 4, 18. Secondly, As it is a relation unto God, so it is a standing
relation: That wherein he stands toward God, that is a man's estate before
God. There is a difference between one that does sin and one that is in the
state of sin: A child of God may sin, but he is not in a state of sin;
you cannot call him a wicked man. So also there is difference between one that
does some good actions and one that is in a good estate: A carnal man may do
some good things, but he is not in a good estate. The estate of a man is a
standing thing, it is the relation that he stands in toward God. Thirdly, It
is the relation that a man stands in toward God as he is the free fountain
of spiritual life and salvation. It is not every standing relation toward
God: For a man may be considered in relation to God as a Creator, and so the
heavens and the earth and the very brute beasts stand in relation to God as
they are his creatures; but they have not this estate that we speak of, which
is a relation to God as the free giver of spiritual life and salvation (He is
free, he may choose whether he will give it or no.) Now this is a man's estate,
the relation he stands in unto God, Whether the Lord has given him his
saving grace, yea or no; spiritual life in Christ Jesus, yea or no; title to
heaven and salvation, yea or no? this is the meaning when we speak of a man's
estate. It is said of Sodom, They were sinners before God: that is they were in
a bad estate, Genesis 13.13.
a state of sin. It is said of Zachary and Elisabeth, They were both
righteous before God; that is, Luke 1.6.
they were both in a very good state.

All Christians believe that there is a God: Observe. Ministers are to enquire
after the estate of their people. Reasons. 1.
It behooves every one now to consider in what estate he stands to his God.
This is a great question that we which are ministers ought to demand of our
people, to know their estates.

First, because we are shepherds, and are bound to look well how it stands
with our flock. If we do not labor to know your estates, we can never look
well to your souls. Consider that place in the Proverbs, Prove. 27.23.
Be diligent to know the state of thy flock, and look well to thy herds. Where
the wise man first requires that we should look well to our flocks, and then
directs us in the manner how, viz. by being diligent to know their estate how
it stands with them.

Secondly, we are Gods laborers; and we must know in what estate our work
stands: else we may labor and labor and all in vain; we may preach and
exhort and call upon our people to hear and believe, and obey; and all this
may still be in vain, if we do not enquire in what estate they are. This is the
reason why Paul could not forbear sending and enquiring how it stood with the
Thessalonians, 1 Thessalonians. 3.5
in what estate they were in, how it went with their faith, whether they kept
it or no, lest the tempter had tempted them, and his labor should have been in
vain; for so it had been for all his preaching and teaching them if they had
not been in a good estate: therefore he sent to know.

3.
Thirdly, we are to take the care and the charge of your souls: Now then how can
we be quiet if we do not know in what estate your souls be? A good father
cannot be at quiet if he do not know how it is with his children: How if they
should be sick? how if undone? Oh it would comfort a good father to know his
children to be in good case: But if it were otherwise with them, though it
would grieve him much yet he had rather know it then not; for if he know it he
can better tell what to do. So it was with the Apostle; his very bowels yerned
upon the Philippians, Philip 2.19.
Oh my poor people, thought he, I wonder what estate they be in. How if they
totter? how if they miscarry? how if the devil have tempted them to sin and
to apostatize? how if they be in trouble of conscience? He could never be at
quiet till he knew their estate: I trust in the Lord Jesus, says he, to send
Timotheus shortly unto you, that I also may be of good comfort when I know your
estate. He had a great care of their souls, and therefore it would comfort his
heart to know what estate they were in.

Fourthly, we are teachers, and therefore we must know the estate of our
people: otherwise we are ignorant what doctrine to provide for them, what
points to handle among them. Paul in this epistle to the Colossians, knowing
only their estate in the general, delivers abundance of general precepts
and exhortations unto them: he describes unto them the mystery of Christ,
admonishes them to continue steadfast therein, to embrace the preaching of the
word, to beware of philosophy and the vain traditions and sophistry of men, to
take heed of doting upon ceremonies, which are all ended in Christ, to set
their affections on heaven, to mortify the deeds of the flesh, to put off the
old man; he warns them to be loving and humble: he bids wives do their
duties to their husbands, and husbands to love their wives; children to obey
their parents, and parents to encourage their children; servants to obey their
masters, and masters to deal well with their servants; all to continue in
prayer, watchfulness, thanksgiving; to walk wisely toward them that are
without, to be careful of godly and holy communication: Thus knowing their
estate only for the general he teaches them in general, and therefore now
he concludes, as if he should say, Col. 4.8.
I speak somewhat generally because I do not know your estates in particular;
and therefore I send to you Tychicus, a faithful good minister, that he may
learn your estates in particular, and deal with you answerably. It may be some
of you want corrosives; it may be some of you want cordials; it may be some
have need to be searched and humbled, some of you to be encouraged and
comforted: I have sent him to enquire into your estates in particular, that he
may do accordingly. Whom I have sent unto you for the same purpose, that he may
know your estate and comfort your hearts.

The use of this is threefold.

Uses. 1. Instruct.
First, for instruction. Hence we may see that a minister does but his duty
when he enquireth into men's estates how they stand before God: It is not prying
into other men's matters; it is not busi-bodinesse in other men's affairs; it is
not a spirit of meddling: No, a ^inister does but his duty when he does it.
How can a Physician apply true and proper physic unless he enquire into the
state of men's bodies? Jer. 8.12.
Now a minister is a physician to men's souls; and therefore he is to enquire of
the state of men's souls how they stand before God. They are men of Belial that
say, What? must the minister know all? and, Can there be nothing done but the
minister must hear of it? These are very evil speeches. The minister does but
his duty when he is inquisitive.

2. Reproof.
The second use may be for reproof. If it be the duty of a minister to enquire
of men's estates before God, then those people are too blame that will not make
known their estates. What is the reason that so many men abide in a rotten
estate, but because they are loath to open truly and fully what they are to Gods
ministers? Nay many are like them in the prophet, Isai. 30.10.
who say to the seers, See not. They would not have Gods ministers see what
they do, nor see what they are. I confess there be some that will open
something about their estates, but not all they know by themselves: They keep
in the main; like some foolish clients who misinform their Counsel, making
their case better then indeed it is, and so their cause miscarrieth: So some
keep in that which would give most light to judge of their estates: But this
ought not so to be. I can tell you an example of one that being troubled about
his estate before God, and some ministers being by, Oh, says he, I will tell
you all that I know of my self; I Will not hide a syllable from you: and if I be
yet no better then a wretch, I beseech you tell me plainly that I am so; and if
I be in Christ, I beseech you prove it plainly unto me. This man took a right
course, and thereby through Gods mercy came in a little space to the assurance
of his own blessed estate and condition.

Thirdly, for exhortation. 3. Exhortation.
Let Gods ministers know of your estates, that they may be able to speak to you
accordingly. By this means they may speak words in due season, and like wise
house-holders give every one his portion. If you had but a cut finger, would
not you be glad to have the right plastre? and if you had a burning fever,
would you not desire the right remedy? how much more in curing the sickness of
the soul?

Now from the text it self without any cutting up of the words we may gather
four propositions: 1. That there is an estate that every man is in, either an
estate of grace or an estate of sin. 2. That this state may be known. 3. That
every man should be willing to have his estate examined, that it may be known
whether it be good or no. 4. That a man can never have true comfort till it be
known that he is in a good estate.


1. For the first, 1. Observe.
That there is an estate that every one is in, either of grace or sin; See this
in Simon Magus: Acts 8.23.
I perceive, says S. Peter, thou art in the gall of bitterness and in the
bond of iniquity. See, he tells him what estate he was in, viz. a very bad
estate, in a desperate and damnable condition. In this state of sin and misery
are all they that are not renewed by Christ Jesus. And for the other see an
example, Romans 16.7. Romans 16.7.
Salute Rufus chosen in the Lord: The text there tells us what estate he was
in, a very good estate; He was a man in Christ, a choice man, that is, a man in
the state of grace and salvation. In this estate are all they that are called
and sanctified and made new creatures unto God. Every man is in one of the two
estates: there is no middle estate which is neither the one nor the other, but
in one of these two are all the whole world. The reason is, 1. From everlasting
the world was divided only into two ranks, either Elect or Reprobates. 2. Here
in this life the world is divided only into two companies either Godly or
Ungodlie. Matthew. 25.32.
3. At the day of judgment the Lord will divide the whole world only into two
sorts, either Sheep or Goats.


2. Prop. E^e^^ion man be k^own.
II. For the second proposition, This estate may be known: Especially every man
may come to the knowledge of his own estate before God. I do not say that every
man may know whether he be elect or reprobate: yet this I say too, That a godly
soul may know that it is elected to life. The Apostle exhorts all that are
godly to give diligence to make their election sure, 2. Pet. 1.10. He that
atteineth to that faith which the Apostle calls the faith of Gods elect,
Titus 1.1. and receives the word of God, as Paul says the Thessalonians did,
and thence concludes they were chosen of God, 1 Thessalonians. 1.4, 5. he may attein
to much assurance of his election. But though a godly man may know he is
elected of God, yet for reprobation the case is not alike: 1. Because
ungodliness is not always joined with perseverance. 2. Besides, God has many
reasons why he does not reveal men's reprobation unto them: They would then be
outrageous in evil, desperate in wickedness; there could be no order or
government in humane life: Besides that, the form of Christ's administration of
his kingdom could not be so as it now is: for Christ has bid his ministers
preach the Gospel to every creature, to whole parishes and towns, and except
none: Christ will not tell his ministers which be reprobates and which not,
that they may preach unto all, and labor to work upon every soul; and there is
none in a parish but the minister must look upon him as one who may be saved:
Christ will not tell his people which be reprobates, that they may look upon
every one as one that may be won to the faith for any thing they know: Christ
will not tell the reprobates themselves that they are reprobates, that every
one of them may come to the use of the means; How do they know but they may
find grace? yea and the Lord does seriously call them; and it is their fault if
they obey not. It is Gods infinite mercy, that election, which is such a
comfortable point, may be revealed to Gods children; and that reprobation,
which is so intolerable and bitter, is not revealed to the reprobate.
Nevertheless let me add, That some particular men have known their own
reprobation, as Cain and Judas, Shrewd signs of it.
etc. And there be shrewd signs of it: (I do not speak it as though I meant to
persuade any man that he is one, but only that he may take heed of them.)

1. Malicing the known truth is a very shrewd sign: As, when men know that
godliness is pleasing to God, and yet they hate a man for it; when men know
the minister is commanded to rebuke sin, and yet they will spite him for so
doing: this is a very shrewd sign. Paul persecuted the truth; but yet, says
he, I obtained mercy, because I did it ignorantly, 1. Tim. 1.13. intimating
that if he had done it against knowledge he had been in danger to have found no
mercy. And therefore ye that mock and hate those ways which God has
commanded, I beseech you, take heed lest ye sin unpardonably.

2. Absolute apostasy is a shrewd sign too of reprobation: When men have been
very forward in the profession of the truth, and fall totally away and prove
miserably profane, as the Apostle, shows, Heb. 6.6.

3. Final impenitency. This is an infallible sign of reprobation, when a man
lives in sin, dies in sin, and goes away without repentance. Luke 13.3.
Except ye repent ye shall all likewise perish. There be many of us have stood
out long in impenitency; let us take heed lest if we stay any longer we fall
upon this great evil.

I return to the point: That a man may know his estate, proved.
A man may come to the knowledge of his own estate before God. I do not mean,
Whether he be in the state of election or reprobation: but he may know, Whether
he be in the state of salvation or damnation, that is, Whether he be in the way
that leads to heaven or hell, Whether he be in such a case that if he die now
he shall be saved or not saved: Every man may thus know in what estate he is;

Because the word of God shows a man this: Reasons 1. 1. John 3.8.
As for example, He that commits sin is of the devil. Mark; the Apostle
tells us what estate that man is in that lives in sin, in a very bad
estate. So on the contrary; 1. John 3.3.
He that has this hope purges himself. Mark; the Apostle tells us what
estate that man is in who purges himself; he is in a very good estate, in a
state of true hope in Christ. And so 1. Cor. 6.10. the Apostle names diverse
who are not in the state of salvation but of damnation: if they die in such
case they cannot inherit the kingdom of heaven. So that if a man will but
search the word, and believe that God does say true, he may know his estate.

II.
2. Without this knowledge a man cannot have an accusing or an excusing
conscience in respect of his estate: but men may have, yea many men have, a
conscience accusing them of being in a very bad estate; and many men have an
excusing conscience that plainly does witness that they are in a very good and
gracious estate. I and my people are wicked, Exodus 9.27.
says Pharaoh. His conscience did accuse him of being in a bad estate. I am
holy, Psalm. 86.2.
says David; I am thy servant. His conscience told him he was in the state of
grace. So that ye need not go far to know what estate you are in: there is
that in your bosom that can decide the matter.

III.
3. Men cannot desire nor fly f^ o an unknown estate: But men are commanded to
fly from a bad estate, and seek out a good one: Therefore they may know the
one and the other. O generation of vipers, Matthew. 3.7, 8,
who has warned you to fly from the wrath to come? Bring forth therefore
fruits meet for repentance, says John to the Pharisees. He supposes these men
might easily know that they were in a very bad estate, or else how could he say
thus unto them?

Before I come to the Uses let us consider these three things: 1. That every
man living is born in a very bad estate. We all know it well; but oh that we
would consider it! Ephesians. 2.3.
We are all by nature children of wrath. Now here lies the question, When did
we change our estates? We are in the same state of damnation wherein we were
born except we are come out of it. I say, here lies the question, Whether we
are come out of it or no, whether we have mended our estate. 2. Consider that
the greatest part of the world never mend their estates: But as they were born
in a cursed estate, so they live and die in it. And I speak not this of heathen
only; but alas! how many in the visible church do so? How many were there in
the church of Philippi whom the Apostle could not think of without weeping when
he considered in what estate they were. Phil. 3.17.
So in the church of Corinth, not many wise, 1. Cor. 1.26.
not many rich, not many noble called; but commonly the meanest in the eye of
the world were in the best estate toward God. Nay more then so; Many of them
who seek to get into a good estate miss of it and perish. See, Luke 13.24.
Strive to enter in at the strait gate: Mark; it is a strait gate, and lets
but few in: for many shall seek to enter in and shall not be able. Here and
there a few even where the constant ministry is. 3. 3.
Consider that it is a mavelous hard thing to pass from state unto state,
from a bad to a good estate. There is a very vast gulf between the state of
sin and the state of grace, and it is mavelous hard to pass it. These
things premised, the Uses follow.


1. This point may be many ways useful: Use 1. Of Instruction.
First, for instruction. If God has made it possible unto us to find out what
estate every one of us is in, then sure he would have us go about it and
enquire after it. It is every man's duty to enquire after his estate.
God might have left us to perish in our natural blindness, never to have
known in what case we had been until we were past recovery. First, we are all
wanderers from God and from the ways of peace, and therefore God might justly
have suffered us for ever to have wandered, and never to have been able to find
out whether we had been right or wrong. Secondly, God has dealt so with some:
He has suffered some to go on all their days blindfold to hell. Thus the Lord
dealt with the scribes and Pharisees; Ma^t^. 15.14.
Let them alone, says he, they be blind leaders of the blind: and if the blind
lead the blind, they will both fall into the ditch. Ye see the Lord has dealt
so with some; and it is his mercy he has not dealt so with us. Since God has
made it possible for us to know, it is our duty to enquire after it: And that
yet further for these reasons: Reasons 2. Cor. 13.5.
1. First, because the Lord commands it: Examine your own selves whether ye be
in the faith; prove your selves: know ye not your own selves, how that Jesus
Christ is in you, except ye be reprobates? Where ye see the Apostle commands
the duty of self-triall: And consider how he presses it upon us: 1. Do ye not
know what estate you are in? then examine and enquire. 2 Do ye think ye are in
a good estate? look ye prove it, and be sure ye be not in an error. Do ye
object ye do not know, neither can ye know? No? then your estate is very bad:
find out some good tokens in you, except ye be reprobates. This command makes
it a clear duty. 2. But a second reason to prove it our duty to enquire what
estate we are in, is, because without the knowledge thereof we can never have
any true peace in our consciences: The conscience must needs be without peace
so long as we are ignorant of what estate we are in: Romans 5.1.
Being justified by faith we have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ.
First the Apostle shows their estate; they were in a state of justification:
and from the knowledge thereof they had peace. We are bound to get true peace
to our consciences; Oh, what a lamentable maze are we in till our consciences
have peace! and this they cannot have until we are fully acquainted in what
case we stand before God: Jo^. 22.21.
Acquaint thy self with God, and be at peace. 3. Thirdly, we can never be fit
for any duty of Gods worship as long as we know not what estate we are in:
We can never be fit for any holy duty, to hear, pray, receive the sacrament:
Let a man examine himself, 1. Cor. 11.28.
and so let him eat, etc. First he must examine in what estate he is before he
can be fit for that high service. So for repentance: Lam. 3, 40.
Let us search and try our ways, and turn again to the Lord: first find our
selves in an ill estate, and then return. So for joy; It is a duty to rejoice
in the Lord: But we are never fit for rejoicing till we have proved what
estate we are in: Ga^. 6.4.
Let every man prove his own work; so shall he have rejoicing. We can never be
fit for any duty until we know in what estate we are in, because every
duty varieth according as the estate of every man is. To instance in prayer; He
that is not in the state of grace must pray one way, and he that is in the
state of salvation must pray another way: the one that he may be converted and
brought home to God; the other, that he may be strengthened and increased in
grace. And so for the duty of hearing, etc.


The second use is for direction; Use. 2. Of Direction.
to let us understand by what means we may know what estate we are in.
There be four means to know this.

1. By our outward and inward actions. Means to know what estate we are in.
I do not say, by our outward actions: For a man may be in the state of
hypocrisy, and yet his outward actions may be good. Neither do I say by our
inward actions alone: For a man may be in the state of self-deceit, and yet say
his heart is good and his meaning and mind good. But I say, by them both put
together. Our Savior sets it out by a tree; Matthew. 7.17.
Every good tree brings forth good fruit: but a corrupt tree brings forth
corrupt fruit. So if the heart brings forth the fruit of righteousness* joy
in good things* patience, meekness, gentleness, love, obedience, godly
conversation, etc. these evidence a good estate: but if the heart brings
forth deadness, earthlinesse, impatience, evil conversation, etc, these are
corrupt fruits and signs of a very bad estate. 2. Ye may know what estates ye
are in by your inclinations and dispositions, from whence these actions
proceed. Psalm. 119.112.
Are your hearts inclined heavenward and Godward, as David's? are ye bent to
holiness and self-denial, etc. as a bow is bent to shoot the arrow? This is a
sign of a good estate: as 1. Chron. 22.19. there is speech of setting the
heart to seek God. Ye know when a man will do a thing indeed, we say he is set
on it. It may be ye do some good duties, make some fair offers of seeking God;
but are your hearts set on it? or are they set on the world and inclined
earth-vvard? The inclinations of every creature in the world do ever show
what the creature is. How do we know that a stone is heavy? Because it
inclines dovvnvvard. How do we know a man is choleric? Because he is
inclined unto wrath. So a man's estate may be known by his constant
inclination either to good or evil. 3. One may know what estate he is in by
that reflexive act which is proper only to man. There is an act in man's soul
(we call it a reflex act) which no creature has but only man, whereby he
can perceive what himself is and does. When a man thinks or speaks, he
can reflect upon himself, and perceive what he thinks or speaks: when he
prays, he can reflect upon his own heart, and perceive how it carries it
self all along in his prayers. I say, no creature in the world has in it this
reflexive act but only man. The fire burns, but it cannot reflect upon its
own burning: Oculus non videt se videre, The eye sees, but it does not see
that it does see; that is, That creature does not perceive what it does when
it sees. But every man has this reflexive act in him, whereby he is privy
to what himself thinks, does, is. None knows the things of a man, 1. Cor.
2.11.
save the spirit of a man that is in him. This is the reason why some know
not what estate they are in, because they choke their own spirit and hoodwink
their consciences. Thine own heart knovveth how it is with thee, and would
faithfully tell thee if thou would enquire of it and hearken unto it. Search
with Gods candle, and thou may easily find what is in thee. The spirit of a
man is the candle of the Lord, Prove. 20 27.
searching all the inward parts of the belly. 4. Ye may know what estate ye
are in by a certain kind of feeling. As there is a kind of bodily feeling
whereby every man knovveth the estate of his body whether he be sick or in
health, so there is a spiritual feeling. Luke 24.32.
The two disciples did feel their hearts burn: Ephesians. 4.19.
Paul did feel a great combat in him betvveen the flesh and the spirit: So if
men be covetous and vvorldly, they may feel it. Yet indeed some men be past
feeling: Their case is the worse because they cannot feel how bad it is: But
for the most, they may easily feel what their estate is.
Use 3. Impediments.
The third use is, to show you the impediments that hinder this knowledge. If
you would attein to know what estate you are in, then remove the
impediments; which are 1. Vain thoughts. Men who are in a state of sin and
wrath, yet have many vain thoughts lodging within them keeping them from
knowing it: God is merciful; and Christ died for sinners; and, There be worse
sinners then they; why should they think so ill of themselves? and, they may be
better all in good time: These vain thoughts hoodvvink their eyes that they
cannot see their estate, nor resolve that it is so dangerous as indeed it is.
Jer. 4.14.
O Jerusalem, wash thy heart from wickedness: how long shall these vain
thoughts lodge within thee? They were in a very bad estate; and yet they had
such vain thoughts that they could not see it. 2. Presumption is another
impediment. Men pray, and hear, and do other good duties, and so take all to
be well without serious examining. This was the case of the Laodicean people:
Rev. 3.17.
They thought they had that in them which they had not, and that their estate
was good, when it was nothing so. 3 Another let are the Cares of this life:
Whereby the heart is so occupied that it does not find time to search its own
estate. Luke 21.34
Therefore our Savior says, Take heed that your hearts be not overcharged
with the cares of this life, lest that day come upon you unawares; intimating
that these cares are great lets from considering our estates. 4. Another let is
an Evil conscience, which affrighteth a man so soon as he begins to stir,
and makes him afraid to go on to look soundly into his estate. John 3.20.
He that does evil hates the light. 5. Another let is Ignorance. Romans 3.11.
There is none that understands, none that se^keth after God. Mark; they did
not seek in what case they stood before God because they did not understand. 6.
Another let is Spiritual sloth and sluggishnesse of heart. Men cannot endure
to take pains with their own hearts till they have made out a true judgment in
what case they are; They begin and quickly give over; and so for want of
diligence and pains-taking make nothing sure.


The last use is for exhortation; Use 4. Of Exhortation.
That all men would bestirre themselves and set in earnest upon this inquiry,
That we may every one know in what state we stand.

1. Consider, this is an enquiry about our souls. We enquire about our outward
man, about the estate of our bodies, and vvorldly affairs, etc. oh, let us not
neglect this main enquiry, Am I in Christ, yea or no? Am I a new creature, yea
or no? Does my soul live to God or no?

2. Consider, this is a question about our everlasting estate. We can never
have comfort until we have put this out of question: and therefore this is a
question which all questions must give way unto. If ye be not in Christ, ye had
need lay aside all and look about it only. How can men eat, drink, sleep,
etc. since the wrath of God abides upon all unbelievers? Methinks our souls
should take no content, do nothing else but faint after Christ, until we know
our interest in him. I say again, This is the grand enquiry, that business
which all businesses must give place unto. Oh, the sloth of our souls! Let us
in time awake and rouse them up, and never rest until we know our own estate
to be good before God, that so our hearts may have comfort, and that with God.

A Treatise of Conscience.
ROMANS 2.15. Which show the work of the law written in their hearts, their
consciences also bearing them witness and their thoughts in the mean while
accusing or else excusing one another.


I Have showed you, What Conscience is.
That every man is in an estate before God. And that has made way now to a
treatise of conscience; which will show us what estate we are in before God. I
desire to handle it common-place-wise: And first I will tell you in brief what
the conscience of every man is. I say, of every man: For Angels and devils have
a conscience too: ye may see it in the speech of the Angel to John when John
would have worshipped him, I am thy fellow servants, says he, Rev. 19.10
see thou do it not. Mark; He had a conscience that could say, I am a servant,
and therefore must not take worship to me. So for the devils: When our Savior
bade them come forth of the possessed, they say, Matthew. 8.29.
Art thou come to torment us before our time. See; they had a conscience that
told them there would be a time when they should be further tormented. But I am
not to speak of such consciences, but of the conscience of man. Now the
conscience of man is the judgment of man upon himself as he is subject to Gods
judgment. Divines use to express it in this Syllogism, He that truly
believes in Christ shall be saved: My conscience tells me this is Gods word.
But I believe truly in Christ: My conscience tells me this also. Therefore I
shall be saved. And so also on the contrary side. So that conscience is a man's
true judgment of himself: 1. Cor. 11.31.
If we would judge our selves; that is, If we would bring our selves before the
tribunal of conscience to receive its judgment.

Four propositions are contained in that portion of Scripture which I have
chosen to make the subject of this ensuing treatise, Romans 2.15.

Four Propositions.
1. That there is in every man a conscience. [Their consciences bearing them
witness,] Every one of them had a conscience bearing them witness.

2. That the light which conscience is directed to work by is knowledge.
[written in their hearts.]

3. That the bond that binds a man's conscience is Gods law. [which show the
effect of the law written in their hearts.]

4. That the office and duty of conscience is to bear witness either with our
selves or against our selves, accusing or excusing our selves or actions.
[bearing witness, and their thoughts accusing or excusing one another.] I
begin with the first.

Proposition I. There is in every man a conscience.
THere was a conscience in all these heathen in the text; 1. There is in every
man a conscience.
their consciences bearing them witness. There was a conscience in the Scribes
and Pharisees: John 8.9.
being convicted of their own consciences. There is a conscience in good men:
as in Paul; Our rejoicing is this, 2. Cor. 1.12.
the testimony of our conscience. There is a conscience in wicked men: their
mind and conscience is defiled. Tit. 1.15.
As it is impossible the fire should be without heat, so it is impossible that
any man should be without a conscience. Indeed we use to say, Such an one has
no conscience: but our meaning is, that he has no good conscience. But every
one has a conscience, either good or bad. The Lord engraved conscience in man
when he created him at first. True it is, since the fall of man conscience is
miserably corrupted; but man can never put it off: Conscience continues for
ever in every man, whether he be in earth or heaven or hell. The most base and
devilish profanelings in the world have a conscience: Let them choke it or
smother it as much as they can, let them whore it or game it or drink it away
as much as they are able for their hearts; yet conscience will continue in
spite of their teeth.

1. No length of time can wear this conscience out. What made Joseph's brethren
to remember the cruel usage they showed him but conscience? It was about
twenty years before; yet they could not vvear it out.

2. No violence nor force is able to suppress conscience but that one day or
other it will show it self. What made Judas go and carry back the money that he
betrayed our Savior for, and also to cry out, I have sinned, but conscience?
No question but he labored to suppress it; but he could not.

3. No greatness nor power is able to stifle conscience, but that it will one
day like a band-dog fly in a sinners face. What made Pharaoh cry out, I am
wicked, but conscience? He was a great King; and yet he was not able to
over-povver conscience.

4. No music, mirth, or jovializing can charm conscience, but it will play
the devil to a vvretched soul for all that. What was the evil spirit of
melancholy that came upon Saul, but conscience? He thought to allay it with
instruments of music; but it still came again.

5. Death it self is not able to part conscience from a sinner. What is that
worm that shall never die, but only conscience? and in hell conscience is as
that fire that never goes out.

I confess some seem to have lost conscience quite: They can omit good duties
as though they had no conscience at all: they can defer repentance and
turning to God as though they had no more conscience then a beast: but one day
conscience will appear, and show plainly, that it was present with them
every moment of their lives, and privy to all their thoughts and all their
vvayes, and set before them all the things that they have done. Be men never so
secure and senseless, and seared for the present, conscience will break out
either first or last: Either here or in hell it will appear to every man, That
he has and ever had a conscience.

Now the reasons why the Lord did plant a conscience in every man living are,
Reasons
1. Because the Lord is a very righteous Judge: 1.
And as he commands earthly judges not to judge without witness: so he
himself will not judge without witness, and therefore he planteth a
conscience in every one to bring in evidence for him or against him at Gods
tribunal. 2. Because the Lord is very merciful. 2.
We are vvonderous forgetful and mindlesse of God and of our own souls, and
have need to be quickened up to our duties: therefore the Lord has given every
one of us a conscience to be a continual monitour. Sometime we forget to
pray, and then conscience puts us in mind to go to God: sometime we are
dull in the duty, and conscience is as a prick to quicken us. Sometime our
passions are distempered, and then conscience checketh and commands us to
bridle them. We should never be kept in any order if it were not for
conscience: Therefore has the Lord in mercy given us a conscience.


The first use is, Use 1.
to condemn that diabolical proverb common among men; Conscience is hanged a
great while ago. No, no; Achitophel may hang himself, but he cannot hang his
conscience: Saul may kill himself, but conscience cannot be killed. It is a
worm that never dies. Mar. 9.44.
As the reasonable soul of man is immortal, so conscience also is immortal.

Secondly, Use. 2.
this condemns such as go about to suppress conscience: Their conscience
makes them melancholic and lumpish now and then, and they go about to shake
it off. Alas! why do ye go about that which is utterly impossible? Ye may
suppress it for a while, and gagge it for a while; but ye can never shake it
off. Conscience sticks so close that a man may as soon shake off himself as
his conscience. And indeed his conscience is himself: 1. Cor. 11.28.
Let a man examine himself, verse 13.
that is, his conscience. Judge in your selves, that is, Judge in your
consciences.

Use 3.
Thirdly, this confuteth that drunken opinion, That conscience is nothing but a
present fit of melancholy. No; It causes it may be the present melancholic
fit, but it is not it. Conscience is a standing power in a man that is evermore
with him, and will evermore judge him and condemn him if he be guilty before
God. It will be with him when his dumpish fit is over. Let him laugh and be
merry; yet conscience lies at the bottom of all, and will spoil all the mirth.
Prove. 14.13.
Let the drunkard be never so joviall; I will not believe but conscience in the
midst of that drunken mirth causes some sadness within, and tells him this
is a very wicked life. Let the carnal hypocrite daub up the matter with good
duties and good prayers and good hopes; I cannot believe but there is a
conscience lies at the bottom and tells him he is rotten for all this. Genesis
4.5.
You may see this in Cain: He had been at a good duty, sacrificing to the Lord;
but his countenance fell when he had done, conscience did lie at the bottom,
and did tell him God did not accept him. Conscience is with evil men at church
at sermon, at sacrament, and tells them secretly that they are not the
persons to whom the blessing of these ordinances belong.

Lastly, Use 4.
this may be for exhortation to the godly; That they would consider this, that
they have ever a conscience within them; and that therefore they would labor
always to keep it void of offense: which was Paul's exercise, Acts 24.16. Take
head you offend not your consciences in duties of piety toward God, in your
prayings, hearings, etc. no nor in your callings, eatings, drinkings,
liberties, recreations: Look always to your consciences, that you offend them
not, because they are ever with you. When two live ever together, they had need
not offend one another; else there will be no quiet: You and your consciences
must ever live together: if ye offend them* ye are like to have very ill lives.
Better live with a cursed scold then live with an offended conscience: ye had
better offend the whole world then offend conscience. There are none whom ye
are always to live with; but conscience ye are always to live with. Ye are
not always to live with your husbands, nor always with your wives, nor
always with your parents or masters; there is a time when you must part: but
conscience and you will never part: Therefore labor to keep it void of
offense. And thus much of the first proposition* There is in every man a
conscience.

Proposition II. The light that conscience acts by, is knowledge.
II. proposition.
THis knowledge is twofold; 1. Of Gods law, 2. Of our selves.

1. The knowledge of Gods law. To know Gods will what is good, what is bad;
wha^ God commands, what he forbids. Every man under heaven has this law
of God in some measure writ in his conscience. I confess Gods children only
know Gods law to purpose, as it is a light to guide them in the way o^
salvation: but all the world have some measure of knowledge, whereby they may
gather tha^ there is a God, and that he ought to be worshipped and obeyed, and
that he has power over life and death. All the world have knowledge in some
measure what is good and what is not, what is to be done and what not, what is
according to conscience and what not: All the world have this knowledge in some
measure; I do not say, enough for salvation, but enough to make them
inexcusable before God for not following that light, and not living according
to that knowledge which they have. If there were not some light in this behalf,
some knowledge of the law of God in every man, conscience could do nothing.

2. Knowledge of our selves: This also is the light that conscience acts by.
There is in every man some measure of knowledge of himself according to the
measure of knowledge that he has of Gods law. Our consciences look backward
and forward; forward to Gods law, and backward on our selves, Whether we be
such as Gods law requires, yea or no. First, ye may find this in good men.
This light did the conscience of David go by: I was upright before God, says
his conscience, Psalm. 18.23.
and I kept my self from mine own iniquity. His conscience had a light whereby
he knew what he did. Secondly, ye shall find this in wicked men. This light the
conscience of Achan went by: I have sinned against the Lord God of Israel,
Josh. 7.20.
and thus and thus have I done.

These are the two lights that every man's conscience goes by: It has light in
some measure to know the law of God, what he should do and what he should not
do; and it has light in some measure to know himself, what he has done or not
done, whether he has done as he should yea or no. Now these two lights are
necessary; as thus I prove.

First, the knowledge of Gods law is necessary, For else conscience cannot
work. A drunkard might be drunk every day in the year, and yet conscience
could not trouble him nor condemn him of sin unless he knew the law, That
God has forbid drunkenness. And so the swearer. And so evil words and bad
thoughts conscience cannot accuse for, unless there be so much light as to
know they are forbidden. And therefore Divines do all say that the Synteresis
is necessary to the exercise of conscience. The Synteresis is this: When a man
keeps in his mind the knowledge of the things contained in Gods law: namely,
That we must obey God, honor our parents, not commit adultery, not kill, not
steal, not lie, not covet, etc. Unless the knowledge of these be kept in mind
conscience cannot work. And therefore when we would stir a man's conscience,
we appeal to his knowledge; Know you not that the unrighteous shall not inherit
the kingdom of God? 1. Cor. 6.9.
As if he had said, Your own consciences may condemn you to the pit of hell if
ye be unrighteous, because your Synteresis can tell you that the unrighteous
shall not inherit the kingdom of God. This is the reason why we say that there
is a natural conscience and there is an illuminated conscience; because some
have no light but only the light of nature, some have besides the light of
Gods word, which shows that which nature shows, and much more clearly, and
teaches many things more which nature cannot teach: And hence the conscience
of the illightned condemns for such things as the natural conscience never
stirs about.

Secondly, the knowledge of our selves is needful; else conscience cannot act
neither. Though we know what Gods law requires and what not, what is good and
what not, yet unless we know whether we go with it or against it, conscience
cannot accuse nor excuse. As for example; A close hypocrite, he knows well
enough that the Lord has condemned hypocrisy, and that hypocrites must have
their portion in hell: yet if he do not know himself to be an hypocrite, his
conscience can never condemn him for being one. And therefore both these
knowledges are necessary, as well the knowledge of a man's self as of Gods
law. Many who had a hand in crucifying our Savior, sinned grievously; yet
they sinned not against knowledge, because they knevv not what they did:
Father, forgive them, Luke 23.34.
they know not what they do.

Thirdly, It is a contradiction to say a blind conscience in act. The
conscience cannot be blind and yet actually condemn. Indeed the conscience it
self may be blind, but it can never act and be blind: If it truly accuse or
excuse it must have some light. It is true, it may erroneously excuse or
accuse, and yet have no true light: Seeming light is enough to do that: seeming
knowledge is enough to make conscience erroneously excuse: As they who killed
the Apostles, John 16.2.
their consciences excused them, and told them they did God good service: they
seemed to know it was good service to God, and therefore their consciences
excused them, etc. Thus ye see that the light that conscience works by is
knowledge.

The use of this point is first, Use 1.
to let us see the infinite necessity of knowledge. As good have no conscience
at all as conscience without knowledge: for it cannot act and perform its
office. This is the reason why so many thousands go on in their sins
without repentance, because being ignorant they have no conscience to prick
them thereunto: as Jer. 8.6. No man repents him of his wickedness, saying,
What have I done? Why, what was the reason that conscience did not prick
them, and say, This thou have done and that, Thus ye have rebelled, etc? The
text answers in the next verse, My people know not the judgment of the Lord.
The stork knows her time, and the turtle, and the swallow; but my people do
not know their duties.

Use 2.
Another use is, to exhort us that we would labor to perfect the light of
conscience, that it may be able to guide us and direct us unto heaven. Our
conscience has knowledge enough by the light of nature to make us inexcusable,
and to clear the justice of God though he should damn us for ever: but there
must be a greater light then that, that must guide us to heaven. O let us pray
to Christ the true light to set up this light in us, that we may never be at a
loss in our way to happiness, never step out of the right path but our
conscience may be able to put us in again, never go slowly but our conscience
may spur us on faster; that our conscience may not be like the snuff of a
candle in a socket, that flameth up now and then, and then is dark again, and
again it flameth out and is dark again: A man may see his book by it, but he
cannot see to read; he may see his pen and ink by it, but he cannot see to
write; a woman may see her needle and cloth by it, but she cannot see to work:
so it is with some men's consciences: Their light is so dim that they can see
the duties, but they cannot see to do them; they can see the commandments of
God, but they cannot see to obey them. O labor to perfect the light of your
consciences, that ye may see to walk by them. And thus much also of the second
proposition, The light that conscience acts by, is knowledge.

Now I should come to the third proposition which as I first propounded them
was this, The bond that binds conscience is Gods law: But I will now a little
alter the method, and make the other which was propounded last to be the third
in the handling; and it is this,

Proposition III. The office of Conscience is to bear witness, to accuse or
excuse.
COnscience is put into this office by God himself. It is Gods officer: III.
Proposition. The office of Conscience is to bear witness.
Not only his register-book that shall be opened at the day of judgment,
wherein is set down our thoughts, words and deeds; but it is a preacher also to
tell us our duty both toward God and toward man: yea, it is a powerful
preacher; it exhorts, urges, provokes: yea, the most powerful preacher
that can be; it will cause the stoutest and stubbornest heart under heaven to
quake now and then; it will never let us alone till it have brought us either
to God or to the devil. Conscience is joined in commission with Gods own spirit
to be an instructour unto us in the way we should walk; so that the spirit and
it are resisted or obeyed together, grieved or delighted together: We cannot
sin against conscience but we sin also against Gods spirit; we cannot check
our own consciences but we check and quench the holy spirit of God.

The office of conscience to our selves is, to bear witness: My conscience
bears me witness, Romans 9.5.
says Paul. Conscience is always ready to do this office, if it shall at any
time be invited unto it: For conscience looks sometimes for inviting;
sometimes it will not bear witness unless we invite it and call upon it so to
do. But there will come a time when it will do it and must do it and shall do
it, namely at death or at judgment: then it will bear witness whether men
invite it or no. Now it may be suppressed and silenced and kept under from
witnessing; but then it must bear witness and shall, either excusing or
accusing, acquitting or condemning, when God shall judge the secrets of men's
hearts, as the Apostle speaks.

Four Properties of Conscience.
The properties that are given unto conscience in the discharge of its office
are four: 1. It is supreme; 2. It is impartial; 3. It is faithful; 4. It is
privy.

1. It is supreme: It has highest authority; it is the most uncontrollable
and ablest witness that can be: the greatest, weightiest witness in the
world; better then ten thousand witnesses. Though all the world do condemn us,
yet if our own consciences do not, we need not fear: And so on the contrary, if
conscience do condemn us, it will be small comfort though all the world
flatter and commend and excuse us. It is a supreme witness: Though all the
Angels in heaven should come and bear witness, their witness is not so
uncontrollable as conscience is. There is no appealing from the witness of
conscience; we must ^e tried by it. If conscience do acc^se and condemn us,
the Lord only is greater then our conscience, 1. John 3.20. and will give
judgment with it when it does its office. And if our conscience do not
condemn us, we may be confident to stand before all the judges and kings in
the world, yea, we may have confidence toward God, says the text. And as
conscience is supreme in bearing of witness, so also it is supreme in
commanding. All the commands of it are powerful and supreme: it will not be
slighted: it binds kings and princes: Nay, though God himself command the
contrary, yet can we not disobey conscience without sin. By this it
appears, that when conscience does witness its witness is supreme; when
conscience commands, its command is supreme.

2. Conscience as it is supreme in witnessing or commanding so it is impartial
in judging. It respects no persons, no estates, but accuses the richest as
well as the poorest, the greatest as well as the meanest. It made great
Belshazzar so to quake that the joints of his loins were loosed, and his knees
smote one against another, Dan. 5.6. It made great Felix to tremble to hear
Paul speak of righteousness and of judgment. Felix thought to scare Paul; but
conscience scared Felix. So on the other side, it is impartial in excusing. It
will give evidence of the good works of the poorest in the world as well as of
the wealthiest. Art thou never so mean? thy conscience will be as ready to
excuse thee if thou have done well, as if thou were the greatest. It is
impartial in its office: Others, it may be, dare not or will not accuse, but
conscience spares none, no not it self: Though its accusations do load and
burden and torment it self, yet it will do its office.

3. Conscience also is faithful in its office and sincere. It always speaks
of us as it thinks: It may be deceived and mistaken for a time, but it never
speaks contrary to what it thinks: It is a faithful and sincere witness
of our thoughts, words, actions, and courses, whether they be good or evil, so
far as it is illightned by Gods word. It ever gives evidence aright; it
never flattereth nor condemns any without a cause: It is a faithful and a
very upright witness. Others may dissemble with us, and commend us and applaud
us when we are naught, and call us good men and good women when we are nothing
so: but this will tell us plainly how vile and sinful we are; and if we say we
are good when we are not, it will tell us plainly we lie. 1. Jo^n 2.4.
He that says I know him, and keeps not his commandment^, is a liar. Mark;
though he say it, yet his conscience gives him the lie. It is faithful again
in excusing. It bears witness of every good duty we perform and of
whatsoever good is in us. Though all Jobs friends spoke evil of him, and God
himself by his outward judgments seemed to condemn him for a wicked man, yet
still his conscience (like a faithful witness) did not forsake him nay, it
offered to reason with God himself, Job 13.3.
I would reason with God: I know I shall be justified, and I will never forsake
mine innocence till I die. Still his conscience stood for him and excused him.
Thus on both sides conscience is a faithful and sincere witness: it will not
be corrupted to speak otherwise then it knows the matter is.

4. It is most privy to what it does witness. It is more privy to what we have
done then all the world: It can say more for us or against us then all the
world. Thou know all the wickedness that thy heart is privy unto, says
Solomon to Shimei 1. Kings 2.44.

The use of all this is; Use.
Seeing conscience is so supreme, so impartial, so saithfull, so privy, we
should take heed how we do any thing that might give it advantage against us.
If we were to appear before an earthly judge to answer for our behavior, and
should have a companion present continually with us, marking every thing in us,
telling us of every fault, and witnessing it against us unto the judge, how
careful would we be of doing any thing that might give him advantage against
us? Lo, we have conscience as a continual watchman, espying out all our
ways, setting down whatever we do amiss, checking us for it for the present,
and one day accusing us before God and setting all things in order before our
faces; Oh how should we then labor to get into Christ Jesus, that our
consciences may be purged in his blood, and study all our life long to keep
peace and friendship with them. Woe be to them who live in their sinne^! They
will need no other witness to come against them to condemn them for ever but
this witness conscience which lies continually in their bosoms.

This I have spoken for the office of conscience, which is to bear witness
either with us or against us: Now the parts of this bearing witness are,
first, its single witnessing; secondly, its judicial witnessing. By single
bearing witness I mean that conscience bears witness what we have done, and
what we do, and what we intend to do, and what we are: By judicial bearing
witness I mean that con^cience does pass sentence on the same whether it be
good or evil, whether it be concerning the action or the person.

First, therefore of the single bearing witness of conscience: Of Consciences
single bearing witness.
And that is about three things: 1. What we have done; 2. What we intend to do;
3. What is the frame and bent of our heart.

1. It bears witness what we have done; what in our childhood, what in our
youth, what in ou^ riper age, what openly, what secretly. Those things which
seem to be forgotten conscience will remember them to us: Like a writing in
marble, though it may be filled and choked with dust and covered with rubbish,
yet when that is done away, and the stone svvept clean, then the vvriting will
appear legible; so though men's deeds may for the present seem to be forgotten,
yet they are written in their hearts with a pen of iron and the point of a
diamond, as Origin observes upon Jer. 17.1. Now the thoughts and care^ of
this life put them out of our minds; but the time will come when all vvorldly
business shall cease, and the only business shall be to look into the
records of conscience. We use to say, Conscience has a very good memory. The
chief buttler had forgot his promise unto Joseph; but his conscience remembered
him of it two years after: Genesis 41.9.
I remember my faults this day, says his conscience. Adonibezek had forgot his
cruelty; but his conscience brought it to his mind: Judge. 1.7.
As I have done so God has requited me, says his conscience.

2. Conscience bears witness of what we intend and purpose to do, whether
against God or man. It will testify every purpose and project of the heart
though it be never acted* though it die in the heart and never come to light.
Men little think of this: Tush (says one) I never did such a thing, though I
once intended it, or had some thoughts about it. Mark; those very thoughts will
conscience bring forth and testify what they were. Hear the Apostle; in that
day God shall judge the secrets of men, etc. Romans 2.16.
The most hidden things conscience shall bring to light, and Christ shall judge
them.

3. Conscience bears witness of the bent and frame of our hearts, what we
affect most and love most, and rejoice and delight in most, and desire most and
grieve for most, what our affections run upon most, whether upon God or the
world, whether upon heaven or the things of this life. Conscience bare witness
to David, Psalm. 119.77.
that his delight was in the law of the Lord, that God was his portion, that
Gods statutes were his counselors. Conscience bare witness to the false
teachers in Christ's time, that they affected vain glory and the praise of men
more then the praise of God. Conscience bare witness to Demas, that
notwithstanding his fair profession his heart was set upon the world.
Conscience bare witness to Jehu, that for all his seeming zeal his heart was
not upright.

Ob. 1. Jer. 17.9.
But it may be objected, How can this be? The heart is deceitful above all
things: who can know it?

Answ.
Who can know it? That is, Who else can know it but a man himself? None under
God can know the heart of man but a man's own conscience, the spirit of man that
is in him. I confess a man may be ignorant of some secret and particular
deceit in his heart: but who knows not the general standing of his own
heart? or may know the chief bent of his own soul. David in a particular deceit
was ignorant: Psalm. 30.6.
I said in my prosperity, I shall never be moved, never distrust God more,
never be disquieted in my mind more. He was deceived in that particular; but he
knew very well the general and chief bent of his heart, that it was truly set
upon God and upon holiness. 2. It is true, many men take it that their hearts
are set upon God when they are not: but what is the reason? Not because they do
not or may not know the contrary, that they love the world most: but because
they will not know it, they are unwilling to believe it, they are loath to have
any bad conceit of themselves. So that when Jeremy says, The heart is
deceitful above all things: who can know it? his meaning is, What carnal man
can abide to know the worst of himself? 3. It is not because they know it not,
but because they will not hear the testimony of conscience: but when it
tells them truly how the case is with them, they gather all the rotten and
broken pieces of arguments together to stop the mouth of conscience, and to
persuade themselves to think well of themselves. 4. Men seem not to know their
own hearts, not because they do not know what they are, but because they are
ignorant of Gods law whereby they should judge of themselves. They know their
hearts are set on the world, and that the bent and frame of their affections
are placed on earthly things: but they hope an under-affection to God will be
accepted, to love God in the second place will serve the turn. They know they
are carnal; but they hope such carnality may be in a man and yet he be right.

Yea, but a man's heart may say on the contrary side, Ob. 2.
that he loves the world more then he loves God when he does not: how then
does conscience bear right witness? I answer,

This arises either from the strength of corruption and weakness of grace:
Answ.
We look into our selves, and see our corruptions violent, and our love to God
small; and so we are deceived, not seeing the radical power of this love of
God, which in regard of its virtue is stronger then the other: As a fool, if he
should feel hot water, would conclude that there is no cold at all in it;
whereas there is radical cold in that water, such as will expel all that heat
in a little space. Or else this arises from anguish of spirit, which so
disturbeth the mind that it cannot see its own condition nor be capable of the
comforts belonging unto it; as it was with the Israelites, Exodus 6.9. otherwise
doubtless we may know our own hearts; and when our conscience bears witness
its witness is right.

Use 1,
I. Use, of reproof to those who stand out against the witness of their
conscience, and like hard-hearted felons plead still, Not guilty, though never
so much evidence come against them, though conscience often tell them, this they
have done, thus they do, such they are. Oh stop not your ears against
conscience; stand not out against it, but believe its testimony, and make use
of it to repent of the evil it accuses of while mercy may be had, before God
himself comes and joyneth with conscience to condemn for ever.

Use 2.
II. It serves for singular encouragement to all to abound in good works.
Conscience will bear witness of them all to our unspeakable comfort in the
time of afflictions, yea at death and judgment. Job felt it a sweet thing to
have conscience give in testimony of his integrity and uprightness: When his
friends proved miserable comforters and God himself seemed to write bitter
things against him, yet his conscience witnessed that he had been eyes to the
blind, and feet to the lame, he had fed the hungry and clothed the naked and
comforted the fathe^lesse. There is not a good thing that ever we do but
conscience will afford us the sweetness and comfort of it in our toubles:
Remember, O Lord, says Hezekiah, Isai. 38* 3.
that I have walked before thee in truth and with a perfect heart.

2. The judic^all bearing witness of conscience.
We have spoken of consciences single bearing witness: Now follows its
judicial bearing witness; which is when it passes sentence upon on the
moral of our actions, whether they be good or evil, whether blessed or cursed.
This is performed by a Logical discourse, by way of reasoning on this manner,
The word says, Whoever looks on a woman to lust after her has committed
adultery in his heart: That is the synteresis. Now the assumption; But I have
had wanton eyes and lustful lookings after a woman: That is the single bearing
witness of conscience. Therefore I have committed adultery in my heart: That
is the judiciary sentence of conscience which it passes on a man's self. So
again; Whosoever crucifieth the flesh with the affections and lusts, he is in
Christ: But, says conscience, I crucify the flesh with its affections and
lusts; Therefore I am in Christ. Though there be not the form of this discourse
in our consciences, yet there is the force of it: for when conscience does
judicially witness against any man or for any man, it does it by the word, and
proceeds in the way which is propounded.

The use of this is, First for comfort to the godly, Use 1.
who may hence gather the assurance of their salvation from the rule of Gods
word and the witness of their conscience that they walk by this rule. The word
says, Matthew. 5.6.
He that hungreth and thirsts after righteousness shall be filled; 1. P^t.
1.01.
He that does these things shall never fall, etc. Get the rule of your hearts
and lives to meet and ye have what ye desire. O what infinite mercy is this to
all godly souls, that the Lord has planted this conscience in their bosoms,
that they need not go far for their comfort: their own consciences and the
rule may preach it to them.

V^e. 2.
Secondly, The wicked on the other side, if they continue as they are, may hence
gather arguments for their own damnation. If the rule and conscience might be
heard they would speak bitter things against them, and give a fearful sentence
on them. It may be they can smother their consciences now for a time; but they
will one day read them a fearful lecture. I speak not now only of those who
drown their consciences in their cups, and fear their consciences by their
gross sins; but of those who would seem godly and perform good duties, but
with hypocritical hearts and carnal minds. O that they would hear but
conscience argue a little in this manner; To be carnally minded is death, that
is, is an evident sign of a man that is in the state of death and damnation,
But, says conscience, I am carnally minded; or we are carnally minded:
Therefore we have an argument about us of death and damnation. And so also for
all other sins; There is not a wicked man under heaven but he may argue out
of his own miserable estate by his conscience, or he might if it were awaked,
as one day it will be.

Use 3.
Thirdly, this may serve for instruction. No matter what opinions men have of us
in the world: The question is, What is the judgment of our own consciences
upon us? It may be thou art taken for a man of great knowledge and a forward
man in godliness; it may be the godly dare not judge otherwise of thee: but
the question is, What is the judgment of conscience? Does not thy conscience
tell thee thou art but a proud fool, conceited of thy knowledge, and love to
hear thy self talk? And so for thy performance of good duties, what testimony
does conscience give of the manner of doing of them? 2. Cor. 1.12.
The testimonial of conscience is above all testimonials in the world: all the
good opinions of the world are not worth a rush without this: If conscien^^ can
say that in our ways we seek to please God, and allow not our selves in any
evil way, this testimony is full and satisfactory, and only this.

Yet further concerning this judicial witness of conscience: It is either
about things to be done or omitted, or things already done or omitted. The
judicial witness of conscience about things to be done or omitted is double:
1. To judge out of Gods law whether it be good or evil; 2, To counsel out of
our own judgments either to do it or forbear it according as the nature of
the action is: If it be good, conscience will counsel us to do it; if bad, to
forbear it. The judicial witness of conscience about things already done is
fourefold: 1. To approve; 2. To absolve; 3. To mislike; 4. To condemn. I begin
with the first, the judicial witness of conscience about things to be done
or omitted: where I shall consider, first, the Office of conscience in this
behalf, viz. 1. To judge, 2. To counsel: and then the Adjuncts of conscience in
discharging this office.

1. Conscience judges of the thing to be done, 1. Conscience judges.
whether it be good or evil, lavvfull or unlawful. As we try the weight
of gold by a pair of balances, so conscience tries all our actions by Gods
word. It is the oracle of God: As the Jews went to Gods oracle to enquire of
the Lord, so our conscience is Gods oracle to enquire of and to determine of
things whether they be good or evil: It is a judge in the bosom. When the
question in Corinth was, whether women should be uncovered when they pray, the
Apostle sends them to conscience for judgment, 1. Cor. 11.13.
Judge in your selves, says he* whether it be comely or no; that is. Put it to
the judgment of your own consciences. So say the disciples to the Jews,
Whether it be better to obey God or man, judge ye; Put it to your own
consciences. Thus ye see it is the office of conscience to judge of an action
to be done whether it be good or bad, lawful or unlawful.

2. Conscience counsels.
2. The second office of conscience is to counsel for the doing of that which is
good and forbearing of that which is evil. This is that faithful friend in our
bosom, that voice within us and behind us saying, This is the way; walk in it.
Isai 30.21.
Mark the words there; ye see these two offices of conscience. This is the way;
there is the judgment of conscience: and walk in it; there is the counsel of
conscience. Nay, conscience does not only give good counsel, but if it have
leave it will bring arguments to persuade to follow it: it will tell us the
thing is well-pleasing to God, of good report, that which will bring peace to
our hearts. And so on the contrary, if it be evil, conscience will counsel us
to forbear, yea bring arguments to dissuade; O do it not: it will tend to the
dishonor of God, and be offensive to others* and wound our souls, etc. It was
conscience that withheld David from killing Saul, 1. Sam. 24.10
and pressed him from it by a strong argument, O he is the Lords Anointed. It was
conscience that withheld Joseph from yielding to the enticings of his
mistress, and yielded him an argument to dissuade him from it, How shall I do
this great wickedness, and so sin against God? It was conscience that
dissuaded Nehemiah from flying, Should such a man as I fly? Nehem. 6.11.
And if one argument will not serve, conscience will use more.

The use of this may be first for Instruction. Use 1.
Hence we learn that natural men may have a conscience urging to good and
restraining from evil. There is no man so evil or ignorant but he has
naturally some light with him by which conscience is set on work to advise and
to counsel, and to say, This is very good; do it: This is very sinful, forbear
it. This therefore is no sign of grace in any man to have his conscience
calling upon him to do good or dissuading him from evil: The very heathen had
so according to their light; yea and in many of them it was forcible to
restrain them from many sins which they were inclined unto. And so may many
men be put upon many good duties, not for any love or liking of that which is
good, but because they would please and satisfy conscience, which otherwise
will not suffer them to be quiet. It was conscience that kept Abimelech from
defiling Sarah, and yet a carnal man.

Here then a question may be asked, Object.
Whether a mere natural man can avoid sin for conscience sake.

I answer, That this expression, Answ.
for conscience sake, may be taken two ways: either 1. for conscience of the
commandment of God and love to it; and so none but Gods children do obey for
conscience sake: and so it is meant when Paul speaks of being subject for
conscience sake, Romans 13.5. 1. P^t. 2.19.
and Peter speaks of suffering wrong for conscience sake. Or secondly, for
conscience sake, that is, when conscience it self enforced by scar compels
one to do a thing or not to do it: As we say, My conscience will not suffer me.
Thus carnal men come to church for conscience sake, and pray for conscience
sake, etc. that is, Their conscience drives them to these duties, and will not
be quiet without they perform them.

Use 2.
Secondly, Since a mere natural man may have a conscience stirring him up to
good as well as the truly godly, it will not be amiss to give you the
difference. The difference is in three things; 1. A godly man's conscience
siniteth him and stirs him very kindly, so that he melts before God. When
David had numbered the people, the text says, 1 Samuel 24.10.
his heart smote him. The word signifies, it smote him kindly, gave him a
loving blow, made him spread forth himself before God. A wicked man's conscience
gives him a dead blow, a churlish and sullen blow. 2. A godly man's conscience
stirs him reciprocally: He stirs up his conscience, and his conscience
stirs up him; he speaks to his conscience, and his conscience speaks to
him: The stirring is reciprocal. Psalm. 4.4.
Commune with your hearts. What have thou done, O my soul? Thus and thus have I
done, says the soul. Whereas a wicked man's conscience speaks to him, but he
cannot endure to speak to his conscience: his conscience stirs him, but he
has no will to stir his conscience; nay, he does all he can to keep it
quiet: But the godly as his conscience smites him so he smites upon his
conscience: I smote upon my thigh, says Ephraim. Jer. 31.19.
The godly, when conscience stirs them, they stir it and provoke it to
speak out all it has to say. Commune with your own heart, and be still: They
are still to give it full audience, and call upon it to speak on; What have
thou more to say, Conscience? 3. A godly man's conscience stirs him to good;
and he is resolved to go to the utmost of what conscience stirs him unto:
that with Job, Job. 27.6.
his conscience may not reproach him all his days for not following it: Whereas
it is otherwise with the wicked.


3. The third use is this; Use 3.
Seeing conscience is appointed by God to be our guide and our counselor, it
should be our practice in every thing we do to ask counsel of conscience
whether we were best do it or no. I say that conscience is Gods oracle:
Whatsoever we are to do we should (as David) enquire of Gods oracle, 1. Sam.
23.2.
May I go this way to work, or shall I take an other course? Hear counsel and
receive instruction, says Solomon, Prove. 19.20.
that thou may be wise at thy latter end. Conscience is a faithful
counselor; hear it. It is the great mercy of God that thou have such a
privy counsel: Thou can go no where but it is about thee to advise thee.
Therefore as Rehoboam said to his green heads, What counsel give you? so say
thou to thy conscience, What advise give thou, Conscience, in this case? my
carnal friends counsel me thus and thus; mine own carnal heart and lusts
would have me go this way: but, Conscience, what counsel give thou?

Use 4.
4. The fourth use is to reprove the custom of most men, who with Ahab refuse
the counsel of that one true wholesome prophet, and have four hundred other
counselors who will give counsel as they would have it: They regard not this
good Michaiah; they slight the counsel of conscience; their lusts and their
carnal reason and flesh and blood are their counselors; The counsel of
conscience, they say, is not good at this time, as he said of Achitophels: They
will hear conscience at another time, but not now. But take heed; for if you
reject the counsel of conscience, it is because the Lord has a purpose to
destroy you.

The Adjuncts of conscience, which show themselves in the discharge of this
duty of judging and counselling.
The adjuncts of conscience.
THe adjuncts are of two sorts: 1. such as respect consciences ability to
discharge its duty; 2. such as accompany conscience in the discharge thereof.

Of the former sort are four: 1. An illightened conscience. 2. An erroneous
conscience. 3. A doubting conscience. 4. A scrupulous conscience.


Of the latter sort are two: 1. A faithful conscience. 2. An unfaithful
conscience.


First, 1. An illightened conscience.
the illightened conscience is such a conscience as is in it self rightly
informed by Gods law, and does direct and judge aright in matters both
concerning our general and particular calling, both toward God and toward
man. And this illightened conscience is a great blessing of God: 1. because it
is the proper effect of the law of God; 2. because it is a very great advantage
to a man in the whole course of his life when a man's conscience is illightened
to direct him in every case what he is to do.

If an illightened conscience be so great a blessing, Use 1.
then be thankful to God for it if ye have it, and use it as a blessing. Some
have it, and use it not as a blessing: The devils have it as a curse; many
wicked men have it as a curse: It makes their sins the greater. Like as a
color, the more light shines upon it the greater it is green is more green,
and white is more white, and red more red, etc. So it is with sin: the more
light thy conscience has the greater is thy sin; thy drunkenness is more
heinous, and thy swearing and the like, by how much committed against more
light. Oh therefore make use of the light of thy conscience, as David did: Thy
word is a lump unto my feet, and a light unto my paths. Psalm. 119.105.
What follovveth? I have sworn, and I will perform it, to keep thy righteous
judgments. Mark; when his conscience was illightened, he bound himself to
follow the directions thereof.

2. Is an illightened conscience such a blessing? Use 2.
O labor to get it; be not without it for a world. Thou were better walk
blindfold over narrovv bridges and planks, better walk in the dark through a
place full of downfalls and marlpits, then walk without a conscience
illightened. He who walks in the darkness knows not whither he goes, John
12.35. O labor therefore to get a conscience illightened. It is true, a man
may have an illightened conscience and yet go to hell: but this is most
certain; without an illightened conscience a man cannot go to heaven. And if
thy conscience be something illightened, yet labor for more light. It will
prevent many a stumble, save thee from many a knock. Thou know not what
case thou may be in, what difficult straits thou may be put unto: if thou
have not light in thy conscience to direct thee, what will thou do?

II. An erroneous conscience.
2. An erroneous conscience.
SEcondly, an erroneous conscience is, when conscience not understanding Gods
law, or misapplying it, does judge amiss and direct amiss. So Joseph's
conscience for a while was in an error when Mary was found with child: Matthew.
1 19.
His conscience informed him that he must either make her a public example or
put her away privily. Here his conscience erred about this particular until
the Angel had better informed him. There is a question here raised by Divines,
Quest.
and it is, Whether we ought to follow conscience erring or no? A question very
necessary to be handled, partly because of men's ignorance in this kind, and
partly because of the frequency of the case. I answer thus;

First, Answ.
we must not obey conscience erring or counselling to that which is evil; For
our error of conscience does not make the transgression of the law to be no
sin; though an erroneous conscience lead us to transgress it. 1. Because the
law of God is above conscience; and therefore the commandment of Gods law
stands in full force though conscience command contrary to it. Suppose a man
should think in his conscience he might not take an oath though never so
lawfully called thereunto by the magistrate and in never so necessary a case,
when as the word of God commands us to swear in truth, in righteousness, and
in judgment; I must follow the commandment of God rather then conscience,
because Gods law is above conscience. 2. Because if I follovv my conscience
when it is in an error, I offend not only against Gods law but I offend
also my conscience: For though for the present while conscience is erroneous it
does not take offense, yet when it comes to see its own error then it will.
Therefore this is our first answer, We must not obey conscience erring, or
counselling to that which is evil. If our conscience should counsel us to tell
a lie to help our neighbor, that is evil and against Gods law; and therefore
if in doing it we do obey conscience, we sin.

Secondly we answer, 2.
That an erroneous conscience whatever it commands (though the law of God
commands the clean contrary) yet we cannot disobey it without sin. For
this is a constant rule, We always sin when we disobey conscience: If
conscience err not, then in disobeying it we sin double, against the law
and against conscience: if conscience do err and we disobey it, we sin
too; for though we do not sin against the law, yet we sin against
conscience, and so against the law too; not as though we were bound to obey
conscience when it erreth, and yet we sin if we disobey it.

3.
Thirdly, Albeit it be alvvayes a sin to disobey conscience though it err,
yet it is not alvvayes a sin to obey conscience when it erreth. Let us
consider three propositions, and you shall see what I mean. First, If
conscience think that to be commanded which is absolutely forbidden, or that to
be forbidden which is expressly commanded, then we sin which side soever
we take: As if an ignorant man thinks in his conscience that he is bound to
pray to Saints departed, which thing the Lord has expressly forbidden: if
this man do pray unto Saints, he sins, because the Lord has expressly
forbid him to do it; if he do not pray unto Saints, he sins too, because his
conscience tells him he is commanded to pray unto them. The second
proposition is this, If conscience hold a thing indifferent to do or not to do
which yet is not indifferent but absolutely commanded, then it is always a
sin not to do it, but it is no sin to do it. The third proposition is this,
If conscience hold a thing necessary which God has left indifferent, as if a
man in conscience thought that he o^ght to pray four times a day (which thing
yet God has left indifferent) in this he is bound to obey conscience though it
err. And it is no sin to obey conscience thus erring; though it be a sin
in conscience thus to err.

The use of this is, I. Use 1.
To let us see what a sacred sovereigne thing a man's conscience is. It is
alvvayes a sin to disobey conscience whether it err or no, as it is
alvvayes a sin to disobey God. A man can never go against his conscience but
he sins. 1. Because conscience is our guide: It is our inward and our
inseparable guide; we can never come by any direction but by conscience; we
can never let in the commandment of God but only by conscience: and therefore
the Lord has made it a very sovereigne thing. 2. Because we break a
commandment through the loins of a sin, when we go against conscience. Ajax
light upon a beast and slew it: his conscience thought verily it was a man;
Kill it not, says conscience, it is a man: he goes against his conscience and
kills it. His conscience here was in an error, yet he as truly guilty of
murder before God as if he had indeed slain a man, because he slew a man
through the loins of this beast: His bloody mind looked at a man, and smote at
a man, and slew a man. So when conscience is erroneous, and thinks this is
a commandment of God; it is not so, but he thinks it so in his conscience; if
he do contrary he breaks a commandment though it be none, because the error
of his conscience made it one to him. Was not Herod truly guilty of the murder
of Christ? He thought in his conscience that Christ had been among the infants
slain at Bethlehem. Thus conscience is a sovereigne thing: It is alvvayes a
sin to go against it err or not err: and if it be a sin to go against
conscience when it erreth, what a sin is it to go against it when it does
not err?

Use 2.
II. This may serve for a word of exhortation, to exhort men to bevvare lest
they sin against conscience; especially when conscience is in the right.
Conscience is as Gods face in a man: when conscience looks on thee, the Lord
looks on thee. It is true, the Lord looks on thee alvvayes: but thou may
see the Lords looking upon thee when conscience looks on thee: And therefore
thou never sinnest against conscience but thou provokest the Lord to his face,
Isa. 65.3.
when not only God sees thee but thou see him. Thy conscience shows
thee the Lord; it presents God before thine eyes, commanding or forbidding,
Will thou do the evil now? Will thou omit the good duty now? When conscience
finds fault thou do now provoke the Lord to his face. If it be such a
sin to sin against conscience in an error, it is much more a sin to
sin against conscience it being in the right. Thus much of a conscience
erring.

III. A doubting conscience.
3. A doubting conscience.
A Doubting conscience is such a conscience as so hangs in suspense that it
knows not which way to take: it knows not which is the sin and which not.
If it goes this way to work, It may be I shall sin, says conscience: if that
way, It may be I shall sin too, says conscience. Such a man sins which
way soever he takes. The reason is this, because he doubts. He that doubts
is condemned if he eat, Romans 14.23.
says the Apostle: for whatsoever is not of faith is sin. Suppose a man
doubts whether it be lawful for him to do such a thing, and doubts also
whether he may lawfully omit the doing it; in such a case whether he do it or
not do it he sins, because both ways he doubts. Yet here these rules are
very useful.

1. Rule; Rule 1.
When conscience doubts on the one part and is resolved on the other, we must
refuse the doubting part and take that wherein we are certain and sure. As for
example; When one doubts of the lawfulness of playing at cards and dice; he
is sure it is no sin not to play, but whether he may lawfully play he
doubts: in this case he is bound not to play. So when one doubts whether it
be a sin not to call his family together every day to prayer; Gods ministers
tell him he must or he sins: I doubt of that, says he. Do you so? but you
are sure it is no sin to do it: Therefore you are bound to do it, because you
are bound to decline the doubtful part and take that which is certain. And so
of all other the like particulars.

2. Rule 2.
When conscience doubts on both sides which is the sin and which not, then
a man ought to do that which is most void of offense. As for example; Say an
Anabaptist amongst us doubts whether it be a sin in him to bring his child
to church to be baptized, or a sin to refuse; here is rule is, That that
which is most void of offense, and most agreeable to brotherly unity and
concord, is to be taken, the balance hanging otherwise even; and the arguments
to urge both the one or the other seeming of like weight, then this must be put
into the scale and resolve the doubt.

Rule 3.
3. It is lawful to do some things when yet our conscience doubts of the
lawfulness of them. For we must consider there are two kinds of doubting:
there is a speculative doubting, and there is a practical doubting.
Speculative doubting is to doubt of the lawfulness of the thing it self to be
done: Practical doubting is to doubt of the lawfulness of the doing of it.
Now this latter is not always a sin, but the other is: As for example; If a
servant be commanded of his master to attend on him on the Lords day, he
knows not what his business should be, and perhaps doubts it is not of
such moment as to be done on that day; yet he has no reason to deny his
attendance: in this case though he doubt of the lawfulness of the thing done,
yet he need not doubt of the doing of it, because he knows not what the
business is, and has no reason whereby he is able to justify his refusal.
And so much also of a doubting conscience.

IV. A scrupulous conscience.
4 A scrupulous conscience.
THe difference between a doubting conscience and a scrupulous conscience is
this; A doubtful conscience hangs in suspense, and doubts which is the
sin and which is lawful; but a scrupulous conscience inclines to the
lawfulness of the thing to be done, but yet not without many doubts and
scruples, because of some difficulties which it has heard of, and which it
knows not how to answer or resolve. The rule which here we must go by is
this, When we incline to the lawfulness of the thing, we should labor to
suppress all difficulties and ambiguities which cause us to doubt. The Apostle
includes this rule in that word fully; Let every man be fully persuaded in his
heart: Get all difficulties removed, all stumblings, and stickings, and
hoverings, and scruples taken away.

But how if that cannot be done? Quest.
how if we cannot get all scruples removed?

If that cannot be done, Answ.
then it is lavvfull to follovv conscience notvvithstanding the doubts and
scruples of it. Observe that place well, Deuteronomy. 13.1, etc. Deuteronomy. 13.1, 2, 3, 4.
the Lord commands if a false prophet should come amongst them to dravv them
from the truth, and should show a sign or miracle to confirm his doctrine,
and the sign should come to pass (which might put doubts and scruples into
their consciences) nevertheless conscience inclining to the truth they are
bound to stand to that: for these doubts and scruples do not argue a want of
faith, but only a weakness of it.

I. Use 1.
This shows what need we have to labor to have our consciences rightly
informed. It is a comfortable thing for a Christian to have his conscience so
fully illightened as that he can without doubting or scruple discharge the
duties both of his general and particular calling: And it is a great
disturbance to a Christians mind, when his conscience is so vveak and ignorant
that he cannot perform his duties without doubts and scruples whether he is
right or no, especially in matters of greatest moment. It is a great misery to
have our consciences blind, which should be our guides, and which it is a
sin to disobey. This is the reason why S. Paul does so often speak, I would
not have you ignorant, 1. Cor. 10.1. and 11.3. It is a very great misery that
ones conscience should be ignorant what to do, what to hold, what to
follovv: I say, it is a lamentable misery, that many who have follovved the
directions of conscience, should by it be led to death and damnation, to do
things contrary to Gods word. What a misery was it for the Jews to have zeal
and not according to knowledge? etc.

Use 2. Prove. 29.1. Means to get knowledge.
II. This should teach us to use the means truly to inform conscience. Without
knowledge the heart is not good; that is, it is most profane. There be three
means to get knowledge. 1. Let us pray unto God that he would open our
understandings; 1.
that as he has given us consciences to guide us, so also he would give our
guides eyes that they may be able to direct us aright. The truth is, it is God
only that can soundly illighten our consciences: and therefore let us pray
unto him to do it. All our studying, and reading, and hearing, and conferring
will never be able to do it: it is only in the power of him who made us to do
it. Psalm. 119 73.
Thy hands have made and fashioned me: O give me understanding, that I may
learn thy commandments. He who made our consciences, he only can give them
this heavenly light of true knowledge and right understanding: and therefore
let us seek earnestly to him for it. 2. 2.
We must seek it in humility, always suspecting our own knowledge. We are not
too confidently and presumptuously to trust to our own judgment, and despise
or neglect the judgment of others. Psalm. 25.9.
The humble God will teach: Pride and self-conceitednesse blinds exceedingly.
3. 3.
We must seek with sobriety, always contenting our selves with that knowledge
which is most necessary, and not be curious about vain and idle-brained
questions, or solicitous to answer every objection that shall be raised up
against the truth. A lover of the truth should not be ready to entertain all
objections against it, and never be settled till he can answer all that can be
cast in; which will be never. It is not expected that there should be in every
man such a ripeness of judgment and such a measure of illumination as that he
should be able to dispute with the most learned, or answer every objection that
can be raised: But we must with that good Martyr say, Though I cannot dispute
for Christ I can die for him: We must be content with our measure, to be wise
unto sobriety.

III. Use 3. Antonius.
Those godly souls that have weak consciences must use them very gently:
Scrupulosi non sunt rigide tractandi, Those that are scrupulous are not to be
handled rigidly. When a mote is in the eye, it is not boistrously to be dealt
withal; that will make it worse. The eye is a tender part, and so is the
conscience. Again, we must take heed of offending weak consciences. It may be
thou know thine own liberty, that thou may do this or that; but thy
brother is vveak, and he does not know it to be lavvfull: O take heed of
giving offense: Consider the Apostles words, 1. Cor. 8.12. When ye sin
against your brethren, and wound their weak consciences, ye sin against
Christ. Consider also the practice of the Apostle, and the resolution that he
had; If meat offend my brother, I will eat no flesh while the world stands,
verse. 13. It is a grievous offense to offend the conscience of the vveak; and
therefore bevvare of it. They are very unchristian speeches, I know mine own
liberty: If others be offended, what care I? Why should I prejudice my self for
them? It is true, another man's conscience cannot abridge me of my liberty: but
yet I in charity ought to suspend the act of my liberty when I know the using
it will give offense to the vveak.

Use 4.
IV. To admonish our selves, if conscience be so tender a thing, to be careful
that we offend not our own consciences. Conscience is quickly offended; but it
is not so soon pacified. Every notorious step into evil, or neglect in duty,
offends conscience; and conscience will keep a grudge a long time, and will
give many a secret wound, deading the heart to duty, making faith and
confidence in God dull: we cannot pray with courage, 1. John. 3.21.
nor come before God with boldness. If our hearts condemn us not, we have
confidence, says John. An erroneous conscience will defile you; a doubting
conscience distract you; a scrupulous conscience unsettle you: but above all
other, an illightened conscience, if it have any thing against you, will
exceedingly disable you; this stabbeth at the heart your confidence toward
God. Go then and labor to purge conscience, else conscience will hinder you;
whether you pray, or hear, or receive the Sacrament, etc. it will deprive you
of comfort. Matthew. 5.23.
If thou bring thy gift to the altar, and there remembrest that thy brother
has ought against thee, leave there thy gift before the altar: first go and be
reconciled to thy brother, and then come and offer thy gift. The case is
greater and more dangerous when conscience has something against us: there is
no offering will be accepted until conscience be satisfied. If thou should
be about to pray, and conscience should stand up against thee as an adversary,
and tell thee thou have been vain, and loose, and carnal all this day, thou
have not set thy self to keep close to God this day, thou have fallen into this
and that sin this day; thou art not fit to pray till thou have reconciled thy
self to conscience: Alas, thy conscience will secretly undermine all thy
praying. First, therefore reconcile conscience by humbling thy self, and
breaking thy heart, and resolving, I have sinned, I will do no more. When
conscience can say thy sorrow, and repentance, and resolution for new obedience
is sincere, then thou art fit to pray, but not before. So whatever other duty
thou go about, be sure to reconcile conscience; else all will miscarry.

V. A faithful conscience.
THus I have expounded the adjuncts of conscience which show themselves in the
discharge of its duty, namely, such as respect consciences ability to the doing
of it: Which, as ye have heard, are four: 1. an illightened conscience; 2. an
erroneous conscience; 3. a doubting conscience; 4. a scrupulous conscience. Now
follows those which do accompany it in the doing of its duty: And they are
two: 1. a faithful conscience; 2. an unfaithful conscience.

5. A faithful conscience.
A faithful conscience is that which does always advise and counsel aright
when need is. This is a very rare conscience: It is rare to find a conscience
every way faithful. For, to say the truth, conscience is always faithful in
it self; for it knows not how to deal deceitfully with any man: Prove. 20.6.
but yet I may say, as Solomon, A faithful man who can find? so, A faithful
conscience who can find? It is a very rare thing. Not for any deceit that is in
conscience it self, but because men commonly would have it unfaithful;
therefore a conscience that will not let men make it unfaithful though they
would, such a conscience I call a faithful conscience: and I say it is rare.
But such a conscience there is; and it has three properties: 1. It is
watchful; 2. It is rigid and severe; 3. It is importunate.

Properties: 1. It is watchful.
1. A faithful conscience is watchful, always awake to apprehend every
opportunity of doing and receiving good, or resisting evil. As when there is an
opportunity to pray, to hear, to show mercy* a faithful conscience will
remember us of it, and put us upon it; as also when there is any opportunity of
quickening and edifying our selves or others. It was a watchful conscience that
made David say, I will never forget thy precepts: Psalm. 119.39.
that is, I will never omit any opportunity to remember them to do them. It was
a watchful conscience that made Paul say, 1. Cor. 9.22.
I became all things to all men, that by all means I might save some; that is,
by taking all opportunities and advantages to do good. It was a watchful
conscience that made Peter say, 2. Pet. 1.12.
I will not be negligent to put you always in remembrance of these things;
that is, I will neglect no opportunity. Again, a watchful conscience takes
notice of every motion and inclination to evil: it is awake to see when evil is
conceived; to tell us of it, to oppose it, and to dissuade us from it: like a
watchman on the top of a tower, always awake to see when any danger
approaches. It is Gods minister with eyes on every side, to epsy seasons of
good, and stir up to make use of them; and of evil, and give warning to avoid
them.

2. As a faithful conscience is watchful, 2. It is severe.
so also it is rigid and severe. In every cause it delivers its judgment:
nothing can escape its sentence: it will not favor our lusts in any
particular. If there be any opportunity of duty to God or man, it makes us to
hear of it; though it be such a duty as none other will call upon us for, or
it may be dare not put us in mind of; as of love, and care, and help toward
inferiors; yet conscience will: It titheth mint and cumine, and will tell us
of the least duty. And so on the other side, it will not swallow the least
sin. As it will not swallow a camel, Luke 16.10.
so it will strain at a g^at* A faithful conscience is faithful in the least.
If David sin but in the lap of a garment, conscience smites him for it. It
made Abraham so precise to a thread or a shoe-latchet; he would not take so
much as that of the king of Sodom. It made Moses strict to a very hoof: It made
Paul find fault with the Corinthians about their hair: It made Augustine
condemn himself for an apple.

3. It is importunate.
3. As a faithful conscience is watchful and severe, so also it is importunate
in all its counsels. It does not only deliver its judgment, but does with
importunity urge the following of its counsel. It will have no nay, but will
be obeyed. I^ leads us bound in the spirit to do it; as Paul said, Acts 20.22.
I go bound in the spirit. See how importunate this faithful conscience was
with the Psalmist: I will not give sleep to mine eyes, Psalm. 132.4.
nor slumber to mine eyelids, until I find out a place for the Lord. It will
not take any nay, say we wha^ we will: say we be sleepie, say we be busy, say
we be loath and full of excuses, it will be importunate, and that with
vehemency. It will follow a man, if he will not hear it, with a hue and cry
of inward checks. It will sometime promise, sometimes threaten, urge us with
hope, fear danger, etc. As we would be saved, we must d^ this; As we would
escape the wrath to come, we must forbear that. Thus importunate is a faithful
conscience.

Use. 1.
I. We see here what a great blessing it is to have such a faithful conscience,
such a faithful friend in our bosom, which will be careful to tell us of all
our duty, and persuade us to it; and of every evil, and dissuade us from it.
It will not flatter us in any thing, but tell us plainly, This ye should do;
This ye should not do. It regards not what pleases us; but what is good for
us, that it looks to, and that it persuades to, and that it urges. O what a
blessing is this* This blessing had those willing Israelites who gave so freely
and largely toward the building of the tabernacle. The text says, Exodus 35.21
that their heart stirred them up, and their spirit made them willing. Mark;
their heart (that is their conscience) stirred them up: Ye have bracelets;
offer them, says conscience: Ye have earrings and jewels, etc. part with them
too, says conscience, to further this pious work in hand. Their spirit made
them willing; their faithful friend in their bosom, conscience, overcame them
with arguments and strong persuasions. This is a great blessing, to have such a
faithful conscience: It will make a man part with all his lusts, pride,
self-love, covetousness, carnal delights, for Gods glory and our own true
good.

II. Use 2.
It is a sign that God means well to that man to whom he has given a
faithful conscience. O this is an Angel keeper indeed. Did not Christ mean
well to his Church in the Canticles, Cant. 6.12, 13.
when he gave her such a conscience as carried her on wheels unto him? Or ever
I was aware my soul made me like the chariots of Amminadib. Return, return, O
Shulamite; return, return. Return, return, says conscience; and again, Return,
return. Has the Lord given thee such an importunate conscience as will have no
nay, will not let thee alone in omitting good or committing evil, will not let
thee slumber and sleep in security, but continually joggeth and awaketh thee?
Has he given thee a severe, a precise conscience, that will not favor thee in
the least evil? It is a most comfortable sign that the Lord means well unto
thy soul.

Use. 3.
III. Labor to be a friend unto conscience, that it may continue faithful unto
thee. True friends will deal faithfully and plainly one with another, and will
be importunate to do one another good: Conscience will not deal thus with thee
unless thou be a friend unto conscience. Now then are we friends unto
conscience when we do what conscience requires. As our Savior said to the
Disciples, John 15.14.
Ye are my friends if ye do whatever I command you: So I may say of conscience.
For conscience if it be truly illightned will command nothing but what Christ
commands. If we deal so in our constant course with conscience, be willing to
hearken to it, and be ruled by it, then if we be out of the way now and then,
conscience will be true to us, and be importunate with us for our good.

Use 4.
IV. Be sure thou stand not out against conscience when once it is importunate.
It is a great sin to stand out against conscience though it be not
importunate; but it is a sin a thousand times greater to stand out against it
when it is importunate. Maxima viola^io consci^n^iae ^st maximepec^atum.
The greatest standing out against conscience is the greatest sin: it is a
sin which comes nearest that against the holy Ghost, which accompanied with
some other adjuncts is the greatest standing out against conscience. There is
no sin that does more harden the heart then to do evil when conscience is
importunate to dissuade from it. This sin was the cause why Saul was rejected
of God; 1. Sam. 13.12.
I forced my self, says he: He forced his conscience; his conscience was
importunate to have him stay according to the commandment of God, but he forced
himself to the contrary. I confess, if conscience be importunate to the
utmost, as it is with Gods children, men cannot with any force put it by, it
will have no nay. Sometimes it is so with the wicked in some particular thing:
but often conscience in them is importunate, and yet will suffer it self to be
born down. Now to bear conscience down is a very high sin, and exceedingly
hardens the heart: therefore take heed of it.

VI. An Unfaithful conscience.
THus I have handled a faithful conscience. 6. An unfaithful conscience.
The second affection now follows; which is an Unfaithful conscience. I do
not mean such an one as is overtaken with evil (for the best conscience has
its failings) but such a conscience as so gives in that it suffers a man to
forsake God, and to serve the devil and his own lusts: This is an unfaithful
conscience; and it also has three properties: 1. It is a silent conscience.
Properties thereof;
2. It is a large conscience. 3. It is a remiss conscience.

1. A silent conscience, 1. It is silent.
that conscience which knows how to judge, how to counsel, how to direct, yet
is silent and says nothing is an unfaithful conscience; that knows what
duties we ow to God and man, yet puts us not upon them, nor is importunate
for the performance of them; and so for sins, what we ought not to do,
tells not of the evil, disswadeth not from it, urges not arguments to cause
forbearance; this is an unfaithful conscience. It is like to a sleepy
careless coachman, who gives the horses the rains, and lets them run
whither they will: So this unfaithful conscience leaves the rains on a man's
neck, and lets him run whither he will, into any danger, any mischief,
that he may do evil with both hands. M^^h. 7.3.
Do ye not think Ahabs conscience was fast asleep, which let him sell himself
to work wickedness? and so Manasseh's conscience?

^. It is large.
2. A large conscience; which makes conscience it may be of some great duties,
but takes liberty in other which it counts lesser. Thus Do^g's conscience
would not suffer him to break his vow, to depart on the sabbath day; but yet it
suffered him to accuse David. Jehu's conscience made him zealous in Gods cause
against the house of Ahab and the priests of Baal; 2. Kings 10.^^.
but it suffered him to maintain the high places which Jeroboam had set up.
Thus Gamaliel's conscience made him speak well for Paul, and yet continue (it
seems) in much other evil. This conscience will restrain from great staring
sins, or from such sins as the man has no natural propensity unto: but
others which seem of a lower nature, or which are suitable to a man's
particular desires, these conscience will swallow without remorse. As civil
people, that cannot swallow down couzenage and injustice, and yet neglect of
prayer and other religious duties never troubles them. And so some
professors, who cannot omit hearing sermons and talking of religion, and yet
can rest without the power thereof.

3. It is remiss; that is, 3. It is remiss.
though it does counsel and direct, yet it does it with such coldness and
remissness that it is easily answered and put off. Thus it was with David. It
cannot be thought but his conscience said, Plot not against Vriah's life: But
he would; and so conscience let him do it. This conscience will be answered
with every slight and idle excuse: As when conscience tells one, Your ways
are not good: I wish you to repent, and make your peace with God; it may be the
man answers, Yea, so I mean to do; but I cannot yet intend it: when I have
dispatched such and such business then I will do it. If conscience speak
again, Yea, but you were best to do it now; True, says he, I know it, I know
it. If God would give me repentance I would repent: It is his gift; of my self
I cannot do it. Or when it tells him of family duties, it may be he
answers, I have no leisure; so long as I go to God by my self, I hope it will
serve turn. Or when it tells him of his wickedness, it may be he answers,
Many worse then I have found mercy; and I hope so shall I. This is the
conscience that lets a man's heart say, I shall have peace. Deuteronomy. 29.19.
Now conscience being remiss and cold, it is easily put off and answered with
these idle and foolish excuses, or with some other pretenses like these, and so
lets the man go and live as before. This conscience is like Eli, which said,
Ye do not well, my sons, but exercised no severity to cause them to do
otherwise.

Use.
By this we see the dangerous estate of those men who have such a conscience.
There be many who live in many sins, in carnal courses, some in
company-keeping and drunkenness, some in hatred and variance, some in
chambering and wantonness, some in covetousness and love of this present
world: your consciences, no question, can say, Ye should do well to be more
godly, to look more after Christ and after heaven, and ye should do well to get
the truth of saving grace; yet it may be they say nothing or nothing to the
purpose in this behalf. Therefore is these men's case so dangerous because their
consciences are so silent and so remiss. They have lost the most sovereigne
remedy, namely conscience. Conscience is the most sovereigne means (under God
and his holy Spirit) to work repentance in men that can be; and is it not
dangerous to have it prove traitorous and unfaithful? What good can the
ministry of the word do unto you when every idle and false excuse or pretense
which the wisdom of the flesh can devise can stop the mouth of your conscience
when it calls upon you to do what the word requires? It must needs be
dangerous, and so much the more because it is so pleasing unto you: ye take
delight in such silent, and large, and remiss unfaithful consciences; ye love
not to have your consciences too busy with you; ye like not that your
consciences should be too clamorous and importunate with you; ye would have
them not too rigid and vehement against your sins. It fares with you as with
many young men who have sold themselves unto folly, and think none their
friends but parasites that flatter them, or those who connive and wink at their
folly: but such friends will soon prove foes, and so will such moderate and
quiet consciences. It is a dangerous thing to have such a silent conscience; to
want the chief means under God of doing a man good. It was conscience that told
the lepers, 2. Kings 7.9.
We do not well to hold our peace: It was conscience that never would let the
prodigal son be quiet till he returned to his father, and said unto him, I
have sinned against heaven and before thee, and am no more worthy to be called
thy son: It is conscience that is the most powerful means under God to
quicken a man up to repentance and obedience; and therefore they are in a
miserable case that want this great help.

But what are the causes why men's consciences be so evil and unfaithful? Quest.


The causes hereof are chiefly these four: Answ.
1. Ignorance is one cause why a man's conscience is unfaithful, when we do not
labor to have conscience thoroughly illightened and informed. Who are more
careless and negligent of their duties both to God and man? who can with more
freedom lie, steal, covet, sin, etc. then those that are ignorant of the law
of God? They know not that they do so much hurt to their own souls as they do.
An ignorant mind has always an evil conscience. It is impossible conscience
should be faithful where it is not illightened: and hence it comes to pass
that conscience is so negligent and unfaithful, because we have been so
careless of informing it. Thy conscience must needs be silent as long as thou
art ignorant. 1. Pet. 2.15.
Ignorance is soon put to silence. 2. A second cause is often slighting of
conscience. It may be conscience speaks not, or but coldly and remissely,
because when it has advised, and counseled, and admonished; thou have
neglected it and disregarded it from time to time. Though it judge and counsel,
yet thou will not listen: Like Cassandra the prophetess, who though her
predictions were true and certain, yet were they never believed: so though
conscience speaks true, yet men follow it not; and therefore it becomes
silent when it is not regarded, but all its counsel, and advise, and
persuasions slighted and neglected. Hence, I say, it comes to pass that for
want of employment it is still and falls asleep, till the time come that it
must be awaked. 3. The third cause is that violence that is often offered unto
it. Many times when conscience persuades to any good duty, or disswadeth from
any evil course, men will do against it and withstand it violently, and put off
the wholesome advise of it: hence it comes to pass that conscience having so
many injuries offered unto it, begins to provide for its own ease, and so
either it is silent and says nothing, or else is soon answered and rebuked; as
it was with Moses: When Pharaoh would never hearken unto Moses, but still fell
to excuses, and at last to deny all, he would not let Israel go notwithstanding
all that Moses could urge, but said to Moses Get thee from me; F^^d. 10.29.
take heed to thy self; see my face no more; Moses then answered, Thou have
spoken well: I will see thy face no more. So it is with conscience; When men
have been obstinate, and have refused to hear it, and would have it speak no
more, Thou have well spoken, says conscience: henceforth I will trouble you no
more, but let you alone to take your course: I will advise you no more; or if I
do, I will not be any more importunate. 4. A fourth cause is, that men do
wilfully stop the mouth of conscience: If it begins to speak, presently they
busy themselves about other things; or if that will not do, they run into
company, and there spend their time, that the howlings of conscience may not
be heard; and if still it be loud, they strike up the drum, and ring all the
bells, that the voice of it may be utterly drowned: and so conscience at last
is content to stand by, to hear and see and say nothing. By this means many
times it falls out that those who have had very turbulent and clamourous
consciences not suffering them to be quiet, have at last tamed them and put
them quite to silence; or if they do speak, it is so coldly and remissely that
they care not whether they be obeyed or no. Oh these are damnable and devilish
devises! Whoever ye be that do thus, ye are in a dangerous estate, and ye carry
the brands of hell and damnation upon you. If ever you desire to avoid this
dangerous estate, then shun the cause: Labor to have your conscience thoroughly
illightned and informed by the word of God, that it may read you your duty. A
friend that knows but little can give but little counsel. Again, give heed
evermore to the counsel of conscience. You know Achitophel took it ill that his
counsel was not followed; therefore he made away himself in displeasure: So
conscience will take it very ill if its counsel be not followed: it will
strangle it self, and smother it self; you shall hear no more of it.
Especially take heed you do not reject conscience, nor offer violence to it: If
you do, you will make it unfaithful and remiss; and then you lose the best
means under heaven of your good: Then deadness of spirit succeeds, and
hardness of heart takes place, and you deprive your souls of all possibility
of cure. As long as a sickman has any possibility of cure he is still under
hope; but if ever he lose that he is gone: Conscience is the possibility of
the soul to amendment; and therefore if you dull conscience, and make
conscience remiss and unfaithful, you take the ready way to deprive your
selves of all possibility of rising again. Consider these things, and have a
care of your consciences.


And thus we have handled the office of conscience about things to be done and
omitted, with its adjuncts, affections, and properties in that behalf. I come
now to consider the office of conscience about things already done or omitted,
together with the affections of conscience in the discharge of that office.

The office of conscience about things already done or omitted.
THis has four parts: 1. To approve; 2. To absolve; 3. To mislike; 4. To
condemn, according to the good or evil of our actions or omissions. The
judgment is not only of the things, what they are; but whither they tend, and
what they will produce.

I. An approving conscience.
FIrst, when that which is done is good, conscience approves it: as Paul
says, This is our rejoicing, the testimony of our conscience, 2. Cor. 1.12.
When he had lived uprightly and sincerely, his conscience approved of it: so
when he had great sorrow and heaviness for his brethren, his conscience
approved it; Romans 9.1.
my conscience bearing me witness, says he. So at his latter end we may see
how his conscience approved the whole course of his life: 2. Tim. 4.7, 8,
I have finished my course, I have kept the faith, etc. there is consciences
approbation of him: from henceforth, says he, is laid up for me a crown of
righteousness: there is consciences judgment concerning the issue of it.
Conscience so approves every particular good action done by a faithful man,
that by it he may gather a testimony of the uprightness of his heart: as
Hezekiah; Remember, Lord, that I have walked uprightly before thee. 1. Jo^n
3.14.
Hereby we know that we are translated from death to life, because we love the
brethren. Mark; Love to Gods children is a sufficient testimony not only of
our uprightness in that particular act, but also of the simplicity of our
hearts in the general, and that we are translated from death to life. So when
good old Simeon had now even finished his days, see what an approbation his
conscience gave of him; Lord, now let thou thy servant depart in peace
according to thy word. Luke 2.29.
His conscience here gave a threefold blessed approbation of him. 1. That he
had been Gods faithful servant; thy servant. 2. That he had walked in the
ways of true peace and comfort; depart in peace. 3. That the promise of Gods
word was his in particular; according to thy word.

II. An absolving conscience.
THe second part of the office of conscience is to absolve and acquit. Thus
Samuel pleading his innocence, had his conscience testifying for him, 1. Sam.
12.3.
Whose ox have I taken? or whom have I defrauded? and his conscience absolved
him as clear and free from those sins. Thus also Job; If I have lifted up my
hand against the fatherless, when I saw my help in the gate; If I rejoiced
because my wealth is great; If I have not given my bread to the hungry; or if I
have rejoiced at the misery of mine enemy: then let it be thus and thus to me.
His conscience absolved him as clear of those sins. Nay, the conscience of a
child of God does not only absolve him from the guilt of those sins which he
never committed, but also from the guilt of those sins which he has
committed against God or against man. It can tell him he has truly repented,
and truly been humbled, and truly got pardon. Ye know David had committed
diverse sins: yet when he had humbled his soul before God, and obtained
pardon, his conscience tells him as much and absolveth him, Psalm. 103.3.
Bless the Lord, O my soul, etc. who forgiveth all thy sins. Nay, though a
child of God have many infirmities daily and hourly, yet his conscience does
absolve him: It is no more I that do it, says his conscience, but sin that
dwells in me. If I distrust, it is no more I; for I fight against it: If I be
overtaken by any weakness, it is no more I; for I labored against it, and do
bewail it.

III. A misliking conscience.
THe third part of consciences office in things done is to mislike if we have
done ill. There be imperfections in the best obedience of Gods dearest
servants: What I do I allow not, Romans 7.15.
says Paul: His conscience misliked something done by him. But that mislike of
conscience which now I speak of is of things that are ill done, that is, not
done in truth and sincerity. Thus it is in all that are not renewed by the holy
Ghost: The office of their conscience indeed is to mislike what they do: When
they have prayed, their conscience can mislike it, and say, I have not prayed
with a heavenly mind, a holy heart: When they have been at a Sacrament,
conscience can truly mislike it, and say, I have not been a fit guest at
Christ's table, etc. When they are crossed and tempted, their consciences truly
mislike their carriage, and say, I do not fight and resist, but readily and
willingly yield to every invitation to evil. Do ye not think that Jeroboams
conscience misliked his altering Gods worship, his innovating religion, his
making Israel to sin? do not ye think his conscience misliked him for these
things? Do not ye think that Nabals conscience misliked his griping? and Doegs
conscience misliked his slandering? and Pashurs conscience misliked his
opposing and misusing Jeremie? and the old prophets conscience misliked his
lying? Who would have thought but Balaam said well, Whatsoever the Lord says
unto me that will I speak, and, I cannot go beyond the commandment of the Lord
to do less or more; no, not for Balaks house full of gold; who would have
thought but that this was well said? yet his own conscience could not choose
but mislike it, being not spoken in sincerity. Many a man has gone for a
Christian twenty or thirty years, and every one likes him; and yet it may be
his conscience has disliked him all the while.

IV. A condemning conscience.
THe fourth part of consciences office in this behalf is to condemn if we have
done evil and contrary to Gods law. Conscience has an office not only to
mislike us but also to condemn us: nay, it will hasten more to condemn us
then God. Gen 3.7.
We see it in Adam: When Adam had sinned his conscience condemned him before
God did: he knew he was naked, that he had made his soul shamefully naked; his
conscience condemned him for an apostate before the Lord came to pass sentence
upon him. Nay, it condemns us oftener then God; God will condemn a sinner but
once for all, viz. at the last day; but conscience condemns him many thousand
times before that. Many men and women who do seem godly in the worlds eyes. God
knows how many of them have condemning consciences in their bosoms, for all
their civilities, and formalities, and crying God mercy, and patched up hopes;
many who would say that man were uncharitable who should condemn them for such
and such, who (it may be) find conscience within so uncharitable, and saying
plainly, Ye are so; like the conscience of Paul's heretic, who is said to be
condemned of himself. Tit. 3.11.


I. Use 1.
This serves for the praise of the justice of God: That he may be just when he
judges, the Lord needs no other witness against us but our own consciences:
they make way for the just judgment of God. Ye may see this in this portion of
Scripture which we have in hand; Romans 2.15.
wherein is showed both that God has appointed a day wherein he will judge the
world, verse. 16. In the day when God shall judge the secrets of all men
according to my Gospel: and then in the verse going before the Apostle shows
that now in the mean while every man's conscience makes way for this just
judgment of God; their conscience bearing witness, and their thoughts in the
mean time accusing or excusing one another. At the last day every man shall be
judged according to his conscience; a child of God according to his; a carnal
man according to his. The Lord shall absolve all his children, and their own
consciences shall absolve them. The Lord shall condemn all the rest, and their
own consciences shall condemn them. This is the book that every man's life is
set down in: Every passage of conversation both of the godly and the wicked is
recorded daily in this book: And according to what is written therein will the
Lord judge every soul at the last day, as Rev. 20.12. The dead were judged out
of those things which were written in the book according to their works. The
Apostle there speaks prophetically, and puts the past time for the future;
they were judged, that is, they shall be judged. So that ye see that by the
judgment of conscience way is made for the just judgment of God.

Use 2.
II. This should be a means to keep us from sin, and to keep us in a holy
life: for according to our works so will be the evidences of our consciences,
whether they be good or evil. We had need to take heed what we write in our
consciences; for according to what is written there so shall we be judged.
Therefore if any sin stands upon record in our consciences, we had need get
it blotted out by the blood of Christ. Repent, be humbled, beg for pardon, rest
not till thou see this debt-book conscience crossed, and thy sins stand
there cancelled and discharged.

THus I have showed you the offices of conscience about things heretofore done.
Now let me show you the affections of conscience in the discharge of these
offices. Ye have heard that conscience has four offices in things heretofore
done; 1. an office to approve; 2. an office to absolve; 3. an office to
dislike; 4. an office to condemn; The two former when we have done well and
lived well; then the office of conscience is to approve and absolve: The two
latter when we have done ill and lived ill; then the office of conscience is to
mislike and to condemn. Now follows the affections of conscience in the
discharge of these offices; and they are four: 1. A tender conscience; 2. A
sleepie conscience; 3. A benumbed conscience; 4. A seared conscience.

First, a tender conscience; that is, 1. A tender conscience.
a conscience touched with the least sin, and checking us for the least
sin; as for vain thoughts, exorbitant passions, idle words, and the like. 1.
Sam. 24.5^
Such was David's conscience, which smote him for cutting off the lap of Saul's
garment. Such was Zaccheus his conscience, which troubled him for supposed
sins: If I have wronged any man, says he. He did not know; but his
conscience was so tender that it made him careful of Ifs. This tender
conscience is a singular blessing of God: And if we desire to attain unto it we
must labor to see the odiousness of sin, yea the malignity and exceeding
evil there is in the least sin: this will make us tender of it. Secondly, we
must labor to mourn for every sin though it seem little: this also will keep
our consciences tender. And we have great cause to prize a tender conscience.
What got the Bethshemites by not being tender in conscience? They looked into
the Ark, and because they durst venture upon it the Lord smote fifty thousand
of them at once. 1. Sam. 6.19. Numb. 15.32, 36.
What got the man that gathered sticks on the Sabbath for not being tender in
conscience? He was stoned to death. Conscience should tender the least
commandment of God, and so be tender of the committing the least sin. This
conscience is a great blessing.

The second affection of conscience is sleepiness. 2. A sleepy conscience.
A sleepy conscience is not so quick in smiting us as it ought: either it
checks not, or else with such faintness that it works not upon us; it makes
us never the more watchful against sin. This we see by many who can commit
such sins without trouble or disquiet as would bring others on their knees
and make them walk heavily long after. This sleepy conscience is very
dangerous: it makes men as ready to fall into the same sins to morrow as to
day, and next day as to morrow: it lets them see their faults, but amendeth
none; because this is such a conscience as does not cause men to feel the
burden of their sins. A man can never come to Christ as long as he has a
sleepy conscience; because it does not cause sin to be burdensome. They who
have this conscience can sleep for all it, and eat and drink and be merry for
all it: Now a man can never come to Christ that is not burdened with his sin,
that he cannot bear it, cannot be quiet for it, cannot sleep for it: Matthew.
11.28.
then Christ calls him, Come unto me, all ye that are weary and heavy laden,
and I will ease you.

3. A benumbed conscience.
A benumbed conscience; that is, such a conscience as is in a deep sleep. This
differs from the former in degree. You know there is a less sleep, and there
is a greater sleep: There is a less sleep, when only the outward senses are
bound; and there is a sleep when the inward senses are bound too. Now a
benumbed conscience is a conscience that is in a deep sleep; Preach to it, it
mourns not; cry to it, it listeneth not: This is a benumbed conscience. Nor
the greatness of sin, nor the wrath of God denounced against it can move it.
Men can know themselves guilty of such and such sins, and yet not lay them to
heart: conscience never tells them about it. Thus the Apostle speaks of
those who knew the judgment of God, Romans 1.32.
that they which commit such things are worthy of death, yet not only do the
same, but have pleasure in them that do them: Their consciences though
informed, and in some measure knowing the evil of their courses and the
severitie of Gods judgment, yet let them go on still, and not only commit the
evil themselves, but delight to see others as bad as themselves. Such are our
swearers, and drunkards, and company-keepers, etc. This is a very wretched
conscience: the Lord deliver us from it.

Fourthly, a seared conscience* that is, 4. A seared conscience.
such a conscience as speaks not a jote; seared with a hot iron, as the
Apostles phrase is, 1. Tim. 4.2. a senseless conscience, a past-feeling
conscience: when men can swallow down sin like drink, oaths, contempt of
God, his word and worship, mockage of Gods servants, hating to be reformed;
such as sin without any remorse. This kind of conscience is in four sorts of
men: 1. In dissolute and profligate persons; who like common strumpets have
their souls lie open to every sin that comes by. 2. In obstinate sinners,
such as, like Ahab, have sold themselves to work wickedness in the sight of
the Lord. 3. In scoffers and jeerers; who speak evil of them who run not in
the same excess of riot with themselves, and nickname the godly. 4. In
Apostates and backsliders; who speak lies through hypocrisy, and have fallen
from the profession of the truth: All these men have a conscience seared with a
red-hot iron. This is a great judgment of God: greater then this there cannot
be: No outward judgment that can fall upon us is like unto it: not the plague,
nor shame, nor beggary, no nor any curse besides hell it self is equal to it.
By this the only means under God of repentance is taken away. Such may come to
repent; but it is a thousand to one if ever they do. It is like a gravestone
lying upon their consciences, which keeps them under until the day of
judgment: at which time God will awaken their consciences, and then they will
be more furious in tormenting then the very devils themselves.

Use.
Ye that are not yet fallen upon this wretched conscience, I beseech you take
heed that ye never do. But ye will ask me, How may we avoid it? Avoid it? alas,
ye may avoid it if ye be careful: for conscience never seareth it self: If
ever it be seared, it is ye your selves that do fear it. Indeed the mind of man
may blind its own self; and the heart of man may corrupt its own self; and the
affections of man may defile their own selves: but conscience never corrupts
it self, never seareth it self. But you will say, What must I do to avoid this
searing of conscience?

First, listen to conscience well, that whatever it says to thee from God thou
may do it. This was the course of the Psalmist; I will hearken what the Lord
God will say in me (so some translate it.) Hear then and listen what the Lord
God will say in thee, what thy conscience illightened says in thee, and do it.

Secondly, whenever this conscience is quick follow it. Nothing more seareth
conscience then suffering quicknings to die. Blow the coals if they do but
smoke. As the Apostle says, Quench not the Spirit; so quench not conscience.

I have hitherto showed you that every man has a conscience, and the reasons
why God has given us a conscience, the light that it acts by, the offices of
it, and the affections of it. Now from all these proceed two other adjuncts of
conscience: 1. A quiet conscience; 2. An unquiet conscience.

A quiet conscience.
COncerning a quiet conscience three things are to be considered: 1. What a
quiet conscience is; 2. How it differs from that quiet conscience which is in
the wicked; 3. The examination whether we have this quiet conscience or no.

I. For the first, What a quiet conscience is; It is that which neither does
nor can accuse us, but gives an honorable testimony of us in the course of
our lives and conversations ever since we were regenerate (I put that in too:
for 1. we do not begin to live till we be regenerate, and 2. we can never have
a true quiet conscience till then.) Such a quiet conscience had good Obadiah; I
fear the Lord from my youth, 1. Kings 18.12.
says his conscience: This was a very honorable testimony that his conscience
gave him. Such a quiet conscience had Enoch: H^b. 11.5.
Before his translation he received this testimony, that he pleased God. Haymo
says, Die^nte scriptura inquit ille.
this testimony was the testimony of Scripture, Genesis 5.24. where it is said
that he walked with God. This is true; but this is not all: The text says not
there was such a testimony given of him, but he had it: and that before his
translation; but the testimony of Moses was after his translation: Therefore it
was the testimony of his conscience that bore witness within that he pleased
God. So that this is a quiet conscience, which neither does nor can accuse us,
but gives an honorable testimony of us in the whole course of our life and
conversation. Now to such a quiet conscience there be three things necessary:
1. Uprightness, 2. Purity, 3. Assurance of Gods love and favor.

First, uprightness is when a man is obedient indeed. Many will be obedient,
but they are not obedient indeed, not humbled indeed, not reformed indeed. What
it is to be obedient indeed ye may see Exodus 23.22. But if thou shall indeed
obey his voice, and do all that I shall speak, etc. Mark; that is obedience
indeed when we do all that God speaks, and are obedient in all things. This
is an upright conscience, when the heart is bent to obedience in all things.
Acts 23.1.
An example we meet with in Paul; I have lived in all good conscience before
God until this day. His conscience could not accuse him of any root of
wickedness and corruption allowed and cherished in him: That is an upright
conscience. Have thou such a conscience as this, My conscience can truly bear
witness there is no sin I favor my self in, allow my self in, but condemn
all, strive against all. Thus David proves that his conscience was upright; If
I regard iniquity in my heart, the Lord will not hear my prayer. The
regarding of any iniquity will not stand with uprightness.

A second thing required to a true quiet conscience is purity. Though our
heart be upright and stand generally bent to the Lords will, yet if we be
guilty of some particular sin this will hinder the quiet of our conscience.
Therefore says Paul, I know nothing by my self; that is, 1. Cor. 4.4.
nothing to accuse me; no corruption, no root of unbelief reigning in him:
Infirmities he had many, and frailties he had many, and he knew them, but be
knew nothing to accuse him. Whatever was amiss in him, his conscience told him
he used all holy means against it. If thy conscience can truly say thus also of
thee, then have thou a truly quiet conscience.

Thirdly, Assurance of Gods love, favor, and pardon. Though we have fallen
into great sins, yet our consciences may have quiet if we can be truly assured
of Gods love and favor in the pardon of them. Heb. 10.2.
The Apostle proves that the sacrifices of the law could not purge away sin;
but only Christ's blood can do it. His argument to prove it is this, Because
those sacrifices could not free a man from having conscience of sin; they
could not purge the conscience: but Christ's blood can: After assurance of
pardon in Christ's blood conscience can no more condemn for sin, how many or
how great soever the sins were which have been committed. These are the three
things required to a true quiet conscience.

Furthermore a quiet conscience implies two things: 1. A calmnesse of spirit:
2. A cheerful, merry and comfortable heart. These two I mean when I speak of a
quiet conscience.

1. A calmnesse of spirit, or a quietness of mind, not troubled with the
burden of sin nor the wrath of God, nor terrified with the judgments due
unto sin. This quietness and calmnesse of spirit is promised to all them
that truly hearken unto Christ and obey him; Prove. 1.33.
Who so hearkeneth to me shall be quiet from fear of evil.

2. A cheerful, merry and joyful heart. When our conscience gives a
comfortable testimony of us, it cannot but make our hearts joyful. This is
our rejoicing, 2. Co^. 1.12.
the testimony of our conscience, says Paul: The comfortable testimony which
his conscience gave of him made him to rejoice. A wicked man cannot truly
rejoice: no, though he be merry and joviall and laugh, yet his carnal estate
is a snare, he can have no true joy; but the righteous sing and rejoice, Prove.
29.6. No mirth like the mirth of a good conscience. All other joy is but
outside, painted, seeming joy: That is only true joy that is rooted in the
comfortable testimony of an upright good conscience, which tells a man his
peace is made with God, and that whether he be in sickness or in health God
loves him, whether he live or die he is the Lords. Thus ye see what a quiet
conscience is.

How a quiet conscience in the godly differs from the quiet conscience that
is in the wicked
THe second thing propounded to be considered about a quiet conscience, is, How
it differs from that quiet conscience which is in the wicked. 1. I confess
that the wicked seem to have a very quiet conscience: Many thousands of carnal
people seem to live and die in quiet. Look into alehouses, lewd houses, into
all places; who so merry and brisk, and heart-whole (as they say) as they who
have no saving grace? Yet 2. Job 21.23.
this quiet conscience in them must needs differ from the quiet conscience of
the children of God. Certainly the Lord will not give the childrens bread unto
dogs; neither will he smile upon their souls; neither does he pardon the sins
nor accept the persons of the ungodly: And therefore if they have a quiet
conscience, it must needs differ from that in the godly. Must not copper needs
differ from gold? And we who are the Lords messengers must teach you the
difference: Ezekiel. 44.23
They shall teach my people the difference between the holy and the profane.
Now the question is this, Wherein lies the difference between the quiet
conscience of the righteous and the quiet conscience of the wicked? Answ. The
difference between them lies in four things: 1. In the thing it self; 2. In
the cause; 3. In the effect; 4. In the continuance.

I. In the thing it self. The quiet conscience in the godly is double; not
only apparentiall and nominall, but real and substantial: It is quiet and
quiet too, peace and peace too: I create the fruit of the lips, peace, peace.
Mark; Isai. 57.19
peace and peace too; peace in appearance, and peace in truth and substance
also. But the peace and quiet of conscience which the wicked have is not such
peace: It is peace and no peace; peace in appearance, but no peace in truth.
Their god is the god of this world, and he persuades them they have peace: But
my God, says the prophet, verse. 21.
speaks otherwise; There is no peace to the wicked, says my God. They talk
of a good conscience sometimes, and boast they have a good conscience; but the
truth is, they cannot have true peace within: for says the prophet, the wicked
is like the troubled sea which cannot rest, whose waters cast up mire and dirt.
So does a wicked man's conscience secretly cast up mire and dirt in his face:
His peace can only be outward and apparentiall.

II. There is a difference in the cause. The quiet of a good conscience arises
from one cause, and the quiet of a bad conscience arises from another.

1. The quiet of a good conscience arises from a distinct knowledge of the
word of God, and of the precepts and promises contained in it: But the quiet of
an evil conscience arises from ignorance: When men know not God nor his holy
word, which should bind conscience, they fear nothing because they see nothing;
they know not the danger of sin: Like a blind man standing before the mouth
of a cannon, he fears no danger because he sees none: so carnal men fear
not because they know not what cause they have to fear. Their very prayers that
they make are an abomination to God, and they know it not: their good duties
they do are all like cockatrices eggs, and they know it not; they know not that
they are in the bond of iniquity, in the snare of the devil. Their consciences
are quiet because they know not what cause they have to be otherwise. This is
one difference; The quiet and peace of a good conscience arises from light and
from knowledge; the quiet and peace of an evil conscience, from darkness and
ignorance.

2. Heb. 10, 22.
The quiet of a good conscience arises from a due examination of our selves by
the word, and purging of our consciences. Conscience never can be good without
purging and sprinkling; no nor without a due examination: the quiet of a good
conscience arises from this. Whereas the quiet of a wicked man's conscience
arises from want of this: He never examineth his conscience, but lets it
sleep till God awake it with horror. I say, a wicked man's conscience sleeps,
and that makes it quiet, and he is not troubled nor molested with it. Like a
baillif or sergeant fallen asleep by the way; the desperate debtour whom he
lies in wait for may pass by him then, and find him very quiet, and not offer
to arrest him: or like a cursed dog fallen asleep; a stranger may pass by him
then and not be meddled with: Such like is this quiet evil conscience.

3. The quiet of a good conscience arises from a good ground, from the works
of Gods Spirit, from true saving grace, from righteousness. Romans 14.17. we
read of righteousness and peace: True peace of conscience arises from
righteousness: Whereas the false peace of the wicked arises only from vain
hopes and conceits; They are not guilty of such and such great sins; or, They
are not so bad as some others: As the Pharisee's conscience was quiet; why?
God, I thank thee, I am not as other men are, no drunkard, extortioner, nor
like this publicane. Or perhaps from this ground their peace arises; The Lord
is very merciful; and, The Lord Jesus died for sinners. Or perhaps this is
their plea, They are good comers to church; They have prayers in their
families; They have been professors of Christ Jesus so many years: From hence
they dream of peace upon false grounds, whenas the way of peace they have not
known. When conscience shall be awaked, then it will tell them how they have by
flattery deceived their own souls, and that having no true righteousness they
could have no true peace.

4. The quiet of a good conscience arises from tenderness and from life.
Therefore the Apostle joyneth together, life and peace, Romans 8.6. True peace of
conscience arises from life: whereas the quiet of a wicked conscience arises
from searednesse and benumbednesse and deadness, when men being past feeling
of sin are not troubled at the committing of it. Thus ye see the second thing
wherein the difference lies, namely in the cause.

III. They differ in the effect. First, The effect of the quiet of a good
conscience is comfort and rejoicing: Romans 5.1.
Being justified by faith, we have peace with God through our Lord Jesus
Christ. What follows? By whom we have access by faith, rejoicing, etc. Mark;
The peace of conscience brings forth rejoicing. Romans 15.13. Gal. 5.22.
And so in other places peace and joy are joined together. But the evil
conscience, though quiet, wants this rejoicing. If carnal men had no more
mirth then what the quiet and peace of their consciences does help them to,
they would not be so merry as most of them be. Secondly, Another effect of
true peace of conscience is, It sanctifies the soul, it purges the heart,
purifieth the life, and reformeth the whole man. It is the instrument whereby
God sanctifies his people more and more: 1 Thessalonians. 5.23.
The God of peace sanctify you wholly. Observe the title which the Apostle
there gives unto God when he sanctifies his people, he calls him the God of
peace; he sanctifies his people by peace: It makes them think thus, We must
not do thus or thus as others do; we shall lose the peace of our conscience if
we do. This makes them strive against sin, deny their own wills and carnal
appetites; If I should not do so I should have no peace. This peace
sanctifies: But the peace which carnal men seem to have does not sanctify
the soul: they are never the more holy for the same. Again, another effect of
the peace of a good conscience is, to put life into us in the performance of
good duties: it makes us with gladness and delight perform the duties of our
general and particular callings: But the false peace of an evil conscience
suffers the wicked to be dead and dull to good duties. The true peace keeps
our hearts and our minds: We should lose our minds in the things of this life,
but this peace does keep them upon God; we should lose our hearts upon our
profits and pleasures and affairs in the world, but the peace of conscience
does keep them upon heaven: Phil. 4.7. The peace of God which passes all
understanding, shall keep your hearts and minds. This does the peace and quiet
of a good conscience: but the quiet of a wicked man's conscience does not do
thus; it keeps not his mind in this manner, but it is upon earthly things for
all that.

IV. They differ in respect of duration and continuance. The quiet of a good
conscience is settled and grounded in the godly; it never fails them nor
forsakes them: the other peace is fading. Let a feeling sermon come and rifle
carnal men, it takes away their peace from them; their consciences then fly
in their faces, and then they see they are not right: Let loss of outward
things come a^^ light upon them, or any other affliction, it takes their peace
from them; conscience then breaks out upon them and shows them how they
have deceived themselves with false peace, especially at their death, then an
evil conscience (that has been quiet before) in stead of comforting will
affright and amaze them. But if we have the quiet of a good conscience, it will
make us hear the word with comfort, and not be troubled and disquieted by a
searching sermon or the threatenings of Gods judgments: Nay, if we be in
trouble, this will quiet us; if in affliction, this will comfort us: It will
endure all our life, and be present at our death; then especially it will show
it self a friend unto us, in standing by us to cheer and refresh us. Psalm.
119.165.
Great peace have they which love thy law, and nothing shall offend them, says
David: nothing shall offend them or take away their peace: it is an eternal
and everlasting peace. Thus you have seen how the true and false peace of
conscience differ.

But here comes a question to be answered, and it is this; Have all Gods
children this peace of conscience? I dare say some of you look for this
question, and long to have it answered. I answer therefore, No; they have it
not always. Job seemed one while not to have it: Job. 7.20.
I have sinned, says his conscience: what shall I do unto thee, O thou
preserver of men. David seemed one while not to have it: Mine iniquities are
gone over my head as a heavy burden; they are too heavy for me, Psalm. 38.4.
His sins lay heavy upon his conscience for a fit. Hezekiah one while seemed
not to have it: Behold, for peace I had great bitterness. And therefore I say
the children of God have it not always. But let me tell you; They might have
it always. 1. It is possible they should have it always: Their sins of
ignorance and infirmity do not break the peace of their consciences: cannot;
for if they could, then no man should have true peace of conscience at any
time. Nothing but willing and witting sins, sins against conscience, can
break the peace of conscience: and as it is possible for the children of God to
live without these, so it is possible for them always to have peace; yea, they
may have daily more and more peace. 2. As it is possible for the children of
God always to have peace, so they are commanded to keep their peace always;
and it is their own fault if at any time they lose it: Acquaint thy self with
God, and be at peace, Job. 22.21.
says Eliphas. So, Col. 3.15.
Let the peace of God rule in your hearts, unto which ye are called. We are not
only commanded to have peace in our hearts, but also that it may rule there,
that no corruption perk over it to hinder it: we are called to this peace, and
commanded to have it; and therefore as it is a sin in the commonwealth when
one breaks the peace, so it is a sin in the spirit to break the peace of
conscience: we are all bound to the peace. 3. If the children of God have it
not always, then they feel the want of it: and in the want of that comfort
nothing else will comfort them. It is not all the peace and prosperity of the
world that can comfort their hearts as long as they have not this peace; not
all the mirth in the world can content them until they enjoy this peace again,
the peace and quiet of a good conscience: they faint for it, and long after it,
they can have no strength without it; Psalm. 29.11.
The Lord will give strength unto his people; the Lord will bless his people
with peace. It is not so with corrupt hearts: they can be without peace, and
yet never faint; they can eat and drink for all that, and sleep and be merry
for all that, yea and go about their profits and their earthly businesses as
roundly as ever for all that: But the children of God if they want the peace of
conscience, they have no strength to do any thing almost, they faint till they
have it again. 4. The godly always have the seeds of it in them: Psalm. 97.11.
L^ght is sown for the right^ous, and gladness for the upright in heart. Mark;
it is sown in their hearts, and it will spring up at one time or other to cheer
them and to comfort them. As it is with the wicked; they may seem now and then
to have true peace, but they have the seeds of horror always in them, which
will sprout forth at last, and then they shall find the worm of an evil
conscience again: so on the contrary side, the godly may seem now and then to
have no peace, but yet they have always the seeds of true peace in them, which
will in time show themselves, and solace their souls for ever. 5. They never
want peace as the wicked do want it: The wicked want it, and have no
possibility of having it: they go in such paths as wherein they shall never
know peace, Isai. 59.8.
such paths as will never lead them unto it: still their conscience is able to
say, they are not right, they are carnal and not spiritual; they know no true
peace of conscience, neither can they: But the children of God walk in such
ways as will bring them to true peace of conscience ere they have done.

By this ye see what a good and quiet conscience is. It cannot be but that all
must like it, and wish, O that we had it! Beloved, let us labor to get it and
the assurance of it. No blessing under heaven is like it: It is a heaven upon
earth. Happy are they who can show they have it: and miserable are they who
have it not. Dulce nomen pacis, Sweet and pleasant is the very name of peace,
especially of the peace of a good conscience: If ye have it, no misery can make
you miserable: and if ye have it not, no happiness can make you happy. It is
Christ's legacy which he bequeathed to his Church; John 14.27
Peace I leave with you; my peace I give unto you. It is glorious and
honorable: Be thou never so mean in the world, thou art glorious if thou
have this peace: be thou never so despised and disgraced among men, thou
have honor enough if thou have this peace: Romans 2.10. To every one that does
good, glory and honor and peace. Mark how it is accompanied; namely, with
glory and honor: But shame and confusion and dishonor is upon all them that
have it not.

III. Examination, Whether we have a quiet conscience.
COncerning a quiet conscience I propounded three things: 1. What it is; 2. How
it differs from that quiet conscience that is in the wicked; 3. The
examination whether we have this quiet conscience yea or no. The two former we
have handled already: namely, What a quiet conscience is; and, How it differs
from that quiet conscience which is in the wicked. Let us pass on now unto the
third, namely, to an examination of our selves whether we have a true quiet
conscience yea or no.

A quiet good conscience is such a mavelous blessing that it cannot possibly
be but we must like it and wish, O that we had it. Let us then examine our
selves and see whether we have it or no. Many have peace and quietness (as
has been showed already) arising from false grounds: they have peace of
conscience because they know not what belongs to trouble of conscience; or if
they know that a little (as some of the wicked do) yet they do not consider
that sorrow which one ^^y will burst in upon them and sink them utt^rly: Let us
try then our peace by these notes.

I. I^ the quiet of our consciences be good, it is such as we have carefully
sought for at the mercies of God in the blood of Jesus Christ, when being
pinched with the burden of our sins we did fly to the promises of God to seek
comfort, to the blood of Christ, to find ease and to get assurance of Gods
favor. If our peace come not this way, it is naught, and we were better to be
without it then have it. It may be we speak peace to our selves; but does the
Lord speak peace to our consciences? Psalm. 35.8.
I will hear what the Lord will speak: for he shall speak peace to his people,
and to his saints: but let them not turn again to folly (for that will break
all their peace.) O go to God then, and hear whether he speaks peace to your
consciences; whether it be God in Christ reeonciling the world to himself that
speaks it to you. It is not true peace without we have sought for it at the
throne of grace, without it be peace of Gods making. Now the Lord speaks
peace to his people who come to him for peace three ways. 1. He speaks peace
to them by his word. This speaking is thus; When the word promises peace to
those who walk by such a rule, and they walk by that rule, then Gods word
speaks peace to their souls. The rule is set down Gal. 6.15. In Christ Jesus
neither circumcision avails any thing nor uncircumcision, but a new creature:
and then follows, As many as walk according to this rule, peace be upon them.
2. God speaks peace to his people in their consciences. This speaking is
thus; When the conscience can say, I am in Christ, I am engraffed into Christ,
then the Lord speaks peace by the conscience, peace be with you all that are
in Christ Jesus: ^. Pet. 5.14.
so also when the conscience can say, I hunger after righteousness, I truly
mourn for sin, I desire in all my ways to please God. Thirdly, God speaks
peace by his Spirit. This speaking is thus; When the word has spoken peace by
the promise, and when the conscience speaks, I am thus and thus qualified,
and therefore I have peace, then the Spirit of God comes in and witnesses,
Yea, you say right; peace belongs unto you indeed, and I say Amen to it. When
the Spirit of God does say thus, then the Lord speaks peace to the soul. Gal.
5.22.
The fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace. Peace is the fruit of the Spirit:
it speaks it to the soul, breeds it in the soul. Now, beloved, examine your
selves: Is your peace of this stamp? do ye seek it of God, and get it in the
blood of Christ Jesus? do ye get it by the word, and by your truespeaking
conscience, and by the holy Spirit of God? If ye get it on this wise, then it
is true peace of conscience indeed. If ye get it by your own vain hopes and by
your good meanings, etc. this peace will not hold always: when your
consciences come to be awaked, your peace will all vanish away and be no more.
This is the first note to try and examine your selves by.

II. If our quiet and peace of conscience be good, it is accompanied with such
a life as is agreeable to the will of God: it avoideth sin, as the thing that
disturbeth the peace. How can any man have true peace of conscience when his
life does not please God but provokes his wrath against him? It cannot be that
he should have true peace who in his heart does regard sin: There is no peace
to the wicked, says my God. No, wherever true peace of conscience does
inhabit, it dwells with godliness of life and unblamablenesse of
conversation; as the Apostle Peter joyneth them together, 2. Pet. 3.14.
Wherefore, beloved, seeing ye look for such things, be diligent that ye may be
found of him in peace without spot and blameless. Mark the words; In peace,
without spot and blameless. If ever we would be found in true peace, we must
live without spot and blameless. A wicked man's conscience may seem to have
peace, and tell him he has served God; Prove. 7.14.
This day I have paid my vows, says the conscience of the whore: but this is
a rotten and deceitful peace. True peace of conscience is ever accompanied
with such a kind of life as is agreeable to the will of God in his word.

III. If our peace be good, it will make us endure to hear any point in Gods
word with joy and delight. A wicked heart can hear points of mercy and
comfort with joy: so long his peace lasts: Every man that calls upon the
name of the Lord shall be saved; If we confess our sins, God is just to
forgive us our sins; If any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father,
Jesus Christ the righteous; Whoever shall confess that Jesus is the Son of
God, God dwells in him and he in God: Such points as these a wicked heart can
read with delight (though if they were truly opened and expounded they would
yield him cold comfort, yet he can hear them with delight in the lump:) But if
a searching point or some terrible point comes, he is afraid to hear that.
Ahab had a quiet conscience but only when Michaiah did preach: Felix had a
quiet conscience no doubt; yet he trembled to hear Paul preach of death and of
judgment, Acts 24.25. One would have thought that Paul (a prisoner) should
rather have been afraid: but Paul had true peace of conscience, and therefore
he could think and speak of death with great comfort, and of judgment with
joy; So could not Felix. Beloved, this is a strong sign of a false peace, when
some points of Gods word lay us slat and bereave us of our hold. Ye shall have
many say, O they have such peace, and they have such a good conscience, as
quiet as can be, and as heartwhole as can be: By and by a sound searching point
comes and ransacketh them to the quick, and they are gone. I confess they go
and get some untempered mortar or other, and dawb up their consciences again;
but they are gone for the time. This is a strong sign of a rotten peace. But a
child of God can hear any point, hear of death, of judgment, of any thing
contained in the word, with delight and comfort. It is true, he may be amazed
thereat: but he is glad at heart that he hears it, and will make use of it,
be it mercy or judgment. Sweet or bitter points all are welcome to him: even
the bitterest points are sweet to him, because God and he are at peace; and
therefore he knows there is no news from God but it is good.

IV. If our peace of conscience be good, it will heal that base fearfulness
which is in many: who dare not be in the dark, dare not go through a
churchyard in the night. Some will quake at the very shaking of a leaf, as the
wicked in Job: Job. 15.21.
which is nothing but a guilty conscience. I grant this fearfulness is
natural to some; yet I say the true peace of conscience will cure it. I do not
say this is a reciprocal sign of true peace of conscience; for many wicked
men may be bold enough: but I say true peace of conscience will cure this
immoderate fearfulness in the godly.

But here two questions are to be asked. I. Whether every true child of God
that has true peace of conscience can think of death with comfort and be
desirous to die.

Answ. 1. Peace of conscience does not take away natural fear. It is the
nature of every living creature to be very fearful of death. The Philosopher
calls death (...), the fearfullest thing of all fearful things. Bildad
calls it the king of terrors. Job 18.14.
Nature loves its own preservation; and therefore fears the destruction of
it. Peace of conscience does not take away all this fear. 2. Besides, peace of
conscience does not take away always all degrees of slavish fear of death. The
reason is, because peace of conscience may be weak, mixed with much troubles of
conscience. For as faith may be very imperfect, so peace of conscience may be
in some very imperfect. Good old Hilarion was very fearful to die: He cried
out to his soul when he lay on his deathbed, O my soul, have thou served
Christ these fourscore years, and art thou now afraid to die? Again, 1. Jo^n
4.18.
a man's love may be very imperfect. Perfect love indeed casts out fear; but
imperfect love does not. Hezekiah had peace of conscience: Remember Lord, says
he, 2. Kings 20.3.
I have walked before thee in truth, and with a perfect heart. Mark; He had the
peace of a good conscience; his conscience told him he had a sincere heart, and
that his ways pleased God: yet he was afraid to die: I do not think it was
only because he had no issue, though that might be some reason of it. 3. When
a child of God is afraid to die, it is not so much for love of this life as out
of a desire to be better prepared. This made David cry out, Psalm. 39.13.
O spare me, that I may recover strength, before I go hence and be no more. Job
10.20, 21.
And so Job; Let me alone, that I may take comfort a little, before I go whence
I shall not return. These good men were then something unwilling to die: They
might have many reasons; most likely this was one* That they might be better
prepared, and more fit and ready for their departure. 4. Some of Gods people;
as these, Job and David, at other times; I say, some of Gods people have such
mavelous peace with God as that if it were Gods will they had much rather die
then live; Phil. 1.23.
I desire to be dissolved, says Paul, and to be with Christ; which is far
better. It may be in regard of the church, or the care of their children and
charge God has laid on them, they could be content to remain still in the
body: nevertheless, they account their state after death much better; and,
were it put to them whether to die or to live longer here, they would choose
death rather of the twain. 1. Kings 19.4.
Nay, Elias requested for himself that he might die: It is enough, Lord: take
away my life. Not that they love death it self; for death is evil in its own
nature, contrary to nature, a badge of sin: but for the love they have to and
the assurance they have of eternal life after death. 5. Nay there is no child
of God but may truly be said to love death, and to love the day of judgment
and the appearing of Christ Jesus. Divines use to put this as a sign of Gods
children: Nay, the Apostle makes this as a property of Gods children, to love
Christ's appearing: I have fought a good fight, says Paul, I have finished my
course: There he tells us of his own peace; and then he tells us of his
reward; 2. Tim. 4.8.
From henceforth is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, which the Lord
the righteous Judge shall give me in that day; and not to me only, but to them
also that love his appearing: that is, to all his children: For all the
children of God love the appearing of Jesus Christ to judgment. Though all do
not desire it with the same strength of faith, yet all desire it with faith.
Heb. 2.14.
They believe that Christ has destroyed him that has the power of death,
which is the devil; they believe Christ has taken away deaths sting, which is
sin, 1. Cor. 15.56, 57.
and swallowed death up in victory; and may all say, Thanks be unto God who
has given us victory through our Lord Jesus Christ. Neither do they so much
question this as their faith to believe it; saying, Lord, help our unbelief. 6.
Gods children have good reason to do so, and to check their own hearts whenever
they do otherwise. Whenever any disturst comes, they should check it down
again: whenever any fear arises, they should say, Psalm. 116.15.
What? I fear death? which is a thing so precious? Precious in the sight of the
Lord is the death of his Saints. Is death precious, and shall I be so vain as
to fear it? Thus ye see an answer to the first question, Whether every child of
God that has true peace of conscience can be desirous to die.

II. Quest. Whether a wicked man that has no peace of conscience may not be
desirous to die too? Answ. 1. The horror of conscience may make a wicked man
desirous to die. He may have so much horror of conscience as that he may think
certainly hell cannot be worse: (Hell is infinitely worse; but he may not think
so.) Thus Judas was desirous to die, when he went and hanged himself: Matthew.
27.5.
Thus many in despair do make away themselves. I confess some in despair may
be fearful to die: as Cain was fearful to die; it was fear of death made him
speak thus unto God, It shall come to pass that every one that finds me
shall slay me, Genesis 4.14. The reason was, because, though he were in despair,
yet he was not so sensible of his horror as Judas was: for Cain could go and
build for all this, and train up his children in music and the like for all
this; but Judas was in a case more sensible of his misery. 2. Dolor of pain
may make a wicked man desire to die. Thus it was with Saul: Saul had received
his deaths wound, and was in most grievous pain: he could not die presently,
neither could he live; but lying in very great pain between both, desired the
Amalekite to stand upon him and slay him, 2. Sam. 10.9. (though Osiander think
the Amalekite lied unto David to curry favor with him; but Josephus and others
think he spoke the truth.) Sure it is, that many wicked wretches having no
peace of conscience to sweeten and allay their torments, have been desirous to
die: nay some have hastened their own death. 3. Malecontentednesse, and shame,
and disappointment of their aims may also make wicked men desirous to die, and,
if death come not soon enough of it self, to dispatch away themselves with
cruel self-murder. Thus it was with Achitophel: when he saw his counsel was not
followed he haltered himself: 2. Sam. 17.22.
He had no peace of conscience to comfort him against all his dumps and
discontents; and therefore he was desirous to die. 4. Wicked men, being vexed
at something for the present, may seem to be desirous to die; and yet if death
should come indeed, they would be of another mind, and be content death should
be further off. Nay, Jonas (that strange man of a good man) O for a fit he
would be dying, yea that he would, Lord, Jon. 4.3.
take my life from me: for it is better for me to die then to live. I suppose
if God had taken him at his word, he could have wished his words had been in
again. But thus it is often in the mouths of wicked people; I would I were
dead; and, I would I were out of the world: not for any peace of conscience
they have, nor for any desire of death, but only for a momentany pang. If they
were to die indeed, they would be loath enough to it. Like the man in the Fable:
who being wearied with his burden of sticks, lay down and called for Death; but
when Death came indeed to take him, and said, What shall I do, man? thou
calledst me: I pray thee, said he, help me up with my burden of sticks. When he
was to die indeed, then he would rather have his own wearisome burden. It is
but a fable; but this is the fashion of many. 5. When wicked men are desirous
to die indeed sometimes not out of discontent or any such like reason, yet it
cannot be out of any true peace of conscience: They may go away like lambs, as
we say; but it is in a fools paradise. It may be whilst they lived they
thought to go to heaven: but when they die, then all their thoughts perish, as
the Psalmist speaks in another case.

To return therefore where we left; O beloved, is there any of you that want
the peace of a good conscience? and do ye know what you want? what a great
benefit and blessing? That ye may see this, and fully know it, and by knowing
it earnestly desire it, consider,

First, that it is the very head of all comforts. A worthy Divine calls it
Abraham's bosom to the soul: Ye know what a blessing it was unto Lazarus to be
taken from his fores into Abraham's bosom: The peace of a good conscience is
like this bosom of Abraham: Who would not gladly lie in it? Such a man who
has it can never look upon another man's comfort, but a good conscience will
say, Yea, and I have my comfort too. When Paul was commending of Timothy, see
how his own conscience spoke of himself at the same time: 1. Cor. 16.10.
He works the work of the Lord, as I also do. Mark; his conscience would be
putting in comfort for himself: Does Timothy work the Lords work? yea and so
do I too, says his conscience: It is Musculus his observation upon the place.

Secondly, A quiet conscience makes a man to taste the sweetness of things
heavenly and spiritual: It makes the word to be to him, as to David, Sweeter
then honey, yea then the honycombe: I have not departed from thy judgments, O
Lord, says he (thus says his conscience:) now what follows next? Psalm.
119.103.
How sweet are thy words unto my taste yea, sweeter then honey unto my mouth. A
good conscience makes a man taste sweetness in prayer, when his conscience
tells him he prays aright: It makes him taste sweetness in a Sabbath, when
his conscience tells him he sanctifies it aright: so also in the sacrament,
when his conscience can witness he receives aright. What is the reason so few
of you taste sweetness in these things? The reason is this; Because ye have not
the peace of a good conscience: It would find sweetness in every good duty,
in every good word and work.

Thirdly, A good quiet conscience makes a man taste sweetness in all outward
things, in meat, in drink, in sleep, in the company of friends: it puts a
Better upon a very morsel, Prove. 17.1. Brown bread and a good conscience, there
is a Better upon it then upon all the costly fare of the wealthy without it.
Bernard calls a good conscience a soft pillow: Another calls it a dear
bosom friend: Solomon calls it a continual feast. It makes a man taste
sweetness in every outward thing. The healthy man only can take pleasure in
recreations, walks, meats, sports, and the like: they yield no comfort to those
that are bedrid, or sick, or half-dead. But when the conscience is at peace the
soul is all in good health; and so all things are enjoyed with sweetness and
comfort.

Fourthly, It sweetneth evils to a man, as troubles, crosses, sorrows,
afflictions. If a man have true peace in his conscience, it comfort him in
them all. When things abroad do disquiet us, how comfortable is it to have
something at home to cheer us? so when troubles and afflictions without turmoil
and vex us and add sorrow to sorrow, then to have peace within, the peace of
conscience, to allay all and quiet all, what a happiness is this? When
sickness and death comes, what will a good conscience be worth then? Sure
more then all the world besides. If one had all the world, he would then give
it for a peaceable conscience. Nay, what think ye of judgment and the tribunal
of Christ? Do but think what a good conscience will be worth then? When Paul
was accused and hardly thought of by some of the Corinthians, this was his
comfort; 1. Cor. 4.3, 4.
I know nothing by my self, says his conscience: I count it a very s^all thing
to be judged of you. Nay, he goes further: His conscience tells him he has
the Lord Jesus (who justifies him) to judge him; he has a sweeter Judge then
his own conscience, even his Savior, to judge him. O there is no created
comfort in the world like the comfort of a peaceable conscience. The heathen
Mena^der could say, (...) Conscience is a little petty god. We may not give it
such a big title: but this is most certain; The conscience is Gods echo of
peace to the soul: in life, in death, in judgment it is unspeakable comfort.

Is there any then that want this? Exhortation.
Let them above all things labor to get it: It is more worth then all things
else. Whatever we neglect, let us not neglect this. It is safer to neglect
body, health, means, maintenance, friends, and all that ever we have in the
world then to neglect this. The more we have the worse it is for us, if we have
not this. Had we all this worlds good, it is like a stone in a serpents head or
a toads head, or a pearl in an oyster; not our perfection but our disease.

Again, you who have a peaceable conscience, 1. Labor to maintain it. Be often
in communion with God, be not strangers to him, the light of whose countenance
is the peace of your souls. It is the walking with God that breeds true peace
and preserves it. It is said of Levi, that he walked with God in peace. Mal.
2.6.
O let us stir up our selves to walk close with God, that so we may have
peace: No sweet peace but in so doing. 2. We must take heed we do not trouble
nor disquiet it, that we do not resist it, or offer violence unto it by
committing sin against the peace of it, but endeavor to maintain the peace
of it by obeying the voice of it. Get the fear of God, which is wisdom; and to
depart from evil, which is true understanding: All her paths are peace, Prove.
3, 17. We cannot walk in any one path of true wisdom but we shall find in it
peace: There is peace in humility, and peace in charity, and peace in
godliness, and peace in obedience, etc. Break any of these things, and ye
break the peace. Ye hear what an admirable thing the peace of conscience is: O
then, if ye have it, make much of it: nay, if ye have it, ye will for certain
make much of it. The very having of it will teach you the worth of it, and
learn you to prize it, and make you above all things unwilling to leave it. And
thus much of the first, viz. a quiet conscience.

An unquiet conscience.
I Have already handled a quiet conscience. I come now to speak of a troubled
and unquiet conscience: Concerning which I shall show you three things: 1. What
it is; 2. The degrees of it; 3. The difference of the trouble that may be in a
good and that may be in a bad conscience.

What it is
I. What a troubled conscience is. It is a conscience accusing for sin, and
affrighting with apprehensions of Gods wrath. And here I would have you
consider two things: 1. What are the causes of it; 2. Wherein it consists.

First, The causes of it are these five. 1. The guilt of sin: When a man has
done evil, and his conscience does know it, then does the conscience cry
guilty: Lev. 5.4.
when he knows it, says the text, then he shall be guilty. This is it which
wounds and pierces conscience; this is the sad voice of conscience. Like
Judas; I have sinned in betraying the innocent blood: Like Cain; My sin is
greater then can be forgiven. Genesis 42.21.
So the brethren of Joseph; We are guilty, say they, concerning our brother. It
is like the head of an arrow sticking in the flesh, or like a dreadful object
continually presenting it self before our eyes: My sin is ever before me,
Psalm. 51.3.
says David. When we have transgressed Gods law, and our conscience can cry
guilty, when the guilt of sin lies upon conscience, this is one cause of
the trouble of it.

2. Another cause is the apprehension of Gods wrath for sin: When knowing
that we have sinned and offended God, we apprehend his wrath in our minds, and
behold the revenging eye of his justice against us. This is a very grievous
thing, so terrible that no man or angel is able to abide it: As we see the
kings and potentates, the mighty men of the earth, call for the mountains to
fall upon them, and the hills to cover them from the wrath of God, Rev. 6.15,
16. When we have incurred Gods displeasure and our consciences see it, when his
anger rests upon us and our consciences feel it, this is another cause of the
trouble of conscience.

3. A third cause of the trouble of conscience is the fear of death and of
hell: When we know we have offended Gods law, and we know also what our sins
do deserve, namely death and judgment aad damnation for ever; this does most
trouble and disquiet conscience, when it fastneth on the apprehension of it.
The Apostle calls it a fearful looking for of judgment, When conscience
looks for nothing else but for hell and damnation, this must needs trouble
conscience.

4. Another cause is privative, want of supportance; when God does withhold
from conscience the help of his Spirit. Ye know the Spirit can enable
conscience to undergo all its troubles; the Spirit can prompt it with mercies
and the promises of God, and hold it up: but when the Lord bereaveth the
conscience of this help, and does not at all support it, this must needs also
trouble conscience.

5. When God does fasten on the conscience such thoughts as may affright and
terrify it; as thus, God does not love me; Christ will not own me; I have
sinned, I am a reprobate, past hope, etc. When such thoughts as these fasten on
the conscience, it cannot choose then but be troubled. Thus I have showed you
what are the causes of the trouble of conscience.

Secondly, This trouble of conscience consists in two things: First, in want
of comfort: It cannot apply to it self neither the promises of this life nor of
that which is to come. Conscience cries, This belongs not to me: This mercy,
this comfort is not my portion. Secondly, In a terror and anguish of mind from
these three heads: 1. From the guilt of sin; 2. From the apprehension of Gods
wrath; 3. From fear of death and of judgment. This is the three-stringed whip
wherewith conscience is lashed. These ye shall find upon the conscience of Adam
and Eve, when they had sinned against God. Their conscience was whipped 1. With
the guilt of sin; they saw they were naked, Genesis 3.7. 2. With the
apprehension of Gods wrath; they hid themselves from the presence of God, verse.
8. 3. With the fear of some vengeance which they began to look for; I was
afraid, says Adam, verse 10. This three-stringed whip ye may see also was upon
the conscience of Cain after he had slain his brother: His conscience was whipped
1. With the guilt of sin; My sin is greater then can be forgiven: 2. With
the apprehension of Gods wrath; From thy face, O Lord, am I hid: 3. With the
expectation of death and of judgment; It shall come to pass that every one
that finds me shall slay me. Thus I have showed you what a troubled
conscience is.

The degrees of a troubled conscience.
II. THe next thing I promised to show is the degrees of a troubled conscience.
A troubled conscience has diverse degrees: For some consciences are more
troubled then other some. 1. The first degree is such a degree as may be in
Gods children: and this arises not so much from the apprehension of Gods wrath
as from the guilt of sin: Their consciences grieve and are troubled to think
that they have sinned and offended the Lord God. Thus we see David could not be
at quiet: Although Nathan had told him from God that his sin was forgiven,
yet his conscience still troubled him: Against thee only have I sinned, Psalm.
51.4.
and done this evil in thy sight, says he. I grant the consciences of Gods
children are troubled at the apprehension of Gods anger; but then it is his
fatherly anger, not the anger of an enemy. Though for a fit they may seem to
apprehend th^^ too, yet mostly it is for that they have provoked their loving
Father to anger against them. A father may be angry with his child out of love;
and so the Lord may be with his dear children. The Lord was angry with me too,
says Moses, Deuteronomy. 1.37. O let not my Lord be angry, says Abraham the father
of the faithful. Psalm. 80.4.
O God of hosts, how long will thou be angry with thy people that prays,
says the Psalmist. Sometimes the Lord is angry with the prayers of his people;
but it is in love, because he would have them pray better, and obey better, and
look to their standing better. Now the consciences of Gods people are very much
troubled when the Lord is thus angry with them.

2. The second degree of trouble of conscience is such as is in the wicked, and
yet not altogether without hope. The conscience is troubled, but yet so as it
conceives hope: God is merciful; and, Christ died for poor sinners, etc.
Thus many a wicked man is troubled and affrighted in conscience, nor for sin,
but for the wrath of God against it; yet he conceives for the present that the
sin is pardonable and may be forgiven: Christ may forgive; God may pardon. It
is indeed but a poor ground of hope and comfort upon possibilities: but yet
this lightneth the trouble in the mean time, and it may be within a while
shakes it quite off: Like the wicked Jews, Isa. 57.10. who were worried and
wearied most grievously; yet they said not, There is no hope. There may be much
horror and disquiet in these consciences for a time: but ther^ is a higher
degree yet, a worse troubled conscience (...) this.

3. The third degree of a troubled conscience is, when it is for the present
altogether hopeless; such a conscience as is swallowed up in despair: when men
thinking of their manifold sins, of the direful wrath of God, of the
dreadful torments of hell for ever, their consciences make them despair of all
hope or possibility of avoiding this; bringing such thoughts as these, What a
deal of time have I spent in sin, wherein I might have made my peace with
God, and have prevented all this? What a great and omnipotent God have I
offended? What an infinite Judge have I provoked, who is able to revenge
himself on me, and who will be my foe to eternity? conscience also bringing in
thoughts of the torments and unsufferable pains to be endured in hell, and such
swallow up in despair without all hope for the present or the future. Like the
wicked man which Eliphaz speaks of, Desperatio est homicida animae, Aug.
He believes not that he shall return out of darkness, Job 15.22. So these
have no hope of escaping, expect to perish as Spira; O, says he, I envy Cain
and Judas: I would I were in their cases: They are damned; but I shall be worse
for evermore. Now though to these all hopes be gone for the present, yet some
of these troubled consciences scramble up again with vain hopes, and some do
not. Cain got up again, it should seem: but Judas did not. Those that never get
up again, either 1. Desperate est in infernum descendere, Isia.
they live in intolerable horror and vexation of spirit, as if they had a
devil in them to put them to anguish, and often (being weary of their lives) do
make away themselves, and so leap quick into hell: or else 2. they run
desperately into all abominable courses: Their consciences telling them there
is nothing to be expected but damnation, they give themselves desperately to
commit sin with greediness, saying with them in Jeremie, There is no hope;
therefore we will walk after our own devises, Jer. 18.12. Or else 3. they grow
senseless of it. They see they are wrong, but they are not sensible of it. It
may be they pray and read and hear; but their consciences secretly whisper,
All is to no purpose. Conscience eats and eats like a worm, E^ek 24.23.
and they pine away in their iniquities, as the prophet speaks. A kind of
sorrow they have, but they cannot mourn; a kind of sad dolor, but they cannot
weep: Ye shall not moan nor weep, but pine away in your sins, says the text.
I confess there be more presumers in the world, who promise themselves that
all shall be well with them: but yet there be despairers too, and very many,
whose consciences are troubled with secret despair; though it may be not
apparently to others.

Now the causes of these despairing consciences are these. 1. The greatness of
sin; when the heart thinks secretly thus, Certainly the Lord cannot find in
his heart to forgive me. As it was with Cain: When he had lived in
earthly-mindednesse, and then in formality, and then in discontent and in
hatred, and then in hardness of heart, the Lord rebuked him, and yet his heart
was so hard that still he went on in evil; then he murdered his brother; and
lastly he despaireth; My sins are greater, Genesis 4.13.
says his conscience, then can be forgiven. He thought God could not find in
his heart to forgive him. So when men sin and sin, and the Lord does rebuke
them, and yet they do sin, and their consciences do check them, and yet they
go on, at last they come to have secret despairs in their heart, that God now
will not look toward them; whereas if yet they had a mind to stoop to Jesus
Christ, they might be forgiven. 2. A second cause of despairing is multitude of
temptations. Indeed the godly should not be so apt to think themselves forsaken
of God by reason of temptations as sometimes they are: they should rather count
it joy, as James speaks, chap. 1.2. But yet many of the wicked despair
finally by this means: Because they do so often fall into temptations,
therefore they conclude they are forsaken of God. 3. Ignorance of Gods word.
When the guiltiness of sin meets with minds not instructed in the doctrine
of free grace and reconciliation by Christ; this is a cause of despair. 4. So
also inured custom of sinning is another cause. When men are often quickened,
and grow dead again; then quickened again for a fit, and then hardened again: in
the end they fall to despair. These and the like are the causes of despairing
consciences. And thus I have showed also the second thing propounded to be
handled, namely, the sundry degrees of troubled consciences.

III. The third thing is the difference between the troubled conscience in the
godly and in the wicked. The consciences of Gods children may be troubled, and
are many times; and the consciences of the wicked they are troubled too: now
the question is, How do they differ? I answer, 1. That trouble in the
conscience of wicked men is accompanied with impenitency, and sometimes with
blasphemy: I would I were able to resist God, says Francis Spira: like those
in the Revelation who blasphemed God because of their torments. Sometimes it is
accompanied with cursings, as Isai 8.21. sometimes with infinite murmuring. But
in Gods children it is not so: When their conscience is troubled, they justify
God, and clear God, and give him the glory of all, and submit under his hand,
and subdue their hearts unto him: as David in his trouble did not fret and
murmr against God, but says he, 2. Sam. 15.26.
If God have no pleasure in me, lo, here I am: let him do with me what seems
him good. So that the trouble of conscience in the children of God and in the
wicked does much differ in this first respect. 2. The trouble of conscience in
the wicked arises only from the apprehension of Gods wrath and fear of
judgment for sin, not for the sin it self and from the love of holiness:
But that in Gods children arises chiefly for sin, and the want of the
apprehension of Gods love unto them: How long will thou forget me, O Lord? for
ever? how long will thou hide thy face from me? Psalm. 13.1. Mark whence the
trouble of the Psalmist came: This was his trouble, that God did hide his face.
3. Trouble of conscience in the wicked never makes them part with sin, never
breeds a hatred of sin in them; but that in Gods children does. True it is
that a wicked man's troubled conscience may make him vomit up his sin, like a
dog that vomiteth up his troublesome meat: but he does not vomit up his stomach
to that meat; for when the trouble is over he returns to his vomit again. So
a carnal man returns to his deadness of heart again, and to his security
again, when the trouble is over. Pharaoh, whilst his conscience was troubled
at the sense of Gods judgments, O then says he, I have sinned: I pray, Moses,
let me have your prayers; and I will let you go. If the children of Israel
could have packed up and departed while this trouble had lasted, they might
have been gone. Exodus 8.15.
But when he saw there was respite, he hardened his heart again. Mark; His
trouble of conscience did not make him part with his sin: But that in Gods
children does. 4. That in the wicked drives them from God: They have little
heart to come unto him: They see nothing but wrath; and they rather go about to
seek ease in other things then to seek his favor: as Saul sought ease in
music, and Cain in building castles and cities, and Judas in a desperate
course. Their trouble fetches them not to God. But the trouble in Gods
children works otherwise: In the midst of trouble of conscience they rest
upon God: as Heman cries, O Lord God of my salvation, Psalm. 88.1.
in the midst of the troubles of his soul. The eyes of Gods children are still
toward heaven; they think still they should have some help from God: They pray
and cry, and though God seems to neglect them, yet they cannot give over:
They will not be beaten off from waiting on God when he will speak comfort to
them. 5. That trouble that is in the wicked makes their heart sullen; but that
in the godly melts their heart: My soul is like melting wax, says David in
his troubles of conscience. His soul melted before God, and was even poured out
before him, Psalm. 22.13. This is a kindly working. Thus ye see the difference.


Uses.
Use 1.
1. BY this we see what a miserable thing it is to have such a troubled
conscience. It is the greatest misery that can be: it is even a hell to men
here upon earth: it is like a dismal ghost to terrify the soul: it is like a
burning furnace in the bosom: it makes the life bitter. In a word, the spirit
of man is not able to bear it: Prove. 18.14.
The spirit of man will sustein its infirmities: but a wounded spirit who can
bear? As long as a man's spirit is sound, it will bear any thing. Some have born
agues, fevers, stones, colicks, convulsions, rackings, torturings: as long as a
man's spirit is sound he is able to bear any of them, all of them: but a wounded
spirit who can bear? Never was there man that was able to bear a wounded
spirit. We may see by many of Gods children how heavy it is: David rored with
the anguish of it: a strange phrase. Heman was ready even to run out of his
wits with it: While I suffer thy terrors, says he, I am distracted, Psalm.
88.15. Moses puts himself into the number, We are even consumed by thine
anger, Psalm. 90.7. Ethan complains that it was like a burning fever: How
long, O Lord will thou hide thy face? for ever? shall thy wrath burn like fire?
Psalm. 89.46. If it be thus with Gods children, what may we think of the wicked?
If we could search into the bosoms of some wicked men who are enemies to God,
then we might see and understand the true weight and burden of this troubled
conscience. Cain cries out of more then he can bear. Judas thought to find
more ease in hell then in his own heart: So terrible was the torture of his
troubled conscience, that he murdered himself, thinking verily that hell could
not be worse.

2. See here what an infinite misery every sinner shall one day be in. Use 2.
Though he be not troubled with this harpye for the present, though he be not
yet gastered with this furious hag; yet the day will come when he shall: I say
the time will come when all ye that are wicked shall be haunted with this
hellish agony of a troubled conscience; either here before ye die, or when ye
die, or at the furthest when your souls are departed out of your bodies: This
is unavoydable to all that live and continue in sin. Though for a while ye
live in mirth and pleasure and security, and conscience lets you alone;
though like Nabal to day ye feast and make merry; yet there is a conscience
within you, an Abigail which to morrow will tell you of it, and then your
hearts will die within you and be like stones, 1. Sam 25.37.
as cold and as heavy as a stone within you. As Samuel met with Saul, Because
thou have forsaken the Lord, 1. Sam. 15.16.
the Lord also has forsaken thee: so conscience will find you out. However for
a while ye slight and neglect it, or else perhaps suppress it, yet it will
find you out, as Eliah did Ahab, and then ye will say as he did, 1. Kings 21.20.
Have thou found me, O mine enemy? yea, I have found thee: Thou have sold thy
self to work wickedness in the sight of the Lord: thou have been a profane
beast, thou have run against heaven, and against God and Christ; and thy life
has been full of rebellions, etc. now I have found thee out. The day will come
when thy conscience shall be like Jobs messenger. Ye know what news the
messengers brought Job; first news of one great evil, and then of another
greater, and then of a third worst of all; cattle and goods taken away,
servants dead, sons and daughters dead, I only am left alive to tell thee:
So, I say, the time will come when conscience shall thus report, Thy pleasures
are dead; thy profits are dead; thy comforts are dead; thy heart is dead; thy
soul is cursed, and must die for ever; and I only am left alive to tell thee:
And then he shall cry out, Cursed was I that ever I was born: and cursed be
the womb that bare me: and the paps that gave me suck. Then shall thou mourn at
the last, when thy flesh and thy body are consumed, and thy conscience shall
say, How have I hated instruction, and my heart despised reproof? I have not
obeyed the voice of my teachers, nor inclined mine ears to them that instructed
me. Such doleful messages conscience will bring in one day; and then it shall
hiss like a snake in thy bosom, Know now that for all these things thou shall
come to judgment. And so thy conscience shall bray thee like a fool in a
mortar, as it were with a pestill, and it shall pounce thee and beat thee and
distress thee for evermore. This is the moth that gets into the cloth, and
does eat it: When thou with rebukes do correct man for iniquity, Psalm. 39.11.
thou make his beauty to consume away like as when a moth fretteth a
garment. This will make thy face gather blackness, and thy spirit be
overwhelmed for evermore.

I must add another use yet: For all this is the law: and until ye be in
Christ ye are all under the law, the curse of it, the rigor of it: And we are
bound to tell you how ye shall find it if ye do not submit to the
righteousness of Christ. But though we do preach the law, yet we do preach it
in the hand of a mediator, says Paul, Gal. 3.19. a terrible killing law, but
yet in a merciful hand, in the hand of a mediator, to drive us to seek for
mercy: and therefore

The third use shall be, Use 3.
to call upon you to be humbled, and to see that there is no living for you in
your sins. Go and stoop to Christ Jesus, who only can purge your guiltle
consciences by his blood. I beseech you, consider, ye who yet abide in your
sinful estates and are yet in the flesh: I beseech you, consider what the
event will one day be. If ye will not look out, your consciences will find you
out at the last, and then woe be to you. Your consciences will make all things
grievous and bitter to you, even those things which in themselves are most
sweet and good: When ye hear of heaven, of mercy, of the blood of Christ,
these will but increase your misery: conscience will say, You have no part in
them. When you hear the word, any promise or comfortable passage in it, your
conscience will say, Yea, this is my misery, I have no share in these things.
This will be a hell unto you, and will torment you before your time. This will
also make all outward good things bitter unto you: When you see wife and
children and friends, then conscience will whisper and say, I shall not have
these long: ere long I shall have none but damned company. When you see your
goods, estates, and the like, conscience will mutter, Alas, ere long I shall be
in a place where a drop of water shall not be afforded me to cool my tongue.
When you see the light and other comfortable objects, O woe is me; I shall
shortly be in a place where I shall see nothing but darkness, utter and
everlasting darkness. Conscience will make your afflictions intolerable, your
sickness intolerable, your deathbed intolerable, the face of death
intolerable. I beseech you, brethren, consider these things, you that have not
felt a troubled conscience until this hour. Ye hardly know yet what it is: ye
will know it to your sorrow, if you do not consider it. There is a phrase in
Ezekiel. 30.24. where God says he will make Pharaoh groan with the gronings of a
man deadly wounded: So it will be with you, if you will not hearken and submit
to Jesus Christ; conscience will make you groan with fearful groans; O woe is
me, I am undone, without hope, without remedy. Consider this therefore, and be
wise, before the things which concern your peace be hidden from you.

And let me the rather exhort you to this in regard of the danger of the times.
Exhortation.
The Lords wrath is gone out, and his judgments do fly through the earth, and
his plagues do fall on every side of us: What will your guilty consciences do
now? oh you can never endure them. Ye had need of purged consciences now lest
ye be quite comfortless in the day of visitation. How miserable is their case
who want the peace of conscience in the time of distress? When troubles and
afflictions are without, then how grievous is it to want peace and comfort
within? When Gods mortal arrows are in your bodies, then to have the arrow of
his wrath sticking in your souls, this will add sorrow to sorrow, and make
your estate much more uncomfortable and unsupportable. Beloved, peace of
conscience is good at all times; but it is most precious when calamities fall
on us: Then to have the peace of a good conscience that may bring us good news
from heaven, that all is well within, all peace there, this is such peace as
all the world cannot give nor sell nor buy. Never more need of the peace of
conscience then now. As one said of the books of faith, There be abundance of
books written of faith: M.M.
buy them all up, says he; ye will need every one of them ere long: So may I
say of whatever may forward the peace of conscience; Buy it, purchase it, get
it, as much peace as you can possible: ye will have need of it all ere long.
Take heed of troubling your consciences or clogging them with guilt, lest the
Lord cast you off, and lest ye be hardened, and so ye perish from the right way.
Do not think thus, O we are believers, and have no need of such threatenings. He
who is certain of his salvation knows assuredly he should be damned if he
should go on in sin without repentance; This If is true enough; If the
righteous forsake his righteousness, Ezekiel. 18.26.
all his former righteousness shall be forgotten. And, 1. Cor. 9.16.
Woe is me, says Paul, If I preach not the gospel. In the state of innocence
there was use of threatenings: so is there now in the state of grace. The Lord
threatened Adam in innocence, If thou eat thereof thou shall die the death. Job
was awed by threatenings not to lift up his hand against the fatherless; for,
says he, destruction from God was a terror to me. Job 31.23.
My flesh, Psalm. 119.120.
says David, trembles for fear of thee, and I am afraid of thy judgments.
Let us have grace, Heb. 12.28.
says the Apostle, whereby we may serve God acceptably with reverence and
godly fear. Why? for our God is a consuming fire. For be it that Gods children
(that is, all believers) shall never fall finally away; yet this threatening is
one of Christ's instruments whereby he keeps them from falling: and they also
may taste of much bitterness if they grow indulgent to their corruptions. O
therefore take heed of this curse, that your consciences may not dog you with
the guilt of sin and the apprehension of Gods wrath. You will never be able
to bear it, much l^s^e in the time of affliction. O it is good being in a dry
house when a great tempest is up: and it is safe being in a good harbor when a
storm b^^teth hard. A good conscience is good at all ^imes; but O how sweet
then! When Jonah fell into affliction, the want of peace in his conscience made
him look upon his affliction as upon hell, as though he had been in the belly
of hell: They who follow lying vanities, forsake their own mercies, says he.
Mark; his conscience dogged him with his fleeing from God, and forsaking his
own mercies. Ye see he was miserably distressed by it till the Lord did deliver
him. Be charie then of conscience, and get it purged, that it may speak peace
to you in trouble.

4 Questions.
NOw I have declared unto you, What a troubled conscience is; What is the cause
of it, and wherein it consists; How many degrees there be of it; How the
troubled conscience of the godly differs from the troubled conscience of the
wicked; the misery of a troubled conscience; and, What a deal of mischief it
does one, especially in affliction: now I should leave this point, but that
there be sundry questions to be answered about it.

I. Suppose a man be rid of this trouble, and have peace of conscience, how
shall he maintein it, and keep out troubles from it? II. Whether and how the
peace of our conscience depends upon our care and obedience? III. What manner
of obedience it is that peace of conscience does depend on? IV. If a man have
no peace, but only a burdened conscience, what must such a man do to be freed
from it and to attein true peace?
I. Question; How a man may keep peace of conscience.

I begin with the first: Suppose a man have peace of conscience, what must he
do to keep and maintein it? I answer,

First, We must labor to prevent troubles of conscience by taking heed that we
do nothing contrary to conscience. We must not be drawn by friendship, or
credit, or the love of any lust, to do that which conscience forbids.
Nothing should be so dear unto us as the peace of conscience: nothing for the
love of it should make us do ought against our conscience. How miserable are
those comforts, delights, satisfactions which we get to our selves in such
courses as our own hearts do condemn! However they seem comforts for a while,
and contentments for a while, and delights for a while, yet at last it will
appear that miserable comforts are they all. Nothing that we get in any evil
way will cheer and comfort us in a time of need. What said Francis Spira at the
time of his death, when seeing his wife and children about him, and thinking on
the goods and estate which he had got for them by denying the truth which he
had before maintained against the Romish errors* he cried out in the horror
of his conscience, How terrible is the sight of these unto me! However before
they had been comforts to him, yet now he could not endure the sight of them.
O, thought he, I recanted for your sake; I yielded to superstition, and it was
long of you: Therefore he abhorred now the sight o^ them. Wretched is he that
allows himself in any course which his conscience finds fault with. It is a
good rule the Apostle gives, Romans 14.22.
Blessed is he that condemns not himself in that which he allows: that is,
Blessed is he that has not a condemning conscience, that allows not himself
in any course wherein his conscience does condemn him. So that if we have
peace of conscience, and desire to maintein it, let us never allow our selves
in any course that our conscience may condemn us in. That is the first answer.

Secondly, If we will maintein our peace, Answ. 2
we must labor to have our hearts grounded in the assurance of the love of
God: alas, it will fail us else, and leave us in trou^le and perplexity in
time of greatest need. Observe how the Apostle joyneth love and peace together,
2. Cor. 13.11. The God of love and peace be with you. If he be the God of love
to us, it is sure enough he will be the God of peace also: If we know once that
God loves us, then we may set our hearts at rest: As long as we doubt of his
love our conscience can never have true peace: And therefore if we would
maintein true peace of conscience let us labor to be assured of Gods love.

Thirdly, We must use the exercise of faith in applying the blood of Christ;
Answ. 3.
we must labor to purge and cleanse our consciences with it. If we find that
we have sinned, we must run presently to the blood of Christ to wash away our
sin. We must not let the wound fester or exulcerate, but presently get it
healed. As there is a fountain of sin in us, so there is a fountain of mercy
in Christ, set open for Judah and Jerusalem, Zech. 13.1.
and for every poor soul to wash in. As we sin daily, so he justifies
daily, and we must daily go to him for it: As every day we run into new
debts, so the Lords prayer teaches us every day to beg forgiveness: We must
every day eye the brazen serpent. Justification is an ever-running fountain,
and therefore we cannot look to have all the water at once. A fountain ever
runs anew; so justification ever flows anew, and we must go to it. Christ
is a Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedec. O let us sue out every day
a daily pardon of course! Let us not sleep one night without a new pardon.
Better sleep in a house full of adders and venomous beasts then sleep in one
sin. O then be sure with the day to clear the sins of the day: Then shall
our conscience have true peace. Object.
But how if I have relapsed? what shall I do then? I answer, Sol.
Every man that falls does not fall on all four, as we use to say; he does
not fall quite: There be degrees of falling. As in a sick man, though he be ill
yet he is not by and by dead; some life remains still, which will look out
toward health again: so there is so much life in justification as to recover
thee again. Be constant therefore in this course: Ever go to Christ, ever wash
in this fountain, ever bring thy soul hither to be cleansed; and then thy
conscience ever shall have peace.

Answ. 4.
Fourthly, If we would maintein our peace, then let us labor to be constant in
obedience to Jesus Christ. Whosoever keeps his word, in him verily is the
word of God perfected; and hereby know we that we are in him, 1. John 2. 5.
Mark; Hereby our conscience may tell us that we are right, and speak peace to
us, if we keep his word,

II. Question; How the peace of conscience does depend upon our care and our
obedience.

The reason why I raise this question is this, Because as our justification is
only in Christ, so our peace is only in him; how then does the peace of our
conscience depend on obedience? The place of Scripture that occasioneth the
doubt is, 1. Pet. 3.21. The answer of a good conscience toward God by the
resurrection of Jesus Christ. It is by Christ; how depends it then on our
obedience?

Answ. 1. A good conscience does not depend upon our obedience as the
principal cause of it, but upon justification which we have by Christ if we be
in him: Romans 5.1. Being justified by faith we have peace with God through our
Lord Jesus Christ. Ye see then that our peace is grounded upon our
justification as the principal cause of it. If we should seek for peace from
our works and obedience, alas, they are sinful and defective; there is no
peace to be found in them: Our conscience would be troubled at our best duties,
at our weakness in prayer, our frailties in hearing, our slips in every holy
service: There is nothing we do but our conscience might find fault with it,
and pick a hole in it; and therefore we had need to fly unto Christ for true
peace. No wonder then that Papists have not true peace, but professedly say,
that every man must doubt, and no man can be sure of his salvation. They must
needs doubt indeed who trust to their own works: which can never bring true
peace. The conscience must ever be quarrelling and finding of fault, and be
without peace, if we trust to the best works. So that this is the first answer,
All true peace depends upon justification by faith in Christ as the
principal cause.

Secondly, We answer, That our peace depends upon our obedience in this sort,
that we can have no peace except we be given to obedience. Those men that can
sin and yet be at peace, were never justified in their lives. A child of God
when he sins; as for example, if he should be tempted to lie, or to omit a
good duty, which he knows he is bound to perform; yet this would much
trouble his conscience; his soul would be ashamed, his heart perplexed, he
would not know how to look the Lord in the face; I have sinned: what shall I do
unto thee, O thou preserver of men? When David had sinned against God, I am
troubled, says he; Psalm. 28.6.
and I go mourning all the day long. And therefore peace of conscience does
depend thus far on obedience, as that a man cannot have peace unless he be
obedient, and take heed of sin, and labor in all things to be upright before
God. Dub. Sol.
Now if you ask me, But how does our peace depend upon our obedience? I answer,
It depends upon obedience as the removing cause: It removes that which would
hinder our peace. Sin would interrupt our peace: now obedience removes
sin. To this purpose the Apostle speaks 1. John 3.18, 19. My little
children, let us not love in word and in tongue, but in deed and in truth: For
hereby we know that we are of the truth, and shall assure our hearts before
God: Hereby we shall assure our consciences that we are in him, if we take heed
of hypocrisy: If we love in truth, and be obedient in truth, we shall thereby
remove all our doubts and our fears, our troubles and perplexities of
conscience. So that peace does depend on obedience as the removing cause: It
removes that which otherwise would hinder peace. This is the first. Again, our
peace of conscience depends upon our obedience as the witnessing cause of it.
Obedience is one of the witnesses of true peace; it witnesses that we have
peace with God. This is our rejoicing, 2. Cor. 1.12.
even the testimony of our conscience, that in simplicity and godly sincerity
we have had our conversation in the world. See here, it is the witnessing cause
of it: Paul had peace of conscience; his conscience was able to make him
rejoice: How? Because it gave testimony that his conversation was godly and
simple and gracious. Though we be in Christ, yet we can have no peace unless
holy obedience does witness the same. Obedience is not the cause of the peace
of our consciences before God, but it is the cause of our perceiving the same:
We know we have peace by reason of our obedience: 1. John 2.29.
We know that every one that does righteousness is born of God: 1. John 4.13.
We know we are passed from death to life, because we love the brethren: 1.
John 3.14.
Hereby we know that we dwell in him and he in us, by the spirit that he has
given us. Mark; we come to know it by obedience and by the fruits of obedience.
Take away obedience, we can never know peace. Gal. 6.16.
They that walk by this rule, peace shall be upon them and upon the Israel of
God, says the Apostle. Thirdly, our peace of conscience depends on our
obedience as the confirming cause: Christ confirms our peace to us by making
us walk close to him and obedient unto him. Paul shows how it preserves
peace, as a shoe preserves the foot: ye know if we should walk without shoes,
barefoot, our feet would be in danger of pricking and hurting: So does
obedience to the Gospel preserve our peace: Ephesians. 6.15.
Stand, says the Apostle, having your feet shod with the preparation of the
Gospel of peace. Mark; he compares it to a shoe, which he would have us shod
with; and then it will be the Gospel of peace to us, and our peace shall be in
safety. Fourthly, our peace depends upon our obedience, not only as a sign
of true peace, nor only as a guard to it, but as a thing pleasing to God,
without the which we displease God. For though God be pleased with his children
always in Christ, yet he is not pleased that any in Christ should be
disobedient to him. 1 Thessalonians. 4.1.
Ye have received of us how ye ought to walk and to please God, says the
Apostle. When Gods children walk in obedience, that is pleasing unto God. So
that peace of conscience does greatly depend on obedience: For otherwise
conscience will be troubled; O I do not please God; This is displeasing unto
God; and, This does provoke God. Not as though there were any such perfection
in our obedience that can satisfy any tittle of Gods law; but because when our
persons are pleasing to God in Jesus Christ, then our obedience to God is
pleasing too in Jesus Christ, and conscience will say it. Thus much shall
suffice for answer to the second question.

III. Question; What manner of obedience it is that peace of conscience
depends upon?

The reason of this question is this; Because it should seem there is no such
obedience in this life as any peace of conscience should depend on. Does not
James say, In many things we sin all? Does not our Savior say, When ye have
done all that ye can, say, We are unprofitable servants? If our conscience can
still say that we are unprofitable, and that we do sin in every thing that we
do, yea in many things, in all the duties we go about; if our consciences can
say thus, How can any peace depend upon obedience? What obedience do you mean
that peace of conscience depends upon?

I answer, 1. Absolute perfection in obedience is not required unto
evangelicall peace. For if it were, no man could have peace; no not Paul, nor
Abraham, nor any of the holiest of Gods children: and therefore absolute
perfection is not required. If we say we have not sinned, we make Christ a
liar, and his word is not in us, 1. John 1.10. Our conscience can still say we
have sinned; and it can still say our obedience is imperfect: A halting leg can
never go perfectly. A Jacob is called he that halteth; and every godly soul
halteth; Though he do not halt between two, as wicked people do, yet he halteth
in following after God. What purblind eye can see perfectly? or thick ear
hear perfectly? He that has these imperfections of body can neither go nor
see nor hear perfectly; So the best of Gods children have imperfections of
heart and spirit and mind: their faith is imperfect, their love is imperfect;
and therefore their obedience must needs be imperfect. But absolute perfection
is not required to true peace of conscience; and therefore this does not hinder
it. 2. Though absolute perfection be not required to peace, yet such obedience
is required as may be acceptable to God. 2. Cor. 5.9.
So says the Apostle, We labor that whether present or absent we may be
accepted of him. Such obedience we must show as may be accepted of him, or we
cannot have true peace. If our endeavors be not acceptable, our conscience
will quickly hear of it, and tell us so: If we pray coldly, or hear
unprofitably, or live loosely, if we do not do that which is acceptable to God,
our consciences will soon complain. Nay though we do do the duties, if we do
not do them in an acceptable manner, conscience will have matter against us
still. 3. This acceptablenesse of obedience lies in this, when our obedience
is sincere, universal, and total, and proceeding from the spirit of Christ
Jesus dwelling in us. The Apostle gives it this phrase, When we walk not after
the flesh but after the Spirit, Romans 8.4. That is our fulfilling the law, when
Christ has fulfilled the law for us, and makes us sincerely to walk by it,
not after the flesh but after the Spirit: when we do not favor our selves in
one lust, nor suffer our selves in any beloved sin; but whatever it be that
is evil, our conscience can say we truly do hate it and labor to avoid it;
whatever it be that is commanded us, be it never so contrary to our nature, yet
our conscience can say we sincerely set our selves to do it. So walking not
after the flesh but after the Spirit, this is sincerity of obedience, and this
is required unto peace. 4. This sincerity of obedience makes us to bewail our
very infirmities, and to be humbled for them: not only to be humbled for
greater sins, but also to be humbled for our infirmities. If we be not
soundly humbled for our very infirmities also, they will hinder the peace of
our conscience: We can have no peace except our conscience can witness that
our infirmities do humble us and drive us to Christ and cause us to sue out a
pardon. If conscience have not a pardon sealed for infirmities also, it will
not be at peace. Matthew. ^.17.
Christ bare our very infirmities: therefore we must be humbled for them, and
go to him for pardon of them too, or conscience will not be at peace. Thus I
have answered also this third question.

IV. Question; How if a man have a burdened and troubled conscience, what must
he do to be freed from it?

The reason of this question is this; Because men are ignorant about it. When
men are troubled in conscience and burdened a little that way, presently they
daub all with peace, and go a wrong way to work. This course the Lord does
complain of in the false prophets who preached too much peace; Jer. 8.11.
They have healed the hurt of the daughter of my people slightly saying, Peace,
peace, when there is no peace. And so they do more hurt then good: Like a
surgeon that skinneth the wound before he gives searching salves to kill
the matter of it: afterward it breaks out worse, and it is a hundred to one
but it will cost the patient his life: So it is with many men: A man cannot
rore a little for his sins, I have been a sinner, and what shall I do? I have
been a beast, etc. But, O, say they, believe man, Christ died for thee, and the
promise is to thee, and God will pardon thee. Thus they heal him slightly with
Peace, peace, and it may be there is no peace to him yet; he had need to be
searched more deeply: they skin the wound, and it is a thousand to one but it
loses the man's soul, by giving a cordial where a corrosive was necessary.
And therefore great reason that this question should be answered, If a man have
a burdened troubled conscience, what must such a man do to be freed from it?

I answer, 1. Let him take heed that he meddle not too much with the secret
will of God, what his decree and purpose is from eternity. As soon as an arrow
is shot into the conscience, and the conscience comes to be humbled, commonly
the heart lays about it, An^ how if God have reprobated me? and what if he
have appointed me to wrath? how then? Beloved, ye must take heed of this: If
your hearts fasten upon reprobation, that will mar all: that will quite
discourage a poor soul from going to God.

2. Understand the word right. Do not think that because God has not in
particular named thee, therefore he has excluded thee. Gods promises are made
in general to all that believe* and they are to be applied in particular to
all them that believe: why then should thou exclude thy self when God does
not exclude thee? Would thou have Christ? Christ to justify thee? Christ to
sanctify thee? Christ to rule thee? Would thou be under Christ's regiment,
and live at his will? Come and welcome: Rev. 22.17.
no soul is excepted. Whosoever will, let him take of the water of life freely.
Ye see there is a Quicunque vult. Whosoever will. Indeed if thou have not a
will to be in Christ; but thou will do thus and thus, and thou will have thy
will, and this lust, and that friend, and such a course, and, Tush, this is too
strict; nay, if you be there thou art not for Christ: I have nothing for thee
but hell and damnation. But if thou would have Christ indeed, and be in
Christ indeed, thy heart in Christ, thy will in Christ, thy whole self in
Christ; then arise, he calls thee. Thus understand the word right, the gospel
does not exclude thee whosoever thou art.

3. Thou must not for fear of shame or loss, etc. keep from restitution
wheresoever thou have done wrong, or satisfaction wheresoever thou have
cozened, or reformation wheresoever thou art accustomed to any evil, or the
doing any thing that may procure ease and quiet to thy conscience. It may be
one is troubled in conscience for his wronging his neighbor in twenty pounds,
and if he would make restitution he might have sound peace: but he will not;
no, he daubeth up his conscience some other way. Another it may be suffers
disorders in his family and foul abuses, which if he would redress he might
have peace: but he will not. Another, if he would down with his pride; another,
if he would be acquainted with Gods servants, or if he would take any pains in
good duties, be more diligent for the work of repentance, etc. but these things
will not be done: Men plaster up their consciences (I know not how) some other
way, and so go to hell for not taking the right way. But if any of you be
troubled in conscience, keep back nothing, hold back nothing that may make for
your true peace and quiet.

4. Thou must wait on God: Cast thy self at his feet, humbly desire him to give
thee the true peace of conscience. But wait Gods leisure, knowing thou have
deserved to be utterly deprived of it: and thus doing thou shall find it to thy
great comfort at last. Blessed are all they that wait for him; Isai. 30.18.
that is, when the Lord will be merciful. He will do it with judgment; he
will do it when it may do thee the most good, when it may bring himself most
glory: therefore it is fit thou should wait for his time of comforting. Now
because many do misconstrue this waiting Gods leisure, (As for example, one is
dead to all good duties, O, ^aith he, I wait the Lords leisure till he quicken
me: My heart is much hardened, says another; but I wait the Lords leisure till
he be pleased to soften it. Thus men are lazy in the mean while; and yet they
think they wait the Lords leisure. O beloved, this is not the waiting the Lord
means; this will not stay conscience; conscience is guilty for all this
waiting) therefore I beseech you consider what waiting I mean. 1. Wait upon the
Lord, and keep his way; thou do not wait else, unless thou keep praying, and
striving, and meditating, and enquiring, and watching thine own heart lest it
should slip aside. 2. Thou must wait as a servant waits upon his master: If
his master calls, he comes; if he sends, he goes; if he beckeneth, Psalm.
123.2.
he takes notice: So thou must wait. As servants wait upon their masters, so
our eyes wait upon the Lord till he have mercy upon us. Be obedient in the
mean time: go when he sends; come when he calls; observe when he beckeneth;
be diligent to be doing his pleasure. 3. Thou must wait only upon God, not
upon thy lusts too, and upon other things too; but thou must wait only upon
God: My soul, wait thou only upon God, says David, Psalm. 62.5. If thou wait
upon any thing else, this is not to wait upon God. One waits a time to be
revenged; another waits a time to satisfy this or that lust: this is not to
wait upon God at all. 4. Take heed of healing thy self, and comforting thy
self, or daubing up thy conscience thy self: If thou do so, thou do not
wait upon God to do it: If thou do it thy self, and snatchest at comfort thy
self before he do give it, then thou do not wait till he give it. Suppose a
man has done thee an injury; the Lord he will right thee if thou will wait:
but if thou go and recompense evil for evil, and right thy self, thou do not
wait upon God as Solomon advises, Prove. 20 22.
Say not thou, I will recompense evil; but wait on the Lord and he will save
thee. Mark; thou must not save thy self, thine own credit, etc. by revenging,
but wait on God for all. So here if thy conscience be troubled, thou must wait
upon God to comfort it: If thou go and daubest up the matter thy self, and
criest, Peace, peace, to thy self, thou do not wait upon God. Thus I have
answered the last question, How if a man have a burdened and troubled
conscience, what must such a man do to be freed from it? And hitherto we have
spoken of the two last adjuncts of conscience, a Quiet conscience, and an
Unquiet conscience; What they be, and, How they differ: and we have resolved
and answered the questions and difficulties about them.

Conscience bears witness of our persons.
COncerning the witness of conscience, I told you that conscience bears
witness of two things: 1. It bears witness of our actions; 2. It bears
witness of our persons. The former has been declared unto you at large: I
come now to the latter; Conscience bears witness also of our persons,
whether we be good or evil, whether in Christ or in sin: And here I will show
you four things: 1. That every man's conscience may inform him what state he is
in, whether of salvation or damnation, whether of grace or of nature. 2. How
conscience does it. 3. When conscience does it. 4. How it comes to pass then
that so many thousands mistake and are ignorant and deluded about their estates.


1. Every man's conscience may inform him in what state he is.
1. For the first, That every man's conscience may inform him what estate he is
in, whether good or bad; (I speak especially of such as live under the light of
the Gospel of Christ.) There are two rules: the one is Gods word, which
points out both estates; and the other is every man's conscience, which is
privy to the frame and standing of every man's own heart, and which of these
estates his estate is, conscience is privy to this. I will instance in some
sorts of men. 1. The Jews, who contented themselves with formality: they
sacrificed, they offered, they paid their tithes, they did that which Moses
commanded them for the letter of it: now ye shall see their conscience could
tell them that they were not perfect nor upright with God: All their duties,
and formalities, and gifts, and sacrifices could not make them that did the
service perfect, as perteining to the conscience, Heb. 9.9. Mark; Their
consciences could say they were not upright for all this. As they were not
upright, so their conscience could tell them they were not upright. 2. Another
instance we have in the Scribes and Pharisees: When they would have condemned
the woman taken in adultery, their own conscience was privy that they were
sinners themselves, John 18.9. So also it is with a child of God: His
conscience is able to inform him that he is a child of God, and that he does
truly serve God. I thank God, 2. Tim. 1.3^.
says Paul, whom I serve with a pure conscience. His conscience told him he
was a true servant of God, and that he was Gods: whose I am, says he. So
David's conscience; I am thine; save me: for I have sought thy commandments. So
the church; My beloved is mine, and I am his. Ye see then how conscience can
inform and tell us what estate we are in, whether we be godly or carnal,
whether our conversation be in heaven or on earth, whether we be in Christ or
out of him. The spirit of man knows what is in him. It is easy to know what
our great thoughts of heart are upon, what our greatest purposes and projects
and studies be; whether about God or the world: the spirit of a man must needs
know it. And therefore every man may draw out from conscience a true conclusion
how it is with him. The reasons are these: 1. The first is taken from the
nature of conscience. The nature of conscience is such that it must needs be
able to know what is with a man. Now his welldoings or his illdoings are with
him: he was with himself when he did them* When thou art proud, or impatient,
or careless in any duty, thou art with thy self when thou art so: All thy
illdoings are with thee: and therefore thy conscience must needs know what thou
art. Isai. 59.12.
Our transgressions are with us; and as for our iniquities we know them. Take a
curser; Eccles 7.22.
and, as Solomon says, Thine own heart knows that thou have used to curse
others. So it is with a godly soul: Thine obedience is with thee, and thy
self-denial is with thee, and thy care to walk before God, all is with thee;
and therefore thou must needs know it. This is the nature of conscience; It is
privy to what is with one. 2. The second reason is taken from the equity of
Gods judgments on the wicked. The Lord he will judge none to hell, but his
conscience shall confess he was one that walked in the way to hell and death.
Ye may read it in the man that had not on the wedding garment: When Christ did
charge him with his not having on a wedding garment, and did condemn him to
utter darkness, the text says, he was speechless; Matthew. 22.12.
that is, his conscience confessed that Christ's judgment was just: I have not
on a wedding garment, says his conscience; and it is my fault that I have
none; and I am rightly condemned. Thus his conscience did know it; otherwise he
could not have been speechless in his own desense. As Festus told Agrippa that
he answered the Priests, Acts 25.16.
It is not the manner of the Romans to deliver any man to dye before that he
who is accused have his accusers face to face, and have license to answer for
himself concerning the crime laid against him: So may I say, that the great
Judge of quick and dead will not judge any man to hell but he will have his
accusers face to face, and if he can answer for himself he may. Now if
conscience be not privy to what estate soever a wicked man is in, his
conscience could never accuse him face to face at the last day, nor justify
the Lord Jesus and make the sinner stand speechless before God. He might
answer, Lord, I do not know any such thing as is laid to my charge: I am not
convinced that the case is thus and thus with me, that I am in such an estate
as I am accused of. No wicked man shall be able to say thus: Therefore
conscience can inform a man in what estate he is. 3. The third reason is taken
from the Lords manner of judging the godly. He will judge them and absolve them
secundum allegata and probata, as we say, according to the word and their own
consciences. Ye may see the true form of judgment which the Lord will go by,
Matthew. 25. Where the Lord convinces the whole world who were righteous and who
not, who to be judged to punishment, and who to life for ever; at last he
concludes, The wicked shall go away into everlasting punishment, but the
righteous into life eternal. As if he had said, Your consciences can say ye
are wicked: ye did not feed, nor clothe, nor visit me: Go your ways to hell.
So for the righteous; Your consciences can say ye are righteous: Go ye to
heaven. Thus the Lord will do. Now this could not be if conscience could not
inform every one that is godly that he is so: If conscience could not witness
what estate they are in, this could not be. Thus ye see the truth of the first
thing.


2. How conscience does this.
II. The second thing that I promised to show you is, How conscience does this.
Ye have heard that it is able to inform every one what estate he is in before
God: Now it follows to consider, How conscience does it. This it does by
comparing the word of God with our hearts, and our hearts with the word: Psalm.
119.6.
As for example; They who have respect to all Gods commandments shall never be
ashamed, says the word: But, says conscience, I desire to know all my duty
to God and man, and to perform all that I know: and therefore I shall not be
ashamed. Prove 11 18.
To him that sows righteousness shall be a sure reward, says the word: But,
says conscience, I plough up my nature and all the fallow-ground of my heart,
and I sow righteousness: and therefore to me shall be a sure reward. So, To be
spiritually minded is life and peace, says the word; But, says conscience, I
am spiritually minded; my mind is set upon things that are spiritual:
therefore I have life and peace. So conscience also judges of the state of
sin. Romans 8.6
Those that live after the flesh shall die, says the word: But, says
conscience, my life is led after the flesh and the lusts of it: therefore I
shall die. Romans 8.13.
He that believes not is condemned already, says the word: But, says
conscience, I do not believe: therefore I am in the state of condemnation. The
word says, A good tree brings forth good fruit, John 3.18.
and a corrupt tree brings forth corrupt fruit: But, says conscience, my
works and my courses are corrupt and naught: therefore so is my heart. Thus ye
see that conscience does it by reasoning: And this conscience can very well do;
1. Because conscience has a very good judgment. It is a very wise and
judicious faculty in the soul of man. Some make it an act of judgment. We do
not take it so: It is not an act of judgment, but it is a reflexive faculty
of the soul having a very good judgment. Whether it be right to obey you
rather then God, judge ye, says Peter, Acts 4.19. appealing to their own
consciences to judge in the point. So that conscience is a faculty of a good
judgment. Now if it be judicious, it must needs be able to reason and to argue
about our estates, and find out whether they be good or no. It is the judgment
of man that is able to argue, and able to hold an argument: We thus judge,
says the Apostle, that if one died for all, then are all dead, 2. Cor. 5.14.
Mark; His proposition he would prove was, That all the believers in Christ are
dead to themselves and alive unto God. Now ye may see how his judgment makes
here an argument; If Christ died for them all, then they are all dead: but
Christ died for them all: therefore they are all dead. Judgment is able to
make arguments: and therefore if conscience be a reflexive faculty that has a
very good judgment, it must needs be able to frame arguments, and so make out
what our estates are. 2. Because there is natural logic in every man's
conscience: It can frame syllogismes, thus, As many as be led by the spirit of
God, are the sons of God, says the word: But, says a godly man's conscience,
I am led by Gods spirit, and I am careful to follow the leading of Gods holy
spirit: therefore I am one of Gods sons. And so on the other side. Ye will
say, How can a countrey-mans conscience make syllogismes? It is only for
scholars and such as have studied logic in the schools to make syllogismes. I
answer, It is true; Artificial logic is only among scholars: But there is
natural logic in conscience, which does not stand upon forms. The godly
people at Rome were never brought up at Universitie: yet the Apostle tells
them they had logic enough to argue themselves to be dead unto sin and alive
unto God through Christ; Likewise also, Romans 6.11.
says he, reckon ye your selves to be dead indeed unto sin, but alive unto
God through Jesus Christ our Lord. The original is, (...), Exercise so much
logic in your selves; Like good logicians prove your selves to be dead unto
sin and alive to God. So that ye see there is natural logic in conscience:
and therefore conscience is able to frame arguments about our estate, and to
inform us what it is.

III. 3. When conscience does this.
The third thing I propounded to consider is, When conscience does this. This
is a very necessary point: and indeed so they are all; but this more
especially. I have showed that conscience is able to inform us what estate we
are in, whether of grace or nature: but when does it perform this? I answer, I
need not so much speak of the godly, because they do mark conscience. But let
me speak of such as are foolish, disobedient, serving diverse lusts, who never
had yet the washing of regeneration nor the renewing of the holy Ghost: I
answer about them; 1. Their conscience must needs have a time when to do it. I
do remember my faults this day, says Pharaohs butler, Genesis 41.9. His
conscience did inform him; and there was a time when his conscience did inform
him. 2. Conscience would choose a time by it self: it would inform a wicked man
solemnly and punctually of his rotten and cursed estate he is in. I say, it
would have a solemn time by it self for this, if it could have it: but a wicked
man takes an order with his conscience that it shall not tell him solemnly how
it is with him; neither will he find a time to suffer it: As it was with Felix;
When his conscience began to grumble against him, when Paul had told him of
righteousness and of judgment, he trembled* his conscience began to stir,
and would then have solemnly dealt with him indeed: but he shuffled it off, and
would not find time; Acts 24.25.
Go thy way at this time, says he to Paul; I will hear thee at a more
convenient time. And so he said to his conscience too. Conscience would take a
solemn and set time to inform men what their estates are; but men will not
suffer them: and therefore conscience is fain to take such sudden times as it
can get. Ye will ask, What times be they?

Conscience interlineth.
I answer, First, when conscience interlineth: As for example, in the hearing of
the word: While men are hearing the word, it may be the preacher preaches of
holiness, and a wicked man hears it; But I have it not, says his
conscience. Mark; his conscience interlineth. It may be the preacher is
preaching how desperately careless men are of their souls, how they look to
every thing more then to them; conscience interlineth, This is my case. It may
be he is preaching against adultery; This sin I have committed, says a
guilty conscience: or against rushing upon Gods ordinances without
preparation; This is my constant course, says an evil man's conscience. It may
be the preacher is preaching of conversion and becoming a new creature in
Christ; This I am yet to seek in, says conscience. Thus conscience
interlineth: Though the man hears on, and it may be takes little to heart,
yet conscience interlineth a sudden information of his wretched estate. Like a
bi^d that flies by, or like a swift-shot arrow, that is presently out of
sight, so it may be a man takes very little notice of it. Like the forenamed
Felix: Act 2^ 25.
as Paul was preaching of righteousness and temperance, I have it not, says
his conscience; and of judgment to come, What shall I do then? says his
conscience. Thus conscience interlined, and made him tremble on a sudden, like
a sudden shivering of a cold, or a sudden startle of a man affrighted, and away
it was gone quickly. I beseech you observe your own bosoms. Do ye not feel
this now and then at a sermon, when ye hear it? do not your consciences
interline our sermons, and put in parentheses now and then? When ye hear such
and such a sin reproved, condemned, And this is my sin, says conscience:
when ye hear these and these graces commended, And I never had these, says
conscience: when ye hear these and these marks of a carnal estate, And these
or some of these are in me, says conscience? do not your consciences interline
in this manner? As Paul was speaking to the shipmen concerning God, his
conscience did sweetly interline thus, Acts 27.23.
There stood by me this night an Angel of God, whose I am, says his
conscience. And as he was writing to the Romans, God is my witness, says he,
Romans 1.9.
whom I serve in my spirit. But do not your consciences interline otherwise
with you? If they do, I beseech you consider it: Your consciences do then truly
inform you of your rotten estates: listen to them.

Secondly, when conscience falls a choking. Conscience choketh.
As for example, in prayer: a wicked man prays; But I do not pray right,
says his conscience. I humbly beseech thee, O Lord: Nay, but I do not beseech
humbly, says his conscience. I desire to be sanctified and purged from my
sins: Nay, but I do not hunger after any such thing, says conscience. I do not
confess my sins right, nor beg for grace right. Do your consciences choke
you thus? Now your consciences inform you of your estates. Peradventure ye
hardly perceive this choking at all: It is done in a moment, and it presently
cease, because ye are not willing to hear it: and therefore it may be
conscience does it by sudden flashes. It is said the Lord spoke suddenly to
Moses: Number. 12.4.
so often conscience speaks suddenly to men, a word and away. As David says
of the wicked, God shall shoot an arrow at them, and they shall be wounded on a
sudden: So conscience shoots a quick arrow, and it wounds men in the
twinkling of an eye, and it is gone. Lord, have mercy upon us, said one: But I
should not say so vainly and in ordinary talk, says conscience. I do not hate
this man for his holiness and strictness: But you do, says conscience. And
so when men are defending evil by arguments; But this is false, says
conscience. Thus conscience choketh on a sudden, and is gone. I confess
generally the men of the world mark not these things: They are such sudden
sparklings of conscience that men for the most part do not heed them: But these
are Gods witnesses; and men shall know one day they were truly informed of
their estates by these instantaneous Items of conscience.

Thirdly, when conscience shoots like a stitch in a man's side. As for
example; Sometimes when men are about their callin^s and their wordly
business, then comes conscience like a sudden stitch in ones side, and gives
them a twitch, O how worldly am I! says conscience: Shall I never get this
worldly-mindednes cured? Many times conscience speaks while men are working,
or playing, or eating, or buying, or selling.

Fourthly, so likewise when conscience commenteth upon the judgments of God.
Let an adulterer fall sick; Yea, this is for mine adultery, says his
conscience. Let a company-keeper be in want of outward things; Yea, this is my
drunkenness, says conscience: Jer. 4.18.
This is my wickedness, my way, my doings which have procured me these things;
this ague, this poverty, this shame, this discomfort. Thus I have showed you
how conscience does inform the wicked of their wretched estate; and when it
does it. It remains now that I speak something of the fourth point.

IV. Why many are deluded about their estate.
How comes it to pass then that so many thousands mistake, and are ignorant
and deluded about their estates? The reason of this doubt is this; Seeing
conscience is able to inform every one what his estate is, whether it be
blessed or cursed; and seeing also that conscience does it; and does it by
argument; and has its time when it does it: a man now would wonder that any
should be ignorant of his estate when his own conscience does tell him how it
is with him. For answer I will explain unto you two things: 1. The reasons why
men are mistaken; 2. The reasons why they are mistaken though conscience inform
them.

First, They build upon false grounds which are not in Gods word. Some are so
foolish that they build upon outward things, as health, peace, prosperity,
success, and the like. They prosper, and all things go well with them, and
therefore sure God is at peace with them: This is not so; but they think so
though. Some again build upon grounds which men of corrupt minds do give them,
or which they take from the common opinion of most, thinking that to be faith
and repentance which the most take so to be, or which a teacher fit for their
palate takes so to be. On the contrary side, weak Christians oftentimes
mistake themselves by judging their estates to be bad, because God lets them
be poor and mean and comfortless in the world: Therefore they conclude God is
angry with them, or that they are not that which they seem to themselves to
be, because they are so crossed in all outward things. This is the first reason
of error in this kind.

Reas. 2.
2. A second reason is the not-right understanding of Gods word: As when men
judge of themselves by such places of Scripture as were not intended to be
rules and to be of use to such ends as they apply them: as Whosoever calls
upon the Lord shall be saved, Romans 10.13. Hence the wicked may falsely
conclude, I call upon the Lord, and I pray unto him; therefore I shall be
saved. And so on the contrary, a weak Christian who finds not in himself
those degrees of grace which some places of Scripture seem to require
concludes from thence against himself, Therefore I have no grace at all. This
is a second cause of mistaking.

Reas. 3.
3. A third cause is the not trying and examining our own hearts. Some are loath
to trouble themselves about it: They are loath to think so bad of themselves as
that they are in such a course as wherein God will not love them. Nay, they
cannot endure that others should discover their hearts unto them: They had as
lieve they should show them the pit of hell as show them themselves. They look
to some common gifts and graces that are in them, such gifts and graces may be
in a reprobate, but they will not think so; as illumination, knowledge, the
gift of prayer, of temperance, etc. These they look to, and these they speak
of, though they have reigning lusts within in their hearts: As Jehu; Come, see
my zeal, says he, 2. Kings 10.16. He does not say, Come, see my pride and
hypocrisy: but, my zeal. Jehu looked at his zeal, and so thought he was right.
So on the contrary, weak Christians may sometimes look only at their sins
and infirmities, and take no notice of Gods graces that are in them, and so may
mistake their own selves, and conclude amiss of their estates. Thus I have
showed you the reasons why men are mistaken about their estates. Now I will
show you the reasons why men are mistaken though conscience do tell them.

1. Because the speeches of conscience in the wicked many times, yea most
times, are low speeches. The gnawings of conscience whereby they are told they
are in a bad and a damned estate are like the gnawings of a very little worm
that a man can hardly feel. Isai. 66.24.
Where their worm dies not: The word in the original, (...) signifies a very
little worm that breeds in scarlet, that a man can very hardly see or
perceive: so men sometimes do hardly see or perceive the condemning and gnawing
of conscience. Again, conscience biteth suddenly, as I told you; it gives a
little nip, and away: Like a sparrow that flies by; it flies so fast by a
man's eye that he can scarce tell whether it be a sparrow or no: So it is not
easily perceived whether it be a condemning conscience or no: it gives such
sudden nips, and away, that men seldom take notice. Beloved, there is never a
wicked man under heaven; unless he be delivered up absolutely to a reprobate
sense, but has a thousand of these sudden momentany nips every day in the
year. Had he the heart to observe them (but be has not) he might see his
wretched estate, to trouble him, and provoke him to Christ, and to be converted
that God might heal him; I say, had he a heart he might see it: but these nips
are so secret and sudden that he does not. So likewise it is with the godly in
regard of true comfort: Their conscience suddenly flasheth in comfort, and they
many times do not observe it. As Job speaks of God, Job 9.11.
Lo, he goes by me, and I see him not: he passes on also, and I perceive him
not: So does the Lord go by his children in the sudden flashes of comfort in
their conscience, but many times they see him not, perceive him not.

2. Because the devil blinds men's eyes, therefore they do not see what their
consciences do show them. Ye may read this of the wicked people in Corinth: ^.
Cor. 4.2.
St Paul says he commended himself and the Gospel to every man's conscience in
the sight of God; that is, He did so preach, and so live, that every man's
conscience could not choose but say, Certainly Paul preaches the truth, and
Paul lives right, and we must live as he speaks and does. He made their
consciences say thus, and to tell them they were not right if they did not. But
mark what follows: Some did not see this: Why? The god of this world, says
he, has blinded their eyes. So the god of this world blinds the eyes of the
wicked, that what their consciences show them they do not see it nor observe
it. So for Gods people; Though they be in a good and a blessed estate, and
their consciences can say it, yet Satan oftentimes hinders them that they do
not perceive their own comfort.

3. Men do not love conscience. We should love conscience better then the
dearest friend we have under heaven. We would do much for a friends sake: but
we should do a thousand times more for conscience sake: Romans 13.5.
Obey Magistrates for conscience sake; suffer disgrace, reproaches, any thing,
for conscience sake. It is better then all the friends in the world. But the
wicked, they do not love conscience: let conscience speak, they care not to
hear it. They will hear friends, but they will not hear conscience. Let
their lusts call, and their profits and pleasures call for this and that thing,
they hear all: but they love not to hear conscience. Nay, many wicked men are
angry to hear talk of it. When Paul had made mention of conscience, Ananias
commanded he should be smitten: Men and brethren, says Paul, Acts 23.^
I have lived in all good conscience before God until this day. Smite him on
the mouth, says the high Priest Ananias. He was angry to hear him talk of a
good conscience. This is most certain; men do not love conscience, nor to be
curbed by conscience, nor informed by conscience: They had as lieve see the
devil as that their consciences should inform them of their estates, and tell
them thus and thus they are. They are told rightly, and yet they are mistaken,
because they do not love to hear conscience of that theme.

Of a good and bad conscience.
YE have heard concerning the witnesse-bearing of conscience about our estates.
The next thing to be spoken of is that welknown distinction of a Good and a Bad
conscience. This distinction we read of in Scripture: Concerning a good
conscience see Heb. 13.18. We trust we have a good conscience. Concerning a bad
conscience see Heb. 10.22. Having our hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience.
There be both the members of the distinction. Of them both briefly and in
order; and first of a good conscience.

Concerning a good conscience
The goodness of conscience is twofold; natural, and renewed. 1. The natural
goodness of conscience consists in those relics of goodness which it
reteineth since the creation. Ye know man depraved and corrupted his conscience
by his fall: yet there be some relics left, as reason, and knowledge, and
reflection. I do not mean relics of any spiritual goodness in conscience:
For as there is no spiritual goodness left in the other faculties of the
soul, so neither in conscience. But the natural goodness which I mean is
nothing else but the veracity of conscience, whereby it is enforced according
to the knowledge it has to tell the truth. Thus every wicked man has a good
conscience: Their conscience is good in that sense; their conscience has this
natural goodness, that it tells them the truth how it is with them. Nay, it
is essential to conscience to be good in this sense. It is the essential
property of conscience to speak according to its knowledge. It is the best
faculty a wicked man has: it is better then his mind, or heart, or will. There
is more goodness in a wicked man's conscience then in any other of the powers
of his soul: His conscience speaks more for God then himself does, and
stands more for God then himself will. Not but that as all the powers of the
soul are desperately corrupted by sin, so conscience is desperately corrupted
as well as any of them: but I speak of the essential goodness of it, which
can never be lost. The devils in hell have not lost the goodness of their
essence: Nay, their essence is better then the essence of Gods Saints: their
essence must be good, because that is Gods creature; nay, better then any man's
essence, because the Lord made them a degree above man. And as man is a degree
above beasts, so angels are a degree above man: so conscience is a degree above
other powers of the soul in its natural goodness. That conscience has such a
natural goodness in it, see it in those cursed Scribes and Pharisees,
hypocrites, who brought the woman taken in adultery to Christ: Their conscience
was good; they were convicted of their consciences: John 8.9.
their consciences dealt honestly with them, and told them the truth that they
were wicked sinners themselves. This is the natural goodness in conscience.

2. A renewed good conscience. I call it a renewed good conscience, because
when a man is renewed, all the man is renewed; all his mind and the spirit of
it is renewed, Ephesians. 4.23. That ye may be renewed in the spirit of your mind.
If the man be renewed, all the mind must be renewed; and therefore the
conscience must be renewed too; for the mind and the conscience ever go
together: nay, conscience is mainly seated in the mind; and therefore if the
mind be renewed, so is the conscience; and if the mind be defiled, so is the
conscience. Tit. 1.15.
To them that are defiled is nothing pure, but their minds and consciences are
defiled. Mark; When they are defiled, they are defiled together: so when they
are washed and renewed, they are washed and renewed together. Now this renewed
conscience is either perfect or defective. 1. Perfect. I mean not perfect in
every degree of goodness: For so no man's conscience in the world is perfect:
But I mean perfect in every part and condition of goodness. 2. A defective
good renewed conscience is that which fails in some conditions of goodness.
We call it a weak conscience, which is apt to be polluted and defiled again. 1.
Cor. 8.7. Their conscience being weak is defiled. This is a defective good
conscience, a conscience renewed, but imperfectly renewed.

A firm conscience.
I. To a good conscience that is soundly renewed five things are necessary.

1. Knowledge of Gods will, and that which does follow the true knowledge of
his will, namely true humiliation and fear. By nature the conscience is blind
and sturdy and venturous; and therefore it is necessary that it should be
illightened to understand the will of God and to press it: and again it is
necessary that the heart should be humbled, or else it will not stoop to Gods
will: and it is necessary also that this holy fear should fall upon the heart,
that it may not dare to transgress. St Peter being to speak of a good
conscience, premiseth all these as necessary thereunto: First he advises that
Christians have knowledge to be able to give a reason of the hope that is in
them; and then that they should have meekness and fear, for to do it: 1. Pet.
3.15, 16.
with meekness and fear, says he, having a good conscience. Mark; Knowledge
and meekness and fear are required to make a good conscience; without them the
conscience cannot be good. By nature we are all blind, and stubborn, and
fearlesse of sinning: and therefore till we be cured of these evils, our
consciences cannot be good. 2. The second thing is a watchfulness and warfare
against sin: This is required too to a renewed good conscience. By nature we
are drowsy, and careless, and secure, and do not stand upon our guard to wage
war against our lusts and the desires of our flesh; and so long our
consciences can never be good: and therefore this spiritual watchfulness and
mainteining war against sin is required to the having a good conscience:
That thou may war a good warrefare, says Paul to Timothy, having faith
and a good conscience, 1. Tim. 1.18, 19. Some who seemed to have a good
conscience, because they did not maintein this holy warfare against sin and
the flesh, they have lost it: Therefore this is another requisite required to a
good conscience. 3. The third is tenderness of conscience. By nature our
hearts are seared, and dead, and unclean: and therefore we must get us tender
and pure hearts if we would have good renewed consciences. The end of the
commandment is love, out of a pure heart and good conscience and faith
unfeigned, 1. Tim. 1.5. See how the Apostle compoundeth them together, a pure
heart and a good conscience. We must get our hearts purged and quickened, that
they may be sensible of the least evil; and then our consciences will be good
and be as a bridle to hold us from evil. A hard heart and a good conscience can
never stand together. 4. The fourth is the cleanness of conscience by the
washing of Christ's blood. This is the main and the principal of all: Yea
indeed the blood of Christ is the sole and only cause of a good conscience. I
would not be mistaken: I named indeed other causes; Knowledge, and Humbling,
and a holy Fear, a Combat against sin, and Tenderness: but I do not mean as
though a good conscience were partly beholding to them and partly to Christ's
blood: For it is wholly and only beholding to Christ's blood for its goodness;
his blood is the only price of it: But my meaning is this, That though Christ's
blood be the one only cause of redemption, yet in the application of
redemption the Lord uses all those forenamed graces while he applies it to
the conscience. Therefore this now I add; The washing of Christ's blood, this
is chiefly required to the goodness of conscience. We have two places of
Scripture to prove it: The one, Heb. 9.14. How much more shall the blood of
Christ purge your consciences from dead works? It is that only can do it. The
other text is 1. Pet. 3.21. The answer of a good conscience toward God by the
resurrection of Jesus Christ. Where the Apostle first gives this title to a
renewed conscience, to be called a good conscience: Secondly, he names the
cause that makes it to be good, the power of Christ's resurrection: When the
resurrection of Christ Jesus is powerful upon us, then conscience becomes
good. 5. The fifth is quietness. By nature nothing is so fierce and violent,
if it be once awaked, as conscience is: O it is unspeakably furious. Thus is
conscience by nature: and therefore it can never be good until we get it
appeased with the assurance of the pardon of our sins, and so true peace and
comfort established in it. This is the reason why the Scripture joyneth a good
conscience and faith so often together: as 1. Tim. 3.9. Holding the mystery of
faith in a pure conscience. It cannot be a pure or good conscience if faith be
not held in it. As long as the conscience is not underpropped by faith, the
conscience must needs be in a wilderness: Perhaps my sins are imputed unto
me; perhaps they are pardoned: Perhaps they are covered, perhaps not. As long
as the conscience lies under these uncertainties, it cannot be firm and
soundly good indeed: therefore we must labor for assurance of pardon by faith.
Thus much of a good renewed conscience that is perfectly and soundly renewed.
An infirm conscience
II. Secondly, There is a good conscience renewed but not soundly renewed, very
much as yet defective and imperfect. The former conscience is called
conscientia firma, a firm conscience: This is called conscientia infirma, an
infirm conscience. Romans 15.1. We that are strong ought to bear the infirmities
of the weak. This infirm conscience is a good conscience too, and renewed, but
cumbred with sundry imperfections; which in process of time by growth in grace
are, for the most part, conquered in the godly. True faith is required unto
this: For the Apostle calls such an one a brother in Christ, one that has
this infirm conscience: Romans 14.21.
It is good neither to eat flesh, nor to drink wine, nor any thing whereby thy
brother stumbleth. And we must not set such an one at naught, Tush, what care I
for him? I know I may lawfully do thus: and this is my Christian liberty; and
shall I lose it for him, because of his conscience? Nay says the Apostle, Why
do thou set at naught thy brother? Romans 14.10.
Mark; The Apostle counts such an one a Christian brother, and not to be set
at naught: and therefore this is a good conscience too, differing as much as
white from black from such consciences as are weak through superstition of mind
and through pride of heart because they will not be otherwise, or through
affected ignorance because they love not to be better informed. These weak
consciences are wicked; I speak not of these* I speak of a good conscience, a
conscience renewed, but renewed imperfectly, having yet sundry defects and
imperfections. The imperfections of it are 1. Imperfection of knowledge. It
does not yet soundly and clearly understand what is lawful and what is pure,
and what is by Christian liberty indifferent. Paul says, Romans 14.14.
I know and am persuaded by the Lord Jesus, that there is nothing unclean of it
self: but to him that esteems any thing to be unclean, to him it is unclean.
He speaks of things that are indifferent: The Apostle had knowledge: but
there were others who did not know this; O I may not eat this meat; I may not
play at bowls, or use any other recreation: I should sin if I should, etc.
This is one weakness in this kind of conscience, weakness of knowledge. 2.
The second imperfection is to be grieved where it needs not be grieved: As
when it sees other do that which it self through mistake does judge to be
evil, it is apt to be grieved and troubled to see it; Romans 14.15.
If thy brother be grieved with thy meat, now walk thou not charitably. It
may be thou think it lawful to eat such meat; but he thinks otherwise,
and so is grieved to see thee eat. This is another imperfection in this
conscience, to be grieved and offended without just cause. 3. A third
imperfection is in judgment: It is apt to judge and condemn another man's
liberty: 1. Cor. 10.29. Why is my liberty judged of another man's conscience? He
speaks of a weak conscience* It is apt to be judging and condemning my
liberty says he; but why so? This is a fault and an imperfection indeed; O
such an one sins, he does so and so: yet it may be the thing is not
unlawful but a weak conscience is apt so to judge it, and to condemn him that
does it. Let not him that eats despise him that eats not: and let not him
that eats not judge him that eats, Romans 14.3. 4. A fourth imperfection is
this: A weak conscience is apt to be misled. So the Apostle intimates; Take
heed lest by any means this liberty of yours become a stumbling block unto them
that are weak: for if any man see thee who have knowledge sit at meat in the
idols temple, shall not the conscience of him that is weak be emboldned to eat
those things which are offered to idols? and through thy knowledge shall thy
weak brother perish for whom Christ died? 1. Cor. 8.9, 10, 11.
Where ye see that weak consciences are apt to be misled. The reason is this,
Because when they see others whom they know to be more learned and judicious
then themselves to do so and so, that may soon tempt them to do it though their
conscience be against it.


Use 1.
The first use is this; If any have weak consciences let them labor to
strengthen them. Ye see what imperfections are in a weak conscience; how apt it
is to be offended and to judge other men's liberty, how prone to misleading:
therefore let every good soul labor to be strengthened.

2.
The second use is this; Those that be strong must be careful that they offend
not the weak. Though they do believe such and such Christian liberties they
have, yet if they know the use of them will offend their weak brother, they
should be careful to abstein, Romans 14.13.
Let no man put a stumbling block or an occasion to fall in his brothers way.

Thirdly, if it be such a sin to sin against the conscience of the weak, 3.
then what a sin is it to sin against the conscience of all that are godly,
whether weak ones or strong ones? Ye who walk after the flesh, and can have
disorders in your families, and vanity in your mouths, and apparent corruptions
in your lives; Ye who can drink and be drunken and keep company and profane the
Lords days; ye offend the consciences of all that are godly: it is a grief to
their souls to see it. Let me tell you; It is a sin to be wicked however, and
the highway to hell: but to be wicked when ye have godly neighbors about you,
your sin now is double: For as you offend God, so you offend them too. Ye may
remember what Christ says, Whosoever offends one of these little ones which
believe in me, it were better for him that a millstone were hung about his neck,
and that he were drowned in the depth of the sea, Matthew. 18.6. Ah ye vile
wretches ^ ye little imagine what fearful vengeance ye pull on your own heads:
It were better for you that a millstone were hung about your necks, and ye
thrown into the sea, then that ye should offend one of these little ones. Ye
may call them what ye will; call them puritanes, precisians, uncharitable
people, censurers: ye may call them as Satan teaches you to call them: but it
is certain, it were better a millstone were hung about your neck, and ye thrown
into the sea, then that ye should offend any one of Christ's little ones: The
Lord open your eyes that ye may repent and believe the Gospel your selves and
be saved.

4. Lastly, be exhorted, brethren, to labor after a good conscience. How
excellent a thing is it that has so many good ingredients! Illumination is one
ingredient, and Faith is another, and Tenderness another, and Pureness
another, and Quietness another, and the Blood of Jesus Christ another. It is
like Aarons composition, which smelt sweetly when he went into the sanctuary:
It is compounded of excellent conditions, such as smell sweet when we come
before God: the Lord loves that such should come near him. We may come with
assurance to speed if we come with a good conscience; Let us draw near with
assurance of faith, Heb. 10.2^.
having our hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience. Mark* we may draw near
with assurance if we come with a good conscience. It will comfort us in all
troubles, and support* us in all dangers: It makes us happy: nay, there is no
happiness without it. It will make us with quietness and contentedness of
spirit undergo whatever it shall please God to lay upon us. How can they want
comfort that have this? It is a spring of comfort within them. This will remain
with us when all other comforts will forsake us: When friends fail, and estate
fails, when credit and health and strength and all fail, then a good
conscience, if we have it, will speak peace to us, yea and it will effect it in
us, comfort us, and fasten comfort upon us. Friends may speak words of comfort
and peace to us; but it may be we are not able to receive it: the minister may
preach peace; but it may be we are not able to take it: But a good conscience
speaks peace and effects it; it does not only speak it but it puts it
into our hearts. It proppeth us up in all miseries, in sicknesses, yea in death
it self. A good conscience then makes us hold up our heads when all the world
shall be confounded: A good conscience will bear us out against the King of
terrors: It is only a good conscience that can look death in the face, and
say, O death, where is thy sting? 1. Cor. 15.55, 57.
thanks be to God who gives us victory through our Lord Jesus Christ. Yea, at
the day of judgment, when the whole world shall be burning before us, when the
great men of the world who go in silks and scarlet and broidered hair shall
fear and shiver as a reed shaken with the wind, this will make us with
boldness undergo the terror of it. This will make us happy in all our
distresses: When crosses pelt us, and sickness paineth us, and death
attatcheth us, we are happy men. What if we have the tokens of Gods wrath upon
our bodies so we have the marks of his love upon our souls? What outward
calamity soever happens to us, yet if we have this good conscience we are
happy. O then let us labo^r to get it by faith and a holy life. If we would be
safe in the floud-time, in the day of Gods wrath, we must be busy now about
the ark, we must provide beforehand for it: Nothing but this ark will save us
in the deluge of Gods anger. It is in vain to trouble our selves about other
things: Genesis 4.20.
Jubal was a merry man; he made pipes and organes: Jabal built tents; others
planted vineyards: but Noah provided his ark. Many desire comfort in sickness,
in death; but they do not provide for it beforehand: They look after their
sports or businesses in the world; but this ark is neglected, this good
conscience, without which all men's labor is vain. Be they what they will be,
in never so much credit and esteem, they are yet most miserable when troubles
and afflictions come on them, as one day they shall and shall not tarry; then
all their comforts will forsake them: When death looks them in the face: then
their hearts die within them. How full of pride and haughtiness soever they
were before, yet when they come to die, if their consciences be awaked, they
will with Saul fall down to hear the name of death, 1. Sam. 28.20.
and no spirits be left in them. Nay, if we want a good conscience when we lie
on our deathbeds, and desire good people to pray for us, Good sir, I beseech
you let me have the benefit of your prayers to God for me: Alas* if thou have
not a good conscience, all the prayers under heaven will not help thee. See
Heb. 13.18. Brethren, pray for us: for we trust we have a good conscience.
Mark; The Apostle tells them they may pray for him with comfort, because he
had a good conscience. As if he had said, If we had not a good conscience, it
were in vain for you to pray for us. If ever God hear the prayers made for us,
we must have a good conscience. Those that have not this good conscience shall
never enter into the kingdom of heaven: Though they had Moses, Daniel, and Job
to pray for them, yet all their prayers could not help them in the time of
their distress.

The bond of conscience.
NOw we must look back unto the four propositions which at the beginning I
observed in the text I am upon; 1. That there is in every man a conscience. 2.
That the light which directs conscience is knowledge. 3. That the bond which
binds conscience is Gods law. 4. That the office of conscience is to bear
witness, to accuse or excuse.


I have in the handling of these a little altered the method, and spoke of the
two first and the last. Now follows the third, and that is consciences bond,
which is Gods law: which show the work of the law written in their hearts, etc.
It is only the work of Gods law that it bears witness of, that it accuses
or excuses for: The bond of conscience is Gods law.
The law of God is consciences bond. Nevertheless we must here distinguish:
The bonds of conscience are either primarie and supreme, or secondarie and
relative.

1. The primarie and supreme bond of conscience is only Gods word and law:
that only is the supreme bond of conscience: Jam. 4:12.
There is one lawgiver, who is able to save or to destroy: who art thou that
judge another? that is, There is but one supreme lawgiver to bind the
consciences of men, and that is God. And the reason is given, Because it is God
only who is able to save and to destroy. As if he had said, God only has
power over life and death, either to save a man for ever, or destroy a man for
ever, and to judge a man according to all that he has done: and therefore he
only can make laws to bind the consciences of men.

2. Now the secondarie or relative bond of conscience is, when others who have
authority from God bind conscience to this or that. I call this a relative
bond, because it is only in relation to the authority of God. For though men
cannot challenge any doings or omissions contrary to their law to be sins,
yet if they have authority from God to command any thing, then they become
beams and parts of Gods law, and do by virtue of that bind a man's conscience.

This relative bond of conscience is twofold. First, other men may bind our
consciences; as magistrates, and masters, and parents: who though they cannot
bind conscience as they are men, yet when they have authority from God, their
commands have Gods seals upon them, and do bind, I say, in relation to Gods
law, which bids us obey them; Romans 13.5. Ye must needs be subject, not only
for wrath but also for conscience sake. The Apostle there speaks of
Magistrates; and he tells us that their laws bind our consciences in relation
to Gods, and therefore we must be subject unto them for conscience sake. Thus
others may bind our consciences. Secondly, we our selves may bind our own
consciences; and that is by vows which we make unto God, or by our promises
which we lawfully make unto men. The vows which we freely make unto God, these
bind conscience to keep them: Numb. 30.4. the vow of a woman is called the bond
wherewith she has bound her soul. Mark; she binds her soul and her
conscience with it. So the promises which we lawfully make unto men, these also
bind conscience: For though before we promise it was in our own power, yet when
we have promised we have bound our own consciences to the performance, because
there is Gods seal upon it; Gods law commands us to be true of our words.
These are relative bonds, bonds only in relation to Gods law: Gods law is
still the supreme bond of conscience. I will handle that first.

I. The law of God the prime bond of conscience.
The law of God whereby he wills and commands and forbids this or that in
his word, this is the main bond of conscience: When this binds it, nothing
else can loose it; and contrary, if this loose it, nothing else can bind it. It
so binds conscience as the observing and violating of it is that which makes
conscience clear or guilty before God. This is it which makes a man a debtour;
I am a debtour, says Paul, Romans 1.14.
both to the Grecians and to the Barbarians: that is, I am bound in conscience
by Gods command to preach the Gospel unto both. This is it that denominateth a
man to be bound: Acts 20.22.
I go bound in the spirit unto Jerusalem; that is, I knowing it to be Gods will
am bound in conscience to go. This is that which lays a necessity upon a man;
A necessity is laid upon me to preach; 1. Cor. 9.1^.
i. I am bound in conscience by Gods word so to do. This is that which lays a
kind of enforcement upon men; Acts 4.20.
We cannot but speak the things which we have seen and heard; that is, If we
should not, our consciences would fly in our faces: We are bound by Gods will
to do so, and our consciences lay a charge upon us that we cannot go against
it. The only will and word of almighty God is that which supremely binds
conscience.

Reasons
1. Because God only knows the heart; he sees our thoughts, and he only can
reach to the secrets of our spirits; and therefore he only can bind our
conscience. For who else can tell whether we make conscience of a thing yea or
no? perhaps we do, perhaps we do not. Nor man nor angel can tell certainly: but
God knows certainly, and he only; and therefore he only can bind our
consciences. When the Lord does command or forbid, the conscience is privy that
God sees it; and therefore now it is bound. The word of God is quick and
powerful; Heb. 4.12.
it pierces even to the dividing asunder of soul and spirit, and is a
discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart. This binds a man's
thoughts and intentions; he cannot be free in these things: and the reason is
given by the Apostle; All things are naked and open to the eyes of him with
whom we have to do. verse. 13.
As if he had said, We are conscious of Gods all-seeing power; he sees our
hearts and our thoughts and all that is in us: and therefore his word does bind
us, yea it binds all our secrets: we cannot think a vain thought but our
conscience will cry guilty before God, because our conscience does know that
God knows all. Besides, the conscience cannot fear any law but only Gods
law. Ye know when conscience is once in a doubt, it is fearful, and begins
to ask questions with it self, May I do this? or may I not do it? 1. Cor. 10.27.
asking no questions for conscience sake. The conscience when it doubts uses
to ask questions. Now this supposes the lawgiver to be able to see it:
otherwise the conscience would not be thus afraid, if it were only the
commandment of a creature, that could not search the heart. So that here ye see
one reason why Gods law is the supreme bond of conscience; Because no eye can
see it but Gods.

2. Because God only has power over conscience: It is his commandment only
that makes any thing sin or not sin unto us. Augustine defines sin to
be A thought, or word, or deed, or lust against the commandment of God. Against
thee, Psalm. 51.4.
against thee only have I sinned, says David. He says he had sinned only
against God. Why? you will say, he sinned also against man: Did not he commit
adultery? that was a sin against Bathsheba: and murder? that was a sin
against Uriah. True, he sinned against man relatively, in relation to the
commandment which says, Thou shall not injure thy neighbor: but primarily and
principally the sin was against God. Conscience is like the kings servant,
whom none can arrest or attach without leave from the king: so no man can bind
conscience without leave had from God: for conscience is only subject to his
power: he only has power over conscience.

3. Because conscience is Gods book. Now no creature can add to Gods book or
diminish from it. Ye may remember that dreadful anathema at the end of Gods
book; Rev. 22.18, 19.
If any man shall add to this book, God shall add to him the plagues that are
written in this book: And if any man shall diminish from this book, God shall
take away his part out of the book of life. Now conscience is also Gods book
wherein his law is written. Nay, conscience is called Gods law: For it is said,
Romans 2.14.
that when the Gentiles which have not the law do the things contained in the
law, they having not the law are a law unto themselves: that is, Their
conscience is Gods law unto them. Like as the Bible contains Gods law for us
Christians, so did their consciences contein the law of God to them: yea, to us
Christians much rather: For we are not to let Gods law be written only in our
Bibles, but we must get it written in our consciences: our consciences are to
be Gods books wherein his laws are to be written. And therefore if it be a
sin to add a new law in the material book to bind men, then it must needs
be a sin for any creature to put a new law into conscience, which is the
spiritual book of God. It is God only who can write laws in this book: his
book is above all the laws in the world; and none but God can put in and put
out: and therefore none but he can bind conscience. I s^eak still of this
absolute, and supreme bond of conscience: For Magistrates may bind relatively;
but not as they are the^r laws, but by the law of God before made. Thus ye see
the necessity of this truth, That Gods law is the absolute and supreme bond of
conscience.

Uses.
1. This serves to direct Ministers how to convince the consciences of their
people. Use 1.
If Ministers desire to work upon their hearers, they must speak to the
conscience; they must show them Gods authority, that it is Gods will and Gods
command. Tell conscience never so much, that we should do thus or thus upon
other grounds and inducements, it starteth not at that, except it be convinced
by the word of God that it is Gods will, the commandment of the great God of
heaven, the God of the spirits of all flesh, who will look for our obedience:
This makes conscience to startle, this affects it and binds it. St Paul
when he said that he approved himself and his preaching to men's consciences, 2.
Cor. 4.2.
what follows? If our Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that perish, etc. As
if he had said, This makes all the world to startle, except they be reprobates
and men delivered over to Satan. It is easy to see what ministry affects
most and does the most good in the hearts of the people, namely that which
brings the clearest voice of Gods Spirit calling to obedience and binding the
conscience. They can hear with ease and great pleasure the sermons of those
whose doctrines are stuffed with humane discourses. Learning and policy never
pierce conscience. Nay, let carnal preachers preach never so much against
peoples sins, they can make a sport of it, though they hear their sins
with humane learning declaimed against. When the preacher does not clearly
preach the Lords voice, though he rip up sin, yet if it be not in the
demonstration of the Spirit of God, and showing his clear authority, the heart
will not be affected. Conscience knows when it is bound, and when it is but
dallied and jested with: And therefore if Ministers desire to have their
ministry work upon the hearts of their people, they must show them Gods
authority, and confirm it by his word, and let them see that it is the
commandment of the Lord, that which will one day judge them. ^* Cor. 14.37.
Let him know, says Paul, that the things that I write are the commandments of
the Lord. It is the Lord of heaven and earth that bids thee yield, and
commands thee to give over thy base lusts: It is he in whose hands thy breath
is; thou had best be obedient. I tell thee, thy conscience observes it; and
if thou will not obey, it will rore like the roaring of the sea one day against
thee, and sting thee like a scorpion. The things that thou hear, know thou
that they are the commandments of God: and if thou disobey, thou do disobey
not men but God.

Use 2.
2. Is it so that the word of God only is the supreme bond of conscience? Then
this teaches us to have an eye to Gods word in that which we do, if we would
satisfy conscience. I say, have an eye to Gods word: not only to do that
which it may be is in Gods word; conscience counts that to be nothing: but to
have an eye to Gods word. Conscience will not be satisfied with any obedience
that we do if we have not an eye to Gods word. Whatever we have an eye to
besides, conscience knows it is nothing, if in all we have not an eye to the
commandment of God: Though we do obey it, conscience looks upon it as if we
did not obey it. It is only Gods commandment and authority that binds
conscience: and therefore nothing satisfies conscience unless we have an eye
unto that. If we do not aim at Gods will in doing what we do, conscience
counts our obedience as no obedience at all. As for example; Ye that are
husbands, ye love your wives: but is it because God commands it? It may be ye
love them because they love you, or because your affections are to them: Alas,
this is nothing: Pagans and reprobates can do so. But do ye aim at the doing of
Gods will, who commands you? O say you, The Lord does command me, I do it.
What of that? Do ye look at his commandment when ye do it? If not; be humbled,
and know ye must get grace to do so, or ye are not obedient to God, neither
will conscience set it down for obedience. Ye that are servants, ye serve your
masters: but do ye aim at Gods will? thus, O the Lord has commanded me to be
faithful and painful in my service. Does your soul look to this? It may be ye
serve them because they are kind, and because they pay you your wages, and the
like: This is nothing to conscience: conscience looks at the commandment of
God; and if your souls do not aim at the commandment of God, it will not
satisfy conscience. Ye that are neighbors, it may be ye love one another, and
be friends one with another: but does your soul look at Gods commandment? is it
because God has commanded us to love one another? People seldom aim at God in
these cases: They are friends with their neighbors: why? Their neighbors are
friends with them. But they do not trouble their thoughts to aim at Gods
commandment in it. Let me tell you; Conscience will not count this obedience:
For conscience feels no bond but Gods word: and if ye do not look at that, it
is no obedience with conscience; conscience will never acquit you or absolve
you for this; it accounts of this obedience as no obedience at all. See 1.
Cor. 10.25. and so forward. There the Apostle handling that question of
conscience, at last concludes, Whether ye eat or drink or whatsoever ye do, do
all to the glory of God, verse. 31. Let your hearts look at that, and aim at
that; in whatsoever ye do, still look at God: all is lost with conscience else.
Though ye eat never so soberly, and drink never so moderately, pray never so
duly, conscience counts it all nothing if ye do not look at God: It is God
only and his word that does bind it; and it will never give a discharge except
your hearts look at him.

Use 3.
3. This serves to confute our Antinomists, such as say the law of God binds
not the conscience of the regenerate. Ye see here that the law of God binds
the conscience: and therefore if the regenerate have any conscience at all, (as
certainly they have the best conscience of all men) then it must needs bind
their conscience. We confess the conscience of the regenerate is freed from
many things by Christ. First, From what Christians are freed.
it is freed from the yoke and bondage of the ceremonial law, Gal. 5.1. Stand
fast in the liberty wherewith Christ has made us free, and be not entangled
with the yoke of bondage. Every man's conscience is freed from that yoke of the
ceremonial law, because it ended in Christ. Secondly, the conscience of the
regenerate is freed from seeking justification by the deeds of the law. Indeed
the first covenant was by the works of the law; He that does them shall live
in them: But the second covenant speaks better things; He that believes
shall be saved. It is true, if God had not sent his Son we must have sought
justification by the works of the law: Though it were impossible to find it by
reason of our sins, yet conscience was bound that way. But now that Christ
Jesus has sealed up a new covenant in his own blood, conscience is freed from
that former: Romans 3.28. Therefore we conclude, that a man is justified by faith
without the deeds of the law. For though justifying faith never be without the
sincere doing of the law, yet the deeds of the law have no influence into
justification: Conscience is freed from seeking justification thereby. Thirdly,
the conscience of the regenerate is freed from the rigor of the law. They are
bound in conscience to use the law as a rule of their life, and in sincerity
to obey it; but are not bound by the gospel to the rigor of it: that they are
freed from; and so they are not under the law but under grace. Romans 6.14.
I grant that all carnal people, who are yet out of Christ, do all lie under
the rigor of the law: and as long as they submit not to Jesus Christ, nor get
into him, they are bound in conscience to keep it, though they cannot: They
cannot sin in one tittle, but conscience will condemn them before God. They
shall be condemned for every vain thought, for every idle word, for every the
least sin, for every the least lust, for any the least omission of good. They
lie under the rigor of the law, and they are bound in conscience to keep it,
and they shall be countable for every transgression, because they are under the
law. But the conscience of the regenerate is free from this rigor, because
they are under grace, Romans 7.6.
and therefore they are delivered from the law: The Lord has deliverd them by
the body of Christ; and therefore they are not bound by the gospel to all that
obedience that the law in rigor requires. Fourthly, the conscience of the
regenerate is freed from the curse of the moral law. For though the law does
condemn, yet their conscience needs not fear it, Romans 8.1.
because they are in Christ: There is no condemnation to those that are in
Christ Jesus, which walk not after the flesh but after the spirit. Indeed those
that are not regenerate, not ingraffed into Christ, they are still in the mouth
of the gunshot: the law does condemn them, and they have no shelter, and their
conscience is bound by it; and they shall find one day that by it their
conscience will condemn them to hell. It may be now for the present their
conscience is quiet, and they choke it, and so it lets them alone: yet they
are condemned in conscience, and one day they shall find it. But the regenerate
are by Christ freed in conscience from all this condemnation. Thus far we
grant.

But the Antinomists and I know not what Marcionites would have more.
Anti^^mis^^
They cannot abide to hear that a regenerate person is bound to any sincere
obedience to Gods law as the rule of their life: They cry out against the
moral law as once the Babylonians did against Jerusalem, Down with it, down
with it even to the ground: O ye do not preach Christ if ye talk of the law.
Beloved, these are drunken opinions, fitter to be preached among drunkards and
Epicures and monsters then among the peculiar ones of God. The law of God does
bind the conscience of all the people of God, so that they are bound to make it
a rule of life. Nay the Scripture calls it Christ's bond whereby he binds
his people to him: Psalm. 2.1, 2, 3
The Kings of the earth set themselves, and the rulers take counsel together
against the Lord and against his Anointed, saying, Let us break their bonds,
and cast away their cords from us. Tush, we will not be tied by his laws, nor
be so precisely straitlaced with such commandments as these. Here the laws of
the Lord are called bonds and cords: Gods people are bound to him by them: But
the wicked they stand out and refuse to be bound. Now if the law be called a
bond, I pray what bond is it, but of conscience? It is not a bond like a
prisoners fetters, to be put about their legs: This is a spiritual bond that
binds the conscience. But let me prove it to you by arguments. There be
sundry arguments to prove it.

Arguments. That Gods la^ binds the conscience of the regenerate. Arg. 1.
Luke 17.10.
First, That which has power to say to the conscience of the regenerate, This
is thy duty, and this must be done, that binds the conscience: But the law
of God has power to say thus to the conscience, This is your duty. Who can
tell better then Christ? When ye have done all these things that are commanded
you, say, We are unprofitable servants; we have done that which was our duty
to do. Mark; He speaks of Gods law, things commanded: now the law is nothing
else but a ^atalogue of those things that God has commanded us. When ye have
done all these things, says our Savior, know it is your duty. Here ye see
the law has power to say to the conscience, This is your duty. But ye will
object, We are under faith; and do ye tell us of law? I answer, as Chrysostom
answers out of Paul, Romans 3.31.
Do we then make void the law through faith? God forbid: Yea, we establish the
law. See how the Apostle does abhor this thought: God forbid, says he. As if
he had said, Far be it from me to teach such an abominable doctrine: No, no;
we establish the law. Hear what Christ says himself, Think not that I am come
to destroy the law: I am not come to destroy, but to fulfill it. O thought
some, If we believe in Christ then we hope we shall have done with the law. No,
no, says Christ; ye shall as soon pull the heavens and the earth out of their
place as disannull one tittle of the law.

Arg. 2.
Secondly, That which has this authority that the breach of it is a sin,
binds conscience: but the law has this authority, that neither regenerate
nor unregenerate can transgress it but they sin: therefore the law binds
their consciences. For the regenerate and all are bound in conscience to take
heed of sin: 1. John 3.4.
Whosoever commits sin transgresses also the law. David was a regenerate
man; yet when he had defiled Bathsheba, I have sinned, says he. Joseph was a
regenerate man; yet confesses, if he should transgress the Lords commandment,
he should sin: How shall I do this great wickedness, and so sin against
God? But ye will object, This is old testament. What of that? I hope you will
not take up the old damned heresy again of the Cerdonians, and Cainites, and
Apellites, and Manichees, and Severians, and other such cursed heretics
condemned by the Church of God: Their heresy was, To hedge out the regenerate
from the old testament. And St Augustine proved it against them, That the
moral law of God was ever the rule of obedience, and shall so continue with
the gospel to the end of the world; and every transgression thereof is sin.
The breach of the ceremonial law was a sin once; but now it is not: because
once it bound the conscience; now it does not: But the breach of the moral law
is still sin: therefore still it binds the conscience. Do ye not remember
what St James says now under the Gospel? he presses it yet on men's
consciences: He that said, Do not commit adultery, said also, Jam. 2.11.
Do not kill. Now though thou commit no adultery, yet if thou kill, thou art
become a transgressour of the law. And though ye may call it a law of liberty
in what sense ye please, yet he tells you, Ye had best look to your words and
deeds: for ye must be judged by this law of liberty: So speak ye and so do as
they that shall be judged by the law of liberty.

Arg. 3.
Thirdly, That which being observed does cause the conscience of the regenerate
to excuse, and being transgressed to accuse, that binds their conscience:
(For what else do you make binding of conscience but this?) But the law of God
being observed does cause the conscience to excuse; being transgressed, to
accuse; In many things we sin all, says the Apostle. Mark; Our consciences
do accuse us: as we do sin in many things, so our consciences do accuse us
when we do so. I am a sinful man, says St Peter, Luke 5.8. His conscience did
accuse him of sin.

Arg. 4.
Fourthly, That which is the condition of Gods covenant of grace binds the
conscience, yea of the regenerate: but sincere obedience to Gods law is a
condition of Gods covenant of grace. See Luke 1.72. To remember his holy
covenant, and the oath that he swear that he would give us, That being
delivered out of the hands of our enemies we might serve him without fear in
holiness and righteousness before him all the days of our life. Mark;
Sincere and universal obedience is a condition of the covenant of grace, not
only for a manifestation to our selves that we are truly justified; as these
upstart patritians do hold: but it is the condition of the covenant of grace.
Every covenant has its conditions annexed; and therefore it is called the book
of the covenant, Exodus 24.7. the words of the covenant, Exodus 34.28. the tables
of the covenant, Deuteronomy. 9.11. The reason is this; Because when a covenant is
made, the conditions are put into a book or a table and expressed in words.
Only here is the difference between the first covenant of works and the second
covenant of grace: Both have conditions; but here, I say, is the difference; In
the one grace gives the covenant, and grace gives the condition of the
covenant; but a condition is annexed though: Now hence we may argue (and none
but enemies to the Gospel can deny it) If the covenant of grace do bind a man's
conscience, then certainly the condition of the covenant binds a man's
conscience too: But the covenant of grace binds the conscience of the
regenerate; and therefore the condition of it binds. If you ask, What is this
to obedience? the answer is, That obedience is the condition of the covenant of
grace, as the forenamed Scripture expresses, Luke 1.72. Thus ye see the law of
God binds the conscience of all the regenerate. This is the third Use.

4. Use 4.
Has the word of God supreme power to bind conscience? Then hence we may
learn, that no creature can dispense with it, nor free conscience from guilt
when a man transgresses the word. What a damned usurpation is it in the Pope
to offer to dispense? The Canonists say he may dispense de praeceptis veteris
and novi testamenti, (They are their own words) he may dispense with the
commandments of the old and new testament. He dispensed with king Henry the
eighth, and undertook to free his conscience from guilt though he married his
own brothers wife. Azorius the Jesuit reports it.
Gregory the second undertook to free subjects from being bound in their
consciences to keep their oaths of allegiance to Leo the Emperor. O these are
damned aspirings; and they plainly declare him to be Antichrist, who exalts
himself in this manner. The word of God is the supreme binder of conscience:
And therefore not all the Angels in heaven can dispense with one idle word.
Psalm. 119.89.
For ever, O Lord, thy word is settled in heaven. Gods word is settled for ever
in heaven; and therefore ye may as soon remove the heaven from its place as one
tittle of the word from binding conscience. Does the word say thus or thus?
thou had best do it: If thou will not, all the whole world cannot help thee;
thy conscience will condemn thee at the day of judgment without remedy. Has
the word convinced thee of thy sins, and made thy conscience say, I am a
sinner, and am guilty before God? I tell thee then, Thy conscience is bound,
and all the world cannot loose it. But have thou been humbled and emptied of
thy self, and does the word pronounce pardon of thy sins in Christ's name,
that thy conscience can say, The Lord speaks peace to my soul? I tell thee,
Thou art loosed, and nor hell nor devil nor, sin nor flesh nor any thing can
bind thee. Ye may see the power of Gods word in that speech of our Savior,
Whatsoever ye shall bind on earth shall be bound in heaven, Matthew. 18.18. That
is, My word which ye preach is of that nature, that if that loose your
conscience, it is loosed indeed, and nothing can bind it; if that do bind it,
it is bound soundly indeed, and nothing can loose it. O this is a terror to
the wicked! Does the word of God say, He that hardneth his neck, Prove. 29.1.
being often rebuked, shall suddenly be destroyed, and cannot be cured? O fear
and tremble ye that harden your necks against the reproofs of the Almighty:
his word binds over your consciences to Christ's bar. Does the word say.
Whoremongers and adulterers God will judge? If thou be such an one, thy
conscience is bound with this word, and it will apply it to the soul before the
tribunal-seat of Christ. Does the word cry out against any of thy courses? thy
conscience is bound as with chains, and it is not all thy vain hopes and
excuses can loose thee. Again, this is comfort to the godly: Gods word is the
supreme binder of conscience. O ye blessed of the Lord, the word of God tieth
such a fast knot to your comforts that all hell cannot open it with their
teeth: The word of the Lord Jesus is with you, who has the key of David, that
opens and no man shuts, and shuts and no man opens. Yea, but say
thou, My sins are against me: What then? mark what the word says, We have an
Advocate with the Father: Thy conscience is bound to believe that. Yea, but I
have a very naughty heart, and I cannot tell what to do with it: Mark what the
word says; Believe in the Lord Jesus, and thou shall be saved: This binds
thy conscience. But I offend daily: Mark still what the word says; Dan. 9.24.
Christ brings in everlasting righteousness. If thou be unworthy to day,
there is righteousness for thee to day; if unworthy worthy to morrow, there is
righteousness for thee to morrow; if unworthy for ever, there is
righteousness for thee for ever. This is Gods word, and thy portion; this
binds thy conscience to lay hold on it. But I have abundantly sinned: What
says Christ's word? I will abundantly pardon. O what comfort is this to every
poor soul which the Lord Jesus has humbled! His word is the supreme binder of
conscience, above the law, above justice, above threatenings, above all the
world besides. His promising word is the supreme binder of thy conscience, if
thou be one of Christ's: And therefore fear not; only believe, and be
thankful, and give glory to God. This is the childrens bread; no stranger can
intermeddle with it.

The secondary bond of conscience.
YE have heard that the bonds of conscience are of two sorts: First, there is a
supreme bond of conscience, and that is Gods word: of which I have already
spoken. Secondly, there is a relative bond of conscience, which binds
conscience indeed, but it is only in relation to Gods word, because Gods word
puts authority upon it. And this latter is also of two sorts: 1. Others may
bind conscience; 2. We our selves may bind our own consciences.

1. Others may bind our consciences.
1. Others may bind our consciences, namely, when they have authority conferred
upon them from God, and so their laws and commands receive vigor and force
from Gods laws. Thus the laws and commands of Magistrates bind the conscience
of People; of Parents bind the conscience of Children; of Masters bind the
conscience of Servants: For though they do not bind conscience as they are the
commandments of men, yet having Gods seal and authority upon them they do. I
will set down some conclusions whereby ye may know how far the laws and
commandments of others bind or not bind conscience.

1. Conclusion.
1. Magistrates have power to command us. Let every soul be subject to the
higher powers: for there is no power but of God; and the powers that be are
ordained of God, Romans 13.1. That chapter does most clearly prove this
conclusion unto us.

Out of the first part of the chapter we learn, 1. That Magistrates have power
and authority to make laws, and to establish orders among men; and therefore
they are called powers: 2. We learn that these laws of Magistrates receive
strength and force from the law of God: For the powers that be are ordained of
God, says the text. 3. Those laws made by the Magistrate and confirmed by God
have power to bind conscience, verse. 5. Wherefore we must be subject not only
because of wrath but also for conscience sake. And the violating of them is
sin. When their authority is confirmed by God, we cannot resist them but we
resist the ordinance of God, says the Apostle: nay, we may pull condemnation
upon us if we do; They that resist shall receive to themselves condemnation,
verse. 2. So that this first conclusion tells us what laws of men are to be
obeyed; viz. 1. Such as do virtually flow from Gods word, though not expressly
commanded in it; 2. Such as are good and wholesome and profitable for the
commonwealth: These though they are not particularly commanded in Gods word,
yet are they by virtue of it enjoined: and therefore to neglect them and be
disobedient unto them, is to neglect and be disobedient to God. Again, so far
only are they to be obeyed (so far only, I say) as they virtually do flow
from Gods word: for so far only they receive force from Gods law. This is
the first conclusion.

2. Conclusion.
2. The commandments of Magistrates and those that are in authority lose their
power of binding the conscience in four cases: 1. When they command that which
though in it self it be not simply and absolutely sinful and unlawful, yet it
does put us upon a necessity of sinning: As for example, If a Magistrate
command single life to all Ministers, this thing is not in it self simply
unlawful (for it is lawful to marry, and it is lawful not to marry) yet this
commandment is unlawful, because it would put Ministers upon a necessity of
sinning: The reason is, because all have not this power. And therefore such a
commandment as this would not bind conscience: For the conscience cannot be
bound to impurity, or an apparent danger of impurity: and therefore though the
thing be not simply unlawful, yet the commandment is simply unlawful, and
does not bind conscience. The Apostle makes such a commandment to argue a
seared conscience in the commander: and therefore none but a seared conscience
can think it is bound by it, 1. Tim. 4.2, 3. 2. The commandments of Magistrates
lose their power of binding the conscience when they command things that are
unlawful in themselves and contrary to the word of God. In this case they do
not bind conscience, because Gods seal is not on them. We have an example of
this in the three blessed children; Dan. 3.16.
Who when the king commanded them to worship the image that he had set up, they
did not conceive themselves bound in conscience to obey: they would rather
suffer torment then obey it. So also Daniel, when he was commanded not to ask
any petition of God for thirty days space, but only of the king, Daniel did
not conceive himself bound in conscience, nay he chose rather to be cast into
the den of lions then obey. Dan. 6.16.
In this case the answer of the Apostles is necessary; who when they were
commanded not to preach any more in the name of the Lord Jesus, thus they
answered, Whether it be right in the sight of God to obey men rather then God,
judge ye. 3. When men's laws and commands overthrow the liberty of
Christianity, that Christian liberty which Christ has purchased for us, then
they lose their power of binding the conscience. But here I must tell you of a
caution; viz. That this liberty may be considered in a double respect: 1. In
regard of it self, the liberty it self; 2. In regard of the exercise or use of
this liberty. Now there is a very great difference between these two
considerations; as there is a great difference between a man's having a sword
and a man's wearing a sword. The Magistrate may restrain a man from wearing a
sword at such or such a time, though he do not take his sword from him: so
there is difference between the having our liberty and the using our liberty.
There is a liberty purchased for Gods children, whereby all things are become
lawful unto them: All things are lawful unto me, Romans 14.14.
says Paul 1. Cor. 6.12. and there is nothing evil in it self: (he speaks of
indifferent things.) Gods children are freed from the observation of meats, and
drinks, and times, and garments. Now whatsoever commandment is made by the
Magistrate contrary to this liberty does not bind conscience: for nothing can
bind conscience when Christ does loose it: Yet there may be a restraint of the
use of this liberty: as for example, the Magistrate may command us to forbear
some kinds of meats at some certain times; and so also for garments, and the
like: namely, when the doctrine about meats and drinks and garments is pure.
And therefore in such a case the command of the Magistrate binds the
conscience; otherwise not. 4. When they command things indifferent to be
absolutely necessary, to make them idolatrous or superstitious, then in this
case they are unlawful and bind not the conscience to obey them. But when are
they idolatrous? I answer; 1. When they are commanded either as absolutely
necessary to Christianity, to the very being of religion and the worship of
God, and with as much necessity as holiness it self, then hey are made
superstitious and idolatrous: And in this case the caveat of St John is
strongly to be kept, Babes, keep your selves from idol^s. 1. John 5.21.
2. When they are commanded as things meritorious, as pleasing to God for
themselves, and to merit of him, then they are idolatrous. 3. When they are
commanded for the substantial perfection of religion, as though religion were
imperfect without them, then they are made idolatrous, and lose their virtue of
binding the conscience. But all such commands of things that are indifferent,
which are commanded without respect to make them idolatrous, they may be
obeyed. This is our second conclusion.


3. Conclusion.
3. Those laws and commandments of Magistrates which want the authority of
Gods law to confirm them (and therefore bind not the conscience) ought not to
be disobeyed for all that with scandal or contempt and by unreverent slighting
or despising the Magistrate or his laws. He must be acknowledged a Magistrate
under God for all that: 1. Tim. 2.1, 2. I exhort that supplications be made for
Kings and those that are in authority. He speaks there of heathen Kings; yet
he calls them Kings, and says they have authority: and we ought to pray for
them: and therefore how much more when Kings and Magistrates subscribe to
Christian religion? Nay, though they command that which is utterly unlawful,
we must not rise up against them: for if we do, we rise up against God. We must
obey them one way or other, either actively or passively: When they command
that which is lawful for us to do, we must obey them by doing: when they
command that which is unlawful for us to do, and threaten punishment, then we
cannot actively obey them by doing, because they command against God; yet we
must passively obey by suffering and submitting to their penalties, because the
Lord has given them authority over us. This is our third conclusion.

4. Conclusion.
4. Those laws of Magistrates which by Gods law do not bind conscience, do yet
in matter of scandal bind us to obedience. If the Magistrate shall command any
thing beyond his power to command yet not unlawful for us to do, though such a
command do not bind to obedience in case of conscience, yet in case of scandal
it does. Thus Christ was content to pay tribute though he needed not to have
done it: The children, says he, Matthew. 17.^7.
are free: nevertheless, lest he should offend the Magistrate, he did pay it.
I will put an example of another nature; In a private wrong, though we are not
expressly bound to it, yet rather then scandalously to contend, conscience
does bind us to yield. Needed Abraham to have condescended so far unto Lot as
to let him take his choice before him? No rather then scandal of religion
should arise, ye may read that he did it. Thus I have briefly made it manifest
how far the commands of the Magistrate do not bind conscience, and how far
they do.

Objections.
1. But it may be objected; Obj. 1.
Conscience has only relation to God.

I answer, It is true, Answ.
as the supreme and absolute binder of conscience: but it has a relation also
unto men in the second place, inasmuch as God puts upon men such terms as
conscience has relation to, Acts 24.16. Herein I have always endeavored my
self, to have always a clear conscience both toward God and toward men.
Mark; Conscience has relation to both: For though it have its main relation to
God and his word, yet in him it has relation unto men.

2. Again it may be replied; Obj. 2.
The Magistrates do not undertake, nor can they, to meddle with men's invisible
spirits; for they are not able to see whether the spirit of man be obedient or
no: and therefore how do their laws bind us in conscience. The Magistrate only
looks at the body: men's thoughts and affections and consciences are naked
only to God.

It is true, Answ.
the Magistrate does not undertake but only to bind the outward man:
nevertheless the conscience of the subject feels it self to be bound to
obedience under pain of sinning against God, who gives this general precept,
1. Pet. 2.13.
Submit your selves to every ordinance of man for the Lords sake, to the King,
etc. The conscience feels this, and so it comes to be bound.

3. Again it may be replied; Obj. 3.
The conscience is not bound but only by way of religion. If I make conscience
of a thing, then I make a matter of religion of it: but what religion is there
in the commandments of Magistrates? suppose the Magistrate commands us to get
our armor in readiness, to mend our highways, to moderate expenses at
nuptials, or the like; these are civil things and not religious, and therefore
how can they bind conscience? We make conscience only of religion and the
worship of God.

Answ.
Such laws do not bind conscience under the name of religion, but under the name
of civil discipline. And again, though they do not bind conscience per se and
immediately, yet they do per aliud and as subjoyned to an higher law. For
though the breach of such laws be only a civil fault in it self, yet in
another respect it may be a moral sin, if the powers that are ordained of
God be neglected and disobeyed. And therefore though the conscience do not
regard civil laws as they are civil; neither do we make conscience of them as
they are civil: yet as they are made by the minister of God, and backed by his
authority which the Lord has set on them, so they do take hold of conscience;
and not to perform them is contrary to justice and charity and the profit and
safety of the commonwealth, and so a sin.

Uses.
Use 1.
1. This confuteth the Anabaptists, who deny that any obedience is to be given
to the secular power. Ye see here that the laws of Magistrates have Gods seal
upon them; and therefore we must yield obedience unto them: for they bind in
conscience. Again, this confuteth the Papists, who teach that their Popes laws
and commandments are of supreme authority, and require equal submission of
spirit with Gods laws: and also that the omission of them is death and
damnation. Our doctrine and religion goes between both: For we teach that Gods
authority is only supreme, and that he only can make laws under pain of
death and damnation; and that the authority of Magistrates is secondarie, and
secondarie obedience is to be given unto them. The Papists speak blasphemy in
saying their Pope can make laws under pain of damnation to be kept: Our Savior
Christ makes this a property only of God; Fear not him that can kill the
body, and there is all that he can do: but fear him who can cast both body
and soul into hell: I say unto you, Fear him, Luke 12.4. As if he had said, Men
can reach no further then the body, and their punishments can go no further
then the death of the body.

2. Use 2.
This teaches us what to do if men should command any thing which is unlawful
for us to perform: (Suppose there should be any such humane commands as are
repugnant to Gods.) In this case ye see we must obey God rather then men; nay,
suffer loss of goods, loss of liberty, yea loss of life, rather then obey
the commandments of men in case they be contrary to the commandments of God.
Ye may read a lamentable example in Ephraim; They were utterly destroyed for
obeying their King rather then their God: The King commanded to worship the
calves, and to go unto Bethel and not to Jerusalem to worship: they yielded to
his commandment, and did so; O thought they, We shall displease the King if we
do not. For this sin of theirs they were broken in judgment, Hos. 5.11.
Ephraim is destroyed and broken in judgment, because he willingly walked after
the commandment. Beloved, Gods commandment is sovereigne, and the supreme
binder of conscience: Whatever commandment is repugnant to Gods word, woe to us
if we do it; nay, though it be to save our goods or our lives. It is true, we
must give to Caesar the things that are Cesars; but so as withal we must be
sure to give to God the things that are Gods.

Use. 3.
3. This comfort Gods people against the calumnies and slanders of wicked and
ungodly men that upbraid them for their obedience to God. O say they, Ye are
irregular and despisers of authority. I say, this is comfort to the godly,
that God is able to bear them out in obeying him rather then men. Gods word is
the supreme binder of conscience; and therefore, whatever men think of such,
they are absolutely bound to obey God. If men command us against the word of
God, we know their authority is the ordinance of God; and therefore if they go
beyond that, they do not bind us in conscience. If God had not bound us in
conscience to him, others might have taken it ill if we should not obey them:
but now what cause have others to think ill of us? What folly were it in us to
seek to please men and to displease God? If we were at liberty, then we might
choose whom we would obey: but now we are bound unto God, and must be obedient
unto God, whatever men command to the contrary, let us do it therefore with
cheerfulness. By this we show our submission to God; by this we satisfy
conscience, which being bound unto God does continually urge us to obey him.
Why should we omit part of the exactness of our obedience which the word of
God does require? We have more to do then ever we shall be able to perform: we
should therefore be careful to do all that we may. By our obedience to God in
this kind we convince the conscience of others of our uprightness toward God:
Though through the overruling dominion of their lusts and passions they rage at
us, and their mouths speak evil of us, yet we may have an evidence in their
consciences within which may testify for us: their consciences will whisper
within them, Surely they do well to please God rather then men: their
consciences will be on our side, though their actions and tongues be against
us. We have a notable example of this Acts 4.15, 16. When the rulers of the
Jews had threatened the Apostles, and had reviled them with many bitter words,
and had bidden them go aside for a while, then they concluded among themselves,
Surely an evident sign is done by them, and we cannot deny it: So that their
consciences acquitted them for good men. So when the wicked of this world have
spoken evil of the ways of the righteous, and blasphemed the holy name after
which they are named: yet when they are alone, and their consciences at counsel
within themselves, then they conclude, Indeed they do well. Thus their
consciences give a good evidence of us, and accuse them for not doing the like.
And thus much shall suffice to be spoken of other men's binding of conscience.

II. We may bind our own consciences.
II. We our selves may bind our own consciences: And that is by those vows and
promises which we make to God of any thing lawful and in our power. Those vows
and promises which we make unto God according to the warrant of his word they
do bind our conscience. They are our own before we have made them: as Ananias
and Sapphira their gift was their own before they vowed it to the church: While
it remained was it not thine own? and when it was sold, was it not in thine own
power? Acts 5.4. We need not vow unless we will: but after we have vowed our
vows are Gods bonds, and do bind the conscience to the performance of them.
Nay, we lie unto God, as the text says they did, if we do not stand to the
performance of them.

But it may be demanded, What vows are they which are unlawful, and do not
bind conscience? I answer; 1. Such as we make of things impossible and beyond
our power: These are unlawful, and do not bind conscience. 2. Such as we make
of things unlawful; when we vow to do that which is contrary to Gods law:
such as David's was when he vowed the destruction of Nabals family: This does
not bind conscience: 1. Sam. 25.22.
nay, we are bound in conscience to break it. 3. Such as though they be of
things lawful and possible, yet we want freedom in the performance of them:
as for a wife or a servant or a child to make a vow, when their relation to
such as are over them will not suffer them to perform it: This binds not
conscience. Number. 30.3.
Nothing binds conscience but that which has Gods seal upon it: but this
has not Gods seal on it; and therefore it does not bind conscience* indeed it
binds us in conscience to repent of it. 4. Such as though they be lawful and
profitable and in our own freedom, yet if there fall a greater consequence
before the time of performance, we are not bound in conscience to perform them:
as if a man upon the receipt of some mercy should in testimony of his
thankfulness vow a hundred pounds to good uses, in the mean time his estate so
decays as that he shall undo himself and his family if he perform it; this
is so great a consequence, and contingently happened, that it freeth his
conscience from performing what he had vowed: Or if a man should promise
marriage to a woman, and before the time of nuptials she be found unchaste; this
is a far greater consequence, and he is not bound in conscience to marry her.
These kinds of vows do not bind in conscience: But all other do bind us.


1. Use; We may learn from hence never to vow but with good judgment and
counsel. For either we must keep our promise, or not: If we must, that is a
sign it is good, and therefore had need of deliberation: If we must not keep
it then it is a sign of rashness and inconsiderateness and besides it may
prove scandalous and offensive to them to whom we make it, and also to them
that shall hear of it: And therefore it requires good judgment and advise to
vow. What a rash vow was that of good Jephthah? If thou will deliver Ammon into
my hand, Judges 11.30.
whatsoever meets me I will offer it for a burnt-offering. How if a dog had
first met him? what a sin had it been? How if his daughter? what a thing had
that been? And indeed it proved to be his daughter. Vows without judgment do
but increase our sins and aggravate our transgressions against God.

2. Use; This teaches us to keep our good vows whatsoever they be that we
make. Indeed it is hard to keep a good, yea it is hard to make a good vow in
that manner as we should: It requires a great deal of faith and self-denial
and humility and strength of resolution: But when we have made it, our sin
is the greater if we do not then keep it; Eccles. 5.5.
Better it is not to vow then that thou should vow and not pay. Have thou
vowed a vow? then defer not to pay it: God has no pleasure in fools. As if
the holy Ghost had said, It is the part of a fool to vow before he consider and
be absolutely resolved to perform, to be off and on with the Lord God of hosts:
The Lord has no pleasure in fools: Therefore pay all thy good vows, and be
humbled for thy rash vows. But we are fallen into bad times, when truth and
equity is perished from among men: Every one is a deceitful bow; yea, the
best (almost) is a briar: Nothing so common as vows and promises; but few make
conscience of performing them. Nay, men are careless of their grand vow which
they have made unto God in their baptism. Baptism.
O this is a very fearful sin! Ye have all made a vow unto God in your
baptism that ye would live otherwise then ye do, and ye make no conscience to
keep it. Baptism is a very weighty thing: If there were no other thing to
bind you to holiness and obedience and faith but only the vow ye entered into
in your baptism, did ye consider what a vow it is, it would move you alone. It
is said of Apollos that he was fervent in spirit though he knew nothing but the
baptism of John: Acts 18.25.
Apollos considered what a vow he had made unto God in his baptism, that,
though he knew nothing else, it made him zealous for God. Baptism is a very
great binder of conscience: It binds a man to believe, and to go out of
himself, and to submit to Jesus Christ. The wicked Pharisees saw this to be
true: Matthew. ^1.25.
If we shall say that John's baptism was from heaven, he will say, Why did ye
not then believe? Beloved, was not your baptism from heaven? was it not an
ordinance of God? and did ye not solemnly then vow unto God? Why then do ye not
believe? why do ye not deny your selves, your works, your ways, and take up
Christ's cross? As Christ says of John Baptist, Matthew. 11.11.
Among them that are born of women there has not been a greater then John the
Baptist; so may I say of bonds and of vows and covenants. Among all the vows
and covenants that ever were made there has not been a greater then this of
Baptism: And therefore ye had best look to the performing of what ye then
vowed: If ye do not, ye are grievous breakers of covenant with God; which sin
will surely stand against you for evil. It is most certain, that Baptism does
greatly bind us in conscience to walk answerably to it in all righteousness
and true holiness: And we can never be saved (though we are baptized) except
we can answer with a good conscience that we live as we vowed in our Baptism:
1. Pet. 3.21. The like figure whereunto, even Baptism, does also now save us;
not the putting away of the filth of the flesh, but the answer of a good
conscience toward God. Mark; Unless we can answer with a good conscience that
we live according to our promises in it, our Baptism cannot save us. I pray,
consider that speech of St Paul; We are buried with Christ by Baptism into his
death, Romans 6.4.
that like as Christ was raised up from the dead by the glory of the Father,
even so we also should walk in newness of life. Mark; There is the vow that we
made unto God in our Baptism: And the Apostle there tells us we are bound in
conscience to keep this vow; otherwise we had better have been without our
Baptism. Do not think that God will be mocked: Ye are content to go for
Christians: but if ye be Christians, consider ye are under a great vow; and if
ye do not keep it, Gods covenant has a quarrel against you, and ye shall be
broken in judgment. There is no sin that ye live in, no lust that your
conscience tells you has enterteinment in your hearts, but it is
sacramental perjurie against the vow that ye made unto God in your Baptism.
Are ye dead to good duties? Ye vowed in your Baptism ye would not be so. Do ye
not daily mortify and subdue your affections? Ye vowed in your Baptism ye
would. Do ye not daily fight against sin and the flesh, like the faithful
soldiers of Christ? Ye vowed in your Baptism ye would. What a horrible
perjurie is this? Nay, it is worse: it is a sacramental perjurie. When the
Apostles saw any sin in the people, presently they tell them of Baptism: as
if they should say, Do ye live thus and thus, when ye vowed the contrary in
your Baptism? When there were divisions in Corinth; Some would be of Cephas,
and some of Apollos, and some of Paul: Paul then tells them of their
Baptism; Were ye baptized in the name of Paul? 1. Cor. 1.13.
As if he had said, I pray, consider how contrary this is unto your Baptism:
Ye were baptized into Christ; and are ye thus divided among your selves? So
when there was corruption crept into the people of Galatia, St Paul tells
them of their Baptism: As many of you, says he, Gal. 3.27.
as have been baptized into Christ have put on Christ. As if he had said, This
corruption of yours is contrary to your Baptism: Ye were baptized into
Christ, and ye have vowed to put on Christ; and do ye yield to such corruptions
as these? So also when there was want of love and unity and affection between
one another among the Ephesians, St Paul tells them of their Baptism: O
says he, There is one God, one faith, one baptism. Ephesians. 4.5.
As if he should say, This is contrary to your baptism: Ye were all baptized
with one baptism; and do not ye live in peace? and is there not unity of
spirit one with another among you? What? and were all baptized with one
baptism? Beloved, ye never do that which is not good but ye go clean contrary
to your Baptism. What? were ye baptized into Christ, and do thus? baptized
into Christ and pray thus? baptized into Christ, and hear the word of Christ
thus? serve God no better then thus? Your Baptism binds you in conscience
against every sin and every evil way: O let us take it to heart and consider
it.

FINIS.

