CHRIST'S ALARM TO DROWSY SAINTS: OR, Christ's Epistle to his Churches.

By WILLIAM FENNER, B. D. sometimes fellow of Pembroke Hall in Cambridge, and
Minister of Rochford in ESSEX.

REVEL. 2. 7. He that has an ear to hear, let him hear what the spirit says
unto the Churches.

LONDON, Printed by J. D. and R. I. for John Rothwell, at the Sun and Fountain
in Paul's Churchyard.

M DC XLVI.

Insigni Eruditione and Pietate V: THOMAE HILL S. T. D.
Acad: Cantabrigienss. Dignissimo Procancellario and Coll: Trin: in eadem Acad:
Magistro* Posthumum hoc.

GUILLIEL. FENNERI Opusculum In Debitae observantiae Testimonium D. D. D.

J. R. Bibliopola.

TO THE READER.
THE Author of these ensuing Sermons was a Minister of God, famous in his
Generation, a burning and shining light, one, to whom, if ever to any, God had
given the Art of winning of Souls, whom I have often heard Preaching, and
always in the demonstration of the Spirit and power, and not in the enticing
words of man's wisdom. He was (as Nazienzen says of John Baptist) Tota Vox,
all Voice: A voice in his habit, in his gestare, and in his life and
conversation, as well as his Doctrine; and being now dead, he is still a voice
by his Works, which he has left behind him. And in particular, by these
Sermons (Printed according to a Copy written with his own hand) which handle a
Subject very necessary for these times, wherein there are many that have a name
to live, but are indeed dead, and many that are spiritually alive, but yet full
of deadness, and unactivenesse to that that is good. Now this Treatise will be
useful (if God give a blessing to it) to make the dead Christian, living; and
the living Christian more active and lively in all godliness; which that it
may effect, is the prayer of

Thy souls friend in Jesus Christ, ALAMY.

The Contents.
THE Coherence. Page. 1 The Division. Page. 2 1 Observe. That Ministers are to
be Angels. Page. 7 1 Use, The Ministry no base office. Page. 10 2 Use, If
Angels, they must be holy. Page. 11 3 Use, If Angels, they must be ready to
preach and labor in the word, Page. 13 4 Use, If Angels, they are mainely for
Gods Elect. Page. 17 5 Use, If Angels, with what reverence ought we to hear
them? Page. 19 2 Observe. All true Ministers as one. ibid. How. Page. 21 What
unity. Page. 24 Ministers ought to preach often. Page. 32 The reasons of their
unity. Page. 39 1 Use Ministers not to envy one another for the faithful
discharge* of their duty. Page. 41 2 Use Ministers must labor to be of one
mind. Page. 42 3 Use, Good for Ministers that they preach one for another,
Page. 44 Ministers may be in fault the people are no better. Page. 46 People a
cause of the Ministers deadness. Page. 48 Particular Preaching does good.
Page. 51 General preaching hartfull, seven Reason. ibid. Moral preaching does
no good. Page. 57 Not enough to profess only the name of Christ. Page. 61 The
more the word ^onvinces, the more subtleties the heart aeviseth. Page. 63 Cold
preaching of the word, is unsuitable to the nature of the word. Page. 64 It is
cold two ways. Page. 66 Evil life causes the Preacher seem vile. Page. 67 1
Use, A Minister may be the cause why the people are dead* Page. 68 2. Ministers
of all m^n should care to be most quickened ibid. 3. People should pray for
their Ministers. Page. 69 4. Ministers should take h^ed of their charge*
^^^irable Royalties of Jesus Christ. ibid. 1 That he has the Seven Spirits of
God. Page. 72 Gives the spirit to whom he pleases. Page. 75 The Reasons why.
Page. 77 Use 1. If Christ have the spirits, what has he not? Page. 80 2. We
are without excuse, if we want the spirit, when Christ has him to give. Page.
81 How we may obtain it. Page. 86 3. Those that want the spirit may have
supplies from Jesus Christ. Page. 89 Signs of it. Page. 93 Second Royalty of
Jesus Christ, he has the seven Stars. Page. 96 Ministers why Stars. Page. 97
Every Parish should have one. Page. 98 Use 1. A Miserable thing when a Land is
darkened. Page. 100 2. We are to bless God when the Stars shine. ibid. 3.
Take heed those few Stars we have set upon us. Page. 101 Six fignes when they
are about to vanish. ibid. Why God will take away his Stars. Page. 105 Christ
has seven Stars in five respects. Page. 107 Use 1. They have their Mission
from him, therefore it is comfort to true Ministers. ibid* 2. They must do his
Message. Page. 108 3. They must give him account. Page. 109 4. A great mercy
Christ should send unto them. ibid. The heads of their Commission, their
Authority. Page. 120 Use 1. If their Commission be from Christ, they are the
greatest Ambassadors that are or can be. Page. 121 2. They must take heed how
they discharge their Function. Page. 122 3. To condemn them that obey not the
Ministry. Page. 124 4. God takes it not well at our hands that Ministers
should be vilipended. Page. 126 5. They must preach no mercy at all to them
that stand out wilfully. Page. 129 6. They that fear God must obey the voice of
his Servants. Page. 131 Ministers had need of many rare gifts. Page. 133 1. To
open the Scriptures. ibid. 2. To deduce from them. Page. 134 3. To Convince.
Page. 135 4. To move affections. ibid. 5. To speak Pro Re Nata* Page. 136 6. To
choose special Texts for special occasions. Page. 137 Use 1. A Minister had
not need to be a fool. Page. 139 2. They are not Christ's Ministers that are
not gifted. ibid. 3. They must go to Christ for gifts. Page. 140 4. Stir up
those he gives them. Page. 141 5. They must rely on Christ. ibid. 6. People
should pray for their Minister. Page. 142 Means to enlarge the Ministers
hearts and gifts to the people. ibid. Christ has the prospering of his
Ministers. Page. 149 The Reasons, 1. Because Ministers are nothing in the
World. Page. 151 2. Conversion is supernatural. Page. 152 Use 1. The Ministers
can only make try all whether they can convert the people or no. Page. 153 2.
They must wait; though they have not success presently. Page. 154 3. It may
condemn the World that lets not Ministers have success. ibid: A Minister has
all good success from Christ. Page. 156 Use 1. Why some Ministers now adays
have so little success. Page. 157 Carnal Ministers may sometimes convert.
Page. 159 2. Christ does bless true Ministers. Page. 161 3. If they have not
success, they ought not to be discouraged. Page. 162 4. The greatest hurt to
Ministers is, to deprive them of the joy of their labors. ibid. Christ
disposes, continues, or removes them. Page. 163 Reason 1. Because no man is
a Pastor that enters not at the door. Page. 164 2. None can be placed in a
Parish but by this Bishop Christ, the Archbishop of our Souls. Page. 165 3. He
pays them their wages; therefore must set them on work. ibid. 4. They cannot
otherwise look for his assistance. Page. 166 5. Nor have peace of Conscience.
ibid. 6. The people can have no pleasure under such a Ministry. Page. 167 Use
1. Ministers ought to look for Christ's placing. ibid. 2. It condemns
intruders. Page. 168 3. Use to them that have Ministers of Christ's placing
among them. ibid. 4. Never complain of graceless Ministers. Page. 168 2. What
is the reason there is no more able Ministers every where? Page. 169 5. God
has the placing of Ministers, then we know whether to go for good Ministers.
Page. 170 The Reasons. Page. 171 Use 1. Ministers should not fear to be
deprived of their liberty. Page. 173 2. A Reason why the Gospel continues any
where, when the world cannot abide it. Page. 174 3. Christ has the continuing
of his Ministers. Page. 175 4. Reason, to be earnest with God to have his
Gospel continued. Page. 176 Christ has the removing of Ministers. And how.
Page. 177 Use 1. If Christ remove Ministers, we ought to mourn before him.
Page. 178 2. Look to the meritorious cause, our sins. Page. 179 3. Christ takes
away Ministers, we ought to repent of our sin. Page. 180 Doct. 1. The Lord
knows every man's ill courses. Page. 185 How. Page. 186 Why. Page. 188 Use 1. If
God knows all men's sinful courses, then men cannot dawb before him. Page. 192
2. To condemn those that do not consider of this truth. Page. 194 3. A terror
to all that go on with a selfe-condemning heart. Page. 195 4. Comfort to good
people, that if he see sins, he sees goodness much rather. Page. 196 5. It
should make us afraid at any time or place, even the secretest. Page. 198
Doct. 2. The knowing that God knows our works, *is the powerful means to all
Gods Elect to quicken them. Page. 199 Reasons 1. Gods knowing our works is not
a mere knowing, but a marking. Page. 200 2. God sees our sins with a pure eye.
ibid. 3. He records them in a book. Page. 201 4. If God see them, all one, as
if the world should see them too. ibid. 5. Our disposition, we cannot endure
any should know of our Wickednesses, that cannot endure them. Page. 202 Use 1.
They that this point cannot work on, are graceless. Page. 203 2. If such
means can work on our hearts, let us not harden them. ibid. The Reasons why
God knows all our works. Page. 210 What is meant by dead. Page. 214 A horrible
thing to rest in the name of being Religious. Page. 215 The Reasons. Page. 216
An unexcusable thing, not to be alive. Page. 217 The Uses. Page. 218 2. What is
meant by dead. Page. 219 Doct. 1. A dead Ministry none at all. Page. 222 2.
The Scripture calls it no Ministry in effect. Page. 223 3. It does little or
no good. ibid. 4. God seldom goes along with it. Page. 224 5. It prophanes the
word of God. ibid. Use 1. We see a reason why a dead Ministry is applauded in
the world. Page. 225 2. To reprove Ministers, that are no more lively in the
Ministry. Page. 226 3. Of Exhortation, to labor for a quickening Ministry*
Page. 228 Motives. ibid. 4. How to get a Ministry to be quickening. Page. 240
What meant by deadness of guilt. Page. 245 What by deadness of mind. Page.
246 What by deadness of heart. ibid. What by deadness of conscience. ibid.
What by deadness of affection. Page. 247 Doct. 1. A dead Christian as good as
none at all. ibid. 2. All duties of Religion, must be done with life. Page. 250
Reasons why a dead Christian none at all. Page. 253 Use 1. If dead Christians
be none, what then that are not Christians in name. Page. 255 2. How dangerous
to be a dead-hearted Christian. Page. 267 For, 1. All we do with a dead heart
is nothing. ibid. 2. It does not please God. Page. 269 3. It cannot yield us
any true comfort. Page. 271 4. Though it comfort us in time of prosperity, it
cannot in adversity. Page. 272 5. We can never bless God with a dead heart.
Page. 273 6. So long Religion is irksome to us. Page. 274 7. If a dead heart
take it up, it will soon be weary of it. Page. 276 Causes of living
Christianly, 1. Efficient, God. Page. 278 2. Isntrumental, Faith. Page. 280
The parts of it. 1. Justification. Page. 281 2. Sanctification. ibid. 3. Joy
and Comfort. Page. 282 2. What is the life of man? Page. 283 Six stirring acts
in the minds of men. Page. 289 1. Application. ibid. 2. Meditation. Page. 291
3. Considering. Page. 292 4. Remembering. Page. 294 5. The Inventing of the
heart. Page. 295 6. The judgeing of the mind. Page. 296 Use 1. How rude, or
profane wicked Christians, are rejected for deadness. Page. 297 2.
Condemnation of the sins wherein most part of the people are dead. Page. 298 3.
What to be a living Christian. ibid. Every act of an heart, not an argument of
the life of it. Page. 304 No not her wouldings. Page. 306 When wishing is an
argument. Page. 308 The same proved. Page. 310 The acts of the heart living, if
converted to God. Page. 312 Five other acts of life in the heart toward God.
Page. 319 What the life of a Conscience. Page. 327 1. A Conscience some what
awakt may like of God and his ways. Page. 328 2. It may oblige a man to all
manner of good things. Page. 329 3. It may be troubled about his sins. Page.
330 4. It may urge one to good things. Page. 332 5. It may be very eager in
urging. Page. 333 6. It may prevail far by its cagernesse. Page. 334 7. It may
make one look a great way as it prevail. ibid. But these cannot be the life of
conscience, and why Page. 335 Signs of a living conscience Page. 341 Two
kinds of Conscience in a godly man. Page. 346 Four effects of a lively
Conscience. Page. 351 Effects of a good conscience. Page. 355 What is an
humbled Conscience Page. 356 How to know quicknings of Conscience. Page. 358
Arguments of a live conscience. Page. 360 Use 1. How few have live Consciences.
Page. 362 When the memory is dead. Page. 363 When the memory is alive. Page.
364 Memory a great blessing, Page. 367 And that for 8 Reasons. Page. 368 There
must needs be the office of the memory. Page. 370 Use 1. The only living
memory that remembers God. Page. 378 2. We can never retain Gods Commandments
without some memory. ibid. 3. The want of this, cause of sin. ibid. Seven
causes of an alive memory. Page. 379
CHRIST'S ALARM To Drowsy SAINTS.
REVEL. 3. 1. And unto the Angel of the Church in Sardis, write, These things
says he that has the seven Spirits of God, and the seven Stars, I know thy
works, that thou have a name that thou live, and art dead.
SAint JOHN being banished into the Isle of Patmos, though the persecuters of
the Gospel thought to do him a displeasure, yet the Lord turned it unto his
great good: For the place of his exile was like Paul's third Heaven unto him, he
was ravished in the Spirit on the Lords day, and had abundance of revelations
vouchsafed unto him, of the things that should occur in the Church, and out,
from thence unto the end of the world. Before which he has a charge given him
to write to the seven Churches of Asia, chap. 1. the Church of Ephesus, the
Church of Smyrna, and of Pergamus, and of Thyatira, these four are written
unto in the second Chapter; the other three are written unto in this: the
Church of Sardis, and the Church of Philadelphia, and the Church of Laodicea.
Now that which I have chosen to handle, and if God afford liberty, I desire to
go through it, is the Epistle unto the Church of Sardis; wherein we may
consider four things.

First, The Inscription, containing a specification whom the Epistle is
specially directed unto. And to the Angel of the Church in Sardis, write.

Secondly, the Subscription, containing a description of the Lord Jesus Christ,
the King of the Church: These things says he that has the seven Spirits of
God, and the seven Stars. I call it a subscription, because in our letters we
use to subscribe our names, or to write our names beneath at the latter end.
But it may be called rather a suprascription, as Kings write their names above
for honors sake, so does Christ the King of Sion, write his Name above.

Thirdly, the substance or matter of the Epistle, I know thy works, that thou
have a name that thou live, and art dead. Be watchful, and strengthen the
things which remain, that are ready to die, for I have not found thy works
perfect before God, etc. verse. 1, 2, 3, 4.

Fourthly, the conclusion, He that overcommeth, the same shall be clothed in
white raiment, etc. v. 5, 6.

First, I say, the Inscription, And unto the Angel of the Church in Sardis,
write. In which words Saint John is directed whom to inscribe this Epistle
unto, and that is, unto the Church which is in Sardis: but especially unto the
Angel of it, that is, the Minister, or Ministers of it: for that is the meaning
of Angel in this place.

Secondly, for the Subscription, or rather suprascription, that contains the
description of the Lord Jesus Christ, from whom the Epistle is sent, and he is
described by two Royalties, the first is, in having of the seven Spirits of
God. These things says he that has the seven Spirits of God, that is, that
has power to send the holy Ghost unto all the Elect: for so the holy Ghost is
called the seven Spirits that are before the Throne, Rev. 1. 4. He means there
the holy Ghost, not as though there were seven holy Ghosts, but he is expressed
in the plural number in regard of the abundance of graces that he infuses into
his Churches; and the number seven is rather taken then any other number,
partly because this number is put for a perfect number, as implying the
perfection of his influence, and partly because of the present business in
hand, for here he writes to the seven Churches of Asia. Now the Lord Jesus
Christ has Spirit enough to send forth into them all. This is his first
Royalty, that he has the seven spirits of God. Another Royalty of his is, that
he has the seven Stars, that is, the seven Pastors of these Churches, Christ
has them all in his hand, it is he that preserves those Ministers that are
faithful; he has power to raise them up, to gift them, to protect them, to
defend them; and they are called Stars, because they are to shine in the
firmament of the Church.

Thirdly, for the substance and matter of the Epistle, it contains three
parts.

First, a Reproof, and the reproof is in these words, I know thy works; that
is, I know them all, and they are stark naught for the most part, what ever
they seem; they may seem to be very good, but I tell you plainly, I know them
all what they be, q. d. generally they are stark naught; and then he instances
in particular, as for example, thy deadness of heart in Religion, Thou have a
name to live, but thou art dead; that is, thou go for an excellent Minister,
and and excellent Church, ye do profess Religion very fairly, and in a goodly
manner, that to see to thou art alive, and thou art taken so too of all thy
Neighbour-churches, they all think and hope thou art alive; but the truth is,
thou art dead, the grace of life is hardly in thee at all. This is the first,
the Reproof.

Then secondly, here is a remedy annexed: for he does not reprove them out of
any ill will, but for their good, and so he prescribes them a remedy, and the
remedy is twofold. The first is, To strengthen the things that remain, that are
ready to die. q. d. as many of you as are not quite and clean dead, stir up
your selves, quicken up your hearts: and this is amplified by showing how they
should do thus: O, be watchful, says he, q. d. that is the reason why ye
languish in this fashion, and ye will languish more and more because ye are
not watchful: therefore Be watchful: and also by rendering a motive to press
this remedy; For I have not found thy works perfect before God; that is, thou
art hardly sincere a jot, thou art full of hypocrisy, and rottenness, and
formality, and thou will lose all thy labor if thou do not look well about
thee: therefore shake up thy self, and strengthen the things that remain. This
is the first remedy.

The second remedy is, to repent, and this is amplified by showing how, and
that is two ways: First, Remember how thou have received and heard; that is,
consider how thou have been taught, and bewail thy declinings: for thou art
horribly departed from what thou have learned in the Ministry of the word.

Secondly, Hold fast, that is, so bewail thy warpings, and wanings, and
degeneratings, that thou may get up again, hold thee fast there when thou
art up. Now lest they should neglect the using of this remedy, the Lord Jesus
sharpens his speech with a threatening, telling them the danger, if they will
not be awakened: If therefore thou shall not watch, I will come on thee as a
thief, and thou shall not know what hour I will come upon thee. This is the
second part of the matter of this Epistle, the Remedy.

Thirdly, another part of the matter of this Epistle is, a commendation of some
particular persons in the Church, that were not carried away in the deadness
of the times, and these he does praise very much, and he gives them an
excellent promise; the praise is in these words: Thou have a few names even in
Sardis, which have not defiled their garments; that is, there be some among
you, though they be but a few, that have not been sutted and soyled with others
bad examples; though others be dead, yet they are not dead too for company: and
then the promise is to them in these words, They shall walk with me in white;
that is, I will give them the grace of repentance, and I will keep them
unspotted unto my heavenly Kingdom and glory. And he adds a reason in these
words: For they are worthy, not as though they did merit repentance and glory;
no, but they are worthy in Christ, and Christ has made them meet to be made
partakers of this mercy. Thus you see the matter of the Epistle.

The fourth and last thing is the conclusion of the Epistle; and that is in the
fifth and sixth verses, He that overcomes shall be clothed in white raiment,
etc. In which words we have the conclusion of the Epistle, and it consists of
two parts:

First, a promise to every one that overcomes, He that overcomes, etc.

Secondly, a precept to command every gracious Saint to attend to these things.
The promise:

First, it is to be considered to whom it is made; it is made to him that
overcomes: that is, ye know there is to be a holy war against all manner of
sin, and all temptations, and all the policies of Satan, and all the alluring
baits of the world, and all the inclinations of the flesh. Now he that
overcomes all these, which is no other but one that is born of God, who alone
is able to overcome, He that overcomes, this is the party to whom it is
promised.

Secondly, what it is that is promised. Here be three things that are promised
to him that overcomes: First, White raiment; He shall be clothed in white
raiment; that is, he shall be preferred to everlasting blessedness, and he
shall walk in triumph in a conquerours robe. Secondly, a permanent and lasting
name in the Book of life, I will not put out his name out of the Book of life,
that is, there be many hundreds that are written in the book of life in the
judgment of men, and in the hope of men; but in the end the Lord blots them
out, he makes it appear, that their names are not there: But this man shall
never be blotted out thence. As he hopes his name is enrolled there, so it
shall for a certain appear to be enrolled there, and it shall never be crossed
out. Thirdly, Christ's confessing of that man's name before his Father and his
holy Angels: And I will confess his name before my Father and his holy Angels;
that is, I will acknowledge him to be mine. Thus you see the first thing, the
promise which is made to him that overcomes.

The second part of the conclusion is a precept to command every gracious Saint
to attend to these things, and that is in the sixth verse; He that has an ear
to hear, let him hear what the Spirit says unto the Churches.

Of these in their order, and first of the Inscription.

And to the Angel of the Church of Sardis, write.

By the Angel he means not the Angels of Heaven, no Some translate it so too,
Which have received the law by the disposition of Angels, and have not kept it.
Acts 7. 53. And so 1 Cor 11. 10. Because of the Angels.
nor the Angels of the bottomless pit: he does not mean the Angels of heaven,
because they are perfectly holy, they have no sin in them. Now the Lord Jesus
speaks of such an Angel here as has much sinned; for he reproves him
exceedingly. Neither does he mean any Angel of the bottomless pit, because
they are perfectly evil, they have no spiritual goodness at all in them. Now
the Lord Jesus speaks of such an Angel here, whom though he reproves for many
things amiss, yet he commends him too for some gracious things; and therefore
he can be Angel of the bottomless pit. It remains then, that a Metaphorical
Angel is here understood, and that is the Minister of the Church. Now as the
Angels are called Ministers, Bless ye the Lord all ye his Hosts, ye Ministers
that do his pleasure, Psalm. 103. 21. So the Ministers are called Angels, An
Angel of the Lord came up from Gilgal to Bochim, etc. Judge. 2. 1. that i^, a
Minister, Phinehas, or some Prophet or other, as it seems, came and preached
unto the people. The point then is this,

That Ministers are to be Angels, as it were. Observe.


They are Angels in some sense.

1. Angels are Spirits, ye know they are spiritual substances, 1.
as the Psalmist speaks: He makes his Angels spirits, Psalm. 104. 4. they are
spiritual creatures, their communion is spiritual, their food is spiritual,
their delights are spiritual, their affections and minds are spiritual: so a
Minister though he be a Body as well as his people, yet he should be a
spiritual man. I confess every true Christian is spiritual, as the Apostle
says: If any man be overtaken in a fault, ye that are spiritual, restore such
a man in the spirit of meeknes, Gal. 6. he speaks to every true Christian, he
is a spiritual man: But a Minister should more especially be spiritual; nay,
our own phrases will rise up in judgment against us, if we be not spiritual.
Do not we call our selves the Spiritualty, as though the people were carnal
in comparison of us? Now if we should be more carnal then they, out of our own
mouths the Lord will condemn us. The truth is, many of us may be called
spiritual men, if we will: but we are mad spiritual men, as the Prophet Hosea
speaks, The spiritual man is mad, Hosea 9. 7. Mad spiritual men indeed, when
we are nothing less then what we profess our selves to be, when we are
spiritual men in a mockery: ye know what a mock is brought up upon this name;
people call a spiritual Pig, that is, the poorest of all the ten, that has no
substance in it, that is given to the Minister: so many of us are spiritual in
a mockery, having no reason why we should be so termed, but only because
there is no substance in us, no goodness, no holiness at all in us; whereas
we should exceed others in it. We should be spiritual in a special manner, we
should be like animae separatae, like spirits sequestered from bodily things,
taken up with spiritual affairs, holding forth the fruits of the spirit; we
should be as Angels in our Parishes, laboring to draw people from all their
carnal courses, endeavoring to breed in them a savor and a relish of all the
things of the spirit of God: our Sermons should not be only moral, but
spiritual; our carriage should be a spiritual walking; where we come, our
discourse should be spiritual, we should be like a company of spirits, for so
the Apostle calls us, Try the spirits whether they be of God, 1 John 4. 1. that
is, try your Ministers whether they be of God, yea or no; whether their
doctrine be the doctrine of life, that will make the soul live: whether their
conversation be after the spirit, lest ye follow a false guide: whether their
Ministry be the Ministry of the spirit. If any man think himself to be a
Prophet, or spiritual, 1 Cor. 14. 37. We cannot think our selves Prophets,
except we be spiritual men. When our courses are carnal, we sin against our
callings: for we are to be as Angels by our places in this sense, lest our own
profession hit us in the teeth at the last.

Secondly, the Angels are creatures of another world, not of this world, though
they walk up and down on Gods errands here, yet they are creatures of another
world; and therefore they are called the Angels of Heaven, Matthew. 24. 36.
Heavenly soldiers, Luke 2. 13. True, every child of God is a heavenly
creature, but a Minister should be in a more special manner, a creature of
another world, crucified unto this, as Paul says, I am crucified to the world,
and the world unto me. The preaching of the word is called the Kingdom of
heaven, so we that are the Preachers of it, should be of heaven too, not only
in regard of the news we bring, but we our selves that bring it, should be
heavenly ones. When our Savior Christ had told Nicodemus, that he must be
begotten from above, O, says he, art thou a Teacher in Israel, and know
not these things? How beautiful upon the mountains! The Ministers of the Gospel
should be men aloft, the world should be a valley to them beneath, they should
not be Secular men. What care Angels for fine houses, or great livings? They
had rather be in the prison with Peter, then with Herod at the Court. Do
Angels care for outward things? No, no more should Ministers. Paul was all for
Jesus Christ, I determined not to know any thing among you, but Jesus Christ
and him crucified, 1 Cor. 2. 2. He cared not though the great Philosophers of
Corinth took him for a Dunce in all human learning; Jesus Christ and him
crucified, Paul included all his learning in that.

Thirdly, the Angels stand before God, as Daniel says, Ten thousand times ten
thousand stood before him, Dan. 7. 10. So the Ministers of God are to stand
before God, as God says to Jeremy, Thou shall stand before me, Jer. 15. 19.
The Ministers of God are to stand before God, to know what his pleasure is unto
the people, what message he has for them. Again, the Angels are Ministering
spirits, sent forth for the good of them that are heirs of salvation, Heb. 1.
14. So Ministers, they are to minister unto them that are the heirs of
salvation, to watch over their souls, to be useful unto them in all their
ways. Again, the Angels pitch their tents round about them that are good, as
the Prophet speaks; so the Ministers, they are the Churches Angels. Whether
Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, all are yours, they are not their own: But as they
are Christ's, so next under him, they are theirs that are Christ's, they are
Ministers by whom they believe, helpers of their faith; they are Gods servants
to bring Jacob again to him. Angels are Gods messengers, they never come but
when they are sent from God: so it is said of Ministers, There was a man sent
from God, whose name was John, John 1. 6.

The use of this is, First, Here we see that the Ministry Use 1.
is no base Office; the world makes a matter of nothing of Gods faithful
Ministers; vile men will Sir them at their pleasure, and take them up as if
they were their dishclouts. But beloved, here we see they are as it were Angels
of God. Christ himself the Apostle makes bold to call him a Minister, Romans 15.
8. Now I say (says he) that Jesus Christ was a Minister: the Apostle knew it
was no disparagement unto him. Solomon when he would choose him his Title, and
might have called himself, The King of Israel and Judah, yet he rather takes
this as honorable enough, The Preacher; Thus says the Preacher, Eccles. 1. 1.
The office of a Minister is an Angels office. When Zachary perceived that his
child should be a Minister, though yet he were a little babe lying in the
cradle, he admires him: And thou child shall be called the Prophet of the
Highest, for thou shall go before the face of the Lord to prepare his ways,
to give knowledge of salvation for the remission of sins, to give light unto
them that sit in darkness, and in the shadow of death, to guide their feet in
the way of peace, Luke 1. 76, 77. The Angels of heaven never go on greater
errands then these. When they came to the Shepherds, what did they do? they
did but tell them of the birth of Christ, of peace on earth, and good will
toward men. Now this is the Ministers duty, let the world think what they will
of us, as though our calling were mean, and they care not much whether they
hear us or no, they will not regard what we preach. O beloved, consider what
an office we have, we are Gods Angels unto you, to declare unto man his
righteousness, Job. 33. 23. to pray men in Christ's stead to be reconciled unto
God, 2 Cor. 5. 20. to gather together the saints, Ephesians. 4. 12. These are no
small things, no mean employments to treat between God and Man about eternal
life, to be Christ's Paranymphs, and the friends of the Bridegroom, to deal
about the getting of a wife for the Lamb, to cater for heaven, to bring in
custom for the Kingdom of God. The whole world has not a greater office in
it; ye cannot despise neither our persons nor our message and be saved, as
Paul says, Let a man so esteem of us, as of the Ministers of Christ, and the
stewards of the mysteries of God, 1 Cor. 4. 1. q. d. O take heed how ye slight
us, or our Ministry, ye cannot have the mysteries of grace without us, ye
cannot have saving knowledge, nor regeneration, nor faith without us. I do not
speak what God may do extraordinarily; but this is Gods ordinary way: How can
they believe on him of whom they have not heard? and how can they hear without
a Preacher? Romans 10. 4. and therefore our office is no mean office, we are as
the Angels of God unto you, and people should honor our Ministry when a
Minister comes into the Pulpit, even as if an Angel did appear. It is said
when Samuel came to Bethlehem, the Elders of the town trembled at his coming, 1 Samuel 16. 4.

Secondly, are Ministers Angels? then they must be holy; Use 2.
ye know the Angels are holy: When the Son of man shall come in his glory, and
all his holy Angels with him, Matthew. 25. 31. They are holy all of them: so
should the Ministers be holy; otherwise they may be Angels indeed, but they are
evil angels, angels of darkness; they are Devils if they be not holy. Every
ignorant, graceless, and unconscionable Minister is ready to press the
dignity of his calling, and what an honorable office he has; but he never
considers what a Minister then he must be. If we be Angels, brethren, why then
as we like this honorable Title, we must have a care to be holy, or else, I
say, we are Devils. Those Angels that are not holy, are Devils. Nay, our very
calling supposes us to be holy, Let thy Urim and thy Thummim be with thy holy
one, Deuteronomy. 33. 8. so that our very calling will testify against us, if we be
not holy: We of all men should labor to be holy; What, a Minister, and yet a
drunkard? a Minister, and yet a whoremonger? a Minister, and yet without the
fear of God? a Minister, and yet have a dead heart? O consider what God says,
What have thou to do to declare my statutes, or that thou should take my
covenant within thy mouth, seeing thou hate instruction, and have cast my
words behind thee? Psalm. 50. 16, 17. With what face can we here stand in a
Pulpit, and preach against sin, and teach our hearers to make conscience of all
their ways, and denounce the judgments of God against them that do evil, if
we that condemn another do the same things or as bad? How inexcusable are we,
if we can preach the straitness of heavens gate, and the narrowness of the
way, and the strictness of the account the people shall be forced to give at
the last day, and lay heavy burdens on other men's shoulders, and we our selves
not touch them with one of our fingers? Teach precisely, and live loosely,
teach graciously, and walk broadly? This is gross hypocrisy; act zeal and
goodness in the Pulpit, and be heartlesse and lukewarm in our private duties
unto God.

Again, we can never look to do good, if we be not holy; as Jet will not draw
if it be not clean: For how can we hope our people will follow our
exhortations, if they see we do not follow them our selves? When S. Luke had
showed how Barnabas exhorted the Christians to cleave close unto God, Acts 11.
23. presently he gives a reason why he might well exhort them to do so, For he
was a good man, full of the holy Ghost and of Faith, v. 24. When our hearers
are met with for any of their sins, when we rub their consciences with our
Sermons, presently their eye is at us, and if they see us to be vain and
worldly, this heals them again; though the word wounded them, yet this is an
ease to them, O think they, he is as bad himself, and we see no such holiness
in him, and we are as fair for heaven as he, he loves his penny as well as we,
he is as ready to quarrel as we, he is as proud, and ambitious, and fearful,
and idle, as we; he loves to sleep in a whole skin, what will not he do rather
then lose his living? he will break the Sabbath, and teach others to do so. Now,
my brethren, how should we abhor this! O it should prick and spur us up to
study holiness of life, that so our Ministry may be powerful.

Thirdly, are Ministers Angels? Then they should be Use 3.
apt to teach, ready to preach, and to labor in Word and Doctrine. It is said
of the Angels, that they have wings, One of the Seraphims came flying unto me,
Isa. 6. 6. They are ready pressed to do any thing that the Lord gives them in
charge; so should we be, or else how should we bear the name of Angels? We
must labor, that we may be fruitful in our labor among our people. You know
the Angels are called Reapers, and so are Gods Ministers* I sent you to reap,
John 4. 38. When a man reaps he gathers; nay, Christ chooses good Ministers for
this end, that they should bring forth fruit in their places, I have ordained
you that ye should go and bring forth much fruit, John 15. 16. Nay, our
Savior Christ supposes that all his true Ministers are fruitful upon some.
Every sower though he Matthew. 13. 3. 8.
have some highway ground to sow in, and some thorny ground, and some stony
ground, yet he has some good ground or other.

For first, a good Minister it is the desire of his soul to see 1.
the fruits of his labors; As a Hen, many a Hen will hardly ever off from her
eggs, till she see a young chickens bill peep; nay, she will sit still till she
die before she will off. What made Paul so desirous to come to the Romans? Was
it only to see them, and to be among them, or to take his tithes or his
maintenance? No, it was that he might have some fruit, Romans 1. 13. And
certainly, this is the study of every true Minister, that he may see his
preaching fruitful in the conversion and salvation of some, that some are
awakened by his means, that some are quickened, some are made to leave their
sins, and to become new creatures unto God.

Secondly, does not every man count it a misery to be 2.
unprofitable? The Lord names it as a brand upon wicked men, that they are
unprofitable, Romans 3. 12. What a woeful brand is this, when we can live two,
three, seven, ten, twenty years in a place, and our services are unprofitable,
no man delivered out of ignorance, no man purged from his filthiness by our
means; when our Ministry is a dead letter, we preach without life, and no man
is translated from death unto life by it? I say, this is to be unprofitable,
like salt that has lost his savor. I confess the best Ministers may have
little takings, as the best tradesman may have little vent for his wares when
his trading grows dead.

Nay thirdly, this is the end of our gifts, that we may 3.
profit with them; as the Apostle says, The manifestation of the Spirit is
given unto every man to profit withal, 1 Cor. 12. 7. Has he given us
knowledge? He has given it us that we should profit others with it. Has he
given us skill in the opening and applying of the Scriptures? He has given it
unto us, that we may do good with the same. And therefore, O how earnest
should we be that our Ministry may profit, that our pains may be profitable
and successful, that we may say with the Prophet Esaias, Lord, behold I and the
Children whom thou have given me.

Fourthly, this is the best argument that God has of a 4.
certain called us to be Ministers in his Church. If we have called our
selves, and run without sending, then no marvel if we be fruitless, and do
little or no good. But if we find that God blesses our labors, this is the
best seal of our ministry: as if the arrow hit, it is a good sign it was sent
out of the bow; it may fall out of the bow of it own accord, but then it never
hits: but when it is sent out of the bow, ye know he that sends it, will aim;
and therefore now when it hits, that is a sign it was sent indeed: so when a
Minister converts peoples souls, this is a good sign that God sent him; when
a Minister can say to his people, as Paul to the Corinthians, The seal of mine
Apostleship are ye in the Lord, 1 Cor. 9. 2. though I be not an Apostle unto
others, yet doubtless I am unto you: For the seal of my Apostleship are ye in
the Lord. So the seal of us Ministers are ye in the Lord: though I have not
converted others, yet doubtless I have converted you unto God, as he says,
Truly, the signs of an Apostle were wrought among you, 2 Cor. 12. 12, etc.

Fifthly, this is that which will give us comfort, when 5.
we lie upon our deathbeds, when we can say, we have been faithful in our
callings, and can show a token of it too, by blessing of our faithfulness in
the gaining of fowls, as Paul says to the Thessalonians, What is our hope, or
joy, or crown of rejoicing? Are not even ye in the presence of our Lord Jesus
Christ at his coming? For ye are our glory and joy, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 19, 20. This is
a pledge of our glory. The promise is clear, They that turn others unto
righteousness, shall shine as the stars, Dan. 12. 3. I do not deny, but a
wicked Minister that has parts, and is gifted of God with an Art of speaking
to the conscience, may convert; and therefore it is not a naked argument. But
when a man has had* this success by his faithfulness, and has set himself
to do it in Gods way indeed; what an unspeakable comfort is this! He is not
the wisest Minister that can plot most for prefermet, or can preach best for
applause, or the like: No, no; but he that can most compose himself to do
good, He that wins souls is wise, Prove. 11. 30. that is, as he had need to
be a wise man, and to go wisely to work, that would do it: so he is a wise
man, he is wise to himself, he lays up to himself a good foundation of comfort
against the world to come.

Sixthly, and lastly, if we can endure to be unprofitable, 6.
not to stir up our selves, not to point and sharpen our Ministry that it
may pierce into men's consciences, nor never study how to do good, what a
heavy woe will lie upon us? You read what was done to the unprofitable
servant, he was bound hand and foot, and cast out into utter darkness, where
is weeping and gnashing of teeth, Matthew. 25. 30. O then how careful should we
be to do good, and to be effectual Preachers, that we may say, these and these
I have been an instrument of good to; by the mercy of God these and these I
have begotten through the Gospel, then are we Angels indeed, that are sent out
for the good of Gods elect. I confess it is good to civilize our people, to
abate their wickedness, to make them Professors, and I would to God we could
see more of these effects rather then none. But to gather in Gods elect, this
is an Angels work, the conversion of one soul is better then the civilizing of
a thousand. And therefore let us be diligent and industrious, and preach in
season and out of season, let us con the skill of preaching, not to tickle men's
itching ears, not so much to make our people say, our Minister is a fine
Scholar, a good Churchman, as to rouse up the consciences of our hearers, to
pull down their hearts before God, to feed their souls with divine meat, with
the good knowledge of the Lord, to show them the several wiles of Satan, as
Paul says, Speak thou the things which become sound doctrine, that the aged
men be sober and grave, etc. Tit. 2. 1. that is, so preach, as to good, to old
men, to old women, to young men, to young women, to Masters, to servants, to
all, as it follows there; we must look unto our life, that we defile not our
Angels place, that we do not undo what we preach. Alas! if we do not
sincerely practice all that we do deliver, if our lives do not answer our
teaching, we are like unto kine that give very good milk, but then put their
feet into the paile, or throw down the paile when they have done. This is to
make our preaching of no effect: and therefore as the Apostle says to Timothy,
Take heed unto thy self, and to thy doctrine, continue in them, for in doing
this, thou shall both save thy self and them that hear thee, 2 Timothy 4. 16.
They are the best Ministers, that carry people unto heaven; when men think to
send people to heaven, and not go themselves, suppose this should do the
deed, yet what will it profit us, if our people go to heaven, and we stay
behind, and never come there? Nay, we cannot look they will go, except they see
us go before them; and therefore let us do nothing that may hinder the
fruitfulness of our Sermons. Thus shall we be Angels indeed.

Fourthly, another use is, If Ministers be Angels, then Use 4.
let us know that we are mainly for Gods elect, as the Psalmist says of every
elect person, God shall give his Angels charge over thee* to keep thee in* all
thy ways, Psalm. 91. 11. Mark, the Angels have the charge of the elect, they
are their main charge; may be they are to do many things toward others, but
these are their principal charge; so it must be with Gods Ministers, their
chief charge is toward Gods elect, as the Apostle says, I endure all things
for the elects sake, that they may also obtain the salvation which is in Christ
Jesus, which is eternal glory, 2 Timothy 2. 10. We that are Gods Ministers, have
all our gifts and graces for their sakes; He gave some Apostles, and some
Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers. For what? For
the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying
of the body of Christ, Ephesians. 4. 11, 12. And therefore if we have any that
fear God in our Parishes, we should bend our main Ministry unto them, and
for the adding of more to them; we should not be like those wretched
Ministers that count such persons the worst of their flock, and they do most
hate them, and oppose them, and jeere them: No, no, we should most dearly love
them, and tender them, and bend our selves unto them; nay, we should not
altogether in these bad times, stand declaiming against drunkards, murderers,
and so leave the Lords Saints without their portion. The truth is, ye that
live in your ungodly courses, ye that walk after your wicked lusts, and will
not be gotten to forsake your cursed doings, we could be content to lay hell
here before you in every Sermon, and spend our shot on you, all the hours that
we have of preaching in the week, are little enough to tell you what a damned
condition ye are in. But if ye will not enter in into the strait gate, we must
not neglect them that will; if ye will be filthy, be filthy still, and if ye
will to hell, and we cannot persuade you to live out of your sins. Though there
be but two or three that are wel-minded in our Parishes, we are to bend our
selves chiefly unto them. Indeed as long as we have any hope of adding more to
their company, we must preach points for them too. May be some of Gods elect
are among you, and if there be, the Word will find them out. I say, this is our
main charge, to be groping for Gods elect, and when any of them appear, to
tender them most, so shall we show our selves Angels indeed for the good of
Gods chosen. More uses I might make, and very many too.

But I will content my self with one more, and that shall Use 5.
be to you that are hearers. If Gods Ministers be Angels, then how should you
come to the hearing of the word of God? Even as if an Angel should drop down
from heaven unto you. How should you receive the Ministers of God that desire
to be faithful? Even as the Galatians received Paul, even as an Angel of God,
Gal. 4. 14. yea even as Christ himself; ye must not look up into the Pulpit,
as seeing nothing but a poor mortal man there, but as though an Angel of God
were standing there. How grave should our meetings here be? how reverently
should ye sit in your Pewes? how sacredly should we stand in our desks? how
graciously should we deliver Gods errands, and you hear them with fear and
trembling? When a good Minister appears in the Congregation, it is as if an
Angel of heaven appeared unto you to speak unto you. O what a homely manner do
we come to Churches? the Majesty of the Word is not seen; nay, we may speak it
with shame, neither by us the speakers, nor by you the hearers; we do not come
to the Word as if an Angel from heaven had spoken it. But generally most people
see little more then a poor mortal creature in the Pulpit, and so they deal
with the Word accordingly, etc.

Thus ye have heard the first Doctrine; To the Angel of the Church in Sardis,
write. I should now speak of the singular number, he does not say, To the
Angels, though there were many Ministers in Sardis, yet he speaks to them all
as if they were all one. From whence we are taught The unity that is between
true and right Ministers, they are all as one man. And then whereas he
inscribes the Epistle, To the Angel of the Church, though he write to all the
Church, and blames and condemns all the Church, yet he names none but the
Angel; here we are taught, That a Minister shares in the good and in the evil
of his Parish: if they be good, it is to his praise; if they be evil,
commonly he is guilty of it.

REVEL. 3. 1. And unto the Angel of the Church in Sardis, write, These things
says he that has the seven Spirits of God, etc.
I Have made an entrance into the words: ye have heard the Analysis of the
whole Epistle, and a short exposition, or a paraphrase upon all the verses.
Unto the Angel of the Church in Sardis, write. This is the inscription or
superscription of the letter that Christ would have written to the Ministers
and Christians in the town of Sardis: Where first ye heard this point of
Doctrine, That Ministers are as the Angels of God unto their Parishes. When God
sends his Ministers unto a people, it is as if he sent his Angels from heaven
unto them. But I will not trouble you with any repetitions.

The next point I foretold you of, that arises out of these words, is this,
That all the true Ministers of the Church are all one as it were, there is or
ought to be an unity between them all, even as if they were all one Angel, Unto
the Angel of the Church in Sardis, write, and yet the Town was a great Town,
and there were many Ministers in it; so we may see it was in Ephesus, the text
says, that Paul called all the Elders of the Church of Ephesus together, and
said unto them, Take heed unto your selves, and to all the flock over the which
the holy Ghost has made you overseers, Acts 20. 28. he speaks to the
Ministers there as to many, and yet S. John is to write to them all as to one
Minister, Unto the Angel of the Church of Ephesus, write, Rev. 2. 1. noting
thus much unto us, That Ministers should be all as one Minister; there should
be a sweet harmony and a glorious agreement, and consent and unity between them
all, even as if they were all one Minister; so that the doctrine is plain. So
again, John prophesying of John Husse, and Jerome of Prague, and other godly
Ministers in succeeding ages, that should mightily strive against the primacy
and domineering of the man of sin, says, There followed another Angel, saying,
Babylon is fallen, Babylon is fallen, Rev. 14. 8. he calls them all one
Minister, intimating unto us how that they all agree in one.

I do not mean, first, that if one Minister be a drunkard, 1.
that all others should be so too; if one be a man-pleaser and a dawber, that
all others should be so too; that if one be an ignorant Sir John, all others
should be so too; every unity is not good, there is unity as our Savior Christ
shows, even among the very Devils in Hell. For if Satan be divided against
Satan, how can his Kingdom stand? Mat. 12. 26. There is a unity among rogues
and thieves, Come, say they, cast in thy lot among us, and letus have one
purse, Pro* 1. 14. There was unity among Ahabs four hundred false Prophets,
they all hung together in a string, Go up and prosper. All the Prophets
prophesied so, 1 Kings 22* 12. as the messenger said to Micaiah, All the
Pophets prophecy good to the King with one mouth, let thy word be like theirs;
be not thou singular, be not thou an odd fellow by thy self, they all agreed
in one. There was unity among the Priests that were met together in a Synod for
the condemning of Christ, they all were in one note, That he was worthy to die.
The Prophet observes that there was unity amongst all the blind watchmen of
Judah: They are all ignorant, says he, they are all dumb dogs, they cannot
bark, sleeping, lying down, loving to slumber, they all look to their own way,
every one for his gain from his quarter, Isai. 56. 10, 11. This is an unity the
world is full of, nay and hell is full of, like the unity of Sodom against Lot,
the men of Sodom compassed his house round, both old and young from every
quarter, Genesis 19. 4. This is a Devilish unity, this is no true unity. True
unity is in Bono, no matter how many are of one mind, and of one heart, and of
one accord, if it be not an union in good, it is faction and no union, as
Tertullian told the Marcionites when they bragged of their Churches, forsooth
they were the Church, says he, Wasps have their swarms: so when wicked
Ministers shall cry, The Church, the Church, I say, these are swarms of Wasps,
I do not mean such a unity; when it is not in good, the greater the unity is,
the less union is indeed.

Secondly, I do not mean neither, that Ministers should 2.
thus hang together in one, that if one be a Boanerges, a son of thunder,
another should be so too. For Ministers may be different in different
auditories. Husbandmen sow their seed according to the diversity of their
ground; the Physician tempers his Physic according to his patients
constitution: as long as people are of sundry dispositions, so certainly the
Ministers manner of preaching may be various. And therefore I do not mean such
an unity neither, that all Preachers should be molded alike; nay, the same
minister may and must differ from himself, sometimes come with cordials,
sometimes with corrasives, to sing of mercy and judgment, to preach comfort to
whom comfort, and vengeance to whom vengeance belongs, to some he must give
milk, to others strong meat, Heb. 13. 14. Paul had a rod as well as the spirit
of meekness. Zacharies Pastor was to have two staves, the one called Beauty,
and the other called Bands, and so he was to feed the flock, Zach. 11. 7. A
Chirurgian has aching tents as well as suppling oil. The Apostle Paul when he
was to deal with Elymas the Sorcerer, he set his eyes on him, and called him
the child of the Devil; but when he was to deal with Sergius Paulus, he was
mild with him. Our Savior Christ preached the acceptable year of the Lord to
some; and to other some as though he were not the same Preacher, he had nothing
but woes in his mouth. There were two mountains in Canaan, there was the
blessing on mount Gerizim for some, and the cursing on mount Ebal for others.

Again thirdly, we do not mean that all ministers 3.
should be the same in gifts and parts, and measure of knowledge and
sanctification; for that can never be looked for, every Parish can never be
provided for alike. Stars are of different magnitudes, some stars are
greater, some lesser: The Angels are not all of one rank, some are ordinary
Angels, some Archangels, some are Principalities, some are Dominions, some are
Thrones, Coloss. 1. 16. and may be, those that are meanest, so they be godly,
and sent of God, may do as much good as those that are more excellent; nay
more, convert more, awaken more, settle more: for it is not they that work, but
God by them, who is not tied unto Organs, unity is not hindered by disparity.
Paul calls Epaphraditus who was much inferior to him, his brother, and
companion in labor, and fellow* soldier, Phil. 2. 25. Though Clement were a
minister much meaner then he, yet he calls him his fellowlabourer, Phil. 4. 3.
Though Tychicus came never so much short of him, yet he terms him his
fellow servants, Col. 4. 7. So that there may be unity for all this, and a
gracious sympathy and agreement between ministers, though of never so
different parts, so they be sincere and cordially minded to do good.

You will say then, What is that unity that must be among ministers?

I answer 1. They must be all competently endued 1.
with ability for the work of the ministry, all must agree in this, that they
be able men in some measure. He has made us able Ministers of the new
testament, 2 Cor. 3. 6. able to preach to the conscience, able to do it with
power and might, able to divide the word aright, able to give every one his
portion in due season. They are none of Gods ministers that are not able men,
that are not able to teach and to apply, to be the mouth of God unto the
people, and the mouth of the people unto God, that are not able to seek that
which was lost, to bring again that which is driven away, to bind that which is
broken, to strengthen that which is sick. Those that are not able to do this,
they are blind guides, Idol-shepheards, and no ministers. Paul says, that a
minister must be able by sound doctrine both to exhort and to convince the
gainsayers, Tit. 1. 9. Faithful men, able to teach others, 2 Timothy 2. 2. This
was one of the ends that Christ ascended upon high, that he might give gifts
unto men for the ministry, as one Apostle speaks, Ephesians. 4. 8. and so as it
follows, He gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and
some Pastors and Teachers. All Ministers should agree in this, that they be
able.

Secondly, they must be all sent of God, though a man 2.
be never so able, yet if he be not sent of God, he is not a Minister. Private
Christians many of them have excellent abilities, as the text says, I am
persuaded of you, my brethren, that ye are full of goodness, filled with all
knowledge, able to admonish one another, Romans 15. 14. he speaks of private
Christians: I say, they are able many of them, and there is very great use of
their abilities too, for the good of their families, for the good of Christian
communion, and the like; yea, it is a shame that private Christians living under
good means of grace, do not grow able to teach. When for time ye ought to be
teachers, ye have need that one teach you again which be the first principles
of the Oracles of God, Heb. 5. 12. Mark, he shames private Christians that do
not grow able to teach. But yet this is not enough to make ministers; true
ministers agree all in this, that they are sent of God. How shall they preach
except they be sent? Romans 10. 15. I have not thrust in my self for a Pastor,
says Jeremy. They are intruders and not ministers that cannot prove their
commission from God, as the author to the Hebrews says, No man takes this
honor to himself, but he that is called of God as was Aaron, Heb. 5. 4.
Christ himself alleged this to bear out his ministry, He has sent me to
preach deliverance to Captives. Woe be to those of whom the Lord shall say, I
have not sent these Prophets, and yet they run. It will be said to them one
day, as to the man without a wedding garment, Friend, how came thou in
hither? The want of this is the reason that so many ministers make no more
conscience of their duty, they make no conscience of taking pains, of strict
preaching, of pressing the word upon peoples hearts, of using all manner of
means to root out sin in their Parish, because they have no dispensation from
God committed unto them: if their consciences were charged with this, it would
make them do otherwise then they do. The want of this is the cause that the
ministry of many is impotent, they may preach all the days of their lives,
and not one soul turned unto God, but themselves and their works perish
together; whereas Ministers that are sent, make the Devils roar, and flesh and
blood chafe, their Sermons are links of iron to bind Nobles and Princes, and
stubborn hearts. The want of this is the reason why so many ministers are vile
in the peoples eyes, people care not a whit for them, dare drink and be drunk
in their company, dare talk of their roguery before them; as Amnon before
Jonadab, Jonadab ask't him what he ailed he was so sad: O, says he, I would
fain lie with my sister Tamar, 2 Samuel 13. 4. He knew before whom he was; if
Jonadab had been a godly man, he durst as well have eaten his own tongue, as
have told him his base lust. A godly man the very presence of him would have
made him ashamed, and to have bitten in his lips. When a minister is unsent of
God, no body does respect him out of conscience, they care not for his words:
whereas when a minister is sent, this makes him as an Angel of God when others
call him all to naught, the conscience of many will plead for him, as we see
there of Jeremy, O this man is not worthy to die, for he has spoken unto us
in the Name of the Lord, Jer. 26. 16. There Is never a sent minister, but if he
come in trouble, except peoples consciences be seared with a hot Iron, they will
speak for him in their bosoms: Alas! why is he put down? Why is he imprisoned?
Why is he opposed? He has spoken to us in the name of the Lord. So that this
is the second wherein all ministers should agree, they should be all sent of
God, not contenting themselves with the calling of man, without being also
called of God.

Thirdly, they must all agree in the matter that they 3.
preach; the same word is delivered unto all ministers to preach. Preach the
word, 2 Timothy 4. The same Gospel, the same Truths, the same Duties, the same
Commandments, the same Promises, the same threatenings: Ye know there is one
God, and one Faith, and one Baptism, one Lord Jesus Christ; there is but one
way of life, one gate to heaven, one salvation, one Bible: Now every minister
must agree in this: You know all men are by Nature the children of wrath, in a
damned estate; now all Pulpits should agree in this, every minister laboring
to bring their people to a sight of their misery by sin; every minister
should show his people what cursed creatures they are, until they be converted
and renewed; every Minister should press the evil of sin, and open the wiles
of Satan, the guilt of the conscience, the spiritualnesse of the Law, the
necessity of humiliation, and repentance, and amendment of life, that there is
no mercy but in Christ, no salvation but by Christ; except people take him to
live in their hearts by faith. All ministers should let their people know the
terror of the Lord, the strictness of Gods judgments, the inseparable
connection of mercy and a godly life, that no profane person can enter into Gods
Kingdom; no hypocrite, no mere civil man; that a form of godliness will not
serve turn, that none but Saints shall stand at Christ's right hand at the last
day. All ministers should preach what a narrow path there is to Paradise, and
how few there be that find it, that saving grace cannot stand with the reign
of the least lust, that people must be pure and holy, what ever the world think
of pureness, and preciseness, and strictness, yet without this no flesh
shall be saved. If all pulpits sounded with these truths, and all ministers
cried those aloud, and would lift up their voices like a trumpet, and not
spare, what a land should we have? The want of unity in this matter, is the
cause that wickedness does so much abound: a drunkard, a whoremaster, a
muckworm may come to a Sermon, and go away with hope that he shall have peace.
When ministers make the pulpit a scaffold, in which like Masters of Defense
they play their prizes, blazon their own wits, descant upon their text, as
though the Scripture were a Rattle for children and fools to sport with,
tossing it to and fro, hither and thither, as boys at a Tennis: when they go
about to amaze their hearers, to mount aloft, to be in their high phrases, and
coined words, more like Mimicks and Comedians then Ministers; when they search
into moath-eaten Friars, affect allegories, would fain be thought Linguists,
and interlace a many of allegations of Latin and Greek sentences, which a
Schoolboy might do with a Polyanthea: or if they speak plain, they skim the
truth of the Scriptures, and never dive deep to the edifying of the soul. May
be they will preach good moral matter. But a man may go to hell, though he
do as they teach; people may hear them a thousand times, and no man made to
cry out, What have I done? They preach of repentance, but then they open it so
slightly, that a man may repent as they say, and be damned: they preach of
faith in Christ, but they make it so broad, that thousands have it and sink
into the bottomless pit with it: they preach that sin must be forsaken, and a
good life must be led, but they handle it in that wise, that their hearers may
do as they say, and yet have no more grace then a reprobate, nor so much
neither. Now beloved, the unity among brethren should be this, to agree in the
right matter of preaching, that the word may be carved to all, as their need
is, that they may see their own cases, that they may understand the wiles of
the Devil, the fallacies of their own evil hearts, the counterfets of faith
and repentance, and new obedience, and that they may not be cousened with them.
This is the third thing.

Fourthly, they should all agree in the true manner of 4.
preaching. That which our Savior says of hearing, Take heed how ye hear,
Luke 8. 18. he means of preaching too, let your Ministers take heed how they
preach. Beloved, we that are the Ministers of God, we are to labor to turn
Lions into Lambs, and to transform the heart of man, to breed new creatures
unto God: and therefore it is not every kind of preaching will serve the turn.

1. Then Ministers should agree in preaching with the 1.
demonstration of the Spirit, and of power, as Paul says, not with the wisdom
of words, lest the cross of Christ be made of no effect, 1 Cor. 1. 17. q. d.
If we should preach wit, and learning, and eloquence, then the death of Christ
would be of no effect, that is, no man would be converted, Christ would be
offered to none; therefore we must preach nakedly, to flash the naked word into
men's consciences, that they may see, Thus says the Lord against their sinful
courses, thus says the Lord of their estates, this reproof is from the Lord,
this threat is from the Lord, thus says the Lord, you are a wretch, this is
thy sin, and this is thy cursed condition, and it is the Lord and not I that
does affirm it. It is said of Christ that he preached with authority, and not as
the Scribes, Matthew. 7. 29. What is it to come with authority? When a man
speaks from God to the consciences of men; as when a Constable comes in the
name of a King, I charge you in the Kings name; this is to come with authority.
Therefore we should not come with the affectation of wit, or of reading, of
fine and filed speaking. You will say, What, would you have us be foolish in our
preaching? I answer, Never object so, for it is the foolishness of preaching,
that saves them which believe, 1 Cor. 1. 21. as one says, we must preach
Christ crucified in a crucified phrase. The world would have gewgawes, and
garish garnishings: and why so? because the naked Word is contrary to flesh and
blood; like some eyes, they must have their silks and their cypresses to look
upon the Sun by, forsooth the Sun beams are too glorious and shining otherwise.
Pedestris oration, as Jerome speaks, a Minister must have a foot-speech, and not
speak a horseback, with trappings, and tassels, and deckings. Though this be
foolishness unto some, yet it is wisdom to them that are of God. We speak
wisdom to them that are perfect, 1 Cor. 2. 6. Mark, they that are perfect will
accept it to be wisdom it is foolishness only to children and sots, and such
as are not able to discern. God will have his mercies hidden under homely
outsides, that men that will stumble at them, may; as men hide treasure under
straw; as the woman of Baharim hid the two Worthies of Israel in a well under a
course sack. Can gallant preaching make people pluck out their right eyes, and
deny their own selves and ways? No, no, when the heart sees it has to do
with God, nothing but this will pull it down: away then with our own
affections, let us labor to come with God into our pulpits, that people may
see God dealing with them.

2. Ministers should agree to preach differencingly, to 2.
distinguish between the precious and the vile, the clean and the unclean; as
we must not bruise the broken Reed, but deal gently with it: so we must not
give childrens bread unto dogs, Matthew. 15. 29. we must not cast our seed into
fallow ground: but we must let the fallow ground feel our ploughes tearing:
we must not fling pearls before swine, nor bitter arrows against Christ his
Lambs. This were as if we should call for snow in Summer, and rain in harvest.
No, no, a whip for the Horse, and a bridle for the Ass, and a rod for the
Fools back, Prove. 26. 3. If people be like Mules, that will not understand, we
must put in a Bit into their mouths: If people will have their own ways, our
word must be fires, and hammers, and axes, and chesils, and swords, and
spears, that their bellies may tremble, and rottenness may enter into their
bones.

You will say, Why then belike we must have nothing in our mouths but hell and
damnation.

I answer, No, nothing but hell and damnation for the naught.

You will say, that will drive them to despair.

Why then let it: it were well if we had our people there, they must despair
before they come to mercy, as Hezekiah says, O Lord, I am oppressed, do thou
comfort me, or undertake for me, Isai. 38. 14. People must be oppressed with
our Sermons, we must lay load and burdens on their consciences, or they will
never be fitted for comforts and Christ's undertakings. True, the servants of
the Lord must be gentle unto all men, 2 Timothy 2. 24. and suffer the wickedness
of all very patiently, praying if at any time the Lord will give them
repentance, that the Devil may let them go. Nothing but hell and damnation is
not good; we must not be like James and John, that would needs be calling for
fire to come down from heaven to consume the Samaritans: no, we must be
long-suffering, but yet we must not let a wicked man live, but we must give him
his deaths wound by the stab of the Word, lest his blood be required at our
hands.

3. Ministers should agree in preaching with all their 3.
strength constantly, and duly, not quadragesimall Sermons only, or the like:
but the Apostle commands Ministers to preach in season, and out of season, 2 Timothy 4. 2. It is a wicked cavil of some, and it is the Devil that does
suggest it, It is not good to cloy the people, is it not fair to preach once a
Sabbath? must we have two, and a week day, too? This is overmuch, this is
unseasonable, that people should trudge and trot to Sermons when they should be
at their callings. Well, be it so, that it is out of season, we must preach
out of season too, all will be little enough. I am sure the Prophet Haggai the
word of the Lord came to him twice in one day, Hag. 2. 10, 20. Austin used
constantly to preach twice a day, as appears in his 2d Sermon upon the 88.
Psalm, nay in one place he says he preached thrice. Do not wonder my dear
brethren, si hodie ter sermonem, that I have preached three times this one day.
And he adds this besides, that it was not without cause, in his 33. Sermon to
his brethren in the Wilderness. Nay, the ancient Fathers preached every day in
the year, as it is well known to them that are used to read them. Chrysostom
in his Homilies upon Genesis, shows this almost in the beginning of every
Homily. And one time perceiving his hearers somewhat few: O (says he) every
hour in the day is seasonable for you to hear, nay the night is not
unseasonable. Paul prolonged himself unto midnight, says he, Acts 20. I pray
did the time hinder him? No though he were for a journey the next day, yet he
would not think much to break his nights rest. Another time preaching by
candlelight, O, says he, do you see this same lamp? take away the oil, you
put out the light; even so it is with the gifts of the Spirit, the dullness of
our hearing, the littleness of our profiting at once, our readiness to
decline except we be pricked forward, our aptness to forget God, the
commandment of having the word to dwell richly in us, the duty of meditating in
it day and night, do plainly enforce this preaching.

You will say, If Preachers should preach often, it would be but prating; we
cannot preach often and soundly.

I answer, it is false: for all that I see, the ablest Divines have preached
the most often, as Calvin, and Luther, and Wickliff, and others, and Mr.
Greenham; nay, Austin preached extempore that Sermon of his upon the 95. Psalm;
it seems that he expected his brother Severus to come and preach for him: but
his friend failing to come, he preached himself, as Dr Don relates the story:
So Basil also preaching two Sermons upon the works of God that he made in the
six days, Genes. 1. confesses he had no more premeditation, then that very
morning when he began to preach them. Thus many holy men by setting themselves
to be instant in Gods harvest time, have had such a door of utterance opened
unto them to speak the mystery of Christ, that like wise Scribes, they could,
as occasion was offered, bring forth out of their Treasuries, new and old. Who
are they that cry down often preaching, whatever color they would seem to
have, be such as would cover their own shame by backbiting the diligence of any
of their brethren. Like the Fox in the Fable, that because he wanted a tail
himself to hide his own filthiness, persuaded the other beasts to cut off
theirs too, pleading forsooth, O it is cumbersome, and weighty, and ye were
better be without; but the truth was, it was only to hide his own deformity,
which were it once in fashion to be without tails, should never be espied. A
worthy Divine cites an excellent admonition of Hierom to Calphurnius, upon the
like occasion to this, That if he wanted teeth himself, he should not be
envious against them which were able to eat. Beloved, I do urge an equality of
labor upon all; but this is most certain, that we are bound every one of us,
to honor the Lord with all our strength, and to study the edification and
salvation of our peoples souls with all our might. It is a shame that ever our
people should meet together at Church, and we not take compassion upon them,
to quicken them with some word of exhortation or other. The Evangelists note of
our Savior, that when he saw a company about him, he had compassion on them
and taught them, Mar. 6. 34. Whereupon was his Sermon in the mount, but because
he saw a company about him? Whereupon was that Sermon of our Savior, Matthew.
13? It was because there was a company of people before him. Certainly, if we
had compassion on our people, we would do so too: If we were not too worldly
and dead hearted our selves, as we are, we would never plead against it. Many
talk much of the Fathers, O the Fathers, the Fathers, and they do not love
these upstart Divines, but it were well they would learn of the Fathers.
Tertullian says, there was never any public meeting in his days, but before
the Congregation was dissolved, they were fed with a Sermon. Nay, Babington, a
reverend Bishop among us, That a Minister can no more enter into the
Congregation without a Sermon, and not be guilty, then Aaron could enter into
the Congregation at any time without death, in case he sounded not his Bells
when he entered. I might add many other particulars concerning the manner of
preaching, wherein all Ministers should agree, but these shall suffice for
fear I want time. 1. They should preach in the demonstration of the Spirit,
and of power. 2. They should preach differencingly, putting a distinction
between the precious and the vile. 3. They should preach constantly and to the
utmost of their endeavors. This is the fourth thing wherein all Ministers
should agree.

Fifthly, they should agree in seeking of the Lord for a 5
blessing on their labors, they should be earnest with God in the behalf of
the people. Alas! how else do they expect to convert any men unto God? For
when we preach, what do we do? We do but as Gehezi, who brought Elisha's
staff to raise the dead child. Poor man! he could not raise it: for though he
had Elisha's staff, he had not Elisha's spirit: So, my brethren, we do but
bring our Masters staff, and therefore we should entreat him to send down his
Spirit; otherwise the dead cannot stand up. We trim up a Sermon, and put we
trim it well, nevertheles what is this? but as the rigging of the sails, and
what will that do except the wind blow? So we should pray that the wind should
blow upon our sails, and then the ship shall go indeed, as our Savior Christ
says, The wind blows where it lists, Joh. 3. 8. The wind is free. When we
have preached all that ever we can, yet the wind is free, whether it will blow
or no. The Spirit of God is not tied to blow upon our endeavors, that they may
have good success. What are Organs without breath? What is Paul's planting, or
Apollos his watering, without Gods giving of the increase? The Apostle tells us
it is just nothing, 1 Cor. 3. 7. As a Divine makes the similitude; when one
heard what admirable victories Scanderbegs sword had wrought, he would needs
see it; and when he saw it, says he, This is but an ordinary sword: alas, what
can this do? Scanderbeg did him word, I have sent thee my sword, but I have
the Arm that did all by it: So, beloved, we have Christ's sword, but we have not
Christ's arm, and therefore let us pray him, that he would together with our
preaching, reach forth his arm, and that will do our people good; without
this, poor Preachers are we all, we may cut at men's sins, but they will never
off without him: we may show people the great things of the Gospel, we may
invite people to come in, to lay hold on eternal life; but O for Christ's arm!
and therefore we should study as much how to pray, as to preach. The want of
this is that which marres all. May be we preach well, but we are not earnest
with God to give a blessing, we do not bewail the sins of our people, we do
not lay to heart the things that provoke Almighty God, we do not get into the
case, wherein God may prove all our pains.

Sixthly, Ministers should all agree in the watching over 6.
the souls of men. Preaching to, and praying for our people, is not the whole
of a Ministers duty; but we should observe our people, and watch over them, as
the Apostle says; Obey them that have the rule over you, and submit your
selves, for they watch for your souls, Heb. 12. 17. And indeed how can we
preach unto the purpose, except we watch them that are committed to our charge?
as Solomon says, Be thou diligent to know the estate of thy flocks, and look
well to thy Herds, Pro. 27. 23. This was Paul's course to enquire into the
estate of people, how it fared with them. This was the news that he asked
after, his desire was to know how grace went forward in the Ephesians hearts. I
hear of your faith, says he, Ephesians. 1. 15. It seems he had been asking of it.
Thus Epaphras told him of the Colossians estate. Thus he learned by some of the
house of Chloe, the state of the Corinthians. Nay, all men will enquire and
hearken after the health of their friends; parents, if their children be at the
University, they will listen after them how they go on in learning. So should
the Angels of every Church, they should listen what courses are in their Town,
what sins break out, what corruptions appear, what proficiency the good ones
make, who grow, who decline, who stand at a stay, who go aside, and wax worse
and worse, that they may shape their preaching accordingly, that their words be
fitted in their mouth, that they may apt their rebukes, their exhortations,
their uses answerably. For then will their Sermons be like Apples of Gold in
Pictures of Silver. It is no curiosity in Ministers to be inquisitive into
their peoples courses. It is the Objection of ill-minded ones, say they, What
need Ministers busy themselves? they must have their tell-tales, we can do
nothing but they must hear of it. O beloved, we can never preach fruitfully if
we stop our ears with wax, and will not listen what our hearers do.

7ly, Ministers should agree in ordering their own conversations aright, it is
but a folly else to be a Minister, we do but make repentance dearer, and at a
higher price. A Bishop must be blameless, as the Steward of God, not
self-willed, not soon angry, not given to wine, nor to silthy lucre, Tit. 1. 7.
It is a double wickedness for a Minister to be wicked, to be a company-keeper,
to be a pot-companion, as God said to Aaron, Whosoever he be of thy seed in
their generation, that has any blemish, let him not approach to offer the
bread of his God, Levit. 21. 17. We can never do good, if we blemish our
selves with vice. True it is, the efficacy of the Word and Sacraments do not
depend upon the quality of the Minister; the seed sown in good ground may grow,
though the sower had a dirty hand. Gold is gold, though it be in the hand of a
thief; yet such is our weakness, that they are weak to us. People are apt to
respect the Word and Sacraments the less, when they see the Minister is not
holy, as we see in Elies wicked sons; for men abhorred the offerings of the
Lord, 1 Samuel 2. 17. Their eyes must be taught as well as their ears. Those
things, says Paul, which ye have heard and seen in me, do. Phil. 4. 9. Except
with Thomas in another case, they see, they will not believe. Let a Minister be
never so godly, he shall do good little enough. The Prophet Esaias, though a holy
man, yet he complains he labored in vain. Now if a godly man can do but
little good upon the most, much less can a wicked Minister. A true Minister
must be able to say as Gideon, Look on me, and do likewise, as I do, so shall
ye do, Judge. 7. 17. Ministers must be examples unto the Flock, 1 Pet. 5. 3.
First cast the beam out of thine own eye, and then shall thou see clearly to
cast out the moat out of thy brothers eye. As it is said of Ezra, Ezra had
prepared his own heart to seek the law of the Lord, and to do it, and to teach
in Israel, Ezra 7. 10. Our Savior Christ did and taught, as Luke speaks. This
is the course of a Minister indeed, to do his own Sermons. When a Minister
does not do what he teaches, this makes him a vile person; nay, this makes him
ridiculous. Like L^^ians Apothecary, who had medicines in his shop to cure the
cough, and told others that he had them, and yet was troubled with it himself.
With what a forehead can thou stand in a Pulpit, and publish the laws of
God, and to undertake the charge of souls, that when thine own naked nesse
appears, when thy tongue is of a larger size then thy hands, thy ministry is
divided against it self, thy courses gives thy doctrine the lie; thou say
that men must be holy, and thy deeds do declare thy mouths hypocrisy, thou
do more mischief then an hundred others, as ` Peter says of wicked
Ministers, Many will follow their pernicious ways, 2 Peter 2. 2. one Minister
shall have many followers. A good Minister shall hardly get two or three to
follow him. But when a Minister is wicked, he shall have many that will follow
him. From the Prophets of Jerusalem, profaneness is gone forth into all the
Land, Jerem. 23. 15. If the springs be tainted, that taint runs forth into
all the streams. People think themselves safe on an Ale-bench, when they have
gotten the Parson with them; this hardens their hearts a thousand times more.
But a true Minister is a godly man. Now when Ministers agree in godliness,
this is another branch of this unity.

Eighthly and lastly, Ministers should agree in concord 8
and in amity, even as all dear fellow servants, as Paul says of Epaphras,
the Minister of the Colossians, As ye also learned of Epaphras our dear
fellow servants, who is for you a faithful Minister of Christ, Coloss. 1. 7.
Being to write to the Colossians, ye see what a tender care he has of
Epaphras, he labors to commend him to his people, that they may regard him the
more. It is an horrible sin when one Minister will gird at another that is
faithful, and that in the presence of some of his people. This helps the
Devil to harden peoples hearts against him, that he cannot do the good that
otherwise he might do; when other Ministers will revile him, and traduce him,
and speak filthy words, such as their malice does prompt them with, Paul did
not thus. When he knew Timothy was to go to Philippi, he does most dearly
commend him unto them. O, says he, I have no man like minded, who will
naturally care for your estate, Philip. 2. 20. So our Savior Christ, how much
did he countenance and back John the Baptists Ministry, to the encouraging of
all that heard him? Among them that are born of women, there has not risen a
greater then John Baptist, Matthew. 11. 11. O it is an excellent thing when
Ministers do not envy one another, when they love one another, and will live
together in blessed Harmony: Thus ye see what this unity should be.

The Reasons of this point, why Ministers should all agree thus, and be all as
one, are:

First, because this makes Ministers amiable in their 1.
peoples eyes, it commends their Ministeries unto the consciences of their
hearers, as the Prophet Isaiah says, How beautiful upon the mountains are
the feet of him that brings glad tidings, the publishers of peace, etc. Isa.
52. 7. You will say, How is that? How comes his feet to be beautiful? It
follows in the eighth verse, Thy watchmen shall lift up their voice, with a
voice together shall they sing. Mark, that was it that made his feet
beautiful; because all the watchmen were of one note, they sung with one voice
together: look as one preached, so preached another, one did not pull down what
another built up, one did not preach more pleasing doctrine to the flesh then
another; but they all sung in one Tune, they all were of one heart.

Secondly, as it makes the Ministry more beautiful 2.
and comely, so it makes it the more powerful, when the Ministers are all of
one mind in the Lord, when they all draw one way, all walk by the same Rule,
all set themselves to do good, and to promote one another good. I say, this
makes the Ministry the more powerful and profitable. The Apostle speaking of
an ignorant man coming into the Church to hear the Minister preach, he shows
how powerful the Word may be unto him, 1 Cor. 14. 25. O says he, the secrets
of his heart are made manifest, and so falling down on his face, he worships
God; that is, the Sermon is made effectual unto him, and turns his wretched
heart. But observe now, how this comes to pass, the Text shows in the four
and twentieth verse, it is by reason of the unity of the Ministers, He is
convinced of all, he is judged of all; that is, all the Ministers were of one
note, they all were in one consent, one did not preach looser doctrine then
another, one told him he was a very wretch, and another told him he was a very
wretch, and a third convinced him he was a very wretch; all had a blow at him:
O thought he, I, I, I am a very wretch indeed; this burst his heart. If he
could have heard any one of them preach easier doctrine, may be that would
have given his conscience some foolish ease, and so the man had gone away never
the better, but when he was convinced of all, and judged of all, this strikes
him dumb. So, beloved, when a man can go into no Church, but every where he
is met with, all the Ministers condemn him, all their lives condemn him, and
all their Sermons condemn him to the pit of hell, and he can scramble comfort
no where; if the man belong to God, this is the readiest way to beat him down,
and subdue his heart. On the contrary side, when a man is wounded at one
Ministers Sermon, by and by he drops into another, and there he catches hold
of some ease: this makes him go on in his sins, and to blind his eyes
against the truth. It is a great stumbling block unto the people this very
thing.

Thirdly, as it makes the Ministry more powerful, 3.
so it brings more glory unto God. As it is said of John the Baptist, that when
our Savior did commend him, and made the people see, that he was of John's
mind, and that he held the same Tenets, and that he would not speak against a
tittle that John had delivered, but testified his unity with him; And made it
appear what a reverend esteem he had of him: says he, He is a Prophet, and
more then a Prophet. Ye shall see how this brought glory to God. The Text
says, When the people heard this, and the Publicans, they justified God, being
baptized with the Baptism of John. Luke 7. 29.

The use of this is, first, to condemn such as envy their Use 1.
fellow-Ministers, and will not be in the unity of mind, and heart, and life
with them. In the most, the Proverb is too true, Figulus figulo invidet. One
potter hates another, one Tradesman envies another custom, so, one Minister,
another: if there be a Minister that desires to power out his soul in the
doing of good, in the taking of pains, in the discharging of his Conscience,
there are some that will envy such a one, their hearts rise up against him;
nay, not only so, but the worst Enemy that Jeremy had, was Pashur, one of his
own Coat, Jer. 20. 2. The sorest adversary that Amos had, was Amaziah, a Priest
of Bethel, who would never leave heaving at him until he had gotten him away,
Amos 7. 12. and why so! because he would not preach such pleasing Doctrine as
he. Forsooth, the Land was not able to bear Amos his words, he Preaches as if
he would scare people out of their wits. He preaches Schismatically, and as
if he loved to be singular. The chief Priests were furious against our
Savior Christ, because his Ministry was more blessed then theirs was, nay, they
hated him more then Pilate, Pilate a very Pagan, his Conscience told him he
found no fault in him, Why what evil has he done? Their envy against Christ
was so palpable, that he did discover it. He knew that for envy they had
delivered him unto him. So when all the Country know in their Consciences that
such and such teach the ways of God sincerely, set themselves to root out
sin, and to save souls, nay, the very Drunkards you shall hear them say, I, I,
he is a good man, Gods blessing on his heart, he tells us our faults, we may
do what we list for all such and such, but he tells us of our faults, and
God help us to amend them, and when they are sick, they would rather have such
a Ministers prayers, then twenty of other Ministers, that will soothe them up,
and be hailefellow with them: Whereas there be many of our own Coat, that are
implacable against a Minister, that labors to be faithful. How contrary is
this unto the Rule? The Ministers of God should be all one, and if one be
godly, all should be, if one painful, all should be so, if one preach home
to the conscience, all should do so, they should all live as Brethren. What
says our Savior Christ? Ye are the Salt of the Earth, but if the Salt has
lost its savor, wherewith shall it be salted? it is thenceforth good for
nothing, but to be cast out, and to be trodden underfoot of men, Matthew. 5.
13. That is, Salt may season others, but if it have lost its savor, nothing
can salt it.

A Minister is of an excellent calling, appointed to season men's hearts, but if
he have lost his savor, he can never truly be seasoned again, nothing can
do him good. An evil Minister, is a more desperate forlorn man than any else.

Secondly, Another use is, that all that are the Ministers Use 2.
of God would be hence stirred up to be all of one mind, all drawing one way,
all bending our forces to one and the same end, the glory of God, and the
salvation of our people. Its a fine comely thing to fee any Brethren in unity.
Behold how good and how pleasant it is for Brethren to dwell together in unity.
It is like the precious ointment upon the head that ran down upon the beard,
even Aarons beard, that went down to the skirts of his garments: as the dew of
Hermon, and as the dew that descended upon the mountains of Zion, for there
the Lord commended his blessing, even life for evermore, Psalm. 133. 1, 2, 3. I
say this is a very comely thing, to see any brethren to dwell together in
unity, it is like the perfume of Aaron, that made all his garments
fragrantsweet, it is like the dews of Hermon and Zion, that made all the ground
fruitful, this is that which has the Lords blessing annexed to it, it is an
excellent means unto eternal life. As the Apostle says, If there be any
consolation in Christ, if any comfort of love, if any fellowship of the Spirit,
if any bowels and mercies: Fulfill ye my joy, that ye be like-minded,
having the same love, being of one accord, of one mind, Philip. 2. 1, 2. if it
be so necessary for Brethren to be united; how much more for Brethren in the
Ministry? of all men, Ministers have most reason to be of one mind, because
we are to teach union unto others. Besides, if we desire to do what we are
commanded to do, we shall have enemies enough in the world. Our Tribe is a
hated Tribe. Of all Offices, the office of a reprover is the most unwelcome.
Paul was counted an enemy, because he told the Galatians the truth. Micaiah
was hated because he dealt truly with Ahab: people love their lusts, as their
members, yea, as themselves: Ergo of all men we are most hated. Every man is
believed in his own profession but we; People do not hate Tailors that make
them a good garment, nor a Shoo-maker that makes them a good Shoe, nor a Cook
that makes them a good Feast, nor a Physician that makes them a good potion,
nor a good Lawyer that makes them a good suite, though these do but provide
for the body, and yet we that provide for peoples souls, if we make them a
good Sermon that would save their souls for ever, so they would obey it; we
are hated for our labor. Ergo, when Moses came to speak of Levi, that were the
Ministers of Israel, he prays God, that God would deliver them out of the
hands of their enemies, Lord smite through the loins of them that hate him,
Deuteronomy. 33. 11. I say we have many enemies in the world, and therefore we had
need to hang together, who ever be at odds, we should stick close. Our
message is hardly believed, and therefore we had need to be all of one mind.
The word which we preach is adverse to flesh and blood, and therefore we had
need all jointly to obey it, otherwise how do we think that we shall
persuade any others?

Force, the more united the more strong. O if we would all join forces in one,
we might make all our Parishes quake! all the wicked round about, their very
hearts would be ready to fail them, if every Pulpit did rowze them. If they
could come in no Church, but they were made to sit upon thorns, I verily
believe, few would have any heart to go on in their evil doings.

Thirdly, another Use is, how we see it is a very useful Use 3.
and a profitable thing, that one good Minister should now and then come and
help another, and preach for another, that our people may see our consent, that
we all preach the same thing, and that is not our private preaching, but all
the Ministers that are of God, are just of the same mind: This made the
Apostle, whenever he was to write to a people, that he knew would be
somewhat backward to believe them, he would join other Ministers with him, as
consenting together with him. Indeed when he wrote unto Timothy, he would not
do it, for he knew that he did not need, he knew the faithfulness of his
heart. But when he writ to the Corinthians, where false Apostles had been, and
had made many of them to doubt, he joined Sosthenes with him, as it were
confirming the same thing, 1 Cor. 1. 1. when he wrote to the Galatians, he
told them he had Peter on his side, and Barnabas and Titus, and James and
John, and how the Apostles gave unto him the right hand of Fellowship, Gal. 2.
1. 9. He writing to the Philippians, he joins Timothy with him. Phil. 1. 1.
And so writing to Philemon, about a thing, that though he hoped Philemon would
do, yet because he knew he might have many carnal reasons against it, he
joins another with him, Philem. 1. This is of very good use, when one good
Minister comes and backs another Ministry. For as it is with men-pleasing
Ministers, that make as if the way to heaven were easier than it is, people
hope that other Ministers will come, and confirming it, make it good. Ezekiel. 3.
6. O they love such a Doctrine alife, and they hope there will be more of that
mind: So when they hear a strict Minister, that delivers the Word to them as
it is, and as they shall find it at last day, tush, this is so uncooth, that
they hope that it is but the opinion of their precise Minister, and that no
body else is of his mind. Now when God shall bring a cloud of witnesses, it is
I say, of very good use. I confess that when a Minister speaks the truth,
though no body else come to set it on besides him, he shall be a witness
against all the people that will not believe, and vexed at the voice of his
preaching. Noah condemned all the world, albeit there were none but he. But
yet symphony and agreement, and the consent of the Ministers of God, is an
Ordinance of God when it may conveniently be had.

Thus I have spoken of this second point of Doctrine, of the unity of
Ministers, To the Angel of the Church in Sardis. I acknowledge this point is
not so much for the general profit of you all. But you must bear with me, for
handling of it. We shall come now to you ere long. For I am sure, if any
portion of Scripture may do us good, in these dead times, the Treating of this
Epistle may. And yet it is not lost time, to speak unto the Ministers, if by
any means I may provoke my self, and my Brethren, to the abounding in the
unity of the Spirit, and of Faith, and heart and mind, for the further
spreading and enforcing of good.

Revel. 3. 1. And unto the Angel of the Church in Sardis, write: these things,
says he that has the seven Spirits of God, and the seven Stars. I know thy
works, that thou have a name, that thou live and art dead.
And unto the Angel of the Church in Sardis, write. YE have had two Doctrines
from hence, concerning Gods Ministers: I told you there is one more, and then I
have done, and so will proceed. The Doctrine is this:

That a Minister may be in fault, that the people are dead, that they have no
more heart to good things, that they are so ignorant, so cold, so ungodly, so
worldly, so vain as they are.

I say the Minister may be in the fault; The point is very clear from this
place. The Lord being to reprove the people here of Sardis, for their deadness
in Religion, he directs his reproof to their Minister. To the Angel of the
Church in Sardis, write: I know thy works, that thou have a name, that thou
live and art dead.

He accuses the Minister for the deadness of the Church, that was committed
to his charge, he means the Church, but he speaks to the Minister. You will
say, how do ye prove that he means the Church? I Answer, there be three
places that do manifest the same. The one is Revel. 1. 4. There John tells us,
that he indeed writes to the Churches, for that in the inscription of every
Epistle, the Minister only be named. John to the seven Churches in Asia. So
that this latter is sent to the Church that is in Sardis. John means it to the
Church, and not only to the Minister. A second place is Rev. 1. 11. what thou
see write to the seven Churches in Asia, to Ephesus, to Smyrna, to Pergamus,
to Thyatira, to Sardis, to Philadelphia, and Laodicea. The third is, the
conclusion of every Epistle. Where it is said thus: He that has an ear, let
him hear what the Spirit says unto the Churches, Rev. 3. 6. and so it is at
the closure of every Letter, to all the rest of the Churches, and therefore the
Holy Ghost there accuses the Church of Sardis of deadness. I know thy works
that thou art dead, and yet he directs it to the Minister of the Church, as a
thing that concerns him, and that may be laid to his charge, and that he is
faulty in. To the Angel of the Church in Sardis write. I know thy works that
thou have a name, that thou live and art dead. That is, thou have a
dead-hearted people, and thou art the cause of it: Thou do not do thy duty,
thou do not do what lies in thee for to quicken them. But thou art too
remiss in thy Ministry, and therefore their deadness may be imputed unto
thee. Thus you see the Doctrine is very plain from the words. The good or bad
estate of a people depends much upon the Minister. Commonly we see it so
fall out, as the Prophet Hosea said, Like people, like Priest, Hos. 4. 9. Like
sheepherd like sheep. Such as the builder is, such is the building, as is the
Husbandman, so is the husbandry. This we may find throughout all these
Epistles, where the Minister is commended, the people are commended. Where the
Minister is taxed, the people are taxed. And therefore they stand and fall
together, they swim and sink together, a wicked Minister, a wicked people, an
ignorant Minister, an ignorant people; and so a good Minister, the people
either are a good people, or else they are Monsters; nay, if the Minister be
good, though the world in his Parish be never so wretched, yet he has a good
people, the Church of God in his Parish, is very good, commonly.

Well then, we have gotten our point out. The Minister may be in fault, that
the people are dead, I do not say, it is always thus. For first, the Minister
may be lively, and yet the people dead. The Lord tells us that Ezekiel had a
stiffehearted people, Ezekiel. 2. 4. and yet he was not to be blamed, themselves
were in all the fault. So Isaiah had a dullhearted people: All the day long
have I stretched out my hands to a disobedient and gainsaying people, Romans 10.
21. and therefore I do not say it was always thus.

Nay, Secondly, sometimes the people are the cause of the Ministers deadness.
The Jews hardness of heart under the Ministry of Jonas, was the cause why
Jonas had no heart to go unto Niniveh. O thought he, if Israel will not hear
me, much less will Niniveh hear me. Thus the people deaded Jeremiah at one
time, that he had little or no heart to preach for a fit. Then I said, I will
not make mention of him, nor speak any more in his name, Jer. 20. 9. Thus
Ezekiel was deaded a while, by his people too. I came to them of the Captivity
at Telabib, and I sat where they sat, and remained there astonished among them
seven days, Ezekiel. 3. 15. The Lord was fain to rowze his heart up, and to tell
him he would require their blood of him, before he could pluck up a good
heart to Preach livelily among them; The people deaded him. Nay more,

Thirdly, sometimes the Lord locks up his good Ministers, and suffers them to
be straightened in their utterance, and other gifts. May be the people are ready
to lay all the blame upon their Ministers. O how tongue-tyed are they! and it
is their negligence, and torpor: Whereas it is for the peoples sins, thus the
Lord locked up Ezekiel, for the peoples sins. I will make thy tongue cleave to
the roof of thy mouth, and thou shall be dumb, and shall not be to them
areprover, for they are a rebellious house, Ezekiel. 3. 26. Nay,

Fourthly, Sometimes peoples sins are the cause why their Ministers are quite
dead, and have no life at all in them, the Lord sends foolish Ministers among
them, merely because of their sins. So it was in Hosea's time. The Prophet
is a fool, the spiritual man is mad, for the multitudes of thy iniquity, Hos.
9. 7. Mark, they had fools for their Ministers; fools, besotted Ministers,
giddy Ministers, Ministers that were wild, and like mad men; you will say,
these were the causes of much sin to the people: No, says the Text, the
peoples sins were the cause of such Ministers. The Prephet is a fool, the
spiritual man mad, for the multitude of thine iniquity. These four exceptions
then there been of the point. Otherwise the point is too too true, that the
Minister may be in fault that the people are dead.

You see here the Church of Sardis was grown dead, and the Lord faults the
Angel of the Church for it. I know thy works that thou art dead. The like is
said of Laodicea. Loadicea, was grown horrible lukewarm, no zeal of God, they
were neither hot nor cold, and the Lord imputes it to the Angel of Laodicea: I
know thy works, that thou art neither hot nor cold, and therefore I will spue
thee out of my mouth, Revel. 3. 14, 15, 16. The same is said of the Church of
Ephesus, that they had left their first love, and yet the Lord hits the Angel
in the teeth with it. I have somewhat against thee, because thou have left thy
first love, Rev. 2. 4. Beloved, the last day I spoke of the Ministers concord
and unity, to the Angel of the Church, all the Ministers should be as one man,
as if they made up one and the same Angel. And therefore our Savior Christ
made choice of Brethren, and Kinksfolkes. Simon and Andrew his Brother, James
and John his Brother. St. Peter's bark is a fisher-boat, not a man of War, it
is not furnished with mortal Engines, but only with nets to catch fish. If
Peter were reproved for drawing upon Malchus, what reproof had he been worthy
of, if he had drawn upon any of his fellows? this was the Theme, that we
spoke of the last day. Now then let us speak of the influence that a Minister
has in his people, he may be the cause of his peoples deadness, if he do
not take heed. And this he may be three ways; first, by his not preaching;
secondly, by his dead manner of preaching; thirdly, by his dead manner of Life,
and Conversation.

First, I say, by his not preaching, ye know the Word of God is the word of
life, Phil. 2. 16. The Word is that which quickens the heart, as David says,
Thy Word has quickened me, Psalm. 119. 50. Now when Ministers do not preach
it, this deads peoples hearts. We see this in those places where the due
preaching of the Word is wanting, people are dead to all goodness; nay, they
that had some quickness in them before, do lose them more and more: As
Solomon says, Where there is no vision the people perish, Prove. 29. 18. that
is, where preaching is defective, the people die, they are spiritually dead in
trespasses, and in sins. Can a man live without bread, or without food? no more
can people live without constant preaching. The Word is the bread of life, now
when this is not broken unto people, they must needs dye. Mark, how Zachary
describes them that are without preaching, They are such as fit in darkness,
and in the shadow of death, Luke 1. 79. that is, they are blind and ignorant,
and livelesse, dead while they live, they are wicked, and abominable, in the
power of Satan, under the wrath of God, strangers from the life of God; such
Ministers as do not preach constantly, they are soule-murtherers, they are
guilty of their peoples blood, they do not give them that which should quicken
them up unto eternal life, they should quicken them up unto newness of life,
but they do not; they should power in the words of eternal life into their
hearts, but they do not; people are naturally dead to Prayer, and dead to
communion with God, and dead to all holiness, they have no heart to pureness
and righteousness of walking, and such Ministers do not study to revive them.

Secondly, as a Minister may be the cause of his peoples deadness by his not
Preaching, so he may be the cause of their deadness by his Preaching, when the
manner of it is dead. Preaching may be dead in the manner of it, 7 ways,

First, When it is too general, when they preach only in general. That which
we say is very good, for the general, but we do not apply our selves, to
every particular man's Conscience, this ^eads peoples hearts. Beloved, it is
particular Preaching that does people good. When Nathan told David, Thou are
the man, 2 Samuel 12. 7. this stirred David's heart. When Peter had said to his
hearers, Ye have crucified Christ, Act. 2. 36. This pricked them to the heart.
General preaching cannot quicken. First, because generals cannot act. Actio
est singularium, as we say. Its only a particular, works. Let a man preach
home and in particular, and this will work on the hearers. This made Michah a
powerful Preacher, when he preached particularly to his peoples Conscience.
Truly, I am full of power by the Spirit of the Lord, and of judgment, and of
might, to declare unto Jacob his transgression, and to Israel his sin, Mich. 3.
8. this made him a powerful Prophet to quicken up his people, because he told
every man his sin, and smote every man conscience for his transgression. No man
is stirred till he feels his case laid open, till he sees the Minister
beats upon him, and hit him; till the Minister treads hard upon his toes, he
will never cry out.

Secondly, General Preaching leaves the Sermon to the people to apply it; now
the people will never apply it while the world stands. Nay, David himself would
not apply, as long as Nathan dealt with him in general, as long as Nathan was
speaking of a man in the clouds, a rich man that had wronged a poor man,
David's heart was as whole as a fish, till he came to Thou art Him. Now he
cries out, I have sinned. Nathan was fain to make application. For David would
never have done it else: Will a truantly Boy ever whip himself? the Master may
lay the rod before him, but except the Master lay it on, he will go scot-free
if he can. The words of the wise are as goods and as nails fastened by the
Masters of Assemblies, Eccles. 12. 11. Mark, the Masters of Assemblies must
fasten them into the post, lay the nails by, the post it self will never knock
them in; So, though the Sermon be never so good a nail; yet he must knock it
in, the people will never do it. The Prophet Jehu must come and say to
Jehosaphat, Should thou help the ungodly? Wrath is upon thee from the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 19. 2. He fastened in the nail; though Jehosaphat were a good man, yet
the Prophet knew he would not do it. Nay, people are so far from applying the
word unto themselves, that they will apply it to any body else rather than to
themselves, the Minister met with such a one to day, there was a lesson for
him: But none will say, this was for me, and I am a vile wretch, and vengeance
hangs over me, unless I do amend, and therefore certainly general Peaching,
is a dead manner of preaching.

Thirdly, General Preaching is confused, when Ministers tell people they must
repent, and believe, and serve God, and be godly, and carry themselves well,
in all their places and callings. When they do thus in general, this is like,
as if the trump should give an uncertain sound, like the noise in a battle, a
confused noise, as the Prophet speaks, Esa. 9. 5. Like the confusion in
Ephesus, Great is Diana of the Ephesians, they kept a great stir, Act. 19.
32. the Text says, The assembly was confused, and the more part knew not
wherefore they were come together, so while we preach only in the general,
Great is the Lord Jesus Christ, and we are great sinners, and great is the
need of repentance, but we neither tell the people how, nor when, nor who, nor
what: may be our Sermons may keep some pudder in men's Consciences, but people
have no distinct edification, they go away and say, O it was a very godly
Sermon, I pray God give us grace to follow it! But no man is the better. They
hear admirable things about repentance, but they are not taught how to go
about it, there they are at a loss. They remember gracious things about the
serving of God, and about a good Conscience, and the like. But they know not
how in the earth to set about these things to any purpose, if ever we would
quicken our peoples hearts, we must let them see distinctly, the will of God
concerning them, the particular means, and helps, and signs of it, the
particular motives, and Arguments to it, the particular circumstances of it,
the particular hindrances; lets, and impediments of doing of it, and you can
never do the will of God, as long as ye do thus and thus, and this course
will break your neck, this practice of yours will be your utter undoing: when
people hear distinct Preaching, this does them good, if any thing will.
General Preaching is like the setting of good Physic before the Patient,
without giving him directions for the taking of it.

Fourthly, General Preaching is deceitful, Est dolus in generalibus, as we
say, there is deceit in the generals, we Preach that people must love God,
and fear him, and thank him, and they must be new men, and they must leave
their sins, and they must Pray, and hear the Word, and they must do every
thing to Gods glory. Now mark what deceit there is in such preaching as this;
this is in the general: People go away, and deceive themselves in the
particular. They think they serve God, and they love God, or else they were not
worthy to live; they think they say their Prayers every day, and that they are
thankful unto him, they never eat their meat, but they say Grace, they never
recover out of si^knesse, but they bless God; Whereas if we should deal with
these men in particular, it would appear, they are haters of God, they are
graceless and unthankful wretches; they never prayed true Prayer to God in
all their lives: hence it is that people generally like a general Minister,
Why? they can go along with such a man and be heart-whole. But now if a
particular Minister should come and tell them they are worldly, and mockers of
God and all goodness, as they are in very good deed; they cannot abide him,
they would say wherein? Such were the Jews under the overly Ministry of the
Priests. When Malachy dealt particularly with them, says he, Ye have
despised the name of the Lord: Wherein say they? Mal. 1. 6. Ye have wearied the
Lord with your words: Wherein, say they, have we wearied him? Mal. 2. 17. Ye
have robbed God: Wherein have we robbed him, say they? Mal. 3. 8. Your words
have been stout against the Lord, yet their answer was, Wherein have we spoken
so much against the Lord? Mal. 3. 13. Alas, alas! their Priests had taught them
only in general, and therefore when the Prophet was to deal particularly
with them, and told them what vile courses they took, they cried, wherein? and
whereof? and why do you say so of us? he was forced to come to particulars.
Otherwise they would have gone away and blessed themselves.

Fifthly, General Preaching lets people see their sins if they will. But
beloved this will do no good, if we let you see your sins, if you will; we
must make you see your sins. Son of man, cause Jerusalem to know her
abominations, Ezekiel. 16. 2. We must not only let you understand, if ye will,
it is said of the good Priests, that they caused the people to understand, Neh.
8. 8. Naturally people love their own selves and their lusts, and they will not
see them till they needs must, they do not love to be precise, they will not
willingly yield that they must be so strict, and so mortified, as the Lord
Jesus will have them, if they mean to be saved, and therefore if they can put
it off they will; show them there is a difference between people and people,
some are the people of God, and some are the children of the devil, some are
the redeemed of Christ, and some have nothing to do with Christ, some are
clean, and some are unclean; though we show them the difference between these
two, they will shut their eyes if they can. General preaching does no more, it
shows them these things. But may be neither the Minister nor they will see for
all that, now we must cause them to discern whether they will or no, if we can.
They shall teach my people the difference between the holy and profane, and
cause them to discern between the unclean, and the clean, Ezekiel. 44. 23. that
is, tell them this is unclean, and this is clean; such and such persons are
profane, and such are holy: Hold it before their eyes, cause them to discern;
this is the way to quicken men's hearts. Now General preaching does not do
thus. It only puts the truth before men, that they may see if they will, but
if they will not, it does not urge them, this deads our people, and does them
no good, for people will not be awakened, as long as they can shift it.

Sixthly, General Preaching is a-loft and a-loofe off, particular preaching is
the most close, and the most plain, and the most sensible preaching of all, if
any Preaching will sink into peoples heads, this will: it makes the truth even
sensible after a sort, as King James said of a Reverend Bishop of this Land,
that is now dead and gone: This man, says he, Preaches as if death were at my
back. So a press Preacher preaches, as if death were at a man's back, as if
judgment and hell were at a man's back, he brings the point home to the souls
door, (...). Arist. Metaph. l. 1.
Generals are not plain. Ignorant people are most led by sense. People may
live seven years under a general Teacher, and be never the nearer, such a
Ministry breeds only swimming knowledge, it does not lay the Truth at every
man's door; may be they get knowledge, but their knowledge does them little
good: it is said of the good Levites, that they taught the people the good
knowledge of the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 30. 22. That is, such a knowledge of the Lord,
as made the people good, they laid the Truth at every man's door, they preached
to the people as if (...) were at their backs. They did livelily teach them,
(...) inform them, this did them good. General preaching is like an Arrow
shot at rovers, that does not hit the mark, as if the Minister would lay his
Sermon on his Cushion, and never dart it into his peoples bosoms. Alas
Brethren! if people do not feel our points at their backs, and like spears
in their sides, and swords in their bellies, they will feel nothing, it is
naked preaching, when we make men's estates even visible before their eyes,
when we preach so of Gods wrath, as if they saw it, when we so set out
Christ, as if he were palpable to men's senses, this quickens and no other, as
Paul says: O foolish Galatians, who has bewitched you, that ye should not
obey the truth, before whose eyes Jesus Christ has been evidently set forth,
and crucified among you? Gal. 3. 1. Mark, how sensibly he had preached Christ
to them, even as if he had held him before their eyes, and therefore he says,
they were even bewitched that they could not see them; q. d. how is it possible
that ye should not see him, that ye should not obey the truth, where it has
been so sensibly preached unto you, and painted to the life, even before your
very eyes! If any Preaching will quicken, this will, and therefore General
Preaching, that will not do the deed.

Seventhly, General Preaching is against the nature of Preaching, for
wherefore is preaching, but to take the word of God, and apply it unto people
in particular, it is called the dividing of the word of truth aright, 2 Timothy 2.
15. When the Minister is a good carver, to divide to every man his portion:
Conviction to the ignorant; reproof to the offender; terror to the obstinate;
comfort to the broken heart; judgment to the wicked; mercy to the Saints, and
true penitent souls; Then the Minister applies it unto every man. Preachers
are Gods Harvest-men, as our Savior Christ says: Pray ye the Lord of the
Harvest, that he would send forth laborers* (...) his Harvest, Matthew. 9. 38.
Now Harvest-men, what* (...)? Do they only bring a sith or a sickle into the
field, and give a slash, a general slash, at one Corn of the field, as though
that would fetch down all the Corn? No, they apply it to the Corn, to reap it
down. The preaching of a General Sermon is but a sickle, now except it be
applied to all the people, it is not the way to reap in Gods harvest. Preachers
are called Christ's seed-men: The sower went out to sow his seed, Luke 8. 5. Now
what does the seedsman? does he only bring in a sack of seed, and power it
all on a heap in the field? does he think that every spot of ground will draw
it unto it self? No, he sprinkles it, and disperses it abroad, that every Lea
may have its part. Whence comes that foolish conceit, that reading is
Preaching, a tenet which many hold? the truth is, it comes from hence, because
General preaching is made by most Ministers to serve the turn; Now, if this
were Preaching, reading were Preaching indeed: But this is no preaching,
preaching is the opening of the Word of God, and the applying of it, according
as every man has need. The not doing of this leaves poor people in their
hardness and deadness of heart. This is the first. General Preaching is such
a manner of preaching, as leaves the heart dead.

Secondly, Moral Preaching is a dead manner of preaching. When Ministers
preach honest matter, but do not go to the quick, they strike at the boughs:
They preach against Drunkenness, and intemperance, and malice, and hatred, and
tale-bearing, and lying, and covetousness, and making of shows, it is very
good to preach against these things, and we must too, and let them know they
are far from the Kingdom of God that live in these or any other such lusts.
But alas! this is only to strike at the boughs. If we would awake the
Conscience indeed, we must preach deeper then so. The axe is laid at the root
of the tree, Mat. 3. 10. John the Baptist was a lively Preacher; now the Text
shows he did not only strike at the boughs, but he laid his axe at the
root of the tree. When Ministers preach only good moral matter, this kind
of preaching does not quicken.

First, Because Moral preaching does not hit all, many are very Moral people,
that have not one whit of grace in their hearts. True, this may hit some. Paul
told Felix of his intemperance, and how that there was a day of Judgment to
judge all such persons, this made him tremble. Felix trembled, says the Text,
Act. 24. 25. I say, moral preaching may startle some, but it does not startle
all. Many Heathens have been sober and temperate, and true in their speeches;
and just in their dealings; and loving in their carriages; and painful in
their callings; as Paul says, they have done by Nature, the things contained
in the Law. Now ye know the Heathens are without grace, and are not acquainted
with God, neither have they any communion with God, Power out thy wrath upon
the Heathen, that know thee not, Jer. 10. 25. Mark, they have no communion with
God, they do not know Jesus Christ, nor the mysteries of saving Grace. So that
a man may be very finely moral, and yet be without grace. Now then, if a
Minister should content himself with good moral teaching, many would go away,
and conclude well of their own estates, though they have no grace.

Secondly, Moral preaching, those that it does hit, it does them indeed some
good, but it does them not the good, it never quickens them up unto eternal
life; it seems to civillize their lives, and to reform them a little, but it
never renews them, neither does it put them into Jesus Christ: Let a Drunkard
hear he is a damned wretch, if he do not give over his drunkenness, if this
Sermon hit him, what does he say? why then I will be sober, and I will never
be a drunkard more. And I can tell you, this is very rare too. But suppose it
be, he may go to hell for all this. Suppose we do make all our people
moral, which were a fine thing if we could, but grant we could, this does
not quicken them together with Christ; No, no, a man must see his vile nature,
and loathe himself, and be made to deny himself, to mortify his carnal
reason, to put off his corrupt will, to feel his cursed condition in himself,
to be emptyed of himself, that Christ may be all in all to him, that he may
be led by the Spirit of Christ, and guided by the word of Christ, that he may
hang only upon the promises of God in Christ, that his mind may be taken up
with Christ, and his thoughts and affections daily be labored to be fixed
upon the things above, none are alive unto God, but such, Now Moral preaching
will never do this.

God-forbid, I should speak against Moral preaching absolutely, or against
Morality it self, it is a very good thing; Who will not commend Abimelech for
the integrity of his heart, that he pleaded before God? Genesis 20. 5. Ye know
how the Lord himself liked of it; who will not say but that the young man in
the Gospel, was a very commendable man, that had observed all these from his
youth: Nay, the Text says, That Christ, in some sense, did love him, Mark. 10.
21. Daniel told Nebuchadnezzar what an excellent thing Morality was. O! says
he, If thou will break off thy sins, and be righteous, he means Moral
righteousness toward man; if thou will show mercy to the poor, it may be
God will lengthen thy tranquillity, Dan. 4. 27. The Prophet Esaias tell the
Moabites, what a deal of good they might do to themselves, if they would but
be morally honest: says he, Take Counsel, execute Judgment, hide the
outcasts, let mine outcasts be with thee, Esa. 16. 3. Q. d. If thou will be
kind and loving to my people, thou shall fare the better. When the King of
Babylon punished the wickedness of Tire, the Lord rewarded them very richly
for it. I have given him the Land of Egypt for his labor, says God, because
he wrought for me, Ezekiel. 29. 20. Moral goodness is commended of God, as well
as spiritual goodness in Jesus Christ; Nay, it is needful that Ministers
should insist very much in pressing of moral duties, and the godly are to be
willing to hear such Sermons, to look to just dealing, to Civil honesty, to
justice between man and man; How abundant is the Scripture in urging this
Theme! it is thought by some, there is no Divinity in this, and such a Minister
is not deep enough, and why does he stand so much upon such things as these,
which the light of nature calls for. But these do greatly err, the Holy Ghost
is careful to urge such duties as these, to be honest. Walk honestly toward
them that are without, says the Apostle, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 12. Let us walk honestly
as in the day, says he, Romans 13. 13. Provide things honest in the sight of
all men, Romans 12. 17. Nay, honesty, civil honesty between man and man is a
sweet thing; the Apostle himself brings it among other things, as a testimony
of his sincerity: We trust we have a good conscience in all things willing to
live honestly, Heb. 13. 18. O it is an excellent beauty to a servant of Jesus
Christ, when his Moralls are sound, and exemplary, and there cannot be any
thing that will make the profession of Religion odious in the eyes of the
world, then want of Morality, when Christians fail palpably in their Moralls.
May be such a one thou will think, comes far short of thee in grace, in the
knowledge of good, in the belief of the Truth, in a spiritual in-sight into
the mystery of Christ; O then count it a shame that he should go before thee
in the keeping of his Word. There cannot be a greater dis-honour unto God, than
when a natural man shall be able to accuse thee of any dis-honesty in any
kind. The Spirit of God sets it down as a great shame upon Sarah, that
Abimelech, a Heathen man should be able to reprove her; Thus was she reproved,
says the Text, Genesis 20. 16. When Jacob perceived that his sons had sinned
against moral honesty, there in the matter of Shechem: O, says he, ye have
made me to stink among the Inhabitants of the land, Genesis 34. 30. Ye have
troubled me, says he, it was a great grief of heart to the good man, he
knew this would be a great dis-honour to God, as well as a shame unto
himself; and therefore God forbid I should speak against a Ministers speaking
for morality.

Yet, Beloved this know, that this is not enough, a man may profess the name
of Christ, and think verily that he Believes in Jesus Christ and be a very
admirable moral man and yet never quickened up to the grace of life. Saint Paul
shows this plainly in himself. I might have confidence in the flesh, if any
other man might trust to that, I might be circumcised the eighth day: of the
stock of Jesse: of the Tribe of Benjamin: an Hebrew, of the Hebrews: as
touching the Law, a Pharisee: Phil. 3. 4, 5, 6, 9. if any fine-carriaged man
under heaven could hope he is right; I could before my conversion. I was
admitted into the Congregation of Christ by the Sacrament of Circumcision: I
was borne in the true Church of God, I had godly Parents, I was of the
Commonwealth of Israel, Nay, I was a Pharisee, which was so admirable a strict
order, that after his conversion, he was not ashamed to be still called a
Pharisee. I am a Pharisee, and the son of a Pharisee says he. Act. 23. 6. He
calls himself a Pharisee still: Nay he was zealous, and concerning the
righteousness of the Law, he was a very blameless man, so that if any fair
cariaged man under Heaven were right, he was right. But the truth is S. Paul
Confesses that when God came to opon his eyes, he find that he was a dead man,
a vile wretch he shows, he had gone sheere to hell for all this, if God had not
converted him. So that morality is a poor thing. And yet people makes it their
Idol and trust to it, and think certainly they are the children of God,
certainly they shall have mercy, certainly they shall to heaven. And how many
Ministers make this to be true Religion, and preach nothing but this? This then
is another way, whereby Ministers do leave a dead Congregation by moral
preaching.

Thirdly, A flat preaching, is, when there is no keenness in our Sermons, when
we do not strive to stagger men's consciences that are to be staggered. When a
man goes on in a track, Preaches true doctrine, though it were to be wished
that more Ministers would do thus: This does not hunt the heart out of its own
starting holes: this Ministry leaves people dead. It is said of our Savior
Christ, that the people were astonished at his Doctrine. Matt. 7. 28. he stunned
their consciences: he set them at a stand, so if a Minister would quicken, he
should labor to set the wicked at a stun. Ye know every wicked one gets
somewhat or other to hang on, to hope they shall not be damned for all they are
no better. Now when a Minister sets himself to put his hearers to a stun;
still to startle truth in an astonishing manner, that may flash the bare truth
into the soul, and to make them see their bad estates, this is quickening
preaching. But when a man's Ministry is cold, there is nothing to stun the
heart, their heart may have its starting holes for all it, his Ministry does
not labor to meet with them, this leaves people dead, a Minister that still
goes on in a track, can never look to quicken.

First, Because a good Minister must make Conscience to bring out new things,
as our Savior Christ speaks: The Kingdom of Heaven is like unto an
Householder, that brings out of his treasure things new and old, Mat. 13. 52.
that is, though he bring none but the old things that were brought before; Yet
still he brings them forth as new: He labors to keep the Word still new unto
the heart, the reason is this, when people have once been convinced of the
truth, presently it grows stale to them, and so they are subject not to be
quickened by it at all. O this we knew before, and so the heart makes little or
nothing of it. I knew this before. Now when the Ministry of the Word darts it
in anew, and makes it look still with a fresh look upon the Conscience; this
is a quickening Ministry. Like a man that keeps his Barrel still fresh, when a
man gives the drinker still fresh from the Barrel: so when a Minister preaches
still fresh from the Word, But when a Minister does not do thus, he is like a
man that gives one liquor that has stood a great while in the Cup, it grows
dead.

Secondly, Because a good Minister must go further and further, or else he
cannot quicken. My meaning is this, the more people are convinced by the Word,
the more subtleties still the heart does devise; the more word is in the
Conscience, the more wiles the heart mints, the Devil also prompting
thereunto: so that if a Minister do not follow men's hearts still further and
further, this will leave the people dead. The reason is this, Because when the
heart has once invented a wile to maintain its own hopes for all the same
truth, we may preach the truth all the days of our life, it will never quicken
that man's heart: because still when he hears that truth, he has a wile lying
by him that still defends himself from it: so that there is a necessity for a
Minister to go further and further. The Word of God is a deep mine, there is
no Bottom, a man may still dig deeper and deeper, Thy judgments are a great
deep., Psalm. 36. 6. When the Minister besieges the heart, he is to dig round
about it, and dig deeper and deeper. Still as the heart bears it self, he is
to come with more and more supplies out of the Word, against it. It is a
strange thing to see how deep Ministers have gone, and yet people arm
themselves against the Word of God and are not converted by it. Tell them they
must be new Creatures, they confess it, and though they be none, yet they have
many fair colors to hope they are. Tell them of Communion with God, and
fellowship with his son Jesus Christ, and Heavenly-mindednesse, and hatred of
all sin, love to universal obedience, plucking out their right eyes: looking
at the Glory of God: not to trust in their performances to go out of
themselves; People make a shift to have something to answer all. All these
things they hope they have done, in some measure. Now when Ministers go on and
on, and do not go further and further, this leaves such people dead. It is
said of a Preacher that is wise, that he still teaches the people knowledge.
Because the Preacher was wise, he still taught the people knowledge. Eccles.
12. 9. That is, people could never come to him, but still he made them know
more and more. You will say, how can a Preacher do thus?

I Answer, if a Preacher be well studied in his own heart, and in the Book of
God, this will help him to do it. For still as he sees further into his own
heart, still he will see further into the Word of God, and let out more and
more light. It is said of Christ's Ministry, That in it the light did spring
up, Matthew. 4. 16. So, this is a true Ministry indeed, when the light springs
up in it. Ye know in a Spring, the water springs up more and more; now when
a Minister goes on in a track, and does not do thus, this is a deading
Ministry. This is the third thing, Flat Preaching leaves people dead.

Fourthly, Cold Preaching too, when a Minister preaches coldly, when the Word
flows coldly from his mouth. When a man hides the affectionatenesse of the
Word, from the people, by the coldness of his uttering of it. Beloved, the
Word is full of affections: what a deal of affection is there in all the
Truths of the Gospel; they are all steept in the warm blood of the Son of God,
there is affection in the promises, they proceed from the tender bowels of God:
Affection in the threatenings, they all issue from the infinite wrath of God
against sin. The Word of God is as fire, Jer. 23. 29. Now when a Minister shall
preach the Word coldly, he preaches the Word otherwise then it is: He does as
much as in him lies, to hide the affectionatenesse of the Word from the peoples
hearts. Suppose the Town were all on fire, would ye not count the man a
ridiculous man, that should come to us, and tell us a cold story? Sirs, let me
tell you a thing, there is a great fire in the Town, and I verily think it may
burn all the Town, and you should do well to go and quench it: This man tells
us so indeed, but would not you count him a fool, for telling us such a thing,
in a cold careless manner, as if it were a small matter? Nature teaches us
another course in such a case. Fire, fire, help, O help, for the Lords sake,
water, water, in all haste. Alas, alas! we are undone, quickly, quickly, run
for ladders, run for buckets, run for wet clothes; ah, you lazy villain, run
apace for iron hooks, and the like: Thus nature teaches to deliver such a truth
that does so nearly concern us, affectionately: So it is here, Brethren; what
weighty things does the Word contain? Truths that our very bowels should yern,
and we should power out our affections in the Pulpit, that we may show by our
delivery, what they are. Now, when this is not done, this deads peoples hearts.
They fit as quiet at a Sermon, though they hear of matters of life and death,
eternal life, salvation and damnation: Yet they sit like blocks in their
seats, as though it were no great matter. Why, they hear one standing in the
Pulpit, as though he were saying his lesson; wicked people will not believe
they are going to hell, though we tell them, they will not believe the ways
of Jesus Christ are so good as they are, though we tell them. It is a pretty
story of Demosthenes, when one told him that he was beaten and mis-used by
such a man; it seems he told it very dreamingly, and coldly, showing no
affection at all; Why, says Demosthenes, has he beaten thee? I do not
believe it, No? says the man: and so the man was as it were in a great
passion: I am sure thus and thus he did to me, and do not you call this
beating? Nay, says Demosthenes: now I believe he has beaten thee indeed. Now
you speak as ye had been beaten, as ye say. So when a Minister preaches unto
people in a dreaming manner, though the things be never so weighty, yet they
will not believe them. He says in a cold manner, that Drunkards are in a bad
case, and such and such persons are in a sad condition, and says, ye must
repent, or you will all perish. But people hear him speak so frigidly of these
things, that they will not enter into their hearts. If these things were
preached as they should be, it would make people quake. It is said of our
Savior, That when he was teaching, the Disciples hearts burned within them,
Luke 24. 32. Did not our hearts burn within us, when, etc. Keckerman makes that
to be the meaning of St. Matthew, where he says that our Savior Taught with
Authority, and not as the Scribes; that is, says he, he did not preach
coldly, but with life and zeal, and this went with Authority.

Now the manner of Preaching is cold, two ways, and, so dead.

First, When it flows not from the heart, for then it is unlikely that ever it
will go unto the heart, Pectus facit esse disertos. The heart is the best
Oratory, as Paul says, What do you weeping and breaking my heart, Act. 21.
13. they spoke so heartily, and affectionately, and meltingly to him, this
burst his very heart. In the 17 of Acts the 16 verse, it is said, Paul's spirit
was stirred in him, to see all Athens given to Idolatry: He was inwardly moved
in his own heart, in his preaching unto them. Now if you look into the 34 verse
of that Chapter, how this quickened some there; Dionysius, and Damaris, and some
others cleaved unto him: that is, he preached so movingly, that he made their
very souls cleave unto him. Why? he spoke from his heart. There be many
clamorous Preachers, says Galvin, who declame against the sins of the
people, and thunder against them, make as though they had a great deal of
zeal, and yet never move a jot, because themselves have a dead heart, and a
secure heart, the people see through their actings, that they are not moved
themselves, and therefore this does not move them neither: when people can see
through a Minister, that he does not preach out of his own heart, this
deadeth their hearts; God bade Ezekiel eat the Book, etc.

Secondly, The manner of preaching is cold, when the Sermon is not delivered in
a lively manner; when he preaches dully and bluntly. The Apostle shows in the
first of the Colossians, that Epaphras did a great deal of good in his
Ministry at Colosse. Now in the fourth of the Colossians, and the 13 verse,
the Apostle says, he was a zealous Preacher; I bear him record, says he,
that he has a great zeal for you. But when a Minister has a cold delivery,
this is a great hinderance to the Word.

You will say, how can this be? Is it not the same word whether preached
coldly, or with heat? Yes, it is: But the Word has two things in it; first,
the bare naked truth: secondly, the fatherly affectionatenesse of God in the
same. Now a zealous Minister; lets the people, in some measure, see both. But a
dull Ministry holds out the one, and hides the other. Again, though the Word
only convert, it is not the Minister that works, but the Word, yet the
Minister is appointed of God to be a means to draw peoples attentions to the
word. Now when he does it in a cold manner, the people are the more apt to let
fall their intentions, and not mark it* Thus you see how a Minister may be
guilty of the deadness of his people two ways, first, by his not preaching at
all. Secondly, by his dead manner of preaching.

There is one more yet remains, and that is, Thirdly, by his dead life and
conversation; an evil life in the Minister, makes preaching seem vile: When
he makes it appear by his course, that he makes no conscience of framing his
life according to his own teaching: Is strict in the Pulpit, and dissolute in
the street: I confess many are ready to quarrel with the lives of their
Teachers without cause, as the false Apostles, with Paul, as though he were
carnal, 2 Cor. 10. 2. But when a man will be a Minister, and yet walk like
men hating to be reformed, and running into the same excess of riot with
others; how does this harden peoples hearts, and deadeth the Doctrine it self?
it makes preaching seem but a ^oy. When a man will seem to persuade to that
which he neglects himself, and to cry out against that, of which himself does
make a common practice. Let no man despise thee, says Paul unto Timothy. You
will say, how shall that be? Be you an example unto them that Believe. 1 Timothy
4. 12. But I am prevented of time. There is nothing that more deads a man's
Ministry then this, when the people know in their Consciences, that the
Minister is as vile as one of them. Let him preach never so excellent things;
they will say, alas, alas! we know he loves his penny, he loves the pot, he
is not right, no more then one of us. But I am forced to give over.

The use of this is. First, Is it so, that a Minister may Use 1.
be the cause why the people are dead? Then here we see the reason why the
Devil is so busy to poison Ministers. He knows, if he, can poison Them, he
can quickly poison all the Parish well-neare. Simon, Simon, Satan has desired
to sift thee. Luc. 22. 31. when Joshua was exercising the office of the
High Priest, Satan stood at his right hand Zach. 3. 1. The Devil is like the
Syrians. O says he, fight neither against small nor great, save only against
the King of Israel: If they could slay him, they knew they should quickly take
his Army; so if the Devil can take the Minister, he cares not. If he can make
him a worldling, or a drunkard, or a Drone, or a Pluralist that is it he
desires. The deading of one Minister, deads a 100. others, if he can be a lying
spirit in a Ministers mouth, he is able to deceive 200. at once.

Secondly, Here we see that Ministers, of all men, should Use 2.
have a care to be quickened. For if we be not quickened, Brethren, our
guiltiness is very great, we shall involve many others in our sin: It will
go hard with every private person that is dead to all goodness: He cannot be
saved, he cannot escape the second death. How then can a dead Minister escape,
that has not only his own deadness to answer for, but also the deadness of
all his people? What says the Lord to the Ministers of the dead Churches of
Sardis Repent, Repent says he, lest I come against thee, as a thief, in an
hour before thou art aware. Rev. 3. 3. And therefore let us be awakened, that
we may be quickened. Beloved, the times now are very dead, and it is we that
are the Ministers of the Church, have let this deadnes in, our not being
watchful, our not being lively and stirring in our places, our not being
quickened. O what wrath hangs upon us, if we do not labor for life, that we
may communicate it unto our people! The common deadness up and down should be
an argument unto us to excite us. When Elisha saw the badnesse of the Church in
his days, he was very earnest to have the spirit of Elias doubled upon him. 2
King. 2. 9. We have need of a double spirit of the good Ministers of God that
were before us, the days do require it, never was there more deadness then
now is. There are not many that profess holiness at all, but of them that
do; O how many are dead, and without life! now who should be a means to
quicken people but we?

Thirdly, This should teach good people to pray for their Use 3.
Ministers: the more quickened the Ministers be, it is the better for them. But
if they be dead, the infection will descend down into you. When Paul and Silas
went out to preach, the Text says. They were Commended by the Brethren to the
grace of God. Act. 15. 40.

Fourthly, This should be an exhortation to us of the Ministry, Use. 4.
that we would take heed unto our selves and to all the Church of God that is
committed unto our charge: that we would rouse up our selves, and specially
now, when there was never more need. When the children of Israel were about to
go back again into Egypt, the Text says, how Moses and Aaron fell on their
faces before all the Congregation of Israel, to beseech them to forbear. Number.
14. 5. They were so mightily affected with the peoples sin, that they fell
upon their faces before them, q. d: For the Lords sake, and for your own souls
sake, Take heed of this sin. What! will you pull all Heaven about your ears?
Will you provoke the living God against you? O my Brethren take heed what ye
do, so we should do, we should labor to be affected with our own and our
peoples deadness. We should call upon them to be quickened. O be quickened, the
Lord will not endure a dead people, get life if ye be wise, it is but a folly
to have a name to live, except ye be alive indeed.

Now the way for us to quicken our people, is, First, If we be good our selves.
When Jehosaphat would encourage the Levites to quicken up the people; Says he,
The Lord shall be with the good. 2 Chronicles. 19. 11. He will bless your labors,
he will strengthen your Sermons to do good, though not to all, for the
greatest part are not of God, yet unto his people. Nay if we were good indeed,
we might have hope do too much good, as it is said of Barnabas he was a good
man, and much people were added to the Lord. Act. 11. 24.

Again, Secondly we should be earnest with God to quicken all our hearts,
that so we may the better quicken our Brethren, as Christ says to Peter, when
thou art converted, strengthen thy Brethren, so we should desire God to quicken
us, that we may quicken our Brethren, that we may wash our hands of our
people. What an excellent comfort was that unto Paul, When he could take his
people to record, that he was pure from the blood of all men! Act. 20. 26.

Thirdly; We should mark which of our people are dead, Ezekiel. 8. 6. And then
think, what, are not we guilty of his deadness?

Fourthly, Let us lay about us soundly, that we not may be guilty of their
sins in any kind.

Fifthly, Another Use is to let us see, What a great danger Use. 5.
Ministers are in, they may be guilty of all the evil in their Parish, if they
do not their duty, which is a great thing to do, they have all the sins of
their Parish lying at their door, This should keep us from security and from
pride, many grow proud that are Ministers, but alas! they know not what an
Office they have, that do so. Our very Calling should make our hearts tremble
and quake to think what a charge is imposed upon us. This made Moses and Aaron
and many a good man more, so fearful to enter upon this function. No man takes
this honor unto himself, says the Apostle (meaning no godly man, no man in
his right wits, no man that is well-advised what he does) but he that is
called, Heb. 5. 4. as our Savior Christ says, Pray ye the Lord of the
Harvest that he would send forth laborers into his Harvest, Matthew. 9. 38.
(...), so it is in the Original, that he would thrust forth laborers into
his Harvest, q. d. God will have no good laborers, otherwise those that are
good are not over-forward to enter into the Ministry, as a Father says, it is
a burden that the very Angels shoulders would tremble under, as the Apostle
said, Who is sufficient for these things? If there were no other Argument but
this in the Text, it might sway all Ministers hearts in the world, lest we be
guilty of our own deadness, and of others too.

Another Use should be to the people, that they would be forward, and willing
to hear, and greedy to drink in the word of life. The want of this is the
deading of many a Ministers heart. I was in much bitterness, says Ezekiel,
but the hand of the Lord was strong upon me, Ezekiel. 3. 14. that is, I had had
no heart at all to preach, but that the hand of the Lord was exceedingly
assistant unto me; whereas the forwardness of people, is a great means to
quicken up their Ministers. When the whole City flocked in to hear Paul,
though the wicked were mad at it; The Text says, He grew bold, Act. 13. 44,
45. When the people crowded in upon our Savior, that he had not so much as
time to eat bread, Mark. 3. 20. the Text shows that he so be-stirred himself
there, that his own Kinssolk thought he had been mad, Verse. 21.

Revel. 3. 1. And unto the Angel of the Church in Sardis, write: these things,
says he that has the seven Spirits of God, etc.
WE have done with the Inscription, And unto the Angel of the Church in
Sardis, write. We come now to the Subscription, and that is in these words.
These things says he that has the seven Spirits of God, and the seven
Stars; Which words contain a description of the Lord Jesus Christ, from whom
this Epistle is sent unto the Church, and he is described very gloriously, to
the intent that what he says, may be the more reverently and seriously
regarded. The Description sets forth two admirable properties and royalties of
our Lord Jesus Christ. First, That he has the seven Spirits of God, that is,
he has the Holy Ghost, to give to whomsoever he please. Secondly, That he
has the seven Stars, that is, the Pastors and Ministers of the Church.
Christ has them all in his hand, to send them, to gift them, to assist them,
to preserve them, to vouchsafe them to a people, or to take them away, as he
lists: and the Ministers are called Stars, because they are to shine in the
firmament of the Church.

First then, the first royalty of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, is, that
he has the seven Spirits of God: by the seven Spirits of God, he means the
Holy Ghost; you will say the Holy Ghost is but one Spirit. By one Spirit we
are all baptized into one Body, 1 Cor. 12. 13. There is one Body and one
Spirit, Ephesians. 4. 4. Through him, we both have an access by one Spirit unto
the Father, Ephesians. 2. 18. The Spirit of God is but one. Ye know there is but
one God, in three persons: one Father, one Son, one holy Spirit. There be
three that bear record in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost, and
these three are one, 1 John 5. 7. there is but one Father, and one Son, whom
the Apostle there calls the Word, for so he is often called in the Scripture.
The Word was made flesh, that is, the Son of God was made flesh: so there is
but one Holy Ghost, one Holy Spirit. Why then does the Text here say of Christ,
that he has the seven Spirits of God?

I Answer, ye may know that the Revelation uses peculiar phrases, august, and
mystical. Now the reason why John speaks thus in the plural number, is.

First, because he alludes to the manner of his Visions, now in his Visions,
the holy Ghost was thus represented unto him, as ye may see, Rev. 4. 5. where
he saw seven Lamps of fire, burning before the Throne, which are the seven
Spirits of God. So, again, Rev. 5. 6. where he saw a Lamb as it had been
slain, having seven horns, and seven eyes, which are the seven Spirits of God,
sent forth into all the earth. So, that this is one reason why he calls the
Holy Ghost, the seven Spirits of God, because he speaks after this manner, of
the Vision that he saw.

Secondly, another reason is, because he was to write to the seven Churches of
Asia. Now he speaks of the Holy Ghost in the same number, because that one and
the same Holy Ghost, is severally and entirely powered upon them all. The Spirit
of God was in Ephesus, and the Spirit of God was in Smyrna, and the Spirit of
God was in Pergamos, and so in Thyatira, and so in Sardis, and Philadelphia,
and Laodicea: and therefore he calls him the seven Spirits of God, though he
be but one and the same Spirit.

Thirdly, he calls him the seven Spirits of God, by a common Metalepsis, of
putting the effects for the cause, because there be many and sundry gifts and
graces, of the holy Spirit of God; the number seven being put to signify the
perfection of them, and the universallnesse of them.

Now that the seven spirits of God, are nothing else, but that one and the same
holy Spirit of God, is plain, out of Rev. 1. 4, 5. John, to the seven Churches
in Asia: Grace be unto you, and peace from him, which is, and which was, and
which is to come, and from the seven Spirits which are before his Throne, and
from Jesus Christ, which is the faithful witness. Which words are Saint John's
saluting of the seven Churches in Asia, wherein he wishes them all grace from
the blessed Trinity, q. d. Grace be to you and peace from God the Father, and
from the holy Spirit of God, and from the Lord Jesus Christ, the faithful and
true witness: Calling the Father, which was, which is, which is to come, and
the Lord Jesus Christ, the faithful and true witness, and the Holy Ghost, the
seven Spirits of God. It is the very self same salutation that Paul uses in all
his Epistles, in effect; saving that this is more full, and more lofty and
august. Now then by the seven Spirits of God, he cannot mean any creature or
creatures, as Angels, or so: but he must needs mean the Holy Ghost, because
he prays for grace from the seven Spirits of God, which no creature is able
to give. Ye know God only can give grace, God only, is the Author of all
grace: He only can justify, and sanctify, and quicken, and give a man
eternal life, as James, Every good and perfect gift comes from above, Jam.
1. 17. It were Idolatry in John, to wish to the Churches, grace from the seven
Spirits of God, if he meant by them any Angels, or any other creatures. We
might worship the Angels, if they were able to give us grace, we might pray to
them, and serve them, and fear them and adore them, if they could be the
Authors of grace to us. Now this is Idolatry. Thou shall worship the Lord thy
God, and him only shall thou serve, Matthew. 4. 10. Of him, and through him, and
to him are all things, to whom be glory for ever, Amen. Romans 11. 36. Ye know
it is the glory of God to be the Cause of all grace. Now what says God? I am
the Lord, that is my Name, and my glory will I not give to another. Isa. 42. 8.
Well then, you see what is here meant by the seven Spirits of God, even the
holy Ghost himself, that one and the same holy Spirit of God. These things
says he, that has the seven Spirits of God, that is, these things says
Christ, that has the holy Spirit of God, to give him to whomsoever he pleases.

Not as though that were all, that Christ has the holy Spirit of God, for so
Paul had the holy Spirit of God, I suppose also that I have the Spirit of God,
1 Cor. 7. 40. so Peter, and David, and all the Saints, all the people of God
have the holy Spirit of God, nay, a man is dead in trespasses and sins, and is
a mere carcass, like a dead body without a soul, that has not the holy
Spirit of God, therefore that is not all the meaning of it, that Christ has
the holy Spirit of God; for so all the children of God have him, and are
quickened by him up to all goodness: But Christ has the holy Spirit of God,
that is, he has him to give to whomsoever he pleases.

But it may be objected, is it not God the Father that gives the holy spirit to
all his poor children?

I Answer, Yes, it is very true, He has him to give to whomsoever he is
pleased to give him, for the Holy Ghost is his Spirit as well as Christ, he
flows from them both. And therefore says our Savior, How much more shall
your Heavenly Father give the holy Spirit to them that ask him? Luke 11. 13. so
that the Father gives the holy spirit to whom he will, but it is in Christ's
name, Christ is the storehouse of this gift. When the Father gives his holy
spirit unto any man, it is only in Christ's name, as himself speaks: The
Comforter which is the Holy Ghost, whom the Father will send in my name, He
shall teach you all things, Joh. 14. 26. Mark, it is only in Christ's name.

Well, now we see the point, That Christ only has the Holy Spirit of God to
give to whom he pleases: If any poor creature would fain have the holy spirit
of God to be in him, he must come to Christ for him. Though the barrel be
never so full of good Wine, yet when it is hoopt round about, if one would have
any, he must draw it at the tap: so, Beloved, the Lord has hoopt himself up
from men, he has closed himself up from all men, by reason of men's sins, he
has shut himself up, no man can have any of his holy spirit, but he must come
and draw it at the tap: he must come to Jesus Christ, the Lord vents himself
only in him, as Christ says, he that believes on me, as the Scripture has
said, Out of his belly shall slow rivers of living water. What is that? this
spoke he of the spirit, which they that believe on him should receive, Joh. 7.
38, 39. Mark, Christ is the tap, ye must come to him by true believing, or ye
cannot receive any of Gods holy Spirit. He only has him to give to them that
do embrace him. From him proceed all the graces of the Spirit, that any men
do enjoy. This is his Roialty, as being the only King and Head of the Church,
and the opened fountain, that all that would be saved must repair unto. He
is the beginning of the Holy Ghost, the Holy Ghost proceeds from him, as he
is the Son of God, and as he is man, he is anointed with him. The Spirit of
the Lord is upon me says he, Luke 4. 18. Ho, every one that would have him,
come unto me for him. Away with your sins, and take me, abhor all your own
ways, see what damnable creatures ye are in your selves, whether your lusts
and corruptions carry you, what will become of you, if ye go on in your own
paths? if ye would have grace, and mercy, and life, and salvation, come to
me, The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, to power him upon you, that ye may
be saved. I say Christ is anointed with him, the Lord has given him his
Spirit in abundance, he has enough spirit to infuse into all that lay hold
upon him, as John says, God has not given the Spirit by measure unto him,
Joh. 3. 34. No, he has the holy Spirit without measure, he has all store of
spiritual graces, to afford to them that lack; a Treasury of all heavenly
blessings, to enrich all his poor distressed Members.

The Reasons of this Point, why Christ only has the holy Spirit of God, to
give where he will, are three.

First, Because there is none but he, that God is well-pleased in. God is out
with all the sons of men, by reason of sin and wickedness, they are all
hateful unto him, they are odious in his sight, and the whole world cannot
make him and them friends again, that ever he should give them grace and
favor, much less his holy Spirit. There is none in whom God is well-pleased
but in his Son. This is my wellbeloved Son, in whom I am well-pleased. Father,
and Holy Ghost, Both came and rested upon him, saying, This is the only He,
in whom I am well-pleased, Mat. 3. 16, 17. q. d. If ye get him to be your
Advocate, take him, and come unto me with him, then I will be friends with
you, he may help you with reconciliation with me, he may get me to give you
my holy Spirit, I am well-pleased in him, and in none but him. This is one
Reason, so that Christ only can put his holy Spirit into thy heart, and so
send thee to his Father. As Paul put a loving mediating letter in Onesimus his
pocket, and so sent him to his Master: then he will be well-pleased with
thee, when thou haste Christ's Letter of commendation about thee, then thou
may go to God from day to day, and be accepted with him: None can do this
for thee but only Christ, he only can put a mediating Letter in thy hand,
he only can give thee the intercessions of his holy Spirit. Thousands go to
God in man's duties from day to day, and because they are without this, Christ
has not given them his holy Spirit, therefore they are not accepted. God is
not pleased with them, they pray without his spirit, they cry God mercy without
his spirit, they seek to enter in without his spirit, and so they are not
admitted. Now when a soul comes to Christ, God is well-pleased with Christ,
and therefore Christ can give him this love-token, Christ can give him the holy
Spirit, and so he shall be admitted into favor with God. God is wellpleased
in him. As Pharaoh was in Joseph, and therefore Joseph could present his
Brethren unto Pharaoh, Genesis 47. 2. If any body else had presented them, they
should never have found favor, but Joseph could put acceptance upon them.
Pharaoh was well pleased in him. So God is well pleased in his Son, and
therefore he can do it and none but He.

Secondly, Another Reason is, Because the Holy Spirit of God will never enter
into man more, except Gods Justice be satisfied. God is resolved he will not
put up those indignities that men offer unto him, except they bring with them
one, in whom his wrath is appeased. As Saint John says, The Lamb slain has
seven eyes, which are the seven Spirits of God. Rev. 5. 6. That is, he has
satisfied Gods Justice, and therefore he has the Holy Spirit of God so given,
the Holy Spirit of God will go to those men that he has satisfied Gods
justice for, I say the Holy Spirit of God will not go to any man, without
satisfaction, if any one will show him satisfaction, then the Spirit of God
will say, I will go where you will have me, only let me have satisfaction.
Now, Beloved, Christ only can say to the Holy Spirit come a-long with me to
this man, here is a satisfaction unto Justice, Therefore he only has the Spirit
at his dispencing. And therefore if any man would have Gods Holy Spirit, he
must bring the Lamb Divine slain, with him to God. Lord here I have the Lamb
slain, and now let me see thy face, now let me have thy Spirit, as David said
to Abner, bring me Michol, or never think to see my face. 2 Samuel 3. 13. q. d.
never come to me, except thou bring me my Michol with thee. The bringing of
Michol with him, this might help him to see the Kings face. So, Beloved, when
a man gets the Lord Jesus Christ, and brings him with him to God, this may
help him to Gods Holy Spirit. Bring him along with thee, and thou shall see my
face, thou shall have my holy Spirit. Neither will God send thee his Holy
Spirit, neither will the Holy Spirit come to thee otherwise. Christ only has
him to give. Have Christ and have him.

Thirdly, another Reason is, why Christ has the Holy Spirit to give, Because
he is flesh of our flesh, and Bone of our Bone, and we may go to him: he is
the fittest to have him to give, because he being man as well as we, we may
make bold to go to him: My Brethren, we are not able to go to God for any
thing, much less for his Spirit, we are not able to look upon him
immediately, as a man is not able to look upon the Sunbeams in their
strength, specially if he have sore eyes: But let him get a Scarf, or a
Cypress, and now he may. Now the Sunbeams will shine upon him through the
Cypress, and not hurt him. The Scarf is able to convey unto him the
Sunnebeames, without dazzling of him. So, beloved, Christ is able to convey the
Holy Spirit of God into any man, our sore Consciences may look up to God
through him, he moderates Gods look, he can make us look God in the face, in
a comfortable manner. Now we may ask any thing of him, even his Holy Spirit,
and he will give him, as the Apostle says: By him we have boldness, Ephesians. 3.
12. O, beloved, they are great things that we need. We have need of such great
matters, that when the Conscience is awakened, it can have no hope to obtain,
that God should pardon such vile wrecthes as we, that he should accept of such
poor services as ours, that he should love such filthy ones as we are, that
he should give us a Kingdom, and his own Holy Spirit to enliven us, to
establish our hearts, to be an earnest of Heaven to us: how can we hope he will
give us such infinite mercies? Now the Lord has put all these Blessings into
the hands of his Son Jesus Christ, that is flesh of our flesh, and bone of
our bones. Now we may boldly go to him for them. As Moses when his face shone,
Aaron was afraid to come near him, Exodus 34. 30. Therefore he put a veil
over his face: Now Aaron and others were able to come nigh him; so before, none
were able to come to God for any thing, but now the Lord has put a veil of
flesh upon himself by incarnating his own Son, now we may make bold.

The use of this, is, First; Is it so that Christ has the seven Use 1.
Spirits of God? Then, what has he not? He is an all sufficient Savior. He is
Gods Steward, God has put all his goods into his hands. No man can be assured
of any thing that is good, but by coming unto him. All things are delivered to
me of my Father. Mat. 11. 27. That is, I have all my fathers goods in my hand:
Favor, Pardon, Mercy, Grace* Comfort, Heaven it self, yea and his holy Spirit
and all, I have the distributing of them all. He is the storehouse whither all
needy souls are to go, He is full of all manner of good things, as John
says, Of his fullness have we al received. Joh. 1. 1^. Look what grace any of
the Saints have* they have it all of him, he is Gods Conduit-pipe, the Lord
opens himself only in him; he is the tap, he lets out Gods Blessings, and
Graces, and Spirit, like a sluice. He is the Lord Treasurer of Heaven and
Earth: As Joseph in Egypt, if any one would have Corn; they must go to Joseph
for it, if they came to Pharaoh but for a pecke, or a gallon, presently he sent
them to Joseph, so the Lord sends all that will have any drop of mercy, to his
Son, if ye will not go to my Son, ye shall not have one drop, ye shall
dye in your sins. This is my welbeloved Son, says he, look ye hear
him: hearken to him: obey him: be ruled by him: bow down unto him: do as he
bids you: if ye anger him, and will not stoop unto him: if your hearts will not
burst, if your minds will not off from the world, and other things, and be
wholly intent unto him, if ye slight him, and suffer vain things to draw away
your affections and thoughts and meditations from him; there is no redemption
for you. No Salvation but only by believing in his name, he has all the seven
Spirits of God, no Spirit of Grace at all can be had but only of him, he was
the Rock, that Moses must stand on, that the glory of Gods goodness might
pass before him.

Secondly, Another use is, has Christ the seven Spirits of Use 2.
God? then we are without excuse: if we be without the Holy Spirit of God,
Christ has him to give: and yet how few will seek him of Jesus Christ! as
Christ says, Ye will not come unto me, that ye might have life. Joh. 5. 40.
That is, if ye would come unto me, I would make your dead hearts to live, I
would quicken you to all goodness, I would power my Holy Spirit upon you: But
you will not come unto me, for it. This makes us without excuse, That Christ
has the Spirit in him, for all that have a mind to him, and we have no
mind. How few among you to this very day have gotten yet Gods Holy Spirit? Ye
pray, but ye have not the spirit of supplieation, to pray by, to lift up your
hearts, to enliven your desires, to be able to wrestle with God to any purpose,
no Spirit of grace stirring in you. When ye come to the house of God, ye hear
Sermons but the Holy Ghost does not fall upon you to make them effectual and
mighty in operation, to convert you to God, to knock off your base lusts: ye
are dead in all holy duties, void of all Heavenly graces, dull to every good
thing, even as the Body without the spirit is dead. Nay the Spirit of the world
dwells in most men tying and glving them to the things here below, and will
not let them savor and relish the things of Heaven. Whereby they cannot cease
from sin nor work the works of God. Rare is that man, now-a-dayes, that has
the Holy Spirit of God remaining in him in any measure: nay if people were
asked, whether they have the Spirit of God, yea or no, their own Conscience
could answer. No they have not: they never felt any such Divine ghuest; their
earthlinesse and lumpishnesse of heart in all the ordinances of God, their
unaquaintednesse with God, their unsettlednesse, and nakedness, and blindness
in all the ways of peace, plainly does declare it; and yet they will not come
unto Christ that they might have life: he has the seven Spirits of God, and
yet they cannot find in their hearts, to be instant and earnest with him, when
Pharaoh appointed Joseph to distribute corn to all comers; Go to Joseph,
says he, Genesis 41. 55. the Text says, all Countries came to Joseph for Corn,
because the famine was sore in all lands. But God has appointed his own Son
to be a dispencer of the Spirit, and there is a sore want of the spirit every
where in all Towns and Parishes, and yet hardly any will come in. Certainly,
this is the condemnation, that men intend their pleasure, and their profits,
and every outward thing, and never seek to Jesus, to have the Holy Spirit of
God.

For First, many of us have hard hearts that cannot melt at our own sins,
nor the public provocations whereby God is provoked, nor the general
calamities of the Church: our hearts are like a stone, and we are not
affected, nor can be affected, no relenting at the Word, no bleeding in any
other good duty, nothing moves us: the spirit could soften, yea, and take the
stone away, and Christ says he would give him unto us, if we did desire him.
I will put a new Spirit within you, and take the stony heart out of the flesh.
Ezekiel. 11. 19. He has spirit enough in him to do it, and yet we will not sue
to him but in a feigned manner, and so a hard heart possesses us still, which
marres all our familie-duties, and all that we do in the public assemblies:
nothing comes of all that we do. If our foolish hearts would come down to be
fervent after Christ, this might be be remedied. He has the seven Spirits of
God for the nonce. But a spirit of slumber bewitches us, and and nothing can
awaken us to this very day. Never was there a more hard-hearted time, never
more hard-hearted Christians, nummed, and past feeling, wishing indeed the
things might be mended, but never putting forth our hand to have them mended.

Secondly, scarce any of us can pray, but in a blunt-hearted-wise: our prayers
never stir Heaven, never give so much as a lift to any of our lusts, neither
are they any whit answerable to the miseries that are on us, whether Personal
or National, the spirit could help us, and enlarge us, as Paul says of the
good Romans, Ye have received the Spirit of Adoption whereby ye cry Abba
Father. Romans 8. 15. and Christ has this Spirit in his hand, to give. But we
would rather sit woulding and yawning then be down on our knees before God.
Every one almost has heavy things that he is conscientious of: terrible
guiltines, horrible mis-givings, self-conde^nings, uncertainties about his
later end, doubtfulnesse whether any thing be sound, yea or no; and yet no
heart of prayer, no strainings after Christ to have the Holy Spirit of him.
Nay, tittle tattle is preferred before coming about Christ: and every idle
business more takes up our thoughts, then how we may enjoy Jesus Christ.

Thirdly, where is the man well-neer, that is holy? some indeed are civil, and
not very many, no, not of them that would be held for Professers. For what
Civility, Honesty is there, when people are palpably proud, and palpably
covetous, and palpably malicious, and spightfull, and envious? but, put case
many be Civil; yet holiness is hardly any where to be seen. Where are any
that are mortified unto sin? Crucified to the world? Pilgrims on earth,
Heavenly-minded? taken up with God? The Spirit indeed, is a Spirit of
Holiness, Romans 1. 4. And Christ has him to give but he cannot have our
custom: We are not thirsty after such matters.

Fourthly, Where is the Communion of Saints? a Theme I spoke of the last
Sabbath day. We are all like unto Ephraim. Ephraim has mixed himself among the
people. Hos. 7. 8. that is, they had no Communion of Saints there among them.
They were a mish-mash people; there was a Chaos and a confusion and a medly
among them. If there be any that bear the name of Saints; They are like Lambs
feeding all alone in a large place. Like Israel when they are scatterd. Hos. 4.
16. Lambs withour flocks: Birds without mates: As if they were all frighted
asunder: No Communion of Saints, no Communion of graces, nor duties, nor
hearts, nor affections. I confess if we had the Holy Spirit of God, we would
make a communion among us: As Paul says. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ
and the love of God and the Communion of the Holy Ghost be with you all, Amen.
2 Cor. 13. 14. He would make a Commuinon among us, and Christ has him too, and
there we might have him, but we care not for him: which is a most fearful
thing: a sign of horrible deadness and livelesnesse in good: as it is with
the boughs of a tree, when they are dead, they fall off, but they hang
together as long as they are alive. Though communion of Saints, be an Article
of our faith, yet we let it dye. We see in nature, if we sling any meat to a
Hen, presently she cluckes for all her Chickens to have part: So, look what
graces we get, we should impart what we can: the Lord has appointed
mutualgiving good example unto one another, edifying one another, exhorting one
another, admonishing one another, comforting one another, conferring one with
another, supplicating one with and for another. As it is said, Luke 5. 10. That
Simon and James and John were partners in their fishing, look what fishes they
caught, they divided among one another; so Christians should be partners. What
they get at a Sermon, they are to impart, What they get in prayer, or at
Sacraments, or in affliction; there be others that should be partners with
them: as the Apostle says, Look not every man on his own things, but every
man also on the things of others. Phil. 2. 4. O says he, if there be any
fellow-ship of the Spirit, thus it must be, that is, the Spirit would breed
this fellowship and communion among you. Now, Beloved, where is this holy
Spirit to be had but in Christ? I say we are without excuse, if we do not get
the Holy Spirit of God, Because Christ has him for us, if we would resort to
him, and therefore we can have no plea.

First, We cannot plead, we have no need of the holy Spirit of God: what need
we have him, as long as we believe there is such a one? Is it needful we
should have him? I, that it is; why else did God make his Son to be the
dispenser, and the distributer, and communicater of him? O, Beloved, the Lord
has done this, because we cannot be saved without the holy Spirit of God:
would we be regenerated and born again; we cannot without the Spirit: That
which is born of the Spirit, is Spirit, Joh. 3. 6. We can never be spiritual
without the Spirit of God: none but spiritual men and women shall enter into
the Kingdom of God. Drunkards, and adulterers, and liars, and muckworms, and
better men than they, are carnal men. Now to be carnally minded is death, but
to be spiritually minded, this only is life and peace: so that we cannot
plead that.

Again, We cannot be justified without the Spirit of God, Ye may say, O, we
hope to be justified only by Faith in Christ; True, but if ye have not the
Spirit of God, ye have no Faith, none have true faith in Christ, till first
they have the holy Spirit of God, and therefore it is called the spirit of
Faith, that is, a spirit inclining a man unto Christ; bowing of the mind, and
heart, and soul, to all heavenly things in Christ, no man can be justified
without this, as Paul tells the Corinthians, But ye are sanctified, ye are
justified in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of God, 1 Cor. 6. 11.

Again, Ye cannot have free will to do the will of God without the holy
Spirit of God. I confess, by nature no man has free will: I, but if ye be
not more then nature, ye cannot be saved. Ye must have free will to all the
ways of God, or ye cannot be saved. Now ye never can have this without the
Spirit of God. Can ye mortify every wicked lust? can ye resist the devil
every day? can ye keep out the world, and ward off the temptations of the
flesh, ye can never do it while the world stands in a holy course, without
the holy Spirit of God. Where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty, 2
Cor. 3. 17. Mark, there is freewill to all these things, that man has liberty
to do supernatural things, that has the Spirit of the Lord, and no man else.

Again, Ye are none of Christ's, if ye have not the holy Spirit of Christ;
that is the Mark he brands all his sheep with, as a man says, when he hears
tidings of any of his sheep; says he, if they be mine, they have such a
mark: they have an A. and a B. on the left side, or so: so says Christ, if
they be mine, they have my Spirit, if any man have not the Spirit of Christ,
he is none of his, Romans 8. 9. Hereby we know that he abides in us, says
John, by his Spirit which he has given us, 1 John 3. 24. so that we have
need of the spirit, and therefore this cannot be our plea, that we have no
need: we have such need of Gods holy Spirit, that we cannot be saved without
the having of him.

Secondly, we cannot plead, we know not where to have him. For Christ says,
he has him to give to all that will receive him. The Spirit of the Lord is
upon me, says he, Esa. 61. 1. that is, he is powered upon me, that he may
run down upon all them that come to be my members. If Christ indeed had not
come, if God had not made him Vehiculum Spiritus, if God had not put his spirit
upon Christ, like water in a Fountain, to run out upon all that will hold their
hearts under him; then we might have some excuse: Lord ^ we know not where to
have the Spirit. But the Lord has told us where we may have him. We may have
him in his Son Jesus Christ.

Thirdly, We cannot plead, we cannot tell how to have him: For as ye know
where to have him, so ye may know how to have him too: and ye all do know,
if we had a heart we may have him four ways.

First, By the hearing of the Word: you will say, ye have heard the Word many
times; yet ye never received the holy Spirit yet. I answer, that is certain,
but it is because ye do not come to it with a greedy yerning heart, with an
open ear, and a willing mind to be guided by it. For if ye came thus with
this mind, ye would quickly have the spirit. Lord tell me any thing, I do
unfeignedly desire for to do it; reprove any thing in me, I do sincerely
desire to leave it. Come thus to the Word; I dare say, thou shall not be one
quarter of an hour without the spirit, as Christ says, Turn ye at my
reproof: behold, I will power out my spirit un to you, Prove. 1. 23. You will
say, this is strange, and have I heard so many Sermons, and never got the
spirit yet? I, you never heard Sermons with an honest heart: You shall see,
Cornelius and his company got the spirit at the first Sermon that they heard,
when Peter Preached, the Holy Ghost fell on all those that heard the Word, Act.
10. 44. How so? ye may read there in the Context, O says Cornelius, We are
all here present before God, to hear all things that are commanded thee of
God. Ver. 33. Now, if we have the Word daily preached, and we get not the
holy spirit of God; we are without excuse.

Secondly, By Prayer, if we did pray faithfully unto God, we should have the
holy spirit, as Christ says: If ye that are evil, can give good gifts unto
your children, how much more shall your heavenly Father give the holy Spirit to
them that ask him? Luke 11. 13. You will say, ye have prayed many a time and
often, and yet ye find no such thing, and no marvel; when a man's heart
prays only by the by: but if ye made it your business, from day to day, if
ye would seek for him as for life, and look upon it as more necessary then
life it self; then ye should quickly speed: But when ye will give God the
blind, and the lame, and your hearts run a whoring after other things; Heaven
is not the main of all your care, and study: the Lord knows a hollow heart, and
can tell how to deny it: none shall have his spirit, that do not desire him
above all things, and labor after him above all things, and use all manner of
means for him. The Spirit of God is a great gift, and we must know its an
infinite mercy to obtain him, and therefore we must seek him accordingly. They
that get him, do not go dreamingly to work.

Thirdly, By repentance; this is another means to obtain the Holy Ghost, as the
Lord says, Rent your hearts and not your garments, and turn to the Lord your
God, etc. Joel 2. 13. what follows? And after that I will power my Spirit upon
you, says he, ver. 28. Never think to have Gods holy Spirit, and live after
the flesh, or go on in a form, or a careless way: not only drunkenness and
whoredom, and capital sins, keep him out, but any other lusts and
corruptions, that the heart clings unto; Rent your hearts then, let your
drowzie doings pain you at the heart, let all your security, and unbeleef, and
luke warmness, whereby ye part stakes with God, let all these be a burden
unto you, and you heavy laden with them: this is the way-making for the Spirit
of Gods coming in.

Fourthly, Take no denial, let not ill-successe beat you off; this is that
which thrusts back thousands: They find little success at the first, and so
they give over. But, Beloved, this is it, howsoever we find cold success in
our holy labors, at the first, yet we must go on, though we do not find
our lusts die, though we do not find that speeding in Prayer that we could
wish, that prevailing in our endeavors, that we do desire, yet still we are
to go on, and still wait upon God, in abounding in our care, until the Lord
grant us better success. The hard success that we have, must not hinder us,
as the Apostle says, Let us not be weary in well-doing, for in due time we
shall reap, if we faint not, Gal. 6. 9. That is, let us not be discouraged
with hard successes, or any other such like thing: certainly, if we go on we
shall speed. When the Wisemen came seeking for Christ at Jerusalem, they had no
good success there, they did not find him there, yet they would not return
back without him; But they went down to Bethlehem, and sought for him there.
When the Church had sought Christ in her bed, she had no success for that
time. I sought him, says she, but I found him not, Cant. 3. 1. What, would
she give over because of her bad success at the first? No, she trudged out
into the Lanes and the streets, she enquired of the watchmen and still she had
little or no success. But the Text says, she would never give over, till she
litt upon him. Beloved, we must take heed of this. It is the impatience of
men's hearts, if they cannot find a blessing at first dash, they will seek no
further, then they strike into a former, or a worse condition: In the first of
Haggai, ye may read, that when the Jews had been hindered by Cambyses, from
building of the Temple for a fit, they gave over: Because they had no success,
they would build no more, but fell a building their own houses, ver. 4. ye
know it was their sin, and the Lord plagued them for it. Therefore, Brethren,
it must be our care, although we do not speed at the first, not to slacken,
or give in: As Isaac would still be building* Wells, he built one, and that
had no success, he built another, and that had as bad; still there fell out
strife, what then? did he give over so? No, he never would have done, till the
Lord gave him a Rehoboth, a Well that there was no striving about, Genesis 26. 22.
so, we should never be quiet, until the Lord give us his holy Spirit; though
we do not feel his workings in us at the first, no bad successes though
never so many, should make us weary: But still we should go on, a seeking of
the holy Spirit of God. Thus, as we know where to have the Spirit of God,
namely in Christ, so, we know how too, and therefore we are without excuse,
if we suffer our selves to be void of Gods holy and blessed Spirit; this is
the second use.

Thirdly, another Use, is, to you that do indeed complain Use 3.
of great want of the Spirit: here you see where ye may have supplies even
from our Lord Jesus Christ, he has the seven Spirits of God. They labor to
know Christ more and more: this is the way to have more and more of the Spirit,
as the Apostle says: That the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of
glory, may give unto you the spirit of wisdom and revelation in the knowledge
of him, Ephesians. 1. 17. Get the knowledge of Christ more and more, and thus the
spirit shall come to thee more and more. It is said of the Indian
Gymnosophists, that they would lie all the day long, looking upon the Sun in
the firmament, so should Christians do, they should lie looking upon Christ,
the more spirit still they shall have, if they do so.

First, May be ye want spirit to make you know the Lords will, you find your
selves backward from day to day: little or no heart to Gods Commandments; look
up to Christ, and say, Lord there is enough spirit in Christ, and he has it
for all them that do want, and would have the same; O give me some together
with him, as he says, I will put my Spirit into you, and cause you to walk in
my statutes, Ezekiel. 36. 27. q. d. look up to me, I will do this for you.

Secondly, May be ye want strength, ye have many temptations, and you have
no strength to resist them, they come in upon you like the breaking in upon
you; may be ye are tempted to deny all, and to say ye have nothing in you;
sometimes ye are tempted to give over all, saying, it is but a folly, I shall
one day be damned, and I were as good give over now, as to do it afterward,
when it will be worse, and ye have no strength to hold out; sometimes ye
cannot meditate; ye cannot pray, ye are fain to break off in the midst; with
base fears; with security, and vain hopes; you are tempted to do as the world
does, and ye have no strength to oppose them: Look up to Christ, ye know the
Spirit of Christ, is a spirit of power, and strength, 2 Timothy 1. 7. and he has
him for you: Look up to him then, and cry for his strong spirit. Who knows?
may be, you may be able to say in the end, as Paul does: I can do all things
through Christ that strengthens me.

Thirdly, May be, ye want boldness to call God your Father: ye are in a
quandary, whether ye should call him so or no: ye are afraid, he is none of
your Father, and that ye are none of his adopted ones: ye shall but blaspheme
him to call him your Father, or to expect of him a childs portion; Look up to
Christ, he has such a spirit in him, whereby ye may cry, Abba Father, Gal.
4. 6.

Fourthly, May be ye want life and quickening, you find your selves very
dead, even as the Church of Sardis in this place; I know thy works, that thou
art dead. Look up to Christ, as here he does bid thee, he has the seven
Spirits of God, and has that which will quicken thee. Christ himself, when he
was naturally dead, he was quickened by his own spirit, 1 Pet. 3. 18. That very
spirit can quicken thy spiritual deadness, to every good word and work. His
spirit is life, and that will make thee lively, though thy heart be little
better then a Timber-logge in duties, yet if that spirit get within thee, it
will make thee agile, and active in every good thing. It is a horrible thing to
see, how little, Christians know of Jesus Christ, though they have been thought
to know Jesus Christ so long a time, yet they do not know him. Christ takes
this very ill, as he told Philip: Have I been so long time with you, and have
thou not known me, Philip? Joh. 14. 9. Christ could be even angry with him,
for learning him no better: what little spirit is there in Christians now
adays! a sign, though they have been a long time a learning Christ, yet they
hardly know him: For if we knew him, Brethren, we could not be at enmity
with the holy Spirit. We do not look up to Christ.

You will say, what is it to look up to Christ in all your ways?

I Answer, It is to follow Christ, as where John said, Behold the Lamb of God
that takes away the sins of the world.

The Text says, That two of his Disciples went away and followed after Jesus,
Joh. 1. 36, 37. O thought they, is he the Lamb of God, does he take away the
sins of the world, we will follow him then. John bade them look at him, and
they followed after him, that is, they looked at him indeed, as a man looks at
one whom he follows: when a man so looks up to Christ, that he follows him:
when a man sees him his only means to be happy, and godly, and in the favor
of God, the only means to do well, and to be well, and desires indeed to
follow after him, this is to look up to Christ, when a man labors sincerely to
follow the counsel and direction of Christ, in all his ways; He bids him to
deny himself, and that is the thing that he labors for; He bids him to
repent of all his sins, and to ply himself to all Gods holy paths, and to rely
upon him for strength and acceptance, and mercy and pardon, and every blessing.
Whatever thing he looks for at the hands of God, he sets himself to follow
Christ's counsel, and to expect it in him. If he see his sins, he looks up to
Christ, and there he sees his death to defray them; when he sees what power
they have over him, he looks up to Christ for his Spirit to subdue them, in
the use of all those means that he has appointed; Prayer, Meditation,
Watchfulness, Striving, Purposing, Endeavoring, and Fighting against all the
lusts of his flesh. And wherein soever he fails, he labors to be humbled,
and yet to look still up to Christ, for forgiveness, and more help against
another time: This is to see the Son of God. Every one that sees the Son, has
everlasting life, Joh. 6. 40. This is to look up to Christ, to believe in
Christ, to have Christ, to be in Christ, to dwell in Christ, and Christ in him.

But you will say, I am afraid I never looked up to Christ then, I never yet had
him, for I have not his holy spirit, how shall I know whether I have the holy
spirit? I Answer, first, I will tell thee, what be not signs; and then
secondly, what be signs.

First, What be not signs, there are four signs that people take to be
signs, and are not: First, a civil Life, when a man is a merciful man, kind
to the poor, quiet and peaceable among his Neighbors, gentle, affable,
courteous, wellconditioned; These are no signs of having Gods holy Spirit:
True, they are very commendable, and they that have the Spirit of God, must
have them, and better than them. But a man may be without the holy Spirit of
God, and yet have all these; Paul shows that the very Barbarians showed him no
little kindness, they kindled him a fire, though they were mere natural men,
Act. 28. 2. Our Savior Christ shows that some are chaste by nature, that are
born so; so, many are temperate by nature, and loving by nature, and meek by
nature, patient by nature; therefore, these are no supernatural graces, these
are no signs of the holy spirit.

Secondly, the profession of Religion* This is no sign of the Holy Spirit
neither for many profess they know God, and ye are reprobate to every good
work. Tit. 1. 16. that is, many profess Religion, they will hear the Word,
they will have prayers in their families, they will be of the better side in
their Parish where they are, if there be any godly ones, they will be of their
Company, if they can, and seem to to do as they do, and yet they have a
carnal heart, they do very good works every day, but they have a Reprobate
and unapproved heart in them. They do not do them right.

Thirdly, Every kind of repentance is not a sign neither, we read that
Pharaoh Confessed, his sin, and desired the prayers of Gods people. Exodus 9.
27. Saul wept for his sins. 1 Samuel 24. 16. Judas made restitution: Esau
bought repentance with tears. The world think certainly these were times of
Gods Spirit; no, no: They were only Common effects of the spirit. The wicked
may in a sort repent of their sins and beat them down too, but the truths
is, they do not mortify them. Like as if a man should come into a garden, and
see how a mole has cast up the earth, and made a foul stir in the Alleyes,
and in the Garden knots, if he tread it only down with his foot, and do
not kill the Mole, anon after it will be as bad as before, so many wicked men
may do, they may beat down their sins every day, but they rise up still as
bad as before; now they beat them down, and so their lusts like the Mole cast
up again. Thus the Mole is not killed. This is no sign of the Spirit. But a
godly heart, he kills the Mole, he mortifies his sin, indeed new Moles may
breed, and cast up again; but he riddes his soul more and more.

Fourthly, Every kind of faith neither, is not a sign of Gods holy Spirit, ye
know the stony ground Believed, Luke 8. 13.

Secondly, Now, for those signs that be* First, When a man is soundly
convinced of his sins; This is an act of Gods holy Spirit, Joh. 16. 8. When a
man has the unction from the Holy one, The Text says, that abides for ever,
where it is, The anointing which ye have received of him abides in you. 1 John 2. 27.

Secondly, When a man has had a sound prick for his sins, this lets in the
Holy Ghost* as Peter told his hearers, That were pricked in their hearts. Act.
2. 37. he told them they should receive the Holy Ghost.

Thirdly, When a man has had an unsatisfiable desire of reconciliation with
God, as it is said of Paul, that when he was rightly touched by the spirit
indeed, he could neither eat nor drink* Act. 9. 9. he could not be quiet,
till Ananias came and told him he was reconciled with God.

Fourthly, When a man is another, and a new creature, Whosoever is in Christ is
a new creature, 2 Cor. 5. 17. the Spirit of God, where* ere He is, He is a
new spirit, and He carries with him a new heart* Ezekiel. 36. 26. He works a
through change, and he renews mind* will, and affections, inclinations,
memory, appetite, members and all: He does not only new-plaster them over,
but he pulls a man quite down, and builds him up a new habitation of God, as
Christ told the Centurion, if I come, I will heal thy servant, so, if Christ
do once come with his spirit into any man's heart, he heales it, he works a
mighty mutation in that man into another man, as Paul tells the Corinthians, Ye
were drunkards, but now ye are washed, ye were railers, ye were adulterers,
ye were covetous, ye were unrighteous, But now ye are washed, 1 Cor. 6. 9,
10, 11. As Paul says, I was a blasphemer, and I was a persecuter, but blessed
be God, now I have obtained mercy. Now I am not the man that I was; I was a
liar, but now, blessed be God, I have the lip of Truth; I hated them that were
godly, but blessed be God, now they are the dearest people to me in the world.

Fifthly, when a man does supernatural good things; natural good things, a
natural man may do, without the holy spirit of grace: when you see a man list
up a hundred, or two hundred pound weight, you will say. I, this he may do by
nature; But if you should see a man lift up five thousand pound weight, you
will say* there is more then nature in him: so, beloved, when you see a man
loves sin and comes to be vain, and cannot abide to be strict; if he be
strict a little, he is soon weary of it, and lays it aside; you may know this
man has not the spirit of God in him, but if ye see you love holiness, and
hate every evil thing, that nothing humbles you so much as sin, nothing takes
you up so much as how to please God; now ye may know the spirit of God is in
you, Why? This is above Nature. This then is another Use.

Lastly, Has Christ the seven Spirits of God, to give them to all that will
come unto him? then what may Christ say to them that are contented without him,
that have no care at all to come at him, that like not his government, that
will not draw water at his Well? He has taken pains to procure a stock of
grace for them, to provide Merits enough for them, a salve broad enough for all
their sores, spirit enough to power into all their hearts; and when he has
done all this, they regard other things more than him. Truly, he may say as
David did, when he was told of Nabals churlish answer, Surely, in vain have I
kept all that this fellow has, in the Wilderness. 1 Samuel 25. 21, Even so may
Christ say: surely, in vain have I suffered for these men; in vain have I come
out of my Fathers bosom for them; in vain did I die upon the cross: They will
have none of my ware, they respect not my graces, they will not come at me for
my holy Spirit, etc.

Revel. 3. 1. And unto the Angel of the Church in Sardis, write: these things,
says he that has the seven Spirits of God, and the seven Stars. I know thy
works, that thou have a name, that thou live, and art dead.
These things, says he, that has the seven Spirits of God, and the seven
Stars. THese words contain the Description of our Lord Jesus Christ, from
whom this Epistle is sent unto the Church in Sardis, and in particular to the
Minister there, who is here called the Angel of the Church in that place. And
the description does instance in two royalties of our Savior Jesus Christ.

First, That he has the seven Spirits of God, that is, he has the Holy
Ghost, and all his spiritual graces in his hands, to give to whomsoever he
pleases, for the quickening of them, and the sanctifying of them, that if any of
his members want spirit, or any spiritual good, he has it for them: These
things says he that has the seven Spirits of God: This we handled the last
day.

Now we proceed to the second Royalty of our Lord Jesus Christ, That he has
the seven Stars, he speaks of the seven Churches of Asia, Christ has all
their Ministers in his hands, and he calls them stars.

First, because the stars do direct: Its a great help when Mariners can see
a star in a dark night. When Paul and they that sailed with him could see
neither Sun nor Star, the company were without all hope of coming safe to
Land, Act. 27. 20. they knew not what to do, when there was not a star to
be seen: The stars serve for direction in the night. So good Ministers are
for direction unto people, they serve to direct people to Christ. Like the
star in the East; When the Wisemen saw the star, they rejoiced with
exceeding great joy, Matthew. 2. 10. that star directed them to Christ, it went
before them all the way, and showed them where to find Christ: so a poor
soul rejoices to find a godly Minister; O thinks he, he is a star to
direct me to Christ.

Secondly, Because the stars do shine, so good Ministers do shine forth,
and hold out a light, to give light to them that sit in darkness, and in the
shadow of death. Ye are the light of the world, says Christ, Matthew. 5. 14.
when a man sits in a dark house, he cannot see to do any thing, but if one
come and open a window, or a casement, and lets in light, now he may see to
go about his business: so, Beloved, people that dwell in dark Parishes, where
no sound Ministry of the Word is, they know not what to do to be saved: they
err, they wander, they grope, they stumble and fall, they see not how to be
godly, and happy for evermore. But when a faithful Minister comes, now light
is let in, and those that have a mind to go to Heaven, now they may see the
way thither, so that in this sense too, Ministers are stars.

Thirdly, Because stars have influence upon these inferiors bodies, as God
says of the Pleiades and Orion, which are a company of stars in the heavenly
Orb. Can thou bind the sweet influences of the Pleiades, or loose the bands
of Orion? Job 38. 31. the stars have influences into things here below. The
Pleiades open the earth, they make herbs and flowers grow, the spring is when
they arise once, Trees begin to sprout, and the plants do wax green; Orion, it
produces cold, the Winter comes when that shows it self; the stars have a
great influence into sublunary bodies, so it is with Ministers. Bad Ministers
are like the stars of Orion, they serve to cool peoples hearts, and dead
them to all goodness. But good Ministers are as the stars of Pleiades, no
soul can have any mind in him to that which is good, but they do exceedingly
help and further, they quicken the heart, they warm and fructisie the souls
of Gods Elect.

Again, the Stars do hang high, so the Ministers of Christ are set high;
they hang high, that all the people may have the benefit of their glistering.
Zachany calls them the Prophets of the most High, And thou child, shall be
called the Prophet of the most High, Luke 1. 76. But I have handled this Point
in effect, when I spoke of Ministers being Angels, and therefore I will omit it
now. Thus ye see the Ministers are stars. Now he calls them seven, because
he speaks of seven Congregations, Ephesus, Smyrna, Pergamos, Thyatira, Sardis,
Philadelphia, and Laodicea. Seven Churches, seven Congregations, and every one
had their several stars. Whence we see that every Parish should have a
particular faithful Minister. Paul appointed Titus, to ordain Elders in every
City, Tit. 1. 5. The Apostles ordained Pastors, and Elders in every Church,
Act. 14. 23. So it was in the time of the Law, as the Text says, Moses of old
time has in every City them that Preach, being read in the Synagogues every
Sabbath day, Act. 15. 21.

The Reason is, first, because those Towns that have not a faithful Ministry
in it, generally do all perish. I do not deny, but some souls in such blind
places may come otherwise to be converted and saved, but generally they perish
for ever, that live in such places: as the Evangelist says of Galile. True,
they had sorry Priests, but they had not a faithful Ministry. says he, The
people sat there in the region and shadow of death, Matthew. 4. 16. that is,
till they had a better Ministry, they were in a damnable estate. So that it is
a pitiful thing, when any Town or Parish are without a faithful Ministry, no
star of Heaven shining among them.

Secondly, because when people have no faithful Minister of their own,
generally they care not for removing of their dwelling, neither will they go a
mile or two for the means, they content themselves with what fare they have at
home, though it starve them to death: Like the people under the false Prophets,
they liked them well enough. My people love to have it so, Jer. 5. 31. Nay,
they love such prophets better than them that would deal plainly with them;
Nay, there be many, that when they have a faithful Minister at home, will be
sneaking out, to a drunken Minister abroad, they would rather live under such a
one.

Thirdly, Another Reason why every Church should have its particular Star;
every congregation had need of a faithful Ministry of their own: Because, if
there be any godly Soul, or any one that desires the salvation of his Soul,
and lives under a blind guide, he cannot go out, without giving very great
offense, it will be thought a giddiness, and a flighting of their own
Minister at home; now if every Parish had a sound Ministry in it, this would
not be: When people came out of every Parish round about unto John, they had
no Pastor of their own, but they came flocking unto John, no question but this
bred heart-burning against John: I, and ill will against those people, that
would not be satisfied with what teaching they had in their own Synagogues.
Now, I say, if every Parish had its several shining Star, this would not be.

Fourthly, When some Parishes have their Stars and many have not. This casts
in a bone of discord between Ministers, for they that are idle, and vain, and
scandalous, will envy them that spend themselves in giving light. Again, the
people of such Parishes have many times occasion of conversing together, and
falling into one another company. Now, how will this harden one another
hearts, when people shall say, Gods blessing on our Ministers heart, he does
not meddle or make with us, we may do what we will for all him! who would
dwell in such a Parish as yours is? we hear he keeps a horrible stir with
you, he will not let you alone, you cannot be merry now and then, but you are
sure to hear of it: he is so strict forsooth, and so precise, you must have
preaching, forenoon and afternoon, and there is such ado to get precise
Constables, that you cannot be quiet. What a woeful thing is this? how does
this harden the Countries hearts?

The Use of this is; first, this shows what a miserable thing Use 1.
it is, when a Land is darkened, that has but a few stars; May be here one
and there one, but most places are in darkness, and have none: Beloved, this
is a sign of the wrath of God. God is wroth with such a Land, and powers his
wrath upon such a people, as the Prophet says. Through the wrath of the Lord
of Hoasts, is the Land darkened, Esa. 9. 19.

Again, secondly, you that have your stars shining among Use 2.
you, how are you to bless God, when there are so many places in the world
that have none! Suppose the Harvest should be coming, and the earth has
great need of rain, to plump up the ears, the Corn is quite spoiled for want
of rain: if it do not rain; Alas! our Corn will be burnt up, and prove little
worth. Now if God should rain upon your fields, and not upon your Neighbors:
Your Closes, and Leizes have rain, but on the other side of the hedge there is
none; What a special mercy is this unto you? As God says, I have caused it to
rain upon one City, and caused it not to rain upon another, one piece was
rained upon, and the piece whereupon it rained not, withered, Amos 4. 7. is not
this a great mercy to the owner of that ground where the rain falls, and does
not fall elsewhere? so, my Brethren, you that have the spiritual rain in your
particular parishes, what a mercy of God is it unto you? when so many Parishes
have not one drop of it.

Again, thirdly, let us take heed lest those few stars that Use 3.
yet be, set upon us, and so we be all in darkness, we have a little rain
yet, here and there some. O let us repent and be more forward to bring forth
more fruit, if we continue to provoke God with our unfruitfulnesse, as we
do, that little shall be taken away from you. When Gods Vineyard in Judah
became barren, and brought forth no grapes, but wild ones; What says God? I
will command the clouds, that they rain no rain upon it, Esa. 5. 6. q. d. I
will take away all the rainy clouds: ye shall have clouds still, but they
shall be clouds without rain, stars without light and heat, Ministers that
shall do you no good, this is a fearful case, and yet God will bring it upon
us, for a certain* if we do not take heed.

There be six signs of all the stars vanishing away, that God will take away
those few stars, those few godly Ministers away, that are left.

First, when people will not walk in the light, while they have the light. As
our Savior Christ says: Yet a little while is the light with you, walk while
ye have the light, lest darkness come upon you* Joh. 12. 35. q. d. ye have
the light; a little while the Lord lets you have it, he lets it stay with you
a little while longer, but if ye will not walk in the light, the light shall
be gone, and ye shall be in darkness, this is an evident sign that the
light will surely away from us: what a deal of light is yet held before our
faces, and scarce any have a heart to walk in it! When servants are idle, and
will not mend their clothes, in the day time at spare hours, why should the
Master allow them any candle? so, we have a day among us, and people will not
bestirre themselves, they go all rent and tottered in their garments, they
care not for doing of their business, therefore, the Lord will allow them no
candle, he will put out all the lights.

Secondly, when people grow deader and deader, when they forsake their first
love, they were once more earnest for heaven, more tender in Conscience, more
eager for good things, more lively in Prayer, more zealous in holy duties, but
now they abate, and slacken, they are told of it, and yet they do not amend,
when it is once come to this pass, the Lord will remove the faithful
Ministry of his Word. To what end should he let it stay any longer? as Christ
says to Hphesus, Remember from whence thou art fallen, and repent, and do the
first works, or else I will come unto thee quickly, and will remove thy
Candle-stick out of its place, except thou repent, Rev. 2. 5. this is another
sign of the Ministeries departing away from us, Candle and candle-stick will
away, for we will not amend. We have been told of our formality, we have
heard whole Sermons against our luke warmness, and against our declinings, and
yet nothing will fetch us up again. We will not think soundly from whence we
are fallen, we will not be persuaded to do our first works, our hearts are
grown senseless, and nothing can pluck them up, therefore how can we hope but
our candlestick will be removed, and quickly too.

Thirdly, when people wax weary of Gods Ordinances, they are even cloyed with
them, like the Israelites there in Amos, when will the New Moon be gone that
we may fell corn? when will the Sabbath be over, that we may set forth
Wheat? Amos 8. 5. q. d. here is such ado with Lectures, and Sermons, we can
hardly have time for our Markets: such ado with the Sabbath, it is so tedious,
so irksome, we are not able to hold out, Prayers in the Family come so fast
about, and duties come so thick, we have hardly any space for our other
businesses. Ministers require so much of us, Sermons are so strict, Sacrifices
are so often, we can have no breathing: thus people are cloyed, they are full
fed, they care not much if they had less, nay, some will not stick to say it,
and others that in their hypocrisy will not say it, yet they have no stomach,
no appetite, there is so much Word, that they are not able to digest it,
neither have they any mind to concoct it; therefore mark there what follows.
Behold! the days come, says the Lord, that I will send a famine in the land,
not a famine of bread, nor a thirst for water, but of hearing the words of the
Lord, ver. 11. that is, you are more afraid of a famine of bread, ye would be
more troubled if you had no Bread to eat, nor liquour to drink, you care not
so it be not that famine. But think what you will, I will send you a worse
famine than that, a famine of hearing of Gods Word. Ye shall have Preaching
little enough. Little enough food for your souls, seeing ye will be filthy,
ye shall be filthy; seeing ye will be heartlesse toward heavenly things, ye
shall be heartlesse; ye shall be hardened, ye shall be let alone; and the
blind shall lead the blind, and both shall fall into the ditch; the wicked
shall lead the wicked, wicked Ministers the wicked people, and both shall
perish together: and then though ye would never so fain have a Sermon that may
come to the Conscience, ye shall be long enough before ye shall hear it: Ye
shall starve for want of spiritual knowledge: starved to death for want of
life: Seared in your sins; ye shall have no Sermons to dispossess you of
Satan, no teaching to purge your hearts, to humble your souls before God, or
to minister the Spirit unto you, ye are weary of the sound Ministry of the
Word, therefore ye shall not be troubled with it. This then is another sign
that God will take away those few Stars that are yet remaining. And then woe
be to you.

Fourthly, when there are hardly any sons of peace, that the Ministers peace
may light upon, then the Lord bids them pack away: Like the Market folks, when
they see their Commodities lie upon their hands, they take up their Commodities
lie upon their hands, they take up their Commodities, and go home. O say they,
people will give nothing, they will not give our price, we and our children
will have them for our own selves, rather then we will part with them for
nothing. So they go away, so, Gods Ministers go away, when the Market is
dead, no Customer will come to their stalls. So Paul and Barnabas went away
from the Jews, Ye put off the word from you, and therefore, lo, we turn unto
the Gentiles, Act. 13. 46. q. d. ye will have none of it, we have offered it
to you, and we were bid to do so, but ye put it off from you, therefore fare
ye well. Die in your sins. So people now put off the word of God, our Doctrine
sinks no where almost; one puts it off from him, another puts it off from him:
Like as the Cities of the Philistims did with the Ark. The men of Ekron, they
cried out, and do you bring it to us? and so the men of Ashdod, said, and it
shall not abide with us. 1 Samuel 5. 7. Every one put it off, they would have
none of it.

Fifthly, when people oppose, they are so far from repenting at the preaching
of the Word, that they fall to oppose, and to mis-use the bringers of it, as
the Jews did Saint Paul. The Text says, He shook his raiment at them, and
told them, your blood be upon your own heads, and away he went, Act. 18. 6.
when people lay their heads together, how they may heave out the Minister, many
times God gives them leave for to do it, that they may bring evil on their
own heads, the Lord lets them have their cursed wills, to their own utter
destruction and condemnation.

Sixthly, when God has sent all his Ministers that ever he means to send: He
sent one Minister, and they would not hear him, he sent another after him, and
they would not hearken to him neither, a man would wonder, surely God will send
no more, well, may be God in his great goodness sends another good man, and he
does what he can, but the people will do wickedly still. Yea, but when God
has sent all that He means to send, now he will send no more; as God did with
Judah. I have sent unto you all my servants the Prophets, rising up early and
sending them, saying, return from your evil ways, but ye have not inclined
your ear unto me, Jer. 35. 15. when God had sent all, then he would send no
more.

You will say, how can this be a sign? when God has sent all that he means
to send: who can tell that?

I Answer, Beloved, God may show it plainly, that God has sent even all that
he means to send; when he blocks up the way, that more cannot be suffered to
come to us, then those that are come, when such courses are laid, that never a
faithful one more is permitted to enter; when Gods faithful ones are
forbidden to Preach, as Paul says, They forbid us to Preach. When people will
have Pashur's, and not Jeremiah's: When there be Laws made, Look ye speak no
more in his name: When they say to the Seers, see not, and to the Prophets
prophecy it. When the good Levites are made to go away, and to leave their
own places, as it was in Jeroboams time, 2 Chronicles. 11. 14. Again, when the
shadows wax long, it is a sign that the Sun is going down.

The reason why God will take away all his Stars, when matters are come to
this pass, is,

First, because it is but lost labor, and Cost cast away, to administer
physic to such patients whose diseases are desperate: my Brethren, God is a
wise phisician, and he knows whom he has to deal with: when he sees men
rend in pieces his Prescripts, and pull off his plasters, and vomit up his
wholesome potions, that he gives them for their good; he gives them up for
gone, he will be their Physician no longer. This was the reason why God did
leave Judah, Thy disease is incurable, Jer. 30. 12.

Secondly, because it is not only lost labor, but it is worse then lost, to
let such people have the Ministry of the word: it makes them much worse. Why
should ye be smitten any more? ye will revolt more and more, Esa. 1. 5. why
should ye be preached to any more? ye will, etc.

Thirdly, Because if men will needs go on in their sins, God would rather they
should do so without his word, then with it: as a husbandman, if the ground
be stark barren, he would rather never plough it, and sow it with seed, then
to have it barren after the seed sown; when people will needs be wicked, God
would rather have them do all their wickedness out of his sight, then in it,
I will cast you out of my sight, Jer. 7. 15. God cannot abide to look upon a
people, that will have their own ways; they anger him more, when they commit
all their wickedness under his Word; God looks toward a people when he sends
them his holy Word, he looks upon them to do them good, he looks toward
them in pity, and calls them to repentance, that they may find favor with
him, and therefore, if they do evil now, this provokes him more a thousand
times. A drunkard where the word is truly preached, an adulterer there, a
muck-worm there, a proud person there, a profane wretch there; I say, this
angers him more a thousand thousand times. The times of ignorance, God wincked
at, Act. 17. 30. If your sins were committed in blind Parishes, God would
winck at you, in a manner, that is, your damnation should be less. God would
excuse you himself, in some measure. Alas! poor creatures, they know not what
they do; let them have less hell, they do not deserve so many plagues; he
wincks at the wicked that live without his Word: But you that live under the
word, he cannot winck at you. He will punish you to the full. O! Beloved,
above all things, the Lord cannot abide that people should be wretched and
vain under his Word: But I will pass over this point. Thus ye see they are
seven Stars, every Congregation had its Star, every Church had its Minister.

Now in the next place, we see here that Christ has these seven Stars. These
things says he that has the seven Spirits of God, and the seven Stars.
Christ has the seven stars. Christ is said to have the seven stars, in
five respects.

First, in respect that they have their mission from him, secondly, in respect
they have their Commission from him, thirdly, in respect they have their
abilities from him, fourthly, in respect they have their success from him,
fifthly, in respect they have their Protection from him; of these in their order.

First, they have their Mission from him. It is Christ that sends forth all
true Ministers: As my Father has sent me, so send I you, Joh. 20. 21. it is
Christ that sends Ministers to the Church, as he told Jerusalem: Behold I send
unto you Prophets, and Wisemen, and Scribes, Matthew. 23. 34. He called the
twelve, and began to send them forth by two and two, etc. Mark. 6. 5. So he
called the seventy and sent them also, Luke 10. 1. so it is Christ that sends
Ministers to this day. True, the Church does ordain them; I, but if they be not
sent by him too, they are intruders. Now when he sends them, they are his
Ministers, though it be the Church that puts them into Orders. As it is with a
true Constable, though the Parish choose him, yet he is the Kings Officer, and
does things in the Kings name; so it is with every true Minister, Christ has
the sending of him, he is the Minister of Christ, as the Apostle says, Let a
man so account of us as the Ministers of Christ, 1 Cor. 4. 1. and therefore
look what we do in our Office, we do it in his name. As he said, in the
name of Jesus Christ rise up and walk. So we say unto Gods Elect, in the name
of Jesus Christ, rise up and walk. In the name of Jesus Christ Repent of all
your wicked ways, and Believe, and though the world will not stir at our
speech, yet they that are elected of God do stir: they are none but the
Reprobate, that lie still in their sins, sometime or other we get all* the
Elect for to hear us.

The Use of this is; first, for comfort to us that are true Ministers, Christ
has the sending of us, therefore certainly he will be with us in all his
errands, the world may be against us, we may meet with many wolves: Behold! I
send you as sheep among Wolves; people may threaten and speak their words
against us, a foot and a half long; what need we care for all their great
speeches, as long as Christ sends us? Christ will be with us for the good of
his Elect, in all the course of our Ministry, be it short, or be it long: We
shall be useful to them what ever the world do: if there be any that belong
to God, we shall find them out, no matter for others. Christ will be with us
in the Pulpit, in the prison, in the dog-hole, if ye would put us into it, as
Christ told his Ministers, Go and teach all Nations, Baptizing them in the
Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost, and lo I am with you
to the end of the world, Matthew. 28. 19, 20. this is our comfort that Christ
will be with us, and this is the Elects comfort, they shall be sure to find
him with us in our Ministry.

Secondly, if Christ has the sending of us, we must be Use 2.
sure we do his message, that we perform the work he sends us to do, every
messenger should do thus, nay, Christ himself did thus. I seek not mine own
will, but the will of the Father which has sent me; Joh. 5. 30. If a Merchant
should send a servant beyond Sea, to be a Factor for him, if that servant
should go and trade for himself, to get moneys for himself, and an estate for
himself, and neglect his Masters business; he may look for a cold welcome
home: so when Christ sends us to be Factors for him, to see what Souls we
can gain unto him; if we should now seek our selves, how to be rich, how to
be somebody in the world, how to get preferment, and so leave his business
undone; we may look for a cold welcome home, when we shall be brought before
God. Certainly, if Christ sends us, we should mind his work, glorify Christ,
labor to reveal Christ, to win Souls to Christ; this is our business to
do. When David sent Hushai to Absalom, to be a factor for him, we see how
well he did the message, he turned the counsel of Achitophel into
foolishness, he marred all that wicked wretches plots, he did all for David:
so we should do all for Christ, we should labor to turn the devils plots
into foolishness, to undermine Satan, and where God has any to save, we
shall prevail.

Thirdly, If Christ has the sending of us, we must give Use 3.
him account when we have done. When Christ had sent his Disciples to preach,
they returned again, and gave him account of what they had done, Luke 10. 17.
Lord even the Devils are subject unto us. Lord I have done thus and thus, I
have declared all thy whole counsel, I have kept nothing back: I have done thy
message, and such and such have heard me, but such and such will not hear me.
A messenger is bound to give an account unto him that sends him: nay, the
devil himself returned to give an account: when the Lord sent him to tempt
Job, he came again, and told what he had done, Job 2. 1. when the children of
Dan sent spies to search the land, they came and gave up their account. The
very devil may teach us this lesson, to go and give Christ account of what
we have done. We see there how they that had received the Talents, how they
came and gave in their account, Lord thy pound has gained ten pounds.

Fourthly, another Use is to you; what a great mercy is Use 4.
this, that Christ should send unto such as you be? If Christ had sent unto
you, when ye had sought him and turned unto him, it had been very much, but
that he should dispatch messengers to you, when ye had not a thought of him;
nay, when ye sinned against him, O what a great mercy is this! It was a great
kindness, that Joseph would send unto his Father, and his Brethren, and bid
them leave all, and come into the Land of Egypt, and willed them that they
should not care for their stuff, for the best of the Land of Egypt shall be
yours, ye know his brethren were unkind unto him. Beloved, Joseph was never
so unkindly dealt with by his Brethren, as Christ has been by us, and yet that
he should send to such wretches as we are: O leave all, and come unto me,
regard not your stuff, regard not your profits, never trouble your selves with
this thing and that thing, for all the best of heaven shall be yours; O what an
infinite kindness is this! when he will send such treasures of his to us, by
his Ministers. As Joseph filled his brethrens sacks with corn, which they
carried to their fathers house, in Canaan, to preserve them alive till they
came over to Egypt; So the Lord Jesus Christ, has put his spiritual treasures
into a sack, and given them his Ministers to dispense them to their brethren,
to nourish them, and preserve them, until they come home to him: he fills his
Ministers sacks every week for us, they come with sack-fulls of heavenly and
divine truths every week to us, with sack-fulls of food to feed our souls unto
eternal life, and when that is spent, he sends us every Sabbath more; and
therefore how should we esteem a true Minister that comes to us from Jesus
Christ! He is one of a thousand, as Elihu speaks, if there be a messenger with
him, an interpreter, one of a thousand, to declare unto man his righteousness,
then he is gracious unto him, Job 33. 23, 24. that is, then is God gracious to
us indeed, such a one is one of a thousand, such a one declares to us our
righteousness, he brings to us the righteousness of Jesus. This the Lord
Jesus Christ sends unto us, when he sends us a true Minister, he sends us an
excellent present, even his own righteousness and merits, and the glad tidings
of peace, how we may live and be saved: So that we should be thankful unto
God, that Christ sends to us his Ministers, with such precious things. If the
King should send to any one of us but five pound, O how would we wonder at it,
who ever were the messenger, we would bid such a one welcome, and, what! does
the King take notice of me? such a poor man as I? who would have thought that
ever he should send such a token to me? what a condescending is this! I tell
thee, if thee, if the King should do thus for thee, thou would make very
much of it, I, and talk of it too, where ever thou come; nay, it would make
thee glad, and a very joyful man, and it would make thee think thy self highly
preferred. O Beloved, and what a horrible shame is this, that the King of
Kings, and the Lord of Lords, should send a messenger to us every day almost,
not with five pounds a-piece to every one of us, but with all the riches and
treasures of heaven, to enrich us for ever, to make us happy for ever, Blessed
that ever we were born, and yet that we should not be affected hardly! My
Brethren, we that are the Ministers of God, we come with heavenly and glorious
things, every day from our Lord Jesus Christ: though we have them but in
earthly vessels, yet they are things that the whole world is but dross and
dung in comparison of, and therefore think how ye should come to Church; think
how ye should come to hear Sermons: Now I come to hear a message from Christ,
now shall I hear an Ambassador from heaven, that will break open Christ's
Letter to me, a reproof from Jesus Christ, a counsel from Christ, Directions
from Christ concerning the framing of my life, Lessons from Christ, how I may
come to glory. O, says the Apostle, He has given to us the Ministry of
reconciliation with God: to wit, that God was in Christ reconciling the world
unto himself, not imputing their trespasses unto them, and has committed unto
us the word of reconciliation. Now then we are Ambassadors for Christ, as
though God did beseech you by us, we pray you in Christ his stead be
reconciled unto God, 2 Cor. 5. 18, 19. 20. q. d. Ah ye poor creatures, God
and you are out, ye are enemies of God, by your evil works, the wrath of God
hangs over you, wrath for all your sins; wrath for your drunkenness; wrath
for your covetousness; wrath for all your carnal courses; ye lie under the
wrath of God, wrath that will damn you, and undo you for ever. Now the Lord
of Heaven and Earth has sent us as Heralds of Peace, we come Ambassadors from
the Lord of all glory, we have the word of reconciliation, the word that we
preach, will make God and you friends, if ye will believe it. O, we pray you
in Christ his stead consider of it, and be reconciled unto God, hear our
message, embrace our Embassage: O do not slight what we say to you, we speak
to you from Christ, do not receive it as a word only from our mouths, but as
indeed it is, the Word of the great God. This is the only Word that can make
God and you friends, O how highly does it concern you to submit hereunto!

How will this judge the world, that the Ministry of the Word, is no more
regarded or heeded! When God sends his Ministers unto people, and because
forsooth, their flesh and blood does not like it; they look little after it:
Whereas this contains eternal life, and if ye reject this, ye reject eternal
life. I beseech you judge what I say: Do you meet with a reproof, that
crosses your corrupt lusts? I pray you reason the case thus with your own
Souls, O let me not put off this reproof, it reproves me of my drunken
doings, it reproves me of my security, it reproves me of my sins: if I put it
off, I put off the word of reconciliation: This is one of those truths, that
comes to reconcile me to God: I stand out in rebellion, and desiance against
God, if I do not take it home. So of any other passage of the Word. Still when
the Prophets would speak unto the people, this was their voice, The Lord sent
me: so says Isaiah, the Lord sent me; and Jeremiah too, the Lord sent me.
When they refused to hear what he said: O, says he! Surely the Lord sent me
to speak thus unto you. One would think it were enough to strike terrough into
the hearts of men, to put off any Sermon, any rebuke, any exhortation, of
Christ's Ministers, when they know the Lord sends them. May be, the Minister is
as poor a creature as one of you; O, but remember who sends him, as Christ
says, he that hears you, hears me, and he that despises you, despises
me, and he that refuses me, refuses him that sent me, Luke 10. 16.

Revel. 3. 1. These things, says he, that has the seven Spirits of God, and
the seven Stars.
I Have begun to handle this Epistle, wherein I noted four things:

First, the inscription, declaring to whom this Epistle is sent, To the Angel
of the Church in Sardis, write: that is, to the Minister of the Church, and to
the Church it self.

Secondly, The Subscription, declaring from whom it is sent: These things,
says he that, etc.

Thirdly, The Substance, or subject matter of the Epistle: I know thy works,
etc. Usque ad, ver. 4.

Fourthly, The Conclusion, He that over-commeth, etc. ver. 5, 6.

I have already Analyzed all this whole Epistle, and Paraphrased upon every
part of it, and showed you the meaning of it, and the scope of it; and have
made some entrance upon it; namely, to reprove their deadness and coldness in
Religion, and to quicken them up unto life, lest the judgment of God fall upon
them. I have dispatched the Inscription: And to the Angel of the Church in
Sardis, write: and so I pass on to the second: Namely, the Subscription, These
things says, etc.

These words, as ye heard, contain a description of our Lord Jesus Christ, from
whom this Epistle is sent. The Description is not a whole and an entire
description of him, but only accommodated to the business in hand. And
therefore it describes him only from two admirable Royalties that are in him.
The first is this, That he has the seven Spirits of God, that is, he has the
Holy and quickening Spirit, to give him to whomsoever he please, q. d. if ye
would be quickened, hearken unto me, come unto me, I have all the graces of the
Spirit to quicken you withal.

Secondly, That he has the seven Stars, that is, as I told you, he has all
the Ministers of the Church in his hand, and at his dispose, These things,
says he that has the seven Spirits of God, and the seven Stars, That is,
Christ has all the Stars, all the Ministers of the Church, they are all in
his hand. I told you, he is said to have them in five respects: 1. They have
their Mission from him. 2. They have their Commission from him. 3. They have
their Abilities from him. 4. They have the success of their labors from him.
5. They have their protection from him, he opens their mouths as long as he
lists, and shuts them, when he sees fit so to do.

I have spoken of the first; The Ministers of Christ have their Mission from
Christ, he has the sending of them, As my Father has sent me, so send I you,
Joh. 20. 21. it is Christ that sends Ministers to the Church, as he told
Jerusalem, Behold! I send unto you Prophets, and Wisemen, and Scribes, Matthew.
23. 34. He called the twelve, and began to send them forth by two and two,
Mark. 6. 7. So he called the seventy and sent them also, Luke 10. 1. so, it is
Christ that sends all true Ministers, to this day. True, the Church does Ordain
them, I* but if they be not sent by him too, they are intruders. Now when he
sends them, they are his Ministers, though the Church put them into Orders. As
it is with a true Constable, though the Parish choose him, yet he is the Kings
Officer, and does things in the Kings name. So it is with every true Minister,
Christ has the sending of him. He is the Minister of Christ, as the Apostle
says, Let a man so account of us, as of the Ministers of Christ. 1 Cor. 4. 1.
And therefore look what* we do in our Office, we do it in his name. As Peter
said, In the name of Jesus Christ, rise up and walk. So we say unto Gods Elect,
rise up and walk, in the name of Jesus Christ repent of all thy wicked ways
and believe, and though the world will not stir at our speech, yet they that
are elected of God do stir, they are none but the reprobate that lie still
in their sins. Sometime or other we get home all the Elect, they hear us, they
obey us, they submit to our Doctrine, in the name of Jesus Christ.

The Use of this is; first, for comfort of the poor Ministers Use 1.
of Christ, may be we meet with many wolves in the delivery of his errands. We
meet with sour faces, and wry looks, suspensions, oppositions, and such like
wolvish dealings, for doing of our message; what need we care for all these, as
long as Christ sends us. Certainly, if he send us, he will be with us, as God
said to Moses, I send thee, certainly I will be with thee, Exodus 3. 12. he will
be with us for the good of his chosen, in all the course of our Ministry, be
it short, or be it long. We shall be useful unto them, though the reprobate
world will not obey any of our words. Christ will be with us in the Pulpit, in
the prison, in a dog-hole, if the wicked put us in it, as Christ said, Go and
teach all Nations, and lo I am with you to the end of the world, Matthew. 28.
19, 20. This is our comfort, Christ will be with us, and this is the Elects
comfort, they shall be sure to find him with us in our Ministry: if we be in
the Pulpit, there they shall hear us teaching of them; if in the prison, there
they shall have us sealing of the truth to them.

Secondly, if Christ has the sending of us, we must be Use 2.
sure to do his message, that we perform the work he sends us to do. Every
messenger should do thus. I seek not mine own will, says Christ, but the will
of the Father which has sent me* Joh. 5. 30. if a Merchant should send a
servant beyond the Seas, to be a Factor for him, if that servant should go and
trade for himself, to get money for himself, and an estate for himself, and
neglect his Masters business, he may look for a cold welcome home: So when
Christ sends us to be Factors for him, to see what Souls we can gain unto
him, if we should now seek our selves, how to be rich, how to be somebody in
the world, how to get preferment, and so leave his business undone; we may
look for a cold welcome home. Certainly, if Christ sends us, we should mind
his work, we should glorify Christ, labor to reveal Christ, to win Souls to
Christ* This is our business to do.

Thirdly, If Christ has the sending of us, we must give Use 3.
him account when we have done. When Christ had sent his Disciples to preach,
they returned again, and gave him account of what they had done, Luke 10. 17.
Lord even the Devils are subject unto us. Lord I have done thus and thus, I
have declared all thy whole counsel, I have kept nothing back: I have done thy
message, and such and such have heard me, but such and such will not hear me.
A messenger is bound to give an account unto him that sends him: nay, the
devil himself returned to give an account: when the Lord sent him to tempt
Job, he came again, and told what he had done, Job* 2. 1. So we should come
again, and tell God what we have done. When the children of Dan sent spies to
search the land, they came and related what they had done, so should we do.
Lord, behold, here am I, and here are the people that I have begotten by thy
Word, and here are the rebels that I could never get to reform their wicked
ways. We see how they that had received the Talents, how they came and gave
in their account, Lord, thy pound has gained ten pounds. O what a case shall
we be in, if we cannot give up a good account at the last day, of what we
have done in our places and callings!

Fourthly, If Christ send us unto you. O, Beloved, what Use 4.
a great mercy is this ^^ that Christ should send unto such as you be? If
Christ had sent unto you, when ye had sought him and turned unto him, it had
been very much, but that he should dispatch messengers unto you, when ye had
not so much as a thought of him; nay, when ye sinned against him, This was a
mercy indeed! It was a great kindness, that Joseph would send unto his Father,
and his Brethren, and bid them leave all, and come into the Land of Egypt: O,
says he, regard not your stuff, for the best of the Land of Egypt shall be
yours, ye know his brethren were unkind unto him. Beloved, Joseph was never
so unkindly dealt with by his Brethren, as Christ has been by us, and yet that
he should send to such wretches as we are: O leave all, and come unto me,
regard not your stuff, regard not your profits, never trouble your selves with
this thing and that thing, for all the best of heaven shall be yours; O what an
infinite kindness is this! when he will send such treasures of his to us, by
his Ministers. As Joseph filled his brethrens sacks with corn, which they
carried to their fathers house, in Canaan, to preserve them alive till they
came into Egypt; So the Lord Jesus Christ, has put his spiritual treasures,
as it were, into a sack, and given them his Ministers to dispense to their
brethren, to nourish them, and preserve them, until they come home to him: he
fills his Ministers sacks every week for us, they come with sack-fulls of
heavenly and divine truths every week to us, with sack-fulls of food to feed
our souls unto eternal life, and when that is spent, he sends us every
Sabbath more; and therefore how should we esteem a true Minister that comes to
us from Jesus Christ! He is one of a thousand, as Elihu speaks, if there be a
messenger with him, an interpreter, one of a thousand, to declare unto man his
righteousness, then he is gracious unto him, Joh 33. 23, 24. that is, then is
God gracious to us indeed. When God sends us a messenger from him, such a one
is one of a thousand, such a one declares to us our righteousness. Ye know
we cannot stand before God without righteousness. Now such a one declares to
us righteousness. He brings us the righteousness of Jesus Christ. So that we
should be thankful to Christ that he sends us any of his true Ministers. O my
Brethren, we that are the Ministers of God, we come with heavenly and glorious
things, every day from our Lord Jesus Christ: Though we have them but in
earthen vessels, yet they are things, that the whole world is but dross and
dung to; and therefore think how ye should come to Church; think how ye
should be affected with our message, think with what affections ye should
hear our Sermons: Now I come to hear a message from Christ, a Letter from
Christ, a Direction from Christ, a reproof from Christ, counsels from Christ,
for the framing of my life, now I shall be told, what I may do to inherit
glory. O, says the Apostle, He has given to us the Ministry of
reconciliation with God: to wit, that God was in Christ reconciling the world
unto himself, not imputing their trespassesunto them, and has committed unto
us the word of reconciliation. Now then we are Ambassadors for Christ, as
though God did beseech you by us, we pray you in Christ his stead be
reconciled unto God, 2 Cor. 5. 18, 19. 20. q. d. Ah ye poor creatures, God
and you are out, ye are enemies of God, by your evil works, the wrath of God
hangs over you, wrath for all your sins; wrath for all your drunkenness;
your covetousness; worldliness; wrath for all your carnal courses; your
slighting of heaven and heavenly things, the wrath of God abides on you. Now
the Lord of Heaven and Earth has sent us as Heralds of Peace, we come as
Ambassadors from the Lord of all glory, we have the word of reconciliation, the
word which we preach, will make God and you friends again, if ye will believe
it, and embrace it. We pray you in Christ his stead to consider of it, be
reconciled unto God, hear our message, do not slight what we say to you, we
speak to you from Christ, This is the only Word that can make God and you
friends.

O how will this judge the world, that the Ministry of the Word, is no more
regarded nor heeded! When God sends his Ministers unto people, and because
forsooth, their flesh and blood does not like it; they look little after it*
Whereas this contains eternal life, and if ye reject this, ye reject eternal
life. I beseech you judge what I say: Do you meet with a reproof that crosses
your corrupt Iusts? I pray you reason the case thus with your own Souls, I am
reproved for my looseness, and my vain ways, my fashioning of my self
according to this world, my fawning, my flattering, my gaming, my scandalous
courses, my sinning against light, I have had good education, I have lived
under good means, but I am very graceless, if I put off these reproves, I
put off the word of reconciliation: This is the word that comes to reconcile me
to God, if I have faith to apply it, but if I put it from me, and do not
regard it, I refuse all reconciliation with God. So, when the Word shows you
your duty, how to believe, how to live, how to walk, in all holiness and true
righteousness. Consider, if ye put it from you, ye put away from you the
only word of reconciliation. These are the truths that are sent unto me, to
reconcile me unto God: O, if I will have none of them, I cast off the Son of
God, and everlasting life. Still when the Prophets would speak unto the people,
this was their preface, The Lord sent me: so says Isaiah, the Lord sent me,
Esa. 48. 16. so says Jeremiah, the Lord sent me. When they refused to hear
what he said: O, says he! Truly the Lord sent me, of a truth the Lord has
sent me unto you, to speak all these words unto you. Jer. 26. 15. One would
think it wore enough to strike terror into the hearts of men, to put off any
Sermon, any rebuke, any exhortation of Christ's Ministers, when they know the
Lord sends them. Of a truth the Lord has sent me to speak all these words
unto you. May be, the Minister is as poor a creature in himself, as one of
you; O, but remember who sends him, as Christ says, he that hears you,
hears me, and he that despises you, despises me, and he that despises
me, despises him that sent me, Luke 10. 16. So much shall suffice to have
been spoken of the first way, whereby Christ is said to have the seven Stars,
that is, the Ministers of the Church, namely, he has the sending of them.

Secondly, He has them, that is, he has the giving of them their
Commission, as they have their Mission from him, so they have their Commission
from him too. They are not only messengers but Ambassadors. This Commission
has two things; first, the heads of their Embassage, that Christ sends them to
treat of. Secondly, the authority of their Embassage, that Christ invests them
with.

For the first, the heads of their commission, Christ has the appointing of
them, what they shall treat of, and they are five. First, they shall preach the
Word. Go and preach the Gospel to every creature, Mark. 16. 15. Secondly, to
remit the sin of all them that do embrace the Gospel, Joh. 20. 23. that is, to
pronounce all the promises of the Covenant of Grace, and in particular,
forgiveness of sins to all true penitent and believing Souls. Thirdly, to
administer the Sacraments of the New Testament, to all the said persons, to
whom the promises of eternal life do belong, for the assuring of their
hearts, concerning all the things of the Kingdom of God to them in particular,
Matthew. 28. 19. Fourthly, To build up the Church of God, for the perfecting of
the Saints, and the edifying of the body of Christ, until they all come, etc.
Ephesians. 4. 12. Fifthly, to shut the Kingdom of Heaven upon all that have an
evil heart of unbelief, to go on in their sins, and not to stoop to the
Scepter of Jesus Christ, Mark. 16. 16. and in diverse other places. These are
the heads of their commission, that Christ will have them treat of in their
Embassage unto men.

Secondly, now for the Authority that he invests them with, it is not any
carnal or earthly authority, to jet, and to vaunt, or to domineere, as though
they were Lords, and Gods heritage, 1 Pet. 5. 3. no, says Christ, it shall not
be so with you. But he that is greatest among you, he shall be as the least,
Luke 22. 26. and therefore I do not here speak of any earthly authority: No,
the Authority that Christ's Ministers have, and they have it from him, is a
spiritual Authority: uamely, not only to preach, and to declare forgiveness
of sin, and to administer the seals of the covenant, and to build up the
Saints, and to denounce wrath and damnation to all that continue in their
unregenerate estate through impenitence and unbelief, but to do all these
things with a heavenly Power and Authority, to have an Office under Christ for
the doing of them, so as to be the very mouth of Christ, and that which they
do according to their commission from him, to stand firm and good, for ever
and ever. I will give power to my two witnesses. Rev. 11. 3. The Lord has
given me power and authority says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 10. 8. You will say this
is great power indeed, all the Kings and Potentates of the earth have not so
great power as this, this is a power of life and death, not natural, nor
temporary, but Spiritual and eternal, this is a power not oven men's Bodies
but over their souls, not in small matters* but either for salvation
ordamnation. This is a great Commission, how come they by such a great one as
this is? O says Christ, I am able to invest them with as much as this comes
to. For all power is given unto me in Heaven and Earth. Matthew. 28. 18. q. d. I
am able to furnish you with all authority and power, go you in my name, and
preach you in my name, in my name bid people repent and believe, in my name
open heaven to all that do obey, and shut it upon all that do disobey, and I
will make it good.

The use of this is. First, have the Ministers of Christ such Use 1.
a Commission from Christ? then they are the greatest Ambassadors, that ever
were, or can be. Ambassadors of earthly Kings, have a great Commission, they
represent the Kings person from whom they come, Alas, what are they to these?
they come about petty things, about civil peace, or war and yet they are
Lord Ambassadors, they are Lords by their places, they are much respected among
men. O then what great Ambassadors are the Ministers of Jesus Christ, that
represent the King of Kings person, that represent the person of the Lord of
Lords, that came to Treat of peace between God and Man, or of open Hostility
between the Creator and the Creature? as Paul says now then we are
Ambassadors for Christ, As though God did beseech you by us, we pray you in
Christ's stead be reconciled unto God, 2 Cor. 15. 20. that is, we have a very
great commission, we represent the person of our Lord Jesus Christ, we come to
treat with you about eternity, according as you hear us, or hear us not, so
it will be with you unto all eternity. O consider what we have to do, you are
enemies unto God from the womb, as long as your sins do remain, ye are enemies
still, we come to set you at one again. Ye know the condition, ye know what
the heads of our commission be, if ye will not hearken unto them, and submit,
ye are damned for ever; if ye do, blessed and happy are ye for evermore, was
there ever such a great Embassage as this? as the Apostle says, To make known
the mystery of the Gospel, for which, I am an Ambassador in bonds, Ephesians. 6.
19, 20. q. d. though the wicked and blind world, look upon me as a
Schismatique, and a malefactor, and cast me into the prison, and here I am in
bonds, they see no such thing in me, as an Ambassador of the great God, yet
the truth is, though I be in bonds, they shall know it one day to their cost,
who I was, and what a commission I had, and what it is to slight it, and put it
off. I am an Ambassador of the mystery of the Gospel, though I be in bonds.

Secondly, Have some Ministers, such a commission from Use 2.
Christ? then let them learn how to behave themselves in their function. My
Brethren, Christ has committed unto us the custody of his own power, and
authority, and therefore we are to exercise it in his name, our commission is
to charge the great men of the world, Charge them that are rich in this world,
that they be not high-minded, 1 Timothy 6. 17. True, we are your servants for
Jesus his sake, and we are to be humbled, and to wait upon men of lowest
degree, and to condefcend unto men of meanest capacity, and there is a time
when we should for loves-sake entreat, but the truth is too, we have power to
charge and command, These things command and teach, 1 Timothy 4. 11. These things
speak and exhort, and rebuke withal authority. Tit. 2. 15. We must not betray
the power and majesticall simplicity of the Gospel of Jesus Christ. We have
Christ's own power and authority in our ministry, and therefore we are to
command you in his stead: as ever you will answer Christ, before his Tribunal
at last day, neglect not those things, which we preach to you from him. Now we
command you, Brethren, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye withdraw
your selves from every brother that walks disorderly, and not after the
Tradition which he received of us. 2. These. 3. 6. True, we are inferiors to
Kings, and Princes, and Magistrates, and the Nobility and Gentry of the land:
There be thousands and thousands that are our Betters, in all civil respects;
but our Embassage is above all.

The Lords own Power and Authority goes through the ministry, as a Trunk. As,
the King may send a Command to the greatest* Nobleman of the Kingdom by the
hand of a mean man* and he is to hearken to it: though the messenger in
himself be his underling, yet his message is above him, and he looses his head
if he despise it. So, beloved, we are over you in the Lord, that is in regard
of our message. Though we be your inferiors, and some of you be our betters,
and we are to stand with Cap in hand to you; yet ye loose your souls; if ye
will not hear us, and obey our Embassage. We must not bow to your humors, nor
make the Spirit of Christ in the Gospel to bend and comply with human lusts.
If Princes and Potentates were by, we must not spare their sins. Nathan deals
roundly with King David. Thou art the man. Jehu, with King Jehosaphat, wrath is
upon thee from the Lord, because thou have helped the ungodly. We must let all
the world know that Christ whom we preach, is above them all, we must not
prostitute Christ's Scepter, no not at a Monarchs foot. If we be men-pleasers,
we are not the servants of Christ. We must not suffer Christ's word to be bound,
whosoever is our hearer, whether high or low. We defy popish Divinity that
exalt their Antichristan Clergy, above the civil Magistrate. Belarmines Martin
is but a foysted story. But yet in this sense we are above all the Kingdoms of
men, as God says, Behold I have put my words in thy mouth, and lo I have set
thee this day over Nations and Kingdoms, to plant and to root up, to build and
to throw down. Jer. 1. 9. 10. Let no man think we are saucy, though we
reprove the greatest of you all, as long as we do it in Christ, and from
Christ, we are the mouth of the Judge of quick and dead, and he will make our
words good; The meanest Sergeant in the Kings name dares arrest the greatest
Duke. So, my Brethren, we come in the Kings name, in Christ his name, and
therefore we must not be afraid of your faces, As Paul told Philemon, I have
great authority in Christ to command thee, that which is convenient. Philem. 8.
We have great authority to command every one of you, to do your Duties toward
God, and man. We have Christ for our Author, and therefore he will be a wall of
Brass to us. We are his Ambassadors, and therefore our Message is with great
power.

Thirdly, Have we this Commission from Jesus Christ? Use 3.
then this may serve to condemn all such as do not obey our Ministry. Though
we have all this authority, the very power of Christ himself in our mouths,
that equally binds King and Beggar; Yet who obeys our commands? who stirs?
who repents? who submits himself unto our commission? we have called for
humiliation, but no man will humble himself* We have cried for reformation, and
amendment of life, but no man relents; we have read our commission every week
unto people, we show them our Letters Patents from the Lord Jesus Christ, and
they are counted as idle tales by the most. O what an indignity is this unto
our Lord Jesus Christ! we are his Ambassadors, and your standing out against
us, is not against us, but against him, and he will repay it. O, says the
Apostle, if any man obey not our word, By this Epistle, note that man, 2 Thessalonians.
3. 14. q. d. note him with a brand of infamy, note him as a Rebel against
Jesus Christ, look upon him as a wretched miserable creature, take heed of him,
avoid him, withdraw your self from him, point at him, yonder goes a wretch,
that will not obey the voice of his teacher, excommunicate him from your
company, have as little to do with him as you can. Be ye shie of such a man,
certainly there is great wrath hangs over him. So, Beloved, if any obey not
our word, note such persons, note such parishes, note all such families, the
wrath of heaven hangs over them, their stubbornness, and hardness of heart
is not against us, but against the Lord. These are notorious Towns, notorious
people, that have Christ's Ambassadors among them, and yet will not be obedient,
and yet how is our Embassage made nothing of! if Kings only, and Princes, and
Lords, and great men should make nothing of it, we should not so much wonder,
because they are greater men, then those that God sends his Embassage by, and
yet if they were wise, and knew what they did, they durst not do as they do,
but every base fellow stops his ear, and hardens his heart, against the God of
Heaven and earth, and will not obey our word: nay, men can hear their sins
ripped up, and the Anathema's of Christ spread before their faces, and not
blush. They can hear that those very sins they live in, do separate from
God, do adjudge them to hell, and show them to be under the blacknes of
darkness, and the sentence of damnation, they can see it shown them out of
the word, which they cannot deny for their hearts, though they would never so
feign, and yet they will not repent nor return that they may have mercy. Not
one drunkard will leave, nor one Mocker leave, nor one Covetous person, nor one
graceless wretch leave, they will have their own ways, do the Ministers of
God what they can. We can get none to be awakened, none quickened, none
stirred, none startled to any purpose. Setting aside here one and there one
that truly obeys the voice of Gods servants, the whole country lying in
ignorance of God, in the privation of his Spirit, unreconcilednesse with
heaven, voydnesse of faith, emptiness of grace and life, the nakedness of an
outward profession, having no true quickening within, nay the most in gross
wickedness, drunkenesse, company-keeping, unrulinesse, disorder,
uncleanenesse, lasciviousness, covetousness, mocking at the pure in heart,
malicious alienation of spirit against the holy ways of God. Nay since we have
spoken to them in the name of the Lord, yet none will hearken to any effect
that their souls may live.

Fourthly, therefore, I pray you let me add one use more; Use 4.
do but consider, how the Lord takes this at our hands, that his Ministers
are thus vilipended. They are in more danger of their liberty for reproving,
then the wicked for committing of their sins. Are his Ministers, his
Ambassadors? then he will never endure that his Ambassadors shall be abused.
When the King of the Ammonites had abused David's Ambassadors, that he sent him
in love. 2 Samuel 10. Ye know what it cost, it cost above 40. thousand men's
lives. The Romans slew the Illyrians and the Tarentines, for mis-using of their
Ambassadors, and as Cicero says, our Ancestors says he, for this very thing
destroyed all Corinth. For alas how could Princes deal with one another, if
Ambassadors should not go safe, and be hearkened unto? Therefore Ambassadors
must be regarded. When Scipio Africanus took a ship full of Carthaginians,
though he meant to rifle all they had, yet when they said they were
Ambassadors, he would not meddle with them. True, they were not, they did but
counterfeit, that so they might escape. But yet you may see how inviolable
Ambassadors were, the least indignity offered to them, was punished as if it had
been offered to the person of that Prince, that they did sustain. Well then,
how do we think will the Lord take it at peoples hands, that his Ambassadors
are abused, and disobeyed, that people will not diligently come to them, and
acknowledge their errands, and yield obedience to him, no Nation under heaven
has had more Ambassadors from Heaven then we have had, and though some have
hearkened to them, yet for the most part they meet with Ammonitish dealings
they are disfigured, and mocked, and laded with indignities, denied to deliver
their message, every paltry rascals complaint admitted against them, none walk
in so much danger as they, none more shot at, then they; scarce any will hear
them and submit to their Embassage, and those few that do, are counted the
only factious people, and pestilent fellows in the land, O, what wrath is there
against us for these things* For this very cause, the Lord plagued all Judah
even because they would not listen to Gods Ambassadors that he sent to them
early and late, as the Prophet speaks. Jer. 29. 17, 18, 19. Thus says the
Lord of Hoasts. Behold I will send upon thee the sword, the famine and the
Pestilence, and will make them like vile Figs, that cannot be eaten they are
so evil, and I will persecute them with the sword, with the famine and with
the Pestilence, and I will deliver them to be removed to all the Kingdoms of
the earth, to be a curse, and an astonishment and an hissing and a reproach,
among all Nations whither I have driven them. Mark now; what is the reason, why
God would do thus? Because they have not hearkened to my Word, says the Lord,
which I sent unto them by my servants the Prophets, rising up early and sending
them, but ye would not hear says the Lord. This was the reason, why God
would plague them so grievously, because they would not listen to his
Ambassadors that he sent them for their good. The like we read of the ten
Tribes: the Lord powered his vengeance on them too for this very reason, because
they would not hear his Ambassadors, therefore the Lord cast them out of his
sight, and flung them away from being his people and he would never be their
God more, the place is 2 King. 17. 13, 14, 15. The Lord testified against
Israel and Judah, by all the Prophets and Seers, saying, Turn ye from your
evil ways and keep my Commandments and my Statutes, according to all the Law
which I commanded your fathers notwithstanding they would not hear, but
hardened their necks, like to the neck of their Fathers, and did not believe in
the Lord their God, and they rejected his Statutes and his Covenant, that he
made with their Fathers. Mark, this was the cause why the Lord was so angry
with them, and removed them out of his sight. Because they would not do as his
Ambassadors did command them in his name. Now as God has let out his fury upon
them for not attending to his Ambassadors, so he has done, and daily does and
will yet more do upon us. For though for temporal Judgments, God be patient
and forbearing, beyond all admiration, we feel yet no Sword, no Famine, no
Pestilence, we may be astonished to see how long suffering he his, O if we had
the grace to consider of it, nevertheless the Lord is effusing out upon us the
very dregs of his Cup, he fats us up for his eternal ire, he has done
converting of our hearers, he has done blessing of our Sermons, he has made
us Loammies, and Toruhamahs, and turned us into a generation of his wrath. You
whose eyes God has opened, whose hearts God has inclined unto him, whose
Consciences God has purged and Sanctified and made you Saints. Bless him and
praise his holy name, and make more of his infinite grace and goodness. For it
is to be feared God will now add no more to your mumber, he delivers people
now to a reprobate sense, he resolves to be revenged on our land in fire and
Brimstone, for the contempt of his glorious Gospel, that has been preached
so long a time. He lets men fill up the measure of their sins, that those that
are filthy may be filthy still, those that are drunkards may be drunkards
still, those that are led with their lusts, shall be so still, to the intent
that he may bring upon the world, all the fierceness of his spiritual and
everlasting wrath, and that he may revenge the quarrel of his Covenant, and
the labors of so many Ambassadors, whom he has sent unto you, and ye would not
hear. O that this might move some of your souls, that so ye might prevent
this dreadful judgment and be plucked out like Brandes out of the Burning.

Fifthly, Another Use is, are Gods Ministers, his Ambassadors? Use 5.
then they must Preach no mercy at all, unto such as wilfully stand out against
Jesus Christ. When Antony was a Rebel, O says Tully, it is not fit to send
him Ambassadors of Peace, to treat with him of Peace; as Theseus said once:
Go, says he, and tell Creon, Theseus offers thee a gracious offer; Yet I am
pleased to be friends, if thou will submit. This is my first message: But if
this offer prevail not, look for me to be up in Arms. So, Beloved, Gods
offers of peace have been made already, again, and again, and they have been
rejected. Now his Ambassadors must cry. Arms, Blood, and fire, and pillars of
smoke. At the first God dealt with us, as Tullus with his Enemies, Quae verbis
componere potuit, armis non decrevit: as long as he could reconcile them with
his word, they should not have his blows: So the Lord has dealt with us, at
the first he persuaded us with the promises of his Word, now seeing no more can
be gotten in that way, he will have his Ministers lay the axe at the roots,
to hew down, and to destroy, and to slay people with the sword of his lips. Do
not wonder, when we preach hell and damnation to all rebellious souls* You
will say, here is nothing but judgment, Preachers send us all to the devil,
they preach, as if they would drive us to despair: they should put in, except
we repent.

I Answer, it is enough now to understand it; when the Gospel has been a long
time in a place, Gods Ambassadors must hold out the black flagge: when
Tamberlane had hung out his White flagge, and that would not do, and his Red
flagge, and that would not do neither; then he hung out his Black flagge. Now
look for no mercy. So, Christ's Ambassadors should do. When Paul knew that the
Gospel was contemned in Corinth, the white and red flagge had ceased to do
good; You see how he hung out his black one. Know ye not that the unrighteous
shall not inherit the Kingdom of God. Be not deceived, No idolaters, nor
adulterers, nor effeminate, nor railers, nor covetous, shall ever inherit the
Kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10. He does not put in, now except ye repent;
no, no, now look for no mercy. So the Apostle John. The fearful, and
unbeleevers, and whoremongers, and liars shall be cast into the Lake that
burns with fire and brimstone, Rev. 21. 8. he does not put in, except ye
repent: if we should be ever putting in, except ye repent, and concluding
with mercy upon condition of repentance, what would hard-hearted people say? O
we had a terrible Sermon to day, but the Preacher gave us comfort in the
closure, he had a sweet bit at the last, and thus they heal all again. Nay,
when people grow once to be stubborn, then Prophets have been so far from
putting in except ye repent, or any other term of mercy, that they used to
meet with the peoples presumption of repentance. So Jeremiah, and Ezekiel, and
others, they threaten destruction to the wicked, and they add this above all,
though they cry for mercy, nay, though they fast, and could get Noah, and
Samuel, and Job and Daniel to pray for them, yet they shall have no mercy: q.
d. ye think to avoid these judgments, by repenting another day; no, no, when
ye cry for mercy, ye shall not have it. When a Nation, or a Parish, or any
people grow perverse, and have rejected the sweet tenders of mercy, Gods
Ambassadors are to look upon such wretches as rebels; no indenting with them
more, no terms of peace more, as the Law says, with Pirates, and Traitors,
and Rebels, the Law of Arms is not to be observed, as Baldus speaks, they
have broken the league, as Florus speaks: when Spartacus the Rebel, desired an
Embassage of peace, he would feign have Crassus contract a league with him,
Crassus scorned the motion; when Talfarinas that egregious Robber and Traitor,
sent an Ambassador with treaty of Peace to Tiberius the Emperor, Tiberius took
it with indignation, that he should be so sawey with him. No Embassage of
peace is to be made with rebellious wretches; we need not put in, except ye
repent, when we are to deal with such; No, no, when ye grow once to despise
reproof, see you to that. True, if ye do repent, who knows what God will do?
Though Crassus would not parlee with Spartacus about peace, yet when he did
repent indeed, he received him to mercy. So will God do with you. But in the
mean time, know that the God of Heaven is at defiance with you, and all the
curses in his Book, are directed against the face of you. Ye have played the
deaf Adder, against the gracious tenders of mercy from day to day, and
therefore see your damned condition. The Ambassadors of Christ have not one
tittle of mercy of you, if we could see you melt, and cry out, and down on your
knees, and your hearts turn, and your spirits sink down before God, then we
might say something unto you; therefore, Brethren, if the Ministers of the
Gospel do daily preach more and more judgment, do not think much, they ought
so to do.

Sixthly, and Lastly, one Use to you that fear God, and Use 6.
believe his Ambassadors, and are besought by them. Let me say to you, as the
Prophet Isaiah said, Who is among you that fears the Lord, that obeys the
voice of his servants, that walks in darkness, and has no light, let him
trust in the name of the Lord, and stay upon his God, Esa. 50. 10. that is, be
of good comfort, though all the world, and all the devils in hell be against
you, yet be of good cheer; what, although ye meet with never so many
temptations, and fears, such a fogge of them, that ye can see no light, yet it
shall assuredly go well with you. Though others have not come in at the
preaching of the Word, ye have. Howbeit others will not reform, will not see
the Lords hand lifted up, they will not acknowledge their sins and sinful
doings, and damned case, yet ye have. Ye have seen it, and felt it, and run to
the throne of Grace, and have sought the Lord, according as Gods Ambassadors
have directed you out of his Word, ye have feared God, and obeyed the voice of
his servants, though others make a mock of such as will be ruled by Preaers;
tush, they shall not curb me, says one, and they shall not control me,
says another. What, does he think to lead me in a string? Yet ye do fear
God, and ye dare not stand out against the preaching of his servants, ye
desire that ye may ever practice their Word, and lead your lives according to
it, what ever others do. Be of good cheer, says the Prophet, The Lord is
your God, and do ye stay your selves on him. the Doctrine that God has sent
unto you by the Ministry of his servants, is the only Doctrine of Salvation,
and therein ye shall find eternal life.

Revel. 3. 1. These things, says he, that has the seven Spirits of God, and
the seven Stars.
THese words are the Subscription of the Letter, unto the Angel of Sardis,
containing a description of Christ, from whom the Letter is sent. Now Christ is
here described, according to the matter in hand, from two royalties of his;
first, That he has the seven Spirits of God, that is, he has the giving of
the Holy Ghost, and all his gifts and graces to whomsoever he pleases;
Secondly, that He has the seven Stars, that is, he has the disposing of
the Ministers of the Church. And this, I told you, is to be meant diverse
ways. Christ is said to have the Ministers of the Church five ways. First,
he has the sending of them, they have their Mission from him. Secondly, he
has the delegating of them, they have their Commission from him. Thirdly, be
has the gifting of them, they have their abilities from him. Fourthly, he
has the prospering of them, they have the success of their labors from him.
Fifthly, he has the keeping of them, they are put into a place, continued, or
removed, they have their liberty from him, and when they are put down or
silenced, it is he that does do it.

The two first I have handled already; first, that he has the sending of them;
Secondly, that he has the delegating of them. I come now to the third, He
has the gifting of them; look what good gifts and abilities they have, they
have them all of him. As Paul says, He has made us able Ministers of the New
Testament, not of the Letter, but of the Spirit, 2 Cor. 3. 6. and this was one
of the ends of his Ascension, as the Apostle says, He ascended up on high,
and led captivity captive, and gave gifts unto men, Ephesians. 4. 8. that is, this
was one end of his ascending up to Heaven, that he might send down gifts unto
his Church. Now what gifts does he mean? True, he sends gifts to all his true
Members, but he means the gifting of his Ministers, as it follows: And he
gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors
and teachers, for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry;
and so forth, ver. 11, 12.

And the truth is, it is not without cause, for of all men, we that are the
Ministers of Jesus Christ, have need of singular and rare gifts and abilities.

First, To open the Scriptures: the Scriptures are a great deep, and they have
under the Letter, much admirable spiritual matter encouched, and many things
are hard in them as Peter says, And a Minister is to open them, and to give
out the sense, as it is said of the Priests, They read the Law distinctly, and
gave out the sense, and made the people to understand the Reading, Nehem. 8. 8.
Now if a Minister have not gifts from Jesus Christ, what mad work will he
make? the Scripture will be a clasped book unto him, and a Fountain sealed up.
Like the Philistines, that in three days could not expound Sampsons Riddle. It
is said of Christ, that he opened the Scriptures, Luke 24. 32. The Scriptures
are shut, and contain Mysteries folded and lapped up, now the Minister had need
of abilities to open them.

Secondly, To Teach; as a Minister is to open the Scriptures, which requires
great gifts: so, he is to teach the people out of them, to draw Doctrines out
of the same, and this requires great gifts too, to inform the judgment, to
let out the light of the Word, to scatter the beams of the Sun of
righteousness abroad, to dispel the darkness of men's minds, to shine round
about them in spiritual knowledge. This is a work of much ability, as the
Apostle speaks to Timothy, the things which thou have heard of me, the same
commit thou to faithful men, who shall be able to teach others, 2 Timothy 2. 2.
and therefore it is called Prophesying. Despise not Prophesying, that is,
despise not Teaching, a man had need of a special gift, to be able to
Prophecy, so, if a man would be a Teacher; when Nicodemus would express what
an able Teacher Christ was, says he, Thou art a teacher come from God. A man
had need to be one that has been with God, that would teach aright. There is a
gift of fitness and aptness, without which a man cannot do it. The servant
of the Lord must be apt to teach, 2 Timothy 2. 24. the Apostle tells us, there
be heaps of naughty teachers in the world, a good teacher is a rare man, it
cannot be without all wisdom, as he says, Teaching every man in all
wisdom, Col. 1. 28. we are to teach people the learning of the holy, how to
know God, how to fear him, and love him. We are to teach people how to pray,
how to walk in all holiness and righteousness of living: the great things of Gods
Law, the deep things of the Spirit, the mysteries of eternal life, to open the
wiles of Satan, the mistakes of the hearts of men, the many by-ways of the
soul, ye know sin is covered over with pleasures, and profits, and carnal
reasons, and evasions, and we are to lay it out naked, as indeed it is.
Gracious and godly courses, seem grievous, and irksome, and uncouth, and vile,
and needless, and we are to discover the inward pleasure, and commodity, and
necessity and glory of them, and therefore we have need of abilities.

Thirdly, to Convince, ye know how the heart does use to put off the Word, and
if it meet with a doctrine, or a reproof, or a precept, that it does not like,
it will deny it, it will cavil and carp, O, it is false, as Johanan and others
said to Jeremiah, it is false you do not say true, we will never believe it.
When we paint out a drunkards damned estate, he is ready to gainsay it, or an
adulterers, he is ready to except, people contradict such passages of the Word,
as are against their lusts, and they give us very little better then the lie,
many times, therefore a Minister should be able to convince, that he may be
able by sound doctrine, both to exhort, and to convince the gainsayers, Tit.
1. 9. when people are subject to condemn us for harshnesse, and hard sayings,
and that we do not preach placentia enough, we must be able to use some speech
that cannot be condemned, Tit. 2. 8. when a Minister preaches weakly, Sermons
like wide nets, or rotten threads, that the Birds may get through or break,
this is not able preaching, as Zwinglius said of Carolostadius, when he heard
him disputing weakly against consubstantiation, O, says he, I am sorry that so
good a cause should have such a weak defendant. It is said of Apollos, that he
mightily convinced the Jews. Stephen, the University-men there, that came
huddling about him, they were not able to withstand the Spirit, and the wisdom
by which he spoke, Act. 6. 10. it is the promise of our Savior, I will give
you a mouth and wisdom, which all your adversaries shall not be able to
gainsay, or resist, Luke 21. 15.

Fourthly, to move the affections, Ministers have need of abilities to move the
affections of their hearers; not only to inform their judgments, but also to
work upon their affections, not only to illighten their understanding, but
also to stir up their hearts, as Peter says, I think it meet as long as I am
in this tabernacle, to stir you up, 2 Pet. 1. 13. a Minister is to stir up
his people, to stir their hearts and affections: he may preach a wholesome
Sermon, and the hearers be like Mill-posts, and not stirred a jot: Paul
labored to stir affections too: Knowing therefore the terror of the Lord,
we persuade men, 2 Cor. 5. 11. that is, we labor to work upon your
affections, and therefore Christ sent a Seraphim with a live coal unto the
Prophet Isaiah, to touch his lips, Esa. 6. 6. he had need of live coals in his
lips, to fire the affections of his auditory; So, he sent the Holy Ghost down
upon his Apostles in fiery tongues, without this the information of the
judgment is little worth. Religion consists more in the will and the
affections of men, then in any other faculty of the soul. I confess the
Minister must shine too; I, but he must heat too. John the Baptist was a
burning and a shining light.

Fifthly, To speak Pro re nata, a Minister has need of extemporary abilities,
sometimes he shall be called before Councills, he preaches such doctrine as
angers the world, and therefore he is in danger to be had before Councills, and
therefore he had need to have an extemporary faculty, that he may answer as
he sees cause, as Christ says, When they deliver you up, take no thought, how
or what ye shall speak, for it shall be given you in that same hour, what
ye shall speak, Matthew. 10. 19. sometimes to preach upon short warning, as
Augustine did, when he relied upon his Brother Severus, to Preach for him, he
not coming, he was feign to go up extempore himself, and so he preached upon
the 95 Psalm; So; when there was a sudden judgment of God that fell out
there in Hippo, though Augustine had preached twice that very day before, yet he
went up again, and preached the third time: O, says he, do not wonder, my
dear Brethren, Si hodie ter Sermonem, etc. do not wonder that I preach thrice
this same time, it is not without cause, etc. Again, a Minister may be put upon
it as Philip was by the Eunuch, concerning the meaning of a place of Scripture
to speak of it at first sight, and a Minister must not only have this
knowledge in his note-book, but in his lips; that is, to be in a readiness
upon every occasion. His lips must preserve knowledge. Mal. 2. 7. Sometimes he
may come among his people, he may light upon their company by chance, now if he
have not good abilities, he cannot do the part of a Minister. As Paul says, I
long to see you, to impart unto you some spiritual gift, Romans 1. 11. A
Minister when he sees his people, he should be a well-stored man, to impart
some spiritual thing or other to them, a word of instruction, a word of
exhortation, a word of admonition, when he does but see them, he should be able
to drop something among them.

Sixthly, to observe seasons, to be able to make choice of special Texts for
special occasions. For howsoever all Scriptures are full of divine and
Heavenly truths; yet some Scriptures sit some persons and some occasions better
than othersome. Aarons bells must be wisely rung, sometimes in one tune,
sometimes in another as the occasion serves. A Minister is to change his note,
as the circumstances do require. A Steward in a family must have as well
wisdom to Minister every own his portion in due season, as fidelity to
dispense his Masters goods. A word fitly spoken in due time, is like Apples of
Gold in pictures of Silver, Pro. 25. 11. The very Heathen man Commends much
(...) When a man speaks in due season. S. Paul had this gift, in all his
preaching to ponder all circumstances, who, and what, and where, and when, and
how. I made my self a servant unto all, says, he that I might gain the more,
To the Jews I became as a Jew that I might gain the Jews: to them that are
under he Law, as under the Law, that I might gain them that are under the Law.
To the weak I became as weak that I might gain the weak: I am made all things
to all men, that I might by all means save some. 1 Cor. 9. 22. To Beloved, we
are the ministers of God, and we have need of abilities to fit our doctrine to
the present time and occasions and persons, that we may profit hearers. When
the Apostle came to Athens, he took his Text according to the present hint. He
found an Altar with this inscription, To the unknown God, and so he spoke of
that. Act. 17. 23, 24. He took occasion from thence to speak of the God of
Heaven and Earth to them. When our Savior Christ saw the woman of Samaria come
to draw water, he took opportunity to preach unto her of the living water.
Joh. 4. 10. Ministerial gifts are for this very purpose as the Prophet says.
The Lord has given me the tongue of the learned that I should know how to
speak a word in season. Isa. 50. 4. It is noted of John Baptist, that when he
saw the Scribes and Pharisees came in to hear him, he had about with them. O
generation of Vipers, who has forewarned you to sly from the wrath to come,
q. d. What do you make here? ye are Hypocrites, ye are vile wretched persons;
repent or else you will to hell. This was now in due season. So when a Drunkard
comes in, we should let fly at him. Weep and howl ye drunkards. See what God
says of you: to whom is woe but to you? See what the Scripture says of your
courses, ye shall never inherit Gods Kingdom, none of you, as the Apostle
speaks. So, when Whoremongers step in, we should give them their doom, O ye
Whoremongers and Adulterers, God will judge you one day. This is like the
former and the latter Rain. Then it comes, when the ground has need of it. So
when a Minister observes seasons, then the word comes, when the soul has need
of it. It comes pat, as we say, Then people may see a special providence in
it. I see a special providence of God that the Minister should speak of such a
Theme this day, that he should hit so right upon my sin; when a man has been
cozening, then to come to Church and there hear of it again: When a man has
been swearing and lying, then to turn in to the preacher, and hear of that
very sin, and the danger of it, and the damned estate of the commit of it:
When a man has been thinking to do evil, then to sit in his seat and hear
his evil ripped up, and all his secrets laid open, and woe to you wretch, that
devise evil, the Lord knows your devilish intentions, ye are thinking to be
revenged, but God will be revenged on you, ye are minding to go by-and-by to
such a piece of villainy, but the Lord will find you out. This is preaching in
season. So when a soul cannot be cast down, but when he comes to a Sermon,
there he meets with his own case, his temptations are treated of wine and oil
is powered into his wounds, this is to preach in due season. O what gifts had a
Minister need to have! He had need of daily inflvence from God: Daily
instincts, that God should guide his tongue and his heart. Now, Beloved, it is
Christ alone that gifts all his true Ministers. I will be with thy mouth, says
he to Moses.

The use of this is. First, here we see that a Minister had not Use 1.
need be a fool, no; no, he that wins souls, is wise, Pro. 11. 30. he must
be a wise man that would be a Minister, it requires more then human wisdom
to catch souls, when the heart has so many put-offs, so many deceits, so many
strongholds, so loath to obey the word, so subtle to invent excuses, so crafty
to thrust away the truth; There is some wisdom required to catch fishes, and
birds, and vermin; how much more, to catch men! who is sufficient for these
things? The best of us all may blush to think how unfit we are to be
Ministers. O how should we bless God, if he fit any of us in any suitable
measure! and when we have done our best, we had need to go home, and down on
our knees, and cry shame on our selves for not doing better.

Secondly, Then they are none of Christ's Ministers that are Use 2.
not gifted for this mighty work. Will he send a fool on such a weighty
Message as this is? He that sends a Message by the hand of a fool, cutteth
off the feet and drinks damage, Pro. 26. 6. That is, if a man have a
business of any great importance, He had not need to employ a fool in it,
lest he suffer great damage. It is all one as if one should chop off ones feet
and then bid him go on our errand. O, Beloved, preaching of the Gospel is a
work of infinite importance, the humbling of men's hearts, the convincing of
consciences, the converting of men's Souls, these are great businesses,
doubtless they are no Fools that Christ sends on such errands. True, all
Christ's Ministers are not alike gifted, some have meaner gifts then othersome
have, but he that has least, he is fitted in some measure to dispense divine
mysteries, to call home Gods elect, to build up the called, to judge all his
hearers, to stop the mouths of gainsayers, to hew down the obstinate, to show
unto men the things belonging to their peace, to give the Saints their due, and
the wicked their due. That a good man cannot come, but he shall have heavenly
meat to feed on: Nor a wretch neither, but his Ministry will single him out and
give him his bit to chew upon. He that cannot do this in any measure, he is
none of Christ's Ministers. Surely he will not send such a Message by a fools
hand, but either he makes him a wise able man, or else he runs without his
sending.

Thirdly, then my Brethren, hence we learn whether to go for Use 3.
gifts, if we would be enabled to our calling, let us go to Jesus Christ that
has the seven stars in his hands, he can make our inflvences strong, and our
light and heat mighty, he can give us a gift of boldness to fear no men's
faces. He can unty our stammering tongues that we shall have liberty in
speaking. He can make our tongues a sharp sword. He can make us sons of
consolation unto some, and of thunder, unto others. If we want knowledge in the
mystery of Christ, let us make our wants known unto him, and he will instill
into us. If we want words, he can make them flow in unto us. If we want
affections, he can purge away our iniquities and fire our hearts and lips.
While the Apostles were together at prayer. Act. 1. 14. suddenly the Lord Jesus
sent them the gift of the holy Ghost in fiery cloven tongues Act. 2. While Paul
and Silas were praying in the prison, the Lord backed them from Heaven, and made
them instruments of turning the heart of the Jailer. Let us pray, then, not
only in our Pulpits before our Sermons, but also in secret, God gives the
greatest gifts in secret, and like man reveals himself apart: as secret
meals make a fat body, so does secret prayer, it makes a well-liking soul.

Again, this should teach us to stir up the gifts that he Use 4.
gives us: We should labor to put them forth, a man may lose the benefit of
Christ's gifts, for want of rouzing up himself, and putting of them forth, as
Paul says to Timothy, I put thee in remembrance that thou stir up the gift
of God, which is in thee, by the putting on of hands, 2 Timothy 1. 6. we must
stir up the gift in us. When Father Isaac would prophecy to his Sons, he
stirred up his spirit with savoury meat. When Elisha would Prophecy before the
three Kings, he called for a Minstrell to stir up the spirit of Prophecy in
him. Deborah cries, awake, awake, Deborah; Awake, O my soul, says David. When
Christ would pray to his Father, the Text shows, how he stirred up himself,
These things spoke Jesus, and lift up his eyes unto heaven, Joh. 17. 1. He lift
up his soul and his spirit, as Sampson went and shook himself, if his spirit
had been in him it had been well, but like a fool he had driven him away. But
it should seem, when he had the spirit in him, this was his wont, he shook
himself as at other times, he used to stir up the Spirit in him, so we
should stir up the Spirit in us, we should rouse up our gifts, like sparks
out of the ashes, and bestirre our selves soundly, remiss using of them, lets
them warpe and wane.

Again, we should labor to rely more upon Christ, we Use 5.
trust too much to our notes; but, O if we could trust more to Christ, that's
warmest matter that comes down from heaven in the speaking, not that we should
leave all without study, till we come into our Pulpits: No, prepare as much as
we can. But then if we would trust in Christ for his present assistance, and
yearn up to him for prompting, it would make our Ministry more lively. When a
Sermon is an effect of Faith, that's it that does most good: then Christ's Spirit
Preaches, and not we, as the Prophet David says, The Spirit of the Lord spoke
by me, 2 Samuel 23. 2.

Again, this should teach the people of God, if they would have their Ministers
enabled indeed, to do their souls good; that they should pray for them, that
Christ would mor furnish them. How often does the Apostle tell the people, that
Ministers might have greater gifts, if they had a heart! O says he, Pray for
me, that I may have utterance, and that I may speak boldly, to make known the
mystery of the Gospel, Ephesians. 6. 19. q. d. if ye have a heart to pray, I do
verily think that I shall be the more assisted, a great deal. Our Chariot
drives the more heavily, because it wants the wheels of your Prayers, and the
truth is, God uses to punish people thus, that because they are dead and dull,
and have no heart, and are weary of the Word; therefore he withholds from the
Minister on purpose, to plague them back again; as God told Ezekiel, Son of
man, thou shall be dumb, and when thou would reprove, thou shall be
tongue-tyed, thy tongue shall cleave to the roof of thy mouth: now mark the
reason; why? for they are a rebellious house, Ezekiel. 3. 26. Mark, it was long of
Judahs sins that the Prophet Ezekiel was tongue-tyed and locked up: An
excellent Minister, and yet straightened for the peoples sins.

O, Beloved, I will tell you what would enlarge our hearts and our gifts
toward you. First, if you would more flock to the Word, and attend. It is said
in Matthew. 5. 1, 2. That Christ seeing the multitude, He opened his mouth, that
is, he was the more enlarged to Preach, upon the sight of such a great
auditory. Who would not cast his net amidst multitudes of sishes? The Text
says, When Christ saw the multitude, he had compassion on them. So, if
Ministers could see all their Parish come in, all that might hear; the sight of
such a multitude would stir up pity. O would we think, O what a goodly
company is here! O it is pity but they should have somewhat, O if I could win
some of you. There may be a lust in this thing, and we must take heed of it
too, lest we be tickled with flockings, or discouraged with thin Pewes. This is
pride, but yet there is a truth in this. What a shame is it, that there should
be fewer of our own Parish every Lecture-day, than of strangers? is it not
just with God to make the breasts dry, when the Children care not for sucking?

Secondly, if God had more among you to be saved, as God said to Paul,
concerning Corinth, Be not afraid, speak, hold not thy peace, I am with thee,
and no man shall set on thee to hurt thee, I have much people in this City,
Act. 18. 10. this opened Paul's mouth, this made him find abundance of
assistance from Christ, because God had much people there.

Thirdly, if you would hear with alacrity, and with a ready and a greedy mind.
When Cornelius and his company were all listening, and earnest to hear, and to
hearken, O say they; Speak Peter, we are all here before God, to hear every
thing thou speak. Then Peter opened his mouth, Act. 10. 33, 34. But when
people look dully, and blockishly, and sit sleepily and drowsily, as though
they were weary of hearing, and cared not whether they heard or no; Nay, this
is the reason why the Devils instruments are so bold to oppose the Ministry of
God, they see they are not much cared for, none but here one, and there one, a
sort of precise fools: whereas, if people would be eager to hear over all the
land, they durst not meddle with them, as it is said of our Savior, the Chief
Priests, and the Scribes sought to destroy him, but they could not find what
they might do, For all the people were very attentive to hear him, Luc. 19. 48.

Fourthly, if ye would be fruitful in obedience, and in learning; this would
put life into our Prayers at home, this would quicken our labors and pains in
the Pulpit. The very hope of having fruit, made Paul very eager to come to
Rome, Romans 1. 13. The very thought that the people are gracious, and godly, and
fruitful, carries the Preacher beyond himself. Nay, its strange to consider,
how, when the Minister knows he has but one understanding judicious hearer,
one gracious Soul in his Parish, it provokes him very much, it makes him look
about him the more, a great deal: How much more, when there be many such? But
when a Parish is senseless, and heavy, and froward, it is unspeakable to
consider how it straitens a Minister. Let a man be to pray in a meeting, where
they be graceless, and dull, and hardly any almost godly, he cannot tell
what to say almost, he is not himself. Whereas, if he were to pray among them
that he knows can savor gracious things, there he has more liberty to let
out himself.

Revel. 3. 1. These things, says he, that has the seven Spirits of God, and
the seven Stars.
And the seven Stars. THe Doctrine we continue yet in, is, That Christ has
the seven Stars, he has all the Ministers of the Church. I told you he is said
to have them five ways. First, he has the sending of them; they have their
Mission from him. Secondly, he has the delegating of them; they have their
Commission from him. Thirdly, he has the gifting of them; they have their
abilities from him. Fourthly, he has the prospering of them; they have the
success of their labors from him. Fifthly, he has the disposing of them,
either for placing, or removing, for freedom, or restraint.

The first three I have handled already; the last whereof was this; That He
has the gifting of his Ministers; As Paul says, He has made us able
Ministers of the New Testament, 2 Cor. 3. 6. This was one of the ends of his
Ascension; He ascended up on high, he led captivity captive, and gave gifts
unto men, Ephesians. 4. 8. Thus the Text says of the Apostles, they preached every
where, the Lord working with them, and confirming the word with signs
following, Mark. 16. 20. So Paul had great gifts, and abilities, which he calls
the signs of an Apostle. Truly, the signs of an Apostle were wrought among
you, in all patience, with signs and wonders, and mighty deeds, 2 Cor. 12. 12.
they that are not competently, at the least, gifted for the Ministry, they
show no sign that they are the Ministers of Jesus Christ. Christ gives all his
Ministers a gift of utterance, a gift of speaking to the Conscience, a gift of
dividing of the Word aright, mighty deeds. They may all say to the people,
Truly, the signs of a Minister of Jesus Christ has been wrought among you.
These gifts are the witnesses, whereby he gives witness to a man, that he
comes from God to a people, as Paul says, God also bearing them witness, both
with signs and wonders, and with diverse Miracles, and gifts of the Holy Ghost,
according to his own will, Heb. 2. 4. I confess such wonders and Miracles are
now ceased; I, but the gifts of the Holy Ghost, are powered out still upon all
the true Ministers of Christ, and these are Gods witnesses, that people may
know they are sent of Jesus Christ.

I showed you how Ministers have need of excellent and rare gifts; I, and you
have need that they should be wellgifted, that so they may be able to do you
good:

First, for the interpreting of the Scriptures, they are a sealed and a clasped
book, they are shut up naturally to a man. It is said of Christ, that He
opened the Scriptures, Luc. 24. 32. So, a Minister had need of gifts to open
the Scriptures; to give out the sense, as the Priests in Nehemiah did, St. John
wept, when no man could open the sealed book. When a Parish has a Minister
that cannot open the sealed Book, it is enough to make good people weep and
lament.

Secondly, they have need of gifts to teach. He that would teach, had need to
be an able man, as the Apostle says, that are able to teach, 2 Timothy 2. 2. The
servant of the Lord must be apt to teach, 2 Timothy 2. 24. there is a gift of
fitness and aptness, without which a man cannot be a good teacher.

Thirdly, they have need of gifts to be able to convince, it requires a great
art to speak irrefragably to men's minds. Many truths the hearts of men do
not like, and therefore they labor to put them off. And therefore a Minister
had need of a gift of convincing, That he may be able by sound Doctrine to
convince the gainsayers, Tit. 1. 9. as it is said of Stephen, they were not
able to withstand the spirit, and the wisdom by which he spoke, Act. 6. 10.

Fourthly, to move the affections; a Minister is not only to inform men's
judgments, but also to work on their affections, as Peter says, I think it
meet as long as I am in this tabernacle, to stir you up, 2 Pet. 1. 13. a
Minister is to stir up his people, to stir their hearts and affections: as
Paul says: Knowing therefore the terror of the Lord, we persuade men, 2 Cor.
5. 11. that is, we labor to stir your affections, Christ sent a Seraphim
with a live coal to touch Isaiah his lips, Esa. 6. 6. we had need of fire
coals in our lips, to heat your affections. Religion consists in the will and
affections of men, more then in any other faculty of the soul.

Fifthly, To speak Pro re nata, a Minister has need of extemporary abilities,
to be able upon short warning, when Severus, Augustines Brother, failed him
one day, he was feign to go up extempore into the Pulpit himself and Preach.
A Minister may come into the company of his people, now if he be not
habitually furnished, how unprofitable will he be? Saint Paul says, when he
came among his people, he would impart unto them some spiritual gift, Romans 1.
11.

Sixthly, A Minister had need of abilities to observe seasons, that Aarons
bells may be wisely rung, sometimes in one tune, sometimes in another, as
occasion serves, A word sitly spoken in due time, is like apples of gold, in
pictures of silver, Prove. 25. 11.

The use of this was First, here we see that a Minister had Use 1.
not need be a fool, no; he must be a well-gifted man. He that wins souls
is wise, Pro. 11. 30. he must be one that may win souls, and therefore he
must be a wise man, when the heart has so many wiles, and so many put-offs,
and so many evasions, and distinctions, and excuses, and strongholds, he had
need be a wise man that will go about to catch it. There is some wisdom
required to catch birds, and beasts, and fishes, and vermin; because they are
all subtle in their kind, how much more, to catch the heart? This is Onus
humeris angelorum for midandum, as Chrysostom. speaks. Who is sufficient for
these things, says the Apostle? 2 Cor. 2. 16. The best of us all may blush to
think how unfit we are to be Ministers: and therefore how should we bless
God, if he fit any of us in any suitable measure?

Secondly, another Use was, Then they are none of Christ's Use 2.
Ministers that are not gifted for this mighty work. Will he send a fool on
such a weighty Message as this is? He that sends a Message by the hand of a
fool, cutteth off the feet and drinks damage, Prove. 26. 6. There is great
damage in the Church, because so many fools have the handling of Gods
message. But I let this pass.

Thirdly, Hence we learn then, whether to go for gifts, if Use 3.
we would be enabled to our callings, let us go to our Lord Jesus Christ, that
has the seven Stars in his hands, he can make our influences strong, our
light mighty; he can give us a gift of boldness, to fear no man's face; He can
untye our stammering tongues, that they shall have liberty in speaking, that
words may flow in; He can make our tongues a sharp sword; He can fire our
hearts and lips. While the Apostles were together in prayer, Act. 1. 14. the
Lord Jesus Christ sent down the Holy Ghost on them in fiery tongues, Act. 2. 1.

Fourthly, This should teach us to stir up the gifts that Use 4.
he gives us; we should strive to put them all forth, as Paul says to
Timothy, Stir up the gift that is in thee by the putting on of hands, 2 Timothy
1. 6. we must stir up the gift that is in us: when father Isaac would
Prophecy to his sons, he stirred up his spirit with savoury meat: when Elishah
would Prophecy before the three Kings, he called for a sacred Minstrell, to
stir up the Spirit of Prophecy in him: so Samp son used to go and shake
himself, when he went against the Philistims; as Deborah, while she was at her
work in Gods worship: Awake, awake Deborah, says she; she shook up her self;
we should labor to use all our gifts to the full, as the Apostle says, Make
full proof of thy Ministry, 2 Timothy 4. 5. so, we should make full proof of
every one of our gifts, put them out to the utmost. Ministers should be able to
say, as Paul does, I have fully preached the Gospel of Christ, Romans 15. 19. to
preach fully, to convince fully, to exhort fully, fully to terrify the hearts
of the wicked, not to use our gifts by halves. O, how shall we answer it, if
we let our gifts rust for want of sound using of them?

Fifthly, We should rely more on Christ, we may trust Use 5.
too much to our notes; but, O that we could trust more in Christ, that is
warmest matter that comes down from Heaven in the speaking, not that we should
leave all without study, till we come into our Pulpits, and then hope to have
it given us in that moment; No, we must prepare as much as we can: as Solomon
says, Prepare thy work without, and make it fit for thy self in the field, and
afterward build thy house, Pro. 24. 27. So, we must prepare our Sermons, and
make them fit for our people in our studies, and then come and preach them,
Give attendance to reading, to exhortation, to Doctrine, says the Apostle, 1 Timothy 4. 13. God gives gifts by means, but then if we would trust Christ for
his present assistance, and ^erne up to him for prompting, it would make our
Ministry more lively. When a Sermon is an act of Faith, that is it that does
most good, then Christ's Spirit Preaches, and not we, then, then God speaks,
and not our notes, as the Prophet David says, The Spirit of the Lord spoke by
me, 2 Samuel 23. 2.

Sixthly, this should teach the people of God, if they Use 6.
would have their Ministers enabled indeed, to do their souls good; to pray
for them, that Christ would more furnish them. How often does the Apostle tell
the people, that Ministers might have greater gifts, if they had a heart! O
says he, Pray for me, that I may have utterance, and that I may speak
boldly, etc. Ephesians. 6. 19. q. d. if ye have a heart to pray, I do verily
think that I shall be the more assisted, a great deal. The truth is, God uses
to punish people thus, because they are dead and dull, and have no heart, and
are weary of the Word; therefore he withholds from his Minister on purpose,
to plague them; as God told Ezekiel: Son of man, thou shall be dumb, and when
thou would reprove, thou shall be tongue-tyed, thy tongue shall cleave to the
roof of thy mouth: now mark the reason; why? for they are a rebellious house,
Ezekiel. 3. 26.

But I will recapitulate no more of what I have delivered. Thus ye have heard
the third thing, how Christ has the gifting of his Ministers? They have their
gifts and abilities from him. Now I proceed on to the fourth. That he has the
prospering of them: They have the success of their labors from Jesus Christ.
Christ bids us preach, Repent, repent, but it is he that must give the
Repentance; So, Paul preached to Lydia, and had good success, for the text
shows how she was converted by his Ministry: But, it was God that opened her
heart. As Rebeccah cookt the Venison, but Isaac gave the blessing. So we may
cook the Word for you, but the blessing is in Christ's hands, as the Apostle
says. We are Ministers by whom ye Believed, even as the Lord gave to every
man, 1 Cor. 3. 5. that is, when we preached among you we had good success,
you believed. What? as we would our selves? No, Alas we would feign have had
you all to Believe but even as the Lord gave to every man, the success was as
he would; soto some he gave only conviction by the word to some only
knowledge, to some good reformations, to some a true faith. It was as he was
pleased to give to every man. So when he preached unto other Gentiles he
confesses, look what good success he had, he had from Jesus Christ. I will
not dare to speak of any of those things which Christ has not wrought by me,
to make the Gentiles obedient by Word and deed. Romans 15. 18. that is, as who
should say, that the Gentiles did hear me, that they were brought to obedience
in word and deed, that I had so good success in my labors; God forbid I
should say or think it was my doing. I dare not say so for a world. No, no, It
was Christ, and he alone that did work by me as his poor Instrument. I have
all my good success from him. The success is merely as he will. If he will be
pleased to give so good success, Peter shall convert 3000 at one Sermon. But
if he be pleased to deny a good success, the Prophet Esaias shall preach in the
reign of 4 Kings, about fourscore years and convert hardly one, as he says
to Israel, as the Apostle quotes him. All the day long I have stretched forth
my hands unto a disobedient and a gainsaying people. Romans 10. 21. All successes
are of God, and therefore much more success here. Let it be in any calling. As
for example, fishing; that when a man goes a fishing, he sindes good success,
this is of God. Simon and his company toyled all night and took nothing. But
when Christ came and gave them good success, then they enclosed a great
multitude of fishes, two shipfull of fishes at one draught, Luke 5. 5. So when
a man runs, who shall get the Goal; the man may run, but whether he shall
get the Goal, that he cannot tell. When a man fights, the man may fight, and
be the better man of the two, but whether shall overcome, that is uncertain
unto them; the success is of God, as Solomon says, The race is not to the
swift, nor the battle to the strong, nor riches to the wise, time and chance
happens to them all, Eccle. 9. 11. that is, not as though the swift do not
sometimes get the race, and the strong the Victory, and wise men riches, yet
they do many times; namely, when God gives success, otherwise they do not.
How many times do men go about businesses, and in all likelihood, they might
hit well, yet how often do they not? the Lord will have us see that success
is from him.

Now if it be so in outward things, how much more here, in other things, the
work is more in the man's hands, and the thing is traceable to him, but it is
not so here: We may labor to convert Souls, but this work is not in our
hands, the using of the means, the Lord Jesus Christ puts that into our hands;
but the doing of the deed, the success is only from him.

First, Because we are nothing in this work. We may be something at other
works, we may study, and in an ordinary providence we may make a Sermon. But
when we come to preach, it is not an ordinary providence that will make us to
convert souls; no, here we are nothing, Paul may plant, and Apollos may water,
Now mark what follows, he does not only say, it is God that gives the
increase. Paul may plant, and Apollos may water, but God gives the increase. 1
Cor. 3. 6. that is, all their success and all the fruit of their labor is
from God. That is not all he says. But in the seventh verse, says he. Neither
is he that planteth any thing, nor he that waters any thing, but God that
gives the increase. As if he should say, as excellent gifts as these men had,
they did nothing in this work, the whole success is of God. Beloved we can
but set before you, life and death, we can but tell you thus ye will be damned,
and thus and thus ye may be saved. But it is God that must bless this unto
you. Otherwise we can do nothing. We may preach our hearts out; and yet you will
to hell, do we what we can, except the Lord break your careere. Elisha's man
could lay his Masters staff upon the child, but the child stirred not, till
Elisha came himself, and then the child was raised. So we can but lay our
Masters staff upon your dead souls, But except our Master come himself, never
a dead soul will stand up: what is all our preaching, and dressing up of our
Sermons, like the riging of the sails, that's nothing except the wind blow. The
Spirit of Christ is the wind, except he blow upon you, we are nothing: the
tampering on the Organs is nothing, but when the breath comes, then there is
music; So, we may keep ado to turn your hearts, but till God breath into
you, there is nothing done. True, the preaching of the Gospel is a very
powerful thing; I, when Christ's arm goes along with it, it is the sword of
the Spirit, but if the Spirits arm be not with it, we may brandish it here
every week, and do little; as Scanderbagge said: One hearing what mighty feats
Scanderbagges sword had done, sent for it, and when he saw it, he made nothing
of it: Is this the Sword that has done such great exploits? what is this Sword
more than other swords? O, says Scanderbagge, I sent thee my sword, but not my
arm, that did handle it. So, my Brethren, the word which we preach, is but
Christ's sword; God sends you his sword many times, when he keeps his arm to
himself, and so nothing is done. So then, we are nothing, and therefore all
success is of Christ. First, our wills are nothing to do it, we may will to
do you good, but Converts cannot be made by our wills, as the Evangelist
says, Joh. 1. 13. Secondly, our pains and labors are nothing; we may labor
and take pains, but look Esa. 49. 4. Thirdly, our gifts are nothing; who had
better gifts than Christ had, as he was man? and yet that would not do it,
Joh. 12. 38. Fourthly, our Prayers are nothing, they may do something,
sometimes, but except God be pleased to give success, they are nothing,
Jeremiah prayed, Jer. 14. 7, 8, 9. yet the Lord told him, that should not do
it, ver. 11.

Secondly, the Conversion of Souls, is a supernatural work; we that are
Ministers, preach to make men new creatures, to turn Leopards into Kids, as if
we should preach to make Blackamores white, the dead alive, which is a work for
God alone to do, and therefore the success must needs be from him, Alas, what
are we able to do? as the Apostle says, You are Gods wormanship in Christ
Jesus, created to good works, Ephesians. 2. 10. we are his instruments, that is true
indeed, but ye are his workmanship, you are the Epistle of Christ, administered
by us; Written, not with Ink, but with the Spirit of the living God, 2 Cor. 3.
3. The Epistle of Christ, but ministered indeed by Christ, his is the hand, we
are but the pen; when we bid you repent, and believe, and be holy, and godly,
and heavenly minded men; deny your selves, be dead to the world, and alive to
God, come out of Satan's power, come into Christ's Kingdom: it is like Ezekiels
bidding of the dead bones to gather flesh, and stand up living men. All the
success must needs be of God.

And therefore what does this teach us? The Use of it is: Use 1.
First, That we that are the Ministers of God, can but make trial whether we
can convert our people, or no; as the Apostle speaks, proving, if at any time,
God will give them repentance, 2 Timothy 2. 25. so it is in some of your Bibles,
so, we must make proof: we must try; come into the Pulpit every week, and try,
sharpen our nails as sharp as we can, and strike them as far in as we can,
and so try, often try, as the wiseman speaks in another case, In the morning
sow thy seed, and in the evening let not thy hand rest, for thou know not
whether shall prosper, this, or that, or both, Eccle. 11. 6. So Jeremiah did,
he would try; first, he went to the poorer sort, to see whether they would
hearken unto him; when he had no success there, then thought he, I will try
the great men, I will get me to the great men, Jer. 5. 5. we should make
assayes, we do not know, may be God will give us good success, we must make
assayes, as it is said of Paul and Silas, That they assayed to go into
Bithynia, but the Spirit suffered them not, Act. 16. 7. O, thought they, here
be a great many souls in this Country, we will try, whether there be any for
Christ, yea, or no. Indeed, they found that they had no success in their
attempt. But they made an assay though.

Secondly, This teaches us to wait, though we have not Use 2.
success presently, yet we should wait, all success is from Christ, and
therefore it is fit we should wait for it, and therefore a Minister is
commanded to be patient. The servant of the Lord must be gentle to all men, apt
to teach, patient, 2 Timothy 2. 24. q. d. he has not the success in his own
hands, to have it when he will; no, though he do no good yet, nor yet, he
must be patient. He is not apt to teach poor people else, except he be
patient, as he is not fit to teach a dull Scholar, that is overhasty. And
therefore, my Brethren, though we have lost all our labor hitherto on the most
of you, yet now again we speak to you, come, will ye yet go to heaven? come are
ye yet in the mind to hearken and obey? we come to you once more, will ye
yet, etc. as Jeremiah says, Woe unto thee, O Jerusalem, will thou not be made
clean? when shall it once be? Jer. 13. 27. Beloved, we are dull Scholars in
Religion, and people are hard to take their learning in this kind, and
therefore if we would be apt to teach, we must be patient, what though we see
no good yet, this must not make us out of heart, or to grudge our pains, we
must be patient still, we are to think, may be the next time I preach God
will give me good success, Isaiah and Paul gave not over, though they had
cause to complain.

Thirdly, This may serve to condemn all the world, whether Use 3.
the Gospel comes, and specially us hereabouts, that do not let Ministers have
any good success, you will say, how do I make this use of it? If all the
Ministers success be from Christ, then one would think, this were an excuse
unto people.

I answer; no, the meaning of the Doctrine is this, that the people are so
contrary to the Word, such enemies to the ways of Jesus Christ, that a
Minister can look for no success, except the Lord turn their hearts: This is
the meaning of the point. Does this excuse any? what, does your enmity against
Christ and all goodness afford you any excuse? nay, this aggravates your sin.
Now this is the meaning of it. As Saint Paul, when he spoke, how little
success he and all the rest of his fellow-Apostles had, he lays the blame
upon the people; All the day long, I have stretched out my hands against a
disobedient and a gainsaying people, Romans 10. 21. So the Prophet Isaiah, from
whom these words are taken, complains of the unfruitfulnesse of his Ministry,
as being the peoples fault, and therefore he complains of them unto God; Lord
who has believed our report, Esaias. 53. 1. The conscience of man knows this to
be true, for he knows he sins willingly, and he knows he would not do
otherwise, he daily feels Gods Spirit haling him to good, and telling him he
ought to live thus and thus, and yet he is loath and will not, he inclines the
other way, and rather would do as he does, then as he knows God would have him:
what is this but contempt? and indeed this is the great sin of this Land, the
contempt of the Gospel, people count it not a precious, but a tedious thing.
Never merry world (says some) since we had so much Preaching: as if the Sun
shone too bright; like the Israelites who stumbled at the plenty of Manna: Nay,
they are akin to the Devils, who asked Christ if he were come to torment them;
they account the Gospel a torment, because it crosses their lusts, and lets in
so much light. These can spend days and nights in vanity, but an hour at a
Sermon is tedious, if they had any delight in the Word, they would not care
though their Minister stood somewhat long. Though Zachary stayed long in the
Temple, yet the people waited for him till he came out, Luke 1. 21. they
marvelled indeed he stayed so long; but the Spirit of God notes, that they
waited for him. But our people sit upon thorns at a Sermon, but they can lie
soaking at an alebench as though they sat upon soft cushions. The Onions of
Egypt have a better taste with them, than the Quails of the Wilderness. They
had rather live at the Hogs-trough, than in their Fathers house. With the
Gadarens they parfer their Pigges before our Savior Christ. O say they, we
cannot live by Sermons; Sermons are too holy and strait for them. Bid them take
up Christ's yoke, they care not for it except it were wider. The Ministry has
no success at all with them unto any purpose. What a thing is this Brethren!
Whence is it that we regard the Gospel no more? The sooth is, people know not
their damned estate, neither will they believe it, though we tell them; nay,
they care not whether they hear it or no. But if they knew the goodness of it,
they would run from East to West for it, if drunkards, and worldlings, and such
rabble, knew their fearful estate, the Minister should be as welcome to them,
as bread to the hungry, or a pardon to a Theif; So that ye see this condemns
them deeply, that the Word has no success with. Thus ye see the Ministers of
Christ have all success from Christ, if any one soul come in at their
teaching, it is an evident sign, it is of Jesus Christ; for otherwise people
hold off, some hold off altogether, others yield a little way, but will not
yield full out; if a man yield to us indeed, it is merely by Jesus Christ.

Now I will show you, that as a Minister has all his good success of his
labors from Jesus Christ. So if he be a true Minister of Christ, Christ uses
to give him good success. When Christ put Peter into the Ministry. He told
him from hence forth thou shall catch men. Luke 5. 10. That is, as I have made
thee a Minister, So thou shall have good success. They shall have some good
success, as we see in the sense though three parts fell into hard ground, yet
some fell into good ground, Mar. 4. 8. Nay, though Christ's Ministers come into
the most Desperate places that can be, as we read in the Acts of the Apostles,
notwithstanding the places they went to, were deeply rooted in Idolatry and
full of persecuting Jews, and they were ready to be stoned to death, the
people were so mad against their Doctrine; yet they never Preached any where,
but they had good success with some. When Paul came to Thessalonica, the text
notes, some of them believed, and joined in Company with him. Act. 17. 4. When
he came to Athens, though some mocked, and some hung in suspense, like Neuters,
that were neither fish, nor flesh, howbeit certain men clave unto Paul, and
believed Act. 17. 34. So when he came to Rome. Though some stood out, yet some
were persuaded, Act. 28. 24. Yea when Philip came to Samaria, though it was a
Town, that was bewitched, full of sorcery and witchcraft, and they had even
given their souls to the Devil. A Minister could hardly come into a worse
Town, yet the people gave heed to those things that he spoke. Act. 8. 6. Nay,
the context shows he had marveilous good success, the Lord makes that
precious account of the Ministers of the Gospel, that he never bestows it
upon any place, where he has not some elect; other blessings God bestows more
promiscuously, Reprobates have as great plenty as others. All things come a
like to all. But this blessing he gives to no place, where he has not some to
save. Either some in the Town, or some there abouts.

The use of this is, first, Here we are to enquire then what Use 1.
may be the reason that Christ's Ministers have so little success now adays.
First, Some Ministers have the less success by raising up of others that have
greater. As Calvin after Luther. Luther had admirable success for a time, and
then when Calvin came, he did increase, and Luther did decrease. So John
observed of himself, he had admirable success for a time, but when Christ
came, John had the less. He must increase but I must decrease. Joh. 3. 30.
Again, it may be peoples unthankfulness, for the Ministry of the Word. When
people have had the Word along time, and yet they will not obey it, may be God
says to them as he did to the Fig Tree, Never fruit grow on thee more, while
the world stands. Then God sends Esaias to make the heart of the people fat.
Then Jeremiahs errands most an end to pluck up and to pull down. Then John is
to say, He that is filthy let him be filthy still. Then Hosea cries, Ephraim is
joined unto Idols; let him alone.

Thirdly, Some Ministers may be have the less success, for their own fault
in not speading of the net, when their preaching is little better then reading.
True, it may be a man may be converted by reading, as Luther says he was. And
John Husse by reading Wiclefes books. Austen says he was converted by reading
the 13. of the Romans and the 14. verse. There is a Blessing that may be looked
for by reading. Blessed is he that reads Rev. 1. 3. But this is very rare.
There may a fish or two hang on the net, being let down on a heap, but that
is a chance. No, no, it is not the net lapped up together that brings in the
draught, but hayled out at length and spread all abroad, this closes in the
fish. So it is the spreading of the Word, the stretching of it out upon every
soul present, this is the way to catch some: When a Minister labors to hit
all.

Fourthly, some Ministers may be unsuccessefull for not preaching roughly
enough. Beloved our times are knotty times. Rough hewing is needful. Now people
had need hear of hell and damnation, and wrath and vengeance, against their
sins, Some save with fear, as the Apostle speaks, plucking them out of the
fire, Jude 23.

Fifthly, Again, May be a Ministers success is not seen, may be he is
successful, though he shall not live to see it, as Christ says, One sowes
and another reaps, Joh. 4. 37. as the Prophets sowed, and the Apostles reapt:
So, Beloved, we may sow now, and those that come after us, may be they shall
be the reapers. The present age, now may sow seed for the succeeding. Arbores
serit, quae alteri prosuit saeculo. As the Chinah make their dishes: the
Fathers lay them into the fire, and the third generation after takes them out.
Though we do not see our seeds to come up; may be we meet with no harvest,
this may be our comfort, if we can but sow, for others afterward to reap. Let
us have a care of sowing, many a man that now hears the word, and now is
brought up under a good teaching Ministry, though yet he do not obey it, who
knows what God will do? may be God may cast him into some horrible affliction
yet before he dies, and sling terror into his Soul, and then what we have
delivered may do him good: And therefore we should never lin sowing, though
we never see the Harvest: this should be our comfort, that the ground has
the seed. Let us still power in good examples into our people; Parents into
their children, Masters into their servants, Ministers into their hearers, let
God alone with it, when, and what, and where the Harvest shall be.

Lastly, Some Ministers are not godly, and then how can they look for good
success? as God says, If they had stood in my Counsel, and caused my people
to hear my words, then they should have turned them from their evil way, Jer.
23. 22. I dare not say absolutely, that a carnal Minister shall never have
good success in his Ministry. As if a Minister should conclude he were a
good man, because God has blessed his labors; No, that is not a good
argument: for,

First, It is the Word that converts, and not the person of the speaker, I dare
not tie God to the goodness of any man's person. God, as he is a Creator he is
a wise God, and can write well with a bad pen, and cut well with a blunt
naughty knife.

Secondly, Such may be sent of God, and gifted for the Ministry, and
therefore for all that I know, they may be an Organ of conversion sometimes.

Thirdly, Paul rejoiced that Christ was preached by the false Apostles, though
it were but of envy, Phil. 1. 15, 16, 17, 18. you will say, how could he
rejoice in that? that was a wicked manner of Preaching. Why surely he could
not rejoice in it, but that he did think that it might do some good.

Fourthly, This may be thus, or else, no man can be assured of his salvation:
For, if a carnal Minister cannot be the means of conversion, etc.

Fifthly, They may say at last day, Lord, Lord, we have Prophesied in thy
name, and in thy name have we cast out devils, and yet Christ will say unto
them, I know you not, etc.

Sixthly, Why else does our Savior Christ bid people hear the Scribes and
Pharisees, but that he implies, they may be a means of good to them.

Seventhly, Judas was sent out to Preach, Matthew. 10. 4. Christ said to him as
well as the rest, When ye go Preach, saying, the Kingdom of Heaven is at
hand, ver. 7.

Eighthly, Experience has found this to be true; some godly souls have
confessed this very thing, that such as now they see to be palpably carnal,
have been the means of their conversion, etc. Many helped Noah to build his Arc
that perished in the waters. God may make the crowing of a Cock, to be a means
of a wakning Peter's Conscience. The temptations of the Devil, to be the means
of Luthers quickening: and therefore, I do not simply affirm that carnal
Ministers cannot convert. But this I say, it is a very rare thing, as Christ
says, If the blind lead the blind, both shall fall into the ditch, Matthew.
15. 14. So, if a Hypocrite lead a hypocrite, the Drunkard lead the drunkard,
etc. It is a woe to a Parish, when their Ministers are not godly: Woe to the
City says God, Zeph. 3. 1. why so? Her Prophets are light persons, ver. 4. Woe
to such Towns whose Ministers will go to the Alehouse, whose Ministers will
keep company, and be hail fellow with every vain fellow, whose Ministers will
embrace this present world, whose Ministers are proud, and envious, and
malicious, that give a bad example to the people, that depend upon their
charge. Woe to them, says God. The curse of God is upon such Parishes. God
has hardly any intention to save such peoples souls. Or, if he have any of
his Elect there, God will save them some other way; as God told the naughty
Shepherds. I, even I will search out my sheep and seek them out, Ezekiel. 34. 11.
that is, I will search them out some other way, I will not do it by you. and
therefore when he has a mind to save a poor people, he sends good Ministers
among them, or them to good ones. Turn o backsliding children, says God, and I
will take you, one of a city, and two of a family, and I will give you Pastors
according to my heart, Jer. 3. 14. etc. God would have none but wise-hearted
men to work in his manual Tabernacle, Exodus 35. 10. how then do we think he
will let fools, as all carnal Ministers are? etc. Saint Paul said, it was a
part of the hope that he had in the presence of Christ, at his coming, that
God had made him the instrument of gaining souls to his Kingdom. For what is
our hope, or joy, or crown of rejoicing, are not even you in the presence of
our Lord Jesus Christ, at his coming? 1 Thessalonians. 2. 19. and has made a promise
to such as convert souls; so runs the Promise, They that turn others to
righteousness, shall shine as the stars, Dan. 12. 3. indeed this is but a
secondary evidence of Salvation, etc. O, Beloved, if we could convert any of
your Souls, what a comfort would it be? whereas, if a man be a wicked man,
what hope can he have that God will bless his labors? nay, he has said
expressly, that if a man will not obey the voice of the Lord: cursed shall he
be in the field, and in the house, and so in the Pulpit, in his studies, he
cannot look for Gods assistance, as God told the wicked Priests: I will curse
all your blessings, if ye will not lay it to heart, Mal. 2. 2.

Secondly, Another Use is, does Christ use to bless and Use 2.
prosper his true Ministers? then let us labor to get this blessing of him.
Let us seek to him to give us good success, O how eager is Paul every where in
prayer to God for good success?

Thirdly, Another Use is, if we have not the success that Use 3.
we could wish, let us not be discouraged; as the Prophet Isaiah says, My
labor is with the Lord: though Israel be not gathered, yet shall I be
glorious, Esa. 49. 4, 5. The Husbandman loses by an ill crop; I, but if we
be faithful, we shall not loose, though our crop be never so ill, if we have
plowed well, and sown well, no matter what the crop be, we shall have our
pay. If I preach and you repent not, it shall never repent me of my pains, I
will preach still. For though my preaching be not a sweet savor, yet it shall
be to God, even in thee, and thou shall smart for it; and therefore let us not
cease working, many a draught the poor fisher man makes and takes nothing, yet
he leaves not off; many a time is the net of Preaching shot forth, and yet
none converted thereby. So it pleases God to exercise the patience of his
servants. Yet still the work must be followed, and the Lords leisure must be
waited for. Oftentimes the net takes fish, and they slip out again; So, there
be many that seem to be pulled in by the Gospel, nevertheless they slide
away again. Again, there is oftentimes brought in into the net, that which is
yet good for nothing when it is got, there comes in frogs, and weeds, and a
great deal of trash, which in the end are cast away, and yet for love of the
fish, the fisherman is content to hale all in that he can; So, Beloved, we
draw in many hypocrites, many that prove naught, and yet for hope of good fish,
we must still be a laboring, and may be we may have a good Harvest yet,
though yet we see little likeli-hood. Be not weary of welldoing, says the
Apostle, for me shall reap if we faint not. Gal. 6. 9.

Fourthly, another Use is to you, that you do not wilfully stand out, to
deprive us of good success. The shrewdest turn you can do your poor
Ministers, is to deprive them of the joy of their labors; the way to rejoice
them, is to embrace the Gospel they preach, it will be heavy for you when we
shall groan to God, that we could not persuade any of you. If thou will not
now hear that which may profit thee, thou shall hear one day that which shall
make thy heart ache. Go ye cursed into everlasting fire. O, remember Sodom,
and do not stand out against the Ministers that come from Jesus Christ to you.

Revel. 3. 1. These things, says he, that has the seven Spirits of God, and
the seven Stars.
HAving done with the inscription of this Epistle, To the Church that is in
Sardis write, we came to the Subscription, containing the person from whom the
Epistle is sent. The Lord Jesus Christ, who is here described from two
Royalties of his, First, that he has The seven Spirits of God, that we have
handled already. Secondly, that he has the seven Stars, or the Ministers of
the Church. This we have almost finished too; we showed you that Christ is
said to have the Ministers of the Church five ways.

First, he has the sending of them; they have their Mission from him.

Secondly, he has the delegating of them; they have their Commission from him.

Thirdly, he has the gifting of them; they have their gifts and abilities
from him.

Fourthly, he has the prospering or not prospering of them; they have their
success from him.

All these four I have spoken of already. Now remains the fifth and the last,
he has the disposing of them, the placing of them in a Town, the continuing
of them, or removing of them, the holding of them up, or the pulling of them
down, as the Apostle speaks, He has the key of David, he opens and no man
shuts, and he shuts and no man opens, Rev. 3. 7. that is, he has all
power in the Church, to place it or displace it. To settle it or to transplant
it, to prescribe or not prescribe, to absolve or to condemn, to save or to
destroy, to give Ministers liberty or to take it away. As Christ tells the
Minister of Philadelphia, I have set before thee an open door, and no man can
shut it. Rev. 3. 8. good Ministers shall have Liberty to preach in their
stations, as long as he pleases, and they never can be hindered, till he is
pleased so to permit it, or appoint it. So when Paul was at Ephesus though he
had never so many adversaries there, that would feign hinder him if they could,
Yet as long as Christ gave him an open door, to preach and to do good, none of
them all could withstand him. A great door and effectual is opened unto me,
and there are many adversaries, 1 Cor. 16. 9.

First, Christ has the placing of his Ministers. As he says to Jeremiah I
have set thee. So Christ says to all his true Ministers, I have set you. God
has set to all men the bounds of their habitations. Act. 17. 26. that one man
shall dwell here; another there, one in this Parish, another in that Parish.
How much more does he appoint unto his Ministers their habitations, that John
the Baptist shall be in the Wilderness of Judea, Titus shall be in Creete,
Epaphras shall be at Colosse, Epaphroditus at Philippi, Timothy at Ephesus, and
the like. Nay, he is no Minister of Christ that is not of Christ's placing. As
the Apostle speaks. Take heed unto your selves and to all the flock, over
which the Holy Ghost has made you overseers. Act. 20. 28. Over which the Holy
Ghost has made you overseers. He is a true Minister to this or that
Congregation; that can say that the Holy Ghost has made me an overseer to them.

The Reason is, first, Because no man is a Pastor or a Shepherd to any sheep,
that did not enter in by the door into those sheep. He that enters in by the
door, is a shepherd of the sheep. Joh. 10. 2. Now who is this door but Jesus
Christ? I am the door says he, By me if any man enter in, he shall be saved.
As it follows there in the ninth verse. As he is the door, no man can enter
into the Ministry rightly but by him. He must have his Letters of Orders from
him. So he is the door into any flock, and if a man have not institution and
induction from him, he is no Shepherd of the flock. Nay, Christ tells him
flatly, he is a thief and robber, and a hyreling. When the Danites asked the
Levite in Mount Ephraim, who brought thee hither? What make thou in this
place? Judge. 18. 3. ye know he put himself there, he sought for the place
himself, and it was maintenance that brought him thither. His own conscience
told him he was a Hyreling. He could not say, the Lord brought me hither. He
came not in by the door; Now every true Minister comes in by the door into a
Parish, and therefore he comes in by Jesus Christ.

Secondly, No Minister can be placed in any Parish, but by the Bishop of the
Diocese. Now Beloved, who ever be Christ's substitute, Christ is the maine
Bishop of every Diocese, Christ is the Shepherd and Bishop of our fowls, 1
Pet. 2. 25. Indeed there be other Bishops under him, other Shepherds under
him, I but he is the great Shepherd of the sheep, Heb. 13. 20. the Arch
Shepherd. (...) 1 Pet. 5. 4. The chief Shepherd. When the chief Shepherd
shall appear. Well if he be the chief Shepherd, it is fit that he should
institute and induct into Pastoral charges. Its fit that his word should be
followed, in every ones coming into a living, to go no where, but where his
word does allow. To take no care of Souls, but of such as he commits to our
custody. All true Ministers are his Curats, and therefore if they be not of his
placing, they came not in right.

Thirdly, If it be he that must pay them their wages, then reason good, that he
should set them on work. If a man thrust himself into a Parish, it was not
Christ that moved him to come there, but forsooth he wanted a Living, he would
feign have maintenance, there is so much Per annum, this was his motive, Christ
never moved him, this man can look for no wages from Jesus Christ. When he has
gathered in his Tithes or his quarteridge, Christ will tell him as he told the
foolish Pharisees, Ye have the record. He that set you on work, he will pay your
wages. I never set you on work, and therefore ye can look for nothing at my
hands. Certainly if Christ must pay a man his wages, good Reason that he should
have the putting of a man into this or that Vineyard. He called in the
Laborers and paid them their wages that gave them their task. Matt. 3. 20. 8.

Fourthly, How can they look for his assistance and Blessing, if they be not
placed by him? when the Lord had placed Jeremiah a Prophet in Judah, the Lord
undertook to assist him. I have made thee this day a defenced City and an iron
Pillar, and Brazen walls, I will be with thee Jere. 1. 18, 19. A Minister has
need of Christ's assistance, where e're he is, his Preaching else will do
little good, his Sermons will be of no effect, Christ's assistance and Blessing
is all in all. Moses prays for Levi, Bless Lord his substance, and accept the
work of his hands. Deuteronomy. 33. 11. No man has more need of Christ's blessing to
go along with him then a Minister. Now when a Minister is not there where
Christ would have him to be, How can he expect that Christ's blessing should be
with him? if he can say, Christ would have me here, Christ has placed me here,
then he may look for Christ's being with him.

Fifthly, what peace of Conscience can they have, when they lie on their
deathbeds, except they can comfortably say, Lord thou did place me in this
Parish, Lord I came in by the door, and by no other way. It was not by-ends,
nor filthy lucre, nor gain, as Jeremiah says, I did not thrust in my self to
be a Pastor, Lord thou made me a Minister to this Congregation, I have
faithfully tended those Souls, that thou gave me to feed, this is a sweet
thing. Ye know people are apt to say, who sent for you, who made you our
Minister? we will not acknowledge you to be our Minister. As Shemaiah said of
good Jeremiah; Thou have made thy self a Prophet to this people, Jer. 29. 27.
Now if Jeremiah had not his own Conscience to prove his Institution from God,
what a taking had he been in?

Sixthly, And lastly, what comfort else can the people of God have to live
under such a man's Ministry, unless they can say, this is my Minister, set
over me in the Lord! This is so needful, that without it, he were as good have
no Minister at all. As the Apostle tells the good people of Colosse, Epaphras
is for you a faithful Minister of Christ, Col. 1. 7. This is their comfort
indeed, when they can truly affirm that this man is for us a faithful
Minister of Christ. This Minister is our Minister in Christ. This is the ground
of their Consciences, submitting to his Ministry, and of their receiving of
him, as an Ambassador from Christ unto them. Now when a man is not placed by
Christ in a Parish as their Minister, what joy can they have to hear him? What
hope that God will sanctify his labors among them?

The use of this is, first; For us that are Ministers, that we Use 1.
look we be of Christ's placing, that we may be able to conclude to our people,
as Paul to the Corinths, Though I be not an Apostle unto others, yet doubtless
I am an Apostle unto you. So that we may be able to conclude to our people,
doubtless I am Christ's Minister unto you. As our Savior Christ says. Who is
the faithful wise Shepherd, Whom his Lord shall make Ruler over his household?
Luke 12. 42. Has the Lord made us Rulers over his household? We are all
shepherds in such and such Parishes. But did the Lord put us there? We are
Spiritual Rulers over such and such households of God, but did the Lord make us
Rulers over them? otherwise we are not Stars in his hands; No, We are blazing
Comets out of his Orb, if we be Stars in his hands, we can prove our placing
from him.

Secondly, This serves to condemn them that are thieves Use 2.
and intruders into Gods Heritage, that never came in by the door, but by some
other way, that are hirelings and will leave the sheep, for their own
advantage; Gain makes them take livings, gain makes them chop and change, that
never went to Christ for his approbation, it is said of the Apostles that the
Rulers and Elders perceived that they had been with Jesus, Act. 4. 13. Those
are Ministers of Parishes indeed, that have been with Jesus, But these men, no
man can perceive that ever they have been with Jesus Christ, that ever they had
any allowance from him, and yet they will be crowding in into Livings. But I
let this pass.

Thirdly, Has Christ the placing of Ministers? then this Use 3.
is of use unto you, that have Ministers of Christ's placing among you. Take
heed how ye carry your selves under your Ministry. If you do not obey their
Doctrine, you sin against Christ. O reject not their reproves, put not off the
Word of God in their mouths, if ye do, ye do not put off men but God. It was
an excellent exhortation of that godly King, Jehosaphat: Hear me, O ye
inhabitants of Judah and Jerusalem, believe the Lords Prophets and ye shall
prosper, 2 Chronicles. 20. 20. O, if Kings and Princes would do so now, call upon
people up and down, O Sirs, believe the Lords Prophets and ye shall prosper: Ye
that have Gods Ministers among you, believe them, may be when they threaten
against all your sinful courses, they tell you of hell, and damnation, and
heaven and salvation, ye hardly believe any such thing: O believe them, that it
may go well with you. Remember they be of Christ's placing among you. He put
them into your Pulpits, he gives them the Themes that they preach to you from
day to day. Believe them.

Fourthly, Has Christ the placing of Ministers? then never Use 4.
complain of graceless Ministers; O, ye have graceless Ministers, and our
Minister is not as he should be, he is not a good liver, he does not preach to
the Conscience. People are apt to complain of Patrons, and such and such
causes, but let me tell you, you murmr against Jesus Christ, every Parish in
England might have a good and a godly Minister, a Minister after Gods own
heart, for all that I know, if they would go to Jesus Christ, he has the
placing of Ministers.

Now what is the reason that there are no more able worthy Ministers every
where?

Answer, Surely if Christ were sought to, this would quickly be helped, when
Judah had no Ministers in the Captivity, their souls starved for want of good
feeding, thousands perished, and their souls were quite lost for lack of
Vision. What says Christ to them. Turn ye backsliding children, says the
Lord, for I am married unto you, and I will take you one of a city, and two of
a Family, and I will bring you to Zion. And I will give you Pastors according
to my heart, which shall feed you with knowledge and understanding, Jer. 3. 14,
15. people are subject to murmr, and this is long of such and such, that we
have no better Ministers, whereas the Truth is, it is long of our selves,
iniquity abounds every where, the love of many waxes cold, people grow weary of
wholesome Doctrine, they have itching ears, they are full fed, any Ministry is
good enough for them, if a man prophecy of Wine and strong drink, he shall
even be the Prophet of this people, Mich. 2. 11. that is, any Prophet is good
enough for them, fitter than a better. One that would show people how to get
Bread and Drink, and Wine, and profits, and pleasures; People would rather hear
such a one preach, than to hear of Repentance and Mortification; and Faith, and
Holiness, and the ways of God, they care not for these things. The true
Preaching of the Word, is as contrary to the disposition of men as can be.
Nothing is more irksome unto them, as the Word rightly taught. It goes against
their lusts, it crosses their wicked wills. They are weary of it, they say unto
God depart from us, they will not let Christ reign in their hearts, therefore
we may rather wonder that there is any good Minister in the Kingdom any where,
we are to bless God, and pray for our Governors, that we have any good
Ministers at all, the truth is we deserve not any. There is so little Religion
every where, so much hypocrisy, so much profession without any power of
godliness, such a deal of vanity, and unsoundnesse, and hollow-heartednesse;
nay, among such as have gone for good Christians, so much falsehood and
rottenness, and apostasy, to what end should Christ let us have any more
Preaching. We give the world occasion to think, that Preaching is the cause of
all this wretchedness. What a dishonor is this to Jesus Christ? and therefore
no marvel we have no more, we may admire the patience of God that we have
any.

Fifthly, Has Christ the placing of Ministers? then Use 5.
see whether to go for good Ministers. Christ is the general Patron of all
Livings* He can present whom he will to a Parish, and therefore we should
pray unto him. When our Savior Christ preached here and there, and saw how the
people came out of all Parishes to him, it seems, though they had Levites in
their own Synagogues, yet they did not know how to feed their flocks; they were
as sheep for all them without a shepherd* there was hardly ere a good Minister
among them all. Mark, what the Text says. Jesus had compassion on them,
because they were scattered abroad as sheep having no shepherd: O says he,
Pray ye therefore the Lord of the Harvest that he would send forth laborers
into his harvest, Mat. 9. 38. so much for the first.

Secondly, Now as Christ has the placing of Ministers, so he has the
continuing of them, as long as he pleases. He continued the Prophet Isaiah in
his Ministry during the Reign of four Kings. He kept the Prophet Hosea in
his function, during the reign of five Kings, though the times were very bad.
When it was told Christ that Herod sought his life, that he would not only
put him besides his Ministry, but also his very life; says he, Go tell that
Fox, Behold I cast out Devils, and I do cures to day and to morrow, and the
third day I shall be perfect, Luke 13. 32. Christ had his time appointed him
by his Father himself, and he would Preach all that time out, and all the
devils in hell, and all his Enemies on earth should not hinder him. So,
Beloved, it is with all his Ministers, he has set them a time, and he has
power to continue them all that time. I shall preach to day, and to morrow, and
such a day, do the world what they can, they cannot hinder his ministers from
preaching, till Christ please, as he told his people: Though the Lord give you
the bread of adversity, and the water of affliction, yet shall not thy Teachers
be removed into a corner any more: But thine eyes shall see thy Teachers. Esa.
30. 20. q. d. though thy Ministers have been put by, yet I will restore them
again, and they shall not be put by any more. I have power to continue them as
long as I will; when he called Noah to preach to the old world, he appointed
him 120. years, and he continued him all that while, whether the wicked world
would or no.

And the Reason is, first, because Ministers are his Ambassadors. Now a King it
is in his choice, how long his Ambassadors shall lie Lieger in a forain
Country, he has so many businesses for them to do, and so long they shall
continue there. So, true ministers are the Ambassadors of Christ, as the
Apostle Paul speaks, Now then we are Ambassadors for Christ, as though God did
beseech you by us, we pray you in Christ's stead, be reconciled unto God, 2
Cor. 5. 20. we are Christ's Ambassadors, and therefore he will continue us as
long as he list; as long as he has any business to do; as long as he has any
souls to save, any men or women to reconcile to his father, or to build up, so
long he will continue us. Its a doleful sign when Christ takes away his
Ministers from a place, its a sign he has no more souls to save; if he had,
he would let his Ambassadors lie beseeching still: so that this is one great
reason, because, Ministers are His Ambassadors.

Secondly, Because Christ has all power in Heaven and in Earth, as he told his
Apostles, when he sent them out to preach, All power is given to me in Heaven
and in Earth, Math. 28. 18, q. d. I have power to send you, and I have power to
continue your Ministry as long as I think fitting, and I have power to take
you away, I have power to ordain you either for salvation or the damnation of
men. Whom I will I can convert by your Sermons, and whom I will I can deliver
up to the counsel of their own hearts, that they shall not be converted by
you. Now: if Christ have all power in Heaven and in Earth, then he has power
to continue his Ministers as long as his will is. I need not stand to prove
this, it is too evident: he has power to lengthen his Ministers lives, to
prolong their liberties, when he takes away one, he has power to put in
another as good: when he meant to take away Elias, he anointed Elisha in his
room. If their enemies be never so many, he can tie up their hands; he
deliverd Paul from the mouth of the Lion: though forty men had vowed to take
him away by death, he diverted their plot, and continued him still: nay, when
he was in Bonds, yet he was able to get him liberty to go abroad with his
keeper, and to preach the Kingdom of God to as many as came. Suppose the world
be never so mad against Christ's Ministers, yet as long as he has any more
work for them to do, he can hold off their singers from meddling with them,
till they have finished the Task that he has given them to do.

The Use of this is; first, That Ministers should not fear Use 1.
to be deprived of their liberty, so long as they do well; indeed if they do
ill, if they be wicked or idle, or unworthy, such Ministers should fear they
do deserve to be put down. But if we be godly Ministers, it is our baseness
to fear any such thing. Christ has the continuing of us, our times are not in
men's hands, but in his. What a horrible thing is it, that we should go
against our conscience in any thing, or be afraid to speak what God bids us,
to be mealemouthed, to be discouraged with rumors, or dangers, we should
keep nothing back of the whole counsel of God, we are stars in his hands,
and he has the continuing of us; though men fight against us, they cannot
prevail against us, till our business is all done. As the Lord told the
Prophet Jeremiah: They shall fight against thee, but they shall not prevail
against thee, for I am with thee, Jer. 1. 19. Let us then be afraid of nothing
but sin. Let us be afraid to do any evil, either toward God or toward
man; let us be harmless in the midst of a crooked, and a perverse generation.
Let us deal faithfully with our people, let us undauntedly Preach, Rebuke,
Exhort, with all long suffering and Doctrine, make our faces hard against the
wickeds faces, no matter for their railings, their threatening speeches, their
malicious accusations, and not fear, the Lord Jesus has the continuing of us.

Secondly, Here we may see the reason why the Gospel Use 2.
continues in any place, a man would wonder it should continue any where,
because the world cannot abide it. Which of the Prophets have not your Fathers
persecuted? saves Stephen, Act. 7. 52. They that do evil, hate the light, it
cuts them to the heart; Every one hates me, says the Prophet, he was
reproached for the Words sake. Report, say they, and we will report it. One
time they put him into a dungeon; Another time they would have killed him.
Shemaiah writ Letters to the high Priest against him, Jer. 29. 25. And yet he
continued his Ministry, until the day of the Captivity. Nay, he had liberty,
when others had their liberty taken away. Ye know Christ himself Preached
daily in the Temple, and they took him not, though they gnasht their teeth at
his Doctrine, and sometimes were in the mind to throw him down headlong and
break his neck, sometimes to stone him; yet till his hour was come, he had his
liberty.

And the truth is, a man would wonder how any of Gods Ministers have their
Liberties continued; when there be so many Drunkards, so many Enemies of all
goodness, so many that follow their own ungodly lusts, and the Gospel is an
eyesore unto them, and yet in many places it stands still. This is Gods doing.
You see here Christ has the continuing of his Ministers; they shall have their
liberty, as long as God has any use for them.

Thirdly, Is it so, that Christ has the continuing of Use 3.
his Ministers? then this is of use also unto you; Now you hear whence to have
your good Ministers continued, even by seeking to Jesus Christ, he can lay a
charge upon all the world where they are, to let them alone. He can say, Do my
Prophets no harm, Psalm. 105. 15. you will say, why? what shall we do?

I Answer; first, let us repent of our sins, it is our sins that removes the
Ministers of God, if we would repent us of our sins, and turn from our wicked
ways, and let the Word work upon our hearts, this would continue the ministry
of the Word, as God told Judah, when they should repent of their sins, O says
he, I will be your God, and you shall be my people, and my Sanctuary shall be
among you for evermore, Ezekiel. 27. 27, 28. that is, by Sanctuary he means his
public Worship, the preaching of his Word, and other of the means of grace,
when they repented of their sins, then these should be continued: So, Beloved,
if ye would repent of your sins, I do not mean one or two, or a few, or so;
But if there might be a general Reformation among us, this would fasten the
Word among us, as in a sure place.

Secondly, Let us prize the Gospel, the Gospel loves to stay there where it
is welcome: it will never go away, if it might have good entertainment, if we
would honor it, and glorify it, and pluck up our affections, in the dearest
manner to it, this would preserve it among us for ever. The Church of
Philadelphia, that used the Word best, had it longest, etc. Our Savior Christ
has a saying, Into what soever Town or City ye enter, enquire who is worthy,
there abide, Matthew. 10. 11. And as he says, Luke 10. 7. Go not from house to
house. The Gospel does not love to change houses till it be urged; so it does
not love to change Towns, if it may have good usage; So, Beloved, if we would
give the Gospel good usage, the Lord would continue it; like a Guest that is
the willinger to stay when he sees he is among Friends.

Thirdly, Let us bring forth the fruits of it. The Husbandman will ever
continue ploughing of his ground, as long as he sees it will give him a good
crop. But when he perceives it will not quit charges, then he lays it
Fallow. So Christ would have stayed his word still in Judah and Jerusalem, if
they would have brought forth competent fruit. But when once they grew barren,
he said he would take his Kingdom away. The Kingdom of God shall be taken
away from you, and given to a Nation that will bring forth the fruits thereof,
Matthew. 21. 43.

Fourthly, Let us be earnest with God, to have his Gospel continue.
Importunity may do much: Importunity held Christ a night longer with the
Disciples, Luke 24. 29. Importunity held the Levite three or four days longer
then otherwise he would, Judge. 19. 4, 5, 6, 7. O If we would be importunate
with Christ to stay his Gospel still; as Jacob did the Angel, Thou shall not
go till thou bless me, Lord thy Gospel shall not go till it convert me;
and it shall not go till it convert me, and it shall convert me first; if
every one would hang upon Christ, to stay his Gospel still, and thou shall not
let it go till it has done my soul good, till it has illightned mine eyes,
and quickened my heart, this would obtain much; may be some do do thus! as
Jeremiah did: O thou hope of Israel, Why should thou be as a stranger in
the Land, and as a wayfaring man, that turns aside to stay for a night, Jer.
14. 8. Alas! that would not do, if there had been many Jeremiah's* to do
thus, then they might have gotten him to stay longer. So, may be some do cry
importunately thus, O thou hope of Jerusalem, etc. And so I fall upon the third
thing: ye have heard; first, how Christ has the placing of his Ministers;
secondly, he has the continuing of them.

Thirdly, Now it follows, he has the removing of them too. People are prone
to look upon second causes, But Christ is the supreme, he is the principal
cause of this judgment upon men, to take away his Ministers, as the Prophet
Isaiah speaks, The Lord of Hoasts does take away from Jerusalem and from Judah,
the mighty man, and the Judge, and the Prophet, Esa. 3. 1, 2. Whether it be by
death, or removeall, or imprisonment, or suspending, or any other way: It is he
that deprives a people of his faithful Ministers, whosoever be the instrument.

First, He can take them away by death out of the world, Thus the Lord took
away the Prophet Enoch, Genesis 5. 24.

Secondly, He can take them away by removeall, thus he took away Jonas from
Israel, and sent him to Niniveh, Jon. 3. 1. Ye know he was a Prophet in Israel,
and the Lord removed him thence to the Land of Assyria.

Thirdly, He can take them away by letting them be imprisoned, thus he took
away John the Baptist, by letting Herod put him into prison, for telling him of
his sins, Mark, 16. 17. So, Ahab imprisoned Michaiah for telling him the truth.

Fourthly, He can take them away by letting them be suspended, and inhibited
from Preaching, by letting wicked men have their wills, That say to the Seers,
see not, and to the Prophets, prophecy not, Speak to us smooth things,
prophecy deceits. Esa. 30. 10. Thus King Amaziah silenced the Prophet that
reproved him, 2 Chronicles. 25. 16.

Fifthly, He can take them away by silencing them himself, this is as bad as
taking them away for the time, thus himself stopped Ezikels mouth, and made him
dumb.

Now the Reason why Christ does do thus, is; first, because of the wicked,
they will not receive their Doctrine. Thus the Lord Jesus took away Paul out of
Jerusalem. Make haste, get thee quickly out of Jerusalem, for they will not
receive thy testimony concerning me, Acts 22. 18.

Secondly, The Lord does it in regard of his own people, because they begin to
forsake their first love. This was the reason why the Lord threatened to take
away the Ministry of the Word out of Ephesus, I will remove thy Candlestick
out of its place, except thou repent, Revelations 2. 5.

Thirdly, The Lord does this sometimes in regard of the Ministry it self, that
it may be more precious afterward, as it is said there in Samuel, when the
Lord had deprived Israel of his Prophets, for a matter of fourscore years
together, O says the Text, The Word of God was precious in those days,
because there was no open Vision, 1 Samuel 3. 1.

The Use of this is, first, Is it so, that it is Christ that Use 1.
removes Ministers? then this should teach us to mourn before him, if ever any
of our Ministers be taken away by any means, we should see whose hand is
upon us, the hand of the Lord is gone out against us, it is he that inflicteth
this judgment, and therefore we should mourn unto him, as the Church did.
When all their Prophets were gone, and all Religion went to wrack, and the
enemies had burnt up their Synagogues, and broken up all their godly
Assemblies: O how they mourned unto God for it. O God, why have thou cast us
off? Why does thine anger smoke against the sheep of thy pasture? Remember thy
Congregation, which thou have purchased of old. Remember mount Zion, wherein
thou have dwelt, Psalm. 74. 1, 2. this was a heavy judgment indeed, they felt
the Lords anger smoke against them then. Why? What was the matter? We see not
our signs, there is no more any Prophet, Ver. 9.

Secondly, Another Use is, Let us look into the meritorious Use 2.
cause, which is nothing but our sins. If Gods Ministers be put down at any
time, it is our sins that put them down. For if Christ be the inflicting cause,
certainly our sins are the deserving cause; we can blame none but our own
sins, if any thing stop any good Ministers mouth, it is they, it is peoples
drunkenness, and disorder, you are the cause, your unfruitfulnesse, and
security, and hypocrisy, and formality, you do not learn goodness and
godliness under the Word, ye remain vain and blind, and hardened in your
hearts under the same. What Parishes more disorderly, than those where most
preaching is, where is more hatred of word, and virtue, and piety then there?
where is more railing at a good life, and holy walking, and such as desire to
do well? the more preaching people hear, for the most part, the worse they
grow. People come to Church it may be, but they make it a cloak for their
villainies, they will give us the hearing, but no obedience, no practice, no
Reformation, no sign of amendment, no love, no truth, no faithfulness, no
communion at all, welaneare, where most Preaching is! if any thing stop our
mouths, this will do it. And indeed what may men think of us, but that we
are a company of hypocrites, and teachers of vanities; what are these
Preachers, we see little good they do, what becomes of all their Preaching,
factions and odd opinions, in one Town, and dissoluteness and all manner of
licensiousnesse in another. If the whole world should let us alone, I verily
fear God himself would put us down immediately, in the end. So many scandals,
so many thousand offenses are given every day, that its a wonder we stand as
we do. That the Lord of heaven lets any Minister in England, come into a
Pulpit more; nothing but pride, and self-conceits, and selftrustings, and
feared consciences, dead hearts, and profaneness; unless it be a very little
handful; O Beloved, if where preaching is, it were honored as it ought to
be, and obeyed as it should, if people would do as we teach, I dare be bold
to affirm we might Preach long enough. If our Towns would sweetly reform,
set up good Government, root out all disorders and cursed abuses, live like
Christians indeed, be humble, and sober, and loving, and dutiful to God and
Man; Giving to Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and to God the things that
are Gods. If we would fear God, and honor the King: Reverence Gods Courts,
obey the voice of his servants, love Christ and his word, above our appointed
food, this would lengthen the Ministry of the Land, this would be a means
for the establishing of Gods Kingdom among us, Christ would never repent that
ever he sent his Gospel unto us, where we have some, we should have more,
where we have more, we should have a hundred times more, as the Apostle Peter
says, Who is he that will harm you, if ye be followers of that which is
good, 1 Pet. 3. 13.

Thirdly, Another Use is, is it Christ that takes away Use 3.
Ministers, either by death, or restraining, or by any other way? Then let it
be a means to exhort us to repent of our sins, that Christ may still give a
door of utterance to his Ministers, that they may still speak in his name.
This should move us to seek God. When Peter was cast into prison. O what
fasting, and crying, and praying was there to God for him, till he was
restored again, Act. 12. 5. they did not go to Herod to restore him; No, they
knew Christ was he that took him from the Church, whoever were the
instrument, therefore they sought to Heaven for him again, if any peoples
Ministry be gone, this is the best way to fetch them again. Paul knew this to
be true, and therefore when he was in prison at Rome, he writes to Philemon
thus. I trust that through your prayers, I shall be given unto you. Philemon v.
22. Nay, he is so confident that if people would but cry hard for him to God,
that he should quickly be enlarged. Nay, says he, prepare me a lodging,
for I trust that through your prayers I should be given unto you. q. d. I make
no question but I shall out of prison, if you will but be earnest with God.
So, also it seems the Author to the Hebrews, was restrained from Preaching.
Now mark what an exhortation he uses, Pray for us, says he, and I beseech
you the rather to do this, that I may be restored unto you the sooner, Heb.
13. 18, 19.

Thus I have finished this part of the Description of Jesus Christ, That has
the seven Stars in his hand, and the whole Subscription too: These things
says he that has the seven Spirits of God, and the seven Stars. I come now
to the Epistle it self. I know thy works, that thou have a name, that thou
live and art dead, but of this more, etc.

REVEL. 3. 1. And unto the Angel of the Church in Sardis, write, These things
says he that has the seven Spirits of God, and the seven stars, I know thy
works, that thou have a name that thou live, and art dead. I know thy works,
etc. Revel. 3. 1. I know thy works, etc.
YE have heard two things concerning this Epistle. First, the Inscription, that
declares the person to whom it was sent, To the Angel of the Church in Sardis
write. That is, it was sent principally to the Minister of the Church in the
Town of Sardis, and also to the Christians that were in that Church.

Secondly, the subscription that declares from whom it was sent, These things
says he that has the seven Spirits of God, and the seven Stars: that is, it
was sent from Jesus Christ.

Now we come to the third thing, and that is the subject matter of this
Epistle, which consists of three things.

First, a Reprehension of the sins of the Minister, and the body of his
congregation.

Secondly, a Direction, or the showing of the remedy, for the curing of their
sins.

Thirdly, a Commendation of some particular persons in that Congregation, that
were not carried away with the sins of the times.

The reprehension is either in general, I know thy works, that is, I know them
all, and I know them to be stark naught for the most part, whatever they seem,
they may seem to be very good, but I tell you plainly, I know them all what
they be, q. d. Generally they are stark naught.

And then in particular he instances in two: first, the sin of hypocrisy, or
seeming to be good, Thou have a name that thou live. Secondly, the sin of
deadness of heart; But thou art dead. This is the reprehension, or the reproof.

Then follows the Direction, or the showing of the remedy, for he does not
reprove them out of any ill will, but for their good. And therefore he
prescribes them a remedy, and the remedy is twofold: The first is, to
strengthen the things that remain, that are ready to dye. v. 2. q. d. as many
of you as are not quite and clean dead, stir up your selves, quicken up your
hearts; and this is, first illustrated by showing how they should do thus. Be
watchful says he, q. d. that's the reason why ye languish on this fashion, and
ye will languish more and more, because ye are not watchful, therefore be
watchful: and then it is urged by rendering a motive to use this remedy: For I
have not found thy works perfect before God, that is, thou art hardly sincere
a jot, thou art full of hypocrisy, and formality, and thou will lose all thy
labor, if thou do not look well about thee; therefore shake up thy self, and
strengthen the things, etc. this is the first remedy. The second remedy is to
repent, v. 3. and this is amplified by showing how, and that is two ways, 1.
Remember how etc. i.e. consider how thou have been taught, and bewail thy
declinings, for thou art horribly departed from what thou have heard out of the
Word. 2. Hold fast. i.e. so bewail thy warpings and degeneratings, that thou
may get up again, and hold thee fast there, when thou art up.

Now lest they should neglect the using of this remedy, the Lord Jesus sharpens
his speech with a threatening, telling them the danger if they will not be
awakened, if therefore thou shall not watch, I will come on thee as a thief,
and thou shall not know, etc. Thus you see the remedy.

Then the next thing is the commemoration of some slain persons, raw Birds,
that were not carried away with the sins of the times, and in the common
deadness of the Congregation, where they lived, and these he does commend
very much.

And then an encouragement to give them an excellent promise. The commendation
is in these words. Thou have a few names even in Sardis, which have not defiled
their garments, verse. 4. That is, there be some among you, though they be but a
few; and he commends them for two things. 1. From the place, that they could be
in Sardis, and yet keep their quickening. Thou have a few names even in Sardis.
Even in Sardis, q. d. in dead Sardis, even there be some lively Christians,
that are not dead. 2. from the quality of their care expressed by a metaphor of
keeping their garments clean, which have not defiled their garments, that is,
they have been very careful indeed, that they are not sooted and soyled with
so many ill examples; though others be dead, yet they will not be dead too for
company.

And then their promise follows for their encouragement in these words. They
shall walk after me in white, in the same verse; that is, I will give them the
grace of presence, and will keep them unspotted unto my Heavenly Kingdom and
Glory; and he adds a reason why he makes them such a promise, in these
words. For they are worthy; not as though they did merit presence and glory;
no; but they are worthy in Christ, and Christ has made them meet to be made
partakers of this mercy. Thus you see the matter of the example.

Well, now to come to the reproof, and first in general, Doct. 1.
I know thy works, that is, I know them all, and I know them to be stark
naught for the most part, what ever they seem; they may seem to be very good
and godly; but be it known unto you, I know them all, what they be, q. d.
generally they are stark naught. The first point we hence gather is that the
Lord knows every man's ill courses; he is privy to every man's sins, though
men carry them never so cleverly and closely, yet he knows them.

First, he sees men's sinful works; they can do nothing, 1
but he sees it, as Elihu speaks, his eyes are upon the ways of men, and he
sees all their goings. There is no darkness nor shadow of death, where the
works of iniquity may hide themselves, Job. 34. 21, 22. what ever evil men
do, they cannot hide it from him; they may go into a house, and think to shut
out all men from seeing of them, but they cannot shut him out; they cannot get
out of his sight be they never so private, and who sees them? yet the Lord sees
them.

Secondly, he knows every syllable that men speak 2
at any time, as David says, There is not a word in my Tongue, but lo O Lord
thou know it altogether, Ps. 13. 4. The Prophet Elisha could tell what the
King of Aram spoke in his privy chamber, 2 Kings 6. 12. the Lord can tell what
words people speak under the Rose; what they say in their beds, what they
whisper in their close meetings, what they belch out on their Alebenches. Enoch
says he will have them all up at the day of judgment, nay if a word be but at
the Tongues end, he hears it.

Thirdly, he knows every thought in men's hearts, as 3
Moses says, and God saw that the wickedness of man was great upon the Earth,
and the very imagination of the thoughts of his heart was only evil
continually, Genesis 6. 5. Though men's thoughts be sly things, and are out of men's
eyes, and Devils eyes, and Angels eyes, yet they are not out of his eye, he
sees what men think.

Fourthly, he knows all that ever a man has done in 4
times past; he revealed unto Moses what Adam did in the Garden, what Cain in
the sield, what bragges Lamech used before his Wives, what villainy Lots
Daughters did in the night time, many 100 years after they were done. He knows
what was done yesterday and the other day, and the other day, seven hundred hundred
years ago. He has a Calendar of all the sins of men ever since the
beginning of the World; what people did in their childhood, what in their
youth, what in their manhood, though they themselves have forgotten, yet he
remembers; There Is no time out of mind unto Him: as Solomon says, God
requires that whch is past, Eccl. 3. 15.

Fifthly, he knows what sins men will commit hereafter; 5
Christ told his Apostles before hand, what wicked dealings they should meet
with; the Lord told Moses what Pharaoh would do, before he went to him, I know
he will not let you go, Exodus 3. 19. So likewise when the children of Israel
were in the Wilderness, the Lord told them even then that he knew all the
wickedness that ever they would do when they came into Canaan. I know their
imaginations even now says he, before I have brought them into the Land which
Isware, Deuteronomy. 31. 21.

Sixthly, He knows not only what sins they have 6
committed heretofore, nor only what they will commit hereafter, but also he
knows what they would commit, in such and such cases. He knew Abimelech would
have taken Sarah, if he had not hindered him. He knew that the men of Keilah
would betray David, if he should stay there, 1 Samuel 23. 12. He knows what a
rich man would do if he were poor; what a poor man would do if he were rich;
He knows that such a one would play the apostate, rather then loose all his
living; He knows that such a man would do mischief, if he had wherewithal;
he sees what is in every man's heart, what lies particularly in every man's
nature; It may be here is one that dies in his infancy, the Lord knows what he
would have done, if he had lived till he was a man; here is one that dies at
40, the Lord knows what a wretch he would have been, if he had lived to
twenty or thirty years longer; here is one that dwells now in a good family, it
may be now he conformes to good duties, he does not fly out, but the Lord
knows how he would be a very rakeshame; if he lived in another place.

Seventhly, the Lord knows what men are and what they have been, and what
they will be, as he knows all their thoughts, words and works, He knows all
their dispositions, their persons, their natures, their qualities, their
affections, and ends and aims, and motives and estates; he knows how many
are rotten though they profess never so much, how many are unfound though they
be never so well esteemed in the Church; He knows in what estate every man
stands in. He knows vain men, he feeth wickedness also; will not he then
punish it? Job. 11. 11. The reasons of this point, that God knows all men's
sins and sinful courses, he knows all that they ever have done, or do
do, or will do, or can do or would do are:

First, because God is infinite in knowledge, as David 1.
says, his understanding is infinite, Psalm. 147. 5 as the Prophet Esaias says,
there is no searching of his understanding, Isa. 40. 28. well, if he be infinite
in Knowledge, what can a poor Creature keep close from him? who can hide his
iniquities from him? who can set such a color upon his wicked devises that he
can not discover them? let a man excuse himself, may be his excuses may pass
current among men, but God must needs know the falsenesse of his excuses, and
that they are but Fig leaves: men may pretend what they will, and deny what
they will with an impudent forehead, and set a good face upon what they will
and this may go unperceived among men; but Gods understanding is infinite, and
therefore he knows all that men do, he knows how every man stands affected
unto him, he knows how people come to Church, and whether they mean to do
what they have been taught, whether they mean to reform what they have been
reproved for; for, He is infinite in Knowledge, and therefore he is privy to
all the sins of men.

Secondly, as he is omniscient, so he is omnipresent; he 2
is present every where; whether can any Creature go from his presence? if he
go into Bed, or Chamber, or Closet, or Street, or high way, or Alehouse, or
Drabhouse, home or abroad, he can go howhere but where God is, and how can he
do ought, but God must needs see him? God himself argues on this manner, Can
any hide himself in secret places, that I should not see him* (...) not I fill
Heaven and earth? says the Lord, Jer. 23. 24. q^d if I be every where, I must
needs be able to see every where.

Thirdly, the Lord is omniprovident, as I may so speak, 3
he has a hand either in the making of all things, or at least in the
permitting and disposing of all things. All that is good, he does it himself,
or else it cannot be done. All that is evil, he must permit it to be, or else
it cannot be committed; nothing is done without his concurrence or sufferance;
therefore he must needs know all men's sins he knows what he has suffered to
be* or does suffer, or will suffer; not so much as the sins of men can fall
out without him; as Peter speaking of Judas his sins, and the Jews, and
Pilats, and Herod's, they did nothing but what he knew they would do; why they
did nothing, but what his Hand and Counsel determined before to be done* Acts
4. 28. therefore he knew the Jews would be betray Christ; he could tell the
Prophet Zachary diverse hundred years before, that he would take 30 pieces of
Silver to do it. He could tell the Prophet Esaias that they would fmite him, and
buffet him, that they would reck on him among transgressors; he could tell the
Prophet David that they should pierce his hands and his Feet, and that they
should offer him Vinegar to drink, the Lord knew all these sins of yours;
why? because he had decreed them. True he did not decree that he would make
them commit them, but he decreed that they themselves should be the agents of
them* it should be merely their fault, their covetousnes, their malice, their
men-pleasing, their wicked disposition; I but he ordered these things, and
therefore he must needs know them. The drunkard could not hold up the cup to
his mouth, if God had not intended to preserve his arms, and his mouth, at
that time; he could not go to the tippling house, but that God intended to
continue him his feet, and his health; no man could think a wicked thought,
nor speak a naughty word, but that God upholds his heart and his tongue in the
interim; if God should forbear his goodness to them, he would be speechless,
and not able to think so much as any thought at all, and this aggravates man's
sins, that he has need of Gods goodness at the same time* and yet that he
should sin against his Maker.

Fourthly, the Lord knows every man's sins, because 4
he has a Candle in every man's bosom; he has made men's hearts on that wise,
that he has a Candle in them all. Ye know there is a spirit in a man, that we
call conscience, that is Gods Candle, as Solomon says, The spirit of man is
the Candle of the Lord, searching all the inward parts of the belly, Pro. 20.
27. well, if he have a Candle shining in every man's bosom, what can there be
hidden in the dark? nay he knows men's hearts and ways better then they knew
them themselves, as the Physician can better judge of his Patients body then
himself; Christ knew Peter's unbelieving heart, when he knew it not himself,
though all men be offended in thee yet will not I; Christ knew he would be
offended in him that very night; so he knew Hazaels wicked life, when the man
that owned it, would not believe it; is thy servant a Dog says he, that I
should be so wicked? yet he knew he would be so wicked and cruel; and
therefore God can bring to a man's mind a thousand things that he never dreamt
of before; many a man deceives himself all his life time; But when he comes
to sicken and die, then God shows him what he is, and what he has done, and
now he sees he is a damned wretch, and yet before though all the Ministers in
England had told him so much, he would not have believed it.

Fifthly, he must needs know every man's sins, because 5
he is the Judge of all the World, and he is to judge every sinner according to
his deeds; now if he should not know all his sins, he could not judge
righteous judgment. The Judge must know all secrets, otherwise he cannot well
judge. Now beloved God is a righteous Judge, and therefore no sin can escape
him; God shall bring every work into judgment with every secret thing, whether
it be good or whether it be evil, Eccl. 12. 14. True it is, he shall not want
witnesses in the day, for conscience shall be a thousand witnesses; yet it is
needful that himself should have perfect knowledge of all the actions of men.
For why is conscience so ready to accuse a man, when it is awakened? it is
only because it is conscious that God knows all its doings; now if God had
not perfect knowledge himself, conscience would not witness all then, neither
could it make a sinner confess all. But Gods knowing all, this is it that will
make conscience to speak truth. Jeremy has a very excellent saying, let. 11.
20.
The Psalmist being to dispute against a company of Atheistical people that
said, tush God shall not see, Psalm. 94. 7. mark how he reasons against them.
He brings an argument from Gods judging of men to prove that God must needs
see; O says he, it is he that chastises the hea hen, shall not he correct?
he that teaches man knowledge, shall not he know? verse. 10. q. d. ye deny
God to be judge; if he say he does not know, how can he correct them? will he
judge men for that he knows not what? no, if he be the judge of the whole
World, he must needs know all that men do.

The use of this is, First, is it so that God knows all Use 1.
men's sinful courses, if men be dead-hearted, he knows it; if they be
heartles in good duties, he knows it; though they would be loath that men
should know what they are, and do keep it from them, yet they cannot dawb it
before God; he knows it; then this may serve to confute them that say God does
not know sin. This was Averroes his opinion, who says God does not know sin;
God knows all that ever he knows by knowing of himself, and how can he know
sin, because he can see no such thing in himself? I answer this is to
derogate from the knowledge of God, and to deny the perfection of it. True, sin
is an evil, yea the greatest evil of all evils; yet the knowledge of it is
good: nay, it were strange to say that God does not know who sin against him;
that were a pity; if men be abused, we say it were pity but that they should
know of it; and if we do love them, we tell them who they be that abuse
them, and what the abuses are. Certainly God knows who do abuse him, and how
people carry themselves toward all his Commandments and worship; it is a part
of his perfection to know it. Again we our selves may know sin, and may know
sin by the contrary, as we know what darkness is by the contrary, which is
light; and shall we say that God do not know it? God damnes all the wicked one
after another for it, and therefore he does know it, nay we see that God brings
secret things to light here in this World, when people had thought that no body
should ever come to know it, yet he does often bring secret sins to light
here in this World, how much more at the last day? And though God knows all
that ever he knows by looking upon himself, and sin be not there, but nothing
but good and goodness it self, yet he can know it as a Medium to bring good
out of it; And so it is good as he wills it, and therefore he decrees it, and
therefore he must needs know it and know it in himself. For the permission
only of it is in himself, and the acting which is evil is out of himself,
neither does it follow that Gods understanding should become vile by knowing so
many vile things, as Vorstius and others do blasphemously astirme, and thence
they would conclude their cursed Atheistical axioms; we indeed may make our
selves vile by looking upon vile and base things, because we cannot keep our
hearts from savouring of them; whose end is damnation, etc. who mind earthly
things, Phil. 3. 19. that is, their mind becomes vile by so doing. Hereby
people come to be unacquainted with God, and with Heavenly things. They know
how to buy and sell, how to earne and get gain, how to plough and sow and such
earthly things, and they do so savor their minds, that they make their minds
base with them, and therefore we are commanded to ennoble our minds and
understandings, for these things make them vile, and therefore we should think
of them no oftener then needs must, for our minds are debased by base objects;
This is to be meant in regard of us, not as though any thing that God has made
were vile, but our corruption makes us vile; when we look upon vile things, we
are apt to run a whoring after them, and our affections to be hampered by
them; but God can daily and every hour see and look what vile things men do;
for he keeps a continual and an uninterrupted hatred of them, as the Psalmist
says, he is angry with the wicked every day, so he hates their courses every
day.

Again does God know all men's sins? then this confutes the Anomists, that say
God cannot see the sins of his people, God sees no sin in his people say they;
abusing that place there of Balaam. He has not beheld iniquity in Jacob,
neither has he seen transgression in Israel. Numb. 23. 21. what is this but to
pervert Scripture, he speaks there of the eye of his Justice, He does not
speak of the eye of his Knowledge; He speaks of such things as is in the
wicked: That indeed God do not see in his people; for it is not there to be
seen; otherwise, if Gods people sin, God makes them know and confess that he
sees it; as David says, O God thou know my foolishness, and my sins are
not hid from thee, Psalm. 69. 5. The garments of salvation that God puts upon
his people, are not to hoodwinke Gods Al-seeing Knowledge, but to keep of the
destroying Angel.

Secondly, another use is to condemn the most sorts of Use 2.
men, that do not consider of this truth; they little think that God sees all
their doings. I fear there is hardly any among us, that will seem to deny but
that God can see all his ways; and yet we see it is too apparent by men's
lives, that few men do believe this indeed. There is this vile Atheism
sculking in all our hearts naturally (otherwise we durst not do as we do)
that either God is such a God as the Epicures made him, that sits in Heaven and
regards not what men do here below, or at least we do not charge this truth
on our hearts, that God sees us; this is the cause of all the sins that are
among us; That there is so much luke warmenesse in the better sort, so much
heartlesnesse in holy performances before God, so much wickedness among
others; for why? if men did seriously consider that Gods sees all and marks
all, nay he marks all that men do, so curiously that he can set them in
order before them, all that ever they have done, Psalm. 50. 21. in the same
order that they committed them; mark he can set before us in order all that
ever we do from day to day; this sin then, and that sin then; such a sin we
did at such a time, such sins in the morning, such at noone, such the last
night, such lusts were in our hearts in such a place, and such in such a place;
he can set them in order before us, he knows them so well, and will too
before he has done; I say if we did charge this upon our souls, we could not
live so loosely as we do.

You will say, yea, but we are Christians, why do you tell us such a known
truth? what need so many arguments to prove that God knows all our sins? we
know that already and no body will deny it, we are Christians. I answer, this
is the hypocrisy of men hearts; their hearts will confess it to be a truth,
but in their works they do deny it. The Prophet David speaks of men that were
in the visible Church of God as well as we, and that would confess this truth
as well as we, and yet he says of many an one of them; He has said in his
heart God has forgotten, he has hid his face, he will never see it, Psalm. 10.
11. And the truth is, this is the cause of all the boldness of people to go
on in their sins, or to yield to sin at any time; they put this out of
their bosoms that God sees them; As Ezekiel speaks, the land is full of
blood, the City is full of perverseness, for they say the Lord has forsaken
the Earth, and the Lord sees not, Ezekiel. 9. they say so in effect; they put God
afar of, and they do not consider that he sees them. Beloved there is none of
us all but has need that this truth shoud be urged upon us, that God beholds
all iniquity and evil; we can never do amiss, but he takes notice of it.

Thirdly, another use is; is it so that God sees all men's Use 3.
sins? Then this is a terror to all that go on with a self condemning heart.
O consider what the Apostle says, if our heart condemn us, God is greater
then our heart, and he knows all things, 1 John 3. 20. q. d. if we have a
self condemning heart, how much more shall we find a self condemning God? If
our own heart can find us out, if that can find out our worldlines, or our
irreverence, or our carelessness of God, how much more wlll God find us out? He
knows all our sins better then we our selves; and therefore, O let us quake
all of us to go on with a selfe-condemning heart; it is a bad badge, it is a
prodigious token of the fearful judgment of God; if we do not get our sins
done away, by the blood of Jesus Christ, and by his sanctifying Spirit, God
will find us out; for he knows what we are, and what we do daily, and how
we live every day and hour. Again, this is a terror to them that are
Hypocrites; If God could not see a rotten heart, he should speed as well as the
best. O but says God, I the Lord search the heart, J try the reins, even to
give every man according to his ways and according to the fruit of his doings,
Jer. 17. 10. and therefore woe be to such as are otherwise within then they
seem to be without; without they are painted sepulchers, but within they are
full of rottenness, they profess godliness, but they suffer within a Worldly
spirit, a guilty conscience, a vain mind, an unbelieving heart, no love of
God, no zeal to his glory, no feeling of the Churches misery, no compassion
with the Saints, no delight in them that fear God indeed; and yet they will
go for Christians forsooth. God sees all their works, and will unmask them in
his due time, either in this world, or in the world to come, and will pour
everlasting contempt on them.

Fourthly, this is comfort to good people, for if God see 4.
all men's sins, then he sees all men's goodness much rather; what a comfort is
this in prayer to consider, that he that searches the heart knows what is the
mind of the spirit? Romans 8. 17. He knows all thy groans, He knows all thy
desires; what a comfort is this when ever an honest soul is put to it soundly
in temptation, when the soul is accused by Satan, hardly thought on by men,
and God lets bitter temptations to come on? I say what a comfort is this, that
God knows all the good things that are in man? all ones affections, all ones
endeavors, ail ones combats against sin, all ones griefs for corruption, as
Peter said, Lord, thou know all things, thou know that I love thee, Joh.
21. 17. Peter was put to it soundly at that time; But yet this was his comfort
that God did know all things. He had many tokens of Gods gracious goodness
about him, he had love to Jesus Christ, he had deep desires to do all that
he bade him. O says he, and thou know it. Again this is an excellent
comfort in time of affliction. When Job was in affliction, and his friends
scorned him, then did he go and pour out his Tears unto God, and this was
his comfort, Behold my witness is in Heaven, and my record is on high, Job.
16. 19, 20. Again this an excellent encouragement to serve God in these bad
and sinful times; people generally never look after God, nor holiness; the
World looks after their pleasures and their profits, and preferments, and
friends, and the like; but Religion and Devoutnesse, and Godliness of living,
few people look after that as though God did not regard what people do. Now
beloved, when we hear that God sees all that men do, and marks it, and will
call all men to account, what an encouragement is this to serve God, as David
said to Solomon, Know thou the God of thy Fathers and serve him with a perfect
heart, for the Lord searches all Hearts, and understands all the
imaginations of the thoughts, 1 Chronicles. 28. 9. Again, what a comfort is this
against false accusations? He knows all our innocence, when our Neighbors
say all manner of evil of us. He knows we do that in simplicity, which
others think we do out of a sinister respect, or out of pride, or
popularity, or for applause. What a comfort is this, when we can appeal to
God, as Paul says, the Lord knows that J lie not, as David says, I have not
refrained my lips from Preaching thy Righteousness O Lord, thou know, Psalm.
40. 9. He knows the uttermost endeavors and desires of our hearts is to be
as good as we seem, though the World take us for Hypocrites He knows we be
true men, that reverence every power that is of God, though the World esteem
us factious and humorous. Little does the World think what the Saints do
every day, what wrastlings with God, what conflicts in their minds they
endure; this is sufficient, the Lord knows.

Again, what a comfort is this? if we desire to know our sins, God is able
to show them unto us* He can open our eyes to behold them for our humiliation,
that we may say with the Prophet, I know mine own iniquities and my sin is
ever before me; if we want a right sight of our sins at any time, it is but
going to God, He knows them all, he can help us to see them aright.

Fifthly, does God know all men's sins? then this should make us afraid to do
evil at any time, or in any place, yea in the secretest; we can never do any
evil, but God will spy us out; we cannot have a thought in our heart, but he
does discern it; nor omit any duty but he does perceive it; nor slubber over
any good duty, but he stands by and looks on; may be when ye are among your
selves, ye can shoot out your Arrows even bitter and malicious words, may be
no body can tell what ye said, tush it shall never come to such a ones Ear;
Who can tell that you did say so? Who? why God can Thus ye said and thus ye
said, says the Lord; That have you said O house of Israel, for I knew the
things that came into your mind every one of them, Ezekiel. 11. 5. He knows thy
adultery and with whom and in what Bed; neither Curtains, nor Doors, nor Lock
and Key can hide from him. He knows how thy heart has risen up against the
Word, He knows how many times thou have smothered thine own conscience, and
gone against it, and outwrestled it; He knows how thou let thy mind rove
in Prayer, how many times thou have come to the Lords Table unworthily, omitted
Family duties or hudled them over without due regard; He knows what tricks
thou have to put off conviction, what a base esteem thou have of the
strictness that Gods Word does require, when thou hear it laid open. O I
say, this should make thee to fear God, this should make thee to fear
everywhere as the Psalmist says, Thou compassest my paths and my lying down,
and art acquainted with all my ways, Psalm. 139. 3. Thou have beset me behind
and before, within and without; thou possessest all my reins. O what an awe
should this breed in us! But I let this Use pass. This Use will better come
in the next Doctrine.

Well then, the next Doctrine is this. The knowing Doct. 2.
that God knows all our works, is the powerful means to all Gods elect, to
do them good, and to quicken them, and to make them take heed of all manner of
sin; when the Lord would quicken his people here in Sardis, he uses this as
his first means to do it by, I know thy works; we may see this in David. I
have kept thy Precepts and thy Testimonies, for all my ways are before thee.
Psa. 119. 168. when Solomon would confute a whorish heart, he uses this for
his argument, Why will thou my Son, be ravished with a strange Woman, and
embrace the bosom of a stranger? for the ways of man are before the eyes of
the Lord, and he ponders all his goings. Prove. 5. 20. 21. why will thou does
us? q. d. thou art mad, thou art desperate, if this argument will not prevale
with thee.

The reasons of this point are, First, because the Lords 1.
knowing of our works is not only a mere knowing of them, but also a marking
and a pondering of them too; He diligently observes what we do, he ponders
and considers whence it proceeds, and whether it tends, as the Prophet says,
The Lords Throne is in Heaven, his Eyes well consider, his Eye-lides try the
Children of men, Psalm. 11. 4. And therefore when the Scripture would tell us
that God knows men's hearts, it sometimes expresses it thus, The Lord pondereth
men's hearts, Prove. 24. 12. if God did only see what we do, it were another
matter, but when the soul shall hear that he marks, and that he ponders,
and considers men's sins, and weighes them how heinous they are, what
punishment they deserve, and how horrible it is that they do, how much it is
against his glory; its a sign of a desperate heart, when this will not work.

Secondly, because when God sees all our sins, it 2
is with a most holy and pure Eye, and such an Eye as cannot abide such an
object before him, as the Prophet Habakuk speaks, Thou art of purer Eyes then
to behold evil, thou can not look on iniquity, Hab. 1. 13. if God saw our
sins with such an Eye as men see them now and then, it were no such great
thing; for we know that most men can endure to see our sins well enough, and
like us little the worse; but they are infinitely offensive unto God, he sees
them with such an eye, that if ever the conscience be a wake but to perceive
how he looks, it will burst the very heart of a man.

Thirdly, because when God sees our sins, he records 3
them, he notes them in a book, that he may never forget them; as he told the
people of the Jews, behold it is written before me, I will recompense and
render it into your bosom, Isay. 65. 6. if God did see our sins, and there is
an end, then indeed this doctrine of Gods seeing would do little; may be God
would forget them again; yea, but when he sees, he registers too, nay he lays
it up in record to be in store by him against another day; nay, he seals them
up in his treasure; is not this laidup in store by me, and sealed among my
Treasures? Deuteronomy. 32. 34. now when the Soul shall come to mark this, this will
wound it to the quick, this must needs do a man good, and strike an awe into
him of God.

Fourthly, because when Gods sees our sins, it is even 4.
all one as if all the world should see them too; as Origin notes; for let our
sins be never so secret, our inward unsoundnesse never so unknown, yet if
God know it, it is as bad and worse then if all the world knew it; for all the
world shall know it one day, God will lighten all things that are hid in
darkness, and will make manifest the secret counsels of men's hearts; then
shall every man have praise of God, 1 Cor. 4. 5. that is, whosoever have been
godly, God will bring all their godliness forth, and every one of them shall
have praise of God; this shall be an honor to them before all the world: so if
a man have been evil, then God will produce all his naughty courses forth,
then shall he have shame from God, God will shame him before all the World.
There is nothing now covered that shall not then be revealed, nothing hid that
shall not then be laid open; what a shame then will this be for thee, that thou
which have gone so many years for an honest man, and may be have been some
body here in this world, when all the Saints shall see thee standing as a
wretch, as a hell-hound as a limme of the Devil, on Christ's left hand? what a
shame will it be, if we that are now earnest Preachers, if any of us shall then
be found among the goats? what a shame to any of you, that would count it a
sore disgrace to be called a wicked man, to be led forth with evil doers, and
sholed among the damned? well then, if Gods seeing of men's sins be such a
kind of seeing as this is, no marvel it work so effectually on them that are
of God.

Fifthly, an other argument may be taken from our 5.
disposition; our disposition is such, that we cannot abide that our
wickednesses should be seen of any body that we know cannot abide them; Which
among us when we pray and have base roving thoughts, would not be ashamed that
a man should see our thoughts rove? which of us, that are unsettled and
dead-hearted, would not blush that men had a casement to see how dead he sits
at a Sermon, and how dead at a Sacrament, how dead in other of Gods Ordinances;
what base and impure thoughts sometime do arise in his mind; if he did think
that any man should see them, he would not hardly be able to show his face
among men. Let but an adulterer that is naught with a whore, have but a few
men, or but one man come and take him in the act, O how it will gall him and
vex him to be seen (...) as Job speaks, if one know them, they are in the
terror of the shadow of death, Job. 24. 17. they abhor the light, they cannot
abide to be brought out to be known. Now beloved if this be our disposition by
nature, that we cannot abide that so much as a man should know us; nay, not a
child of six or seven years of age, then O what a terror is it that the God of
Heaven and Earth should know us, that he should see all our lusts, all our
sinful and vile thoughts, all our unclean and noy some affections, all our
by ends and carelessness of God! O what a powerful thing is this to work upon
the heart, except it be delivered up to a reprobate sense, to slight God, and
care less for him then for a little Boy, or a mortal man? so then ye see,
this is a powerful means to work upon a soul, to know that God knows all
his works; though the Woman of Samaria stood jesting, and playing, and
contesting with our Savior a good while: yet when she perceived that he knew
all her villainy, this burst her heart; O says she this is no other then
Christ, he has told me all that ever I did, Joh. 4. 29.

The use of this is. First, here we see they are desperato Use 1.
that this point cannot work on; its certain they are graceless that can
hear that God sees all their works, and yet it does not purge them from day
to day; its an evident argument that a man contemnes God, and makes nothing of
him. When David had showed that the wicked care not for Gods eye, they make a
matter of nothing of it; tush God does not see, Psalm. 19. 11. say they; that
is, they knew he saw indeed, but they made nothing of it; as long as men did
not see them, they counted Gods seeing as nothing; now mark what follows,
wherefore do the wicked contemn God? Psalm. 13

Secondly, is it so, that this is such a powerful means Use 2.
to work upon our hearts? let us not harden our hearts, but let us consider of
it, that it may cut between the bone and the marrow, and devide between the
soul and the spirit; God sees all our works. This point should fall upon our
hearts, like the almighty hand of God, as it did upon Job, I know thou can
do every thing, and that no thought can be hid from thee, Job, 42. 2.

REVEL. 3. 1. That thou have a name, that thou live, and art Dead.
WE are come to the subject matter of this example; and First, we meet with the
reproof that Christ gives to the Church of Sardis; the reproof is either in
general; I know thy works, i e. I know them all to be stark naught for the
general; and then in particular, first, their hypocrisy, thou have a name
that thou live; secondly, their deadness indeed, and art dead. The general
reproof we spoke of the last day, I know thy works, and there ye heard that
God knows all the sinful courses that any man takes; he is privy to every
man's sins: though men carry them never so closely and cleverly, yet he knows
them.

First, he sees all men's sinful actions, as Elihu speaks, 1
his eyes are upon the ways of man, and he sees all his goings; there is no
darkness or shadow of death, where the workers of iniquity may hide
themselves, Job. 34. 21. 22. people cannot get out of his sight, they cannot
sin so in private but he sees them; they may go into a secret room, and
shut every living creature out, but they cannot shut God out.

Secondly, he knows every syllable that men speak, 2
I have heard what the Prophets said, they prophecy lies in my name, Ier. 23.
25. the Lord can tell what men speak under the rose; look what the King of
Aram spoke in his bed* chamber, he could tell Elisha. As Enoch speaks; he
knows all the speeches that wicked men speak, and will have them up at the
day of judgment against them.

Thirdly, he knows every sinful thought that is in men's 3.
hearts, as Moses says; God saw the wickedness of man was great upon the
earth, and that every imagination of the thoughts of his heart was only evil
continually, Genesis 6. 5. though men's thoughts be sly things, and are out of
men's eyes, and Angels eyes, and Devils eyes, yet they are not out of his eye,
he sees what men think.

Fourthly, he knows all that ever a man has done as 4.
the woman said of Christ; come see one that has told me all that ever I have
done, Joh. 4. 29.

Fifthly, he knows all the evil that ever men will do 5.
hereafter; the Lord told Moses what Pharaoh would do before he went to him; I
know he will harden his heart and will not let them go, Exodus 3. 19. while the
Children of Israel were in the wilderness, he knew what they would do when
they came into Canaan; I know their imaginations even now before I have brought
them into the Land which I swear to give them, Deuteronomy 31. 21.

Sixthly, he knows all the evils that men would do 6.
in such and and such circumstances; he knew Abimelech would have taken Sarah,
if he had not hindered him; he knew that the men of Keilah would betray David,
if David should stay there, 1 Samuel 23. 12. he knows what a rich man would do
if he were poor, what this or that poor man would do if he were rich; one
dies in his infancy, he knows what he would have done if he had let him live
to be a man: here is a man that lives in a good family, and may be carries
himself very squarely, but the Lord knows what he would do, if he lived in
another place.

Seventhly, the Lord knows men's dispositions, their 7
natures, their qualities, their projects, their intentions; he knows how many
are rotten, though they profess never so much; he knows men's persons, he
knows vain men, Job. 11. 11.

I told you the reason of this, First, because he is omniscient and knows all
things, his understanding is infinite, Psalm. 147. 5. let a man set as good a
color* as he can upon his wicked devices, God can discover him, let a man have
never so many excuses; though they pass for current among men, yet God sees
what they are; men may pretend what they will, and deny what they will, and set
an 1.
impudent forehead and face on the matter, and go unperceived among men, but
they cannot go unperceived by Allmighty God, his understanding is infinite.

Secondly, as he is omniscient, so he is omnipresent, he 2.
is everywhere; whether can any creature go from his presence? if he go into
the street, or alehouse or drabhouse, or his house or his closet, or his privy
chamber, he can go nowhere but where God is; and therefore how can he do
ought but God must needs see him? can any hide himself in* secret places, that
I should not see him? do not I fill Heaven and Earth, says the Lord? Ier. 23.
24.

Thirdly, the Lord has his providence in every thing, 3
nothing is done without his concurrence or sufferance, if it be good, it is
done by his assistance; if it be evil, it cannot be done without his
permission and disposition; therefore he must needs know every thing. He knew
whether the Devils should enter into the herd of swine, for they could not
enter in, until he suffered them: he knew all that Judas, and Pilate, and
Herod, and the Jews and the High Priests did against Christ, because they did
nothing but what his hand and counsel had determined before to be done, Act.
4. 28.

Fourthly, the Lord knows every man's sins, because 4
he has a candle in every man's bosom. The Spirit of man is the candle of the
Lord, searching all the inward parts of the belly, Prove. 20. 27, that is a man's
conscience, that is the Lords Candle; well, if He have a Candle standing in
every man's bosom, what can be done there in the dark?

Fifthly, because He is judge of the whole World; O Lord 5
of Heasts that judge righteously, that tryest the Reins and the Heart, Jer.
11. 20. He could not judge every man righteously else. A man may do well, and
yet seem to do evil; again a man may do very evil, and yet seem to do
well; ye know the heart is all in all; now if God did not know all men's
hearts, all men's looks and aims, and intents, and meanings, the
circumstances, and every thing that men do, He could not judge every man
according to his works, as he will for a certain. He will judge every man
according to his works, and therefore He knows what every man's works be.

The use of this was, First. To confute Averroes and others Use. 1.
that say that God does not know men's sins; O say they, God sees all things
by looking on himself; now there is no such thing to be seen in himself.
Beloved, here you see that this is a blasphemous Doctrine; for God knows what
ever men are* or think, or speak, or do, or have done* or shall do, or
would do in any case; and though sin be not in God, yet the suffering of it
is in God and He may suffer it in his just judgment and wisdom; though the
commiting of it be wicked, yet his suffering of it is good, and just. The Eyes
of the Lord are in every place beholding the evil and the good, Pro. 15. 3.
But I let this pass.

Secondly, to condemn the most sorts of men that do 2
not consider of this truth; for though men will grant that God knows all the
evil that they do, yet this vile Atheism is lurking in men's hearts, they
either make God as the Epicures hold, that he sits in Heaven, and regards not
what men do, or at least God will not require it, Psalm. 10. 13. they do not
charge this truth on their hearts; This is the cause that men are so daring to
do evil.

Thirdly, this is a terror to all that do evil. This 3
is a terror to them that have condemning hearts, as John says, if our heart
condemn us, God is greater then our hearts, and He knows all things, 1 John
3. 20. again this is a terror to all Hypocrites; if God could not see a rotten
heart, then a Hypocrite should speed as well as the best. But God sees what men
are; seem they what they will, He sees what they be.

Fourthly, this is comfort to good people, for if God 4.
see all men's sins, then He sees all men's goodness; what a comfort is this
in Prayer to consider, That He that searches the Hearts knows what is the
mind of the Spirit? Romans 8. 27, He knows all thy groans and sighs;
though thou can not utter what thou would in Prayer, yet He knows what
thou would have. What a comfort is this in temptation, in the midst of the
accusations of Satan, when a man is pitifully put to it in spiritual
conflicts, that God knows what is in us? all our secret affections, our
mournings after him, our private seekings of him, all our hidden meanings to
him, all our combats against sin, all our griefs for corruptions; as Peter
says, God thou know all things, thou know that I love thee, Joh. 21. 17.
Peter was put to it soundly at that time, yet this was his comfort that God did
know all things; and as He knows more evil by us then our selves, so He
knows more good by us then our selves.

Again, what a comfort is this against the nicknames and false judgings of
wicked men? He knows all our innocence, when men say all manner of evil of
us; He knows we do that in sincerity, which men think we do in
Hypocrisy; He knows our. simplicity, when men judge that we do it out of by
and sinister respects; what a comfort is this when we can appeal to God as
David says, the Lord knows that I lie not; as David says, I have not
refrained my lips from preaching thy Righteousness, O Lord thou know,
Psalm 40. 9. little does the World think what the Saints do every day, what
wrestlings with God, what goings out unto him they have; this is a comfort; the
Lord knows. Again, what an encouragement is it to serve God in these bad and
sinful times? People generally never look after God, nor holiness, as
though God had forsaken the Earth; most people are of the mind, that if a man
be precise, he is little the better; and if he be not so precise as some be,
he shall never be the worse for that, as though God cared for no such matter.
Beloved, when we hear that God sees all that men do, and marks and will
call all men to an account, what an encouragement is this to serve God? as
David says to Solomon, Know thou the God of thy Fathers, and serve him with a
perfect Heart, for the Lord searches all Hearts, and understands all the
imaginations of the thoughts, 1 Chronicles. 28. 9. This was the first pont.

And then the Second point was this. The consideration of this that God knows
all our works, is a powerful means to all Gods elect, to do them good, and
to quicken them and to make them take heed of all manner of sin; when the
Lord would quicken his people here in Sardis, he uses this as his first means
to do it by; I know thy works; we may see this in David; I have kept thy
Precepts and thy Testimonies; for all my ways are before Thee, Psalm 119 168.
when Solomon would convert the whorish man, he uses this for his argument, why
will thou O my Son be ravished with a strange Woman, for the ways of man are
before the Eyes of the Lord, and He ponders all his goings, Pro. 5. 20, 21.

The reasons of this point, are. First, because the Reas. 1.
Lords knowing of our works is joined with a marking and a pondering of them
too. He diligently observes what we do; He ponders and considers whence it
proceeds, whether it tends; what light we go against, what checks of
conscience we meet with, what mercies we abuse, what pricks we kick
against; He does not barely see what we do, but He considers what we do,
how hainously we sin, what a vile thing it is that we do; He considers
how cursed we are, what a great One we offend. The Lords Throne is in Heaven,
his Eyes do consider, and his Eyelids try the children of men. Psalm 11. 4.
He ponders men's hearts, Prove. 24. 12. if God did only see what we do, it
were another matter, but when the soul shall hear that He marks and
considers, and that he ponders men's sins, and weighs them how horrible they
are, how much against his glory, what punishments they deserve, how inexcusable
they be, how just it is to damn them, its a sign of a desperate heart when
this will not work.

Secondly, the Lords seeing of our sins is with most 2
holy and pure Eyes, and such Eyes as cannot abide such an object before Him,
as the Prophet Habbakuk speaks; Thou art of purer Eyes then to behold evil,
thou can not look on iniquity, Hab. 1. 13. If God saw our sins with such
an Eye as men see them with, it were no such great thing; many men can endure
them well enough, and like us little the worse; nay may be they will like us
the better; but they are infinitely offensive to God. He sees, them with such
an Eye, that if the soul did but see how God looks, it would burst the very
heart of it; as when Peter had denied Christ, Christ looked upon him; But it
was such a look, that burst his very heart and made him go out with shame,
and weep bitterly.

Thirdly, the Lords seeing of our sins is joined 3
with recording of them; He notes them in a Book that he may never forget
them, as he told the Jews, Behold it is written before me, and I will render
it them into their bosom, Isaiah 65. 6. if God did see our sins and there is
an end, then indeed this Doctrine of Gods seeing of our sins would do little
good, may be God will forget them again; yea, but when he sees them, he
registers them too, and he will never forget them; now when a soul shall come
to consider them, this will wound it to the quick. O he will never forget
them, he sets them on our score, and we shall hear of them another day,
except we make our peace with him.

Fourthly, when God sees our sins, it is even all 4
one as if the whole World saw them; nay he will show them before all the
whole World, He will bring to light things hidden in darkness, 1 Cor. 4. 5.
would not thou be loath that all the World should see all thy thoughts, and
hear every word that thou speak, and know all the evil thou have done;
would it not much bridle thee, if thou could do nothing, not think a
thought but all the whole World should see it? why man, the Lord sees thee, and
that is all one and more too; for he will open it before all the World, before
he has done.

Fifthly, another argument may be taken from our 4.
disposition; our disposition is such that we cannot abide our wickedness
should be seen by any body; which among us when we pray, would not be ashamed
that any body should see how our thoughts rove? which of you that are unsettled
and deadhearted would not blush that men had a casement to see how dead he
sits at a Sermon, how dead and blockish at a Sacrament, how dead at other of
Gods Ordinances? What base and unclean, and blasphemous thoughts do sometimes
come into our hearts? if a man did think that any man should see them, he
would hardly be able to show his face among men: should an Adulterer be but
taken in the act by any Man or Woman or Child, O how it would gall him and vex
him to be seen! as Job speaks, If one know them, they are in the terror of
the shadow of death, Job. 24. 27. now beloved if this be our disposition by
nature, that we cannot abide that a man should see us do something that we
do, nay not a child of seven years old, then O what a terror is it that the
God of Heaven and Earth should see us and know us; that he should see all our
lusts, all our noisome and unclean affections, all our vile and hideous
thoughts! O what a powerful thing is this to work upon the heart, except it
be delivered up to a reprobate sense? The Woman of Samaria she was brisk and
frolique a great while, till she perceived that Christ knew all her villainy,
this made her ashamed, and brake her very heart.

The use of this was: First, here we see they are Use 1.
desperate that this point cannot work on; its certain they are graceless
that can hear that God sees all their works, and yet it does not purge them
from day to day, its an evident argument that a man contemnes God, and makes
nothing of him.

Secondly, is it so that this is such a powerful means Use 2.
to work upon our hearts? O let us not harden our hearts, but let us consider
of it, that it may cut between the bone and the marrow; God sees all our
works. This point should fall upon our hearts, like the Al-mighty hand of God;
so it did on Jobs. I know thou can do every thing, and that no thought can
be hid from thee, Job. 42. 2. so much shall suffice to have spoken of the
reproof in general.

Now we come to the particulars. And the first is in these words, thou have a
Name that thou live, and the other is, and art dead.

That thou have a name that thou live; This is the first particular whereby
the Lord Jesus, proves that which he had employed before, viz. that the works
of Sardis were all stark naught, because they had only a name to live, they
rested in a mere outward name to be Religious and good Christians, and people
of God, and believers and a Church of Jesus Christ; they had the name, and that
was all; they had a name to live; well, says he, for this very thing, I know
all thy works, ( i) I know them to be all stark naught. Some think this is
an allusion to the Minister of Sardis his name, who (they say) was called
Zosing, that is Living. Thou have a name that thou live, but the truth is,
thou art dead; whether that be so or no, I know not; but this is the meaning of
the words, that both the Minister and the Church seemed to be alive toward
God; he to be a very good and godly Minister, and they very good and godly
hearers, they were all professors, they were all very devout and forward in all
their duties of Religion to see to; Thou have a name that thou live.

By name is meant a mere name, as we see by the clause following, and art
dead; for when a man is dead, the name to live must needs be a mere Name.

First, a Name in regard of themselves, they took 1
themselves to be alive; as Paul had a name to live before his conversion,
while yet he was a Pharisee, he had then a name to live, I was alive without
the Law once, Romans 7. 9. That is, I had a name to live then, I taking my self
to be alive; I thought verily in those days that I had true Grace, true Faith,
and true Hope, and true Love, and the true fear of God before my eyes. So this
Church had a name to live, they thought themselves to be alive.

Secondly, a name in regard of other godly Churches; 2
others in the judgment of Charity conceived they were alive; as the Scribes,
the Pharisees, our Savior Christ told them they had a name to live, Woe unto
you Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites; for ye are like unto whited Sepulchers,
which indeed appear beautiful outward, but are within full of dead men's
bones, Matthew 23. 27. that is, ye seem to be alive, ye have a name to live,
but indeed ye are dead; They had such a great name to live that our Savior
Christ had much a do to keep his own Disciples from overweening of them;
beware of them says he, q. d. what ever ye may think, they have a mere
Name to live.

Thirdly, a name among poor ignorant and simple 3.
people; ye know there be abundant of poor simple people that are led away
with shows, that know not what true Religion is, nay may be hate it, but yet
they are led away with the show of it; now they that seem to be religious,
they are the only Men and Women with such; they are held for the only good
people in a Country, they are admired, poor silly people take them for their
Ghostly Fathers, if they can have but their Prayers, they think their Prayers
can do much; when they are sick, they love a life to have such by their
bedsides, they give them a great deal of comfort, like Absulom that comforted
the people that came to him, O your matters are good; so the Apostle shows
that they that had a sorme of godliness, had a name to live among a company of
poor silly people, 2 Timothy 3. 5. 6.

Fourthly, a name among the persecutors of Religion, 4
and so they are persecuted too among them that live indeed; for mockers take
them to be of the same number. So Alexander the Coppersmith, had a name a great
while, and the enemies of goodness persecuted him even as Paul; so Demas for a
time had a name, and was persecuted as well as the Apostle, till afterward he
was weary and forsook him. This is one of your Precisians, this is one of you
purer people, this is one of them that call themselves the people of God, These
are the people of the Lord, Ezekiel. 36. 20. as a Bat has a name to be a Mouse,
and so the Birds persecute it, and cannot abide it.

Now the point of Doctrine is this, that it is a horrible Doct. 1.
thing to rest in a mere name of being Religious; it is the argument that
Christ uses, to prove that Sardis works were all stark naught, because they
had a mere name to live; so when the Lord would declare how the Jews were
grown to be stark naught, he lays this to their charge, that they had only
a name to be his people; They call themselves of the holy City, and stay
themselves upon the God of Israel, the Lord of Hosts is his name, Isaiah 48. 2.
that is, they got themselves a name to be his people, and there was all; they
had not the thing it self, but they took the name; thus he proved them to
be stark naught.

The reasons are; first, because this is to be farthest Reas. 1.
off from Religion; religion is a real thing, and therefore he that rests in
having the name of it, is farthest off from it; as Christ says of Nathaniel,
Behold an Israelite indeed, in whom is no guile, Ioh. 1. 47. so when a man is
religious indeed, humble indeed, fears God indeed, this is religion; when a
man is freed indeed from his sins, and from the power of them, this is
religion: if the Son shall make you free, ye shall be free indeed, Joh. 8.
36. Now when a man has only the name, he is farthest off from this; Religion
is a real, solid, and a substantial thing; as John says, my little children
let us not love in word, neither in tongue, but in deed and in truth, 1 John 3.
18. what though a man have the name to love God and goodness? how far is
this off from doing of it indeed? a man may go for one that is converted; but
he is converted that is converted indeed; so he is godly that is godly indeed;
the name is nothing where the thing is wanting; all religion is in deed, to
believe indeed, to deny a man's self every day indeed, to be sensible of God
indeed in all ones ways; not to say ones prayers, but to pray indeed; to give
God thanks indeed; to worship him indeed; as Paul says, when a man can say
God is in us indeed, 1 Corinthians 14. 25. when a man has only the name,
this is a mere fancy and conceit.

Secondly, it is a very blasphemy to get the name 2
for good people, when we are not good people; indeed the reason is this,
Religion has an inward dependence upon God, it unites a man to God, it has an
internal relation unto God, it puts a man in a propriety with God, that God is
his God, that he is borne of God, it puts the very Name of God upon a man; now
if a man take the name with out the thing, it must need be a very blasphemy
as he says, I know the blasphemy of them that say they are Jews, and are
not, but are the Synagogue Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in
vain.
of Satan, Revelations, 2. 9. as if a man should say he were of the blood
royal; ye know the blood royal has such a dependence on the Crown, that
that man that should say he were of the blood royal, and is not, he must
needs blaspheme the King. So beloved, Religion has a near dependence on God,
and therefore he is a blasphemer of God, that gets the name of it, and lets
the thing alone; and therefore how shoud we take heed, how we have the name
for Religious people, except we be Religious indeed, and holy indeed, and
Heavenly indeed, as Ambrose says; nam ^it nomen inane, and crimen immane, a
bare name is a horrible blame unto any man, whosoever he be.

Thirdly, it is a flat lie; when a man has the 3
name for a good Christian, and has not the thing signified by the Name, this
is a flat lie; as God says, Note it in a Book that it may be for time to
come, for ever and ever, that this is a rebellious people, lying children,
children that will not hear the Law of the Lord, Isaiah. 30. 8. 9. that is,
they had the name of his children, but they had not the thing signified by that
name; they would not do as children should do, they would not be ruled by
their fathers Laws, therefore they are lying children, they lie in bearing
such a name; the Lord notes it in a Book, that it might stand for ever and
ever against them at the day of judgment; this was nothing else but to lie
before God; you go for my children, what? and will not do as I bid you? you
lie in having the name of my children; when a man shall have the name of a
child of God, or the name of a Minister of the Lord Jesus, or the name of a
Christian baptized into Christ, he had need to take heed what he does; for if
he do not answer this name, he does but play the Ananias to lie to the Holy
Ghost: Look into thy general calling; look into thy particular, look into
thy carriage; look into thy manner of good duties, whether thou do behave thy
self answerably to this holy name whereby thou art called, knowing thou do
but lie to God, if thou do not.

Fourthly, it is an unreasonable thing; when a 4.
man has not the thing, there is no reason that he should have the name; when
God gave Abram the name of Abraham, he told him there was a reason why he
should be called by that name; thy name shall be called Abraham, for a Father
of many Nations have I made thee, Genesis 17. 5. so it is an unreasonable thing
why we should have the name of Gods servants or Christians, unless there be
some reason why we should have the imposition of this name; now when we make
it a bare title, and do not obey Christ, nor make conscience of all his holy
ways, this is very unreasonable; as Abigail reasoned about her Husbands name;
as his name is so is he, Nabal is his name, and folly is with him, 1 Samuel
25. 25. So my brethren, as our name is so should we be; if Christian be our
name, true Christianity should be with us; humility, love, meekness,
patience, faith, holiness, and all other parts of Christianity should be with
us; now if we have the name without these things intimated by the name, this is
a very unreasonable thing; nay, it is not only unreasonable, but also
ridiculous; who will not count the names that the Papists give to their
blockish Friars ridiculous? subtilissimus Doctor, Doctor Angelicus, Seraphicus,
these are ridiculous, as a drunkard a Christian, a whoremonger a Christian, a
worldling a Christian, a vain man a Christian? what a ridiculous thing it is
to call such the Saints of God? strangers here on earth, such as have their
conversation in Heaven, such as are buried together with Christ in his death;
such as are men of another World; mortified, justified, sanctified, crucified
to themselves, loving the things above, and not the things that are here
beneath; If these things do not agree with us, what a ridiculous thing is it
that we should be termed good Christians; here be Christians indeed? this is
a mere mockery.

Fifthly, it is an impudent thing; when we have a 5
name to live and to be wrought upon by the word, what an impudent thing is it
if we do not look to it that we be so indeed; one would think we should
blush to think what a name we have, and how little we make good our name,
between God and our own souls. When the men of Bethlehem said, is not this
Naomi, O how she was ashamed of her self; call me not Naomi, call me Marah,
for the Almighty has dealt very bitterly with me, Ruth. 1. 20. so when we are
named Christians, we should even blush, call me not a Christian, call me a
wretch, call me a vile creature, a hell-hound, a limme of the Devil, a cursed
sinner; for the Almighty never yet turned my heart; he never yet purified my
Soul and life, I never yet have resembled Christ to this very day; I say the
most of us should even be confounded to think what a name we have. I a
Christian, and do no more good, and live no better life? I a Christian, and
not humbled, not abased yet before God, so dull to all goodness, so carnal,
so dead to all Gods Ordinances, so void of all grace, so senseless of my
sins? how can this be? we are impudent, if we have our name for naught, our
name may upbraide us; the good opinions that others have of us, may fill our
faces with shame to think how short we come of it.

Sixthly, it is an inexcusable thing; if we have a 6.
name to be alive, we are without excuse if we be not.

First, because now out of our own mouths God 1
will judge us; we said we were his people, we took the name of his
servants; why then he will say why had I not your service? why would you do no
more for me? why were you coveteous, why were you proud, why were you
hardhearted, why were you so careless of me? you wore my livery, you shrouded
your selves under my name. So the Lord did with the Jews that had the name of
his children and servants; see how he judges them out of their own mouth; a
Son honors his Father, and a servant his Master; if then I be a Father,
where is my honor? and if I be a Master, where is my fear? Malachi. 1. 6. q.
d. you say I am your Father, and I am your Master, and I am your God; well, out
of your own mouths I will judge you; why then did you honor me no more? why
did ye regard me no more? ye cared not for me, ye did not look after me,
you had little or no heart after me; your own mouths have even cast you.

Secondly, ye can have no other excuse; can you 2
say you could not believe in my name? ye could not forgo such and such lusts
at my command? why then would you go for my servants? you should have said so
plainly, and not daily have come into my Courts, as if you would obey me; nor
taken up the profession of my Worship as if you would go through stitch with
it; why would you come to my Table, as though my promises belonged unto you? if
ye could not do as I bade you, you should not have borne me in hand as though
you would; now ye have played the Hypocrites and drawn near to me with your
lips, and taken my name into your mouths, whereas ye would not be reformed by
me; What had you to do with my Covenant, that you must needs he meddling with
it? Psalm. 50. 16. if ye would not obey it, ye should have let it alone; so
that ye see, that to have a naked name to live, is an inexcusable thing.

Seventhly, it is an unprofitable thing; a naked 7
name will do us no good; when the Jews trusted in the name that they had, O
they were the children of Abraham, they were Gods only people, they had his
Covenant, and his Oracles, and his Temple; O the Temple of the Lord, the Temple
of the Lord; they hoped well, having thus much to say for themselves; but
mark what God tells them, behold you trust in lying words that cannot profit,
Jeremy. 7. 8. this would not profit them one jot, because they did not verify
the name they had. So the Galathians they presumed mightily on this, that they
were Christians; as for making good this holy name, that they gave no heed to
at all; they would have the Ceremonies; when Paul told them of their faults,
they would not listen unto him may they counted him their Enemy; they would
have the Ceremonies of the Law; well, the Apostle told them plainly, that if
they would not be ruled, their name would do them no good. Behold I Paul say
unto you, that if ye be circumcised, Christ shall profit you nothing.
Galathians. 5. 2, q. d. you bear your selves upon Christ, and yet will not do
as he would have you do, ye will do what ye list; but let me tell you, if
ye will not reform, Jesus Christ shall profit you nothing; you say you
believe in Jesus Christ, I but it shall profit you nothing: So when the people
there in Isay rested in this, they came to Gods house, they gave him Sacrifice
every morning and evening, they did thus and thus, and so they had a name for
his peculiar people; the Prophet assures them, this should not profit them one
whit. I will declare thy righteousness and thy works, for they shall not
profit thee, Isaiah. 57. 12. Thou prayest and do many good duties, and so
thou getttest thy self a name; yea but if thou do not soundly and thoroughly
answer that name, God will declare all thy righteousness and all thy
profession, and all thy good duties, and none of them all shall profit thee; in
that day he will declare what rotten things they have been, how heartlesse, how
livelesse, how dead-hearted all thy duties have been, and they shall do thee
no good; and indeed what good can a name do a man? true faith alone does
justify, not the name of it; true peace of conscience does comfort, not the
name of it; true interest in God gives a man a cheerful access to God, not
the name of it.

Eighthly, it is not only unprofitable, but also 8.
it is hurtful. It is hurtful unto others; a bare name I say without
substance and truth is hurtful unto others. It is hurtful unto them that are
without; for when they see how lazy such as go for professors, be, how they
have little else in them but talking and professing, and prating and hearing,
otherwise they are as vain and as covetous and as having as other men, no
strictness no pureness, no holiness, no humbleness of mind, no love, no
forgiving one another, no forbearing one another, no brotherly Kindness, no
Union nor Communion, no power in their Prayers, no gravity non authority in
their speeches, no Heavenlinesse in their conversation, no brokennesse of
heart, this hardens the hearts of them that are without, and makes them all
think that Religion is a matter of nothing; thus they do a great deal of
hurt unto others; the professing Wife to the profane Husband, the professing
servant to his profane Master, the professing Neighbor to his profane
Neighbor; whereas if they were godly indeed, and humble indeed, and as their
name does import, indeed they would do a great deal of good, but now they do
a great deal of hurt.

Again, they do a great deal of hurt unto comers on; many a man that is
smitten at the Word, that begins Reformation and amendment and gives good
hopes that he will come to something in the end; when he lights upon such
Sardian Saints, that are so in name, but there is no life at all in them, these
put him back again, and make him set up his staff before he sees half way,
like the dead body of Amasa that made the people stand still.

Again, they do a great deal of hurt unto the Saints of God, sometimes by
deceiving of their hearts and cooling of their zeal and fervor, or if they
cannot do that; then they hate them, and prove very shye of them, and gird
them behind their backs, and do them much mischief, as Paul complains, he
was in perils among false Brethren, 2 Corinthians 11. 26. that is, those that
had a name to be Brethren in Christ, but were not so indeed, he was in perils
many times and often by them; again they increase the disgraces and sufferings
of Gods true Saints and Children; for while they seem to be Saints good enough
themselves, the other that are Saints indeed, are rejected of all, and thought
to be besides their wits.

Again, they do a great deal of hurt to themselves, for it had been better
for them they had never had a name, then having a name not to be as the name
does require.

The use of this is, First, let me tell what use ye must not make of it;
namely, to beat down the having of a name, for all the Lords people should be
careful of having of a name. I will give them a name of Sons and Daughters,
nay a better name then so, Isaiah 56. 5. yea, and the people of God should make
conscience of a name before men; A good name is betier then precious Ointment,
Eccles 7. 1. and the servants of God have had a name; Demetrius had a good
report of all men, yea of the truth it self too; and therefore they are black
mouths of Hell that object against good people, that they are Hypocrites, they
do thus and thus to have a name. This is no news, for the World has always
dealt thus with the Saints in all Ages; Paul was counted the great imposter of
the World; O sayee he, we are deceivers and yet true, 2 Corinthians 6. 8.
that is, the World gives us a name for deceivers, and yet we are true; Ye
know what was said of Christ Jesus himself, some said of him he was a good
man, others said nay, He was a deceiver of the people; it was said of David,
that He was a subtle man, a crafty Fox, and that He was a mere Politician,
it was Saul's judgment of him. Thus the Saints have a nick name put on them;
the World thinks they are Hypocrites, and that they have sinister ends in what
they do, and whereas they make such a show, it is but in Hypocrisy, that they
may deceive, and that they may have a Name for Religious people; so that the
World would feign put down the having of a Name. But that is a Devilish use;
we must not make such a use of this point, No; the Lord does not find fault
with Sardis for having of a Name that they lived, but that they had this Name
when as they were dead; if they had been alive, the Name to be alive had been
well; well then what use must we make of this point?

The First Use then is this, to show the misery Use 1.
of the Church of Rome, which has a Name to live, and in their own judgment
and a great part of Christendom, is the only true Church, but in the
judgment of God it is dead, and therefore stark naught; some say its a body
full of diseases, and whose throat is cut, but yet the heart pants, and life is
therein; But the truth is, its stark dead, and has no manner of spiritual
life, What though they have the Sacrament of Baptism? so had Edom
circumcision, and yet they were never counted a Church of God; And what is a
Seal to a blanke? what though they have the Scriptures among them and the
Articles of our Creed? that does not make a Church; for Ptolomy and all Egypt
had the Bible, and yet that did not make them a Church; if the Scriptures might
have their own sense, it were another matter; but they oterturne it with their
exposition, and make it in their sense to be a fardell of Doctrine of Devils;
and what though Antichrist be said to sit in the Temple of God? yet his Body
is a Synagogue of Satan. There is no life in that Church. But to come nearer to
our selves.

This may be said of them, of our Churches too, and of our Congregations; they
have only a Name to live, though we might live well enough; for we have the
Doctrine of Life, in many places, yet in regard of our conversations for the
most part, we may say it is but only a Name. For how does sin reign among
us everywhere, Coveteousnesse, Profanesse, fullness of Bread, Lust, Security,
as it were in Noah's time, deadness of heart, Formality; now where such sins
do abound, there the power of godliness must needs be away; generally our
Assemblies content themselves with an outward profession, if they go so far,
they have but a Name to live. True, we are a Church, so was Sardis though she
had hardly any thing but a Name, yet she was a Church, as Saint John shows,
washed in the Blood of Jesus Christ, Revelations, 1. 4, 5. for they had a few
Names that were so, but the body had only a bare name; so it is with us, we
are not nullifyed from being a Church, for God has his chosen among us though
they be very few, here one and there one that live indeed and in truth; yet
the Bodies and Bulkes of our Congregations, have only a Name, if that; no
Discipline, no good Order, no thorough Reformation nay Cages of unclean Birds;
nay such as profess better then the multitude, little better then titular and
moral Christians.

Nay, are not all things almost grown to be a sole Name? What is the
Preaching almost but the bare Name of Preaching? For conversion of Souls where
is it? the pulling people out of the Kingdom of Satan where it it? a thousand
Sermons may be, and hardly one wrought upon? we may be said to be fishermen;
but it is turned only into a name, for when do we catch any?

So for hearing of the Word. True, it is very common, and yet not so common as
it ought to be, for many care little whether they hear or no. But that that
is, there is hardly ought left but the Name; for who hears with trembling, who
mingles his hearing with faith, who drinks the Word, as the Earth does the
Rain, who does what he hears, without which all hearing is no better then an
empty Name?

So for coming to the Sacrament, is not that made a name too? setting a side
the Name of a Sacrament now and then, what have we else? who feeds upon Jesus
Christ? who comes to the increasing of his Faith? who has Faith at all, that
it may be increased? Who comes to it with preparedness? who sits at the Lords
Table with a Wedding Garment? who goes away nourished up any more unto eternal
Life? without the which all our Sacraments are but natural things.

So for holy Conference, unless it be the Name of it, what is there of the
thing it self left? may be a few cursory words of goodness, before we part,
but no quickening of one another up, no exhorting of one another, no comforting
of one another, or admonishing one another; nay we are grown to be ashamed
of these duties; and for Prayer, but that we take Cushions and fall down on
our Knees, and say a company of Confessions, and Petitions, there is little
else done.

Come we to the Graces of Gods Holy Spirit, without the which a man is Dead in
trespasses and in sins, etc. as Faith, Repentance, peace of Conscience, and
Love, etc.

Secondly, another use is of terror against us; Use 2.
do we think that the Lord will endure this at our hands? He has endured
it too too long, but He will not suffer it always. He has a Spiritual
thunder-clappe that He lets slye against this sin; The vile person shall be
no more called liberal, nor the Churl be said to be bountiful, Isaiah, 32.
5. That is, the Lord will unmaske all such persons, He will pluck of all
their Names, and they shall have a Name fit for their natures, and He will do
this.

First, in their own Consciences, if we will 1.
not be awakened to be as we have a Name to be, the LORD will make our own
Consciences to call us Reprobates as we are, and then what will our Name do
us good, when our own Consciences shall tell us we are naught, and condemn
us in our Bosoms? what shall we be the better for our Neighbors judging
well of us? Our Neighbors may be think we Pray well; what a poor thing is
this, when Conscience shall say no? our Neighbors may hope we stand upon good
ground, when Conscience shall say no; Men call us godly, and Conscience shall
say nay but ye are not. What a shame was it to the Jews when they were
convicted by their own Consciences? Joh. 8. 9. It is not the Name of joy and
holiness that will give their Consciences true Peace, no, no; Conscience
knows another name is sit for us. Unbelief, and Ungodliness, and Hardness
of Heart.

Secondly, again He will do it in the judgment 2.
of others; if we rest in a Name, the Lord will detect us at last before
others; and then what a shame will this be? as David says of Doeg, the Lord
would discover him; He would make all the good people round about say of Him,
Lo this is the Man, that took not GOD for his strength, Psalm 52. 7. So he
will do with us. Lo, this is the Man, that had such a Name to Live. Lo, this
is the Man; now we see here is a wretch, now we see how he deceived his own
soul; he never truly sought GOD in all his life; he was not the Man that
we took him for; he built upon the Sand, he did not lay a good foundation,
and therefore now he is tumbled down, and what is become of his name? Now he
shows himself in his Colors, now we see he is an Enemy of GOD, he can
side with the Times, he can embrace this present World, he has no eternal
life abiding in him.

Nay, the Lord will not only do thus with us, if we rest in a Name, but also
he will pour his Wrath upon us otherwise too; ye may read how that this was
the reason why the Lord drowned all the old World; not only the wickedness of
them that were without; for if they that professed Religion, had been sound,
they might have prevented the Deluge, and prayed it away. But they that
professed Religion, had only a Name. The Sons of GOD saw the Daughters of men
that they were fair, Genesis 6. 2. That is, the Sons of God, they were only
so in Name, their works plainly showed that they were only so in Name,
therefore the Lord swept them all away; So the Lord will pour bitter things on
us, if we be Christians only in Name, and the servants of CHRIST only in
Name, if we be not so indeed; nay, this is not all, but we shall have a
deeper Portion in Hell too then Pagans or Papists, or any in our own Land; the
more we have borne of his Name, the surer shall our damnation be, if we do
not really answer the Holy Name wherewith we are called. We may see this in
the Man in the Gospel; Friend, how came thou in hither? Bind him hand and
soote, cast him into utter darkness where is weeping, etc. Matthew 22. 12.
13. Come Friend, how came you in hither? mark, he had the Name of a friend of
Jesus Christ; therefore the Text says he was speechless, he had nothing to
say for himself, his damnation had nothing to lessen it; other people shall
have something to say for themselves to lessen their damnation; but those that
have a Name to live shall not have the least syllable.

Thirdly, then let another use be to humble Use 3.
our hearts, let us go to God in humiliation of heart, as the poor prodigal
Son did, and down on the knees of our souls and bodies, and say, Lord, I
have sinned against Heaven, and before thee, and am no more worthy, to be
called thy Son, Luke 15. 21. So as many of us as are guilty of this sin,
(as who almost is not and that in a horrible manner?) let us say, Lord, I have
been called a Christian, I have been called a child of thine, I have had the
Name a good while; but O what a Wretch have I been! I am not worthy of this
Name, I have sinned against heaven and in thy sight, I have not answered the
Name I have had, and therefore it were just with thee to cut me asunder with
Hypocrites, and so fling me down to Hell.

REVEL. 3. 1. And art Dead.
THese words are a part of the Epistle, that Christ sent to the Ministers and
Church of Sardis. Ye have heard the inscription, to the Angel of the Church in
Sardis write. Ye have heard too of the subscription, These things says he that
has the seven spirits of God, and the seven Stars. We are come to the
Subject matter, and therein first to the reproof in general, I know thy
works: and secondly to the partculars of the reproof. The first particular was
this, Thou have a name that thou live: all these have been delivered already,
now follows the second particular reproof, And art dead. Here the question is,
what Christ means by dead. By dead, he does not mean dead in errors and
heresies, though these be called deadly poisons, and may make a Church dead.
For the truth is called the word of life, Phil. 2. 16. and wholesome Doctrine,
as the Apostle calls it, and ergo errors and heresies, these poison and dead any
people that drink them in. But this cannot be the meaning here, for we see no
such thing here laid to their charge, it should seem this Church was an
orthodox Church; neither by dead does he mean profane wicked manners, though
they make a people dead too, as we see the prodigal Son that had been given
to profane and dissolute courses, his Father says, he was dead in those
days, Luke 15. 24. Yet this cannot be the meaning neither; for this Church had
a name to live, and it had this name among the Churches of Jesus Christ, which
had more wit, then to Judge them to be alive, if they had been so palpably
wicked; no, it seems they were an excellent Church to see to, a good Ministry
to see to, but both dead; so then this is the meaning. For all their seeming to
be alive, they were indeed dead; as the Apostle says of himself, before he
was quickened by Christ Jesus, He was dead* sin revived, and I dyed Romans 7. 9.
yet he was as jolly a good man as any other, and yet he confesses he was dead;
so they were dead for the most part; and those that were not all out dead, yet
they were deadhearted, and without life in Gods ways. For as it was with the
Moraller Heathen they did the things contained in the Law, yet they were dead;
so a people may do the things contained in the Gospel too, and yet be dead;
people may believe; yet as James says, their says be dead says, Jam. 2. 26.
namely when their faith is without works, so people may have goodly works, for
the moral part of them, and yet do them with a dead heart; to be sober and
temperate, and loving, and chaste and civilly humble, and meek and diligent in
their calling* and known to frequent all the ordinances of God, in publik and
in private, these are outwardly good works* and yet may be in the number of
those works that the Apostle calls dead works, Heb. 6. ^. namely when there is
no life of God in them. Thousands deceive themselves in this, when they have a
kind of faith, and a kind of particular faith, and such works as these flowing
from their faith, they think this to be a lively faith* no, no, a man may be
dead for all that. This truth will not sink into men's minds; fancies, fancies
say they* these are nothing but the whimses of a company of giddy ^raines; what
would they have? if this be not true religion we wonder what is; thus they jear
these things but beloved it is certain; for it is not enough to believe, except
we do it with life, he that lives, and believes in me Joh. 11. 26. faith
without life is but equivocally termed faith; so it is not enough to hope in
God, except we do it with life; he has begetten us again to a lively hope
says Peter. So it is not enough to be a member in Gods Church, a Stone in Gods
building, except we be lively Stones, Ye also as lively Stones says he, 1 Pet.
2. 5. The like I may say of all the duties of Religion, it is not enough to do
them, but we must do them with life, as to pray, to pray with a dead heart is
nothing; no says David, Lord quicken us and we will call upon thy name, Psalm.
80. 18. In a word not to heap particulars; we cannot walk in any of Gods ways
aright as long as we walk in them with a dead heart, as the psalmist says;
Lord quicken thou me in thy way, Psalm. 119. 37. it is a poor thing to walk in
Gods ways only for the matter of them; That indeed a dead heart may do,
there is no duty that God bids a man do, unless it be them that consignifie
life, but flesh and blood may do it, for the matter of it, if there be matter
and form in it. True, some duties are simple that flesh and blood cannot do,
as to love God, to delight in God, to have communion with God himself; to take
God for ones Portion and Lot, and inheritance, and to be all in all to him,
these are simple acts, they are not compounded of matter and form. But when a
duty is compounded of matter and form, flesh and blood may do the matter of
it, whatsoever it be; now then as the essential form is the life of the
matter, so the matter without it is a dead matter; and the doing of it dead.

Well then now we see what is meant by dead; the next is, what is the meaning
of Thou? Thou art dead, the word has a double relation, the one to the
Minister of the Church in Sardis; thou art dead, thy Ministry is dead; the
other to the Church in Sardis it self: thou art dead, thou art a dead people.
First it has relation to the Ministry, thou art dead, thy Ministry is dead,
there is no life in it at all; hence the Doctrine is this, that a dead Ministry
is as good as no Ministry at all, for this our Savior Dect.
means, in regard of the Angel of the Church in Sardis q. d. thy Ministry is
little better then no Ministry; it is stark dead well near, it is not lively
at all, there is little or no warmth to be had by it. Like the Ministry of the
Scribes that had no authority nor power at all in it Mat. 7. 29. As Luther said
when he heard a cold Sermon, cold, cold, cold, says he, this is cold
Preaching, here is no heat at all to be gotten; as God says of the Ministry of
Laodicia; Thou art lukewarm, Romans 3. 16. that is, as there was no heat in his
people, so there was no heat in his Ministry; this is little better then no
Preaching at all, it is even as good as nothing. First, because true preaching
is lively preaching when the Minister is a stirring Minister, as Peter speaks,
I think it meet to stir you up, a Pet. 1. 13. when the Minister is earnest to
save the peoples souls; as the Lord says, I earnestly protested to your
Fathers, Jer. 11. 7. He speaks of the Ministry of Moses and the prophets down
along until the Prophet Jeremies time; they did not only witness the word of
God unto the people, but they did it in a lively and earnest manner; as Paul
did, I have striven to Preach the Gospel, Romans 15. 20. mark he belabored him
in the Pulpit, he lay about him soundly, that his Ministry might have life in
it. Saint Luke shows, that he had sweaty Handker-chiefes, Act. 19. 12. (...),
as Hugo says upon the place, it seems he swet much in preaching, and so
Christ compares Ministers to Harvest men, that labor in Gods Harvest; ye know
Harvest men are hot at their work, so Ministers should be Harvest men, they
should be hot at their work. Thus ye see dry and dull Preaching is little
better then no preaching at all, it is contrary to the manner of preaching,
contrary to the practice of all true and right preachers.

Secondly, a dead Ministry is called no Ministry; the 2
Scripture calls it no Ministry in effect. The Scripture is the best Judge what
is a true Ministry, and what is not? now the Scripture makes a dead Ministry,
and no Ministry all one: the Scribes and the Pharisees, ye know were partly
moral men most of them, as we may see by Paul's Testimony of himself, and they
were orthodox Ministers, as our Savior witnesses of them in the maine, for our
Savior bids people hear them, yet their Ministry was little better then no
Ministry; as the Text shows, the people that sat under their Ministry, are
said to be as sheep having no Shepherd, Mat. 9. 36. they preached as if they
did not preach; people might come to their Sermons and be near a jot moved;
nay, such as came with a desire to be quickened, could get no quickening at all
under them, Matthew says they sat under darkness yet for all them. These are
Idol Sheepheards; woe to the Idol Shepherds, Zach. 11. 17.

Thirdly, a dead Ministry does do little or no good; 3.
though it be never so true, yet it is very unfruitful; it does not awaken any
of the auditory, it does not startle any of the hearers, it does not rowze up
men's hearts, it does not grapple with the obstinate, it does not pull down the
proud, neither does it carry life at all with it, neither is it sitted to work
upon the conscience; you may see an example of this in the Angel of the Church
of Sardic. a dead Minister, a dead people, as he was dead himself, so his
people were dead too; a lively Ministry does a great deal of good, it even is
the saveur of life unto life unto those that be of God, or else the savor of
death unto death, unto those that be not of God, 2 Cor. 2. 16. it ever works
one way, either it makes people rage, or it fats people up, or else it drives
people home unto God; which way so ever it works, it is a sweet savor unto
God, it glorifies God; but a dead Ministry does neither, it is a flat weapon
and cuts not, it is a blunt Sword and wounds not; may be it has the true words
of God, but they are not in a wise work man's hands to make them as Goads and
sharp Nails; partly good points, but not pointed to prick any bodies heart; it
is said when Paul Preached, some went away converted, others went away
blaspheming, Act. 13. 45. 48.

Fourthly, a dead Ministry, God seldom goes along 4.
with it, nay, that is the life of a Ministry, when the Minister seeks God to
go along with him; now a dead Ministry God goes not along with it, a lively
Ministry Christ goes along with it, So I am with you to the end of the world,
Matthew. 28. 20. if there be any of Christ's sheep in the parish, a lively
Ministry does assuredly one time or other find them out; those that are not
Christ his sheep, a lively Ministry hewes them all down, slayes all their
Souls, ripens them apace for hell and for the pit. But a dead Ministry, the
Lord does not go along with that, the Lord does not Crown it.

Fifthly, a dead Ministry prophanes the word of God, it makes it seem nothing
worth; it does not hold forth 5.
the glory of the Lord, nay, it hides it, and keeps it from being seen, either
by dwelling upon Generals, and what is that but hiding? for people will confess
the word in general, they see it the general, all their blindness is in
particulars, there they slip away, like Fish out of a broad Net; or else by
delivering it so coldly, that people think it no great matter; a lively
Ministry holds forth it lets out God into the conscience, it gives people to
understand they come upon life and death, it makes people look about them, it
makes people consider all that ever they have done, it slashes the word of God
into their hearts, as a light to discover all their ways; it gives them a view
of their Christian estate, either one way or other; as it is said of Paul's
Ministry, The word of the Lord was glorified by it, Act. 13. 48. But a dead
Ministry prophanes it, it vailes the glory of it, it lets people sit quiet
under it; it diseases no sinner, where as if it glorified Gods word, it would
either trouble them, or turn them.

The use of this is, first here we see the reason why a Use 1.
dead Ministry is not houted at but applauded in the world; why, it is as good
as no Ministry at all; it does not make the devil roar, it lets people sleep
in their sins; whereas a lively Ministry can hardly come into a pulpit but
presently he is half a martyr, Briers and Thorns were with Ezechiel, Ezekiel. 2.
6. lively Ministers cannot give the world any good content; they fought against
Jeremy, they played the wolves against the Apostles of Jesus. John the Baptist
was counted too stern and austere, and Luther says it is impossible for a man
to be a true lively preacher of Gods word and not be persecuted; there is an
utter antipathy between the world and such a one, the world and such a Minister
can no better agree together then light and darkness; such a Ministry stands
in the worlds light, it makes the world see their works are evil, it detects,
it shames, it opposes their sins that the world tumbles in, as Christ says,
I have given them thy word, and the world hates them because they are not of
the world, Joh. 17. 14 and therefore there cannot be a lively Ministry any
where, but the world has a sling at it; but now let a man have a dead
Ministry, that's let alone, that may stand long enough; that never comes home to
men to show them their ill estates, the devils dawbers, the devils upholsters,
that do not pluck men's pillowes away from under their armeholes, that deal
gently with men, and they may do what they list for all them, these are the
worlds minions, and applauded at all hands; what a thing is this? whereas a
dead Ministry is the undoing of men's souls; it lets men perish and never
draws them back.

Secondly, this may serve to reprove us, that are Use 2.
the Ministers of Jesus Christ, I desire to speak to my self, especially that
we are no more lively in our Ministry; that our Ministry has no more edge upon
it to enter into this horny thick skin age: we complain of much deadness now
a days; alack how if we be found guilty of it, that we preach no more
quickningly! I confess, blessed be God we have so much lively preaching left
yet among us, that woe be to them that are dead and have to grace of life. But
O that our Ministry had more livelihood in it; that it were more exciting, and
provoking. Is the Apostles of Christ complained of dull hearers, Heb. 5. 11.
how many dull hearers have we! why then shall we make our souls guilty of
their dullness? the deader people be we had need to be the quicker in our
Ministry, or else we cannot say we are pure from their blood don't we see how
many people are very near the Children of wrath; how they cannot be saved
except they be justified and sanctified in Jesus Christ; how few are so; how
hard a thing it is to awaken men's hearts; nay, the world and the cares of this
life, carry their minds quite and clean away; how scarce any almost seriously
consider their latter end? don't we see how the devil tempts, how the flesh
and the world reign in most, and how little religion we have up and down? the
Saints scarce, the wicked many; times very bad, the shortness of life, the
irrecoverable estate after death? the immortality of the soul, the pains of
hell, and the joys of heaven, and how that without holiness no man shall see
God, how should we bestirre our selves to beat these truths into men's minds,
that they may be bethink themselves and flee from the wrath to come? The cold
preaching of such weighty things clean cozens the world, so that they hardly
conceive any great matter in the business; live and dye, and perish for ever
in their sins, and we give them such faint warnings, that no wonder so few do
take any warning; we found the trumpet too too low, that scarce any almost
prepare themselves; we come into the pulpit, but we do little or no thing
there, may be we preach good doctrine, but we do not press it to the quick,
that the conscience may feel; we do not bleed for our peoples security, and
though they do not hear, how little does our soul weep in secret or melt in
publik? Bucolcerus that admirable lively preacher, was wont to say, that a
Minister should preach flebiliter, obsecratorie, anxie, humiliter, expectore,
cum gemitu; that is, a Minister should preach mournfully over peoples souls,
beseechingly, anxiously, humbly, heartily, groningly; as it is said of our
Savior Christ, he groned for the peoples unbelief; now when our Ministry is
deadish, as though we cared not much whether people do our doctrine or no,
whether they be damned or no; this is a lamentable thing. The poor souls of
our hearers may say to us, as the disciples of Christ said to Christ, and more
justly, they said it unjustly to him, Master carest thou not that we perish?
Mark 4. 38. he was asleep, and they awakened him, Master carest thou not that
we perish? more justly may our people say so to us, O sirs, do not ye care
that we perish? they may even come and awaken us, Sirs, Care ye not that we
perish? do not you see how dead we are, how heardned, how Ignorant of God, how
empty of grace, how backward to that which is good; how prone to loose our
souls; and do not you care that we perish? why do not you labor more to
quicken us, and move us, and to drive us out of our by ways, that we may come
into the right way and live? when Archippus was somewhat dead in his Ministry,
Saint Paul bids the people of Colosse to go and awaken him; say to Archippus,
Take heed to the Ministry which thou have received in the Lord that thou
fulfill it, Col. 4. 17. well then.

Thirdly, another use is an use of exhortation, that we Use 3.
labor for a quickening Ministry, that our Ministry be a reviving ordinance of
God; that we may as Esaias say, though Israel be not gathered, yet shall I be
glorious, Isa. 49. 5. so though our people be not quick end yet shall we be
glorious, we have done what in us lies for to quicken them.

Consider first, this is the end of all true Ministers 1.
preaching, that they may bring life into the hearers hearts; as the Prophet
says, Hear, and your souls shall live, Isa. 55. 3. wherefore else do we
preach, but that the dead may hear the voice of the Son of God and live?
people are alive to that which they should be dead unto, and they are dead to
that which they should be alive unto, they are alive to the world, and the
things of the world, and dead to God and all goodness, dead to the humbling of
their souls, dead to the seeking of God, dead to Prayer, dead to the holy
communion of the Saints, dead to holy comfort and meditation, and what ever
else may do their souls good? now wherefore do we preach, if not to quicken
up your hearts, that your souls may live for ever; they have knowledge
already, more knowledge then they are quickened up to; our maine intention then
should be to quicken them up to do what they know; are we not sowers of seed?
why then we should most labor so to plow and harrow and till the ground, that
our seed may quicken; this is the very end of preaching, that our hearers may
hear and live.

Secondly, as it is the end of all true Ministers preaching 2.
so it is the nature of all true and right preaching; either to quicken, or to
be a fitted instrument of quickening; when David heard the word, it quickened
his heart, thy word has quicken me, Psalm. 119. 50. and indeed it is never
heard nor preached aright, unless it be in a quickening way; and therefore let
us not think it is only the taking of a Text, and the speaking of good and
wholesome truths, but let us ever remember what right preaching is, that our
Ministry be quickening, that God may affect our souls, and accompany our words,
and teach us how to go beyond the policy of men's hearts, and direct us how to
drive the truth home to the quick, to answer the evasions of flesh and blood,
and so put his live coal into our speeches, that our Sermons may be warming.

Thirdly, let us consider this is only profitable preaching; 3.
we may preach all the days of our life, and our people stird no more then a
mill-post, unless our Ministry be quickening; they may hear what we say, but
unless we could quicken their hearts, they will forget all again; it may be
they may remember the doctrine, but I mean they will forget to do what they
hear; it is the quickening that makes any remember to practice; as David says,
I will never forget thy precepts, for with them theu have quichened me, Psalm.
119. 93. we can never forget that friend whom our hearts do most dearly
affect; so when our Ministry does quicken and affect peoples hearts, they will
never forget what they have heard; The quickening of the come in the earth,
makes it the faster in the earth, it twists about the earth, it gets a rooting
if it quicken; so it is with our Sermons, if they be quickening, they get about
peoples souls, and will not out again; otherwise they are never the nearer.

Fourthly, let us consider this kind of preaching only 4.
will yield us true comfort; when our Ministry is lively in our parish, as Paul
was at Ephesus; when we can say to our people, You has God quickened by us, as
he says, you has he quickened, who were dead, Ephesians. 2. 1. I dare say it was a
great comfort to his soul, to see that his Ministry was quickening; nay, if
our Ministry be quickening, though none be quickened by it, but two or three,
nay, though none at all, yet we shall have comfort; whereas when we have
preached 1000 times in a dead hearted manner never laboring to creep into men's
consciences, nor to be Ministers of life, we shall have no comfort on our
deathbeds; nay our own hearts will tell us, we have preached often indeed,
but we never preached Christ Jesus, we never flung our hearts among our people,
as one said of the good Bishop E^lt^n, he flung his heart among his people. But
when our consciences can say, we are not hearty for God, we are not earnest to
save our peoples souls, we did not go the way to do them good; this will lie
as lead upon our bosoms when we dye.

Fifthly, a dead Ministry, is but the bare name of a 5
Ministry, it is little better then mere voice; as the Lacedemonian in Plutarch
said, when he heard how sweetly the Nightingall sang, O thought he, surely that
Bird is good meat if I had it; and so when he took it, and eat it, and found
but little meat in it, he said, voxes and praeterea nihil; now I see thou art
mere voice and nothing else; so a dead Ministry it may have a great name of a
good Ministry, and a man may desire to live under it, O let me live under such
a Ministry, but when he comes to it, and thinks to receive much benefit by it,
he finds it to be little better then a name.

Sixthly, a dead Ministry is not a sign to our people; 6
Ministers should be signs to the people, thus Ezechiel is unto you a sign,
according as he has done, so shall ye do. A voice, Ezekiel 24. 24. true, John
the Baptist was a voice, Isa. 40. 3. I but he was more then a voice, he was a
burning and a shining light, there was life and heat in his Ministry, he was
not a mere voice. But when ones Ministry is but a mere voice, little good
comes of such a Ministry.

Fourthly, another use is for direction; to show what Use 4.
a lively Ministry is, and how we may have a true lively Ministry, that is in
one word to preach with affection; as Quintilian says of Eloquution, affections
are the soul and life of Eloqution; so I may say of preaching, affections are
the life of preaching; now by affections, I do not mean feigned and forced
affections, they are no affections indeed, but when a man preaches so for the
matter and manner indeed, affectionate matter, and with a true affected heart,
that he may move the hearts of men; as one says the world is now full of
knowledge, as a drunkard is full of wine, that his stomach is not able to
digest; so I say, people have more knowledge, then they can well digest, the
stomach wants heat to concoct it for their good; as Rodolphus Agricola speaks,
any man that has learning may teach; but to move the heart and affections, it
requires more a great deal. This is lively preaching, when a Minister sets
himself to be in men's bosoms; what alively preacher was the Apostle Paul, you
may see by his dealing with Agrippa, he made the Kings heart even yearne again
with his speaking; the King confessed how his speaking worked within his bosom,
almost thou perswadest me to be a Christian, Act. 26. 28. so you may see by the
Galatians, his preaching did not only convert many of them, but those whom he
did not convert, he did wonderfully work upon their hearts, that they could
have be contented to have plucked out their eyes, and have given them to him,
Gal. 4. 15. such a lively preacher was he in the second of Judges, that when he
preached, he set all the people a melting, a weeping, like little children that
had been beaten Judge. 2. 4. 5. I grant it may be the best and liveliest
Ministers under heaven cannot do so now, peoples hearts are more hardened. But
yet though we cannot undertake to move any one man's heart, that is the work of
God, yet our Ministry may be lively.

First, by laboring to make the things that we preach 1.
as it were lively before peoples eyes; as the Apostle preached Christ
crucified, even as if he were crucified before his peoples eyes, Gal. 3. 1. so
Moses had a very lively Ministry; the Text says, he set before them life and
death; he labored to preach with that evidence, as if he had set before their
eyes life and death, heaven and hell, good and evil; when a Minister preaches
in the evidence, and the demonstration of the Spirit, 1 Cor. 2. 4. when he
labors to bring the Gospel plainly to men's hearts; a man may teach the
Gospel, but it is not preaching, except he set it lively forth, and labor to
make people see it, this is the truth, and this is your sin against that
truth, this is the doctrine, and thus you fail in the doctrine, this is the
threatening of God, and thus you lie under the threatening; otherwise they hear
a Sermon, as if it did not concern them.

Secondly, coming to particulars; generals are but 2.
dead; we see they leave people dead, people have a hundred tricks to put them
off; but when a preacher comes to particulars, he either quickens or slayes, he
convinces either to life or to death; when a Minister lays the truth at every
man's door, he presses it upon every man's heart, he meets with many a put off,
he makes every conscience, say I am the man, except they be asleep or their
minds are a wooll-gathering, he darts into his hearers faces, a view of their
particular estates; he touches their copyhold, he confutes their false pleas,
and knocks off the fingers that would be applying of a promise when it does not
concern them, and puts it only upon the soul to whom it does belong. This is
lively preaching, that gives to every soul his due, terror to whom teror,
comfort to whom comfort belongs; milk to the Babe, strong meat to the grown,
oil to the bruised, and a sword into the hard heart, a whip for the Horse, and
a Bridle for the Ass, and a rod for the fools back, Prove. 26. 3. application
is the life of preaching; this serves to condemn such a one, this serves to
confute such a one, this serves to comfort such a one, when a Minister does as
Paul says, divide the word aright, 2 Timothy 2. 15.

Thirdly, by worrying of people out of their sins, 3.
when a Minister will not let people be quiet in any of their sinful courses,
when he labors daily to vex their guilty consciences, and to turn them from
day to day, as the two witnesses did, Rev. 11. 10. that they may say, we cannot
be quiet for this man, he makes me sit upon thorns; when a Minister labors to
make hell to have every vile wretch, and heaven and the promises to have every
honest heart, etc.

Fourthly, by being pittious and affectionate toward the 4
poor people, to let them see how we pity their condition, as we should do
what we can to make them feel their damned estate, as also with bowels, and
compassion, labor that they may see we do pity them, and therefore preaching
sometimes is called lamentation in Scripture, Ezekiel. 19. 1. it may be people
then may say, what a beast am I; how does our Minister pity us! he mourns over
us, and bewayles us; what a wretch am I, that I do not bewail mine own case?
O beloved, what a woeful thing is it, that any of us should perish, to be
damned for ever in hell! to lie in eternal pains! what a pity is this? is it
not much better ye should embrace the good word of God and believe and take
Jesus Christ, and be willing to do any thing he would have you to do, then to
lie by it for ever in the pains of hell, for the pleasures of sin for a
season? alas it is for want of bowels, that we do no more good.

Fifthly, by being deeply affected with the word of 5
God, laying nothing on peoples backs, but what we lift up upon our own
shoulders; speaking the truth from the bottom of our hearts, uttering the word
of God with feeling and with a contrite spirit. O if we could drop our Sermons
as dew down from heaven on our people; this would be lively preaching indeed as
the Prophet Ezekiel did, he dropped the word of God upon Jerusalem, Ezekiel. 21. 2.
so if our Sermons did come droping down from us, as if they dropped down from
heaven. O how coldly do our Sermons come from our mouths, we do not preach
as if the word came down from heaven, as if our hearts were no higher then our
pulpits.

Lastly, by getting the Lord to go along with our Ministry; for it is not our
preaching it self that has any life; no, it is but a dead letter, as Micha
says, I am full of power by the Spirit of the Lord, Mich. 3. 8.

REVEL. 3. 2. And art Dead.
THese words as ye heard, have a twofold relation; one to the Angel of the
Church in Sardis; thou art dead, thy Ministry is dead; there is no life, nor
heat at all in thy Ministry, it is no stirring Ministry; thou art dead; another
to the Church it self; thou art a dead people, a dead congregation. For the
first thence we had this point of Doctrine; that a dead Ministry is little
better then no Ministry at all. By a dead Ministry I mean though the matter
preached be never so sound and orthodox, yet when the preaching of it is dead,
this is a dead Ministry; as a Prayer may be dead, though the things prayed for,
be never so honest and godly; now such a Ministry is little better then no
Ministry; there is no warmth hardly to be had by it at all; like the Ministry of
the Scribes, that had no power nor authority in it at all, Matthew. 7. 29. as
Luther said, when he heard one preach very cold; cold, cold, says he; this is
cold preaching; here is no heat at all to be gotten.

First, this is nothing like a true Ministry indeed; a true Ministry indeed is
lively; it is a Ministry that warmes and heats; it is a very earnest Ministry;
as when the 1.
Lord let the Jews have a true Ministry, he says they had a lively Ministry,
I earnestly protested to your Fathers, Jer 11. 7. he speaks of the Ministry of
Moses and the Prophets; it was a very lively Ministry; they preached in good
earnest to the people; so Paul was earnest in his Ministry, I have striven to
preach the Gospel, Romans 15. 20. he belabored him hard in the pulpit, he laid
about him soundly; so that a dead Ministry, is nothing like a true Ministry.

Secondly, the Lord counts a dead Ministry, even as if it were no Ministry at
all. The Scribes and the Pharisees, were very moral men most of them, as ye
may see 2.
by Paul's Testimony of himself, and they were orthodoxe Ministers for the
maine, as our Savior says of them, for he bids people hear them, yet he
counted their Ministry even as no Ministry at all; he calls the people that sat
under their Ministry, people having no Shepherd, Matt. 9. 36. true they had
Shepherds, but as the Prophet says of the Shepherds of Judah, they were
Jdoll Shepherds, Zach. 11. 17. they were very Idols; ye know Idols are dead
Images.

Thirdly, a dead Ministry does little or no good; it is very unfruitful; it
does not awaken any of the auditory; it does not stir any of the hearers; it
does not rouse up 3.
men's hearts; it does not grapple with the obstinate, nor pull down the proud,
neither does it carry life at all with it; as Jeremy says of many of the
Priests and the Prophets of Israel, they did not convert any; God tells them, if
they had stood in his counsel, they should have turned many, Jer. 23. 22. But
as the matter went, they turned none, they converted none; a lively Ministry
does a great deal of good; but a dead Ministry is a flat thing.

Fourthly, a dead Ministry God seldom goes along 4.
with it; nay, that is the life of ones Ministry, when the Minister seeks God
to go along with him; now a dead Ministry, God goes not along with it; a
lively Ministry God gos along with that; as Christ says, Lo I am with you to
the end of the world, Matthew. 28. 20. such a Ministry God blesses, it gathers up
Gods Jewels, it builds up Gods Church it helps to perfect the Saints. But a
dead Ministry, the Lord does not go with it, he does not work with it.

Fifthly, a dead Ministry prophanes the word, it makes 5.
it seem nothing worth; it makes people think there is no great matter in it;
a lively Ministry glorisies the word, it lets out God into the conscience, it
givs people to understand they come upon life and death, it makes people look
about them, it makes people hear over all that ever they have done, it flashes
the word of God into their hearts, as a light to discover all their ways; it
gives them a view of their eternal estate either one way or other; it is the
savor either of life unto life, or of death unto death; as it is said of
Paul's* Ministry, the word of the Lord was glorified by it, Act. 13. 48. But a
dead Ministry prophanes, hides the glory of it; it lets people set quietly
under it; it diseases no sinner.

The use of this was first, here we saw a reason why a Use 1.
dead Ministry is not houted at, but applauded in the world; Why? it is as good
as no Ministry at all, it does not make the devil roar; it lets people sleep
in their sins; such Ministers are dawbers, they are the devils upholsters they
do not pluck away men's pillowes from under their* arme-holes; people may do
what they list for all them. The world will let such alone, they may sleep long
enough; whereas a livelie Minister can heardly come into the pulpit, but
presently he is half a Martyr; as the Lord said to Ezekiel Briers and thorns
are with thee Ezekiel. 2. 6. The world fought against Jeremy; they played the
wolves against the Apostles of Jesus Christ. Lively Ministers cannot give the
world any good content; there is an antpathy between the world and such; they
cannot more agree then light and darkness; such a Minister stands in the
worlds light; he makes the world see their works are evil, he detects and
shams, and opposes the sins that the world wallows in; such a Ministry is a
dissering Ministry, it makes a division among men. There cannot be a lively
Ministry any where, but the world has a sting at it. But a dead Ministry may
go Scotfree, it does not torment them that dwell upon the earth.

Secondly, this may serve to reprove our selves that Use 2.
are no more lively in our Ministry. That our Ministry has no more edge upon
it to enter into this horny thickskin age; we complain of much deadness now a
days, alas how if we be found guilty of it, in that we preach no more
quickeningly? if the Apostles of Christ complained of dull hearers, Heb. 5. 11.
O how many dull hearers have we! The Lord awaken our hearts! The deader people
be, we had need to be the quicker in our Ministry, or else we cannot say we are
pure from their blood. Don't we see the damned estate that our people are in by
nature? the carelessness of getting to be delivered out? the necessity of
faith, of repetance, of holiness, the danger of sin, the multitudes of them
that perish, and the fewness of them, that strive to enter in at the straight
gate? the deceitfulness of the heart, how the world and the cares of this
life, carry almost all eleane away? the badnesse of the times, the shortness
of this life, the irrecoverable estate after death, the immortality of the
soul, the pains of hell, the joys of heaven? O how should we bestirre our
selves, to beat these truths into men's hearts, that they may bethink them, and
fly from the wrath come? The cold preaching of such weighty things quite
cozens the world; we give them such faint warnings, that it is no wonder that so
few do take any warning; we sound the Trumpet too too low, that scarce any
almost prepare themselves; we preach as though we did not care much, whether
our people be damned or no; this is a lamentable thing, people may say to us,
as the disciples said to Christ; they said it unjustly to Christ, but our
people may say it justly to us. Master carest thou not that we perish? Mark. 4.
38. he was asleep, and they awakened him; Master carest thou not, etc. O Sirs,
don't you care that we perish? awaken, awaken, don't you see how dead we are,
how hearned, how Ignorant of God, how empty of grace, how backward to that
which is good! how prone to lose our souls! and don't you care that we perish?
why don't you labor more to quicken us, and move us; why don't you rub us, and
pull us, and prick us, and drive us out of our security?

Thirdly, another use is, that we labor for a quickening Use 3.
Ministry. This is the end of all true Ministers preaching; that they may
bring life into their hearers hearts; as the Prophet says, hear and your
souls shall live, Isa. 55. 3. wherefore else do we preach, but that the dead
may hear the voice of the Son of God and live? people are alive to that
which they should be dead unto; and dead to that which they should be alive
unto; dead to God and all goodness, dead to reformation and amendment, dead to
Prayer, and the communion of the Saints; dead to holy conference and meditation
and what ever else may do your souls good: now wherefore do we preach, if
not to quicken up your hearts, that your hearts may live for ever? are we not
sowers of seed? why then we should most labor so to plow and harrow and till
the ground that our seed may quicken.

Fourthly, now another use is how to get a Ministry Use 4.
to be quickening. First let us consider the worth of a soul, our Savior
Christ says, its of more worth then the whole world, Matthew 16. 26. if one
soul be of such worth, O then what is the worth of so many souls as God has
given us the charge of* wherefore do we stir up our selves no more in our
Ministry? its a plain sign, we don't consider the worth of souls, that we
have the care of; the blood of the Son of God was shed for them. O if we
would but consider this, this might whet us up if by any means we might gain
some souls to Gods heavenly Kingdom.

Secondly, as we must consider the worth of the souls 2.
of our people, so we must get bowels to tender their souls. The Apostle Paul
says, he had the bowels of a Father toward the souls of the Thessalonians,
you know how we exhorted and comforted and charged every one of you, as a
father these his Children, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 11. nay, as a Mother to the Babe of her
womb; nay, says he, we were ready not only to impart the Gospel of God to
you, but also even our own souls, because ye are dear to us; as it is there
in verse 8. Is a Father dead-hearted toward his dear child? or a kind Mother
toward her dear babe? no; if we were set to do our people good, if our bowels
did yearn after their everlasting good, it would appear in every Sermon we
make, yea, it would appear in our delivery, in our faces, in our carriages, in
our earnest endeavor for their comfort; the earnestnes of a true Ministers
preaching, Saint Jude compares to the snatching of a child, that is fallen
into the fire; other some with fear, plucking them out of the fire, Jude. 23.
if we did see our poor children fallen into the fire, how would we bestirre
our selves quickly to pluck them out again? would we go about it coldly? nay,
would we not run, and snatch and pull, and cry out, and alas my poor child,
nay, we would schriek out, O woe is me my child will be burnt; O how our
bowels would yearne, so we should do to our people, this would quicken our
Ministry, and so I full upon a third.

Thirdly, then as we should dearly love our peoples 3.
souls, so we should be pitious and affectionate toward them; we should let
them see how we pity their condition; we don't only tell them their sins, and
threaten against them the Judgments, but with pity and compassion; lamenting
their condition, as Jeremy said, O my howels, my homels, I am pained even at
the very heart, Jer. 4. 19. we should not mouth hell and damnation and roar
out against their sins in a stirdy manner, as if we had Iron sides, but in a
relenting pittious wise, bewayling their case. Preaching sometimes is called
lamentation in Scripture; take up alamentation for the Princes of Israel, Ezekiel.
19. 1. that is, go and preach to them; this is to quicken in our Ministry; may
be people now will say; what a beast am I! how does our Minister pity us? he
mournes over us, and bewayles us; what a wretch am I, that I do not bewail
mine own miserable condition! O beloved, what a woeful thing is it that any of
us should perish! to be damned for ever in hell? to lie in everlasting
burnings; what a pity is this? Is it not much better, we should embrace the
good word of God, repent and believe, and take up Christ's Yoke, and to be
willing to do any thing, to part with any thing, then to lie by it for ever in
the pains of hell for the pleasures of sin for a season? alas brethren it is
for want of bowels; that we do no more good; O we should fling our hearts
among you, as was said of that good Bishop, the People said of him, he flung
his very heart among them; so should we do, we should even melt over you, the
Lord give us tender bowels for you; this is a quickening Ministry.

Fourthly, We should worry our people out of their 4
sins; we should not let our people be quiet in any of their sinful courses;
we should daily labor to disease them, to make them set upon thorns, as is
said of the two witnesses, they tormented the earth, Rev. 11. 10. so we should
torment and vex guilty consciences, gall them, and pierce them, and make our
Sermons haunt them; we should be eager and earnest with them to let go their
sins; we should be like the importunate widow, that would have justice, she
would never let the Judge be quiet for her; as God says there, return
return, O Shulamite, return return; compel them to come in, Luke. 14. 23.
repent repent, O wretch, repent repent; O do not go on, thou wilt perish, turn
back, turn back, thou wilt be in hell in a moment else; it is not enough to
deliver a good doctrine, and then to say thus and thus ye are guilty of sinning
against this good doctrine; but we should labor to lay it home, and to impose
it firmly on their conscience, to haunt* them with the danger; O how dull, and
blockish and secure in their heart how apt are people to forget any thing that
is good, to put off any thing that should pull them down before God? and
therefore we should labor to help our poor people, that if* it be possible,
we may stop them from going down into the pit.

Fifthly, we should labor to make the things that we 5
preach as if it were lively before peoples eyes; as the Apostle preached Christ
crucified to the Galatians, even as if he were crucified before their very
eyes, Gal. 3. 1. so Moses had a very lively Ministry; the text says he set his
points before their very eyes. I call heaven and earth to record against you
this day, that I have set before you life and death, blessing and crusing,
Deuteronomy. 30. 19. mark he set before their eyes, life and death, heaven and hell;
he preached so evidently, that the people might see, as it were with their
eyes, the things that he preached; this is lively teaching; as the Orator says
Hypotyposis is an excellent means to persuade; when the speaker does as it
were point before the hearers eyes, when he represents the things he speaks
of, this is preaching in the evidence, and the demonstration of the spirit, 1
Cor. 2. 4. (...) when a Minister demonstrates his points, and this it is, this
is the sin, and this is the case, and this is the misery, and thus it stands
with you, when he labors to make people see it, and they must needs see it,
unless they be wilful and shut their eyes; otherwise people hear a Sermon as
if it did not concern them; there is a man in the pulpit, and they hear what
he says, but they never consider how deeply it concerns them.

Sixthly, we should be truly affected with the word of 6
God our selves; laying nothing on our peoples shoulders, but what we lift upon
our own; we should speak the truth from the bottom of our hearts, uttering
the word of God with feeling and with a contrite heart; we should be heavenly
as the word is; that lip and heart, and word may be all a like. O if we did
drop down our Sermons as dew down from heaven on our people, this would be a
lively preaching indeed; as the Prophet Ezekiel did, He dropped the word of God
on Jerusalem, Ezekiel. 21. 2. if our Sermons did come dropping down from us, as
if they dropped down from heaven. O how homely do our Sermons come from our
mouths, as though they never were higher then the pulpit; we do not preach,
as if the word came dropping down from heaven; and therefore people do not
look up to heaven, while they hear, their minds are no higher then our
pulpits: whereas if we had heavenlier hearts and lips, it would more quicken
a thousand times, or at least be a sitter instrument to quicken.

Seventhly, and lastly, we should get the Lord to go 7.
along with our Ministry; for it is not our preaching it self, that has any
life; nay, it is but a dead letter as it issues from us; if we were such men,
that had the Lord going along with us throughout all our Ministry, what a deal
of profit would there be in our Ministry? as Micha says, I am full of power by
the spirit of the Lord, Micha. 3. 8. But I let this point pass; thus ye have
heard the words as they have relation to the Ministry of the Church in Sardis.
Thou art dead; that is, thy Ministry is dead.

Now I come to the words, as they have relation to the Church it self. Thou
art dead. Thou art a dead people; though thou have a name to live, yet, thou
art dead; that is, thou art outwardly reformed, thou have goodly ordered
congregations, good sober, civil and fair carriaged people, all professing
the true religion, and frequenting the good Ordinances of God, yet, thou art
dead; that is, thou art even as good as nothing; the doctrine hence is, a dead
Christian is as no Christian at all. Ye know we are all dead by nature, in
trespasses, and in sins; that is, we are alive to the works of the flesh, and
to the world, but dead toward God. And a true Christian is he that is made
dead unto sin and the world, but alive unto God; as the Apostle Paul says.
Likewise reckon ye your selves to be dead unto sin, but alive unto God through
Jesus Christ our Lord, Romans 6. 11. this is a true Christian, that so leaves his
sins, and so takes up the worship and service of God, that he is dead to his
sins, and alive toward God; now when a man it may be leaves his sins after
a manner, and takes up the profession of Gods Service, and yet he is alive
still unto the flesh, and dead toward God, this is just nothing.

By dead I mean things; first, deadness of guilt; when a 1.
man is guilty of any offense, that is death by the Law, he is said to be a
dead man; therefore every man has sinned against God, which is death by Gods
Law, so that every man is dead by nature; when a man is pardoned of God, then
he is alive again; and therefore it is called justification of life, To. 5. 18.
now when a man is not pardoned of God, he is dead, though he have never so many
hopes and conceits of forgiveness, thought to apprehend himself to be
pardoned, yet as long as God has not pardoned him indeed, he is a dead man.

Secondly, deadness of mind, when the mind is 2.
Ignorant of God, in regard of saving knowledge, when a man's mind is without
saving understanding, then his mind is said to be dead; true saving
understanding is the life of so many minds; as David says, give me
understanding and I shall live, Psalm. 119. 144. then my mind shall be alive
says he, then I shall know thee aright; now let a man have never so much
knowledge and learning, yet, in divine things is otherwise, and have nothing;
his mind is still dead; he is a dead man to all the things of God; he cannot
see God in all his ways no more then a dead man; he cannot mind God; he may
mind earthly things; but he cannot mind God; nay, though he can mind learning
and divinity, learning and learning about God, yet he cannot mind God; his
mind is dead to such savoury knowledge; even as dead as a dead man; he knows
not how to pray to God, as a child to his Father; he knows not how to do any
duty, in a godly gracious manner; his mind is as dead to these things, as a
simple Country-mans is to Latin, or Greek or Hebrew.

Thirdly, deadness of heart when the heart is not 3.
inclined toward God, then we say it is dead toward God and all goodness;
though he go to good duties every day, yet as long as the heart is not
inclined to them, it goes about them in a dead manner; when a man's heart is
once inclined toward God, now it begins to be alive toward him; as David
says, the heart shall be alive that seeks God, Psalm. 69 32. that is, you
whose hearts are inclined to serve God, your hearts are alive; now when a man
has no divine inclinations to all heavenly duties and courses, though he do
never so much profess the following of them, he follows them with a dead
heart.

Fourthly, deadness of conscience, when the conscience 4
has no force; it may be it finds fault with such and such ways, but it has
no power over the man, to make him to leave them; perhaps it approves such and
such holy performances, yea, but it has no power over him, to cause him to
buckle to them indeed; this is a dead conscience; it has no life at all in it;
when the conscience has life in it once, then it has power; it has a mighty
force over a man; as the Church, my soul made me like the Chariots of
Aminadab, Cant. 6. 12. that is, my conscience was very forceable and powerful
in me, it made me not only to go after God, but it carried me as it were in a
Chariot very willingly. But when the conscience can whisper only and find
fault, and has no power at all with it to make one obey from day to day, this
is a dead conscience.

Fifthly, deadness of affection; when the affections 5.
are clumbzie, and will not stir toward God, and all heavenly things; when a
man is like a block in good duties, he has no affections to them nor in them;
when the affections are all alive to earthly things, when they are still out of
order; as the Apostle Paul says, mortify your inordinate affections, Col. 3.
5. that is, your affections must not be out of order, if they be alive to other
things ye must kill them, that way, that they may be alive toward all the
things that are above; now when the affections will not move that way at all,
then they are dead. But I will speak no more of this; well then let us come to
the doctrine; a dead Christian is even as good as no Christian at all; go
through all Christianity, and we shall see this to be true in every passage;
should a man have all Christianity in him, and yet be dead and dull and without
life, it is even all one, as if he had just nothing.

First, for conversion; should a man seem to be converted. 1.
O what a changed man is this, he was a drunkard, and now he is sober; he was a
whorer, and now he is chaste, he was a Profane beast, and now he is clean
another man; this is well; I, but if thou be dead to the ways of God; if
thou be not quickened up to them, this is magnum nihil; conversion is a
quickening; when we were dead in sins, he has quickened us together which
Christ, Ephesians. 2. 5. conversion is not only a turning of a man from wicked ways
to good, but to be quickened up in them; conversion puts another life into a
man; a man may be converted from profaneness to civility; from not praying
constantly to praying constantly, from not hearing to hearing, from not
preaching to preaching, from not professing to professing. True, this man shall
have the less hell, yea, but this is nothing toward heaven; except a new life
be put into this man; to be alive in all these good ways; except he be
quickened together with Christ.

Secondly faith; should a man lean himself upon 2.
God, and upon Christ, should a man apply all the promises of the Gospel to
his soul, and believe all that is contained in the covenant of grace; alas what
of all this? if this man be dead still, without such a faith as produces life;
it is little better then nothing; as Christ says, He that lives and believes
in me, Joh. 11. 26. true faith carries life with it, wheresoever it is; and
therefore if a man's faith be without life, it is but equivocall faith. faith it
may well be, But true faith it cannot be; for if thou would be able to say
thou beleevest in Jesus Christ, thou must be able to say that thou live too
in him; it is impossible a man should rightly believe in Christ and be dead; ^o,
he lives that believes in me, says Christ.

Thirdly, as ye heard heretofore, to be a member of 3.
the visible Church of God, to be a stone in Gods building; were a man the
finest and the most carved stone of all, put in by Baptism, kept in by
profession of the Christian faith; this is a poor thing, if this man now be not
a lively stone; ye also as lively stones are built up a spiritual house, a
holy Priesthood, etc. 1 Pet. 2. 5. The right stone; in Gods spiritual house
are all lively stones; if thou be but a logge, a heartlesse, dull, dead
member, thou art none of Gods spiritual house, house, no part of his holy
Priesthood, thou art no more a Christian then a dead man is a man. Thou art
but a sit room, thou have nothing but a name of a true Christian; The body of
Christ, is all full of life, derived from him the head; all the branches that
are in him, have the life of the root in them; if thou be but a dead branch,
thou have no communion with Christ at all, though thou be in the body.

Fourthly, for hope; it may be thou have hope that 4.
thou art a good Christian, that thou have a part in the redemption of the
world by Jesus Christ, thou have a hope of the heavenly inheritance, that thou
shall be saved in that day; now if thy hope be a dead hope, if it do not
quicken thee up to trample on the world, to beat down thy worldly lusts, to
scrue thee up to a gracious life more and more, to carry thee on through thick
and thin, this is not a gracious hope; no, no; the grace of hope is a lively
hope, as the Apostle speaks. Blessed be God, and father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, which according to his abundant mercy, has begotten us again, to a
lively hope, 1 Pet. 1. 3. this grace of hope it quickens up all them that have
it, it is not a dead hope, that lies sluggishly and blockishly in the soul,
and does not stir it up every day; no, it revives him toward God, it makes
him eager after the best things; if thy hope be a dead hope, that lies like a
carcass in thy heart, to little or no purpose, it is no good hope through
grace, but a hope in a dream.

Fifthly, for repentance; what ever thou have to say 5.
for repentance, can thou plead a 1000 changes and reformations, yet if thou
have not gotten out of a dead temper, thou art yet under an impenitent heart.
That repentance that is the gate of heaven, the Evangelist calls it repentance
unto life, Act. 11. 18. true repentance it rends the heart, it shows sin to
be the greatest evil, and it rowzes a man up daily to take heed of it; it
makes us see what a God we have dishonored, and therefore it awakens the soul
to be earnest to please him in all things for the time to come; the soul was
dead and careless, and drowzie, and neglectfull of obedience, goodness,
holiness, humility, pureness, strictness, preciseness of walking, it cared
not for these things before, but when true repentance comes in, it wheels about
the life of the soul toward God, now the cares shall be to him, now the
endeavors make after him; pains, labors, cautious, watchfulness,
considerativenesse, studious striveings, and all is active that way now; so that
if a man be still dead, his repentance is false.

Again to go over all the duties of religion; they all must be done with
life; to do them with a dead heart, 1
is as good as not to do them at all. First prayer, suppose we pray at Church,
and pray in our families, and pray in our closets, is this all? to pray with a
dead heart, as if we cared not whether we sped or no, no pullings of our heart
down before God; no wrastlings with God for what we ask, no liftings of our
souls up, no fastnings of our minds upon his presence, no cries, no mournings,
no importunity, but the heart as lumpish and unweldy as a stone; is this
praying? no, says David; quicken us O Lord that we may call upon thy name,
Psalm. 80. 18.

Secondly, for hearing of the word: It is not thy hearing of it so many times a
week, though thou must hear it as often as ever thou can, and those that
will not no hearing as frequently as they may, are high despisers of God and
his Ordinances; but yet if thou hear the word with a dead heart, thy hearing
is made as no hearing; it is said of those primitive converts that they were
pricked in their hearts as they were hearing, Act. 2. 37. they only got good
by their hearing, they heard the word with life; so it is said of many of
Christ's hearers, they did (...), they lay upon him, they preased upon him,
Luke 5. 1. in another place, it is said that they hung upon him, they were
attentive and eager to him; our Savior Christ says, it is a very great
judgment to be dull of hearing, Matthew. 13. 15. when people set as if the word
did not concern them, when they hear without any motion or affection, the
word hardly joggeth their hearts, it hardly shakes their conscience at all,
the word does neither delight them, nor wound them, nor pierce them, it heales
none of their sins, it cannot get between them and their lusts; when they
have heard a Sermon, they go away just as they came, they sinde nothing now to
do, it does not dragge them one jot more out of the world, nor an inch nearer
heaven; their carriage is much at one as it was; when they come home, it cannot
be perceived that ever they were at the word; as earthly as ever; as carnal as
ever; as backward to all goodness as ever; this is no hearing at all.

Thirdly, for sanctifying of the Lords day; it is said of 3
the Sabbath, that we should call it our delight, Isa, 58. 13. that is, we
should keep it with life it should even quicken up our hearts to think it is
coming, we should be revived to consider Gods goodness, that he would give us
such a day, seeing we have so much need of it; when we have been six days
about our own business in the world, that we should have a seventh given us
of God, lest we should be over head and ears in the world to take off our
hearts; now when this is no delight to us, our hearts are dead to it, we do
not sanctify it indeed but profane it, as though it were not honorable and
the house of the Lord.

Fourthly, for taking hold of an opportunity to do 4.
good; this is a duty too to be done with all life; how glad should we be; if
there be any opportunity for us to show our love to God, or our hatred to sin;
we should be willing to ride or go, or be at charges, nay we should deny our
selves, and lay down our gains and credits, and goods, and friends, and all
that we have at Christ's Foot, and bless God that gives us such a price in our
hands; but now we have a dead heart to this; what a horrible thing is this?
though we do take the opportunity, yet to go about it as though we were sorry
that God has given it unto us; this is mere folly; as Solomon says;
Wherefore is there a price in the hand of a Fool to get wisdom, seeing he
has no heart to it? Proverbs 17. 16.

Fifthly, In one word for all the ways of God, there is 5.
near a one of them all, that can be walked in aright, without a live heart as
the Prophet says. Lord turn away mine eyes from beholding vanity, and quicken
me in thy way, Psalm. 119. 37. now when we go dreamingly on, as though we could
not do withal, though the way be God's, yet our going in it is stark naught,
and little better then not going in it at all; and therefore the Lord accepts
not of it, when we humble our selves before God, to hang down our ^eads ^ike a
bull-rush, it is naught, it is naugh, the Lord cannot away with it; when we
confer about the word, or any gracious and Godly theme, to speak as if we
had no saveur of it, no pleasure in it, when our hearts would rather be on
another subject, and never lin till they have wound all good talk out; if we
speak one word to edification, there shall be twenty to that one, that shall
serve to no other end, but to the hardening of one another; when Christ and the
two disciples were communing together, their hearts burned in them; did not our
hearts burn within us, while he talked with us by the way? Luke 24. 32. that
was talking with life. But when our hearts are as cold as a flint, this we may
call talking, but holy conference it cannot be termed

Thus ye see a dead Christian, is as good as no Christian at all, no grace is
without life, no duty can be done without life; the reasons of this are.

First, because this is all one as to have no grace at all; 1.
though a man be a member of the congregation of the Lord, though he have the
seals of the covenant, and profess the faith of Jesus, and be as moral in
his life as ever any of the heathen, and as full of good duties as ever any
hypocrite was, and more too, yet if he have not life yet, he is but a tinckling
cymball; he has no grace at all. I mean no saving grace at all; saving grace
the Apostle calls it the grace of life, 1 Pet. 3. 7. It is the grace of life, it
breeds life in him that has it, it makes him alive toward God, it lets out
the life of his heart in every good word and work; it makes him pray with
life, hear with life, use the ordinances in public and private with life; the
natural life that is in the soul it turns it to God, it turns the man
about, as a ship is turned on the Sea; that sailed before toward North, now it
sails toward South. So when grace comes into the soul; ye know the man had
life before, but it sailed toward the world, and the things of the world, but
when grace does come in, it makes it row and sail and steer toward God; so
that when a Christian is dead, he is as no Christian at all.

Secondly, a dead Christian has not Christ dwelling in his 2.
heart by faith; he is no Christian indeed, that has not Jesus Christ dwelling
in him by a truly and a lively faith. It is the indwelling of Christ that makes
one a true Christian; now when Christ does dwell in any man, Christ is a
quickening spirit; as the Apostle speaks, the second Adam was made a
quickening spirit, 1 Cor. 15. 45. that is Christ; he is the second Adam; he is
a quickening spirit where ever he dwells; he quickens all the soul. He makes it
dead to that, which by nature it was alive to; and alive to that which by
nature it was dead to; he inclines the soul unto God* he infuses a principle
into it to shine with life toward God, he does more and more hale the strength
of the soul toward him; though he do not do it at all once, yet he does it
more and more; now when a man is still dead to God and all goodness, he has
not Christ dwelling in him by a lively faith; for if he were in once, though
the soul may complain still of deadness, as commonly those that are alive
complain most of deadness, yet it has a supernatural quickening, and it
shall have more and more.

Thirdly, a dead Christian was never yet soundly 3.
wrought upon by the word; the word of Christ is a word of life, and it
quickens where it do effectually work; and therefore though such a one have
heard a 1000 thousand Sermons, he never fed upon them in all his life; as
Christ says, If any man eat of this bread, he shall live for ever, Joh. 6. 51.
it is better then ordinary bread; ordinary bread indeed, if a man have a
natural life, it will feed it and preserve it. But if a man be dead, it will
not revive him. But the word of God is such a bread, that as it feeds a
spiritual life in them that have it, so it is able through the eternal
spirit, to quicken the dead; it is able through God, to put life into men, that
never had any; and it does so to all that are of God, sooner or latter; now
when a man is dead, it is a plain sign that the word has not yet wrought upon
that man; it may be it has shaken him many a time; yea, but if he be yet dead,
it never wrought upon him soundly; the oracles of God, are lively oracles, as
Steven calls them, Acts. 7. 38. they make their hearts lively that they come to
work soundly on; though they were never so dead to God and good things before,
yet now they wax lively, they make their hearts to receive a divine strength,
that now they wax able in some measure to live toward God, to hunger and
thirst after God, to delight in the seeking of him; be their lusts never so
mighty, now they can compose themselves to oppose them, and to swim against
the stream; now they can pray, and they cannot abide to have blockish hearts
in that nor in any other duty, they have a life that resists that same
deadness that dwells in them. So then this is another reason, that a dead
Christian is as good as no Christian at all, the word has never wrought
soundly on that Man.

The use of this is; first, if the dead Christians in Sardis Use 1.
be as good as nothing, what are the riff-raffe in the Town, that are not so
much as Christians in name? if a dead Christian be rejected of God, what is a
dead drunkard? a dead whormonger, a dead prophanling* if one that walks in
good courses be refused* because he is dead in them, then what shall become of
them that will not follow good courses at all? if such that are Saints to them,
cannot be saved, where shall they appear? it is said that Christ loved the
goodly fine carriaged young man, Mark. 10. 17. Christ is never said to love a
drunkard; a profane wretch; no, he regards one that carries himself in a sayre
civil honest way, more then all the world besides, except only his own
children; and therefore if he counts mere civil men stark naught, how much
more does he thee, that art a very beast compared with them? thou art so vile,
that we that are men do know thou art in a fearful estate; nay, the Lord
pronounes a woe upon them that dare speak well of thee; these sins are to be
punished by the Judges; if thou have lived in Israel, thou should have been
put to death; a drunken Son should have been stoned; an adulterer, a fornicator
should be burnt; a blasphemer should be brained to death. Thy sins are so
palpable, that pillaries, and stocks, and prisons, and gallows, should be thy
fare, if thou were well served. Thou art not only dead, for the manner of thy
life, but for the matter too; not only the Saints do abhor thee, but all
that have any civility in them, do loath thy filthy doings; and would not do
as thou do; no, no, for a world; as Solomon says such as thou art, are not
only dead but in the depth of hell, Pro. 9. 18. There be many though they be
not right, yet they are so much reformed that the Saints of God cannot say but
that they may be good Christians; But thou art so foul, that he that has but
one eye may see the devil leads thee; there be some that a man may be to blame
for judging them wicked, but he that judges thee other wise, hates his own
soul; poor creature, does thy foolish heart promise thee hopes to find mercy?
alas the devil does but lead thee in a string, he knows well enough, though
he will not let thee see it, there is no mercy for them that go on still in
their wickedness. Thou have not so much as a name that thou live, how dead
then art thou? Thou art dead and rotten, and stinkest not only in the nostrils
of God, but of all that have any common grace in them. Others may be in a
damned condition for all their profession, but to be sure thou art in a damned
condition, there is nothing between thee and hell, but only the poor thread of
thy life; How can thou keep out of hell, that can hardly keep out of the
Alehouse. O hear this ye that have not so much as any face of Religion. See
the word of the Lord, and think upon it for your good, if ye have any ear to
hear before it be too late.

Consider first, thou art far from the Kingdom of 1.
God; such as are sober and moral and frequenters of the ordinances of God,
and profess godliness, though they be not alive, yet they are not far from
the Kingdom of God; as Christ said of the discreet Scribe, Mark. 12. 34. But
thou art a hundred hundred degrees farther off; thou art so far off, that
thou have need to hasten quickly, thou have a 1000 degrees of reformation to
pass over, before thou can get so near as some of them that are short.

Secondly, thou art altogether become unprofitable, as the 2.
Apostle speaks, Romans 3. 12. thou art good for nothing, but to do mischief in
a parish, to infect, to spoil youth, to trouble thy wife, and thy poor
Children; to corupt thy servants and thy neighbors, to spill the good
creatures of God, to be a very slave to thy fleshly-lusts; others that are well
governed in their lives, though they be dead, yet they do a great deal of
good, they help the Saints, they are I say gotten to stand for good order; but
thou art a very burden to all well disposed people, the very shame of the
Town, the disgrace of the family where thou art; what will people say yonder is
a drunkard, yonder goes a fornicator a dissolute fellow, though he be a
gentleman, yet he is fit for none but rogues, and raseals, and tinkerly
companions, a man that has but a spark of honesty would be ashamed of him; a
Christian? no, he is a very beast, he cannot govern himself. But what do I
stand spending of time to speak against such ways which the Apostle says
should scarcely be named in Christians mouths? The very heathens shall judge
thee; the Lord open thine eyes, to see what a cursed creature thou art, that
thou may come out of the snare of the devil.

I have hindered my self from going on; I should show you, first, a reproof of
those that are Christians and yet dead.

Secondly, I should show you the danger of being a dead Christian.

Thirdly, what it is to be a lively Christian.

Fourthly, how we may know whether we be dead Christians or no.

Fifthly, how far forth a child of God may be dead.

Sixthly, what is the reason that so many are dead.

Seventhly, how we should all come to be lively.

Eighthly, what motives there be to induce us to labor for life in our
Christian course. But of these at another time.

REVEL. 3. 1. And art Dead.
THe last doctrine that we gathered out of these words was this, that a dead
Christian is as good as no Christian at all; though a man be orthodoxly
converted, baptized, reformed, though a man profess the true faith toward
God, repentance and amendment of life, and follow all manner of good and honest
courses for the matter of them, yet if he be dead to them, he is even as good
as nothing.

I told you what I meant by a dead Christian. I showed you this in five things.

First, deadness of guilt; when a man is guilty of any 1.
offense, that is death by the Law, he is said to be a dead man; so every man
has sinned against God which is death by Gods Law, and therefore every man is
dead by nature; when a man is pardoned of God, then he is alive again; and
therefore it is called Justification of life, Romans 5. 18. now when a man is not
pardoned of God he is dead; though he have never so many hopes and conceits of
forgiveness, yet as long as he is not forgiven indeed he is but a dead man.
Let a man have never so much Christianity about him, if he be not forgiven
indeed* he is a dead Christian.

Secondly* deadness of mind; when the understanding 2
of man is dead; my beloved ye must know it is not bare knowledge that quickens
the mind; a man may have the knowledge of all Christian divinity, and yet have
a dead understanding; it is said of Christ, and every true Christian, that he
is of a quick understanding in the fear of the Lord, Isa. 11. 3. then is the
understanding quick, when it is quick in the fear of God; when it feels the
weight of all divine truth; we may see this in worldly minded men, their
understandings are quick in the things of the world, if there be any booty to
be had, presently they feel it, you may lead them any way, so you do but let
them see profit and gain, there is weight in such reasons. But now show them
divine reasons, why they should believe the sacred writings of the holy
Prophets and Apostles, and yield obedience unto the form of wholesome words
delivered in the Gospel, though they understand well enough what we say, yet
they feel no weight in these reasons; whole Sermons do not stir them; their
understanding is here dead; so that this is a dead Christian, who though he
have never so much knowledge, yet his understanding is dead, he feels not the
weight of divine things; he has divine things in his speculative
understanding, and carnal in his practical; gracious truths in his fore
dictats, and carnal in his last; when he knows heavenly things, but minds
earthly; my meaning is this. O says his understanding, I should live thus and
thus, this is the rule, this is the will of God. But then his own corrupt will
suggests unto him for to do otherwise, and His understanding does not hinder.

Thirdly, deadness of heart, when the heart is not 3.
inclined toward God. The life of the heart, consists in the inclinations and
bents of the heart; as David says, Incline mine heart to thy Testimonies,
Psalm. 119. 36. what follows? quicken thou me in thy way, This is the quicking
of my heart to thy Testimonies, when it is inclined unto them; now though a man
go to good duties everyday, yet as long as the heart is not inclined unto
them, it is dead to them all; it goes about them in a dead manner; as a Boy
that is not inclined to his Book, though he do go to School, it is with a
dead heart. This then is another expression of a dead Christian; he is a man
though he be a professor of Holiness, yet his heart is not inclined toward
God, and all goodness; and therefore he goes on in good duties with a dead
heart.

Fourthly, deadness of conscience; when the conscience has no force; it may
be it finds fault with such and such ways, but it has no power over a man, to
make him to leave them; it approves such and such holy courses, yea, but it
has no power over him to make him to buckle to them indeed. O says the
conscience, I should not do thus; I should be more mindful of God, I should
not be so vain, I should not spend my time as I do, I should make another use
of Gods warning then I do; I should be better. But it has no force over the
man whose conscience it is; this is a dead conscience; there is no life in it at
all; when the conscience has life in it once, then it has power over a man;
as the Church says, my soul made me like the Chariots of Aminadab, Cant. 6,
12. that is, my conscience was very forcible and powerful in me; it made me
go after Jesus Christ, nay, it carried me freely like the Chariots of
Aminadab. But when the conscience can whisper and only find fault, and has
no power at all with it to make one obey from day to day, this is a dead
conscience.

Fifthly, deadness of affection, when the affections are 5.
clumbzie, and will not move toward God, and all supernatural things; when a
man's affections are lively enough in other things, and too lively; But he is
like a block in good duties, he has no affections to them nor in them. These
are affections out of order; mortify your inordinate affections says the
Apostle, Colos 3. 5. that is, your affections must not be out of order; if they
be alive to the things here below, ye must turn the life of them another way;
ye must kill them that way, and let the life of them run out toward God, and
his service and worship; now when the affections will not move this way at all,
then they are dead. Thus ye see what I mean by a dead Christian. Now that such
a one is as good as no Christian at all, is very plain; go through all
Christianity, and you shall find this to be true in every passage.

First, for conversion; conversion is not only the 1.
turning of a man from wicked ways unto good, but so as to be quickened up in
them. Conversion puts another life into a man; when we were dead in sins, he
has quickened us together with Christ, Ephesians. 2* 5. that is, conversion is the
quickening of a man, not only the turning of a man from not praying to
praying, from not hearing of the word to hearing of the word; from not sober to
be sober, from not chaste to be chaste, from not professing Christian religion
to be a professor of it, but also it is the quickening of a man up in it; it is
the putting of a new life into a man; and therefore to be converted merely
from the one to the other is just nothing; as long as a man is dead-hearted to
the same.

Secondly, for believing; should a man lean himself 2.
upon God, should a man apply all the promises of the Gospel to his soul, and
credit all that is contained in the Covenant of grace, alas what of all this? if
this man be dead still. True faith produces life; as Christ says, he that
lives and believes in me* Joh. 11. 26. True faith carries life with it,
wheresoever it is; and therefore if a man have such a faith as lets him be dead
still, it is as good as nothing; faith it may be, Put true faith it cannot be;
if thou would be able to say thou beleevest in Jesus Christ, thou must be
able to say that thou live in him too* it is impossible that a man should
rightly believe in Christ, and be dead.

Thirdly, for hoping in God; it may be thou have hope 3.
that thou art a good Christian, that thou have a part in the redemption of the
world by Jesus Christ, thou have a hope of the heavenly inheritance that thou
shall be saved in that day; now if thy hope be a dead hope, if it do not
quicken thee up, to beat down thy worldly lusts, to serve thee up toward God
more and more, to carry thee on through thick and thin, thy hope is not worth a
rush. True hope is lively; he has begotten us again to a lively hope 1 Pet. 1.
3. it is not a dead hope, that lies sluggishly and blockishly in him that has
it, not stirring him up every day, but it lies like a carcass in the heart to
little or no purpose; no, no, this is as good as no hope at all. True hope is a
lively hope; it revives a man up to the Kingdom of God, it bears a man aloft
in good duties, it fortisies a man against daily temptations.

Fourthly, for repenting; what ever thou have to say 4
for repenting, can thou plead never so many tears for thy sins, a
thousand changes and reformings, yet if thou have not gotten out of a dead
temper, thou art yet under an impenitent heart, true repentance is to life,
Act. 11. 18. True repentance rends the heart, it shows sin to be the greatest
evil, and so it rowzes a man daily up to take heed of it; it makes us see what
a God we have dishonored and therefore it awakes the soul to be earnest, to
please him in all things for the time to come. The soul heretofore was dead to
all holiness and pureness, and precisnesse, and humbleness, and
mortifiednesse of walking, it was dead to such things heretofore, but when true
repentance comes in, it turns about the life of the soul toward God, now the
cares shall be to him, now the endeavors make after him; pains, labors,
cau^elo^snesse, watchfulness, circumspection, consideration, all are active
now toward him; so that if a man be still dead, his repentance is false.

Fifthly, for praying; suppose we pray at Church and 5.
pray in our Families, and pray in our Closets, is this all? alas if we pray
with a dead heart, no pullings of our heart down before God, no wrastlings
with God for what we ask, no heaving of our souls up, no fastnings of our
minds on his presence, no favoring of Jesus Christ, no yearnings to the
throne of grace; this is as good as no praying at all; no; says David quicken
us O Lord, and we will call upon thy name, Psalm* 80. 18.

Sixthly, for hearing of the word. Though thou hear 6
it never so often and duly, yet that is not it; if thou hear it with a dead
heart, thy hearing is little better then no hearing; our Savior Christ says,
it is a great Judgment to be dull of hearing, Matthew. 13. 15. when the people
sit as if the word did not concern them, when they hear without any motion or
affection, the word hardly joggeth their hearts, the word does neither delight
them, nor warm them, nor pierce them, nor touch them, it heales none of their
sins, it cannot get between them and their lusts; when they have heard a
Sermon, they go away just as they came, it does not drag them one jot more out
of the world, nor an inch nearer heaven; the carriage is much at one as it was,
when they come home, it can hardly be perceived, that ever they were at the
word; as earthly as ever; as carnal as ever; as backward to all goodness as
ever. This is as good as no hearing at all.

Seventhly, for taking hold of opportunities to do 7
good. This is a duty too to be done with all life. How glad should we be if
there be any opportunity for us, to show our love unto God, or our hatred to
sin, we should be willing to ride or go, or be at charges, nay, we should be
willing to deny our selves, to lay down our names and goods, and friends, and
respects, and all that we have at Christ's foot, and bless God that gives us
such a price in our hands. But now to have a dead heart to this, what a
horrible thing is it? though we do take the opportunity, yet to go about it,
as though we were sorry that God has given it unto us; This is mere folly; as
Solomon says; wherefore is there a price in the hand of a fool to get
wisdom, seeing he has no heart to it? Prove. 17. 16.

But I will not repeat any more; you see now that a dead Christian is as good
as no Christian at all; I showed you the reasons of this point: but I will let
them pass. I come now to the uses.

And first this is for the reproof of the deadness that Use 1.
is now among us; the Lord may say to us, as he did unto Sardis, I know thy
works, thou have a name that thou live, and art dead; for notwithstanding
the great means of life, that the Lord has placed among us, O how does
deadness of heart reign; we are like them the Prophets speaks of, that drew
nigh to God with their mouth, and honored him with their lips, but their heart
was far from him; Matthew. 15. 8. they had no heart to his holy worship. So it is
with most of us; we draw nigh to God with our outward man, but our heart is
far from him; no heart to prayer, no heart to the word; we hear it
peradventure, but no heart to it at all; how ordinarily do we come to Gods
house, but heartlesnes has dominion over the most of us; the doctrine of the
Gospel does not quicken up our hearts, we deal with it as Phinehas his wife
did with her Son, when the women about her told her she had a Son, the text
says she did not regard it. So what little regard have we of the Gospel of
God! I stretched out my hands and no man would regard, Prove. 1. tell us of our
damned estate by nature, how cursed we are from the womb, what infinite need
we have to be sensible of it, we know it, but how dead is our knowledge of it?
it does not stir up our hearts to consider of it; neither does it prick us so
much as the pricking of a pin; tell us of the the redemption of the world by
Jesus Christ, his precious blood, his passion and merits, whose heart is
enlivened and quickened up by them? nay, our souls are hardly moved at all at
the hearing of them. Tell us of the Kingdom of heaven, the marriage Supper of
the lamb, his Oxen, and his fatlings; O they are all ready, come Sirs, come to
the marriage; we are even as they in the parable, they made light of it, Matthew.
22. 5. these things are made as if they were of no moment, as if they were
light matters, they find poor entertainment at our hands; what little irk
somnesse do we feel in sin, what little dejectedness of heart, what little
remorse of conscience nay, few know by experience, what humiliation means; we
can confess in our prayers, how vile we are, and how unworthy and how wretched
and sinful but as though these were words of course, our hearts are so dead,
that there is little or no relenting at it; we can say we are undone if God do
not hear us, our prayers are all nothing except they be with faith and life,
and yet who strives to awaken and rowze up himself? we can say, O how are we
beholding to God, for life, for health, for his daily good providence, for his
patience, his bounty? and we can say it is not the bare naming of his Blessings
before him that is counted thanksgiving without being affected with his
infinite goodness; and yet who does unseignedly labor to be affected with
them from day to day? no body of us dares deny but that we should set the Lord
always before us, tthat he may be at our right hand, and yet who has the
heart to provoke this hereunto? The devil may be of their right hand and not
God for all the pains that they take to have him there. So that dead-heartednes
is a common evil, now a days; as Christ says of the last times. Because
iniquity shall abound, The love of many shall wax Cold, Matthew, 24. 12. so it
is now; because iniquity abounds the most are profane, and dissolute, and
licentious and loose, therefore many that profession love to Jesus Christ,
their love does grow cold; and dead no life heardly at all, no sign that they
are alive from the dead; if they do believe after a manner, there is all, they
do not live in Jesus Christ; if they have any hope of mercy or heaven, that is
all they have, it is not a lively hope, that may quicken them up in Gods holy
ways, if they do see their sins, there is the utmost, it is a dead sight,
that does not excite them up unto strictness and preciseness of living, if
they do follow good and godly duties, alas there be few that do so, but if
they do go so far it is clean without heart and life; as though any thing
would serve Gods turn well enough; what a horrible thing is it when a dead
Christian is as good as no Christian all. No matter how many Christians we
have, alas none of us are true, but such as are alive from the dead.

Secondly, is it so that a dead Christian is even as good 2.
as no Christian at all; then learn hence my Brethren, what a dangerous thing
it is to be a dead hearted Christian.

First, all that we do with a dead heart, it is as good as 1.
nothing; as Paul says of love; had we all faith, and all knowledge; yet if we
have not love* we are nothing, 1 Cor. 13. 2. Whatsoever we do, if we do not
do it out of love, all is nothing; so I may say of life, whatsoever good duty
we do, if we do not do it with life; it is but a dead work; and therefore
it is no more then nothing; when the prophet David would do good duties, so as
to do them to good purpose indeed, you shall see how he labors against a dead
heart, Quicken me after thy loving kindness, so shall I keep the Testimony of
thy mouth, Psalm. 119. 88. so we may say too, Lord quicken me after thy loving
kindness, so shall I preach, so shall I hear, so shall I do thy holy will,
so shall I go up and down doing good; now as long as a man does it with a
dead heart, it is even all one as if a man had not done it at all; a dead man
is no man, as the Apostle says; God quickens the dead, and calls things that
are not; mark, dead things are no things; so dead works are no works, as
Solomon says. There is no work, and no devise, and no wisdom, and no purpose
in the grave whether thou go; that is, when men are dead, then they can do
nothing, so it is here; as long as we are dead, we can do nothing. True,
because we have the life of sense and of nature, and of a natural conscience
in us; we may counterfeit good works as a painter may make a man. True he
cannot make a living man; so as long as we are deadhearted, we do but paint
out good duties before God; all our Prayers are but painted prayers, all the
good works we do, are but paint; there is none of them to the life; as God
says of the Jews; you will say they did very many good works; they fasted
and prayed, and sacrificed, and many other things they did. But what says God?
they are vanity, their works are nothing, Isa. 41. 29. as a dead Corpse; there
be eyes, and nostrils and ears and mouth; But when the life is out, they are
as good as nothing; so it is with a dead heart; we may think we preach much,
and study much, and hear much, and profess much, and do much; the truth is,
we do nothing.

Secondly, all that we do with a dead heart, it does 2
not please God; God says, my Son give me thy heart, Prove. 23. 26. ye know the
heart, that is primum vivens that is the first living thing in us; now if we
give God never so many performances, yet if all our heart be not with them,
what cares he for them all, when they are a company of heartlesse things? when
the Apostle had said, that to be fleshly minded is death, by and by he
concludes; so then says he, they that are in the flesh, cannot please God.
Romans 8. 8. would that please any of us, that one should come and rake up a dead
stinking carcass, and lay it before us? no more can it please God, to lay a
dead duty before his heavenly Majesty; ye know a dead carrion it is loathsome,
as long as life remains in it, that is a sweet thing, and it preserves it from
stinking; and therefore the heathens called the soul the salt of every living
thing; because the life is a preserving thing it preserves a thing sweet; but
when the life is gone out, presently it becomes odious; so is all that we do,
when we do it with a dead heart, it is odious with God, it cannot be accepted
of him; as the Apostle Peter speaks; Ye also as lively stones are built up a
spiritual house a holy Priesthood, to offer up spiritual Sacrifices,
acceptable to God by Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 2. 5. that is; the Apostle had
compared true Christians unto stones, now he corrects himself, did I call
true Christians stones? I pray do not mistake me, I do not mean for
deadness, but for firmness; a stone is a dead livelesse thing. O says he,
ye must be stones I, but ye must take heed of deadness, ye must be lively,
otherwise ye cannot offer acceptable sacrifices unto God; this is even as if a
Jew should have taken a dead sheep out of a dich, and laid it on Gods Altar.
This is abomination to God; even so are dead doings to Almighty God; as Vinagar
to the teeth, and smoke to the eyes. so is a sluggard to him that sends him,
Prove. 10. 26. that is, when a Master sends a servant on his errand, if he go
dully about it, even as if he had no life nor heart in him at all, to do his
Masters business; this will not please him, nay, it will offend him, as smoke
does the eyes; or as Vinegar does the teeth. it will make him look with a
sour look upon such a servant, so beloved when God bids us serve him, in all
our ways may be we are not so gross, as not to go about it at all. But we
go about it with a dull and a dead heart, this does not please God one whit,
nay, he takes it ill that we should think he will accept it at our hands; as
when the Jews had no heart to Gods holy and pure worship, it was too chargeable
to them, it put them to too much charges; what a whole sheep, and a whole lamb
every morning, besides many whole ones at other times, whole Bullocks, whole
Oxen, and whole Goats, this was even as death to them, they went up to Gods
Temple with a dead heart, nay, they thought much to give him of the best, they
gave him the torn and the maimed, now mark what he says; should I accept this
at your hand, says the Lord, Malac. 1. 13. He took it ill, they should think
he would accept it, so when we think much to be so precise and so strict, to
pray so much, to hear so much, to mind him so much, and to deny our selves so
much, to watch so much over our hearts, to humble our selves so much, what? may
we not keep one lust? may we have no more liberty then so? may be we do some
thing this way, but God knows how with a dead heart it is, the Lord takes it
ill, that we should hope he will accept this at our hands.

Thirdly, all that we do with a dead heart, it cannot 3.
yield us any comfort true if we were quickened up toward God, if we served
God with all our heart and soul and life, this would comfort us indeed; to
seek him daily in a lively manner, to go into his presence with all our
mind; if we went eagerly a days to the throne of grace, if we were earnest in
prayer, earnest against sin, earnest for all goodness, this were a sign of
his favor, and a Testimony of the true grace of life this would comfort our
hearts exceedingly; this would breed peace in our conscience as the Apostle
speaks. To be spiritually minded is life and Peace, Romans 8. 6. there is life,
and therefore there is peace. The reason is thus; because lively works alone
can truly pacify conscience; when a man has been a professor all his
days, and done never so many things; yet if the conscience can say, yea, but
all these are dead works, all this while I have gone on with a dead-heart,
this fowls the conscience; it can never have true peace. How much more shall
the blood of Christ purge your conscience from dead works, to serve the living
God, Heb. 9. 14. it shall purge the conscience from dead works; dead works
foul the conscience; whether they be dead for matter or manner; sin is a
dead work for matter, and good duties heartlessely done are dead works for
manner; now both foul the conscience; the conscience remains under guilt;
continues without peace; it is an ill conscience; why? because the conscience
knows it has the living God to serve that will not like of such works; when
a man pays in his rents only by halves, or by dribblets or with light money,
the Kings receiver will not give him an acquittance; my brethren, conscience is
Gods receiver, no wonder it does not give you an acquittance, when ye pay in
only wash duties, clipped obedience; if ye served God with life, conscience
would give you an acquittance; when ye have prayed, it would give you an
acquittance; when ye have done a days work in his harvest, it would
acknowledge the receipt of it, well done good and faithful servant; it is well
done in some measure. This made Paul full of life every day. Herein do I
exercise my self to have always a conscience void of offense toward God, and
toward men, Act. 24. 16. that is, I do not only go on in good duties both
toward God and toward men, but this I do always, I do even exercise my
self, that I may have an acquittance from mine own conscience when I have
done; that my conscience may give me a true discharge; well done, I have done
well in some measure; now as long as we are dead-hearted and hollow in Gods
ways, our conscience can never give us a discharge, no marvel, that so few of
us have Peace of conscience, when we are so dead-hearted as we are; if we would
stir up our selves to serve God with all heart and life, we should have
Peace; but till this will be once, we can never look to have Peace and comfort.

Fourthly, Though we have comfort in time of prosperity, 4
yet we cannot have comfort in affliction, if we be of a dead heart; how many
are there that seem to have comfort while they are well, but when they come to
be sick, and at deaths door, then they are all to pieces? then they see they
have no grace, no faith, no good cards to show; then they are stripped stark
naked, then their conscience sees what they are; O, I am a wretch; how have I
deceived my self; so beloved, though we have comfort in time of prosperity, yet
if we be deadhearted, we can have no comfort in affliction. As David says,
this is my comfort in affliction, thy word has quickened me, Psalm. 119. 50.
when the word of God has quickened our hearts, and made us lively in all
manner of goodness, this will yield us comfort in affliction. But if we be
dead to all spiritual ways, though we scramble up hopes now, they will not
hold when affliction comes; now what a fearful thing is it we shall all come
to affliction ere long; for man is borne to trouble as the sparks that fly
upward, as Job speaks; nay we know not how soon; man knows not his time as
Solomon speaks; but as the Fishes are caught in an evil Net, so are the
Sons of men snared in an evil time, when it falls suddenly on them. And
God only knows what sore afflictions we may have; the Cup of affliction is in
Gods hand, and he tempers it and powers it out as his pleasure is. I say what a
fearful thing is it not to have comfort then; then we have most need of
comfort, and if we have not comfort then, we are utterly undone; now my
brethren it is not a dead dull profession will yield us comfort then? Let us
think of this; as God says, What will ye do in your day of visitation? to
Whom will ye fly for help then? Isa. 10. 3. so may I say, though ye can be
quiet and comfortable enough now, in the days of health and peace, your
deadness does not trouble you now; but what will ye do in the days of
visitation? do but consider what a sorry comfort ye shall have then; assuredly
a dead heart will assord not a syllable of true comfort then.

Fifthly, we can never bless God with a dead heart; a 3.
dead heart is not able to affirm upon any good ground that God is his, or
that the promise is his; or that Christ is his; the soul knows Christ is a
quickening spirit, and they that have him, are quickened up by him, the promise
is a promise of life, and they cannot be dead that are the possessors of it, we
cannot bless God either for love or mercy or grace, or any thing else, when we
would bless God for any of these things, the deadness of heart, it will be
objected to us, O I am so dead, that how can I hope that these things belong
unto me? Let my soul live, and it shall praise thee, Psalm. 119. 175. when the
soul is alive toward God, then it can praise God; then it knows all the good
it has, it has it in mercy; doubting and deadness do ever go together, or
it is a great marvel. And indeed what is deadness of heart toward Christ, and
all his holy Gospel, but a secret doubting whether it have any part in it or
no; as when a poor man sees a rich treasure, it does but dead him the more,
because he sees no interest he has in it; if he could see he had an interest
in it, this would quicken up his heart, and put it out of it is dumps. And is
not this now a miserable condition when a man cannot praise God? if he pray, it
is but in a sorry manner, no life, no heart at all. But for blessing and
praising of God, that he cannot do at all, except he be in a fools paradise;
and dream of a false gift. This is a dreadful condition, when we are hindered
from that which God most delights in; what is there that more delights God,
then to bless him and praise him? The Lord says we never honor him
otherwise, who so offers me praise, he glorifieth me, Psalm. 50. 23. now we
can never offer God praise, except our heart live

Sixthly, Religion is a very irksome thing unto us, as 6
long as we are dead-hearted; what is it that takes away the grievousnesse of
it, but a lively heart? when the heart is dead, it must needs be very tedious;
very tedious to be thinking of God, to be meditating of death or the world to
come; to be employed in prayer, to be constant in the humbling of the soul, or
the abstaining from our natural inclinations, to be discoursing of repentance,
or studying of Gods heavenly Kingdom; to be employed in the word, or to go
through dirty and frozen ways to it, to go and repeat it in our Families or
to urge it upon our hearts, O what weary tedious duties are these, when the
heart is a dead heart! This is the reason why the world lets them all generally
alone, and never troubles their hearts with them at all, because they have no
life in them; and many that are better minded, fend them very tedious, because
they are dead-hearted; as Solomon says, correction is grievous to him that
forsakes the way, Prove. 15. 10. now as long as we are out of the way of life,
while we are dead-hearted, we forsake the right way, and therefore correction
is grievous unto us, nay, all the commandments of God are grievous unto us;
does a dead heart rejoice to go to Prayer? nay, generally he is loath to go to
it; is he glad that the Sermon Bell rings; is he glad at an opportunity to do
good? nay, does he not shrink, and winch, and draw back? we see thus in the
Jews, how irksome the Sabbath was to them, when they were held from buying and
selling; O that the Sabbath were over, Am. 8. 5. it may be men do not find
the Sabbath so tedious now, because they help themselves by talking of the
world, by taking liberty that way; but if they were held to it, as they ought
to be, would they not wish it to be over, The like we may see in the young man,
what an irksome thing was it to him, to hear that he must fell away all? the
Text says, he was sad at that saying, Mark. 10. 22. now is not this too a very
hideous thing to be dead-hearted, when it makes all the ways of God tedious?
nothing should be more delightful unto us then they; they are perfect
freedom; there is great reward in them, they are the best ways in the world;
all his ways are ways of pleasantness, and all his paths are peace; and if
we were quickened in our hearts, we would say so too; as the Apostle speaks;
when he had said, that none of Gods Commandments are grievous; 1 John 5. 3. in
the next words he gives a reason of it; O says he, He that is borne of God
overcomes the world; that is, he that has the life in him that comes from
above, he has gotten above the world, he has past all the irksomeness of
them. The irksomenesse of any commandment, does not lie in the commandment,
that is sweet and pleasant, but it lies in the deadness of the heart; a dead
heart will ever count them grievous.

Seventhly, as religion is an irksome thing to a dead 7
heart, so a dead heart, if it should take it up, it will in the end be weary
of it; as we see in the example of Israel when they grew to be dead-hearted
toward God, at last they were weary of his worship, they went and devised
othergets worships, an easier kind of religion, they were weary of his. Thou
have been weary of me, O Israel, Isa. 43. 22. we see this in Judah too. Behold
what a weariness is it? Mal. 1. 13. this is too plain and palpable; how are
we grown weary of God, and of his pure service? we have had the Gospel so
long, till we are even weary of it; weary of sanctity, weary of spiritual
truth; whence are all innovations but because people are weary of the old way?
many that have been very forward in preaching, and in hearing, and very zealous
of good courses, they begin to abate, to side with the times, to remit of their
former strictness; whence is all this? whence is it that we see so many
apostates, that once loved good people, now do not; once were very zealous
against disorders, now are not; once were against humane devises, now are not;
now they can brook any thing well enough; they are weary of their first pitch,
they were wound up too high, now they let themselves down again; all this is
because men have no life in them; they are dead to what they did profess; you
shall see many a man smitten at the word, and there he is knocked down, and
sees what wretched courses he has taken that will lead him to hell; well, he
goes and reformes and grows very precise, and now there shall not be a Sermon
but he will hear it. There shall not be any good Christian duty, but he will
take it up, he will leave his old acquaintance, he will join himself to good
people, he will have very good orders in his Family; all this is well; if it
would hold; I but if this man do not go on to get the grace of life, in the
end he will be weary; a dead heart be it never so forward, it will end in
weariness. It is merely for want of quickening, that any man grows weary of
well-doing; as the Apostle says; Be not weary of well-doing, for in due time,
ye shall reap, if ye faint not, Gal. 6. 9. take heed ye do not let quickening
go; if ye let your quickening go, directly you will grow weary; if ye suffer
your selves to faint, if ye do not get aqua-vitae, to cure your fainting sits;
you will be weary of well-doing; now beloved what a pitiful thing is this, that
we should be weary of welldoing? if any of us have begun to do well, O how
should we labor, that we may never grow weary; how ever things go, though
persecution arise, what ever dealings we meet with at the hands of the wicked
world, yet never to give in; what ever flesh and blood say, what ever
discouragements we meet with, from without or from within, we should earnestly
labor, that we may never be weary of well-doing; never weary of preaching to
their conscience, never weary of attending on the word, or of preaching of our
hearts, or of resisting of sin, or of redeeming our time, or of keeping our
garments, never weary of washing our hands in innocence, and keeping of our
selves, that the wicked one touch us not; and therefore what a dangerous thing
is it to be deadhearted? for that is the high way, to be weary of welldoing at
the last. This then is the second use, that we are to make of this point; to
see what a dangerous thing it is to be a dead Christian.

REVEL. 3. 1. And art Dead.
I Come now to the fourth thing, and that is this; what it is to be aliving
Christian. First, I will describe it by the efficient cause. Secondly, by the
Isntrumental cause. Thirdly, by the parts of it.

For the first, the efficient cause that makes one a liveing 1.
Christian, is God; as the Psalmist says, he is the fountain of life, Psalm.
36. 9. He is the fountain of al life; it is he that makes one a living man. He
gives life and breath to all, Act. 17. 25. if he should take away our natural
life, we dye and turn again unto our earth; as long as he breaths on us we
live; as Elihu speaks, the breath of the Almighty gives me life, Job. 33. 4.
yea all the world would be a dead Chaos, if he did not quicken it; there is a
kind of life in every thing that has being. But it would be a dead Mass, if
he did not concur with it; what is money, and meat, and clothes, and friends,
and life, and health it self? men think they are well to live when they have
them all. True, if he bless them and quicken them unto us; but if he be
wanting to them, they are dead things, and can do us no good; nay, the word of
life it self, it is but a dead letter without him, all the ordinances of God,
we see they Minister life to some, because God puts life into them, but if he
do not put life into them, they are sappelesse and cadaverous things; so that
God is the author, even of our natural life; as John says, in him is life,
and his life is the life of men, Joh. 1. 4. in him we live, and move and have
our being; and therefore it is a great sin not to be thankful to him for our
natural life; David blesses God for his natural life very often; life is a
very great blessing, a poor thing that has life, a living dog, is better then
a dead Lion. A man will give skin for skin, and all that he has for his
life: I am sure many of us may be very glad of life, for if it were gone now,
we should be in hell; and therefore we had need to make much of our natural
life, yea, every hour of it, least we dye before we be converted, and brought
home to God.

But this is not the life that we do speak of; we speak of spiritual life,
and God is the author of that more especially; when a man is alive toward God,
he is the only cause of it. He spiritually moves our hearts by the holy
Ghost, and begets us again after a strange, and an inessable manner; by
joining his spirit to our spirits, his mind to our minds, and his will to our
wills, he revives all the powers of the soul with his presence; and therefore
this life is called the life of God; which the world are strangers to and
aliens from; being alienated from the life of God; Ephesians. 4. 18. so likewise it
is called the life of Jesus. 2 Cor. 4. 11. He only is the author of it. Thus
ye see the efficient cause of it.

Secondly, the Isntrumental cause of this life, is true 2.
faith; this is the ligament that couples this life and a man together; that
now he is said to be a living man; ye know God is the only living God; they
that are not united unto him, remain in the congregation of the dead; now
faith unites a man unto him; faith is the having of him; He that has the Son
has life, and he that has not the Son has not life, 1 John 5. 12. when a
man cleaves unto God, by a true and lively faith, this man has life; as Moses
says, That thou may love the Lord thy God, and that thou may obey his
voice, and that thou may cleave unto him, for he is thy life, Deuteronomy. 30. 20.
Though a man has not that strong faith that some have, whereby he has a
clear evidence of Gods love and favor in Jesus Christ, though a man have not
this faith, yet if he have a faith of adherence, and cleaving unto God, this
man is a living Christian; this man is joined unto the true life; This is the
true God, and even life, and therefore whosoever cleaves to him, has life; if
he will not away from him, he will still seek him, still pray unto him, still
make him his refuge, though he have no feelings, that is not it; if a man will
never give over seeking of God; He believes God is the fountain of all life
and peace, and grace and comfort, and Gods way, is the only way; he believes
himself is a cursed wretch in himself, and that all hope is in Christ, now if
this man have such a faith whereby he adheres, though with never so much
weakness, this man is a live. This is the faith whereby a Christian lives; as
Paul says, the life that I live, I live by the faith of the Son of God, Gal.
2. 20. Thus ye see the Isntrumental cause of it.

Thirdly, now for the parts of it. The parts of it are 3.
three.

The first part is the life of Justification; ye know every 1.
man by nature is a dead man; as a malefactor that has committed an offense
that is death by man's Law, we say he is a dead man; so we have all offended God
from the womb which is death by Gods Law; and therefore we are dead men; now
when God has justified a man freely by his grace, when God has given him a
pardon in Christ Jesus; now he is a live man; and therefore Justification as ye
heard, is called Justification of life, Romans 5. 18. now beloved this life is
not in the man that does live, but in Christ that he lives by; this life
supposes no life in this party; no, it looks upon him as a dead man in
himself. But God counts him alive in Jesus Christ; as the Apostles says,
Christ is our life; Col. 3. 4. q d this life is not in us, but in Christ; so
that this life denominats aman alive; as Christ denominated the demosel alive,
that was yet dead. The Damsel is not dead, says he Matthew. 9. 24. ye know the
Damsel was dead at that time, when Christ said so; and yet he said she was
not dead, because he had life for her; she had life in him; now when he raised
her up, then she had life in her too.

And so I come to the second part of this life; and that 2.
is the life of Sanctification, and this life is in him that does live; for
though he were dead before to all goodness and holiness, and alive unto
sin, yet now he is made dead unto sin, and alive unto God; as the Apostle
speaks, likewise also reckon ye your selves to be dead indeed unto sin, but
alive unto God, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Romans 6. 11. this life is called
the life of grace, and new obedience, when a man is quickened up to all the
ways of God; you has he quickened, who were dead in trespasses and sins, Ephesians.
2. 1. and this is the quickening that I would feign open to you.

The third part of this life, is the life of joy and comfort; 3.
ye know when a man's eyes are opened to see his sins, and his damned estate,
by reason of them, the Law comes and that kills him, his very heart dies in
him; now when God propounds to him a Savior, and causes him to believe in him,
this revives his heart again; this yields him some joy and comfort so that
true joy is a life too; we may see this in the Children of God, let their joys
and comforts be all gone, this makes them all amort, this makes them very heavy
and sad, as if they had no life at all in them; as the Church says; Will thou
not revive us again? that thy people may rejoice in thee, Psalm. 85. 6.

Now my brethren, all this is only by way of preface; to come then to the
question, what is it to be a quickened Christian? a Christian that has not
only a name to live, but is dead? dead toward God? dead to all good duties?
no: But is quickened up to them. I answer, that as death is taken in a
metaphorical sense, when we say such a one is dead to God, dead to the holy
ordinances of God, we do not mean properly dead, as if he were naturally
dead, and had no soul in his body; but we take it in metaphorical sense; so
is life here to be taken too; namely for the activenesse of a thing; when a
thing is not active, we use to say it is dead; as Sarahs womb is said to be
dead; he considered not the deadness of Sarahs womb, Romans 4. 19. that is, her
womb had no activity to conceive; now when a womb is active this way, then we
say it is quick; so a coal that has sire in it, is said to be a live coal:
There flew one of the Seraphins, having a live coal in his hand, Isa. 6. 6. we
call it alive coal, because it is active; it is able to burn; whereas if that
fire were out, then it were not able to burn, and therefore then we call it a
dead coal; so when a man is active toward God, Take him in prayer, there he
can act now; take him in self denial, in reconciling of himself, in humbling
of the heart, in mourning for sin, in hungering after righteousness, even as
a man does after his appointed food, take him in any of the things of God,
though he were like a dead coal before, yet here he can act now; now he can
move this way; when one is like a block in good duties, that man is dead; we
call moving things living things; Every moving thing that lives, Genesis 9. 3.
when a thing cannot stir, that we call dead; when a man is not stirring in
heavenly things, he is stirring enough in earthly, but he cannot stir in
heavenly things; that man is a dead Christian, though he profess never so
much, yet if he be not stirring toward God from day to day, he is dead; I
think it meet to stir you up, says Saint Peter, 2 Pet. 1. 13. that is, I
think it meet to quicken you up. Now beloved, this being so, if ye would know
what it is to be alive toward God, let us but find out a little, what is the
life of a man.

First, what is the life of a man's understanding; people 1.
think that bare knowledge is, and approving of Gods ways, and thinking of
them now and then; they think this is the life of their understandings. But
you shall see these are not it; therefore we will search out what is the life
of the understanding.

Secondly, what is the life of the will or of the heart; 2.
people are apt to think that wishings and wouldings, and velleities, if they
have some volitions toward God and all holy courses, they think their wills
are alive; no; these are not it; therefore we will search too, wherein the life
of the will does consist.

Thirdly, what is the life of the conscience; people 3.
generally do conceive that if their consciences do check them for their
sins, and smite them for evil, and excuse them in other things that are
good, then their conscience is alive; now we desire to enquire, what is the
life of the conscience indeed.

Fourthly, what is the life of the affections; I gave 4.
you a touch of these when I showed you what it is to be dead; now let me
speak of them more fully, to show you what it is to be alive.

For the first, what is the life of the understanding; ye know there be many
things in the understanding; knowing, approving, studying; determining; now the
world thinks that when the understanding is so far wrought upon, as to know
Christian religion, to approve it to study it to determine aright upon things;
evil things to be evil, good things to be good; duties to be duties, sins to
be sins: now they suppose their understandings are alive. But the truth is,
none of all these are the life of your understandings. The understanding has
another life besides these. The understanding may have all these, and be dead.

As first, for knowledge, I need not stand to prove that; the dead Heathens,
the Apostle says they knew God; when they knew God, they glorified him not as
God, Rom 1. 21. knowledge is not enough; as cur Savior Christ speaks; is ye
knew these things, blessed are ye if ye do them, Joh. 13. 17. nay, literal
knowledge does not so much as give them understanding, true light, much less
life; a great learned divine that is wicked, his understanding is still in
darkness; nay, it may leave him more dead, then those that are groslely
Ignorant; as the Prophet says of them that had knowledge; I will get me to the
great men, for they have known the way of the Lord, but these have altogether
broken the Yoke, Jer. 5. 5. they were more dead, their hearts were more averse
from all goodness. Bare knowledge is a poor thing, and yet people are apt to
glory in it, the Apostle makes a pish at it; we know we have all knowledge, 1
Cor. 8. 1. q. d. is that such a piece of matter? never tell me of your
knowledge; I know ye all have knowledge; but that is a poor thing; nay, the
greater is thy woe, if thou have not a quickened mind; as Solomon says, he
that increases knowledge, increases sorrow, Eccl. 1. 18. thou increasest
thine own self condemning, the more thou have, the greater knowledge in thy
Bosom, thou know, the more thou feast to condemn thee; thy knowledge is
like a sword in thy bowels, that daily galls thee, and wounds thee; and
therefore little reason to think that knowledge is the life of the mind, it
is not so much as the light of the mind; take heed says our Savior, that the
light that is in thee be not darkness, Luke 11. 35. that is, thou may have a
great deal of light, and yet be in darkness; nay, in worse darkness, then
Ignorant blind people that have no light at all; if the light that is in thee
be darkness, how great is that darkness, Matthew. 6. 23. such people are more
senseless at the word, harder to be wrought on, they have the more
distinctions to deceive their own souls, they think to well of themselves;
they are too wise to be fools, that they may be wise, they are farther of from
confession; if they had less knowledge, it may be there might be more hope to
do them good. But having so much knowledge in a carnal mind, it is made a
strong hold against grace; it is with such people as it was with Babylon; thy
wisdom, and thy knowledge has perverted thee, Isa. 47. 10. true knowledge is
a good thing; but when a man is fleshed with it, that he takes himself to be
some body, this marres all; but I will speak no more of this.

Secondly, for approving of the truth; that cannot 2
be the life of the mind neither; when a man approves goodness, and good
people, this indeed is an excellent mercy of God to make a man approve
goodness, and good men, O how are such bound to be thankful! few go so
far. But alas if thou go no farther, thy mind is not yet quickened up to
God; as the Apostle shows, that a man dead in his sins still, may yet
approve the best things. Thou know his will, and approvest the things that
are most excellent, Romans 2. 18. Herod approved John the Baptist, and his
preaching. Achish King of Gath approved David and all his ways; nay, the
devil approved Christ. I know thee who thou art, the Holy one of God; Mark. 1.
24. Suppose thou approvest all the ways of Christ, O what good ways they be,
thou likest his promises, thou countest his Ordinances admirable good and
lovely, O consider what the Apostle says, happy is the man that condemns not
himself in that he allows, Romans 14. 22. so may I say to thee, do thou
allow of all strictness and pureness and precise people? O say thou the
preciser the better! this is well; now thou art a happy man, if thou do not
condemn thy self in that which thou allowest; thou allowest of the strictest
Servants of God, but if thou condemnest thy self now; and thy conscience can
tell thee, I but I do not set my self to be as they are. I can lose my self;
poor creature, thy allowings and approvings will rise up in Judgment against
thee; so that this is a poor thing too; approving of goodness may be in a
persecutor; Saint Paul tells us that the Jews did allow of his Religion; and
yet they would not leave persecuting of him, Act. 24. 15. nay, Christ's
persecutors they allowed of all goodness, they professed so much at least; for
a good work we stone thee not; therefore approbation cannot be the life of the
mind neither.

Thirdly, thinking of God and of the word, that is not 3.
the life of the mind; and yet many men hang upon this too; that they think
of God, and of his ways, and of their latter end. True some are so graceless,
that they come not thus far; God is hardly in all their thoughts, Psalm. 10.
4. But though a man do think of God, and of heaven, and of Gods Laws, indeed
it is a great mercy of God; thus far it might do a man a world of good, and it
did David; this made him return into the way wheresoever he went. I thought
upon my ways, and turned my feet unto thy Testimonies, Psalm. 119. 59. yet if
this be all, this is no argument of life. The wicked Jews, Christ confesses
they thought upon God and upon the Scriptures, nay, more they thought to have
eternal life in them; Search the Scriptures, for in them ye think ye have
eternal life, Joh. 5. 39. This is so far from being an Act of life, as that
if a man live in sin for all that, it aggravates a man's sins. The drunkard
when he goes to the Alehouse, it may be he thinks of the word of God, that
says a drunkard shall not inherit Gods Kingdom, and yet he will go though; a
liar when he lies, it may be he thinks at the same time, of the word of God,
that says the devil is a liar, and liars shall lie in the lake that burns
with fire and brimstone.

Fourthly, studying is no^ the life of the mind; this is 4
that which bewitches many Ministers; they study all the day of God and his
Kingdom and of eternal life; they are all the day studying of Jesus Christ,
and of faith and repentance, perhaps they think this is heavenly mindedness.
O they love a life to study Divinity; as the Jews said, we delight to know thy
ways, Isa. 58. 2. I grant studying is an intense act of the mind, but that it
is a lively act of the mind, that I deny; that is not always so; nay,
studying may be in the highest degree in a mind that is dead to what it
studies, though never so eager to it, as it is scibile of divine things: for
what is studying? studying is nothing else but the boulting out of the logique
in the Scripture; now if a man rest there, he is never the nearer, if it do
not recoyle on his own mind, when he studies of grace, if he do not seek how
to get it; when he studies the fall of Adam, and original sin, if he do not
get it mortified in himself, all this is nothing; we see the poor simple
Ignorant people ran after Jesus Christ; who were the great students of
Divinity, were so far from doing so, that they sat and derided them for their
labor, yea, and called them silly simplicians, as though it had been a giddy
humor in them; therefore studying cannot be it neither.

Well then it remains to show you what is the life of the mind that if the
mind do give that unto God, it is alive toward God, I answer. All these are
the dull acts of the mind, they may be in the mind concerning God and all his
ways, yea, in a very high degree, and yet the mind dead toward the same. The
Apostle tells the Jews in his second Epistle and the first Chapter, that they
knew all these things before; I says he in the third Chapter and the first
verse, I would stir up your minds, that is, I would quicken up your minds;
as we use to say, when a man looks about him; when a man gives his mind to a
thing, this is the stirrings of the mind, now the mind is quickened up.

Now there be six stirring acts in the minds of men; now look which way they
stand, it is most plain the mind is alive, whether to God, or to the things of
the world.

The first, is the application of the mind. 1.


The second, is the meditating of the mind. 2.


The third, is the considering of the mind 3.


The fourth, is the remembering of the mind. 4


The fifth, is the devising of the mind. 5.


The sixth, is the Judging of the mind. These are all 6.
the stirring and lively acts of the mind, and the mind does not let out
these acts any way, but that way, that a man is alive to, whether it be to the
world or the creature.

First, I say the application of the mind; the mind 1.
has this nature in it, though it know a thing never so much, or approve it,
or think of it, or study it, yet except it do incorporate with the thing, it
does not come to apply it; if it incorporate with the mind, then it will apply
it; as we see in a worldling, whatsoever good husbandry he knows, if he know
any way of getting of gain, he applies it, and takes it to himself; why his
mind is alive to the Profits of the world, he can relish savor in them; so
when the mind begins to be applying of divine things, now it is alive unto
God; as Eliphaz said to Job. Hear it and know it for thy good; Job. 5. 27.
that is, do not only know it, but be quickened up to apply it to thy self
for thine own good; as the Prophet says; hearken diligently, and eat ye that
which is good, Isa. 55. 2. that is, I would have your minds not only to
attend, but let them be quickened up to apply, and feed upon what ye know; let
it be your food; a quickened mind is like the Disciples of Jesus Christ; when
Christ said, one of you shall betray me; they were all very sorry, and they
began every one of them to say, Lord is it I? Matthew. 26. 21. they all did apply
it, you see how his speech stirred their minds, they fell presently to apply;
so when a man cannot hear any sin ripped up; but presently he cries out,
Lord it is I: Is it I that am guilty of this sin? O if it be I, let me see it
that I may leave it; if he hear of any threatening; he says Lord is it I? O
teach me, that I may be humbled; when he hears of any grace; Lord is it I,
that have this grace? O if it be not I, O let it be I; a quickened mind, is an
applying mind; now if the mind be yet dead, it cares not for applying, though
it know never so much, yet it lets the word still be a stranger unto it, it
does not take it home to it self; like the hearers there in Hosea; as God
says, I writ to them the great things of my Law, but they were counted as a
strange thing, Hos. 8. 12. they would not take them home, now a quickened mind
takes them home; this reproof is to me, this Commandment is to me; this
reproof is to me; nay, when a reproof to ones thinking of all other should
seem least to concern him; as when our Savior Christ spoke against rich men;
O how hardly shall a rich man enter into the Kingdom of God! yet the Apostles
took it to themselves; they were amazed says the Text, Matthew. 19. 25. one
would have thought the doctrine should little concern them; alas, they were
not so rich, but they applied it though, fearing least that little that they
had should draw their hearts away from God; this then is the first.

Secondly, the meditating of the mind; this is another 2
stirring act of the mind; a natural man may think of his eternal good now
and then, but this is nothing, his mind is dead for all that. But when a man's
mind runs on such things, now it is alive; look what your minds do run on,
that your minds are alive to; Because it is most certane, that that is it
which you respect most; as David says; I will meditate on thy precepts, and
have respect unto thy ways, Psalm. 119. 15. A dead mind may light on good
thoughts, but when a man meditates of them, when his mind runs upon such
themes; this man's mind is alive to them, he gives his mind to them; as Paul
says to Timothy; meditate on these things, give thy self wholly to them, that
thy profitting may appear, 1 Timothy 4. 15. you may see this in ungodly men, they
do not only think of the world, for so a godly man may do and must do, but
their minds run on the world; they give their minds to it; it is the
Apostles saying; they mind earthly things, Phil. 4. 19. it may be they know
gracious things, I but they mind earthly; they cannot find in their heart to
give their minds to Gods word and will, so that would you prove your selves
and your minds to be alive toward God? labor that your minds may bend their
meditations that way; let your minds run on him, and how ye may have his
favor, and how ye may keep it, how ye take heed of offending of him; a man is
yet dead, that does not give his mind to these things; whose mind does not
run on them daily. And therefore beloved as ever ye do desire to have a
proof of your life toward God, let your minds run on these things, give
diligent, heed that they may not slip out of your minds; as the Apostle says,
ye ought to give so much the more diligent heed to the things which ye have
heard, least at any time ye let them slip. Heb. 2. 1. if they do slip away ye
know not how, as the flesh will let them go, if ye do not take heed, call for
them again as God. says Bring it again to mind, O ye transgressors, Isa.
46. 8.

Thirdly, the considering of the mind; when the 3.
mind looks cursorily on things, what is this but the remissness and
looseness of the mind? now when the mind comes to consider seriously of
them, now it quickens up it self* now it looks wishly and intentively on them
indeed; alas all our knowledge of the truth, all our approving of good courses,
all is nothing without consideration; our knowledge and approbation are dead
things without this; even as good, as if we had no knowledge at all, for all
the good it will do us, if we do not consider; as God says; Israel does not
know, my people do not consider, Isa. 1. 3. look what our minds do consider
from day to day, that our minds are lively on; consideration is the eagerness
of the mind, when the mind cares not for an object, it will not trouble it
self to consider of, a less act will serve such a thing well enough; but
look what the mind is inclined unto, there it will not go slightly and
lightly to work, there 'twill take pains, nay, it counts it no pains to
perpend and to weigh things as in a Balance; as it is said of Mary, look what
she heard from Christ, she kept it and pondered it in her heart, Luke 2. 19.
she pondered it, and weighed it in a balance, O it was matter of great weight
with her mind; where the mind is alive, there it will consider and ponder and
weigh, nay, there is not a circumstance, but the mind will take it to
consideration. Take a man that is alive to the things here below, how
considerative is that man, in all matters of that nature: As for example now,
for his gain; he takes every thing into consideration that may make for his
gain; He will have his wits about him, when he buys or sels, when he sowes or
reaps; he considers with himself; that he will not sow too soon, or too late
in the year, or a grain that the ground will not bear, he considers how long
it was since it was fallow, how long it will bear, till it be laid fallow
again; he considers when he may sell dearest, when he may buy cheapest; when
is the best time to put off a commodity. This is the livelynesse of his mind
in these things. Take this man now for his soul, his mind is stark heavy,
any loose thoughts shall serve turn for that, he does not consider here. But
when a man is a live unto God, now his considerations run out this way, now
he is considerative this way, for his soul, for his spiritual and eternal
good. Beloved consideration is a lively act of the mind; as you may see there
in Moses. Know therefore this day and consider it in thy heart; that the Lord
he is God in heaven above* and upon the earth beneath, Deuteronomy. 4. 39. that is,
do not only know it, but quicken up thy mind to consider it; this will do
thee good indeed; this is a very perfect Act of the mind; as we see in David;
when I consider the Heavens the work of thy hands, the Moon, and the Stars
which thou have ordained; then I say, Lord what is man? Psalm. 83, 4. you see
how stirring his mind was, when he considered the heavens and the earth, it
wrought mightily on him; it made him the more humble. Others see the Heavens
every day, and it does not move them one whit to Humiliation before God. But
when the mind comes once to consider* then it shakes off its dullness and
remissness, then it grows busy, such a man will not go to Prayer, but he
considers what he goes about, what a great God he is to speak to, what a vile
creature himself is that is to pray to him; he will consider how he may pray
with faith and hope and feeling of his wants; how he may rise up from his knees
not without profit. Now he will not go to the word, but he will consider what
it is he repaires to, now all his mind is how he may get good, now he is busy
in every duty; when he is tempted to do as others do, he considers what the
issue will be, and this makes him forbear. Beloved, this is the life of our
minds, when they consider things; when we consider our latter end; when we
consider Gods promises; when we consider his threatenings, when we take his
commandments into our deep consideration, when we consider the danger of
sin, we do not only know all these things but we consider them. Though we
know near so much, yet except we consider what we know, our minds are lumpish
and dead; consideration is the activity of the mind; and therefore if we would
prove our selves to be alive toward God, let us put on consideration a days.

Fourthly, the remembering of the mind; when the 4.
mind forgets it self every day, this is nothing but the deadness of the
mind; for if it be alive to a thing, it will be sure to remember it self of
that, if it oan; Can a maid forget her ornaments, or a Bride her attire? yet
my people have forgotten me days without number, Jer. 2. 32. that is, my
people are dead-minded to me; if they regarded me, they would remember
themselves every day, to serve me; look what a man is alive to, the mind will
be sure to remember us of that; we can have no journey to take, but our minds
remember us of it; no business to do, to feed our Cattle, to milk our kine
every morning, and evening, to sheare our sheep every Lammas, if we forget any
thing in this kind, presently it is a 100. to one, but we remember our selves;
now when a man is alive to the best things* in some measure, he will remember
himself of them every day; so David did, I remembered thy name O Lord, yea, in
the night too, and so I kept thy Law, Psalm. 119. 55. I remembered my self, and
I would be sure to do what God bid me do; it may be his heart began to arise,
but presently he remembered himself, and beat it down again; it may be some
other lust began to be up, but by and by he remembered him, and checked his own
soul; when the mind is alive toward God, the knowledge of the word does not
lie dead in that man; but still he remembers it at every need; when the Sabbath
is coming; then thinks he I remember what God bade me do. Remember the
Sabbath day to keep it holy; when the Sacrament comes, then he remembers
himself, O thinks he, let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of that
Bread and drink of that Cup; now the mind thinks, I will labor to remember
God continually; what ever I forget, I will not forget him; when I rise up,
when I lie down, still I will set my self to remember him; when I go out,
when I come home; what ever the Devil say, what ever the flesh whisper, I will
labor still to remember God; if I be tempted to wrath; then I desire to
remember what God says; give not place to the Devil; when I feel spiritual
laziness, then I will unfeignedly endeavor to remember what God speaks unto
me, cursed is he that does the work of the Lord negligently, etc.

Fifthly, the inventings or the devisings of the heart; 5.
where the mind is naturally bent and alive, there it is witty, if riches, if
preferment, if pleasure, if learning be a man's lust that he lives, in there he
is witty; so when a man is a live unto God, his wit will have that way it is
vent; as Christ says, I find out witty inventions Prove. 8. 12. he speaks not
only of himself, But of his grace in every one, that is this; when the mind
is alive and set toward Christ, it will find out witty inventions; nay, it is
a strange thing though men have no parts, yet if they be worldly, how witty
they are for such matters; and so for good people, whose minds are turned
toward God, though they be of very weak parts, yet how witty they will be in
good things; what pretty ways they will have to do good, to shun offenses;
to break occasions of sin; as a Minister in his preaching; as Paul says, I
caught you with guile, 2 Cor. 12. 16. so let man have a liberal mind, the
Prophet says he will devise liberal things, Isa. 32. 8. mercy and truth shall
be to them that devise good; Prove. 14. 22. whence comes the blockishnesse of
our minds; but from this, that our minds are so dead; if our minds were more
alive toward God, it would make us more graciously witty, we should devise
good things, find out admirable inventions, it would teach us plots against
Satan, plots against the flesh, as the wicked, their minds are full of sinful
devises, fetches, stratagems, policies, a man would wonder to see how witty the
devil is in them, to carry them headlong to hell, etc.

Sixthly, and lastly, the judging of the mind. But I 6.
spoke of this not long ago; and therefore I will let it alone now; thus I
have showed you, what a lively Christian is in regard of his mind.

Now the next is, that we show you what a live Christian is in regard of the
heart, etc.

And then in regard of the conscience, etc. and then in regard of the
affections, etc.

REVEL. 3. 1. And art Dead.
THe point we are in, is this; That a dead Christian is as good as no Christian
at all. First, we have opened the meaning of this point; and showed you what is
meant by a dead Christian. Secondly, we have showed you that this is so, by
going over all the graces of Gods spirit; a man has near a one of them all
that is dead; again by going over all the duties of Christian Religion; ye
heard, a man does near a one of them all, as long as he does them only in a
dead hearted manner. Thirdly, I showed you the reasons of this point, why a
dead Christian is even as no Christian at all; there be many reasons of it, it
stands with good reason that it should be so. Fourthly, we began to show you
the uses of this point.

First, how wide then are they that are profanely wicked Use 1.
if they that are Christians, and do the things contained in the Gospel are
rejected, because they do them with a dead heart, where shall they appear
that will not do them at all?

Secondly, another use was to condemn these times Use 2.
of ours, wherein for the most part people are dead. There be not many that do
live like Christians at all in outward appearance, and yet how many of that
little number are even dead and without life? they draw near unto God with
their outward man, but their hearts are far from him, Matthew. 15. 8.

Thirdly, another use was to show you the danger of Use 3.
being a dead Christian, I showed it in seven things. But I will not name them
again.

In the fourth place we are come to show you, what it Use 4.
is to be alive Christian; a Christian quickened up toward God; and here I
showed you, First, who is the principal and prime cause of this life and
quickening, and that is God, who quickens the dead; God the Father quickens
whom he will; God the Son he quickens whom he will, and God the Holy Ghost, he
is the spirit of life.

Secondly, I showed you what is the Instrument of this life, and that is faith;
this faith when it is a true and a lively faith, it makes a man adhere to the
fountain of life. That thou may cleave unto him, for he is thy life, Deuteronomy.
30. 20. Faith is the having of God for our God, as the Apostle says, He that
has the Son has life. Thirdly, I showed you the parts of this life; and the
parts of it I showed you were three. The first is, the life of justification,
Romans 5. 18. The second is, the life of sanctification. Ephesians. 2. 5. The third is,
the life of consolation or comfort, Psalm. 85. 6.

Now because the life of sanctification is here principally intended, when a
man is quickened up toward God, and all his holy ways; therefore I descended
down to the branches of this life, and quickening in all the powers of the
soul. The last day we began to search about the understanding, what is the
life and quickening of that toward God.

And first, we showed you that bare knowing is not it; 1.
a man may know God and all his ways contemplatively, and yet not be quickened
up to them; as Israel said, my God we knowledge thee, Hos. 8. 2. and yet as it
follows, they were not quickened up for all that; the Gentiles knew God, Romans
1. 21. I but they did not glorify him as God; it was dead knowledge; nay, we
showed you that bare knowledge is not so much as the light of the
understanding, much less the life of it; as our Savior Christ says, if the
light that is in thee be darkness, how great is the darkness, Matthew. 6. 23.
that is, a man may have that light, and yet be in darkness, and therefore much
more in deadness.

Secondly, I showed you that approving of God and his 2
ways is not the quickening of the understanding neither. Saint Paul shows
that a man may approve the best things and yet be dead, Romans 2. 18. The Devil
approved admirably of Jesus Christ, I know thee who thou art, even the holy one
of God, Mark. 1. 24. suppose thou provest and allowest of all goodness; O
says the Apostle, Happy is the man that condemns not himself in that which
he allows, Romans 14. 22. so may I say, thou may allow of strictness, and
of all the strictest orders of God, and yet have a dead mind, and condemn thy
self. I but, I am not strict though.

Thirdly, I showed you that thinking of God and of heavenly 3
things; this is not the life of the mind neither; a man may think of them
all now and then, and yet be dead to them all notwithstanding; nay, this may
increase thy condemnation; therefore when a sinner sins, it may be he thinks
of Gods word at some time, Gods word forbids this, and yet he does it, though
this increases his condemnation.

Fourthly, I showed you that studying of God, and of 4
faith, and all the Doctrine of life; this is not the life of the mind
neither; and this is that which deceives indeed; when a man's studying is
practical; this is an argument of life; the heart of the righteous studieth to
answer, Prove. 15. 28. Scholars because their minds are not of the world, may
be all the day long, but from morning till night, their minds are about God,
and all Divinity. And they think it may be they are heavenly minded; alas, no,
their minds may be as dead toward God for all this, as the worldlings, that
is musing on his pelf as long a time.

Then I came to show you affirmatively what the life of the mind is; the life
of the mind is, when it is stirred up toward God and all his gracious ways;
as Peter says; I will stir up your pure minds, 2 Pet. 3. 1. that is, I
would quicken up your minds; when the mind is stirring toward God, it was
stirring toward other things before, but now it is stirring toward heaven,
toward repentance and amendment of life, and Christ, and how to please God and
the like, now it is quickened up toward him. I showed you there be six
stirring acts of the mind.

The first is, the applying of the mind; when the mind 1.
does not only know a thing, but it applies it to ones self; this is a
stirring Act of the mind; look where the mind of man is alive, if it be
alive toward the world; if it* know any way unto profit, or preferment, or the
having of what it likes, presently it will apply it; so when a man is alive
toward God, now his mind has a applying disposition, look what he knows
about God, he applies it to himself, for his own edification, instruction,
humiliation, direction and guide; as Eliphaz says; so this it is, hear it and
know it for thy good, Job. 5. 27. that is, do not only know it, but be
quickened up to apply it to thy self; has thy mind an applying disposition,
do thou apply the word of God to thy self to make it thine own. Thou
know what God is, I but have thou a disposition in thy mind, to apply him
to thy self? this is a quickened mind, a man will not let his knowledge lie
swimming in his mind, but he turns it upon himself, and makes it his own.

2. The meditating of the mind; the minding of the mind 2
a natural man may think of God and his commandments as ye heard. I but
do thou mind them? if thou do mind them from day to day, now thy mind
is quickened indeed; carnal men think it may be of heavenly things, alas, that
is nothing but frigus and socordia as Calvin speaks, I says as Saint Paul;
but they mind earthly things; look what a man is alive unto, his mind runs
on that, whether it be God or the creature; if thy mind be quickened up
toward God, then thy mind runs on him from day to day; how thou may
approve thy self unto him, how thou may partake of his favor, how thou
may eschew the temptations of Satan, how thou may follow after Christ, be
sensible of thy sins be affected toward holy duties, does thy mind run on
such things? this is it.

Thirdly, The considering of the mind; when the 3.
mind looks cursorily on things, what is this but the looks and remissness
of the mind, now when the mind comes to consider seriously of them, now it
quickens up it self, as Moses says; Know and consider that God he is God,
Deuteronomy. 4. 39. that is, do not only know, that is but a dead thing, but stir
up thy self and consider wishly of it; has the Lord turned about thy mind
that now thou have begun to have a considering frame in thy mind, to ponder
thy ways; to weigh the Sermons that thou hear, as it is said of Mary, she
pondered Christ's words in her heart; now thou considerest how to pray, how to
come to Gods ordinances, how to carry thy self in thy calling; now thou do
not go haire-brainely on his before, but thou take things into consideration.

Fourthly, the remembering of the mind, when the mind 4.
knows how to do well, but the man does it not, he forgets himself every
day, what is this but the deadness of the mind; if the mind be alive to a
thing, it will be sure to remember it self of that. Can a maid forget her
Ornaments? but my people have forgotten me, Jer. 2. 32. therefore they are
dead-hearted toward me; can a man forget to put on his clothes in the Morning?
Can the worlding forget to plough his fields in time; to reap his Corn, when
it is ripe; to milk his kine at night; nay, certainly he will be sure to
remember such things, why? his mind is alive to them; if he should chance to
forget himself for a fit, by and by he remembers himself, so if the mind be
alive toward God, it has a remembering disposition toward him. O says David,
I will not forget thy word, Psalm. 119. 16.

Fifthly the inventing and devising, and plotting and 5
ploding, and contriving of the mind; if the mind be alive toward God, these
Acts go toward God too, as the Prophet says, A liberal man will be devising
liberal things, Isa. 32. 8. Let a man be of weak parts, that is all one, yet
when it is alive to the world, it is a strange thing to see how witty some are
for the world to gather pelf, they have great reaches in these things; so when
a man is alive toward God, though he be of weak parts, yet how witty he will be
for good things; what pretty devises to do good, to understand evil, to shun
offenses, to balke occasions of sin; as Paul says, I caught you with guile,
2 Cor. 12. 16. whence comes the blockishnesse of our minds toward the best
things, but merely of deadness, if our minds were more alive, they would help
us to preach, help us to pray, help us with matters for edifying, discourse,
they would help us from a 1000 snares, they would be the more active, they
would sooner smell a lust, spy Satan, observe the dealings of God.

Sixthly, The judgment of the mind; when the minds lust dictate is for God;
when a man is judicious, this is it that leads men a days, their judgments not
all their knowledge nay, learning; you shall have many a learned man will use
to play the fool, and does every day very foolishly, because his Judgment is
foolish; the reason is a mannever takes any course, nor speaks any word, nor
thinks any thought, but first his judgment tells him, it is best to do so at
that time; never does the drunkard turn in at the Alehouse, but his judgment
says to his will, choose to turn in; you will say, it may be he knows he
ought not to do so, I but it is not men's knowledge that leads men, but men's
judgments; when men's judgment says, this is not for me, this is most
pleasant, this is most profitable, this is most honorable, this is most
delightful; now when the judgment of the mind is in some measure set toward
God, now the mind is quickened; as David says, I esteem all thy precepts
concerning all things to be right, and I hate every false way, Psalm. 119. 128.
that is, by the mercy of God, I have good judgment, be the way what it will
be, though never so pleasing to the flesh, still my judgment says choose Gods
way, that is ever more best.

Thus far we proceeded the last day namely to learn or see what is the
quickening of the mind; that ye may know whether our understanding be dead or
alive; now what remains but this that we all labor for such an understanding;
many of us understand much, so much that if it were quickened up to us, it
would do us a world of good; if we did use to apply it and make it our own,
if we would give our minds to it, if we would ponder it and seriously weigh
it, and remember it for our use in all our ways, if we had a devising mind
for good a mind plotting for heaven, and continuing how we may best glorify
God, and secure our own souls. A judicious mind, a practical mind. This is
a good understanding indeed; as the Prophet says, a good understanding have
they that do thereafter, Psalm. 111. 10. when what we understand does not lie
dead in our heads, but our minds are quickened up to it, this is a good
understanding my brethren, this understanding is not to be had in Books, God
only can help us with it, as David says, O Lord give me understanding and I
shall live, Psalm. 119. 144 you will say what need he keep such a stir for
understanding? had not he the Law before his eyes? could not he read there, and
get understanding: O but it will be all dead, Lord unless thou give me
understanding from above, if thou will give me understanding, then I shall live.

Now I come to the heart, to search what the life of the heart is, every Act of
the heart, is not an argument of life.

First, there be outside Acts of the heart; people think 1.
if they do not dissemble before men; then they are no Hypocrites. O they are
hearty they say; as there is an outside of the outward man, so there is an
outside of the heart. Thou may be hearty in some sort in good duties, and
yet be stark dead; namely if it be only the outside of thy heart; my Son
keep my saying in the midst of thy heart, Prove. 4. 21. not in the outside of
thy heart, no, no. I would have the inside of thy heart too; a man that is
alive to the world, the world has not only the heart, but the very inside of
the heart, the word is deep in the heart; so if thou be alive toward God,
God is in the deep of thy heart, the word is deep in thy heart, nor like the
salt water in the Sea only, on the Top. Ye know what became of the Seed, that
wanted depth of the earth, Matthew. 13. 5. so it is with the heart, when the word
does not get into the depth of it, it never quickens in it. The heart may be so
far toward goodness, as to bring a man to good duties a days, it may bring
one to Sermon or to Prayer, to others of the Ordinances of God, and other good
courses, but what is all this, as long as it is dead; the life lies in the
bottom of the heart, look what the bottom of the heart stands unto, that is a
man alive unto, then thou art alive toward God, when the bottom of thy heart
is unto him; when thou labourest to obey him from the bottom of thy heart,
when thou call upon him from the bottom of thy heart, like Sugar at the
bottom of the Cup, stir up the bottom, the best is at bottom, so thou must
stir up the bottom of thy heart, the heart is a deep thing, Psalm. 64. 6.
though religion be on the top, yet if the world be in the deep, thy heart is
dead toward God; as it is with a puddle, it may be clear at the top, fair
water at the top, but there is nothing but mudde at the bottom.

Secondly, there be flitting Acts of the heart, be they 2
never so deep in the heart, yet if they do not stay there, the heart is dead
still. Solomon says of his Father; he said unto me, let thy heart retain my
words, keep my Commandments and live, Prove. 4. 4. though the word does stir
near so much for the present, this is not life, except thou retain it, and
hold it fast, a man may have many flashes of life in him, but as long as the
heart does not keep them, it remains dead, they that seek the Lord, the heart
shall live, Psalm. 22. 26. that is, when it is not a flash, but it is an Act
that abides by a man, the heart is steadfastly set toward God, now his heart
lives; now when people are moved only by fits, they are humbled by fits, and
startled by fits, their righteousness is like a morning dew, ye know there the
dew is every morning, but all the day it is gone, may be when morning comes,
there it is again, but all the day it is gone. It is true there may be
horrible offs and ons in the Children of God, to the confounding of their faces
before God. But I do not speak to discourage them. But let us take heed we
may have admirable flashes of life, fits of humblings, fits of enlargements,
fits of selfe-denyall, sits of great eagerness after God, the heart may be
toward God for a sit, a false heart; as the Land of Israel; their heart was
firmly toward him for a sit, they remembered that God was their rock and that
the high God was their redeemer, but their heart was not right with him, they
were not steadfast in his Covenant, Psalm. 78. 37. mark. it was but a fit; like
Esays crying for a fit. This is a poor argument of life then; no, no; the
flitting acts of the heart, may be no acts of life.

Thirdly, there be wouldings and wishings in the heart; 3.
and these cozen the world more then any other; these they think verily are
effects of true life.

First, because these are not in the outside of the heart, 1.
but lie, or at least seem to lie very deep in the heart; it is very
certain, that many natural men would give the whole world if they had it, as
they do verily conceive, that they had true grace, that they were Saints, that
they could leave their sins, that they were in a child of Gods case, they
deeply wish it, it is a profound would in their hearts; and therefore now when
they see such yearnings in their hearts, they do verily apprehend, this is
life certainly. Hence it is that they will say they would from the bottom of
their hearts serve God, they have nere a lust but they would full feign have
God deliver them from that; indeed they confess in their consciences, if they
might have a 1000 worlds, they cannot give it over, I but they would feign they
could, and thus they deceive themselves; because this act seems to be from the
depth of their heart; this fancy you may see to be in men's hearts out of Mich.
6. 6. 7. where ye see, though they could not find in their hearts to walk
humbly before God, to live justly and righteously, yet they would give
thousands they could. O say they what would not we give for the sin of our
souls? no question but they thought they were alive, but God told them they
were not.

Secondly, another reason why they think this is a token of life is, because
this is no flitting act neither; But they have these wouldings every day; nay,
you can never come to them, but still they have these, they would do well;
nay, they would do as well as the best; thus they hope they have a fountain
of living water in them that springs up daily; thus it was with them in the
Prophets, they seek me daily says God, Isa. 58. 2. they thought it was their
every days work to serve God, and where they did fail, they thought they
could say, they would do better, they sought the Lord daily.

Thirdly, because they find that this is attributed to the 3
Saints; as the Apostle says, ye cannot do the things that ye would, Gal. 5.
17. nay, the Apostle Paul himself, speaks it of himself, the good that I
would do, that do I not, and the evil which I would not do, that do I,
Romans 7. 19. So that thus they argue now, when they find this same woulding in
their hearts, and cannot do as they would, O say they, I may say with the
Apostle, the good which I would do that do I not; I cannot do as I would.
Thus they hoodwinke their own souls. It is very true these be the Saints
groans, and a part of their sighing toward God, that they cannot do as they
would, this makes them a burden to themselves; and so again when they find
themselves disturbed and limited and straightened by their flesh, this is a
comfort to their souls, and an argument of Gods infinite goodness unto them,
that they can unfeignedly say, they would do better; they do please him in
some measure through his grace, and they would please him better; they do some
good by his heavenly spirit, and they would do more; they do resist every
sin, and they would resist it more. This is very true. But yet how many a
thousands lul themselves asleep in security, by the fancy of this thing. The
heart may put forth daily wouldings, and be as dead as a carcass to all the
works of grace; as our Savior Christ says, Strive to enter in at the
straight Gate, for many shall seek to enter in, and shall not be able, Luke
13. 24. q. d. O stir up your selves, quicken up your hearts, do not only
seek to enter in; many seek to enter in, O they would enter in, and they would
feign enter in, alas, alas, they are dead, they cannot therefore quicken up
your hearts, and do ye more then so; I acknowledge that woulding is an
argument of life in the heart.

First, when a man does believe God in some measure, 1.
and then would believe more, does oppose every known sin, and would oppose
it more; does follow all manner of goodness, and would follow it more, when a
man's would is above the simple will, as when a man will reach as high as he
can, and then streins himself to reach higher, he takes all the Stools and
Ladders that he can, and stands on tip-toes and would reach higher; this is an
act of the will with some life; and therefore the Apostle when he says that
Christians would more then they do, Gal. 5. 17. in the verse going before, he
tells them they must walk in the spirit though. q. d. if ye should say, ye
walk in the spirit and do not, ye deceive your own selves; so that the
woulding it self, is not a living act.

Secondly, a woulding is an act of a living heart, when 2
it is a laborous woulding; so that there is another thing in the will, that is
the living act and not woulding; namely, when the heart labors, and therefore
the woulding is not it; I labor says the Apostle, yea, I labored more
abundantly then they all, 1 Cor. 15. 10. mark though he said in another place
that he would; the good which I would do; yet that was not all, that had been
a dead act, if that had been all; therefore he labored together with it. Well
then; let us come to show you, what the life of the will is. In a word, the
life of the heart is, when the heart will do a thing, it may be it is hindered
a thousand times, but in some measure it will do it, cost it never so much,
though flesh and blood, and world, and devil, and all be against it, yet it
will do it; now the heart is alive it will believe, it will repent, it will
strive against sin, it will set God before its eyes, it will love him above
all, fear him above all, regard him above all. I say though it meet with never
so many hindrances without and within, pull-backes, rebellions, yet it will do
it, now it is alive; when the spirit indeed is willing, Matthew. 26. 41. as Paul
says, To will is present with me, Romans 7. 18. when a man can say it from the
bottom of his heart, that a will is present with him. I will be ruled by God,
I will deny my self; though the flesh be never so violent, and it may be many
times, and often bears down all before it, yet there is a will present, that
will stand it out, and that can never be borne down, the act may be borne
down, now affections may be borne down. I but this still is present, I will
be for God, he is my best, his will is my rule, his Law is my line, and I will
be at his dispose; when it is thus in general, through all the ways of God,
this is a living heart; when to will is present with it, as the author to the
Hebrews says, his will was to live honestly, Heb. 13. 18. As soon as ever
the prodigal Son was come to this pass, that he could unfeignedly speak, I
will arise, I will go to my Father, Luke 15. 18. you see his father presently
says he was alive; this my Son was dead, but he is alive again; you will
say, what if one had bound him hand and foot? that is all one; he will go, he
will wrestle, he will bite the cord a sunder, if he cannot do that, O how he
will cry out. O how they bind me here. I will arise; he will strive, he will
not be quiet, he must go, and he will go; his will is absolutely to go,
stopped or not stopped, his will is simply to go, if he can but get away, and
leave an arm behind, nay, a foot behind, nay both; he will crawle, but he
will to his Father; so when a man will leave his sinful courses, and he will
have God for his God, he will have Christ, and there he will hang; come death,
come fears, come temptations, there he will hang. This is that which God
accepts, when the hearts will is to God, if there be first a willing mind it
is accepted, 2 Cor. 8. 12.

Now that this is the life of the heart I prove it thus.

First, because this is the prefectest operation of the heart, 1
when it absolutely wills a thing. There be many operations of the heart, but
none of them is perfect but this as David said to his Son; my Son know thou
the God of thy Father; and serve him with a perfect heart, and with a wiling
mind, 1 Chronicles. 28. 9. q. d. this is a perfect heart; when thy will is to serve
him; how ever things go, thou will serve him; then thy heart is absolutely set
toward God, this is the whole heart; I eryed with my whole heart, hear me O
Lord, I will keep thy Statutes, Psalm. 119. 145. what is all the deadness of
men, but because either they have no heart to Gods ways or but half hearts,
as it is said of Ephraim, their heart is divided, and God has but a piece; but
when a man has an absolute will hereunto, now he is alive, now his heart is
perfect toward the Lord his God; as it is in sin, when a man does nos only
go on in sin, but he will do it, his will is absolute that way, this man
has a perfect heart toward Satan, so it is here.

Secondly, because this is the might and strength of the 2
heart; while a man's heart puts forth inferior acts toward God, he is dead to
every good word and work. If he have any heart at all, it is but so so, as God
said of Judah, how weak is they heart? Ezekiel. 16. 30. such a man the devil can
easily take him off at any time for a need; such a one can never stand it out
to the end. But he is off and on, because the might of his heart is not toward
God; now when the will is absolutely toward God, this man must needs be alive;
for the might of his heart is toward God; as the Lord himself says, Thou
shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and
with all thy might, Deuteronomy. 6. 5.

Thirdly, because this makes every thing possible; naturally 3
a man cannot believe, he cannot resist his own flesh, he cannot overcome the
world, he cannot live godly in all his ways, he cannot forgo his beloved
lusts. But now when the heart comes once to be willing toward God, now every
thing is possible. I may say of him, as Christ says of faith. All things are
possible to him that believes, Mark. 9. 23. so all things are possible to him
that wills; as we use to say, there is nothing hard to a willing mind. And
therefore godly men in Christ Jesus the Apostle calls them, (...), etc. 2 Timothy
3. 12.

Fourthly, because this takes in the manner of good duties 4
too. as well as the matter; it is more a thousand times, then the bare doing
of them; a dead heart will serve to do them. Put when the heart is made
willing, this is more then the bare naked deed; as Paul says to the
Corinthians about Alms, ye have begun not only to do, but also (...), to be
willing a year ago, 2 Cor. 8. 10. as he says of his preaching; if I do it
willingly I have a reward; but if against my will, etc. 1 Cor. 9. 17. that is
q. d. I may preach indeed, I may have so much heart to it, as to do the deed
alas that is nothing; because if I do it willingly this is it; this is it
brethren, this is the right manner too.

Fifthly, this is an argument that the heart has an inward 5.
principle; what is the life of the heart but an inward principle of acting?
look where the heart is alive, there it works from within; there needs no
compulsion to a covetous heart, to have regard of his profit; no; he regards it
most willingly; he has an inward principle to regard it; and therefore he is
alive to it; now when the heart puts forth its will toward God, now it has an
inward principle of agency; it needs no constraint, as Peter says to
Ministers; feed the flock of God, not by constraint but willingly, 1 Pet. 5. 2.
that is, do it very lively; do it with an inward principle* not because ye
see others feed, not because ye see the disgrace, what will people think, if I
should not preach constantly; not because ye dare not do otherwise, conscience
will fly in your face; alas, ye may do it, that is with a dead heart. But do
it willingly; where note this is the hearts life, this is an inward principle
of the heart; now the heart will do it, though no body else do it, though he
be hated for his labor, though he have no thank for his pains among men.
Thus ye see this is the life of the heart.

Now for your better understanding, we will open this more particularly this
willingness of the heart you see in the life of the heart, and it contains
seven things. First, the inclinations of the heart. Secondly, the intentions of
the heart. Thirdly, the Elections of the heart. Fourthly, the aversations of
the heart. Fifthly, the appropiating of the heart. Sixthly, the savourings of
the heart. Seventhly, the carings of the heart. Beloved, these are the living
acts of the heart, if these be converted to God in you, now your hearts are
alive toward him. These make up the whole willingness of the heart.

First then, the inclinations of the heart; it may do a 1.
thousand thousand good things; with a dead heart. But mark if your hearts be
inclined toward God; then ye serve God with a live heart, if the Lord has
inclined your heart to him; I have inclined my heart to perform thy Statutes
always, even to the end Psalm. 119. 112. Has God made you do thus, has he
inclined your heart to his name? once ye were without heart, but now he has
inclined your heart to do good, now ye find sweet inclinations to every good
duty, ye do not go to them as a Bear to the Stake, but now ye have an inward
disposition to them, he has given you a feeling of your sins and your wants,
and that caryes you to Prayer; a feeling of your Ignorance, and forget
fullness; and that carries you to Sermons, that ye may learn more of God, that
ye may see more into your own unworthiness, that ye may be stirred up in all
his ways; ye do not only shunn your own iniquities, in some measure, but
your heart is inclined unto it, inclined to think of God, inclined to holy
talk, inclined toward them that are Godly-minded; ye had no disposition to
the works of God, heretofore, but now the Lord has not only put you upon
them, but inclined your heart toward them; ye ^^ele inward impressions, that
bows you; others may be have good talk, but you feel an unfeigned desire to
be edisied, and that bows you unto it. Others may be do good things, but the
Lord has bent your heart to them; when you went to good duties heretofore, ye
went against the hare, as a Stone does upwards; but now in some measure, the
Lord has put in a new nature, and ye feel an internal mover. This is life
now.

Secondly, the intentions of the heart; we have a saying 2
in Divinity voluntas sua natura vult finem; the heart naturally wills the end;
now if God were our end, if communion with him, and sanctifying of God in our
hearts and lives, were our end, our heart could not be dead toward his ways,
nay, we should be very eager after them all; all our deadness comes from this,
that God is only a matter by the by, with us: But if he were our end, then we
would be mainely for him, and how to approve our selves to him. Would we talk
as we do, if edification were our end? would we keep such company as we do,
if mutual help toward eternal life were our end? Look what the heart does
intend from day to day, the heart is very earnest after it; therefore those
that intend to rise if they can in the world, they are very earnest in the
pursuit after the same, flatter fawn, please, humor, they will do any thing
to the attaining of it; if it be to rid a 100 miles, it is nothing with them; if
it cost them never so much, O how greedy are they! if a man intend to gather an
estate if he can, or to live in pleasure if he can, all the world are eager in
their intentions; the heart runs naturally on after it is ends. Now when the
heart is alive toward God, these intentions are toward him, now the heart
stands thus, so I may obey God, so I may take heed of dishonouring God, so I
may keep my heart close to him, this is that I do desire; now I go to work,
so I may keep the world from carrying away my heart, I shall be glad; now I am
going to Prayer, so I may draw down a blessing, and get some farther help to
walk before God, this is the thing I aim at; now I go to be in such a
company, so I may discharge a good conscience, carry my self well, and not
bring dishonor to God, and the like; you may see this in Paul, what was the
matter, he was so eager to deny himself, I count all dross and dung? the
intentions of his heart, were after Christ; O says he, that I might know him,
Phil. 3. 10.

Thirdly, the elections and choosings of the heart; this 3.
is another part of the hearts life; no man is dead to that which he chooses
rather then any thing else; now if we did still choose the ways of God, we
could not be dead to them; when we are dead to them at any time, it is because
we could even find in our heart, to make another choice; and therefore if we
would know whether our heart is alive unto goodness, whether do we choose the
way of goodness every day before any other way? as David says, I have chosen
the way of truth, Psalm. 119. 30. as the Lord says of the good eunuchs; they
choose the things that please me, Isa. 56. 4. Beloved what ever we do or
think, or speak, still there be two ways propounded to us one that is Gods
way, another that is our own way, now which do we choose every day; what
thoughts do we choose rather of the two to think, what words do we choose,
what actions, what courses, when we are together, what conference do we
choose, when alone, what do we choose, there be two kinds of eating, and
drinking; which choose we? when we are provoked, there be two ways to take,
either to be impatient, and suffer our passions to arise, or to quell them, and
beat them down, which do we choose; do we say as that good man said; Lord let
thy han help me, for I have choosen thy precepts, Psalm. 119. 173.

Fourthly, the aversions of the heart, ye know the 4
heart it chooses what it likes, so there is some thing that it shuns; now if
thou would know whether thy heart be alive toward God, do but think with
thy self, what it uses to shun when thou art angry, is it disgrace or sin;
it ever shuns some thing or other; either what God dislikes, or what thou,
every day and hour, something it puts off; does it put off things that are
offensive to thy flesh, or things that are offensive to God; Here lies thy
hearts life; if thy heart be alive toward God, it is of this temper, to put
off those things that are displeasing to God; I hate vain thoughts says
David, Psalm. 119. 113. mark his heart was of this temper, to put of all those
things that were contrary to God; it may be many of those thoughts, his own
heart would have rather kept. I but when his heart was alive toward God, he
put them off though; I have refrained my feet from every evil way, that I may
keep thy word, Psalm. 119. 101. now when good things shall be put to a man every
day by the word, and by conscience, and a man has a refusing heart to them,
this is a dead heart; as God put to Judah to return, but they refused to
return, Jer. 5. 3. God put shame before them for their sins, but they
refused to be ashamed, Jer. 3. 3. now my brethren, examine your bosonies, how
stand the refusals of your hearts, do you refuse good or evil every day? if
thou can refuse temporal evil and not spiritual, thou hase a dead heart.

Fifthly, the savourings of the heart; this is another 5
piece of the hearts will; something there is that every heart savours most,
and that it is which it is alive unto: now then if thy heart be alive unto God,
it will savor the things of God most; it will not only do good duties but
savor them too; not only hear the word of God, but it will have an admirable
savor with the heart, as the Apostle says it will have the savor of life
unto life, 2 Cor. 2. 16. as the Church says to Christ, because of the savor
of thy good ointments, therefore the Virgins love thee, Cant. 1. 3. Oh how it
will savor a reproof, how it will relish; but if holy things have no sweet
savor in thy heart; it may be thou can not for shame of the world not seem
to stand for them, thy conscience will not let thee, but thou will give them a
good word, and seem to approve them, but there is no more savor in them, then
in the white of an egg, nay, they are irksome, and untoothsome, they do not
go merrily down with thee, like sweet conserves; assure thy self, thy heart
is a dead heart.

Sixthly, the cares of the heart, this is another show of 6.
the hearts will; what the heart is alive to, it carketh and cares for it, and
therefore if thy heart be alive toward God, how careful will it be that it
may not offend him? yea what care, 2 Cor. 7. 11. As the Apostle says to Titus;
I will have thee affirm constantly, that they which believe in God, must be
careful to maintain good works, Tit. 8. 8. therefore if a Minister be alive
toward God, he will be full of care for his people, how he may pull them from
their sins, how he may draw them to God, how he may most do them good; as Paul
says of Timothy; he will naturally care for your Estute, Phil. 2. 20. True, a
man has many things to do in the world, many cares how to live, how to pay
rent at quarter day, what may become of his poor Children, etc. I but if the
heart be alive toward God, it will labor to cast these cares upon God; cast
all your care upon him, 1 Pet. 5. 7. But for heavenly things, for the having
and keeping of a good conscience, it will be full of cares about these things*
yea it how may get to be more afraid of sin, how may I get a weaned heart
from the earth? it will be caring how he may be provided for evil times, how
he may stand in the woeful day.

Seventhly, the appropriating of the heart; the esteeming 7
of the heart; what is the hearts jewel, that is the heart most alive to; now
think, what does thy heart prize most of all; if it be alive toward God, he
is dearest to thee; his will dearer then thine, his glory then thy credit, his
word then thy life; as Paul says, I do not count my life dear, so that I may
finish my course with joy, Act. 20. 24. this was the Jewel of his heart, how
he might do the work that God set him to do, that he might finish his
course; so likewise if thy heart be alive, love will be like a precious
ointment, Psalm. 133. 2. heavenly wisdom more precious then Rubies, Prove. 3.
15. a promise will be precious to the heart, 2 Pet. 1. 4. So also faith will be
a precious thing; 1 Pet. 1. 7. But above all Christ will be precious to the
heart, to you that believe he is precious, 1 Pet. 2. 7. these are heart Jewels;
these it endeares most; it will rather ^art with any thing then these; nay, it
will morgage any thing to redeem these again. These things are little
esteemed among men, in their consciences; indeed they say they are better then
the whole world, I but their heart does not greatly esteem them, nay, it
slights them and seeks them accordingly; this is a dead heart.

Eighthly, thus ye see what is the life of the heart; it is the 8.
absolute will of the heart, when the heart is inclined toward, God when it
intends God, when it maks choice of his ways, and puts off whatsoever is
contrary to them, when it prizes and endeares every one of them all, when it
savours them, and is full of care for them. I might add another, the cleaving
of the heart, when the heart cleaves to the Lord, as it is said of Hezekiah,
that he clave to the Lord, 2 King. 18. 6. when the heart closes in with God,
and will not let him go, no nor let his ways go, it sticks to a Godly
course, all the world cannot pull him away, not firenor faggot; though it be
never so much hindered, and interrupted by the flesh, yet now it has a sticking
quality in it, as David says, I have stuck to thy Testimonies, Psalm. 119. 31.

Now because when the heart is made willing on this fashion toward God, there
is left still an adverse unwillingnesse, by reason of the flesh; so that the
heart can never put forth these acts, without horrible clogges; therefore now
in a live heart toward God, there be other acts, that are not in a heart that
is alive to the world. And the reason is this. Because when the heart is alive
to the world, the hearts of it own nature is willing unto that, and there is no
unwillingnesse mixed together with it; never was it heard, that the heart
should be willing, and unwilling to the same thing, till saving grace came to
divide asunder the will in two; ye know the regenerate are two men apeice, and
they have two wills, one toward God, and another toward sin and the world;
nay, it is the same will; that has both these branches in it, and this does
much puzzle the hearts, when they find such a deal of unwillingnesse in them
toward God.

Therefore I say there be other acts of life in the heart toward God, and they
are five.

The first, is the preparing of the heart, whereby the heart prepares it self
toward God, 2 Chronicles. 30. 18. 19. 1 Samuel 7. 3.

The second, is the Combating of the heart, Gal. 5. 17. 23. (...) I beat down
my body, 1 Cor. 9. 27.

The third, is the endeavoring of the heart, it reaches forth it self Phil.
3. 13. it stirs up it self; it awakens it self; why art thou so sad, O my
soul? Psalm. 42. 5.

The fourth is the binding of it self by determinations, and purposes; so Paul
bound his own heart, with a determination before he came unto Corinth, 1 Cor.
2. 2. Daniel knowing how unwilling his heart would be to abstain from the
Kings meat, though by grace he was willing; therefore his heart, bound it self
with a purpose; he purposed not to defile himself with the Kings meat, Dan. 1.
8. So Act. 11. 23.

The fifth, is the groaning and sighing of the heart, as 5.
David though he were willing, yet feeling the unwillingnes of the flesh
therewithal fetch a groan; O that my ways were so direct, that I might keep
thy Statutes, Psalm. 119. 5. So Paul groaned earnestly to be dissolved, 2 Cor.
5. 2. This is the putting of the heart more forward. These I have named you
may; name more it may be. But thus if the heart be alive toward God, it will
do: because it feels a great deal of unwillingnesse, it gets what advantage
it can of it self, to make it self willing; as the Church, ere ever was
aware, my soul made me like the Chariots of Aminadab. Cant. 6. 12. it sets it
self right; as the soul when it is dead, it neglects this act quite and
clean from day to day, as the Psalmist says of dull Israel, he calls them a
generation, that set not their heart aright, Psalm. 78. 8.

REVEL. 3. 2. And art Dead.
WE are come to declare what it is to be a live Christian, quickened up toward
God, and all his holy ways, and after sundry passages we came to enquire what
is the life of the soul; and here I propounded five things. First, what is the
life of the mind. Secondly, what is the life of the heart. Thirdly, what is
the life of the conscience. Fourthly, what is the life of the memory. And
Fifthly, what is the life of the affections.

We have spoken of the first, what is the life of the mind; ye know by nature,
the mind is alive to the things of the world, and dead toward God; and
therefore we enquired what the life of the mind is; it cannot be the bare
knowing of things; it may be dead to what it knows; it cannot be the bare
thinking of things, nor the bare approving of things, nor the bare studying of
things; the mind may perform all these acts to a thing that it is dead to;
no, no; the life of the mind is, First, the applying of the mind. Secondly,
the meditating, and minding of the mind. Thirdly, the considering and weighing
of the mind. Fourthly, the remembering of the mind. Fifthly, the devising and
plotting, and projecting, and contriving of the mind. Sixthly, the Judgment
of the mind. The (...) of the mind; look where the mind is alive, there it
puts forth these dispositions; and therefore when the mind is alive toward
God, it lets out these toward him.

Then in the second place, we came to enquire what is the life of the heart;
and this we spoke of the last day; we showed you the heart, may be somewhat
toward a thing and yet be dead toward it for all that?

First, there be shallow acts of the heart, the outside acts 1.
of the heart; there may be so much heart, as to bring a man to good duties, to
constant preaching, and hearing, and praying, and the like; and civil
carriage, and the like; and yet the heart dead to them all. This is not the
life of the heart, The life of the heart lies at the bottom of the heart; not
in the outside; no, it lies deep within; as Solomon says, my Son keep my
sayings in the midst of thy heart; Prove. 4. 21.

Secondly, there be flitting acts of the heart. Though 2
they be never so deep in the heart, yet if they be such as do not stay there;
the heart is dead still; for if it were alive it would keep them. Let thy heart
retain my words; keep my Commandments and live; Prove. 4. 4. Though the word
do stir one never so much for the present; This is no life except thou
retain it and hold it fast; a man may have many flashes of life in him, but as
long as the heart does not keep them it remains dead; when people are moved
only by sits, humbled by fits, startled by sits, their righteousness is only
as a morning dew, a man may have sits of quickening, sits of awakening, sits of
enlargements, and sits of humiliation, and remain in a dead state; what a fine
fit had Israel? they remembered that God was their Rock, and that the holy God
was their redeemer; Yet their heart was not right with him; they were not
steadfast in his Covenant, Psalm. 78. 37. mark it was but a sit; like Esaus
crying for a fit. Therefore, this is not it.

Thirdly, there be wouldings and wishings in the heart; 3
and these cozen the world more then any other; these they think verily are
effects of true life; I told you reasons why people think verily these are
arguments of life; and then I showed you reasons, why they are not; and then I
showed you the difference between the wouldings of a live heart, and the
wouldings of a dead heart. But I let all these pass.

Then I proceeded to show you what the life of the heart is; namely, when it
puts forth an absolute will to a thing; so that when the heart puts forth an
absolute will toward God and all his holy ways, then it is alive toward God,
when a man is at this pass, that he will believe, come what can come of it, he
will believe, and he will repent and he will hate every sin, love God above
all, fear God above all, and he will set God before his eyes, though it meet
with never so many hindrances without and within; pull backs, rebellions, yet
it will do it for all them; now it is alive; as Paul says, to will is present
with me, Romans 7. 18. when a man can say from the bottom of his heart, that to
will is present with him; I will be ruled by God. I will deny my self, though
the flesh be never so violent, and may be many times and often, bears down
all before it, yet he has a will present within that will stand it out, and
that can never be borne down, the act may be borne down, and affections may
be borne down. I but this will is still present; I will be for God; he is my
chief good, his Law is my rule, his will is my will, and I will be at his
dispose; as the Author to the Hebrews; says, His will was to live honestly,
Heb. 13. 18. As soon as ever the prodigal Son was come to this pass, that he
could unfeignedly speak it; I will arise, and I will go to my Father, Luke
15. 18. you see the next new; ye hear of him was, he was alive; his Father
said he was alive. This my Son was dead, but now he is a live; you will say,
what if one had bound him hand and foot, that is all one now, he will go; he
will bite the cord aforesaid if he can, if one should hold, he'ele wrestle, he
ele bite, he will scratch, he will spit in his face, if he cannot get loose,
he will cry out, O how they bind me here; O my father, my father, I will go to my
Father, he cannot be quiet without his Father, he will go to his Father; if
they should cut off his Legs, he will crawle to his Father; I say* when the
will is absolute once toward God, then it is alive toward God.

I gave you reasons of this, why this must needs be the life of the heart.

First, Because this is the perfectest operation of the heart; when it
absolutely wills a thing. There be many operations of the heart, but none of
them is perfect but this; as David said to his Son, my Son, know thou the
God of thy Fathers, and serve him with a perfect heart, and with a willing
mind, 1 Chronicles. 28. 9. q d. this is a perfect heart; when thy will is to serve
him how ever things go, thou will serve him; now thy heart is perfectly set
toward him.

Secondly, because this is the might and the strength of 2
the heart; ye know the heart is a very hard lusty thing, where it is
absolutely set; and therefore when a man will go on in sin, what ever come
of it, reprove him, threaten say what you will, he will still go on; we say he
has a hard heart; nay, the Scripture calls his heart a Rock, or a Stone; I say
the resolute will is the strength of the heart; now therefore, when that is
toward God, his strength and might is to God; as God says, Thou shall love
the Lord thy God, with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy
might, Deuteronomy. 6. 5. a dead heart gives only a few sick and weak acts toward
God; How weak is thy heart, Ezekiel. 16. ^0. therefore that is not it; an
absolute will that only is it; for that is the might of the heart.

Thirdly, because this makes every thing possible; naturally 3
a man cannot believe he cannot habitually resist his own flesh, he cannot
overcome the world, he cannot live godly in all his ways, but now when the
heart comes once to be willing toward God, now every thing is possible, I may
say of this as Christ says of faith; all things are possible to him that
believes, Mark. 9. 23. So all things are possible to him that wills. And
therefore those that are godly in Christ Jesus; are called (...) 2 Timothy 3. 12.

Fourthly, this takes in the manner of good duties too; 4
as well as the matter, it is more a thousand times, then the bare doing of
them, a dead heart will serve for to do them. But when the heart is made
absolutely willing, this is more then the naked deed; as Paul says to the
Corinthians about Alms, ye have begun not only to do, but also (...) to be
willing a year ago, 2 Cor. 8. 10. as he says of his preaching, if I did it
willingly, I have a reward, but if against my will etc. 1 Cor. 9. 17. q. d. I
may preach, I may have so much heart, and so much will as to preach, alas, that
is nothing. But if I do it willingly; that is, if my will be absolutely
thereunto, this is it. Brethren: This is the right manner too.

Fifthly, this is an argument that the heart has an inward 5
principle; what is the life of the heart, but an inward principle of acting?
look where the heart is alive, there it works from within; There needs no
compulsion to a covetous heart to have regard of his profit: no; he regards it
most willingly; he has an inward principle to regard it; as a Stone has an
inward principle to tend down-wards; and therefore he is alive to it; now when
the heart puts forth its absolute will toward God, now it has an inward
principle of agility; it needs no complaint, as Peter says to Ministers, feed
the flock of God not by constraint but willingly, 1 Pet. 5. 2. that is, do it
very truly, do it with an inward principle; not because ye see others feed,
not because ye see it is a disgrace not to feed, or because your conscience will
not let you do otherwise, alas ye may do it thus with a dead heart; but do
it willingly, do it out of an inward principle; no obedience is good without
it be done with an inward principle; if ye be willing and obedient, Isa. 1. 19.
that is, if ye obedient with an inward principle of obedience; I this is it
indeed. Thus you see an absolute will is the life of the heart.

Now least any should be deceived, I showed you what this absolute will of the
heart is.

I showed you, first it is the inclination of the heart; ye 1
know the heart that is alive to the world, all its inclinations are that way,
and therefore the will runs mainely out that way; but its averse from God,
backward to all heavenly things; now when the will is absolutely set toward
God, God inclines it toward him, and makes it incline it self; as David
says; I have inclined my heart to perform thy statutes always, even to the
end, Psalm. 119. 112. it may be the world may wonder that any man should be so
strict as some are, to forgo the pleasures of the flesh as some do, be so
precise and so taken up with God as some are; the reason is this, their wills
are absolutely set that way, the Lord has inclined them.

Secondly, the intention of the heart; we have a saying 2
in Divinity voluntas ut natura vult finem; the heart naturally wills it own
ends; look what men aim at, look what they would have, what they beat at,
what they drive at, that they will naturally, that they will eagerly; now when
the hearts intentions are toward God, then the will is absolutely toward him.
Beloved what is it ye would have, what do ye drive at a days, what is the
souls scop? if that be God, if that be to commune with him, if that be to
please him, doubtless ye are alive toward God; for then the wills are
absolutely to him. This is a rare work, and therefore true grace of life is a
rare thing; for how few do attain this? you come to Church, if God were your
aim, certainly ye would hear otherwise then ye do many: would ye set in your
pewes so as ye do, if your aim were to please God, or that the word should
direct you? if this were your aim, ye would hear in another gats manner; so
when ye discourse, if your meaning and aim were, O now I will discourse to be
edisied, would ye talk so loosely as ye do? nay ye would speak more to the
purpose a great deal? you may see this in Paul what made him so eager to deny
himself? I count all things dross and dung says he; O says he, the
intention of my heart is to Christ; that I may know him, etc. Phil. 3. 10. But
I must hasten.

Thirdly, the election of the heart; ye know all our life 3
is in Bivio. There be two ways in everything; there be two ways of thinking;
two ways of speaking; two ways of doing; the one godly, the other not. There
be two ways in eating and drinking, in sleeping and waking; in studying, in
praying, and in all our cariages, one gracious, and the other not; now which
do your hearts choose? if your hearts have such a disposition to choose the
gracious way, then your wills are set absolutely that way; there ye are alive,
as David says, I have chosen the way of truth, Psalm. 119. 30. mark he had
this disposition in him to choose the true way.

Fourthly, the conversation of the heart; the heart ever 4
shunnes something, or other; every day and hour, the heart puts off something
or other; now what does thy heart shun every day? does it shun things offensive
to thee or things offensive to God? if thy will be set absolutely toward God,
then thy hearts shunnings will run there, in things displeasing to him; as the
Prophet says; I have refrained my feet from every evillway, that I may keep
thy word, Psalm. 119. 101.

Fifthly the appreciatings of the heart* or the estimations 5.
of the heart; what is the hearts Jewel, that the hearts will is absolutely to;
now do but think, what does thy heart prize most of all; what is dearest to
thee? O says Paul, I do not count my life dear; so that I may finish my
course, Act. 20. 24. this was his hearts Jewel, how he might do the work
that God set him to do; how he might finish his course; Gods commandments
were dearest to him, not his own credit but Gods glory.

Sixthly, the savouring of the heart; this is another 6.
piece of the hearts will; something there is that the heart savours most. Now
does thy heart savor the things of God most; thou savourest a business, where
there is profit; I but do thou savor Gods word most, can thou find the
best relish of all in holy duties, can thou savor life in them; as Paul
says, there is the savor of life in these things, 2 Cor. 2. 16.

Seventhly, the cares of the heart. This is another sign 7
of the hearts absolute will; worldly minded men are full of cares above the
things of the world, but art thou full of cares about heaven; does heaven fill
thy head full of cares about it, how thou may get it, etc. Thus ye heard what
an absolute will is.

Now because when the will is made absolutely to be for God, yet there is an
unwillingnesle in the same will in regard of the unregenerate part; therefore I
showed you there be other acts of life in the heart toward God, opposing that
unwillingnesse in the flesh. But I must of necessity break off; so much for
the heart.

The next thing to be inquired about is the conscience; what is the life of the
conscience; and here the world is deceived too; for the conscience may be
awakened very much, and yet never quickened indeed. First, a conscience
awakened, may like all good things. Secondly, a conscience somewhat awakened,
may oblige a man to all manner of good things. Thirdly, a conscience somewhat
awakened, may be troubled about his sins. Fourthly, a conscience somewhat
awakened, may urge one exceedingly to good things. Fifthly, a conscience
somewhat awakened, may be very eager in this urging. Sixthly, a conscience
somewhat awakened, may prevail very far with it is eagerness. Seventhly, a
conscience somewhat awakened, may make one look at God, so far as it
prevails; all this may be in conscience, and yet the conscience never
quickened indeed, so that you see what need there is to enquire what the life
of conscience is.

First, I say the conscience somewhat awakened, may 1.
like of God, and all his ways; it may like of Gods judgments, be they never
so terrible; as we see there in Pharaoh, when God plagued Egypt; his
conscience liked of Gods dealings he thought in his conscience the Lord dealt
very righteously with him. The Lord is righteous, says he, and I and my people
are wicked, Exodus 9. 27. So when Rehoboam was horribly beset with Enemies, his
conscience justified God, O he deals very rightly with me. The Lord is
righteous, 2 Chronicles. 1^. 6. so Adonibezek, when the Lord brought that lamentable
judgment on his head, his conscience lik^ of Gods doings; as I have done, so
God has done to me; so again the conscience awakened may like of Gods
commandments; as Moses tells Israel, that God gave them no other Commandments
but such as were right, and wise and good in the sight of the Heathen, Deuteronomy 4.
6, 7, 8. that is, they were such commandments that the Heathens thought in
their conscience were good. Again the conscience somewhat awakened, may like
of Gods people that walk according to those Laws and Commandments; you may
see this in Balaane, O that I might dye the death of the righteous! Numb. 23.
10. his conscience liked of their courses; so Saul's conscience did approve
David's courses. Thou art more righteous then I, 1 Samuel 24. 17. A conscience
somewhat awakened, may like of the best preaching; and the strictest preachers;
never man spoke like this man; O how mightily they liked him! Herod liked John
admirably, he was glad for to hear him; profane Israel did wonderfully like
the Sacrament of Gods presence; when the Ark of God came into the Camp; they
shouted with a great shout, that the earth rang again, 1 Samuel 4. 5. now when a
carnal man perceives this work to be in him, he is apt to conceive, this is
true grace of life. Beloved, you see this is very false, Thou may like of
Gods dealings with thee, yea, thou may think in thy conscience, he deals
very rightly with thee, though it be never so bitter, thou may think in thy
conscience, his commandments are good, though they be never so strict, thy
conscience may like his Ministers, and like his precepts, and like his
Ordinances, and his Sacraments, and yet be a dead conscience.

Secondly, a conscience somewhat awakened, may oblige 2.
a man to all manner of good things; it may lay the commandments of God to his
charge, conscience may make him say not only that the commandments are good,
but that it is his duty to do them; we see this by experience in many carnal
people; tell them of any commandment, what is their answer? Oh you say well, I
confess it is my duty; every drunkard will say thus, I it is my duty never to
be drunken, the swearer will say thus, you say right, it is very true, I
confess I should not take Gods name in vain; and therefore they are said to
be under the Law, Romans 3. 19. that is, they are bound in conscience to the Law;
their conscience tells them they ought to do it; their conscience lays it on
them as a bond; as the mad Prophet said; must I not take heed to speak what
God bids me speak? Number. 23. 12. conscience laid a must upon his soul. And
this is the reason, why a naughty heart will put off a commandment of God, if
he can, when he sees it goes against his profit, or his ease, or his credit,
for he knows if he yield it to be a commandment of God, his conscience will
come over him and say, why then ye must do it; as we read of the Priests and
the Elders* they would not yield that John's Baptism was from heaven; O if we
should yield that, why then, Christ will say, why do ye not believe? Mat. 21.
25. mark the conscience comes over a man in all that he knows God has
commanded, and it lays it to his charge; and you must do this, and you must
do that, this is your duty; now when men see this, they are apt to conclude
that their conscience is alive; they think this is the life of their
conscience to lay Gods commandments to their charge. Alas brethren, the
conscience may be dead for all this, you see this in people that are dead in
trespasses and sins. All that the Lord speaks, that must I do, Number. 23. 26.
it was the speech of a very wretch; thou may have this principle in thy
conscience, all that the Lord bids me, that must I do; and yet be a dead man.
O how does this beguile people: because they feel such a principle in their
conscience a days! O thinks one, all that the Lord bids me, that must I do;
when people feel such a principle as this, they think they are well; now if
they do offend at any time, they hold it to be but their infirmity; and
there is an end. But this is very false; the conscience may have this principle
in it and be dead.

Thirdly, a conscience somewhat awakened, may be 3
troubled about his sins; he may be troubled before he commits, he may be
very loath to commit them; as we see there in Herod, when he was betrayed with
his rash Oath. and he was now tempted to behead John the Baptist, his
conscience made him very loath to do it; the Text says, ^^ was exceeding
sorrowful, Mark. 6. 26. and the contempt shows it was merely, because he
thought in his conscience, he should do very ill to behead so good a man, and
therefore he was very loath; he was troubled in conscience about it; so was*
Darius, when the Princes had wound him to cast Daniel into the Lions Den, he
was moved and troubled in conscience about it, he was very loath to do it, he
sought a good while how to put off the temptation by getting away* how to avoid
this great sin, Dan. 6. 14. so was Pilot troubled in conscience about the
condemning of Christ, he went to it with a heavy heart; and as a conscience
somewhat awakened, may be troubled before the committing of sin* so he may be
troubled in the committing of it. An example of this we have in Saul, when he
committed that sin, in sacrificing before Samuel came, he was troubled in
conscience in the very act. I forced my self and offered a burnt offering, 1 Samuel 13 12. Mark, he did not commit the sin hand-smooth, as some do, but he
felt a reluctance, againstit. Again, a conscience somewhat awakened, may be
troubled exceedingly after the committing of sin; when Judas had betrayed our
Savior, you see how his conscience was troubled after he had done. O says
he, I have sinned, in betraying innocent blood, Matthew. 27. 4. especially at
the hearing of a searching Sermon, or at a Fast also, then the conscience if it
be only awakened a little, will be troubled exceedingly for his sins; when
Samuel kept a Fast there at Mizpah, the Text shows how they were smitten in
conscience for their sins, in so much that they cried out in the open
congregation, we have sinned against the Lord, 1 Samuel 7. 6. and yet many of
these very men, by and by showed the rottenness of their hearts, so that this
is another gall; when men feel a lothnesse in them to commit sin, trouble of
conscience before, and at, and after, they think this is true grace
doubtless; doubtless their conscience has life.

Fourthly, conscience somewhat awakened, may urge 4
one to good things, and no question but many of you that are yet in your
sins have found this to be true, how often have your consciences urged you to
give over your sins? to look after the getting of Christ, to lead a godly
life? how many heaves have your consciences given at you? to hoyse you up out
of the state ye wallow in, to make you more earnest for heaven, more strict in
your walking, to provide for your latter end, when ye are at Prayer? how often
does it urge you to dwell longer at it? As it is said of Doeg, he was detained
before the Lord, 1 Samuel 21. 7. he was held there, he would have gone away
before, but he was held, now what should that be but his conscience? his
conscience urged him to stay long; so your consciences urge you to be more
attentive in hearing* more mindful of preaching, more humble in your minds,
less worldly, more heavenly; you may think this is a lively conscience; no,
no; it is not, the truth is, the more your consciences do urge you a days,
the greater is your sin* if ye yield not. But this is so far from life, that
it argues you to be the more dead, if ye do not obey; and urging conscience is
a great blessing, I, if men have eyes to see what the Lord does for them* to
deliver their souls from the pit. This is the taking of men by the shoulders;
now if thou pull away thy shoulder. They refused to hearken, and pulled away
their shoulder, Zach. 7. 11. that is, the Lord set conscience upon them, and
urged them to obey, as if a man should take another by the shoulder, so dragge
him and hale him, and yet they would not. So when Paul spoke to Agrippa, he
felt an urging in his conscience, O let me be a Christian, and he confessed as
much two, Paul, almost thou perswadest me to be a Christian; it was almost
done; he had a great heave; he was urged. But it would not do, so that this is
no argument of life neither.

Fifthly, conscience somewhat awakened may be very 5
eager in urging, it may be very importunate, every day digging in his sides,
every day whispering in his bosom; O think of God, O consider thy soul* O
remember death; conscience may be earnest and wonderful eager with a man, O
do not live as thou do, O be not so careless of God; what will thou dye
and be damned? will thou to hell? will thou never have done? away with thy
sinful courses; away with thy dreamings; O be stir thy self; or thou will
perish; such a conscience had Pilat about Christ, it was eager with him not to
condemn him. This conscience is an admirable blessing; and woe be to those
that stand out against it; it is like Jacob with the Angel, He would not let
the Angel go till he blessed him, Genesis 32. 26. like the man that was
importunate with his friend, and knocked, and knocked, and would have no nay,
Luke 11. 8. I am in bed; never tell me of your being in bed; I pray let me have
three loaves; my children are in bed, I pray trouble me not; that is all one,
still he knocks, he will have him up; so when conscience is thus awakened* and
is importunate and will not be answered etc. many a wretch has such an
impudent conscience as this. But this is so far from an argument of life; as
that it is a sign of a greater death.

Sixthly, conscience somewhat awakened, may prevail 6.
very far by its eagerness, it made the King of Jury do many things; it
made the Heathens do the things contained in the Law, Romans 2. 14, 15. when the
Pharisees came to tempt Christ, with the woman taken in adultery, conscience
made them cease and go out one by one, Joh. 8. 9. it made Paul live so
unblameably as he did; ye know concerning the righteousness that is in the
Law, he was blameless, Phil. 3. 6. now if ye look into the 23. of the Acts
and the first, you shall see it was his conscience, that made him do so; men
and Brethren, I have lived in all good conscience before God to this day; as
since his conversion, his sanctified conscience made him live godlily in
Christ, so before his conversion his natural conscience helped by good
education made him live unblameably; so that, what with one, and with the
other* he could say he had lived in a good conscience to that day; that is
either morally good, or spiritually good. And therefore it was conscience, that
made him do all that he did; people think, I indeed, if they did good duties
for outward by respects, then they should think they were unsound, but
conscience sets them a work, and therefore they gather, they are sound and
alive toward God; no beloved, conscience may make a carnal man go against
all outward by-respects, and do very good duty; this we see in Balaam, he
went against all outward self respects, and followed conscience; for a house
full of Silver and Gold, he would not go beyond the word of the Lord to do*
less or more, Number. 22. 18. so Judas went against his credit, and his profit,
and all; ye know, when his conscience told him the money was unjustly taken, he
went and threw it down: so did Michah, the man was an* Idolater, and had
stolen 1100 Pieces of Silver from his Master, yet when he heard his mother
curse, he restored all again, O thought he, what shall I hear my mother
curse, his conscience rose up against that and made him make restitution; why
do carnal men pray in secret, no question but it is conscience that makes
them; may be when they are tempted to a sin in secret, they will not do it,
and it is the conscience that with holds them; in this sense they do good
duties out of conscience; now is this Conscience alive? no, it does not follow,
ye see this may be in natural men and women.

Seventhly, conscience somewhat awakened, may make 7
one look at God so far as it prevails; you may see this in Laban. the man
was a wicked man; yet he looked at God in not hurting of Jacob; though it were
in the choice of his hand, yet he would not hurt Jacob; and he looked at God in
the thing. O says his conscience, the God of your Father spoke to me
yesternight, Genesis 31. 29. he abstained from hurting of Jacob, and he looked at
God in the abstaining from it. Because God had forbidden him, therefore he will
not hurt him; so it was with King Cyrus, he was a natural man too; yet when he
took order for the building of the Temple at Jerusalem his conscience made him
look at God in the thing. O says he, the Lord God of Heaven and earth, has
charged me to build him a house, Ezekiel. 1. 2. so when Jehu destroyed Ahabs
house, and Baals Priests, he himself says, how he looked at God in the thing;
come see how zealous I am for the Lord of Hoasts; so when the Philistines sent
home the Ark of the Lord, they would send it home honorably, with a very rich
present, and the Text says, how they looked at Gods glory in the thing. O say
they, let us give glory to the Lord God of Israel, 1 Samuel 6. 5. Thus you see
how the world are deceived about the life of the conscience; when people have
these operations of conscience within them, they think their conscience is
alive and good toward God.

Now that these cannot be the life of conscience, I prove it.

First, because all may be in natural men, as ye have 1
heard in Laban, in Pharaoh, in Balaam, in Micah, in Saul, in Darius, in Judas,
which were dead in trespasses and sins; what life can be in a dead man? it is
very true, the conscience is least dead of all the powers of the soul; the
Pelagians say* the will is a pure virgin; that is as false, a^ the devil is
false; if any faculty be a pure virgin it is the conscience; all the religion
that is left in a natural man, God has planted there; there is the effect of
the Law there, Romans 2. 15. The whole nature of man is like a Country taken by
the Enemy, except one little Fort; may be that is battered too* but it is not
quite taken; so is the conscience, after the whole man is quite vanquished by
sin, except only that and that is battered too in a woeful manner. But it is
not quite taken, the Lord will ever keep a part in that, to have the man at
control when he pleases, and as far as he pleases. But yet it is so far
taken too, that there is no spiritual life left at all in it; man is dead in
trespasses and sins, and so is the conscience too.

Secondly, the conscience notwithstanding all these may 2
be deader then ever it was. I confess these are flashes of life, that God
sparkles into men's consciences, but they use to go out again, and leave the
conscience as dead, and deader then ever before they came; we see it in
Pharaoh, that hardened his heart worse afterward, Exodus 9. 34. so did Balaam,
though his conscience were so quick for a spurt, yet within a while, he could
go and lay a stumbling block before the Children of Israel to make them sin,
Rev. 2. 14. and we see it to this very day, many smitten in conscience for a
time, afterward their smitings cease, and they grow more stiff then ever they
were; like water that has been heated, it freezes afterward the more.

Thirdly, the conscience notwithstanding all these is soon 3.
pleased; though it seem to be eager, and earnest, and zealous for God, yet
any little thing will content it; if it were alive nothing would content it,
but merely indeed, the favor of God, the Image of God, sincere conforming to
God. But this conscience is soon pleased again; it is but angry a while, if
but half the Lords due be brought in, this conscience is satisfied. Like the
unjust Steward, that set down 50 for a 100 Luke 16. 6. When the man goes on
praying, and doing good duties, may be, the conscience is whist, though it be
but a form; when he has reformed a little, conscience thinks it has enough;
we may see this in Balaam; when he had found that work of conscience, that he
could deny Balac's house full of Silver and Gold, to stand for God, presently
he concluded that God was his God; if Balac would give me his house full of
Silver and Gold, I cannot go beyond the word of the Lord my God* Number. 22. 18.
Like the wretched Jews, they brought God the blind and the lame, and the
torn and the sick, and then they thought much that they should be called
despisers of God, Mal. 1. 6, 7, 8. Saul was commanded to destroy all the
Amalekites, now though he spared some, his conscience was content. I have done
the will of the Lord says he; such a conscience as this is soon pleased, like
little Children, it cries, it takes on* it sets up its Pipes, but a little
thing stills it; may be a Rattle, or an Apple, or a Brass Counter; so my
brethren though a man's conscience be thus as ye have heard, yet it is a very
child, it will be soon stilled; let him but bestirre himself a little
toward God, and go on in a pretty handsome way, this conscience will quickly
say it is well.

Fourthly, the conscience that has but these stirrings, is 4
so far from being alive, that many times it will be a help unto ones lusts;
which if it were a live it could not be* But thus it is though, when these
works are real, it will serve to help a man's lusts; when a man's lusts would
faigne have some thing or other don, then steps in thy conscience, and will
help the lame dog over the style; as we say Herod had a lust to make away
John the Baptist. O but he is a good man says his conscience, and thou must not
cut off his head, Mark. 6. 20. O but he was urged now to do it, by Herodius
her daughter; and he had sworn to grant her hearts request; now see how his
conscience helped him to do it. Thou have sworn an Oath, and thou must make
conscience of that; therefore cut off his head. So it was with the Jews, when
they have a lust to crucify Christ, their conscience found out a trick for it;
we have a Law say they, and by our Law* he should dye, because he mado himself
the Son of God, John 19. 7. mark, they made it a matter of conscience; what
they murder Christ? they put him to death unjustly? no, God forbid; we have a
Law, and are bound in conscience to keep it; so when a man has a lust, as to
wear long hair; by and by he makes it a matter of conscience to wear it;
forsooth his head will ache; and he is bound in conscience to have a care of
that; so if a man have a lust of covetousness, and not to give where is need;
forsooth his conscience finds a place in the Apostle to help it. He is worse
then an Infidel, that provides not for his own; and so he will make
conscience of that; so when a man has wronged him, he has a lust of revenge,
anon he finds out a trick, O it may tend to the dishonor of the Gospel, if
he put it up, the matter is not so. But he is willing to think so; and he will
make conscience of that; is he revengefull now? no God forbid. It was a
disgrace to religion, and he did it out of conscience of that. Thus men will
have what lust they please, they can find some Text or other, which they wrest
to make conscience of that, O how common is this.

Fifthly, this conscience is not all, it calls out only some 5
particular sins to be violent against, and lets alone others may be as bad;
like Ahabs for the Vineyard; and let his Baalisme alone; or if the conscience
be against all manner of sins, it is but in a fume, cito redibit in gratiam.
they are but like new Wine, in old Bottels; at last the Bottels break and the
Wine is all spilt; so all these works in an awakened conscience, are only
then while the conscience cannot sleep. But when it can fall asleep again,
then the man can be quiet again; the conscience is an old conscience and not
renewed, and therefore it is not able to hold them; well then ye see these are
not consciences life.

What then is the consciences life? for this ye must know. First, the
conscience has a Testimonial life; a life whereof it lives* as the soul
lives; for it is the reflection of the soul, the souls privity to it self,
between God and it self. And therefore if the soul be alive toward God,
then the conscience is alive too; as the Apostle says; How much more shall the
blood of Christ, who through the eternal spirit offered himself, without spo^
to God, purge your conscience from dead works, is to serves the living God,
Heb. 9. 14. mark, when a man's dead works are purged away, the conscience is
alive; when a man's self is alive, and his works are alive, the conscience is
alive; as we say of the goodness of conscience, though the conscience be never
so good in it self, yet as long as the man is not good, his conscience can
never be good; conscience is said to be good, as a Messenger is said to be
good; namely when he brings good tidings; though he be never so good a man,
yet if he do not bring good tidings, we say he is an ill Messenger; he sent
evil Angels among them, Psalm. 78. 49. Calvin thinks it may be meant of good
Angels; yet said to be ill Angels, because they brought evil Plagues upon
Egypt; so stands a good conscience, that can bring good tidings of a man, that
he is a good man; true, a wicked man's conscience may report well of him, as
Absolon did of the people, O your matters are good says he, when they were
stark naught; so thy conscience may flatter thee, and say thy matters are good.
But when conscience can say truly, thy matters are good. The conscience is like
a Register or a Bill; now then it is a Bill of good Items, when all thy sins
are blotted out; ye know we call it a foul bill, that has foul crimes
written in it. Item this man stole a horse. Item he brake into such a man's
house. Item he murdered such a man; when such a Bill as this comes in at the
Assizes against a poor Prisoner, this is a black Bill; this is a foul Bill;
so as long as thy conscience is a foul Bill; Item I was born in sin; Item I
have lived very loosely; Item I have heard so many Sermons, and gotten litte
good; Item I was at such a Sacrament and was nere the better, thy conscience is
a foul Bill, this is a foul conscience; as the Apostle says, a defiled
conscience, Tit. 1. 15. This is a bad conscience; now when the conscience is
clean, then it is a good conscience; so I may say of a lively conscience, the
conscience is alive, when the man is alive toward God, then it bears
witness, but that is not all, the conscience has other acts. Secondly, the
conscience has another life of it is own, namely the conscience is said to be
quickened up to its duty, when it quickens up the whole man to do his. As the
conscience of the good people that offered to the Tabernacle, was a quick
conscience; their conscience was quick to do its duty, because it quickened
them up to do theirs; their heart made them willing, Exodus 35. 29. that is,
their conscience made them willing; though the conscience be never so eager,
that is not it; it never does its duty with life, till it make thee do thy
duty with life. The conscience of the godly, may be is not so eager, neither
does it keep such a do, as many a wicked man's conscience. The eagerer
conscience is feign to be, it is a sign the man is the more dead; when a man is
alive, the conscience stirs him up with more ease; like a man that is willing
to pay his debts, the creditor need no more then ask; whereas when the debtor
is a slye fellow, there needs the more Bawling; so that if thou would know
whether thy conscience be quick, the question is not whether it be eager or no;
But whether does it quicken thee up to do thy duty or no.

This then is the life of conscience, when it makes a man do his duty toward
God and man; when it makes a man believe with all his heart, when it makes him
love God with all his soul, and mind, to serve him in truth, to do his holy
will, to humble himself soundly before God for all his sins, to make his
peace with God* daily to please him, and to walk before him in newness of
life. This is a living conscience, this conscience has the grace of life in
it, whether it do it by eagerness or not, that is not it; whether with much a
do, or little, that is all one.

First, When the conscience does not only check, but it 1.
checkes to some purpose, as when David had numbered the people, his heart smote
him, 2 Samuel 24. 10. such checks there may be in a wicked heart* when a man is
made to do the Lords will for conscience sake.

Secondly, When it does not only accuse for sin, so a 2
natural conscience may do, but it pulls a man down before God; and cites
himself effectually before God. The just man first accuses himself; as the
Greek, and the Latin read it Prove. 18. 17.

Thirdly, when it does not only condemn one for sin, 3
for so the wicked have condemning consciences; as the Apostle says, if our
heart condemns, 1 John 3. 20. that is, if we be wicked; as Paul says;
knowing that he that is such, is subverted and sins, being condemned of
himself, Tit. 3. 11. that is, he is a wicked wretch, so that a wicked man's
conscience may and will, and shall condemn himself. But I mean, when the
conscience does not only condemn one for sin; but it tramples upon ones
self as a damned wretch in himself; to save God a labor; as the Apostle
speaks, if we would judge our selves, we should not be Judged, 1 Cor. 11. 31.

Fourthly, when it does not only pull a man a days; 4
so it may do the wicked and the ungodly; they feel many pulls every day, and
may be their conscience makes them leave many particular sins. But when the
conscience pulls a man out of every known sin, withal the detestation and
loathing; out of unbeleife, out of inpenitency and heardnesse of heart, out of
formality and all; this is a lively conscience; as Job says, my heart shall
not reproach me as long as I live, Job. 27. 6. These are the lively acts of
conscience about sin.

The lively effects whereof are three.

The first, is penitent shame that ever he has done it; 1
conscience makes him fly from it as a horrible shame and confusion of face
before God; as the Apostle says, what fruit have ye of those things, whereof
ye are now ashamed? Romans 6. 21.

Secondly, another is penitent grief, and compunction 2.
of heart; so ye may see this effect in the new converts. They were pricked in
their hearts, Act. 2. 37.

Thirdly, another effect is penitential fear, whereby 3.
he is afraid to sin against God again, 2 Cor. 7. 11.

Fourthly, another is humbling despair in himself, that 4
he sees nothing in him, but death and damnation and so he lies at Gods Gate,
as a man utterly undone in himself; having no hope but only in Christ; for as
God dealt with Paul in regard of his recovery out of his sickness, he brought
him to despair of life in himself, 2 Cor. 1. 8. so does a lively conscience
in regard of misery.

Thus ye see for sin.

Secondly, now for the lively acts of conscience, in regard 2
of good; when the conscience has life, it does not only excuse in part, for
so it may do in a wicked heart, nay a wicked man has such an excusing
conscience when he does good for the matter of it; as we read in the Heathens;
Romans 2. 15. But it does sweetly excuse him, and tells him he has done it
unfeignedly in the truth of his heart, that he does believe, that he does truly
repent, that he does in some measure, walk in new obedience from day to day;
and that he stands guiltless before God through Jesus Christ.

When the conscience does not urge a man only to that which is good. As it
urged Agrippa, almost thou perswadest me etc. 26. 28.

Thirdly, approbation, when the conscience either may 3
or does pronounce a man to please God.

The lively effects of these acts are 1 Joy. 2 Cor. 1. 12.

The second, is boldness, and freedom from slavish fear. The righteous is
bold as a Lion, Prove. 28. 1.

Again, a lively conscience is a sudden conscience. Secondly a tender
conscience.

REVEL. 3. 1. And art Dead.
THe point we are in, is, when is the conscience alive, when is that quickened
up in a man ye have heard? First, what is the quickening of the mind?
Secondly, what is the quickening of the heart? now I say it follows what is
the quickening of the conscience? I showed you how thousands are deceived here;
for the conscience may be awakened very much, and yet never quickened indeed.
First, the conscience somewhat awakened may like of good things. Secondly, the
conscience somewhat awakened, may oblige a man to all manner of good things.
Thirdly, a conscience somewhat awakened, may be much troubled about sins.
Fourthly, a conscience somewhat awakened, may urge one to good things. Fifthly,
it may be very eager in this urging. Sixthly, it may prevail very far with
its eagerness. Seventhly, it may make one look at God in some sense, so far
as it prevails. All this may be in conscience, and yet the conscience never
quickened indeed; and we have showed you all these, and cleared them unto you;
so that you see what need there is to enquire what the life of conscience is.

After the handling of these seven particulars; we gave you five reasons to
prove that these are not arguments, that the conscience is truly alive; that
the conscience may do all this, and yet not have the grace of life in it.
First, because all these works of conscience may be in a natural man. 2.
Because the conscience notwithstanding all these may be deader then ever it
was. Thirdly, because such a conscience as this may be foolish, and childish
and soon pleased; if the conscience were alive indeed, nothing would content
it but the favor of God, and the Image of God, and true faith', and true
peace, etc. But this conscience may be soon pleased; if it have but any color
of grace and goodness, that is able to still it and quiet it. Fourthly, because
the conscience though it be thus stirring as ye heard, it is so far from being
alive, that it uses to be a help and furtherance unto ones lusts. Fifthly,
because this conscience is not universal, it culs out only some particular
sins to be violent against, and lets alone others; it picks out some
particular duties and good courses to be very eager for, and is careless of
others.

You will say then, what is consciences life? when is the conscience said truly
to be quickened? For the opening of this, ye must know there be two lives of
conscience in a godly man.

The first is a relative life; whereby it is alive, when the man is alive.

The second is a simple life. The first I say, is a relative life, whereby it
is said to be alive, when the man whose it is, is alive; for conscience is the
reflection of the soul, the souls privity to it self, between God and it
self. And therefore if the soul be alive toward God, then the conscience is
alive too; as the Apostle says; How much more shall the blood of Jesus Christ,
who through the eternal spirit offered himself without spot to God, purge
your conscience from dead works to serve the living God, Heb. 9. 14. Mark
when a man's dead works are purged away, the conscience is alive, when a man's
self is alive, and his works are alive, the conscience is alive also; as we
say of the goodness of conscience, so it is the life of conscience; though the
conscience be never so good in it self, yet as long as the man is not good,
his conscience can never be good; conscience is said to be good as a Messenger
is said to be good; namely, when he brings good tidings; as David said of
Ahimaaz, he is a good man, and he brings good tidings, 1 Samuel 18. 27. Though
a Messenger be nere so good a man, yet if he do not bring good tideings, we
say he'es an ill Messenger. He sent evil Angels among them, Psalm. 78. 49.
Calvin thinks it may be meant of good Angels, yet said to be evil Angels,
because they brought evil upon Egypt; so that is a good conscience that
brings good tidings to a man; that he does believe; that he is in Christ,
that he is a good man. True, a wicked man's conscience may report well of him,
as Absolon did of the people, O your matters are good says he, when they were
stark naught; so thy conscience may flatter thee, and say thy matters are good;
but when conscience can say truly, thy matters are good. The conscience is like
a Register or a Bill; now when it is a Bill of good Items; when all thy sins
are blotted out, and good things are written in; now it is a good conscience; ye
know we call it a foul Bill, that has foul crimes written in it; though the
Bill be never so fair written, yet if it have foul crimes written in it, it is
a foul Bill. Item, this man stole a Horse. Item, he broke into such a man's
house. Item he murdered such a man; when such a Bill as this comes in at the
Assizes against a poor prisoner, this is a black Bill; this is a foul Bill;
so as long as thy conscience is a foul Bill, Item I was borne in sin. Item I
have lived very loosely. Item I have heard so many Sermons, and yet I have
been nere the better. Item I have been at so many Sacraments, and yet I have
gone on in my vile courses, thy conscience is a foul Bill; this is a foul
conscience; as the Apostle says, a defiled conscience, Tit. 1. 15. now when
the conscience is clean, then it is a good conscience; so I may say of a lively
conscience; the conscience is alive, when the man is alive; when his mind is
quickened up toward God, and his heart which before was dead in trespasses and
sins, now it is alive toward God; this man's conscience is alive. The reason
is because now his conscience may say, I am alive; for conscience is the
reflection of the soul on it self, and therefore if thou be alive thy
self, thy conscience is alive too. This is the first life; the relative life
of conscience.

Now that this is one life of conscience, is plain, because if a man's self be
dead, conscience will say, I am dead; as Paul says, speaking of himself and
the Ephesians before their conversion. O says he, ye were dead in sins, Ephesians.
2. 5. look what a man is, if the conscience be enlightened, it takes it on it
self, when David had sinned. I have sinned says his conscience; so let a man
be holy the conscience presently takes it upon it self; as we see there in
David, when he was holy; I am holy says his conscience, Lord preserve my
soul, for I am holy, Psalm. 86. 2. So that if thou be dead, thy conscience
is dead; if thou be alive, thy conscience is alive. But I let this pass.

I come now to the second life of conscience, and that is, it is simple life,
conscience has another life of its own; for as when the man is alive, the
conscience is alive so the conscience is quickened up to do its duty, when it
quickens up the whole man to do his, as the conscience of the good people that
offered to the Tabernacle was a quick conscience; their conscience was quick to
do its duty, because it quickened them up to do theirs; their heart made them
willing, Exodus 35. 29. that is, their conscience made them willing. Though the
conscience be never so eager, that is not it; it never does its duty with life,
till it make thee to do thy duty with life. The conscience of the godly may be
is not so eager, neither does it keep such a do, as many a wicked man's
conscience. The eager conscience is feign to be, it is a sign the man is the
more dead, when the man is alive, his conscience stirs him with more ease;
like a man that is willing to pay his debts, the creditor need no more then
ask; whereas if the debtor be a very slye fellow, there needs the more
bawling; so that if thou would know whether thy conscience be quick, the
question is not whether it be eager or no, but whether does it quicken thee up
to thy duty or no?

This then is the life of conscience, when it makes a man do his duty
sincerely both toward God and man; when it makes a man believe with all his
heart, when it makes him love God with all his soul; and mind to serve him in
truth, to do his holy will, to humble himself soundly before God for all his
sins, to make his peace with God, daily to please him and to walk before him
in newness of life. This is a living conscience. This conscience has the
grace of life in it; whether it do it by eagerness or not; whether with a
horrible stir or a great pudder or no; that is not it if it make a man do
his duty aright, then conscience does its duty; this is Consciences life.

First, when the Conscience does not only check, but it 1.
checks to some purpose, when it smites so that all the soul feels it, and
lies down under it, when the Conscience does not only do duty in this thing,
but it makes a man to do his, it makes him smite himself as the Publican did,
he smote upon his breast, Luke 18. 13. as Ephraim did, I smote upon my thigh,
Jer. 31. 10. when a man is made to Check himself, what have I done? Jer. 8. 6.
when David numbered the people, the Text shows how his conscience was quick,
his heart smote him, 2 Samuel 24. 10. Dull checks there may be in a wicked heart,
yea, mighty checks, and mighty smitings, yea, greater for quantity then in any
Child of God, but all to little or no purpose, David's Conscience smote him to
purpose you see there, it made him do his duty indeed, it was a Divine Check,
it was a Check that put him into a right way again, so except thy Conscience
thus Check thee a days, may be thou forgetest thy self now and then, and then
thy Conscience gives thee a Check, O what a beast am I, and so sets thee to
rights again, sometimes thou art over taken in passion, but then comes
Conscience, and tells thee what God says, O why do I give place to the Devil;
and then thy passions go down again. This is Gods Bit, that he guides his
people by, as the Rider does his beast with a Bridle. The wicked are like your
sturdy horses, that get their Bridle in their Teeth* God may pull hard at them,
give them fiercer twitches, then he does his own Children, but they get the
Bridle in their Teeth, and so they are unrulier: But when it is Gods Bridle to
lead a man by, now his Conscience is alive, when it Checks to purpose.

Secondly, when it does not only accuse for sin, so a 2
natural Conscience may do, but it pulls a man down before God; and Cites
himself effectually before his Tribunal. I make this a different work, for
the accusation of Conscience differs from its Checking; the Check is a
spiritual lash the Conscience gives the soul, now the accusation gives the
reason of its lashing. O thou have sinned against God; ye know this is a duty
of Conscience too in regard of sin, to accuse. And then Conscience is alive,
when it does this duty to purpose, to make a man to do his; namely to go and
Confess his sin in a penitent manner. True a wicked man's Conscience does
accuse, but that drives a man from God; as it is said of the Scribes and the
Pharisees, when their Consciences accused them, they went cut, Joh. 8. 9. But
when Conscience is alive, it accuses before God, it Cites a man soundly before
God; and what a vile wretch am I! it so does its duty in accusing, that it
makes a man to do his; freely to accuse himself. The just man first accuses
himself, Prove. 18. 17. So it is in the Greek and the Latin* Have thou such a
Conscience as this? this is a lively Conscience; when thy Conscience does not
only do its duty to accuse thee for every sin that thou do, but it makes
thee to do thine, freely to accuse thy self before God; a wicked Conscience
may accuse, I but it does not make the man to do his duty; he does not freely
accuse himself; it is only forced in him; it is with Coaction and Compulsion.
But its free in Gods Children; when Daniel went to confess his sins before
God, the Text says, he set himself to do it; I set my face unto the Lord God,
Dan. 9. 3. that is, his Conscience did not only do its duty, in this thing,
but it made him to do his.

Thirdly, when it does not only Condemn one for 3.
sin; for so the wicked have condemning Consciences, as the Apostles says; if
our heart condemn us, 1 John 3 20. that is, if we be wicked; as Paul says;
Knowing that he that is such, is subverted and sins being condemned of
himself, Tit. 3. 11. that is, he is a very wicked Creature; so that a wicked
man's Conscience does Condemn. But I mean when the Conscience does not only
condemn one for sin, it does not only do its own duty in this thing, but
it makes the man to do his; it makes him trample upon himself; as a damned
wretch in himself, to save God a labor, as the Apostles speaks; if we would
judge our selves, we should not be judged, 1 Cor. 11. 31. when Conscience makes
a man freely to accept of damnation; thou shall accept of thy punishment, then
I will remember my Covenant, Levit. 26. 41. 42. when it makes thee lay thy Neck
on the block; Lord the worst place in hell is too good for me. I have often
told you a story in the acts and monuments of the Church; when Edward the
first, one of the Kings of England was a hunting, and one of the standers by
had displeased him, the King rid after him with a drawn sword for to stab him,
the man run away for his life; the King rid over hedge and ditch to overtake
him, and when the man saw he had no way to escape, he fell down, and held up
his throat to the King, if it please your Majesty here is my throat. The King
melting toward him, showed him mercy. So when Conscience makes thee say Lord
here is my throat, here is my soul, if it please thee thou may send Satan to
take it, and carry it to hell with him. Thou have no way to escape, therefore
offer thy self unto God; may be thy Conscience does Condemn thee; alas that
is not it, thy Conscience does not its duty with any life, till it make thee
do thine; do thou freely Condemn thy self; accept of thy punishment, lay
thy head on the block, does thy soul lie grovelling before God? this is a live
Conscience.

Fourthly, when it does not only pull a man a days 4
from sin and Iniquity; so it may do with the wicked and the ungodly; they
feel many pulles every day, and may be their Conscience makes them leave many
particular sins, though that is very rare as the times now be, but when the
Conscience pulles a man forth of every known sin, when it so does its duty
in this kind, that it makes thee to do thine; when thou pullest thy self
withal detestation and loathing out of pride, out of security, out of
unbelief, out of heardnesse of heart, out of formality and all; this is a
lively Conscience; as Job says, my heart shall not reproach me so long as I
live, Job. 27. 6. that is; as my heart does its duty toward me, so it shall
make me do mine, I will yield to mine own Conscience in every thing;
whatsoever sin it tells me off, I will be sure to set my self against it; it
shall not lie heaving at me, and I never stir; then it would reproach me, but
it shall never reproach me so long as I live. These are the lively acts of
Conscience about sin.

The lively effects whereof are four.

The first, is a penitent shame, that ever a man should sin 1
against God; when Conscience does thus as ye have heard, then it produces this
effect, that the man is ashamed before God; as the Apostle says, what fruit
have you of those things whereof ye are now ashamed? Romans 6. 21. people are apt
to be ashamed before men, Diodorus Cronus, when Stilpo asked him a ridiculous
question, and he could not answer him; he was so ashamed, that he fell down
stark dead; he thought it was such a disgrace to be nonplust But if Conscience
were alive, and did do its duty indeed, it would make us ashamed for our
sins before God; Ezra was ashamed before God for the sins of the people, I
blush says he to lift up mine eyes unto thee; when a man is Ignorant of God in
Jesus Christ, this should be a shame. I speak this to your shame, 1 Cor. 15.
34. that is, if there be any grace in your hearts, certainly ye will be
ashamed that ye should have no more knowledge of God. I say when the Conscience
is alive against sin, it makes a man ashamed before God; It shows him his
nakedness before heaven, it propounds God before his eyes, seeing all his
uncleanenesse, and so it makes him ashamed before him; do thou Count it a
disgrace to do evil, a disgrace to offend God, a confusion of face to do
iniquity, though it be never so secret? Can thou not look upon thy unworthy
dealings with God, but it makes thee ashamed in his sight? this is the effect
of a living Conscience. 2


Secondly, another effect is penitent grief and compunction of heart; ye may
see this effect in the new converts; they were pricked in their hearts, Act. 2.
37. when their, Conscience began to be alive to smite them for their sins, to
accuse them and Condemn them, it grieved them exceedingly; it went to the
quick; it was like a Dagger in their heart; it pricked them; it made them mourn
for all that they had done. True, a natural Conscience produces grief; there is
nere a wretch but if his Conscience be awakened to Check him, and accuse him,
and condemn him, it will make him to grieve for his sins. But this is only
legal and surly. Now when the Conscience is alive to do its duty, as to make
the man to do his, now it makes him grieve out of love to God, out of love to
grace and goodness; now he grieves because he has broken those Commandments
that he loves; he loves to obey God O it is the unfeigned desire of his soul
to obey him and, therefore he grieves, that he has done the Contrary. 3


Thirdly, another effect is, penitent fear. It makes a man afraid to sin
against God again; as the Apostle says; Yea, what sear? 2 Cor 71. 1. a
natural conscience may cause a kind of fear too, nay, a horrible fear. The
sinners in Zion are afraid, fearfulness says surprised the Hypocrites, etc.
Isa. 33. 14. for a guilty Conscience cannot but work fears when its awakened,
but this fear is merely out of self love, and of Bondage. But when the
Conscience has done so its own duty upon a man, that it has made him to do
his, now it makes him filially afraid to sin against God; as a true Child
fears to offend his Father, when a man has this fear in him, this is a sign
of a living Conscience.

Fourthly, another effect is trembling despair in ones 4
self, it maks him see nothing but hell and damnation in himself; and it
flings him down at Gods Gate, as a man utterly undone in himself, having no
hope in himself, for as God dealt with Paul. in regard of his recovery out of
sickness he brought him to despair of life in himself, 2 Cor. 1. 8. so does a
living Conscience in regard of mercy; a natural Conscience the effect of that,
is to despair too. But that is to despair in God. because when there is
nothing but nature in the Conscience, how can it be otherwise? But when there
is grace in the Conscience, grace in the heart, now though Conscience represent
to him his damned estate, it represents withal the free grace of God in Jesus
Christ, to all such as are heavy laden, and so it is only despair in
himself; now have thou such an effect in thee, to despair in thy self; to
fling of all thine own hopes, and thy own dependences, hangings, holdings; ye
know the soul has a thousand thousand such, wishes, wouldings, purposes
duties, performances, these the soul hangs on. But now have thou this effect
in thee, that thou do absolutely despair in thy self? I mean self
confidence with whatsoever good is in thee, be it grace, or what ever; do
thou despair in thy self? this is a sign of a living Conscience; now thou
hang'st upon nothing, but the mere mercy and good will of God. And this is the
best hold in the world, though the world cannot abide it. Thus ye see for
sin. The livingnesse of Conscience in regard of sin.

Secondly, now for the livingnesse of Conscience in regard 2.
of good. Then is the Conscience alive to that which is good.

First, when it goes and it does not only urge a man to 1
that which is good; so it did Agrippa. Almost thou perswadest me to be a
Christian, Act. 28. 28. when Paul spoke unto him, it seems his Conscience
took hold of Paul's words, and it did mightily urge; it had almost done the
deed; alas this is not it; a dead Conscience may do this yea, with admirable
importunity; as it is in many. But when the Conscience does not only urge,
when that does not only do its duty in this point, but it makes a man do his
duty too; the man freely urges himself; and freely sets himself to it and
about it; as it was with David; when thou say, seek ye my face, my heart
said unto thee, thy face Lord will I seek, Psalm. 27. 8. that is, when thou
say thus in my Conscience, seek my face, my heart ecchoed back, I will do
so indeed; mark his Conscience did not only do its duty, but it made him to
do his; as his Conscience did urge him, so he took these urgings, and urged
himself.

Secondly, when the Conscience has life toward good, 2
it excuses, and it does not only excuse in part, for so it may do in a
wicked heart; many a wicked man has such an excusing Conscience, when he does
good for the matter of it, as we read in the Heathen, Romans 2. 15. their
Consciences accusing or else excusing; their Conscience did excuse in part. But
it excuses full out; it tells him, he has done it unfeignedly in the truth of
his heart, that he does believe in God, that he does truly repent from dead
works, that he does in some poor measure, walk in new obedience from day to
day; and that he stands guiltless before God, by faith in Christ Jesus; or if
it do not excuse thus, it is merely out of Ignorance of the things given him
of God; a living Conscience is an excusing conscience; it does not only say
the thing that he does is good but that he does it unfeignedly withal his
heart; true a natural Conscience not awakened may do thus, but that is a
misprision; for when it comes to see its own condition indeed, then it will be
in another tale; ah I am rotten; I have beguiled mine own soul to this very
day; but a living Conscience can never be confuted, as it excuses, so its
excuses shall stand before God, because it is quickened by the grace that is in
Jesus Christ, his blood is sprinkled on it.

Thirdly, when the Conscience has life toward good, 3.
it approves a man and his ways; it either may or does pronounce a man to
please God. As it was with Enech, he had a conscience that told him he was
approved of God; before his translation, he had this Testimony that he pleased
God, Heb, 11. 5. this is the nature of conscience, if it be alive, to do its
duty, and so as to make a man to do his, to tell a man that he is allowed of
God; which is an admirable mercy, that a child of God should have such an
intelligencer in his own bosom, that can tell him he is approved of God, no
creature is able to express what comfort this is; none but good people can
have this, others may be approved of men, others may hear that such and such
do approve them, but they can never hear that God does approve them. These
are the consciences only toward good, which it can never do except it be
alive.

Now the effects of these be. First Joy, when the conscience 4
does its duty toward God, and makes a man do his duty too, this works Joy
in his heart; as Paul says. This is our rejoyeing even the Testimony of our
conscience, that with sincerity and godly pureness we have had our
conversation in the world, 2 Cor. 1. 12. There is no joy like this joy; wicked
men may laugh, and seem as merry as crickets, but in the of their laughter,
their conscience gives them but cold comfort; now when a man has such a
conscience as this, that sets him about that which is good, this makes him have
truer joy then all the world besides; for howbeit the world are besotted, that
they do not look after God: Yet the conscience knows it is goodness only
that will please God; and therefore when the conscience is privy to this, no
tongue can speak what a joy this is unto one.

Secondly* another effect is boldness and freedom from 2
slavish fear: There Is a deal of fear in a man's heart, as long as he does
not serve God, and do the things that are pleasing in his eyes though it may
be people do not feel this same fear as long as they are well and lusty; but
let but conscience be awakened, or let death seize upon them* then a fear will
appear, O how afraid are they to go before God. But let a man have such a
living conscience as this, this gives a man boldness. The righteous are as
bold as a Lion Prove. 18. 1. thy conscience is an admirable thing; without this
all a man's boldness is nothing. Thou may hold up thy head very high, and out
face all the world for a time, as bold as can be; tush thou art well thought of
among all thy neighbors, but what says thy conscience? if that cannot say
thou art a gracious man, I tell thee thou can have no boldness. But now if
thou have this same living conscience, now thou may be as bold as a Lion;
though the world do accuse thee, yet what says thy conscience? if that excuse
thee, thou may show thy face, where thousands shall be confounded; when
Austin was accused by Secundinus to have come from the Maniehees for fear of
loss, and for hope of preferment, he comforted himself with his conscience, I
esteem not says he what Secundinus thinks of me, so long as my conscience
approves me before God; so also Paul, when the false Apostles accused him, O
says he, it is a very small thing with me, that I should be judged of you, 1
Cor. 4. 3. Thus ye see for good; what is the livingnesse of conscience toward
good. This is the second thing.

Thirdly, now about Poth; both sin and goodness, 3.
when is the conscience alive about both? namely when it does instruct a man,
and not only so, but it guides a man to shun the one, and to embrace the
other. This is a living conscience indeed, when it is a man's privy counsel
from day to day. This is a Divine Counsel; its like a little privy Counselor
in a Child of Gods bosom, that the Lord in mercy has placed there to direct
him; as David says, I will bless the Lord for giving me Counsel, my reins
instruct me in the night seasons, Psalm. 16. 7. By his reins he means his
conscience, now that did instruct him not only in the day time, but also in
the night; if he were tempted to sin, his conscience instructed him, nay, I
must not yield to that* if he found himself backward to any good duty, nay,
still his conscience advised him, nay, I must be forward to that. I confess a
dead conscience may give admirable counsel* and Instruction to the wicked; I*
their conscience proves it unto them. But it does not do its duty, for it does
not make them to do theirs. Thus ye see what a living conscience is, when it
so does its duty, that it makes us to do ours.

But it may be humbled conscience is paedagogus animae, it is the souls
Schoole*Master, as Origin calls it; now a Schoolmasters may do his duty,
though he do not make his Scholar do his; for if he be diligent in teaching
and doing of his office, the Scholar may be a dunce for all him; the best
Schoolmasters, may have a block head and a dunce in his School. I answer, the
reason is not alike.

First, a Schoolmasters teaches another. But conscience is a Schoolmasters
not to another but to a man's self; and therefore if the conscience do its
duty indeed, it must needs make the man to do his, because his conscience is a
Schoolmasters to himself.

Secondly, again a Schoolmasters is not always by his 2
Scholar, sometimes his back is turned; but conscience is ever by a man, and
therefore if it did always do its duty it might make the man to do his.

Again, Thirdly a Schoolmasters* it may be his Scholar 3
is duller then himself; and then though himself be never so learned, yet he
cannot put his learning into his Scholar. But it is not so here, here the
Scholar and the Schoolmasters is all one; one is no more dull then another,
for look how dull the one, so dull the other; look how active the one is, so
active is the other, because conscience and the man is all one; it is very
true, the conscience by accusation is eagerer then the man; for God may take a
dead conscience, and sur it exceedingly, and he does so ordinarily in men; but
these stirrings of conscience, are none of consciences stirring but Gods, my
spirit shall not always strive with man, Genesis 6. 3. they are his strivings
with men. But the consciences own quick enings, and the man's are all one; you
will say how shall I know whether the quickening that is in my conscience, be
my consciences, or only the Lords stirring in my conscience. I answer.

First, when thou art glad that thy conscience is so busy 1.
with thee, it is very welcome unto thee, then the Lord has made thy
conscience alive; then God does not only strive in thy conscience, but thy
conscience it self is alive; as we see there in David. I will bless the Lord
for giving me counsel, my reins do instruct me, Psalm. 16. 7. when his
conscience did instruct him, he was glad of it, he blessed the Lord for it; his
conscience was alive. But now in a wicked heart, the more his conscience
accuses, and condemns, and checks, the more buisie it is with him, the more
unwelcome it is, and therefore he labors to still it; may be he will stop it
with some thing; may be some little reformation for the time, may be with
Prayer, or some yeeldings thereunto; nay, there be some labor to drown it out
right, they will go to the Alehouse, or to Cards, or among their boon
companions, and so shake of those dumps; therefore my Brethren, if ye would
have a sign, that your conscience is alive, be glad at its dictates, give them
all their dear intertainement ye can. Bless the Lord for them, and make very
much of such, they are the sweet motions of Gods holy spirit, quench them not;
do not stop the mouth of them by half payments, let them have their full sway.

Secondly, when thou call upon thy conscience to be 2
buisie; when thou usest to stir up conscience every day, wind it up as a man
does his Clock, that it may be in continual motion. So the Prophet did; Why
art thou so heavy O my soul? why art thou so disquieted within me, hope thou
in God, Psalm. 42. 11. mark he took his conscience and stirred up himself with
it, a wicked man does not thus; his conscience comes before it is sent for, it
is like an unbidden guest. And therefore if thou would know whether thy
conscience be alive, do but consider whether this be thy course, if thou do
daily awaken thy conscience, if thou do set it a work, this is a sign of
life in it; as Paul did, here in do I exercise my self, that I may have a
good conscience, void of offense, Act. 24. 16. He labored for his conscience,
he called it up every day, he was active about it, so that the stirrings that
are in wicked men, they are none of theirs; but Gods merely to pull them out of
the bottomless pit, if it might be; in the mean time, his conscience is as
dead as himself. Thus ye see what the life of the conscience is. First, there
is a relative life of conscience; the conscience is alive, when the man is
alive. Secondly, the conscience is alive, when it makes duty so, that it makes
the man do his duty too; when it does not only check for evil, and accuse for
evil, and condemn for evil, and prompt a man that he should take heed of
evil, but it make a man do his duty in all these; so also when it does not
only urge a man to that which is good, and excuse him and approve him, but in
all these, it makes him do his duty too; so likewise when it counsels, it does
not only counsel and dictate what is to be done, and what not; but it so does
all these particulars, that it makes the man to do his duty, in sincerity from
day to day. This is alive conscience.

Now that this is the live conscience, I prove it unto you by five Arguments.

1. Because conscience was made not only to do all these 1
acts, but to make a man to do his; so that when conscience does its own acts
never so much, that is nothing to the life of conscience* does thy conscience
check thee, and smite thee, does it whisper never so much in thee? this is no
Argument it is alive, except it make thee to be obedient unto God Conscience was
given man for this purpose; and therefore then only is it alive, when it is
for this purpose in thy Bosom: when David would get up out of his temptations,
you may see how he got up by conscience; I communed with my own heart, and my
spirit says he made diligent search, Psalm. 77. 6. that is, he communed with
his conscience, what he knew about God, and so got himself up; this is thy
consciences office to tell thee what thou have heard out of the word, and that
is not all, but to lead thee, guide thee as the helm does the Ship. It is
given thee to be thy keeper, as he says, J was upright before him, and I kept
my self from my iniquity. Psalm. 18. 23. that is, this is my iniquity, this is
the sin that I am most inclined to, I must keep my self from that. Thus his
conscience was his keeper under God.

Secondly, another argument is, because this is the way 2
whereby godly people do their duties, their conscience makes them do their
duty, it makes them believe, it makes them fear God, it makes them eschew
evil and do good from day to day. Bless the Lord O my soul, and forget not
all his benefits, Psalm. 103. 2. when the Prophet would do this duty, he made
his conscience press it soundly upon him to do it; so when he would wait
upon God, he set his own soul and conscience upon him, to make him to do it;
wait on the Lord, be of good courage, he will strengthen thy heart, wait I
say upon the Lord, Psalm. 27. 14.

Thirdly, another argument is, this is the description of 3
those that have a live conscience, they are such as make themselves do their
duties continually; as the Apostle says. He that has this hope in him,
purisieth himself, even as he is pure, 1 John 3. 3. that is, he is a man that
makes himself do his duty, his own soul and conscience says thus unto him,
Christ is a pure Christ, and I must be like him, as ever I hope that he will
bring me into his kingdom; and this makes him do his duty; he purisieth
himself, even as he is pure; I could quote abundance of places to prove this.

Fourthly, another argument is; when God speaks to 4
any that are alive from the dead, to do their duties toward him, he bids
them make themselves to do their duties on this manner; so Saint Paul says,
Having these promises, let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of the
flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the sight of God, 2 Cor. 7. 1. that
is, go and ask your own soul, and conscience, what have I not these and
these promises? why then I must labor to be cleansed from all manner of sin,
I must perfect holiness in the fear of God; now says he, let us make our
selves do our duties thus.

Nay fifthly, when God speaks to them which are yet 5
dead, and would turn them home unto him, he bids them do thus in regard of
the means; turn your selves and live you, Ezekiel. 18. 32. that is, Let your
own souls and consciences consider this is the way to live, ye cannot be
saved without turning; as ever I would live for ever, I must be turned from all
my sinful courses; make your selves do your duties in this manner; that is,
use all the means, that the Lord has given you to use, make your selves go
about it, not as though any man has free will to turn himself; But he
speaks of the use of all means, that he puts into your hands; make your
selves to use them; nay no soul can ever look to be saved, except he do not
only let his conscience check him, and tell him thus and thus his duty is, but
also let his conscience make him do his duty too; so that this must needs be
the life of the conscience; when it does not only do its own duty, to check
and to whisper but also it makes a man to do his.

The use of this is; first, then we see here how few have Use 1.
live consciences, for people have consciences that do only tell them they
should be more careful; they should give over such and such sins, they should
believe, and they should be zealous, and they should be more settled, but O how
few have consciences that make them do their duties? Numb. 15. 40. that ye may
remember and do all my commandments and be holy unto your God.

REVEL. 3. 1. And art Dead.
WE are come to speak of this necessary point when is a man quickened up
toward God and all his holy ways? We have showed you three things concerning
this already. First, what the life of the mind is, Secondly, what the life of
the heart is. Thirdly, what the life of the conscience is. Now there remains
two more, the one is the life of the memory; the other is the life of the
affections.

Fourthly then, what is the life of the memory? for the 4
memory too may be dead, and the memory may be alive.

First, the memory may be dead; when a man may be 1.
remembers, if ye ask him a thing, he can tell it; ask him of a Sermon, he
can tell the Text and the points, and the particulars that were delivered in
the Sermon, but here is all, it is a dead memory, he never remembers it to any
purpose; this is to remember, even as if a man did not remember; as Moses
says, remember and forget not that thou provokedst the Lord to anger in the
wilderness, Deuteronomy. 9. 7. that is, remember it, and do not remember it with a
dead memory. As Balaam remembered that God was angry with him in the way, no
question but if a man had asked him about it a week or two after, he would have
showed that he did remember it, he could tell the place, the time, and the
manner, and how it was in his journey, and how the Lord stood before him with a
drawn sword. But alas this was a dead memory; for this practice showed plainly
that he had forgotten it in effect. I say there is a dead memory, a man may
have an excellent memory to go from point to point, nay, a better memory in
this sense then many of Gods dearest Children, and yet this memory be a dead
memory.

Secondly, there is a living memory; a memory that 2
has life in it; as God says of penitent Ephraim; I do earnestly remember
him still, Jer. 31. 20. mark, God did not only remember him, so he does
remember all men, he remembers reprobates and all, but he did very earnestly
remember him; so when a man does earnestly remember God; the remembrance he
has of him is earnest, he remembers his word earnestly, he is earnest in the
remembering of his will, though there be never so many things, to put God out of
his thoughts, he is daily tempted to forget himself in some thing or other
about God, but he is earnest to remember, when a man's memory is eager after a
thing, now it is a live memory.

Now the question is, when the memory is alive, for the handling of this.
First, I will show you what the memory is. Secondly; what a great blessing of
God it is that we have a memory. Thirdly, when the memory may be said to be
alive. Fourthly, we will prove it, and then we will make some uses of the point.

First, what memory is. It is the conservation of what we apprehend, as a man
has many things in common with a beast, so memory is in his fancy and
imagination, for look what a man has seen, or heard, or tasted, or smelt, or
felt, memory is the conservation of the same; some can remember the shape of
men, of town; and creatures, we can remember what color things are of, what a
taste such and such meats have, such a memory beasts have, as we see in the
milch Kine, they remembered their Calves, 1 Samuel 6. 12. they went lowing as they
went; thus the children of Israel remembered the flesh that they had in Egypt,
we remembered the flesh, which we did eat in Egypt, Numb. 11. 5. and this we
call a sensitive memory.

Secondly, memory, most properly, is a faculty of the 2
mind, whereby it preserves the species of what it once knew and therefore
when a man is said to remember he is said to be mindful, as David says, be ye
mindful always of his Covenant, 1 Chro. 16. 15. that is look you always
remember his Covenant, for when the mind once knows a thing, memory is a
certain Paper of the mind, to retain it and to keep it, and therefore it is
called the souls storehouse; it is the souls treasury, as our Savior Christ
speaks; a good man out of the good treasury of the heart, brings forth good
things; and an evil man out of the evil treasure of the heart, brings forth
evil things, Matthew. 12. 35. memory is the souls chest, where it keeps all its
Jewels; that look what a man knows, specially if he like it, presently he lays
it up to keep by him, as it is said of Mary, still when she knew any thing of
our Savior, when she knew of any saying of his, she kept it in her heart; Mary
kept all these sayings, Luke 2. 19. properly I say memory is a faculty of the
mind, whereby when it knows a thing once, it is able to keep it. This we call
intellectual memory.

Thirdly, by consequent, memory is in the conscience; 3.
for the soul of man being privy to it self* what it knows, what its told of
God, what notions it has, what it does, what it has done, or what it has not
done, it has a Paper to record this; and therefore in this sense, we call
memory the souls Register; for thus it is in the conscience; so when the
Son, of Jacob were privy to themselves, that they had sold their brother
Joseph ye know how their conscience remembered what they had done, above twenty
years after. O we are verily guilty concerning our Brother, in that we saw the
anguish of his soul, when he besought us, and we would not hear. Genesis 42. 21.
their conscience had registered their fact up, and did remember it against them,
so many years after. So Adonibezek being privy to himself, when he cut off the
thumbes and the great toes of threescore and ten Kings, and made them to gather
scraps under his Table, you see how his conscience had registered this, and
could remember it against him another day, Judge. 1. 7. so that memory is by
consequent in the conscience too. And this memory we call the Book of a man's
conscience. These three are all the proper memories that we have, because
memory can properly be nowhere but where apprehension is; either sensitive
apprehention as in fancy; or intellectual apprehension, as in the mind; or
reflective apprehension as in the conscience; they understood not thy wonders,
neither did they remember them, Psalm. 106. 7.

Fourthly, memory in an improper sense, is in the will 4.
and heart of a man, because there is some retention too of what is past and
gone; as let a man love or hate his brother, though that act be past and gone,
yet there is some retention of that act against another time, for when a man
has hated one heretofore, he is the more ready to hate him afterward; which
is a sign that the heart does retain what it did before; nay, says
Aristotle, there is memoria in pedibus; there is memory in the feet; there is
memory in the hand; as the Psalmist speaks; if I forget thee O Jerusalem, let
my right hand forget her cunning, Psalm. 137. 5. this is called remembering too
in the Scripture; but this is improperly so called; this we call a habit or
faculty, or a dexterity in acting, by reason of precedent actings. Thus ye see
what memory is. Now this memory is of things that are past; for if things be
present, we are said to see them, or behold them, or so. But when they are
past, now if we can see them still, this is by way of remembering; indeed we may
be said to remember things both present and to come, in regard that our
knowledge of them is past; as the Apostle says, Remember them that are in
Bonds; as being bound with them; Heb. 13. 3. that is, though the thing be now
present, yet I would have you remember it; because your warning is past; this
is a duty, ye have been told in times past, therefore look ye remember it. So
Solomon says, Remember thy creator in the days of thy youth, Psalm. 12. 1.
That is, though thy creator be not past, yet thy creation is past, and thou
art not so young but thou have been told of thy duty in this thing in times
past; O therefore remember that; nay, thus a man may remember that which is yet
to come, as for example the day of his death, that he must dye and come to
Judgment; for though the thing be yet to come, yet he has had warnings of it
in times past; as Jeremy says of Jerusalem, her filthiness is in her skirts,
she remembered not her last end, therefore she came down wonderfully, Lam. 1.
2. the Lord finds fault with her that she did not remember her time to come.
The reason is, because she was told of it aforehand in times past.

Now for the second thing; that this is a great blessing, 2
beloved it is a great blessing of God, that we have such a faculty in us as to
remember; it was a naughty speech of Charoone that an excellent memory is
needful for three sorts of men. First, for great Tradesmen, for they having
many businesses to do many reckonings, many Irons in the fire, had need of a
good memory. Secondly, great talkers; for they being full of words, had need to
have a good Storehouse in their heads to feed their tongues. Thirdly, for
Liars; oportet mendaeem esse memorem, for they telling many untruths, had need
of a good memory, to be able to remember what untruths they have told, lest
afterward they be taken in their lying, contradicting themselves. I say this a
profane speech, as though a good memory were of no other use, then for
engrossers of affairs, and talkative fellows, and forging companions; whereas
memory is a great blessing of God, and the more we have of it, the more
advantage we have unto our own eternal good, if we have a heart.

First, it is a great blessing that what we once knew, we 1
may always know; now this may be by memory; were it not for this, we should
be Ignorant again as fast as we learn; whence is it that ye still know how to
read but because ye remember your letters and spelling; whence is it that ye
still know your Trades and your callings, which ye were taught so long ago,
but ye remember how ye were taught. Ye once knew the grounds of religion, may
be ye were taught heretofore; if ye know them still, it is because ye remember
them; were it not for memory, we should be as much to seek, as if we had never
learnt ought; as Jude says, I will put them in remembrance, though ye once
knew this, Jude. 5. that is, as ye once knew it, so I desire that ye may know
it still; that it may stick by you, that you may make it your own; what a mercy
is this? we cannot undertake to have always the means of knowledge, we may
want preaching; God knows how soon; now if we have memory to lay up some
knowledge, we may have the benefit of it, how ever things go; may be God gave
us a warning, to take heed of such and such sins, now if we have a good
memory, this warning may be still present with us; we have had such motions,
such convictions, such sights of sin, such stirrings, such manifestations of
God to us, what a mercy is it that God has given us such a thing as memory is?
as we had them once, so we may have them still if we remember them.

Secondly, memory is a great blessing, to bring our knowledge 2
to act upon all occasions. How many thousand truths do we know, that we do
not, neither can we actually think of; now when we have use of those truths,
it is a great mercy, that the Lord has framed a memory in us, where we may
have them upon all such occasions; e. g. we know we should be patient, may be
we do not think of this duty for a day together, but now when we have use of
it, then we may remember it; So for meekness we know it, and for forgiving of
wrongs, to resist temptations, to deny our selves, to shun the occasions of
evil, we know all these things, but our knowledge cannot always be in act;
now when we have use of these truths, what a mercy is it that we have such a
thing as memory is to remember them afresh? did David actually think of Gods
gracious judgments always? no, but when he had use of them, when he was at a
dead lift, then memory brought him to mind. I remembered thy judgments O Lord
and comforted myself, Psalm. 119. 52. may be Peter had no occasion actually to
think of those words of Christ, that John indeed Baptized with water, but ye
shall be Baptized with the holy Ghost: but having a memory, that gave him the
use of those words in due time; then I remembered the word of the Lord says he,
Act. 11. 16. may be this truth is not thought of a 12. month together, that
ones enemies may be they of our own household; now perhaps all on a sudden; we
have use of this truth, then we remember it: now is not this a great mercy,
that God has given us such a thing; that we may put up his truths, as a man
does his memory in his purse, to take it out when occasion is.

Thirdly, it is a great blessing to have God always with 3
one; this memory is such a faculty, that if a man have a heart, he may have
God always with him, and heaven with him; ye know that most men are without
God in the world, what is the reason of it? but because they will not remember
him? how many do know God very much? as the Heathens did, they knew him to be
eternal, to be Almighty, to be every where, to be holy and just, they knew
him, but they did not like to retain him in their knowledge, Romans 1. 28. that
is, they let him go away from them, they would not keep him in remembrance, as
Nebuchadezer says of his dream, when he had forgotten his dream, it is gone
away from me, says he, Dan. 2. 5. so people forget God, they let God go away
from them; now beloved this makes us without excuse, when God has given us a
memory, we might have God always with us, if we had a heart; we need not let
him go away. The memory is a deep vault in the soul, where it may hide what
it has a mind too, that, nor men nor devils can take it away from us; as the
Israelites hid their corn from the Midianites, so we may hide what ever our
heart has a likeing unto in our memories, that we may have it always with us,
if we will; as it is said of the good Merchant, when he had found the rich
Treasure he hid it, Matthew. 13. 44. that is, he laid it up in his souls
storehouse; as Solomon says, my Son if thou will receive my words, and hide
my Commandments with thee, Prove. 2. 1. I say the memory is a deep vault in the
soul, where a man hides what he has a mind to, that it may never be taken
away from him; so that memory is an excellent thing; a man may have God always
with him, and heaven and all heavenly things, if so he have a mind to them.

Fourthly, it is a great blessing, that if a man chance to 4
go out of his way, he may put himself in again, seeing he has a memory; I
speak of a Christian, that has once heard the ways of God he cannot go out,
but by memory he may put himself in again; memory is the souls Map; as David
says, all the ends of the earth shall remember themselves and turn unto the
Lord, Psalm. 22. 27. he speaks of all Gods Elect; mark how they get into the
way again, they shall remember themselves so when are a man steps aside by
pride, thus he may come in again by remembering himself; O, God resists the
proud, the Lord says he will give grace to none but the humble; thus he may
come in again; so if he step aside by too much yielding to the world, thus he
may set himself to rights, O woe is me, what have I done? now I remember the
love of the world is enmity with God; if he chance to have bythoughts at the
hearing of the word, let him remember himself, O what a beast am I* I forgot I
was in Gods presence with him, I remember my self, that I am before him; and
thus he may correct himself; so the prodigal Son did, when he had fetched
his wild vagary, at last he remembered himself; O how many hired Servants of
my Fathers have bread enough? Luke 15. 17. he remembered what a good Father he
had run away from, this fetched him home again.

Fifthly, it is a great blessing to help a man to believe; 5
though a man do not believe for the present; he hears the word of God, he
hears that which might do him good, but for the present he does not believe;
yet who knows but this very word may do him good another day, memory may
bring it to mind, through the goodness of God, and then he may believe it; as
the Disciples of Christ, ye may read how that Christ spoke some words, that did
them little good for the present. But the Text says, that when he was risen
again, then they remembered the words that he had said unto them, and believed,
Ioh. 2. 22. many times we are untoward for the present, and then the word does
us little good, I but it is a blessing that we can remember; the same word may
be represented by our memories to us, and may do the deed; as we see in the
second son in the Gospel; his Father said to him, go work to day in my
Vineyard; ye know how distempered he was for the present, he answered and said,
I will not, Matthew. 21. 29. I but afterward he repented himself and went, that
is, he remembered afresh what his Father said to him, and that made him do it.

Sixthly, it is a great help to better knowledge; it may be at the first, when
we are taught, the word does not sink into our hearts, we do not understand it.
But yet remembering what it was we were told, afterward through the mercy of
God some thing or other comes in, that now we can say, blessed be God, now I
understand such a truth, such a promise, such a commandment; and yet no new
teaching, but remembering only what we read or heard; as sometime one of the
Jewish Doctors not understanding that place in the Prophet, where it is said,
that God would sweep them away with the besom of destruction, isa. 14. 23.
afterward seeing a maid come with her besome to sweep the house, now he saw
the meaning of the place; so when Christ said to Peter, that before the Cock
crowed twice he would deny him thrice; that Peter had a poor weak heart, and
that he had a horrible deal of faint-heartednesse in him, and that he would
deny his own Master, Peter understood not his words, he saw no such thing in
his heart, as to think those words to be true. But when he had been in the
High Priests Hall and there had abjured his Master, and had heard too the Cock
crow twice, and his Master look at him, now he remembered his words, and went
out and wept hitterly, Matthew. 26. 75. that is, now he saw the truth of Christ's
words, now he saw what a wretched heart he had, and lamented it. I say memory
is a great help unto knowledge; as God says; O my people, remember now what
Balak King of Moab consulted; and what Baalam the Son of Beor answered him from
Shictim to Gilgal, that ye may know the righteousness of the Lord, Mieh. 6. 5.
How many things have we heard and seen, when we were children, that then we
never knew the meaning of? yet afterward when we come to have more wit, then
remembering what they were, we understand them; as Christ said to Peter, when he
went to wash his feet; what I do thou know not now, but thou shall know
hereafter, John. 13. 7. that is, when thou remembrest it hereafter, then thou
shall know my meaning in it.

Seventhly, memory is as excellent help for a man to 7
preach to himself; Beloved we can but preach to you an hour or so, but
seeing God has given you memories, ye may preach to your selves all the day
long; memory may help you to repeat the word every day in your hearts; as the
Apostle says, speaking unto your selves, Ep. 5. 19. so by reason of this
blessing of God, ye may speak to your selves from day to day.

Nay eighthly, it is an excellent thing, for it may let you 8
have the benefit of things before they be; your death is not yet, your last
sickness is not yet, your salvation is not yet; the day of judgment, the
Kingdom of glory, these are things that are not yet. I but, you having a
memory, ye may have much Benefit by them in the mean time; ye may represent
them to your selves as things present, and have a world of good by them; and so
all the things that are past, no act of the soul can make them still present
but memory; your childe-hood is past, all the Sermons that ye heard heretofore
are all past. O how many sins have ye committed in times past! and how many
dealings have ye had of God in the days that are past? now having a memory,
except ye have graceless hearts, ye may do your selves good by all these,
even as if they were now before you; if a child of God be at a loss for the
present, he may help himself by memory; as David says, I remembered the days
of old; I call to remembrance my Song that I have had, Psalm. 77. 5. 6. so if
any of you besecure, ye may remember some thing or other that is past, which
may awaken you again; has God never showed you your damned estate heretofore?
were ye never sick heretofore, and did you not see that if ye had dyed in that
case, ye had perished; ye may remember that now, and awaken your selves; and how
if God should take you away in such a case as that? It cannot be related what a
blessing it is that we have a memory.

But let us come to the third thing; and that is this, when may the memory be
said to be alive? I answer, there be two parts of the memories deadness
toward God. The first is an aptness to forget God and all his commands.
Secondly, an aptness to remember those things that are not so good for us; now
when those two faults are rectified in some measure then the memory is alive
toward God.

First, There Is aptness in your memories to forget God 1.
and all his commands; ye know God commands us to remember the Sabbath day to
keep it holy, Exodus 20. 8. how apt are we to forget it? how commonly is it out
of our minds? so in the 78. Psalm, and the 7. verse, God says there, he would
not have us sorget his works, but that we should keep his commandments; now
O how apt are we to let them leake out of our hearts? we have a hellish art of
forgetfulness; how often do we forget our selves herein, and suffer the
remembrance of God to be taken away from us? ye have forgotten the exhortation
that speaks to you as to Children, Heb. 12. 5. how often do we forget to keep
our selves unspotted? though we be told of the will of God, yet any little
thing is enough to put it out of our minds, stay them not least my people
forget it; though we be told of our misery, and the infinite danger we are in,
may be at the first it moves us a little, but how soon do we forget it, and
other things take us up? now when this aptness is rectified in some measure;
when God has a sound impresse on our minds that we must needs remember him,
and all the things that concern our peace; when there is a Law in our minds,
that we will not forget God; as ye may see there in David, Bless thou the Lord
O my soul, and forget not all his benefits, Psalm. 103. 2. when our memory is
sanctified, and is made the good Treasury of our heart; when the Lord has
lifted up our memory unto him, then it is alive.

Secondly, as by nature there is an aptness in our memory 2
to forget God, so there is an aptness to remember other things that either are
not good for us, or not so good; we are apt to remember injuries; nay, one
injury will be thought one more then many good turns; so likewise idle tales,
we are apt to remember them; whereas good things go out in our hearts like
sparks in wet tinder. We may see this in the hearing of the word; the Apostle
terms us forget sull hearers, James 1. 25. if a tale be told us in a Sermon,
that we can remember; how many are apt to carry that way; whereas that which is
wholesome, and might do us more good, how apt we are we to forget that? as a
Divine says, our memories are like strainers, all the pure milk runs
through, but if there be any dross, that stays behind; or like a grate that
lets the pure water run away, and if there be any strawes and sticks and filth
and mud, and dregs, that it holds, so it is with our memories by nature
trifles, and toys, and worldly things, them we are apt to remember, like the
Shepherd in Yorkshire, that could remember all his flock, he kept a thousand
sheep, and if one should but change one Sheep and put in another, he could tell
which it was. But for gracious things our memories does soon forget them; like
Israel, they soon forgot all the works of God, Psalm. 106. 13. now what is this
but the corruption and deadnes of our memories toward God? may be we are apt
to excuse it, alas we have weak memories true, if we were as weak memoryed in
other things, it were something; but when we can remember our pleasures, and
profits and tales, and any thing; when*we go to buy, weel'e be sure to
remember our selves there, when to sell, we will be sure to remember our selves
there, that we will have to the worth if we can. But in matters of God there we
forget our selves; this cannot be excused. Now when this is rectified in some
measure, then our memory is alive; when we will rather forget any thing else
then God; rather forget our selves in all the world, then forget our duty
toward God, when this study is once set up soundly in the soul in some
measure, now the memory is alive. Thus ye see the third thing.

Now for the fourth, that this must needs be the life of the memory, I prove it
by arguments.

First, because the memory has hardly any other 1
quickening, then the quickening of the man whose memory it is, so that when
the man's mind is quickened together with his conscience and heart, the memory
is quickened too; as the Prophet says, I will never forget thy precepts, for
with them thou have quickened me, Psalm. 119. 93. that is, my memory is
quickened up to thy precepts, because with them thou have quickened me; for we
see commonly, that the faculty of memory is much at one after conversion that
it was before conversion; if it were a weak memory before; so it is after;
only this; as the strength of it was let out toward the world and sin, and
self before, so now the strength of it is in some measure let out toward the
best things. And therefore what can the life of the memory be, but the aptness
of a man to remember God?

Secondly, because this is the only practical memory; 2
ye know a man may have an admirable memory, to remember Sermons, whole
Chapters in the Bible, and yet have a dead memory to God; a Sanctified memory,
is a practical memory; as the Lord says, remember the Sabbath day, to keep it
holy; q. d. ye may remember still when the Sabbath is come, I this is the
Sabbath day; that is not it; that is only a contemplative memory. But I would
have you have a practical memory; not only to remember the duty, but remember
for to do it; for as the contemplative understanding has a faculty of
conserving its species; so the practical understanding, has a faculty of
conserving its species too; as long as a man has not this practical memory,
it is nothing. Because he remembered not to show mercy, Psalm. 109. 16. mark,
the Lord does not sinde fault with a man for not remembering of that duty, for
may be he did remember that, I but he did not remember to do his duty; this is
a live memory, when a man's practical memory is toward God and his ways. Now
when a man is made again to remember God and all his holy ways, now his
memory must needs be made practical.

Thirdly, because this is the only memory that 3.
represents things lively to the soul. I say when a man is made in some
measure apt and inclined to remember God, then and only then does his memory
represent God and his ways lively to him; ye know reason says the life of the
memory must needs be in this, that it represents things lively and powerfully
unto us; when it does not only show us what we do remember, but it shows it
to the life; when it shows it dully and bluntly and obscurely, that is with a
kind of forgetfulness; then a man remembers it to the full, when a man
remembers to the utmost of what he once knew; so that if a man's memory be
alive, it must remember to the full in a perfect manner; as David says, I have
remembered thy name O Lord in the night, and have kept thy Law; Psalm. 119. 55.
that is, I remembered it, and remembered it to the full, I represented it
powerfully to my self, so that I made my self to keep thy Law by it. I
affected my own heart by what I did remember; as the Church says, my Ieule
has them s^^ll in remembrance, and is humbled within me, Lam. 3. 20. well then
ye see, that a lively memory is it that represents things lively to a man; now
when a man is made again to remember God and his ways, then and never till
then does he represent God lively to himself. Those that have not this
aptness wrought in them, may be they remember God now and then, and the duties
now and then, but they never remember them in a lively perfect manner.

The use of this is, first, if this be the only lively memory Use 1.
to be apt to remember God, then let us labor to get this same aptness into
our minds to remember God in all our ways. Let us consider. First because
without this memory, all men's other cries are nothing. Israel had a memory to
remember God; they remembered that God was their Rock, and at the high God was
their redeemer, Psalm. 78. 35. but that remembrance was nothing. So that if we
be not thus mindful of God, we are yet in our sins; as God tells Judah.
Because thou have forgotten me, and cast me behind thy back, therefore be are
thou thy lewdness, Ezekiel. 23. 35. if a man were once pulled out of his sins,
if he once had that true conviction, and godly sorrow, and reformation, and
faith and amendment of life that is in being converted, the soul would have
the lively remembrance of it still, to make him go on as he has begun, and
therefore if we have not this blessed remembrance yet in us, it is most plain
we are yet in our sins.

Thirdly, thy heart can never retain Gods commandments 2
without this same memory; as Solomon says; My Son forget not my Law, but
let thy heart keep my Commandments, Prove. 3. 1.

Fourthy, The want of this remembering of God is the 3
cause of all sin; Moses speaking of all the sins of Israel, says he, they
have forgotten the God that formed them, Deuteronomy. 32. 18. so again in another
place; they have perverted their way, they have forgotten the Lord, Jer. 3. 21.
so again it is said in the Book of the Judges, the Children of Israel did
evil in the sight of the Lord, and forgot him, Judge. 3. 7.

Fourthly, the want of this memory, is the high way to 4
destruction, the Lord will destroy them, that forget him; that do not
remember to fear him, that do not press it upon their minds still to regard
him; the Lord will in the end, destroy all such people; as he says, Israel
has forgotten his maker, therefore I will kindle afire, that shall devour
them, Hos. 8. 14. Beloved how do we look that God should remembers us, if we
will forget him. I will utterly forget you. Jer. 23. 39.

Secondly, another use is to show you, how ye may get 2
alive memory. There be seven causes of it.

The first, is a true knowledge of God. I told you remembrance 1.
is most properly in the understanding; now look how a man understands God, so
he does remember; if a man know God only literally, he remembers him no
otherwise; but if a man know God aright, then he remembers him aright. The
understanding can keep no other species then it has; if it have a saving
knowledge of God, then it has saving species of God; no man can have other
money in his purse, then he puts into his purse. If he would have Gold in his
purse, he must put Gold into his purse; so if we would remember God aright, let
us labor to get a right knowledge of him. I will establish my Covenant with
thee, and thou shall know that I am the Lord, that thou may remember, etc.
Ezekiel. 16. 62. 63.

Secondly, a new and a true heart; men's memories ever 2
follow the nature of their hearts; they ever will remember that their memory
is set to; let a man be proud, he will ever remember his respect; let him do
any thing that seems to deserve praise, he will ever remember to jet himself;
let him be at any time disparaged, he will ever remember to be very much
stirred; so let a man be covetous, he will ever remember his profit, he will
remember never to go against his profit, if he can otherwise choose; what ever
he forgets, he will not forget that; so let a man be Bookish, let a man's lusts
be to have learning, he will be sure to remember that; now if a man's heart be
set truly toward God, this will draw his mind toward God, now he will
remember to please God, to have his heart in a sweet frame; if he sinde any
distemper in his heart, he will remember to remove that if he can possibly;
when the heart is upright, it runs thus; we will remember thy love more then
wine, the upright love thee, Cant. 1. 4. so that if we would remember God with
this alive memory, we must get an upright heart.

Thirdly, a clear and a distinct estate before God; as long as a man is
confused in his conscience, he knows not 3.
what to make of himself; this breaks the neck of true memory; methodus est
matter memoriae, distinctnesse is the mother of memory as we say. Let a man be
confused in his notions, this spoileth all memory; so it is here, as long as we
are confused in our consciences, we know not where we are; we cannot remember
God; we know not what to call to mind; his justice or his mercy, his promises
or his threatenings; as David when he was to seek at one time, he could not
remember God to any purpose, I remembered God and was troubled says he, Psalm.
77. 3. He was troubled horribly in remembering of him; like a man in his wooing,
he is troubled to remember ought; now when a man has cleared up his Estate,
it is strange to see how clear he is in his Prayers, how clear in his
conscience, clear in his apprehensions, where as another man knows not where
he is; so that if we would remember God in all our ways, let us labor to
clear up our estates; this will help us to remember him a thousand times
better then ever we did before; then we shall see his promises distinctly, and
every thing distinctly.

Fourthly, a delight in good ways; this is a very admirable help of memory;
what is the reason, we are apt to 4.
forget any thing, but because we do not regard it; the more the mind regards
any thing, the more it remembers it; as the Prophet says, I will delight my
self in thy Statutes, I will not forget thy word, Psalm. 119. 16. And so for
hope too. Ps. 78. 7.

Fifthly, meditation is another cause of this remembering 5
of God; meditationes salvant memoriam says Aristotle. the more a man thinks
of a thing, it is the deeper in his mind; when the good man had said, he would
remember Gods works, Psalm. 77. 11. O says he, I will meditate of them, verse
12.

Sixthly, the rubbing up of our memories. The memory 6.
is a very lazy faculty, if it be not every foot rubbed up, it will be
forgetful; therefore we should rub up our minds, if we see them ready to let
his word slip, we must call it back again; as the Lord says, remember this
and show your selves men, bring it to mind O ye transgressors, I sa. 46. 8. our
memories are naturally exceeding slippery, they are apt to leake out that which
is good; and therefore we should take pains with our minds, as the Apostle
speaks; therefore we ought to give the more earnest heed to the things that we
have heard, least at any time we let them slip, Heb. 2. 1.

Seventhly, and lastly, which is the maine of all, and that 7
is the holy Ghost. But the comforter which is the holy Ghost, whom the Father
will send in my name, he shall teach you all things and bring all things to
your remembrance, whatsoever I have said unto you, John. 14. 26.

FINIS.

