A DIVINE MESSAGE TO THE ELECT SOUL: The Heads of these ensuing SERMONS
contained in this BOOK. Viz. The use and benefit of Divine Meditation The
danger of deferring Repentance. The Arraignment of vain and evil thoughts. The
Judgment of the World passed by the Saints. The punishment of unworthy
Receivers. The Duty of Communicants. The Duty of Reprovers and Persons reproved.


The second Edition, corrected and amended by a worthy friend of the AUTHORS.

A DIVINE MESSAGE TO THE ELECT SOUL: DELIVERED In eight Sermons upon seven
several Texts.

By that laborious and faithful Messenger of CHRIST, Mr. William Fenner, B.D.
Sometimes Fellow of Pembroke Hall in Cambridge, and late Minister of Rochford in
Essex.

The second Edition, corrected and Enlarged.

I have sent unto you the pestilence, after the manner of Egypt; your young men
have I slain with the sword, and have taken away your horses, I have made the
stink of the Camp to come up to your nostrils, yet have ye not returned to me,
says the Lord: therefore thus will I do unto thee, O Israel; and because I
will do this unto thee, prepare to meet me thy God, O Israel.

Amos 4.10.12. Printed at London by T.R. and E.M. for John Stafford, and are to
be sold at his house in Brides Churchyard, 1647.

THE EPISTLE TO the godly Reader of these pious Sermons.
THE Author of these ensuing Sermons, Master William Fenner, was so deservedly
famous in the Church of God, and so well known unto me in particular, and one
to whom I was so much obliged when he was living, as that I could not think it
sufficient to give a bare Imprimatur unto his Sermons, but have added this
Testimony also, that thereby all good people might be encouraged to read these
Works of his, whose life and conversation was a continual Sermon, and who
spent himself in studying and preaching, and whose memory will be ever precious
unto

Your loving friend, Edm. Calamy.

TO THE READER.
Good Reader,
THe Author of these Sermons, having served his time, and being fallen asleep,
The lot is fallen upon me to appear in their behalf, and to seal unto their
worth and usefulness for public service, as far as thou please to seal unto
my judgment and faithfulness in such a case, with thine opinion and
approbation. For the truth is, that the strength and value of my testimony
concerning them, is like to extend no further, then thine does concerning me:
So that if I add any thing to their credit and estimation in the world, by my
recommendation, it is by the mediation of thine ingenuity and fairness toward
me. But if thou shall please to be at any reasonable cost in the reading of
them, and lay thy judgment and conscience as close to the Spirit, as thou must
thine eyes to the letter of what thou read, I make no question but I shall
be the gainer, and not they, by this engagement of my self for them. True
worth, especially when it overcomes, and breaks out of the cloud of obscurity,
always returns more then what it receives from any man's testimony: neither is
there any method or trade so proper and certain, whereby to raise an estate of
honor and reputation to a man's self, as the bestowing or casting honor and
reputation upon others, so he be careful and dexterous in the choice of his
subject. John Baptist by giving testimony only to one, Jesus Christ, outgrew
the common stature of those that are born of women, in true greatness, Mat.
11.11. And yet there was little or nothing (in effect) added to Jesus Christ
himself by his testimony, Joh. 5.34. It is an ingenuous and inoffensive way to
serve our selves out of other men's excellencies, by advancing them: neither do
the generality of men in their practice, more generally consent upon any
principle of reason and equity, then this, To recompense such men with terms of
honor, who are unpartial and free in subscribing and acknowledging the worth
and eminency of others. And as many that are but of mean condition in the
world otherwise, yet maintain themselves comfortably, by trimming and dressing
the gardens and orchards, and vineyards of rich and wealthy men: so may men
that want other personal abilities and excellencies of their own, subsist upon
terms of a convenient reputation, only by vindicating, adorning, and setting
forth the endowments and graceful parts of other men.

The subject or argument of these Sermons, is partly that noble and
high-importing strain of Christian devotion; Preparation for that solemn
enterview of Jesus Christ in his death, at his Table; The great severity of
Gods proceedings against despisers of admonitions and reproof. Both theames of
savoury consideration for all those that love not death; and more especially
for those, who desire not only to be saved, but to be saved upon sweeter and
more comfortable terms then as by fire, 1 Cor. 3.15. Those that were chastened
with weakness, and sickness, and death, amongst the Corinthians, 1 Cor.
11.30. were yet saved, ver. 32. but this was as by or through fire: though they
did not perish, were not consumed by the flames of Gods displeasure against
them, yet they were sorely scorched with them, the smell of this fire was
strong upon the garments of their flesh: They discerned not the body of his Son
Jesus Christ, in his ordinances; but in stead of that holy, reverend, and
deep-studied behavior which was due unto it, both from their inner and outward
man, as being a creature of the highest and deepest sanctification that ever
God sanctified; Sanctified not only to a more excellent and glorious condition,
but also to many ends and purposes of far higher and deerer concernment, both
for the glory of God, and benefit of Men themselves, then all other creatures
whatsoever, whether in heaven or in earth: They handled and dealt by it in both
kinds, as if it had been but a common or unsanctified thing; thus they
discerned not the Lords body. And as they discerned not his body, so neither
did God (in some sense) discern theirs; but in those sore strokes and heavy
judgments which he inflicted on them, had them in no other regard or
consideration, then as if they had been the bodies of his enemies, the bodies
of wicked and sinful men; thus drawing the model and platform of their
punishment (as usually he does) from the structure and proportion of their sin.
And if the moral or spiritual seeds and originals of our outward and bodily
afflictions, as sicknesses, weaknesses, either upon our selves or ours,
declining estates, losses, etc. (which still lie deeper than the natural) were
but carefully and narrowly sought out, it is much to be feared we should find
a great part of them (at least) in the bowels of the same Sin so frequent
amongst us, I mean, of Not discerning the LORDS Body. The just and righteous
God builds up the breaches that we make upon the honor belonging to the body
of his Son, with the ruins of that honor which he had given unto ours in
health, strength, life, and many other outward comforts and supports. But thou will hear more of these things in the Sermons themselves: the wholesome
Admonitions and Reproofs wherein contained, with the rest of that heavenly
provision for thy Soul, which thou shall find here gathered together, and laid
into thy hand, I heartily wish may be sanctified unto thee by the highest hand
of the Sanctifier; that so thy sins and corruptions may fly seven ways before
that Spirit of power which here pursues them, and thou never presume to return
back again unto them more. The God whom we serve, is able to perform this
great petition, by Jesus Christ. To whose grace the peace of thy soul is
faithfully and feelingly recommended by

That poor and unworthy servant of Christ and his Church, John Goodwin.

The Contents and Heads of the eight following Sermons.
The Contents of the first two Sermons from HAG. 1.5.
THe Preface showing the usefulness of Meditation, together with the danger in
neglecting it, Page 1 The opening of the Tex in several particulars, page 4
Doctrine. Serious Meditation of our sins by the lord, is an especial means for
to make us repent, 4 The definition of Meditation in four particulars, 4 1 It
is an exercise of the mind, 4 2 A settled exercise of the mind, 5 3 It is to
make a further inquiry into all the parts of the truth, 6 4 It labors to
affect the heart, 7
Two Reasons. 1. Because Meditation presses ^ll Arguments home to the heart, 7
2 Because Meditation fastens sin close upon the ^oul, and makes the soul to
feel it, 9
1 Use. For the reproof of several sorts of men that are loath to put in
practice this so necessary a duty, 12 Four lets of Meditation. 1. Vain company,
14 2 Multitude of worldly business, 14 3 Ignorance, 16 4 That natural
averseness is in the heart of man unto it, 16
This averseness of heart consists in three things 1 In the carelessness of
the heart, 17 2 In the runnings and rovings of the heart, 17 3 In the
wearisomnesse of the heart in meditation, 17
2 Use. For terror unto all those that dare sit down in security, never at all
regarding this soul searching duty, 18 Four means or helps to meditation. 1
With all seriousness tell the soul that thou have a message from the Lord unto
it, 20 2 Observe sitting times for meditation: viz. 1 The morning, 21 2 The
night, 22 3 The evening, 22 4 When the heart is after some extraordinary manner
touched with Gods word or providence, 22
3 Call to mind what evil thou have done ever since thou wast born, 23
4 Rouse up thy heart and thoughts as high a^ heaven, 23 3 Use. For the
reprehension of those that meditate upon their sins, and how they may with the
more freeness commit sin, 24
Four grounds upon which meditation must be raised. 1 Meditate on the
goodness, mercy and patience of God, that you have often abused by your sins, 26
2 Meditate on the justice of God that you have so often provoked, 28 3 Meditate
on the wrath of God that you have so often kindled, 29 4 Meditate on the
constancy of God, who is a constant hater of all sin, 30
Four directions how to carry Meditation home to the heart. 1 Weigh and ponder
all the foregoing things in ^hine own heart 33 2 Strip sin, and look upon it
starknaked, and in ^ts own colors, 33 3 Dive into thine own soul, and search
thine ^eart to the quick, 34 4 Prevent thine own heart by meditation, and ^ell
thy soul that it will one day wish, that it had not ^eglected this so necessary
a duty, 36
Four duties to be discharged, that we may put life to Meditation. 1 Let
Meditation haunt and dog thy heart with the promises, and threatenings,
mercies and judgments of God, 38 2 Let Meditation trace thy heart in the same
steps, and run over all thy duties discharged, 41 3 Let Meditation hale thy
heart before Gods Throne, there to pour out thy complaints before the
Almighty, p. 43. and let thy complaint be 1 Full of sorrow, 44 2 A full
complaint of all thy sins, 44 3 A complaint aggravating all thy sins by all
their circumstances. 45 4. A self-condemning complaint, wherein the complaint
of Ezra is illustrated in eight particulars, 46
4 Let Meditation when it has searched out thy case, and made it appear how
woeful it is, cast thee down before God, 49
Four motives to stir up the soul to Meditation. 1 Consider it is the part of a
fool not to meditate; It is a madness for a man to walk on in a course, and
not to consider whither it will tend, 50 2 Consider, not to meditate, is the
brand of a Reprobate, 52 3 He that meditates not, robs God of his honor, 52 4
All the service that a man performs unto the Lord, will be abominable, if he
meditate not before it, and after it, 53
The reason why we have so many vain thoughts in our holy exercises, is,
because we prepare not our hearts thereunto by meditation, 54
The Contents of the third Sermon. Proverbs 1.28.
1 THe opening of the context in 5 particulars, 59 2 The opening of the words
of the Text in four particulars, 62 1. Doctrine. Those that will not hear the
Lord when he calls upon them by the ministry of his word, and voice of his
Spirit, the Lord will not hear them, when in their misery they call upon him.
62 3. Reasons of the point. 1. The law of Retaliation, of rendering like for
like, requires it. 64 2. Because Gods two Attributes of Mercy and Justice, have
their season in this life, and when Mercy has acted her part, then comes
Justice upon the stage for to act her part. 66 3. Because it is Gods manner for
to do so in temporal things, and therefore much more in matters of grace and
salvation. 68
God gives to men a day, and no Man nor Angel knows how long this day
lasts, or when this season of grace shall have an end. 71, 73 And as there is
a Personal day, so there is a National day. 74 Object. 1. A man may be called
at the 11th or 12th hour of the day. 75 Ans. Those that were called at the
first hour, came in at the first hour; these that came in at the twelfth
hour, were not the same that were called at the first hour. 75 Object. 2 The
day of grace lasts as long as the day of life. 77 The Objection is cleared
under three particulars. Ans. And it is answered, that the day of grace may end
to a particular man long before his death. 1. Because God may harden a man's
heart. 78 2. Because God may sear men's consciences. 78 Object. 3. Suppose I go
on in my sin, and repent upon my deathbed, will God hear me? Ans. The answer
is negative. 80 Object. 4. Suppose I humble my self by fasting and prayer, will
not God hear that? The answer is negative, if thou neglect the day of grace. 81
5. Obj. At what time soever a sinner repents, he shall find mercy. Ans. It is
true, if he repent from the bottom of his heart, but a man may have many a
degree of repentance, and yet never repent from the heart, 81. Self-love may
make a man do much. 82 2. Doct. It may be this very day, even this particular
Sermon, this instant hour may be thy day, that art now in thy sins, that if
thou repent not at this very one Sermon, thou neglectest eternal life for ever.
82 Four Reasons of the point. 1. Because Gods patience is in his own breast,
and who can tell how long it will last? 83 Wherein Joel 2.13. is opened in five
particulars. 84 God usually gives some signs of death beforehand. 86 But the
day of grace may end, and a man never have any warning of it. 86
2. Because Gods patience gives no marks or incklings of its ending before it
ends. 86 3. Because God keeps a strict account how many opportunities he has
vouchsafed. 88 4. Consider it is a wonder that the day of grace is not ended
already, and that thou art not now in hell. 90

The Contents of the Fourth Sermon, upon Philip. 3.18.19.
1. An explanation of the several parts of the Text, in five particulars. 98
Doct. That those whose minds and thoughts run habitually on earth and earthly
things, their end must needs be destruction. 99 6. Reasons. 1. The curse of God
is the desert of vain thoughts. 99 2. The curse of God is the event of vain
thoughts. 99 3. That man whose thoughts are habitually on the things of the
world, can never truly repent. 100 4. Because that man whose thoughts run
habitually on earthly things, has no part in Jesus Christ. 102 For the
thoughts and affections of the heart are the feet of the soul. 102 5. Because
so long as a man's thoughts run habitually on the things of the world, that man
has no true love of God in him. 105 6. Because so long as a man's thoughts run
after the world, he can never depart from his sins. 106
2. Uses. 1. For humiliation, because these vain thoughts bearing sway in the
heart, they make that man's end to be destruction. 108 2. For the terror of
those men who suffer their hearts to be taken up with vain thoughts. 111
Object. But I think of God, and of Christ, of faith and repentance. 113 Ans.
1. Consider whether thy good thoughts be merely cast into thy heart; or whether
they be raised by thy heart, 113 A wicked man may have a thousand good
thoughts, and yet go to hell in the midst of them, 114 2 Thou have good
thoughts, but consider whether they be fleeting or abiding thoughts, 116 There
are two kinds of vain thoughts: First, vain because the matter and substance of
them is vain; Secondly, vain for want of durance and lasting, though not vain
for the matter of them, 116 3 Thou think of God, but consider whether thy
thoughts be studied or accidental thoughts. When a good thought comes into a
godly man's heart, it leaves a good impression behind it; but when a good
thought comes into a wicked man's heart, it leaves no impression behind it, 117,
118 A godly man not only thinks of God; but he studieth how to think of God.
119 4 Thou think of God, but consider whether thy thoughts of God be
profitable, or unprofitable thoughts, 120 Thoughts are not free; 121. Not free
1 From Gods knowledge, 121 2 They are not free from Gods word, 122 3 They are
not free from the wrath of God, 123
Three means, in the use whereof we may rid our selves of vain thoughts. 1
Love the word of God, 123 2 Go unto God by prayer, 124 3 Consider thou have not
so learned Christ, 125
All vain thoughts arise from these three Heads. 1 From the variety and
abundance of the thoughts of the world, 125 2 From the Fountain of corruption
that is in men's hearts, 126 3 From the damned malice of Satan, and his
temptations both within and without, 126
1 Materially thoughts are vain, 1 When the matter of them is vain, 126 Such
are the thoughts of the world, calling or recreation: these are evil, 1 When
we think of them primarily, that is, before we think of God, 127 2 When we
think of them too usually, too often, 129 3 When we think of them too savourly,
130 4 When we think of them without counsel, 131 5 When they are thought
needlessly, 131
2 Thoughts are vain formally, when though the matter of them be never so good,
yet the manner of thinking them is evil, 132 It is possible for a wicked man
to go to hell, though he perform the same things for the matter of them that a
godly man does. 132 3 Thoughts are vain efficiently, when the heart that
thinks upon them is earthly, and vain 134 4 Thoughts are vain, when the drift
and end of the soul in thinking on them, is vain, 136 Wicked men will be
thinking of God, 1 To make God amends for their dishonouring of him by their
wicked thoughts. 137 2. To collogue with God, and to flatter him. 138 3. To
smother and choke their own consciences. 139
The Contents of the Fifth Sermon upon 1 Corinthians. 6.2.
1. An explanation of the text, together with the verses foregoing and
following. 144 Doctrine. The Saints shall judge the world. 146 Objection. How
shall the Saints judge the world? 146 Answer. 1. By their consent unto Christ's
judgment. 146 2. By their applause of Christ's judgment. 147 3. By their
Majesty; then shall they shine as the Stars in the Firmament, and the wicked
shall be amazed at the sight of them. 148 4. By their lives and conversations,
by their accepting of the Lord Jesus Christ, shall judge the worlds rejecting
of him. 148 Four Reasons of the point. 1. First, because of that mystical
union that is betwixt Christ and his Saints, so when Christ judges the world,
the whole body of Christ may be said to judge the world. 149 2. In regard of
their sufferings with Christ, as they are judged by the world, so they shall be
judged of the world. 149 3 For the greater terror to all wicked men at the day
of judgment, 150 4 Because the mouths of wicked men may be stopped, and that
they may have no excuse for themselves, 150
Use 1 For information in five particulars, 1 Hence we may learn that the
Saints, by their now being Saints, do now judge the world, 151 Wherein Heb.
11.7. is cleared from an objection, 2 Hence let the world learn that when any
one sinner is converted, there is one Judge more to sit upon them, 153 3 Hence
we may learn that it concerns all the world to take notice of every grace in
Gods children, because there is never a grace in any of the Saints, but it
shall make for the condemnation of them that want it, 154 4 Learn hence, that
if the Saints, then much more the world that begets them, shall judge the
world, 155 5 Learn hence also that the Ministers of God by every Sermon they
preach, shall judge the world, 157
Use 2 For to condemn the world, who see not an amiablenesse in the faces of
the Saints, who shall one day be their judges, who shall judge both Saints and
Angels, 157 2 This shows the folly of the wicked, who prepare not for these
Judges, 158 Lastly, it condemns all those that do not see glory and majesty in
the faces of Gods Saints, he that revileth the Saints, revileth his judges,
159, 160 Who shall judge the World. 1 God the Father by way of authority, all
judgment is originally from him, 161 2 God the Son by way of dispensation, 161
3 God the holy Ghost by way of conviction, 161 4 The word of God by way of
form, it being the platform, according to which Christ will judge the whole
world, 162 5 All the Ministers of God shall sit as Justices in common, 164 6
All the Saints from one end of the world to the other, shall assist the just
Judge of heaven and earth, 164
So that the wicked shall not be able to plead, 1 Their ignorance, 165 2 Nor
their poverty, 166 3 Neither their sinning at their masters command, 170 4
Neither callings nor tradings, 167 5 Neither the sinful times they live in, 167
Use 3 First, for the just reproof of many of the Saints of God, because they
are not so circumspect over their ways, as they ought, how will they be able
to rise up in judgment against the wicked for such sins as they themselves
live in? 168 2 It may serve to condemn some of the Saints of God in regard of
that little difference that is to be found betwixt the wicked of the world, and
them in their lives and manners, that it is hard to tell which is a Saint, and
which is a reprobate by their conversations, 170 3 It may serve to condemn the
scandalousnes of many persons in their behavior and actions, 171
The Contents of the Sixth Sermon, 1 Cor. 11.30.
DOct. 1 from the 18 verse, That whosoever will come to the holy Communion,
they must examine themselves, that so they may come worthily, 175 The Apostle
gives three Reasons of it, 1 From the end of the Sacrament, 176 2 From the
wrong men offer to Christ, if they come in their sins, 177 3 From the woeful
wrong that a man does to his own soul, that comes without preparation, 177
The Uses of the point are these, 1 For the reproof of those that coming
unpreparedly get no spiritual strength thereby, 178 2 For terror to unworthy
receivers, 179 3 To show they make themselves liable to Gods temporary plagues,
180 4 For instruction to examine our selves, 180 5 He concludes with an use of
exhortation, 181
An explanation of the words, 2 Doct. God does most severely punish the
unworthy receivers of the Lords Supper, 183 4 Reas. 1 Because Christ himself
instituted it, 184 2 Because Christ is the matter of it, and therefore the more
heinous the defilement, 187 3 Because Christ is the form of it, wherein
confirming grace is sealed to the soul, 190 4 Because Christ is the end of the
Sacrament, 191
Use 1 For instruction; showing whence sickness, weakness, etc. come, 193 2
From whence comes hardness of heart etc. 194 Use 2 For comfort unto every poor
afflicted soul etc. 198 Use 3 For terror to those that come unpreparedly, 199
Object. Do all that come unworthily eat and drink their own damnation? Answ. A
man may eat and drink his own damnation three ways, 1 In regard of guilt, and
liablenesse to Gods wrath, 203 2 In regard of the seal and obligation in the
conscience, 203 3 In regard of the sigillation in heaven, 204
Lastly, the conclusion, denouncing terror to all those that dare rush upon
this holy ordinance, 205 But for comfort to all them, who with all diligence
set upon the preparing of their souls for this great Ordinance, 206
The Contents of the Seventh Sermon on 2 Cor. 11.28.
The words of the Text explained, 210 Doct. 1 We must not rush upon the
Sacrament, 210 There are none of the Ordinances of God that a man may rush upon
without examination, 211 Three Reasons. Naturally we are no invited guests to
the Sacrament, 212 2 Though we are invited, yet it may be we are not disposed:
for naturally we are strangers to God, and the covenant of God, all this
indisposition must be wrought off before we can come comfortably to the
Sacrament, 213 3 This is a solemn Ordinance, and therefore an ordinary
disposition will not serve the turn, 213 Many a reprobate may eat and drink in
Christ's presence, 214 Use. To forewarn men lest they unpreparedly rush upon any
of Gods Ordinances, especially upon the Sacrament of the body and blood of
Christ, 215 The Text divided into Four parts. 216 Doct. 2 There is a necessity
that we should receive the Lords Supper, and receive it often, 217 Doct. 3 The
manner of performance of duties is to be regarded, 218 Five Reasons. 1 The Lord
commands the manner as well as the matter, 219 2 Circumstances overthrow
actions, if they be not rightly and duly observed, 219 It Is instanced 1 In
prayer, 219 2 In preaching, 220 3 In receiving the Sacrament, 221 4 In
brotherly reproof, 221 5 In eating, drinking, and marrying, 221
3 Because only the right manner of doing duties gets the blessing, 223 4
Because Christ himself is an example unto us, in this he did not only obey his
Father in the matter of his commands, but in the manner of them, 224 5 Because
otherwise we canaot glorify God, 225 Use. 1 First, to condemn that natural
Popery that is in the hearts aef men etc. 227 Use 2 For discovery why people
are so willing to do duties for the matter and not for the manner, 229 The
Reasons of it are these: 1 Because the matter of duty is easy, but the manner
is difficult, 229 2 Duties for the matter of them, may be done with a proud
heart, 231 3 They may be done with an unholy life, 232 4 The matter of duty
brings not the cross; and many zealous for the matter, are persecutors of
goodness, 234
Use 3 To exhort men to labor to perform duties aright, 235 Three motives to
persuade people to perform duties after a right manner. 1 Because no Ordinance
at all else can be effectual unto us, 236 2 All is but hypocrisy if the manner
be not regarded, 236 3 It is only the right manner of doing duties, that
pleases God, 238
4 Doct. Every man must prepare himself before he come to the Lords Table, 239
4 Reas. 1 Because the Sacrament is Gods Ordinance, 239 2 Because the Lord
Christ has made great preparation in providing it, 241 3 Because Christ in
this ordinance offers for to come into the soul, and he looks for good
entertainment, 24^ 4 Because the Sacrament is a part of Christ's last will and
Testament, therefore when we know our Lords will, we must prepare for the doing
of it, 243

The Contents of the eighth Sermon upon Proverbs 29, 1.
1, A double exposition of the Text. 1 Doct. From the first exposition, viz. He
that reproves another, and is guilty himself in the same kind, or in any other
kind, and hardens his own heart in it, that man shall be destroyed without
remedy, 244 7 Reasons. First, because the office of a reprover binds him to
be blameless, 2 Because such a reprover as is guilty himself, can never
reprove to a right end, 250 3 Neither can he do it in a right manner, 251 4
Such a reprover is an hypocrite, 252 5 Such a reproving of another man's sin,
makes him inexcusable in his own, 253 6 It is an absurd thing for a person to
reprove another for that whereof he is guilty himself, 254 7 Such a reproving
is a sign of impenitencie, 254 Object. Shall not a wicked Magistrate or
Minister reprove others, etc. Ans. He is bound to reprove, in regard of his
office; ^ut is bound in conscience to amend himself first, 155 Use, For
instruction: first, Let every reprover take heed lest he make himself
inexcusable, 256 2 Let him endeavor to walk unblameable and inoffensive, 256
Two Doctrines from the second exposition of the Words: viz. Doct. 1. The Lord
does not destroy man willingly, but for sin, 261 Doct. 2. It is a great mercy
for a man to be reproved for his sin, 261
Three Reasons of the Second Doctrine. 1 Because reproofs primarily come from
love, 262 2 They tend to the good of a man's soul, 264 3 It is brutish not to
take reproofs in good part, 265
Use 1 First for information, that God is bringing destruction upon a Kingdom,
when he takes away reprovers from them, 267 Use 2 For the reproof of those that
despise the reproof of the wise; they despise not men, but God, 269 The
grievousnesse of their sin who stand out against reproof, is aggravated under
several heads, 270 Doct. 3 The Lord proportions punishments to men's sins, 271
Reas. 1 Because hereby a man's punishment appears to be so much the more equal
and worthy, 271 2 This stops men's mouths, and convinces their consciences, 3
All the standers by may see the equity of it, when the punishment is according
to the sin, 273 Use for instruction, First to teach men not to complain of Gods
dealing with them, if their punishment be (for the kind of it) according to
their sin, but rather let them learn to see Gods immediate hand in it, 274 2 To
teach men to consider how God many time^ proportions punishments to sins: 1 For
kind, 275 2 For quantity, 275 3 For quality, 276 4 For time, 277 5 For place.
277

The Authors Preface upon these ensuing Sermons.
THE cause of that little heavenlines which is in the profession of
Christianity, is the want of Meditation. Many can meditate cursorily, but that
is not enough: it must be a sticking Meditation that must affect the heart.
That place in 2 Pet. 2.8. is mavelous pregnant, it was the means why Lot was
so touched with the abominations of Sodom: That righteous man ^welling amongst
them, in seeing and hearing their ungodly deeds, vexed his righteous soul from
day to day. Many heard and saw too, besides Lot, and were not vexed. Why? Other
matters stuck in their thoughts, they never thoroughly meditated on it; but he
vexed himself, that is, the meditation of those evils, and bringing them home
to his soul, vexed him. The word is a fit word, implying two things: First, the
searching and examining of a thing, his meditating heart examined their sins;
how many they were, how grievous, how damnable, how likely to pull down some
vengeance or other upon them. Secondly, the wracking or vexing upon trial; so
it was with Lot, he observed all their evils, and weighed them in his soul, and
then he wracked his spirit with the consideration of them. The Evangelist uses
this very word for tossing: this word that is here put for vexing, he puts for
tossing of a ship in the seas, Matt. 14.24. The ship was toss'ed with the
waves: so meditation did toss his soul with vexation, sometimes down to the
deep: O miserable wretches that we are! or, How brutish, how beastly, and how
hellish are our sins? Sometimes up; O that the Lord would humble us and spare
us! Sometimes over head and ears in the storm, O fool that I was to choose my
dwelling amongst such men! These meditations vexed hi^ soul: Many have studied
meditations, and yet are not acquainted with this cordial meditation: Many
Minister^ that study Divinity all the day, that study the Word all the week,
that study their Sermons all the year, may yet for all this, be carnal
Ministers. Why? Because their meditation is but inventing and mental
meditation; thi^ meditation is a practical meditation, the thing meditated
feeds the heart: that meditation is like a fluttering Pheasant that flutters
before their eyes* it feeds their eyes indeed, but never feeds the stomach, as
long as they neither catch nor eat it. The saving mysteries of God flutter
before their eyes, and before their understandings, they feed their eyes with
knowledge, but never feed their souls unto everlasting life, unless they foul
for it, dress and digest it in their hearts. There is an apt word, Genesis 24.63.
Isaac went out to meditate in the field: the original has it, to signify
mutual conference, his mind conferred with the truth, and the truth with him,
a mutual working he wrought upon the truth, by meditating of it, and it
wrought upon him; by leaving an impression upon his soul: this is a rare
practice in the world, and yet as necessary as most, it is the art of the soul
in being heavenly, it is the inuring of thee to every good duty: for by
meditation a man comes to have his mind and heart fixed upon every thing that
he would: Would he pray? he that has inured his heart to meditate, his mind is
fixed in his prayer. Would he receive the Sacrament? He that has inured his
heart by meditation, his mind is fixed in the Ordinance. David that was
excellent at meditation, had a fixed heart, Psalm. 57.7. Psalm. 112. 1.7.

A SERMON OF The use and benefit of Divine Meditation.
HAGGAI. 1.5. Now therefore says the Lord of Hosts, Consider your ways.


THe Prophet reproves the people because they could find in their hearts to
mind their own houses and yet were careless of the house of the Lord: the Lord
had sent a drought and a famine, and sundry punishments upon them for this
thing, and yet they laid it not to heart; and therefore he sends Haggai the
Prophet unto them to call them to repentance; and (which is an admirable
course, and little thought of in the world) he begins with holy meditation and
consideration: Now therefore thus says the Lord, consider your ways; that is,
both in regard of the course of them, your wicked ways; and also in regard of
the bitter fruit of them, your wretched and unprosperous ways. Here be two
things very remarkable according to the Text; 1. The repetition and enforcing
of it again; for he urges it again, Consider your ways, in the seventh verse.
2. The benefit that came by it; it brought them to repentance; for they all
obeyed the voice of the Lord, and the words of the Prophet, verse 12. Doctrine
from hence is this, that, Serious meditation of our sins by the Word, is a
special means to make men repent.


Meditation is a settled exercise of the mind for a further inquiry of the
truth, and so affecting the heart therewith; and therefore there be four
things in meditation.

exercise of the mind, not barely closing with the truth, and assenting unto
it, and seeing it, and there rests; but it looks on every side of the truth:
I thought upon my ways, and turned my feet unto thy Testimonies, Psalm. 119.59.
says David; that is, I looked on my ways on both sides, above and beneath;
it is taken from curious works, which are the same on both sides, so that they
which work them, must often turn them on every side; used Exodus 38.23. as
being works with two faces, as one well observes: so it was with David, I
turned my ways up-side down, and looked every way upon them: thou never
meditatest, unless thou look on thy ways on both sides with all
circumstances. An elegant phrase we have, Dan. 12.4. Many shall run to and fro,
and knowledge shall abound, and be increased. [Run to and fro] what is that? It
is not the bodily removing of man from one place to another so much, as busy
stirring of the mind from one truth to another, so that it sees the whole
selvedge and compass of the truth: thou will never get the truth to be
meditated of, till thou run to and fro in it, meditate it on this side, and
meditate it on that side, look on it in every nook of it. Meditation is like
perambulation when men go the bounds of the Parish, they go in every part of
it, and in every skirt of it: so meditation is the perambulation of the soul,
when the soul looks how far sin goes, how far the flesh goes, how far the
wrath of God against it goes.

settled exercise, it is not a sudden flash of a man's conceit, but it, dwells
upon a truth. When a man is in a deep meditation upon a thing he neither sees
nor hears, nor attends any thing else; the stream of the heart is settled upon
the truth received; The word of God abides in you, and you have overcome the
world, 1 Ioh. 2.14. How came these young men to overcome Satan? Not by looking
into the word, or only thinking of the word; but by letting the Word abide in
them. When a man has been offered an injury, his heart is always settled upon
it; when he eats, his mind runs on the injury; when he walks, and talks,
still his mind runs on the injury: so thy heart must go on the truth 2 Timothy
3. Continue in the things thou have learned: that is, take up thy mansion house
in them. A wicked man may turn into the word sometimes to think of it; but it
is as a man goes into another man's house: there is not his dwelling.

further inquiry: Meditation does not only settle upon the truth known; but
it also would feign know more of those truths, that are subjected to it; as a
man without may see the out side of the house, but he cannot see the rooms
within, unless he come nigh, and draw the latch, and come into the house, and
go into the rooms, and look about them. Meditation pulls the latch of the
truth, and looks into every closet, and every cubboard, and every angle of it.
Here is my sin here is my uncleanness, and here is Gods anger, here is the
woeful evil that will follow upon it, and here is a remedy against it.
Meditation searches into all the lofts and closets of the truth. The entrance
of thy word gives understanding unto the simple, Psalm. 119.30. The ingresse
(as one expounds it) or going into thy word, gives understanding; the wicked
stand looking upon the truth without the doors, but it is the ingresse, or
going into the truth, that gives understanding. Indeed the truth is like a
neat palace, (says Chrysostom) the Spirit of God is like the light of the
Sun that shines into it; the wicked they stand without, like fools peeping
in at the windows, and there be many thousands of pearls that are not
manifest unto them: The house seems dark to them that stand without. Thou must
enter into the word, and into every particular truth in it, and go up stairs,
and downstaires, and have an eye into every room. There thou shall find
humility, there contrition, there conversion, there Christ and his Spirit in
one closet, there all his Jewels in that, and that box; all is manifest within
doors.

to affect the heart; it does not only labor to know more and more of the
truth, but also it labors to bring it home to the heart. The good woman
considers a field and buys it. Prove. 31.16. that is,(says Ambrose) the good
Christian soul, if in civilitie, then much more in Divinity, considers the
truth and buys it, he takes it for his own, and appropriates it unto
himself; Lo this (says Eliphas) we have searched out: so it is, bear it,
and know it for thy self, Job 5.27. When thou can say of the truth lo this
it is, we have searched it out; I have dived into it, perused it, so it is,
even so indeed: all this is, that thou may apply it unto thy self, and know
it for thy good.

meditation musters up all weapons, and gathers all forces of arguments for to
press the same, and lay them heavy upon the heart: This usurie is spiritual
and good, when meditation, like usurers, who grind and suck the blood of the
needy, and are not content with their principal, but will have consideration
for every pound they lay out yea for every shilling, and that for every week
and every month, and every quarter, and every year: the poor man could be
content to pay the principal; but to exact use upon use, this kills him; so
meditation exacteth upon the soul and holds it to use upon use. You have
committed evil in a corner, but you shall not carry it away so. Item, it was
against the knowledge of God revealed; Item, against many mercies received;
Item, against many judgments threatened, against many checks of conscience,
against many vows and promises; remember that, O my soul. Item, for that, and
Item for this; Item for every lust, and every circumstance, thus often, and in
this place, an^ at that time, in that manner. So meditated the prodigal. Luke
15.17.
Look as it is in wars; were there but many scores come against an Army,
they might be conquered: or many hundreds, they mighr be resisted; but if many
thousands should come against a small army, it would be in danger indeed.
Meditation leavieth a whole Army of arguments, a whole Army of curses,
miseries, judgments, commandments against the soul: how ever one misery or
plague will not knock it down, but the soul may brook it, and go away with
it: but meditation brings a great Armado of arguments, and tells the soul God
is against thee, and against thy ways: God is against thee where ever thou
art, or what ever thou do. Then the heart begins to cry out, as Elisha his
servant did, Master, what shall we do? 2 Kings 6.15. So many horses against
us, so many charets, and so many men against us? Master, what shall we do? so
many sins, and so heinous, so many judgments and so heavy, and so many
evils and spiritual maladies! Oh, what shall I do to be saved! that I should
commit sin against a God that has damned innumerable Angels, millions of
Kings, Princes, and Nobles! that I should commit it against this God, so
merciful to me, so gracious, so patient, so good to my soul! that I, wretched
rebel, should for a cup of drink refuse heaven! for a lust not worth a straw
under my foot, cast off Christ, and grace and all! how shall I do? Then the
soul stands in a maze.

meditation having bundled up all Items against the soul, and brought in all
bills of account, it fastens sin upon the soul* I mean it makes the soul
feel it, so that it must needs be convinced without any evasion. Meditation
deals with a man as Elisha dealt with the messengers of King Joram; the
murderer he was coming to do mischeife to the Prophet, and the Prophet did
shut the door, and held him fast at the door, 2 Kings 6.32. and then he made
him know that the evil was from the Lord, before he could stir: so
meditation, when the soul would fain out of doors into i^s old course again,
it shuts the door upon it, and holds it fast Meditation tells the soul, this
evil is from the Lord upon thee, O my soul, if tho^ stir in or out upon
this or that lust any more* this evil that curse, that vengeance and
damnation; if ever thou stir forth, thou loses^ thy mercy, thou losest
Christ, thou losest all possibility of comfort. Stir not out; if thou do,
thou will roe it. Sometimes when men hear the Word, they go away touched, they
resolve not to commit sin again as they have done; yet when they are gone, it
works not, but the heart recoyles again, and turns to its old pass. The
Reason is, because they meditate not upon the Word, they fasten it not upon
their consciences.

It is with the Word as it is with a salve: if a man that has never so good a
salve that will heal any thing in four and twenty hours, if a man should do
nothing but lay it to the wound, and take it off, lay it on and take it off, it
will not heal the wound: and no marvel. Why? he will not let it lie on, the
best salve will not heal the soar nor eat out the corruption, unless it be
bound on and let lie: so it is with the Word, many a soul hears it; heart,
conscience, affections, all touched: but when he is gone out of the Church, all
is gone his affections die, his heart dies, and his conscience becomes
unfruitful. Why? he is still removing of the salve, and will not let it lie
on, and therefore the Word over-powers not his corruptions; the Word is like
the salve; conviction of conscience is like the laying on of the salve;
meditation the binding of it to the soar.

St James compares a slight hearer to a man that looks into a glass, who soon
forgets his visage; but a good hearer does two things: First, he stoops down
and looks into it, to take a perfect view of his estate; Secondly, he continues
looking into it, James 1.25. he does not leave the glass behind him, but he
carries away the glass with him: This man shall be blessed in his deed.

If the pills be never so bitter, yet let a man swallow them speedily, there is
no great distaste; but if a man chew a pill, it will make him deadly sick. Thy
sins are like those pills, they go down very pleasingly, because thou
swallowest them: thou swallowest down thine oaths, lies, ignorance, pride,
thou swallowest down the threats of the Lord; but if thou would chew these
bitter pills, and meditate and ruminate, and chew the cud, drunkenness would
be as bitter as hell; swearing, and security, and Sabbath-breaking, would be as
bitter as wormwood; thou durst not go on in them, they would make thee look
sourly upon them for ever: like a man that has chewed a pill, he can hardly
ever see a pill, but his stomach rises against it. Behold, I will hedge up thy
way with thorns, Hosea 2.6. I will not be so precise (says the heart) I will
go on as I have done, I will go after these and these courses; I will hedge
up thy way with thorns (says God;) meditation is Gods instrument, and sets a
thorn in the way to every sin, to bring the heart back again. Would the
heart lash out into luke-warmnesse? Meditation sets a thorn in the way; God
will spue thee out of his mouth: Would the heart sally forth into any sin?
Meditation sets a thorn in the way, Cursed ar^ thou if thou do err from Gods
Commandments. The heart cannot step forth into any lust; but meditation meets
it with a thorn, this curse, and that curse, this plague, and that Plague:
Would the heart reach at mercy in its sin? Meditation pricks it from it;
mercy is vengeance unto thee, so long as thou hankrest after sin. Would the
heart reach after Christ in his sin? Meditation pushes it back with a thorn:
No Christ for thee, but a severe judge, so long as thou itchest after thy
vanities.

practice this duty? Most men are loath, though they be willing enough to
meditate on their worldly affairs. The Mariner meditates and considers his
course by his Compass, or else he might soon run on the quicksands; a
Pilgrim is full of thoughts, what? am I in my right way? He never comes to a
doubtful turning, but he stands in a study and muses, O which is my right way?
The Merchant meditates, and his mind runs on his Count-book, or else he is
soon bankrupt: The voluptuous man, his thoughts run on his pleasures: the
drunkards on his cups, the proud man's on his credit. But it is one thing to
look to that which is thine, and another thing to look to thy self, Take
heed to your selves says the Lord, Deuteronomy. 11.16. Deuteronomy. 12.30. Deuteronomy. 4.9. Exodus
34.12. as if he should say, think on thy self and of thy poor soul; let thy
meditation run on thy poor soul. The heart is untoward unto this duty, and as
unwilling as a Bear to be brought to the stake: the Bear would rather be
rambling abroad then be baited: so men had rather let their hearts ramble about
any thing, then bait them for their sins: yea men scoff at it, saying, shall
we always be poring on our sins? shall we run mad? shall we drive our selves
to despair? cannot men keep themselves well while they are well?

The poor man he has no time for this tedious duty: the rich man, he needs it
not, the wicked they dare not; so no man will: No man repented him of his
wickedness, saying, What have I done? Ier. 8.6. No man would meditate and
think with himself, what is my case? how stands my condition before God? what
evil have I done? In the Ark, and in the old law, if there were any beast that
chewed not the cud, it was a sign of an unclean beast: the word implies the
bringing up of their meat into their mouths again, and sitting down to chew
it again. But now men like unclean beasts, swallow down the food of their
souls unchewed, and will not meditate thereof, that it may turn to good
nutriment; but like Cormorants, they take it down by wholesale, and are never
the better. So the Word is to them as the Quails to the Israelites, while the
flesh was yet between their teeth, ere it was chewed, the wrath of the Lord was
kindled against them, and smote them with a very great plague, Number. 11.33. so
the Word of God sticks in their teeth; ere they chew it, or meditate upon it,
the wrath of God falls upon them, and strikes them with a very great plague of
hardness of heart, and leanness of soul. But the truth is, you that will not
now see your sins, nor meditate on them, you shall see them, and meditate on
nothing but on fear. Lord, when thy hand is lifted up, they will not see, but
they shall see and be ashamed, Esaias 26.11.

Lets of serious meditation are, First, vain company. When Peter saw the people
touched, Acts 2.37. he said unto them, Save your selves from this untoward
generation, verse. 40. as if he should say, If you love your selves, God has
touched your hearts, suffer not Satan and these wicked instruments, to steal
away these impressions of terror from your souls. If ever you love your
souls, sort not your selves with this untoward generation. See as it humbles
you, so let meditation follow upon it, so that it may still humble you. Ill
company brings a man to the gallows (as the proverb is) and ill company will
bring a man to hell (say It) and meditation cannot be admitted to it. David
would not have a wicked man to abide in his sight, when he was to meditate: he
wished that there were never a wicked man in the world; much less would he keep
company with them. My meditation of him shall be sweet; let the sinners be
consumed out of the earth, and let the wicked be no more: Bless thou the Lord,
O my soul, Psalm. 104.35.

multitude of worldly business. A dream (says Solomon) comes through
multitude of business, Eccles. 5. Multitude of business causes the mind so
to run on them, that they do even dream of them in their sleep, as Lucretius,
Seneca, Claudian, and many others of the heathens have observed. He that
over-imployes himself, his meditations of heaven are dreaming meditations, his
thoughts dreaming thoughts, he can never seriously meditete on the good of his
soul. Many ingrosse business into their hands, never thinking they have
enough; they are so greedy after the world, and so careless of heaven. So they
make their hearts like highway ground: the word sown in their hearts is like
seed sown in the highway, where is such a through-fare, and a broad Carriers
road of earthly affairs, that all the word and meditation thereof is trodden
down as the grass in the highway, which cannot grow; so neither meditation in
a busie-bodied heart. For a good meditating mind, ( Nemo ad illam pervenit
occupatus, says Seneca) no man ever came to it surfeited with employments.
David although he had abundance of State affairs, both his hands full, yet he
would not have his hands to be overcharged, but that he might meditate in Gods
word: My hands also (not all down to business only in the world, but also up
to thy Law) will I lift up to thy commandments which I have loved, and I will
meditate on thy statutes, Psalm. 119.48. Take not too much upon thee, like those
grasping worldlings, that will have a finger in a hundred things: Martha,
Martha, thou art cumbred about many things, but one thing is needful, and Mary
has chosen the better part, Luke 10.41. and what was that one thing? Mary was
sitting and meditating in, and pondering Christ's words, not ( as Theophylact
expounds it) as if he would say, Martha, Martha, thou art cumbred about many
dishes, but one thing is needful, only one dish; though indeed so it be, yet
he here speaks not only of one dish, but of many cares which hinder that one
necessary duty of hearing and meditating on the word of God.

ignorance. A man cannot meditate of a thing he knows not; nor thou of thy
sins, if thou be not skillful in Gods catalogue of thy sins; nor of mercies
and promises if thou be not verst in them; nor of his Precepts, if thou be
not expert in them. The Psalmist proves that he had more knowledge then all
his Teachers: Why? Because he used to meditate. I have more understanding then
all my Tutors, for thy testimonies are my meditation, Psalm. 119.99.

averseness of the heart: The heart is like the swine, meditation is like the
yoke: the Hog would fain get into forbidden fields for to grub them; the
yoke, that hinders him; but he cannot abide it; every step he takes, he lifts
up his foot to strike it off if he could; so the heart would feign break
through hedges, and get into forbidden ways, and if thou would meditate, it
would every moment lift up its heel to put thee besides it: If it cannot put
thee besides it, it will mar it if it can; and therefore David praid to God to
settle his heart upon the right, and put his yoke upon him, or it would never
be steadfast else upon meditation. Let the words of my mouth, and the
meditations of my heart, be ever acceptable in thy sight, O Lord, my strength
and my redeemer, Psalm. 19.14.

This averseness of the heart consists in three things: the carelessness of
the heart, the heart prizeth not meditation, nor the things of grace that are
to be meditated on; it will not be at the cost and charge, nor at the pains
for them. To what end is a price in the hands of a fool, seeing there is no
heart to get wisdom? Prove. 17.^6. The heart will not be brought to Gods
price; it would feign have the wares at a cheap rate.

the runnings of it; the heart is like a vagrant rogue, he would rather be
hanged then tied to his parish. Thou can not bring it to prayer, but it will
be a gadding on by-thoughts: thou can not bring it to a Sermon, but it will
be roving after wandering imaginations: thou can not bring it to a meditation
but it will be a gossiping forth. When Christ came to bind men with his
blessed cords, and bind their hearts to him, Psalm. 2. they fall a meditating
afterward, but it was meditating and imagining vain things, verse 1. and when
they saw they were to be tied up, Tush (say they) let us break their bonds a
sunder, and cast their cords from us, verse 3. What, do Ministers call us to
such strictness, thinking to imprison our hearts in their stocks? away with
their bonds, no we^ will have none of it.

the wearisomnesse of the heart: It is a weary of meditation as a Cur is of the
whip, and the chain; Oh how it barks and maunders, till it be loose! yea,
though it be never so eager upon it at the first, it is jaded presently. When
God called the Jews to sanctify his Name, they thought in their hearts, O what
a weariness is this! and ye have snuffed at it, (says the Lord) ye brought
that which was lame, and torn and sick, Malac. 1.13. What a weariness is it
to meditate? says the heart; it snuffs, it is untoward, it is lumpish; it
would fain tear of a piece of the duty, or bring it wanting a leg, or
without soundensse and sincerity; yet some of them (says Calvin) were so
humbled, that they thought on the Name of the Lord, Malac. 3.16. they thought,
and meditated, and forced their hearts to consider thoroughly.

terror unto all those, who for all this that has been spoken, dare sit down
without it; yea, the world will not believe these things, nor meditate therein:
yea, they blame Gods messengers, that call so sore upon them. Habukkuk was so
served; he preached the mercies of God to the humble, and the judgments of God
to the wicked: they ask him why he was so mad? well (says the prophet) I will
stand upon my watch, and see what the Lord says unto me, that I may answer to
them that reprove me. Hab. 2.1. What did the Lord tell him? Write the vision,
and make it p^aine upon Tables that ^e may run that reads it, verse. 2, Will
they not believe? Will they rove? Will they not meditate steadily upon these
things? Will they not let their hearts stay and meditate and consider? The
vision shall be so plain, that he that runs may read it. If thou will not
stay, and meditate herein, the Word is so plain to thy condemnation, that if
thou did but think of it with a running thought, thou may read thine own
vengeance, thine own woes, in regard of the multitude of them. He that runs
by a way full of holes and pits, though he stand not meditating where are the
pits, yet he may run and see them. The book of God is full, leaves and cover,
and all, of woes against thee, Lam. 2.10. It is written without, there thou
may read thy sins written; it is written likewise within, there thou may
read thy plagues.

Secondly, in regard of the greatness of them, he that runs along* and lo a
great town on fire, though he stay not to meditate on it, what or where it is,
yet he may run and read it: so is the curse of sinners a great curse, Zeph.
1.10. he that runs may read it.

Thirdly, in regard of the proximitie and neernesse of them He that run^es, if
a sword come out by his throat, though he do not stop to meditate, what is
this at my throat, yet he cannot but see it. Behold the Judge stands before
the door. Jam. 5.9. Take heed how thou grudgest, or sinnest in any particular;
behold the Judge stands before the door; behold it and meditate on it with
thy heart; if not, he is nigh enough, thou can not step out of doors unto
any sin, but though thou runnest, thou must needs see the Judge that will
Judge thee, Iteming thy sins* noting thy ways, observing thy courses, ready
to unhaspe the door on thee, to hale thee unto hell in thy sins. Whose end
is destruction. Whose? Even those that mind earthly things. Phil. 3.19. If thy
mind and meditation run more on thy ground, cattle, goods, kitchen, house
business, earthly talk, discourses, thoughts, more then of heaven, thy end is
destruction. If thy thoughts will not stay here, do but run, and thou may
read it; Think not that I am come to destroy the Law or the Prophets, I am come
t^ fulfill them, Mat. 5.17. Some (says Chrysostom) might think now Christ is
come, it is no matter though we be not so strict, Christ is enough: Think not
thus (says Christ) but rather think and meditate that I am come to fulfill it
my self, and to see it fulfilled in those I mean to save, so as to make it the
rule of their lives. Themistocles said, he could not sleep in his bed for
continual thinking and meditating on Miltiades his Triumphs: And how can
thou sleep in thy bed, if thou would but meditate on these places of
Scripture? Retire thy self apart, there is no casting up of a man's account in a
crowd: Let me alone, I am busy; so we use to say, when we would be private.

Ehud did to Eglon, who said, I have a secret errant to thee, O King, and so
all went out, and he said I have a message from God to thee, and so stabd him
at his heart, Judge. 3.19. So (for Ehud was a type of Christ, says Lavator) I
have a secret errant to thee, O my soul: and so let all go forth: I have a
message from God to thee, a message of wrath for thy Pride, a message of wrath
for thy vain hopes: Thus, says the Lord; Cursed art thou, O my soul; stab it
to the heart with this spiritual Dagger, wound it with the blade and haft and
all, till thou have let out the fat and the dirt, the filth and iniquity all
out. The Prophet speaking of men's looking on Christ whom they have pierced,
this meditating and laying to heart that they have crucified the Lord Jesus,
says that they shall mourn every one in private, the house of David apart,
and their wivis apart; the house of N^than apart, and their wives apart; the
house of Shimei apart, and their wives apart; every family apart, and their
wives apart, Zach. 12.2.



David chose the morning for meditation, Psalm. 5.1.3. Let them hear this
(says Chrysostom) that rise betimes in the morning to serve their Hogs and
their Dogs, their bellies and their backs* before they serve God in
meditation or prayer, unless it be the mumbling and roting a few [Lord have
mercy upon us] that pray not till after many other businesses, it may be not
then neirher. David prayed and meditated in the morning. In the morning thou
washest thy face and thy hands, but thy soul has more need, which thou washest
not: in the morning thou put thy clothes on thy body: but thou put not
on afresh the new man upon thy soul; in the morning thou shakest off
sleepiness from thine eyes, but thou shakest not off drowsinesse from thy
soul. Thou look into the glass in the morning, to see if thy face be as it
should be; but thy soul is not composedly looking into the glass of Gods
word. In the morning look up in prayer, look up in thanksgiving, look up in
meditation.

O Lord, I meditate on thee in the night watches Ps. 63. not as carnal ones do,
when they cannot sleep, then their mind runs on their Cow and their Calfe,
their markets and vanities, this neighbor and that neighbor, like Petronius
his dog, that was hunting while he lay asleep in his kennell.

in the evening; I prevent the night watches, that I might meditate, Psalm.
119.148. he did not as wicked men do, sleep like a horse in the stable on his
litter, with his neck tied to the manger; they go to bed with their hearts
roped to the world, worldly thoughts, this thought and that thought, and God
knows what.

when the heart is touched at a Sermon, or Sacrament, or observing of any
judgment or mercy, or act of Gods providence, it is best striking when the
Iron is hot. David when his heart was touched at the reproaches of the wicked,
then he meditated, Ps. 119.23. When the Instrument is in tune, then it is good
playing upon it; when a Churl is in a good mood, then it is fittest to deal
with him. Often will thy heart be out of tune, often churlish and in an ill mood:
if thou let the good opportunity go, thou know not when thou shall have
such another. When the fish is nibbling at the bait, then it is good twitching
at the angle rod; when the heart is a nibbling at grace, then give a pluck at
it by meditation. See Act. 17.11. now while the tide ^asts, see thou may get
into the haven.

rub up thy self and thy memory; call as much to mind as thou can, what
evil thou have done ever since thou wast borne, what in the womb, what in thy
cradle, childhood, youth, age; what a servant, what a Master; what as a
servant, what as a son, what as a neighbor, what as an inferior, what as a
superior; either in thought, or word, or deed; how often thou ^ast omitted
good duties, or done them by ^alves; Item for this, and Item for that. They
shall remember themselves, and turn unto the Lord, Psalm. 22.27. First they
shall remember themselves, and say, What have I done, O wretch! how carelessly
have I lived! Secondly, so meditating, they shall turn unto the Lord. Many say,
Oh! they cannot remember their sins. They lie in a thousand particulars; for
they can remember to commit them well enough. See Lam. 3.19, 20.21. our Greek
translation turns it, I sp^ke to my self, and meditated: as if they should
say, O what a rebel have I been! how unthankful, how unprofitable under all
the means of grace! I may thank my sins for all the plagues of the Almighty
that are upon me: if he had damned me, I had been well served. What follows?
The heart bowed, and was humbled, as it is in the text.

wishly upon a thing, as if he would look through it, he sets his eyes on it,
as Paul set his eyes on Elymas, Ah thou child of the Devil, thou, etc. Acts
13.9. Meditation is the setting of the eye of the soul upon a thing: set thine
eye upon thy self and say, Ah thou child of the wicked, why has Satan filled
thy heart! O wretched heart! whence had thou thy self-love? had thou not it
from the Devil? God might do well to send thee to the Devil, if thou love so
to be his Broker. Se^ thine eyes steadfastly upon thine own ways and thou
shall see infinite hellish evils in thy sins.

reprehension. What is more usual then this that men make slight account of
their sins? Nay, when God tells them in their hearts. Thou shall not do this,
thou shall not do that, yet they meditate and think, Why may I not? Samuel bid
Saul stay for directions from him, before he sacrificed unto God. It seems
that God spoke to his heart, Stay till Samuel comes to direct thee: yet Saul
forced himself to disobey, and to do sacrifice, 1. Sam. 13.12. he was bold,
as Vatable turns it; he confirmed himself, as Pagnin translates it: he
thrust himself upon the doing of it; God forbad him, he would do it: God
urged him in his conscience not to do it, yet he would do it: God again
whispered to him to do it not, yet he forced himself to do it; as if he
should say, I hope I may do it, I have stayed seven days wanting an hour, or
a piece of an hour; and a little piece breaks no squares. No? God rejected
Saul for that venture; God would have forced him by meditation, O no, do it
not, by no means: he made him think, Oh, it is against Gods commandments, I
may not do it. No, but nevertheless he forced himself to do it. Thus God
deals with thousands and millions in the world: Be not a drunkard; God flings
the meditation into the conscience yet a drunkard thou will be: be not a
drunkard again; a drunkard notwithstanding thou will be: Be not again; they
force themselves, they will go to the Alehouse. And so of all other sins.
If men will cast often this work of meditation darted into their souls, they
cast off their own mercy. God tells them, pray not, hear not, offer not,
without directions from me; they dread not the commandment, they will: I trust
prayers are good, I will say them. Thus they will not meditate, or if they do,
they break it off before it comes to any strength or perfection: yea, Gods own
servants, that desire to look toward Sion, is not this your complaint often? I
cannot find sin heavy: I confess the word discovers it to me, but I cannot
be troubled for it. Look as it is with men in the world, if five hundred pounds
weight be laid upon the ground, if a man never pluck at it, he shall never
feel the weight of it. Your sins are not many hundreds, but many thousands,
yea many ten thousands: self-love, security, hardness of heart, base fears,
etc. it is impossible to reckon them. The least vain thought that ever you
imagined, the least vain word that ever you uttered, were weight enough to
press your souls down to hell. Therefore what are so many sins, and so great,
and so often committed? What are they? they are as heavy as rocks and
mountains; yet ye feel them not so heavy. Why? Ye weigh them not; if ye did,
ye should find them heavier then the sand, as David did when his sin was
ever before him ( Psalm. 51.3.) that is his sin was ever in his thoughts, and
in his meditation, his sin was ever like a huge Millstone before him, and he
was ever tugging and pulling to remove it out of his way.





First, the ground upon which our meditation must be raised.

Secondly, the manner how to follow it home to the heart.

Thirdly, how to put life and power in it.

The ground I refer to these four heads: meditate on the goodness,
patience, and mercy of God, that has been abused by any of your sins; the
greater they have been to you, the greater is every sin: this makes them out
of measure sinful, because God is out of measure merciful. There are many
sins in one, when a man sins against many mercies. See Judge. 2.2, 3. Why
have ye done thus? I have done thus and thus mercifully unto you, why have ye
done thus unthankefully to me? Why was my mercy abused? Why was my goodness
slighted? Why was my patience despised? as if the Lord should say, I speak to
your own consciences, think of it, meditate of it, why have ye done this? Do
ye thus requite the Lord, O foolish people and unwise? Is not he thy Father?
Meditate of it first, and tell me then. For it is a question put to thy
meditation to answer. Do ye thus requite the Lord ye foolish people? Were thou
ever in want, but God supplied thee? Were thou ever in weakness, but God
strengthened thee? Were thou ever in straits, but God delivered thee? When thou
were in sickness! he cured thee when thou were in poverty, who relieved thee?
when thou were in misery, who succored thee? Has not God been a gracious God
to thee? Every soul can tell, never poor sinner has had a more gracious God,
then I poor sinner have found to my soul. All my bones can say, Lord, who
has been like unto thee? This heart has been heavy, and thou have cheered
it: this soul has been distressed, and thou have eased it: many troubles have
befallen me, and thou have given me a gracious issue. This poor man (says
David, pointing to himself) this poor man cried, and the Lord heard him, Psa.
34.6. And shall I thus reward the Lord? shall I sin against this goodness?
Then what shall I say? Hear. O heavens, and hearken, O earth; Sun, stand
thou still, and thou Moon be amazed at this, and be avenged on such a heart as
this. The Ox knows his Owner, and the Ass his Masters Crib; but here is a
heart that will not remember to know the Lord* Hear, O heavens, this villainy
cries so loud, that your ears may hear it. Hear all ye Angels, and be
astonished, here is villainy to make your ears glow: yea, hear Hell, hear
Devi^s, if ever there were worse committed by you. When men are but ingenuous,
if they have received any kindness from a friend, they were never in want but
he relieved them: never harbourlesse, but he housed them; never to seek, but
he found them: Let a man deal thus kindly with a man, if this man should deny
him any ordinary favor, he will be ashamed of himself, ashamed to come into
his presence. What will he think, his house was mine, his cubboard was mine,
and his purse was mine, and his friends were mine, and that I should deal thus
unkindly with him, even nature rebukes me. This serious meditation will help to
break thy heart.

meditate on the justice of God: God is a just God as well as merciful. Speak
all ye Devils in hell, Do ye not feel that he is a just God? Speak Sodom,
Speak Gomorrah, your fire and brimstone can testify that he is a just God:
Speak Adah, Zillah, and all ye that were drowned in the old world, your deluge
can testify he is a just God, His judgments are in all the world. 1 Chronicles.
16.14. What is become of drunken Nabal, and swearing Saul, and covetous Ahab,
and proud Iesabel, and mocking Iehu, and envious Shimei? What is become of all
blind Jebusites, and prating cavilling Dio^repheses? Justice has taken hold of
them. What is poverty? What is nakedness? What is famine, sickness, the gout
the stone, Fever, plague? These are the little arrows of Gods justice. What
is shame, disgrace, crosses, afflictions, unseasonable raines, dangerous
weather, wars, rumors of wars? What are all the evils under the Sun?
They are the little finger of Gods justice. Thou spiest them here and there, in
every Town, and in every parish, in every Country: do they not all witness
that he is a just God? Read Psalm 7.11, 12, 13. God has bent his bow already
(says David) the arrow is ready to sly out of the string: It will not be long
before it hit thee, if thou meditate not upon amendment: God is angry with the
wicked every day, as an angry man uses to say, I will be revenged on thee.
Will thou not give over thy sins? I will be revenged on thee. Read Psalm 11.5,
6, 7. Meditate on this; he will neither spare King nor subject, nor rich nor
poor, nor noble nor base, nor Judges and Justices; yet judges and Justices may
spare, but God will not spare: they may be bribed to pardon, but God will not
be fee'd to spare them that go on in their wickedness; and do I think to
escape? Nay, my soul, thou can never escape, except thou obeyest.

Meditate on the wrath of God; Oh! what wrath is it? Can I stand against it? It
burns like an Oven, and all the proud, and all that do wickedly, shall be as
stubble, and the day of wrath shall burn them up. Behold this, says the Text.
Malac. 4.1. Behold it, and meditate on it. Can I go naked in a hot fiery oven?
Can I lift up my hands against it? My hands will be scorched. Can I kick
against it? My legs will be baked. Can I blow upon it with my mouth? my mouth
is fired. Did I ever see lime burned? were I in the limes room, could I endure
that boiling? and yet if I live in my sins, I shall be as the burning of
lime, Isay 33.12. Let thy heart meditate terror: Who among us shall be able to
dwell (that is the meaning of it, as Montanus shows) who among us shall dwell
with devouring fire? who among us shall burn with everlasting burnings? verse.
14. Gods mercy shall say, Take him wrath: I would have converted him, but he
would not. Gods goodness shall say, Take him wrath: I would have been kind
unto him, but he has abused me. Gods patience shall say, Take him wrath: I
have suffered him a great while, that he might have time of repentance, but he
repented not in that time. God smote Egypt in their firstborn. Why? For his
mercy endures for ever. God overthrew Pharaoh and his host: Why? For his
mercy endures for ever. Psalm. 136.15. He smote great Kings, Sihon a King, and
Og a King: for his mercy endures for ever. So will God damn thee that art a
drunkard: Why? for his mercy endures for ever. God will confound thee that
art a worldling: Why? for his mercy endures for ever. God will be revenged on
thee that art a Luke-warmling: Why? for his mercy endures for ever. This may
well make thee tear the hair of thy head, rather then let thee go on in thy
sins. See Jerem. 7.29. Meditate on this.

meditate on the constancy of God. As the Lord was an enemy to wicked men, so
he continues the same God still, a constant enemy to them still. As the Lord
would not endure sin heretofore, so he is constant, he still will not
endure it. Did the Lord once say, Weep and howl ye drunkards? Joel 1.5. he is
constant, so he says still. Did the Lord say, he would burn up
Sabbath Breakers? Jer. 17.27, he is constant; so he says still. Who ever
hardened his heart against the Lord, and prospered? Job 9.14. as if he should
say, I put it to thee to meditate of it: can thou show me a president? did
ever any man harden his heart against Gods Word, in his sin, that prospered?
Did Senacherib prosper in his will worship? Did Judas prosper in his
coveteousnesse? Did Jeconiah prosper in his stubbornness? Where is the Scribe?
where is the receiver? where is he that counted the towers? (says the prophet)
Your fathers where are they, says Zachary? Did not my words take hold of them?
and are they not all now in hell, that have ever lived and died in their sin,
from the beginning of the world? Thou can not show me one drunkard, or one
mocker, or one profane person, or one forma^l professor, from the day that man
was created upon the earth, that is not now in hell, if he be dead. Meditate on
this, how can thou expect to be the one only in all the world that shall
escape, if thou live and die in thy sins? If hell were opened, and the
bottomless pit were looked into, thou should see every soul that ever lived,
and died in their sins, even every soul; there is not one soul missing.
Meditate on this; when I die, do I think I shall not be there? nay I shall be
there too, unless aforehand I enter into the strait gate, and walk in the
narrow way of newness of life.

The Second SERMON OF The use and benefit of Divine Meditation.
HAGGAI. 1.5. Now therefore thus says the Lord of Hosts, Consider your ways.


NOw follows the manner, how to follow Meditation home to the heart. Here are
four things to be practiced.

weigh and ponder all these things in thy heart. It Is said of Mary, she
pondered, Luke 2, 19. and kept all these sayings in her heart: verse 51. The
words signify two things: First, she compared these things together.
Secondly, she cast them all in the scales together. Do thou know God is
merciful? ponder it with his justice. Do thou know that Jesus Christ died
for sinners? ponder it with the true drift of it, how that it is not to let men
go on in their sins, but to save them from their sins. Do thou obey God in
this or that Commandment? O ponder thy life with the rest, Ponder the path of
thy feet, and let all thy ways be established. Prove. 4.26. A man that eats
his meat well, forty morsels well, yet one crum going awry throttles him. Thou
walk in these and these Commandments; yea, but there be other Commandments
besides these: do thou walk in them too? thou must, if thou meanest to have
thy ways to be established. The Jews had their continers, talents, mind's
sicles, which were greater weights; so they had also their gerahs, and agorahs,
smaller measures, and smallest of all: so have thou greater and less weights;
great ones to ponder the great Commandments, and less to weigh even the least
of Gods Commandments: and see thou make true Evangelicall weight, or else all
will not be well. Suppose a man were to pay a 100 pound of good and lawful
money, and in weight, upon forfeiture of all that he has, if he weigh it not;
but the Creditor does, and finds it light; he is undone. If thou ponderest not
thy ways, God will ponder them: Prove. 5.21. the word signifies, he weighs, and
ponders them in a balance, or scales; he puts the Word of his Gospel in the
one, and thy goings and obedience in the other. Thou art weighed, and art found
light, thy kingdom is departed from thee: says God to Belshazzar, Dan. 5.27.
So if thou be light, thou shall be weighed, and so found, thou shall lose the
kingdom of heaven for ever.

Secondly, strip sin, and look upon it stark naked: sin covers and disguiseth
it self, with pleasure, profit, ease, and many a whorish garment, and so
inticeth the heart. Even a toad, if she were covered over with gold, those that
saw only the gold, would pocket it up; if it were naked, they would sling it
in the kennell. Why do men love covetousness? Why, its hooded with profit. Why
carding, dicing, hunting, hawking, tabring, piping, and more then the word
allows? Why? they are clothed with pleasure, and delight. Its the duty of
Ministers to unmask and uncase sin, and pluck off the vail that covers it from
appearing unto men. The not doing of this is the cause, that men do not
meditate on the vileness of their sins, never are humbled, never escape Gods
wrath; even because they do not discover men's iniquities. Lam. 2.14. Alas, the
profit of thy sins shall cease, the pleasure cease, the ease cease, and all
these goodly suits shall vanish away, when the soul comes to die, or to stand
before the judgment seat of Christ: sin will remain, but thy silver, and thy
gold, where will that be then? thy laughter, and thy merriment, what will
become of that then? thy delight will be gone. Meditate therefore with thy
self, my sin is now gainful, and easy, and pleasant; but what will my sin
become, when I come to lie on my deathbed? what good will it do me, when I
have most need of succor? I will never acknowledge him my friend that will
turn against me, when I have most need of him. Alas, I must die, I must come to
judgment, I must go either to heaven, or to hell: the profit that I get now
by my sins, will it bestead me then? the pleasure, the ease that I now find in
sin, will it help me there? Alas no, it will then be my break-neck, it will be
a Devil unto me: the more I have been delighted with it, the more it will gall
me: the more I have gotten by it, the more it will damn me: the sin which I
most of all loved, will most of all torment me. Ecclesiast. 11.9. look thus
upon sin.

The third means: dive into thine own soul and heart? there is a tough brawn
over thy heart that it feels not its sins. Now Meditation must look through,
and come to the heart at the quick and cause the truth to dive into the deep
places of the soul. When the timber is hard, the workman cannot thrust in the
nail with the weight of his hand: no, he must hammer it in. Meditation is the
hammering of the heart. It Is a pertinent phrase, Jer. 23.24. Is not my word
like a fire, (says the Lord) and like a hammer that breaks the rocks in
pieces? There be two similitudes, first, of a hammer: the Word of God is the
hammer; meditation is the hand that takes this hammer, and knocks the nail
into the rocky heart, and makes it enter: Will thou not feel? I Will make thee
feel: (says meditation) will thou not take notice of thy wretched estate?
Meditation comes with blow after blow, and makes it take notice. Seeondly, of
fire; the word is like fire; Meditation kindles it about the heart. A man
benumbed with cold is senseless; the water frozen with cold, though the least
peble would have sunk in it before, now a great millstone is able to lie upon
it, and not sink; the water is able to bear it: so is the heart, be it sins
never so heavy, as the hill of Basan, yet it bears it and feels no weight: but
Meditation thawes the heart, and then every sin pincheth and oppresses. Is
not my word like fire? as if he should say, think of it, and muse of it, and
meditate of it, and thou shall feel it as a fire. Meditation is the often
smiting of the heart with this hammer: so did Ephraim, smite upon his thigh:
Jer. 31.19. like a man in a miserable agony, he thumps his own breast, and in a
vexation strikes his hand on his thigh. Oh miserable wretch that I am! So did
Ephraim, Oh what an unruly Ox am I! how unwilling am I to bear the yoke of the
Lord? Oh and oh the hardness of my heart! oh that I could tell how to beat
thee black and blue! Many men smite their hearts, but they smite them not often
enough. When El^sha bad Joash smite upon the ground, he smote thrice and
sta^ed. The man of God said to him in anger, Thou should have smitten five
or six times, for then thou had smitten Syria till thou had consumed them,
where as now thou shall smite Syria but thrice. 2. Kin. 13.19. So men smite
their hearts twice or thrice or so, but they will not smite their sins dead: it
may be they break the head of their sins, but they recover again, and grow
strong upon them, as at first. Thou must smite five or six times, yea fifty
times five times, till thou have quite broken the impostume of thy heart.
Meditate on the mercies of God, and with them smite it often and often:
Meditate on the justice of God, and with it smite it again, and again: Meditate
on the wrath of God, which is as a consuming fire, and with it smite it
soundly. Meditate on the truth of the Lord, this threatening and that
threatening; this commandment, and that commandment; this promise and that
promise; and with all these smite it to powder.

The forth manner; Anticipate and prevent thine own heart: meditate what thy
heart will one day wish, if it be not humbled, and tell thy soul as much; thou will one day wish, Oh that I had been humbled under the reproves of the Lord!
Oh that I had been wise to have understood mine own mercy! Cursed be the day
that ever I neglected the means of grace; so the Lord brings in a foolish
obstinate sinner, cursing and banning his own soul, sobbing and howling at
the last, Oh how have I hated instruction, and my heart despised rep^oofe! and
have not observed the voice of my Teachers, nor inclined mine care to them that
instructed me? Pro. 5.12, 13. I had Ministers to preach to me, but I would not
come at them ^or if I did, I cared not for their doctrine: I had friends that
advised me well, but woe is me damned wretch! I heeded them not. Thus thou will
cast the fool into thine own teeth and fling a thousand curses into thine own
face, because of thy madness. I might have learned. but I would not; I might
have been humbled, but I would not: I was almost in all evil in the midst of
the assembly of the congregation, verse. 14. I lived where the Saints of God
were in whole assemblies, but I mocked them, I hated them, I misliked them for
being too precise. I was not ashamed of my security, no not in thy sight. Thus
thou will cry out one day, if now thou will not yield unto meditation, which
must make this as present with thee. Know thou, O my soul, the time of thy
visitation is at hand, thou will curse thy self hereafter, if thou do not
now be moved by Gods mercies, thou shall never see mercy more: Now be awaked
by Gods judgments, or else thou shall feel them for evermore, now or for ever
thou shall roar for them. Then thou shall curse thy gains and thy profits that
bewitched thee, thou shall curse thy pleasures and delights that besotted thee,
curse thine own heart, and thine own soul, and thine own conscience that have
damned thee. Meditation may tell thee, thus it will be with thee, unless thou
obeyest now. Hear ye me now, oh ye children, and depart not from the words of
my mouth, ver. 7. hear the word now, and obey it, let it not depart out of thy
meditation. Now be humbled with grace, o^ then thou shall be humbled with
horror: then thou shall wish, Oh that I had been ruled! When thou art in hell,
then thou shall meditate, (...) it was good counsel that such and such a ^ster
gave me; good counsel that such a (...) and such a brother gave me; but wretch
(...) I was, I had not grace to follow it! I had more mind of my pleasures,
more mind of my vanities then of grace. Oh if it were to do again, I would not
do so for a thousand worlds: but alas, it is now too late. Therefore let
Meditation press this upon thee beforehand.



Aesops:) So pursue thy heart with its sins, with the hue and cry of Gods
mercies; pursue it with the hubbub of Gods judgments; let meditation haunt it,
and let thy soul see it shall never be rid of the haunt; at last it will be
content to part with its lusts. Let meditation say, Will thou forsake thine own
mercies? If thou live thus and thus, if thou prayest thus and thus,
dead-heartedly, thou kickest against thine own mercy, will thou rush upon the
pricks? This mercy thou may have, if thou would amend; that vengeance thou
shall have, if thou do not amend: Either cut off thy sins, or else God will cut
off thy soul. Return, O Shulamite, return, return, its the voice of Christ to
thee: Let meditation say, Return, O my soul, return, return, and thou may be
saved; return, or else thou shall be condemned. Now what was the effect of this
haunting meditation? Or ere I was aware, my soul made me like the Chariots of
Aminadab, verse. 12. That is, my soul musing and meditating on these and these
commandments, it so humbled my soul, that it made me yield; yea, and made me
run as fast as the Chariots of Aminadab, freely and willingly to Christ.

Deal with thy heart as Junius his father dealt with him: he seeing his son was
Atheistical, he laid a Bible in every room, that his son could look in no
room, but behold a Bible haunted him, upbraiding him, Will thou not read me,
Atheist? Will thou not read me? And so at last he read it, and was converted
from his Atheism: So let meditation haunt thy heart, hold forth the
commandments, promises, threatenings of the Lord, that thy heart may see them;
let meditation haunt thee in thy luke-warmnesse: prayest thou thus lukewarm?
This prayer will break thy neck one day. Repentest thou? This lukewarm
repentance will cause God to spue thee out of his mouth. Hear thou, speak
thou, think thou? These lukewarm duties will confound thee ere long, if
thou look not to it.

Let Meditation haunt thee, as they haunted Nehemiah with warnings, ten times
(says the Text) they sent to Nehemiah, they will be upon thee, Nehem. 4.12.
Beware of the danger, the enemy will be upon thee: ten times they warned him,
never giving over till Nehemiah looked about him, verse. 13. So do thou haunt
thine own heart: they will be upon thee, this curse, this wrath, that hardness
of heart, this security will be upon thee. Ten times, yea, a thousand times ten
times, never give over thine own soul, until thou have made it to submit.
Indeed there be some, let God send Meditations to haunt them, and follow them,
saying, Repent, leave this or that sin, why will thou be damned with this sin?
Oh forsake it, presently they will gagge the mouth of Meditation, and of
conscience, and strike them stark dead: as Abner when Azahel would haunt him,
and follow him, and turn neither to the right hand, nor to the left, but follow
him at the heels. Turn aside (says Abner) but he would not turn aside from
following him. Turn aside from me (says Abner again) or I will kill thee, but
he would not turn aside, he would follow him close: Then he up with his Spear
and slew him, 2 Samuel 2.19, 20, 21, 22, 23 So many deal with the meditation of
conscience, when conscience would dog them, and weary them out of their sins,
they will not: when conscience would haunt them, they will not be haunted
therewith; when conscience would follow them up with their desperate
wilfulness, they gall and wound, and murder conscience to be quiet. But David
haunted his heart, and would have it haunted.

Let Meditation trace thy heart, as it should haunt thee, so also let it trace
thee in the samesteps. So would the Church, Let us search and try our ways,
and turn again unto the Lord: Lam. 3.40. The word (in the original, says
Buxtorf) signifies, track or steps, step by step: this step was in the ditch,
that in the mire, that step awry: track them all, that we may ungo them all
again, and turn unto the Lord. Never pray but let Meditation track thy prayer:
this passage was right, that passage was amiss. Never keep a Sabbath but let
Meditation track thy keeping of it; this duty was sincere, that was rotten:
Never do any thing but let Meditation track it. This thought, this word, this
action was warrantable; that was out of the way: track thy heart, as the Lord
tracted Eliah, he tract him in the wilderness, he tracted him under the
juniper tree, he tract him in the cave; What do thou here Eliah? go forth: 1
King. 19. What do thou here Eliah, go, return. He tract him in the mount, Go,
return, what do thou here Eliah? this is not a place for thee. So let
Meditation wait thee: what do thou here, O sinner? what do thou here O
drunkard? in thy covetousness, or in thy profaneness, what do thou here?
this is not a place for thee, unless thou mean to perish. It may be thou art
now scard out of these sins, and art run into civil honesty; let Meditation
still track thee. What do thou do here, O sinner? Civilitie is not a case fit
for thee, unless thou were better, thou shall be torn in pieces. It may be
thou art driven out of thy civility, and art gone further, to the profession of
Religion, though it be without the power of it: let meditation still wait thee.
What do thou here, O sinner? this sorry kind of profession is not a race fit
for thee: unless thou be godlier then so, thou shall be devoured with
everlasting fire.

Meditation is like the coursing of a hare in the snow; the hare fearing to be
taken by the dogs, here she stops, there she leaps, here she interleaps, there
she goes backward, and forward upward and downward, and all to deceive the
dogs, that they may not find her; but they go smelling and maundring, winding
and turning, and track her step by step, till they find her: so meditation in
the coursing of the soul, the heart has a thousand fetches, a thousand
meanders and labyrinths, a thousand cross windings, and compassings, and
deceits, and all to puzle Meditation. But Meditation must track the heart, as
God dealt with Job, he counted his steps, step by step: Job 14.16. Meditation
is the souls blood-hound, it will never leave howling, the wrath of God, till
it has taken the hearts sin for a prey; Meditation haunts it out of one sin,
and it runs into another; Meditation haunts it out of that, and it runs into a
third: Meditation is a good pursevant, it prosecutes the sinner, and attaches
him.

Now because the heart is most cunning, and hardest to be trackt by its sent,
when the heart has taken up abundance of good duties, and attained unto sundry
graces, these good duties and common graces drown the sent of the hearts
wickedness. As Huntsmen observe, that the hounds cannot well hunt in the
Spring, as Theophrastus, and Pollux, and others observe: the sweet odors of the
flowers and herbs (says Oppian) hinder the hounds from smelling the hare: so
it is with Meditation; it is hard for it to track the heart in the green Spring
time of civil honesty and formalitie. And therefore let Meditation make
diligent search, says he. Psalm. 77.16.


The third duty: hale thy heart before God, and let Meditation bring it before
his throne, and there power out thy complaint against it before God, there out
with all thy villainy, and article against thy self, and bring as many
complaints against thy self before heaven, as there be drops in a bucket full
of water. So do the godly: I powered out all my complaints before him, (Psalm.
102. in the preface) I powered out my complaints, as a man powers out water out
of a vessel; generally men are willing to call for mercy, but they are not so
willing to bring complaints unto God against themselves: ye shall have them
whisper after the Minister, as he is begging for pardon and mercy, but they
will not do so, whiles he is complaining of their sins; the hellish and
devilish abominations of their heart. These are men of corrupt minds,
reprobate concerning the faith, and shall never have mercy, till they be as
forward to complain of their sins, as to be plaintives for mercy.

When a man in Meditation meets with a hard matter, that he cannot sufficiently
dive into, he breaks it to another: so do thou to God; break all thy heart to
God, tell him of thy hardness of heart, of the pride of thy heart, of the
desperate profaneness of thy heart: but take these rules with thee.

First, thy complaint must be full of sorrow: Psalm. 55.

full complaint, of all thy sins, and of all thy lusts; Lam. 2.18, 19. Pour
ou^ thy heart like water before the face of the Lord. Water runs all out of a
vessel when you turn the mouth downward; never a spoonful will stay behind.
The wicked will not complain of their sins fully: they make hypocritical
professions. If it be a sin, I am sorry for it; (says one) if it be naught, I
cry God mercy; (says another) when their own consciences tell them it is a
sin, yet they will not complain of it absolutely.

aggravation: thou must aggravate thy sins by all the circumstances, that may
show it to be odious, as Peter did: when he thought thereon, he wept Mark
14.72. the original has it, he cast all these things one upon another. Wretch
that I was, Christ was my master, and yet I denied him; such a good master,
that he called me before any of my fellow Apostles, and yet I denied him; I was
ready to sink once, he denied not me: I was to be damned once, he denied not my
soul, and yet I denied him; he told me of this sin beforehand, that I might
take heed of it, and yet I denied him. I said I will not commit it, nor forsake
him, and yet I denied him: yea, this very night, no longer ago, did I say and
say again, I would not deny him, and yet I denied him, yea, I said, though all
others denied him, yet would not I; and yet worse then all others, I denied him
with a witness, before a maid, before a damosel; nay, more filthy beast that I
am, I said I did not know the man; nay more, I swear I did not know him; nay,
more then all this, I did even curse my self with an oath, that I did not know
him: nay more, all this evil did I, not above five or six strides from my Lord
and Savior: nay more, even then, when if ever I should have stood for him, I
should have done it then, when all the world did forsake him. Oh wretch that I
was, I denied him! he cast up all these circumstances together, and meditating
on them, he went out, and wept bitterly.

Fourthly, thy complaint must be a self-condemning complaint: thou must condemn
thy self, and lay thy self at hell gates, and set the naked point of Gods
vengeance at thy throat. Thus and thus have I lived, damned, castaway, as I
have deserved to be! So did Ezra in the behalf of the Jews, Ezra 9.

For, 1 He fell on his face; he did not bow down on his knees; but like a man
astonished, he fell on his knees, ready to feel on the ground in amazement.

2. He spread out his hands unto the Lord, verse 5. as if he should say, here
is my heart-bloud. Lord here is my breast, Lord; we deserve thou should stab
us with thy wrath.

3. He blushes to look heaven in the face, verse 6. so vexed to think on the
sins of his people, that he is even confounded to beg mercy.

4. He is (as it were) dumb and speechless before God: And now our God, what
shall we say after all this? for we have forsaken thy commandments, verse 10.
Shall I excuse the matter? alas! it is inexcusable. What shall we say after all
this? Shall we call for thy patience? We had it, and yet were little the
better. Shall we call for mercy? Why we had it, and yet our stubborn hearts
would not come down. I know not what to say for our selves: for we have sinned
against thee.

5. He declares Gods truth, that he had warned them by his Prophet^, ( verse.
11.12.) but no warning can better us.

6. He shows how God had punished them, yet they would not be humbled: for all
that God had brought upon them less evils then they deserved, and wrought
deliverances for them, which they could not have expected; What shall we say,
should we for all this break thy Commandments? verse 13, 14. What can we
expect but hell and confusion?

7. He is sensible of Gods judgments and righteousness: O Lord, thou art
righteous: as if he should say, How can thou spare us for this sin? How
can it stand with thy righteousness? How is it that such hell hounds as we
are, should live above ground, when thou art so righteous a God? It is a wonder
that the earth opens not her mouth for to swallow us up quick: for, O Lord,
thou art righteous.

8. He lays down his soul, and all the peoples souls at Gods feet; as if he
should say, here we be, thou may damn us if thou will; Behold, we are all
here before thee in our trespasses: for we cannot stand before thee, because of
this, ver. 15. Behold here we are: rebels we are: here are our heads and our
throats before thee, if now thou should take us from our knees unto hell, and
from our prayers unto damnation, we cannot ask thee why thou do so: Oh it is
mercy, it is mercy indeed, that we have been spared. Thus meditation must
bring our hearts before God, and there complain against them before heaven.

Meditation should deal with the heart, as the Father did with his possessed
child, who carried him to Christ; saying, Master, my child is possessed with a
Devil, even a dumb spirit, and I spoke to thy Disciples that they should cast
him out, but they could not Mark 9.18. Bring him to me (says Christ) verse. 19.
How long is this ago since this came to him? Of a child (says the Father) and
often it has cast him into the fire, and often into the water to destroy him;
but if thou can do any thing (as certainly thou can do all things) have
compassion on us, and help us. verse 22. And then Christ helped him. So let
meditation drive thy heart to God, saying, Lord here is my heart (I believe)
possessed with a Devil; for it is a most abominable sinful heart: I brought my
heart to thy Ministers to cure it, to Sermons to Prayer, to all other good
duties, but they could not help me: my heart is a Devilish heart, still my
heart is wicked, and rebellious still, the Devil, oh! the Devil is in it
still! Oh, how he tempts me! he holds me, he casts me into the fire of this
lust, and into the water of ever-flowing iniquity. Have thou compassion, come
and help me; for my heart is miserably vexed with Satan; when I pray, the
Devil stuffes me with dead thoughts, and drousie desires* the Devil fills me
with wandering Imaginations, and I know not what; when I hear the Word the Devil
makes me to rise up against it, or forget it, or not obey it; when the Sabbath
is come, the Devil sets me on thinking my own thoughts, and speaking mine own
words; when a Sacrament is come, the Devil hinders me in selfe-examination,
the Devil disappoints me of my preparation: Oh have thou compassion on me.

The fourth duty; let meditation, when it has held thy heart before God, there
cast thee down before him: when Meditation has searched out thy case, and
made it appear how woeful it is, then let it lay thee along before God, with
What shall I do to be saved? So it did with them in Acts 2.27. as if they
should say (says Chrysostom) we have not one jot of hope to find mercy, so
long as we live as we do. What shall we do? Say what thou will, our ears are
ready to hear it; command what thou will, our souls, what ever it be, are
willing to do it: bid us suffer what ever thou please, tell us what it is,
and we will endure it. They did not say, (notes Chrysostom) How shall we be
saved, as wicked men do: they desire to be saved, but their maine care is not
to see what they must do, they are told what they must do, and yet refuse to do
it; but thy chief study must be, to cast thy self down before God, with the
good Jailer, Sirs, what shall I do to be saved? Acts 16.30. First, what must I
do? and then to be saved. First, thy care must be what to do to get out of thy
sins, how to be rid of thy lusts, and then to be saved; as if he should say, I
see I am at a damned pass, and therefore I was a making away my self, the
fire of hell did slay my soul: but now is there hope of salvation? is there
indeed? Oh tell me, I am willing to do any thing, what must I do? Keep nothing
back of all the will the Lord; be it punishments to suffer, tell me of it, I am
ready to bear it; be it precepts for to do, though never so irksome, O let me
know it, and I will not refuse it. What must I do to be saved? When the heart
is thus humbled upon sound meditation, it is willing to do or suffer any thing.
Jonah is willing to be cast into the sea, being humbled. Jonah 1.2. Here I am,
Lord, deal with me as thou will.

Is it a folly not to meditate? Should a man walk on in a course, and not
meditate whether it will tend? When he falls into mischeife, what will he say?
I never thought of this before, I never considered that this would be the end.
Now it is the part of a fool to say, I never thought, as the Latin proverb has
it; when the Steed is sto^len, if he should then shut the Stable door, what
would thou say? He should have thought of that before. The rich man in the
Gospel had these meditations in his heart; he thought within himself, What
shall I do, because I have no room where to bestow, my fruits? He said in his
heart, This will I do, I will pull down my barnes and build greater; and will
say to my soul, Soul, soul, thou have much goods laid up for many years,
eat, drink, and be merry; Luke 12.17, 18, 19, 20. Thou fool (said God) this
night shall thy soul be required of thee; then, whose shall these things be
that thou have provided? God said thus unto him; not as if God spoke thus
familiarly unto him (says Theophylact) but it is a parable, and God says so
in his word, Thou soul, this night shall they requir^ thy soul of thee. In
this night of thy blindness, in this night of thy security, shall they require
it: he does not say, I will require thy soul of thee, but they: he does not
say who, but they, the Devils in hell, God knows who shall come, thou shall
die, and they shall fetch away ^hy soul to hell: they shall require it. A godly
man's soul is not required, but ^ather he requires God to take away his soul:
he is willing to die, that he may be with Christ: but a wicked man's soul is
required of him: he would willingly not ^ie, but that his soul is required of
him and he must die. Doubtless the rich foo^e now thought with himself, I
never thought that I should have died so soon, and therefore now he ^alls (it
may be) to his Lord, Lord, and cries God mercy. But what will they say to him?
Thou should have thought of this before.

The wise man shall inherit ^lory, but shame shall be the promotion of so^es,
^rov. 3.3. ^he wi^e and prudent, those that truly meditate of things before
hand, shall have glory; but fools that hope to be promoted to glory and
salvation, shame and confusion of face shall be all their promotion* and when
they come thereto, besides their expectation; what will they say? We never
thought it would be thus with us before; but fools as we were, we thought to
be promoted to heaven: like Haman, when King A^ashuerus said unto him, What
shall be done to the man whom the King will honor? O thus and thus (says
Haman) for he thought, I am the man whom the King intends to honor, Esther
6.^. but when Haman was presently after to be hanged on a gallows, he might
rightly say, I never thought of this before. So what shall be done to the man
whom the Lord will honor? Thus and thus say thou, he shall have mercies,
blessings, heaven: I, for thou think I am the man that God intends thus to
honor; but when thou art come to hell, what will thou say then? I never
thought of this before, that so it would be.

Thou would be loath to have the brand of a Reprobate: Not to meditate, is
that brand; The wicked through the pride of his countenance, will not seek
after God; neither is God in all his thoughts, Psalm. 10.4. He scorns to be so
poring upon Bibles, to be so wracking his mind with his sins; He has said in
his heart, God will not require it, verse. 13. God requires no such scrupulosity
nor strictness.

Thou would be loath to roh God of his honor, and the maine part of his
service, whis is Meditation. Thou shall love the Lord with all thy heart, and
with all thy soul, Matthew. 22.38. How can this be true of them (says
Chrysostom) who become vain in their imaginations? Thou shall love the Lord thy
God with all thy heart, soul and mind: And so do I (say thou:) So do thou?
What, and not love God with all that is in thy heart? Thy thoughts are in thy
heart, thy meditations are in thy mind; If thy thoughts then, and meditations
be not of God, thou do not love God with all thy heart. David did not only
pray, that the words of his mouth, but also that the thoughts of his heart
should be ever acceptable to the Lord, Psalm. 19.14. not only that he might be
full of heavenly communication in his mouth, but also of holy meditation in his
heart. Behold (says he) thou requirest truth in the inward parts, Psalm. 51.6.
And meditation is one of the duties of truth in the inward parts.

Thou would be loath that all the worship thou give to God, should be
abominable: so it will be without meditation; meditation before it, meditation
after it.

First, Thou must meditate before thou go about a duty of Gods worship:
consider before thou hear the word of God, meditate what thou art going about,
Hearken O daughter, and consider, incline thine ear, Psalm. 45.10. First,
consider and meditate, and then incline thine ear. This is part of those words
often in Scripture, Be ready, be ready: Be ready and come up says God, Exodus
34.2.) Be ready against the third day, Exodus 19. Gather your selves together,
Zeph. 2.1. that is, prepare to meet thy God, O Israel, Amos 4.12.

Secondly, meditate after the duty. When men part with men, they use to give
one another a farewell, and not bluntly deliver their mind one to another, and
so turn their backs one upon another. Lysias could not write a letter to Felix,
and break up abruptly, but he gave him a farewell, Acts 23.30. Neither may a
man when a duty is done, go away bluntly from God, but give him a farewell by
holy meditation. It Is an unseemly kicking of a duty, as most men do when they
are come to the end of their prayers, to whom with the Father and holy Spirit,
be ascribed all praise and glory, Amen; Come, is dinner ready? or, what news do
you hear? This is unmannerlinesse toward the ordinances of God. A man that
has been at a ^oo^ dinner will sit a while after it, or walk a while, he will
not presently run to his work, that the meat may digest the better: So when
thou have been at Gods dainties, sit after it a while, pawsing and meditating
thereof, as often as thou well may, let it have its working a while.

What is the reason thou have so many by-thoughts in prayer? Because thou do
not meditate beforehand and after. Hence it is that thine eyes are not
directed to the duty, but like a blind Archer thou shootest but by aim; when
the good Archer shoots, he must have the white in his eye still, which he must
level at. My voice shall thou hear betimes in the morning, in the morning will
I direct my prayer to thee, and will look up, ^s. ^.3. How came that? you may
look on his meditations, verse. 1. By meditation he was wont to direct and
level his prayer to God. Wicked men know that God is before them, as a blind
man may le^rne that the But is before him, but they see not God before them to
direct their prayers unto him: they pray at rovers. Thou must use then to
meditate of God, that thy prayers may be directed: if thou prayest not thus,
thy prayers are like them in the Prophet, who drew near to God with their
lips, but their hearts were far from him, like an arrow beside the But, or
far from the mark, either wide or short. They have not cried unto me with their
hearts, when they howled upon their beds, Hosea 7.14. They prayed, but they
prayed not to me; (says the Lord) as the White may say of a bungling Archer,
he shoots, but not at me: when he shooted, he shot another way. God counts all
such prayers no better then howling of Dragons and wild beasts; (so the word
signifies says Scindler) God would as lief, and rather too, that a Dog, or a
Wolf, or Dragon should howl in his hearing, then hear such a prayer as this
is. The only way therefore to perform duties of Gods worship purely, is
chiefly meditation, meditation, meditation.

THE DANGER of deferring REPENTANCE, DISCOVERED In a Sermon preached at
Maidstone in Kent, Septem. 25. 1629.

By that Reverend and faithful Minister of the Word, WILLIAM FENNER, B.D.
Sometime Fellow of Pembroke Hall in Cambridge, and late Parson of Rochford in
Essex.

London, Printed by T.R. and E.M. for J.S.

A SERMON OF Mr. WILLIAM FENNERS at Maidstone, Septem. 25. 1629.
PROVE. 1.28. Then shall they call upon me, but I will not answer: they shall
seek me early, but they shall not find me.


THere is a good English Proverb amongst us, that he that neglects the
occasion, the occasion will neglect him. Solomon wisely begins his Proverbs
with it: for he brings in the Wisdom of his Father in these five particulars:
making a general Proclamation in the 20 verse, Wisdom cries without, she
utters her vice in the streets. He compares God unto a Crier that goes up
and down the City from street to street, and from door to door, crying his
commodity, even the richest that ever was, which is a Christ, a Christ for
redemption, a Christ for sanctification, a Christ to enlighten those that walk
in darkness, and in the shadow of death. Ho, every one that thirsts, here is
a Christ for you.

a merciful reprehension, in the 22. verse, O ye foolish, how long will ye
love foolishness, and ye scorners take pleasure in scorning? Foolish indeed
to be without Christ: foolish to be without grace, foolish to chafer away our
souls for sin. How long ye scorners will ye take pleasure in scorning? will
you still persist in your wickedness, and never have done with your sins? will
you never turn back again, but damn your souls for ever? O ye foolish, how
long will you love foolishness?

a gracious exhortation in the 23. verse: turn you at my correction: lo, I will
pour out my mind unto you, and make you to understand my words. As if he
should say, Do you not see how you are going apace to confusion; and that the
way you take, leads unto destruction? turn ye therefore, turn ye back again,
for there is a Christ behind you: O turn ye; for if ye go on in your sins, you
perish for ever.

a yearning promise made unto the world, in the end of the 23. verse; Lo, I
will pour out my spirit upon you, and cause you to understand my words. As if
he should say, return back again with me, and you shall have better welcome
then you can possibly have, if you go on in your sins: the Devil will never
let you gain so much by your living in your lusts, as you shall do by
repentance for them, and forsaking of them. For behold, I will pour out my
spirit upon you, whereby you shall be far greater gainers, then you shall be by
your sins.

a grievous threatening against the world, even all those that have loytered out
the day of grace. As time and tide stays for no man, no more does the day of
grace: Because I have called, and you refused; I have exhorted, but you have
not regarded; I have denounced judgments against you for your sins, but you
have harned your hearts; now a day of woe and misery shall come upon you, a
time of vengeance and desolation shall over-take you; there will a day come
wherein there will be weeping, and crying Mercy (Lord) mercy; but I tell you
beforehand what you shall trust to: let this be your lesson, now I call, and
you will not hear; now I stretch out my hands, but you will not regard: you
shall seek^ me early, but you shall not find me: and shall cry, but you shall
not be heard.

The words are a thunderclap against all those that procrastinate their
repentance, and returning home unto God, wherein note, the parties themselves
that do prolong this time of grace, they: that is, they who when God calls on
them, will not hear; when God invites them by his mercies, patience, and
forbearance, by his Ministers and servants, by his corrections and judgments,
by all fair means and foul means, yet withstand the means of grace: they are
the men, they shall call, but God will not answer.

their seeking after God; they shall call upon me.

their earnest and diligent seeking unto God; they shall not only call, but
seek to, and not only seek, but seek as to labor to find: nay they shall seek
me early* even strive to go about it with all haste, and fly to repentance,
but they shall not find me.

the unseasonablenesse of the time of their seeking, then: that is a
demonstrative, then; even a time which the Lord points at: as if he should say,
you shall see then these men will be of another mind, then they will be glad to
be converted then they will be glad to come out of their sins, then they will
be glad to get grace, and seek reconciliation with God: but alas! they saw not
this then, but God foresaw it well enough; then shall they call, but I will not
answer, they shall seek me early, but they shall not find me.

frustration of their hope, which has two things in it. First, in regard of
their selves, in regard of the slaw of their seeking, it being not aright.
Secondly, in regard of the justice of God, who rewards every man according to
his works. But I will not hear them. Whence observe this point of Doctrine.

Those that will not hear God when he calls them; God will not hear them,
when they call upon him. Those that will not hear the Lord when he calls upon
them by the ministry of his Word, and voice of his Spirit, the Lord will not
hear them, when in their misery they call upon him.

Thus the Lord dealt with the people in Ezekiels days; the Lord called them to
repentance and obedience: but when they stood out, and neglected the
opportunity of grace, and seasons of conversion, see how God deals with them:
though they cry in mine ears with a loud voice, yet I will not hear them
(says the Lord.) When men have gone beyond the time of Gods mercy, and
out-rowed the tide of Gods forbearance, and will not return, the Lord sets it
down with himself, that his wrath shall return upon them, he will no longer
forbear: they had a time wherein the Lord did pity them, and offered grace and
mercy unto them, but they neglecting this season, and withstanding this
proffer of grace, God resolves with himself they shall never have it again.
There was a time wherein God did pity them, but now he will not pity them any
more; twenty five years he called unto them* and sought to bring them home; but
because they stood out and refused, the Lord says, I will love Ephraim no more.

Beloved, there is a double day, a white day, and a black day; there is a day
of salvation; Isa. 49.9 this is the day in the which the Lord said to the
prisoners, Come forth: and to those that lie in their sins, repent and believe.
Now if any man will come forth and humble his soul before the Lord, let him
come and welcome, for it is a day of salvation. But there is another day of
damnation, which is a dark day, a black and a duskie day, wherein the Lord will
visit the sins of the world, and revenge the quarrel of his Covenant. Hos.
9.7, The day of visitation is come, yea the day of recompense; the people shall
know it; the Prophet is a fool, and the spiritual man is mad. Beloved, we are
fools, and all the spiritual men under heaven are mad, that lay not this day
to heart. For the day of the Lord is a day of visitation, and all the world
shall rue it, though now men sleep in security. If once mercy be rejected, and
God turn away his ear from a man, then grace shall be no more, the door of
life shall for ever be shut up against him: and when once this day comes, he
has lost his own peace, and deprived himself of eternal happiness.

three reasons of this point; the first is the law of retaliation, of rendering
like for like, which is the justest law that can be made with man, for to give
unto every man according to his works, to make him take such as he brings, (as
the Heathen call it) to give a man quid for quo. Now if God call upon thee, and
thou will not hear; it is righteousness with God, yea equity with God (that is
more) that when thou call on him, he should not hear thee. For thus runs
the tenor of Gods Word, Prove. 28.9 He that turns away his ear from hearing the
Law* even his prayers shall be abominable. He that turns away his ear from
Gods Law, God will turn away his ear from his prayer. He that turns, it is
spoken in the present tense, that is, he that now turns away his ear, his
prayer shall be abominable (in the future tense) that is, the Lord marks what
master or servant, what father or mother, what husband or wife, what man or
woman it is, that turns away the ear of his head, or the ear of his heart,
from hearing his will, and obeying of his Commandments, the Lord takes special
notice of it, and sets it down in his Calender, and records it in his
Memorial; keeping a strict account thereof: as if God should say, Well, is it
so? I now call, and will not this man or that woman answer? Do I now stretch
out my hands, and will not they take care to obey me? Well, let them alone
(says God) there is a day coming, that I shall be a hearing of them; times of
sorrow and misery will take hold of them, and then they in their afflictions
will cry unto me, but I will not hear; they will beg for mercy, but I will
not regard: they will seek me early, but they shall not find me.

It was one of the Articles of high Treason brought in against Cardinal
Woolsey, that he had the pox, and a stinking breath, and yet durst come into
the Kings presence: So it will be an Article against thee of high treason
before the King of heaven, if thou come into his presence with the stinking
breath of thy sins, living in thy lusts, and wallowing in thy silthinesse, all
thy prayers are but as so many stinking breaths in the nostrils of the Lord,
and every duty that thou performest unto the Lord, shall be as so many Articles
of high treason against thee, for to condemn thee, because thou live in
rebellion, and a Traitor against God.

His prayer shall be abominable: he does not say, I will turn away mine ear
from hearing his prayer, which turns away his ear from hearing my Law, (that
is the true exposition of the words) no, like for like is sometimes in justice:
for if a man should strike a Magistrate a box on the ear, it were not justice
for him to give him another: for it is a greater sin to strike a Magistrate,
then any other common person; and therefore a greater punishment the Law
requires: So God does not say, he will turn away his ear from hearing his
prayer, but will serve him in a worse kind, he will count it abominable, yea
abomination, (in the abstract) it shall be loathsome, yea loathsomeness it self
in the worst manner. Galat. 6. As a man sows, so shall he reap: if thou sow
sparingly, thou shall reap sparingly: if thou sow a dull ear to Gods Word,
thou shall reap a dull ear from God to thy prayer: for God will reward every
man according to his works.

because of the time of Gods attributes: both mercy and justice have their
season in this life; and when mercy has acted her part, then comes justice
upon the stage, and acts her part; so that God will have his attributes
manifested to all the sons of men, yea to the face of the whole world. There is
no market, nor Fair day that lasts always: if the country will not come
in, the Tradesmen will put up their wares, and be gone: but if they come in
time, they may have a peniworth: otherwise if they come too late, they will
find none. For the Merchant will not always dwell in tents, but away he goes,
and will not stay for them. Beloved, Gods standing is now open, and his shop
set wide unto the sons of men; if men will not come in, cheapen and by without
money, whiles God offers his wares, he will put them up and be gone. For the
Merchant will not lose his wares, which he should do, if he should always
remain in the open air with them; if he always continue in the fields
expecting customers, his wares would spoil and rot. So it is with God, how many
sweet counsels does he lose? how many sweet exhortations? how many blessed
Sermons, and holy Sacraments, and Sabbaths, does he lose? how many checks of
conscience? how many days of grace, and motions of his spirit have been
squandred away in vain? do you think that God will lose all these; and let them
rot upon the stall, with staying for you? No, no: the day of grace and mercy
will have an end, and grace and mercy will have an end; and then the day of
wrath and vengeance will step up. To day if you will hear his voice, then
barden not your hearts: then they hardened their hearts, and would not be led
by Gods mercies to forsake their sins; Therefore he swa^e in his wrath that
they should never enter into his rest. If it be so with you as it was with
Israel in the wilderness, in the day of temptation, you do not know but that
your sins may now begin to pluck vengeance upon you. I tell you, if you
harden your hearts this day, you do not know but this very day the Lord may
clap an oath upon your heads, that you shall never enter into his rest. For one
and the selfsame occasion lasts not always: as every day is not a Market
day, nor every week in the year a Fair week, nor every season in the year a
time of Spring or harvest; so every day of a man's life may not claim to be the
day of grace. Therefore if a man fore-slow it, now he fore-sloweth his own
happiness, and puts off his own peace for ever.

Excellent is that annotation of Gregory on Job 27.9. Will God hear his cry
when trouble comes upon him? Beloved, now Gods patience is troubled, wilt not
thou repent? Now Gods Spirit is troubled, wilt not thou obey? Now Gods Justice
is troubled, will thou not relent? Now Gods Word is troubled, will thou refuse
to hearken? Will God hear his cry? He speaks interrogatively, as if he
should say, Art thou so mad, so vain, so foolish, to promise to thy self
being an hypocrite, that God will hear thy prayer? Oh no, then justice comes
to take place.

Number. 12.22. but the text says, They tempted God ten times, that is, (as some
Expositors expound it) many times; or (as others) ten several times. But what
ever the meaning of the text be, certainly it was very many times; so long, til
at last he swear in his wrath that they should never enter into his rest.
Beloved, though there be many a hot swearer that regards not an oath; yet
certainly if the Lord swear, we may believe him: the Word of God is as strong
as oaths: if he say it upon his word, we are bound to believe it: how much
more then, when he confirms it with an oath? Therefore if the Lord swear thou
shall not, how dare thou, how can thou hope or think ever to enter into his
rest? This was almost forty years before he died, that the Lord made this
oath against them: and God knows how many thousands of them fell short, not
only of the land of Canaan, but also of the Kingdom of heaven.

So God took Ismael an hundred and seventeen years before he died: twenty
years God offered him grace and repentance, but he would not take warning; a
mocker he was, and a mocker he would be: for he mocked Isaac when he was a
child of six years old; and no means would reclaim him, before he heard the
voice, Cast out the bondwoman and her son: Out with him, (says God) for he
shall never be heir with my son: this was an hundred and seventeen years
before Ismaels death.

And so God took Saul, five and thirty, or six and thirty years before he
died, according to Josephus Chronology, (if it be true); howsoever, he took
him diverse years before his death: for so the Scripture makes it plain, 1.
Sam. 15.20. The strength of Israel will not lie, nor repent: for he is not a
man that he should repent. Therefore because thou have rejected the word of
the Lord, the Lord also has rejected thee from being a King. And do not think
that thou by thy prayers, and crying God mercy, can ever alter him: for his
council is immutable, and he is strong in his decree, and cannot change.
Hitherto Grace and Mercy have been offered thee, which if thou had embraced,
thou might have found mercy from the Lord, and the Kingdom should have been
established and confirmed unto thee: but now it is too late: for the strength
of Israel cannot lie.

God took Esau fifty years before his death: for so long he lived, after he
sought the blessing with tears: but he was a hunting when God was a calling:
he was following his profaneness when God was wooing him to repentance. At
last when he called for repentance, and sought it earnestly, yea his soul was
careful for to get it; yet he could never obtain it, though he sought it
earnestly with tears fifty years before he died.

Now if the Lord so severely punish contempt of temporal blessings, O how will
he punish the contempt of proffers of grace and salvation! I tell you God will
be more strict in revenging of this sin, then of any other sin: he will
come with Martial law against all those that contemn his Gospel, Joh. 3.18.
He that believes not, is condemned already. Does Christ preach repentance and
salvation, and the Kingdom of God; and will thou not repent and believe?
Martial Law (beloved) martial Law, hang him up; for he is condemned already.
Even like a soldier that rebels against his General, and forsakes his Colors,
they do not cast him into prison, and stay for the Assizes, or Sessions, but
give him Martial Law, even hang him up: So if the Lord sound his Gospel in
thine ears, and offers thee conditions of peace, knocking at the door of thy
heart by his Spirit, and thou refuse to open to him, thou art condemned
already: for the Strength of Israel cannot lie, nor repent. Oh therefore take
heed now whiles his word sounds in thine ears, while his Spirit secretly
whispers in thy heart to thee, open to him, for else thou art condemned for
ever.

Take notice then, that God does commonly give men a day, and no man or Angel
does know how long this day lasts. To some it lasts to their last gasp; to
some, to their old age; and to some, it is cut off in their childhood. God gave
the Angels a day, the which because they neglected, they are reserved in chains
of darkness until the great judgment day. God gave Cain a day, Genes. 4.
During all the time of this day, though Cain sinned again and again, and went
on in his sins a great while, yet he heard nothing but a still voice, If thou
do well Cain, shall thou not be accepted? but if thou do ill, sin lies at
the door. But when no means will prevail, but Cain will go on adding sin
to sin, and murder unto all the rest of his sins, and so let go the season
of mercy, the Lords tells him from heaven, that the day of grace is past, the
gate of mercy is shut against thee: for thou art now accursed from the earth.
As if the Lord should say, Before I gave thee a day of salvation, and offered
thee mercy, but thou would not accept of it; but now I have clapped a curse
upon thy soul, that thou shall never claw off. So God gave Nineveh a day to
repent, Jona. 3. Yet forty days and Nineveh shall be destroyed. God gave the
Figtree a day, even three years, before he would have it cut down. God gave
the old World a day of an hundred and twenty years; during this time God sent
unto them Noah, a Preacher of righteousness, to call upon them to repent, and so
set it down also, that his Spirit shall not always strive with man, but his
time shall be an hundred and twenty years: yet one writes, that the Lord cut
off twenty of the hundred and twenty years, because of their iniquities, which
were so grievous, and provoked him so much, that they hasted him to come before
he would have done. In all this space if they had repented, they should have
found mercy from the Lord: but when this time was gone, and the day of grace
was out, the Deluge came in upon them, and God by his judgments overthrew the
whole World.

when this day or season of grace does end, or cease.

neither men nor Angels can tell; but this I say, it may be yet this day of
grace lasts unto thee, now it may be God speaks whom to thy soul, now it
may be God warms thy heart, and givs thee good purposes and resolutions: now it
may be the Lord Jesus passes by thee in a good thought and desire; lay hold on
it, for thy day may cease this very night, for ought thou know. Luke 17.22.
The time shall come (says Christ) when you shall desire to see one of the
days of the Son of man, and shall not see it. Now is the day of Christ upon
you, now is Christ offering and preaching himself to you: but if you let this
day pass, thou may desire to have one of the drops of that blood that has
been offered to thee, and yet never have it: thou may desire to feel one rap
of that Spirit that has knocked at thy heart, and yet go without it: thou
may entreat for one dram of that mercy that has been offered, and thou have
rejected, but it shall never be granted to thee: God may clap that fearful
sentence upon thee, Now henceforth never grow fruit more on thee, never
repentance come into thy heart more. If now thou will not repent and be
converted, the Lord may set it down in his decree from this day forward, that
thou may fumble about thy sins, but shall never get victory over them: thou
may ever be mourning for thy corruptions, but never mourn aright for them:
thou may blunder about repentance, but never do the work.

Ezekiel 24.23. You shall not mourn nor weep, but you shall pine away for your
iniquities, and mourn one toward another. There is many a soul for contemning
of God, and not taking up repentance while they may have it, this plague of God
is come upon them, that they are ever repenting, and are never able to repent,
ever poring upon their sins, but never able to come out of them; they pray
and pray against them, but their prayers moulder away under them: for they
shall pine away for their iniquities. What is the reason? he shows in the 13.
verse: Because I would have purged thee, and thou wast not purged, thou shall
not be purged any more. Because I gave thee line upon line, precept upon
precept, motion upon motion, Sacrament upon Sacrament, Sabbath upon Sabbath,
and Ordinance upon Ordinance, because I used all fair means and foul means, I
awaked thy conscience, and stirred up the motions of grace in thee; but because
I would have cleansed thee, and thou wast not cleansed, thou shall never be
cleansed. A fearful sentence it is, if men's hearts were soundly opened to
consider rightly of it.

And as there is a personal day, so there is a national day; if the Nation
turn unto God during that time, then that nation shall find mercy; but if they
neglect that day, then God will hide those things from their eyes that belong
to their peace, as Christ says of Jerusalem, Luke 19.42. O Jerusalem, if that
thou had known in this thy day, those things that did belong to thy peace!
but now they are hid from thine eyes: in this thy day; if thou had known it
during that day, it had been happy for thee; but now the day of grace is gone,
the Lord has concealed it from thee, and thou shall never perceive it any more.

Some men's day of grace God ends even in their very childhood; therefore if
there be any little ones, any children here in this congregation, that are of
age to know what belongs unto an exhortation, to them I speak, that they take
heed how they rebel against the commandment of a father or a mother, or
master, against the teaching of Gods Word, for though you be children, yet God
may inflict judgments upon your heads; for not only the day of grace, but also
the day of life may be cut off from children, as 2 Kings 2.24. Four and twenty
children were torn in pieces for mocking the Lords Prophet. Some men's day of
grace is not shut up until their youth, some not until their old age, some
not until they are a dying; and if they refuse then, they are alike, yea sure
to perish for ever; I know the day of grace may have several returns, but at
last Gods Exchequer will be finally shut up.

May not a man be called at the eleventh or twelfth hour of the day? The day of
grace lasts always; and does not the Apostle call the day of life the day of
grace? 2 Cor. 6.2.

the Lord calls men at the eleventh and twelfth hour; but yet, look and you
shall see in the twentieth of Matthew, that they were not called at the first
hour, nor at the second nor third hour, nor at the sixth and ninth hour, i.
he does not say he found the same men that he found at the first, and third,
sixth and ninth hours, but he saw others standing idle: No, those that were
called at the first hour, came in at the first hour; and they that were
called at the third hour, came in at the third hour; and they that were
called at the sixth and ninth hour, came in at the sixth and ninth hour.
Well, does God call thee in thy childhood, in thy youth, or in thy middle age,
now at the first or sixth, or ninth hour, now come in and labor in Gods
Vineyard, and work out your salvation with fear and trembling, and make use
of the season of grace, now whiles it is upon you: for if thou be called the
first hour, the sixth is for another, and not for thee; if thou be called the
sixth hour, the ninth hour is for others and not for thee; if thou be called
the ninth hour, the eleventh hour is for others and not for thee; The Text
says, He came and found others standing idle in the market place, and said
unto them, Why stand ye here idle? And they say unto him, No man has hired
us; as if they should say, We never had any means of salvation, we have had no
Ministers to preach unto us; but now God calls upon thee to come in, this is
thy hour, look unto it. If God call thee, see thou come in, whether it be at
the first or third hour, at the six or ninth hour, lest the Lord in his wrath
clap bardnesse of heart upon thy soul.

that the day of life, and the day of grace are paralleled and likened one to
another; and therefore there is hope so long as a man remains in the
Congregation of the living.

the day of grace lasts so long as the day of life: 1. In regard of others,
for others are so to esteem of it, the Minister is to look to his people, as
to a people to be converted as long as they live.

2. In regard of a man's own self, he is so bound to believe, for the
commandment of faith stands in force on a man, so long as he lives, and
therefore infidelity and despair cease not to be sins, till a man is actually
in hell; when he is in hell, then they are no sins, because then he is not
commanded to believe, but are part of the punishment of the damned; but whilst
a man lives it is a sin, for men are now bound to lay hold upon Christ and to
believe, at what hour of their life soever.

3. It may be said to last all a man's life long, because it is bounded within
the compass of life: for no man has a day of grace after this life.

But what is the meaning of all those Scriptures which show how God does
deliver up men unto the Spirit of giddiness, and unto the Spirit of slumber?
And what means the hardening of men's hearts, and searing of men's consciences,
but only to show that the day of grace may end unto a particular man, ten,
twenty, thirty, nay forty years before his death.

1. Because God may harden a man's heart, Jerem. 13.10. and deal with them as
with Israel in the Rock, so shut up their hearts, that they shall never melt at
any Sermon, never be wrought upon by any judgment, God having closed them up
in a rocky heart, that he says of them, Can the Blockmore change his skin, or
the Leopard his spots? then may they do good that are accustomed to do evil.
The blackness of the Blackmore is only in the outside of the skin, yet all
the Art under the heavens cannot blot it out: So if once hardness possess thy
soul, all the preaching of the Ministers, and all the means of grace in the
world can never bring it unto that frame and temper, as to make it melt under
the hand of God; I tell thee, thou that usest to come unto Sermons day after
day, and refusest to repent, living still in thy sins, there is no hammer nor
beetle in the world more hard then thy heart: as those men and women that sit
under the preaching of the Word, and hear the doctrine of life, like rain from
above, beating and knocking on their consciences, and on their hearts, to
awaken them out of their sins, and yet notwitstanding will not repent at
last, they prove to be deaf Adders, that stop their ears against the Word,
charm the Charmer never so wisely.

2. God may sear men's consciences; Does thy conscience tell thee that thou art
a lukewarmling, and will thou not be reformed? Does thy conscience tell thee
that thy prayers and all thy religion is rotten and unsound, and that thy
repentance is hypocritical and naught; and that for all thy vain hopes, thou
art but a dissembler, and yet remainest in thy sins, and will thou not be
bettered hereby? Take heed; for that man that runns on in sin against the
voice of his own conscience, that man sins the sin of Saul, 1 Samuel 13.8.
God bid him stay seven days until Samuel came: Saul stays full seven days
within one hour; at last his lust began to bawl: What? shall I stay for a
Prophet thus long? Stay, says his conscience; Why? (says Saul) I waited for
him so long, even seven days lacking but one hour. Stay (says God to his
conscience) for the Word of God bids thee stay so long: he stayed one day, and
two days, and six days, and seven days but one hour; Stay (says his
conscience:) no, he would not; but I forced my self, (says the Text) as if
he should say, I hardened my heart to do it, though the word of the Lord, and
my own conscience bid me stay and not do it, yet I forced my self to do it:
What was this man's sin! Was it his offering of Sacrifice, and calling upon
God by prayer? No, the Lord commands us to call upon him in time of distress;
and being commanded, it was lawful. Was it his sin to meddle with the
Priests office? No: for he did but appoint the Sacrifice, the Priest offered
it. What? was it the breaking of one hours time? No: for he had sinned more
against God then so: but this was his sin, that he went against his own
conscience, when God stood in the way, when conscience stood in the way;
conscience said stay, but he would not stay: God bid him stay, but he would not
stay. And this is the sin of many thousands amongsts us; men's consciences tell
them that they must not be drunkards, men's consciences tell them that they must
not be worldlings, they must not be swearers, they must not be lukewarm
professors, they must pray better then they do, and have other faith then yet
they have, if ever they mean to be saved; will thou yet against thy conscience
force thy self to go on in thy sins from day to day, and never be reformed?
take heed lest the Lord be provoked to set thy sun upon thy head, and shut up
thy heart, and tonclude thy eternal destruction.

Suppose I go on in my sins, and follow my wicked courses now; what if I seek
him hereafter, and humble my soul before him with fasting and prayer, and when
I lie upon my deathbed, I send a ticket unto my Minister to pray for me, will
all this do me no good?

Jerem. 15.1.) Though Moses and Samuel stood before me, yet my affections could
not be toward this people: cast them out of my sight. Do thou lie sick upon
thy deathbed? were Samuel, Job, or Daniel the Minister of thy Parish, and thou
should send thy ticket unto them, desiring them to remember thee in their
prayers; if Noah stood in the Pulpit, and Job and Daniel were here before the
Lord for to plead for thee, yet he would not hear thee.

suppose I humble my self by fasting and prayer, will not God hear that.

Jer. 14.12. when they fast. I will not hear them: and when they offer
oblations, I will not accept their cry: but I will consume them by the sword,
by famine, and by pestilence. You may set up your fastings, prayers, and
humiliations, you may lament and mourn, and pine away your selves in your
sins; but it is not all your prayers and fastings, it is not all your
lamentation and mourning, that will do you good, so long as the counsel of the
Lord is rejected. Because I called, and ye would not answer; therefore you
shall call, but I will not hear: they thought that the Lords ears would
always be open, and that when they called the Lord would have answered* and
that the day of grace would ever remain; but God says, I will not hear them:
they would never have sought if they thought the Lord would not hear them, but
all their seeking was in vain.

You will say, at what time soever a sinner repents he shall have mercy.

repent from the bottom of thy heart, but thou may come with many a degree
of repentance, and yet never repent whilst thou live: if thou repent from
thy heart, and root out thy sins, then God will put away thy sins; but thou
may go on in repentance and calling upon God, and performing many duties of
Religion, and yet be hardened; look how much Religion will stand with self-love,
so much thou may have after the day of grace is gone. Self-love may make a
man fly to prayer, and run after Sermons, and go on in many holy duties, and
give over many sins; look how far self-love may drive thee unto holy duties, so
far thou may go, and yet notwithstanding remain hardened. O therefore let us
not delay, nor put off the time of grace, nor let go salvation while it may be
had; then shall they call, but I will not answer: he does not set down when
this time is; it may be it is now, it may be not this seven years, it may be
not till thy death.

It may be, this very day, even this very Sermon, this very hour may be thy
day that art now in thy sins, that if thou repent not at this very one
Sermon* thou neglectest eternal life for ever; lose the benefit of this Sermon
at this time, and thou may lose eternal salvation, and never have it more.
The thief that robbed this day, how does he know but this one robbery may bring
him to the gallows? So the man that sins this day, how does he know but that
this very days work may bring him to hell? Deuteronomy. 32.35. To God belongs
vengeance: their feet shall slide in due time. Therefore if a man sin against
him, he may stand to day, and to morrow, and many days; but when the due time
comes, even the time which God has set, then up goes his heels, he shall slide
and break his neck: thy houre-glasse runs in heaven, and thou see not when
the sand comes to the bottom, but when it is out, then down thou go to hell
for ever.

There was one resolved to kill Julius Caesar such a day; the night before, a
friend sent him a letter to acquaint him with it: but being at supper, and
busy, I will not look upon it now, (says he) to morrow is a new day. The next
day when he should have read his letter, he was stabd; Whence this Proverb came
in Greece, To morrow is a new day. God sends thee a letter and a message from
heaven to day; hear his voice to day, repent and come out of your sins, or for
ever to hell; to day be converted and sanctified, or for ever be hardened. Do
thou refuse to bearken to day, and put it off until to morrow? it may be
to morrow may be a day of Gods wrath, and then thou may be hardened, seared,
and bound over unto the great day of Gods vengeance: to morrow God may set the
decree upon thy soul, that thou shall never repent. Therefore if thou refuse
this, thou refusest all; for what know thou, but this very day may be thy
day?

Gods patience is in his own breast; and who can tell how long it will last?
Have thou Momus his glasse-window, to look into Gods secret counsel? have thou
a keyhole to look into Gods treasury? can thou stand on tiptoe, to look over
Gods shoulder, to look into Gods decree, to see how long his patience will
last? It may be God has suffered thee till this day, thou art guilty of ten
thousand sins, and yet he is patient toward thee; God has stayed thus long
for thee, that have sworn I know not how many oaths, God has born thus long
with thee that have told I know not how many lies, profaned I know not how
many Sabbaths contemned I know not how many ordinances, and slighted I know
not how many judgments, yet Gods patience is in his own breast, it is the long
sufferance of God. Thou may say, I would fain have it to morrow, and this
seven years, but alas, it is his long sufferance and not thine: and how do
thou know when he will conclude it? it may be this day as well as to morrow.
Joel 2.13. Rent your hearts, and not your garments, (says the Prophet) for the
Lord he is gracious, and merciful. This word [for] has a great deal of force
in it: First, It is a descriptivum [for:] for he is gracious and a merciful
God: therefore rent thy heart, and let thy soul burst within thee, that thou
have sinned against him: for he is a merciful God, and it may be he will
pardon all thy sins, and heal all thy rebellions committed against him.

Secondly, it is an upbraiding [for:] upbraiding thee for thy sins: rent thy
heart therefore, why? he is a patient God; will thou go on in thy sins against
such a patient God? and rebel against such a loving Father* that has loved
thee with so much compassion? Rent thy heart, for he is patient.

Thirdly, it is a comforting and encouraging [for:] rent thy heart for there is
encouragement for thee to repent, give over thy sins, and go to the throne of
grace. For there is much mercy to welcome thee, and great patience for to bid
thee come home, and abundance of grace for to encourage thee: therefore rent
thy heart and come home unto the Lord, for he is patient and long-suffering.

Fourthly, it is a forewarning [for:] rent your hearts, for the Lord is
gracious and merciful, slow to anger, and of great kindness; yet his mercy
lasts, yet his patience endures, yet he has all his attributes, and yet he
is pleased to manifest the same, still tendering grace and mercy unto thee. Oh
turn unto him, while these endure, or else thou shall perish for ever.

Fifthly, it is a threatening [for;] now he is gracious, now he is merciful,
but his mercy will end, his patience will end, and then if thou have not rent
thy heart before, it will be too late then. Therefore as ever thou love thine
own soul, now rent thy heart and turn unto God.

It is Gods own proclamation; The Lord the Lord, slow to anger, and of great
mercy, forgiving iniquity and sin. Yea what man soever it be, that humbles his
soul before him he shall find grace and mercy with him; yea abundance of
mercy, pardoning iniquity, transgression and sin; yea any thing: Let but a
soul come prostrate before him, humbling his soul, he will pardon his sin. But
as it follows in the words; He will by no means clear the guilty; if
notwithstanding all Gods patience and mercy, thou go on in thy sins, the Lord
will never forgive thee, but will visit thy sins upon thee unto the third and
fourth generations, because thou have withstood the day of grace. Beloved, men
run on in their sins, as if so be an Angel from heaven should cry unto them and
tell them, yet God will be good unto them, yet God will show them mercy, and
forbear them. Beloved, let your consciences answer, if you ever heard the Lord
God say to any of you, thus long I will forbear you. No, Gods patience is in
his own breast, and therefore no man knows how long it will last.

because Gods patience gives no marks or inklings of it, before it ends:
commonly when God strikes a man with death, he gives some signs of warnings
of it before, as sickness, and pains, and gray hairs, and many sorrows, etc.
Now because thy life is in Gods hands, thou carest not for it, but venturest to
go on in thy sins, hoping to have some warning, though thousands be cut off
without it; but the day of grace may come to an end, and yet thou never have
any inkling or warning of it beforehand: commonly when God strikes a man with
death, he tells him of it beforehand by aches and pains, as if the Lord should
say, Now thou shall die, now will I take thee out of the world. But when the
Lord takes away the day of grace from a man, though the spiritual man may
take some notice of it, yet there is no sensible apparition of it, but after
the day of grace is set upon a man, he may be as strong and lusty as before,
he may come to Church as well after as before, perform religious duties, and
do many good things, as well after as before; as Saul went on in duties of
Religion, as well after Samuel had pronounced the Lords doom upon him; how
many times was he offering sacrifice unto the Lord after the Prophet told him,
that he was a man rejected? how many good speeches came from him? as when
Samuel met him, he salutes him with these words; Blessed be thou of the Lord, I
pray thee turn again with me, that I may worship the Lord. A man would have
thought that Saul had been a good convert. No, no, before all this his
judgment and doom was set upon him; God steals upon him and says nothing; he
claps his plague upon their souls, and holds his peace.

Isa. 42.14. I have a long time held my peace, I have been still, and refrained
my self; now will I cry like a traveling woman, I will destroy, and devour
at once. The Lord shows here how he deals with men, they go on in their sins,
but the Lord holds his peace; they provoke him every day, but the Lord
refraines his anger: but now all at once his wrath breaks forth upon them.
Psalm. 64.7. God will shoot an arrow at them suddenly, their stroke shall be at
once. The Lord suddenly shoots a swift arrow at thee; no sooner it is shot, but
it enters into thy bowels. When the Lord comes upon a man; he comes suddenly;
when he ends the day of grace upon him, he does it suddenly. He ended the day
of grace on the Scribes and Pharisees even in the very Sermon time, while
Christ was preaching unto them, they were delivered up to hardness of heart:
so many were delivered up to hardness of heart in the time of Hosea's
prophecy, Hos. 4.17. Ephraim is joined to idols; let him alone (says God,) as
if he should say, Sermon, let him alone; Preacher, let him alone; Sirrit, let
him alone; Christ, let him alone; Beloved, if we stand out against God, and
reject the day of grace, the Lord may say. Word, let such a man alone, and
never convert him; Christ, let such a man alone, and never redeem him; Spirit*
let such a man alone, and never sanctify him; Sacraments, let such a man
alone, and never seal up any comforts unto him: a fearful sign that men are
come to this hour, do we not see that men come to the Word, and the Word lets
them alone in their sins? do not men come to the Sacrament, and the Sacrament
leaves them still in their filthiness? men come unto good duties, but good
duties let them alone, and do them no good: and this is the condition of many
thousands in the world. Therefore oh think upon this you that have made a
league with your sins, and an agreement with hell: hear this delivered to you
this day, that the day of grace may be ended, and God may come and clap his
curse upon men, and never give them any inkling of it at all.

God reckons upon every hour, if God kept not a strict account of time, how
many Sermons* you have had, how many mercies you have enjoyed, how many crosses
he has warned you by: if God kept not a true tale and account of every hours
time; you might rub on many days, and months, and years, and spend much time
in fulfilling of your lusts; but God keeps a reckoning of these things, yea
of every hour, and of every minute. Acts 17.30. The times of ignorance God
regarded not; but now he admonishes all men to repent. Alas, when men live in
their sins through blindness and ignorance, and know not God, the Lord takes
no such strict notice of them, but lets them go on longer and longer; but when
the Lord sends them his Word and Gospel, and affords them the means of grace,
he does the more strictly look unto them, and takes the more exact account of
them; before they had the means of grace, the Lord winked at them, and did not
so narrowly watch them: but looked over men's igonrance, (as the original has
it) but now God sends his Word and Gospel, he admonishes all men to repent, he
winks at never an hour, but sets down how often thou have had exhortation from
thy Minister, how often thou have had warning by sickness and aflictions, how
often thou have had checks from thine own conscience, how many admonitions
thou have had from thy friends, how many times thou have had the sound of the
Gospel to sound in thy ears to bring thee home unto God, John 2.7.11. This is
the first beginning of miracles that Jesus did. John 4.58. This is the second
miracle that Jesus did, says the Text, God sets down this, is the first, this
is the second time: This is the second Epistle I wrote to you, says Paul. Oh
this is the third time I wrote unto you, 2 Cor. 13. that when I come I will not
spare: so God sets it down in his catalogue, this is the first time that I
have warned this man, this is the second time, this is the third time, that
when I come I will not spare; the Lord accounts how long he has sought unto
thee, and entreated thee by his mercies, how long he has allured thee by his
word, how long he has warned thee by his judgments, how often he has smote thy
heart with fears, and thy conscience with terrors. Now if for all this thou will not return, just is it with God to cast thee down to hell for ever.

it is a wonder that the day of grace is not ended already, and that thou art
not now in hell. When a thing in this kind is looked for to be done, it is a
wonder that it is not done: It is a wonderful mercy of God unto this Kingdom
that yet the day of grace is continued amongst us, in regard of our long fear
and expectation of the contrary. For from the highest to the lowest we have
highly revolted more and more, and provoked God to his very face. What contempt
of Gods word? what neglect of Gods Ordinances? what profanation of Gods
Sabbaths? what scoffing and deriding of Gods servants? how does wickedness and
profaneness stand up in the highest room, climb up into the highest chambers?
But as a whore condemned to die being with child, is repreived for a time,
until her child be brought forth: so this Land has gone a whoring from God,
yet so long as God has some children to be brought forth, which are not yet
come unto the birth, he lets his grace and Gospel continue until these
children be brought forth. Therefore now (beloved) if we stick at the birth and
come not forth, a hundred to one but we shall miscarry.

When Christ comes first to thy soul, he witnesses grace and mercy to thee,
if thou will repent and amend; yea he witnesses forgiveness of sins,
redemption and salvation, if thou will believe; but if not, he will be a swift
witness against thee, Malachi 3.5. if thou continue and go on in thy sins:
Agree with thine adversary, while thou art in the way quickly, Matthew. 5.25. Now
God is in the way with thee, Christ and his Spirit are in the way with thee;
thou need not now say, who shall go up to heaven and bring down the Spirit
to thee; Christ's Spirit is now knocking at thy heart, and now God offers his
mercy to thee, now thou art in the way, now he calls unto thee to accept of his
mercy, now he commands thee to take Christ, now hear him caling to thy heart,
now he tenders grace unto thee, embrace it: now receive Christ and make up thy
peace with him: remember the saying of the Apostle, 2 Corinthians. 13.5. Examine
your selves whether you be in the faith; prove your selves. Know you not your
own selves, how that Jesus Christ is in you except you be reprobates? As if the
Astostle should say, I have been an Apostle to you this year and half, I have
preached thus and thus long unto you, I have wrote one Epistle to you to
reform those abuses that were among you, and now I write this second Epistle,
to declare the whole will and counsel of God to you. Now cast up your
reckoning, examine your selves, and make up your account: see if you have
gained Christ. O, I have Christ, (says one) I have Christ, (says another.) I,
but prove it, says the Apostle, and try your selves: know ye not that by this
time Christ is in you, or else you be reprobates? As if he should say, if yet
Christ be not in you, and grace wrought in your hearts, if yet you lie festring
in your sins, and go on in your wicked ways, it is to be feared you are
reprobates: either you or we are reprobates, you for not obeying, or we for
not delivering the truth of God unto you: But I trust that ye shall know that
we are not reprobates: verse 6. God forbid that this word should be ever spoken
unto any soul in this Congregation: but this let me say, is there any man
here that goes on in his lusts, and in his carnal course of life, in pride,
security, hardness of heart, and impenitencie, that has not the soundness of
grace? he has a fearful sign and brand of a reprobate, whose conscience is
stifled: it is a fearful sign, if he be not a reprobate before God, yet he is
one that is not approved, but for the present in a wretched and miserable
condition. Now is the time of grace wherein God has spoken to your souls,
remember that vengeance that is coming toward you if it be rejected; now the
Lords fatlings are ready; his Oxen, and Sheep are slain, and laid upon the
board; Christ is sacrificed, and his blood is shed, and the grace of the Lord
Jesus Christ is tendered to you; you that have grace, get more grace; you that
have no grace, get grace and Christ, and take heed of neglecting any
opportunity of grace, for that may come unto thee in one hour, that will never
come again.

FINIS.
VAIN THOUGHTS ARRAIGNED At the Bar of Gods JUSTICE. SET FORTH In a Sermon
preached at Linton in Kent, Septem. 29. 1629.

By that Reverend and painful Minister of the Word, WILLIAM FENNER, B.D.
Sometime Fellow of Pembroke Hall in Cambridge, and late Parson of Rochford in
Essex.

London, Printed by T.R. and E.M. for J.S.

A SERMON OF Mr. WILLIAM FENNERS Preached at Linton, Septem. 9. 1629.
PHIL. 3.18, 19. For many walk, of whom I have told you often, and now tell you
weeping, that they are the enemies of the Cross of Christ, whose end is
destruction, whose belly is their God, whose glory is their shame, and who mind
earthly things.


THE Apostle in the closure of this Chapter, sets out unto us a twofold kind
of life: First, the life of the godly, and that 1. by way of Exhortation, verse
17. Brethren, be followers together of me, and mark them which walk so as you
have us for an example: 2. By way of declaration, verse 20. But our
conversation is in heaven, whence also we look for the Savior, even the Lord
Jesus Christ. Then secondly, he sets forth unto us the life of the wicked,
which walked otherwise then the Disciples and Apostles of Christ walked, in
these words read unto you. The Apostle warned those wicked men again and again,
but they would not take warning, neither did they think themselves so bad as he
made them, and therefore they thought they should speed well enough; he
preached to them in the Pulpit, and wrote unto them, though he were six hundred
miles and more distant from them, (and that weeping too) that they are enemies
to the Cross of Christ: whose end is destruction, whose God is their belly,
who mind earthly things.

The words may be const^ued two ways; either as being meant, 1. Of several
wicked men, as first of Heterodox walkers, such as walk contrary to the
Apostles: 2. Of wicked persecutors of the Gospel, enemies to the Cross of
Christ: 3. Of Drunkards and hypocrites, whose God is their belly: 4. Of
Ambitious and proud persons, whose glory is their shame: and 5. of covetous and
carnal minded men, who mind earthly things: or as Chrysostom expounds the
words (and so it seems is the meaning of them) to be meant of one sort of men,
who mind earthly things, they are such as walk otherwise then the Apostle
walked. Who are they that mind earthly things? they are enemies of the Cross
of Christ: Who are they that mind earthly things? Whose hearts and affections
run more after the things of this life, then after the cross of Christ; Their
God is their belly. Who are they that mind earthly things, and think only how
to increase their living, and enlarge their estate, and make them sure unto
themselves? their glory is their shame. Who are they that mind earthly things?
that give their hearts (the flower of man) and their affections (the flower of
their souls) unto the world, and unto the base things of the world, still they
are they that mind earthly things, which set either their loving thoughts, or
their carking and caring thoughts, or their fretting and vexing thoughts; or
their eager, covetous, and vain thoughts on earthly things, they are they that
walk otherwise then the Apostles of Christ walked; These are those that are
enemies to the cross of Christ, whose God is their belly, whose glory is their
shame, who mind earthly things, whose end is destruction.

Hence then will we observe this point:

those whose minds and hearts run habitually on earth and earthly things, their
end must needs be destruction.

Jerem. 6.19. Hear O earth, (says God behold I will bring evil upon this
people, even the fruit of their thoughts, because they have not hearkened unto
me, but rejected my Law. Wherein we may see 3 things, 1. That the curse of God
is the desert of cursed evil and vain thoughts: 2. That the plague and curse
of God is the event of evil and vain thoughts; evil thoughts do not only
deserve Gods plagues, but also bring them: 3. Here is notice given to all the
world; Hear, O earth: as if he had said, here is a reckoning that you little
dream of, I will bring a plague upon you not only for your idolatry, for your
whoredom and fornication, but even for your vain thoughts, Prove. 24.9. The
thoughts of the wicked are sin; the Lord does not only condemn the actions
and courses of wicked men, but sets his curse upon their very thoughts. Sin
is of an homogeneall nature, of which every part of a thing is the whole; every
piece of stone is stone, for it has the nature of the whole: even so it is
with sin, the least part of sin, the least thought of sin, the least shiver of
sin, is sin, and abominable before God.

That man's end must needs end in destruction, that never repents: Now, so long
as a man's thoughts run usually and habitually on the things of the world,
that man never repents; repentance not only cleanses the outside of man, but
the inside also, even the heart; repentance goes as far as the Law of God
goes; where the word of God begins, there repentance must needs begin: now the
word of God begins and strikes at the heart, as says the Apostle, The word of
God is sharp and powerful, sharper then any two-edged sword, piercing to the
dividing asunder of the soul and spirit, the joints and marrow, and is a
discerner of the thoughts of the heart, Heb. 4.12. Now then if the word of God
strike at the thoughts of the heart, then repentance must go and teach so
far to reform and amend the things of the heart, or else he never repents.
Let a man sweep his house never so much, yet it is not clean so long as there
remains one Cob-web in it: so if thy heart be swept from drunkenness, whoring
and swearing, and yet if the old Cob-web of vain thoughts remain in any corner
of thy heart, not washed out, nor swept down, thou have not as yet repented: Oh
Jerusalem (says God by his Prophet) wash thy heart from wickedness, that thou
may be saved: how long shall thy vain thoughts lodge within thee? Jer. 4.14.
Mark how the Lord inforceth his exhortation: see how he backs his counsel* [
that thou may be saved:] as if he had said, thou can not be saved, unless
thou wash thy heart from vain thoughts: how long shall thy vain thoughts lodge
within thee? He does not say, why do vain thoughts come in thee? for they will
come into the best and most holy heart; but how long shall they lodge within
thee? If but vain thoughts do lodge in man and take up their nest in his heart,
if a man let his thoughts dwell upon vain things, and he give way unto them,
and use them as his market, trade and recreations, he cannot be saved; it is
an emphaticall kind of speech: as if the Lord should say, O Jerusalem, thou
never considerest this, and thus he does as it were pity and compassionate them
in their blindness and ignoran^e, and horrible besottednesse, that think that
thought is free. Beloved, when the Lord comes to reckon with the world, he will
not only reckon with them for their pounds and shillings, for their hundreds
and thousands of sins; for their murders, whoredoms, blasphemies, etc. but
he will call them to account for their least sins, the pence and farthing
sins, even their very thoughts: agree with thine adversary quickly, while
thou art in the way, lest he deliver thee up to the Jailer, and thou be cast
into prison: thou shall not come out until thou have paid the utmost farthing;
thou must deliver up thy farthing as well as thy pound sins, or else thou
never agreest with thine adversary. When the Lord by his prophet calls upon his
people, exhorting them to repentance, he wills and exhorts them to change
their thoughts, Esaias 55.7. Repentance is the change of the thoughts, according
to the English Proverb, (I have changed my thoughts:) Look unto thy feet when
thou go into the house of God, Eccles. 5.1. Thou can never go to the House
of God without thy feet: the thoughts and affections of the heart, are the feet
of the soul; and thou can never go to God without them; and therefore if thy
heart and affections run habitually on earthly things, thou did never repent,
and so thine end is damnation.

that man's end must needs be destruction that has no Christ in the world: now
so long as thy thoughts run habitually on earthly things, thou have no Christ.
It is not enough for a man to hang on Christ, for many a man does so, and yet
is cut off from Christ, and perishes for ever: thou must not only hang upon
Christ, but thou must also get into Christ. As in the old world, when the
deluge came, and the waters increased so greatly, that the mountains and high
hills were covered with them, and the people could not save themselves by
getting unto the tops of the mountains, no question but many seeing the Ark
swim above the water, did climb up and hang upon the sides of the Ark, thinking
to save themselves, yet none of them were saved, but those that were gotten
into the Ark: so many a man will catch hold of Christ, but his hold will be
gone, and he perish for ever, unless he get into Christ. Now a man can never
get into Christ, unless his heart be purged from vain thoughts: For Christ
when he enters into a man, cleanses his heart from vain thoughts, 2 Cor.
10.5. If Christ once come into the heart, he will set up his throne there: he
will hold up his Scepter of Righteousness in it: when Christ comes, see what
a work he will make in the heart, he will not suffer a proud thought to remain
there to upbraid him: he will not suffer ever a sinful lust to stand up to
beard him; but he will cast down every imagination, and all high things that
exalt themselves, and he will bring every thought into subjection unto himself.
Therefore if thy thoughts run after the lusts of thy own heart, thou have no
Christ in thee: for Christ (beloved) will never dwell in a foul house: I know
there is no wheat without some darnell, no gold without some dross, no wine
without some lees; so there is no man but has some sin; no man so clean, but
has some defilements of sin upon him; therefore if a man have not his
cleansing grace of Christ in him, cleansing the heart from vain things, there
is no Christ in him: for Christ will never dwell in a foul heart. Now beloved,
the very vain thoughts of a man defile him: as Christ says, Matthew. 7.21, 22,
23. Out of the heart proceeds evil thoughts, and they are they that defile a
man All these, not only murder, and adulteries, and uncleanness, and all
other abominable sins, which men's conseiences startle at, bull evil thoughts
defile a man: Assure thy self that so long as the league of these evil
thoughts is not broken, thou have no Christ as yet within thee. Hence is that
exhortation of the Apostle, Colos. 3.12. If you be risen with Christ, then seek
those things which are above.

Brethren, you must remember that there be two kinds of exhortations in
Scripture: the one, if a man do them, blessed and happy is he: the other, if
he do them not, yet he may find mercy; it will be a grief and a sorrow to
him, but it follows not that he shall miscarrie. But there are exhortations
that tie to obedience, that must be obeyed: or else there is no salvation, as
this exhortat^on of the Apostle; it is not left to our choice to do or not to
do but if a man be risen with Christ, he must do it: he must seek the things
that are above: that man then that has his thoughts run habitually on the
world, that man has no Christ in him; and therefore his end must needs be
destruction.

that man's end must needs be destruction that loves not God; now so long as thy
thoughts run habitually on the things of the world, thou have no true love of
God in thee. For thus runs the Commandment of love, Thou shall love the Lord
thy God with all thy heart, with all thy soul and with all thy might. Matthew.
22.37. It is as if Christ should have said, thou shall love God with all thy
heart, and with all thy heart, and with all thy heart: for the soul, mind, and
heart are all one, that no man might dare to keep any part of their heart from
God. Every one will say, I love God with all my heart, I go to Church and serve
God with all my heart: I hear the Word, and pray with all my heart: I receive
the Sacraments with all my heart: Do thou so? and yet let thy thoughts run
upon the world? do thou pray, and yet let vain thoughts lodge within thee?
do thou hear the Word, receive the Sacraments, and yet letst vain thoughts
distract thee? Do thou walk in thy calling, and yet let vain thoughts
steal away thy heart, and yet say thou, I love God with all my heart, when
thou take away thy heart from God? How do thou think thy thoughts? with thy
heels, or with thy heart? Surely thou say, with my heart: Why then if thou
love God with all thy heart, thou must give thy thoughts unto God; God that
calls for thy heart, calls for all the heart: now the heart is nothing but all a
man's heart; all the affections and desires, all turnings and windings, all
things that are in the heart do but make up the heart: and therefore when God
calls for thy heart, he calls for all the powers and faculties of the soul.
And therefore the Prophet David would bless God with his soul, and all that
was within him. Psalm. 103. So thou must give thy thoughts, and all that is
within thee to God, or else: thou give God nothing; therefore that man's end
must needs be destruction that loves not God.

that man's end must needs be destruction, that never gives over his sins: and
so long as thy thoughts run after the world, thou can never forsake sin: thou
may resolve and think on the contrary, yet so long as thy thoughts run
habitually on the things of the world, thou do not forsake sin. Wicked and
carnal men may have the eyes of their consciences opened, and their hearts
awakened, whereby they may see their sins, and the hellish evil and danger
of them: whereupon they may resolve and purpose to forsake them, and then they
will make a covenant with God that they will not do thus and thus; I have been
touchie and choleric, but I will be so no more; I have been a profane
swearer and blasphemer of the name of God, but I will be so no more; I have
been a drunkard, and an unclean person, but Lord thou shall see a reformation
in me. Nay it may be he will tell his Minister of it, and his father and his
mother, his wife, his children, and all his friends too of it: but when he
comes to his cold blood again, and these cold graces which sluttered so, come
to be cold in him, so that his heart comes to it self again, then vain thoughts
rest in his heart, and he returns to his old sins again* as the dog to his
vomit, and the sow being washed, to the wallowing in the mire.

The Apostle excellently describes a man that can never depart from his sins:
They have eyes full of adultery, which cannot cease to sin: 2. Pet, 2.14. where
the Apostle speaks not only of that adultery which is a breach of the seventh
Commandment; but of such an adultery which is a perfect breach of every
Commandment, when the heart runs awhoring after every sin and vanity: when
the eye of the soul is full of adultery, the heart cannot cease to sin; when
the eye cannot see an object of gain or profit, but the mind is presently
engaged and runs after it, when it cannot see an object of delight and
pleasure, but it is straightway caught by it: when he cannot see any wrong or
injury done unto him, but presently he is inflamed with revenge, and his heart
runs after it: I say that if thy eye be thus full of adultery that thou can
not see the occasions and hints of sin, but presently thou art ensnared, and
thy soul is taken by it; thou art the man that can not cease to sin:
therefore until thou turn the eye of thy soul, which is the thoughts and
affections of thy heart, another way, thou will never cease to sin. For
wheresoever thou look, thou will be ensnared, so long as thy thoughts are
evil and vicious; either upon pride, or covetousness, or ambition, or envy,
or delights; thy soul will look asquint on God: and until these vain thoughts
of thine be crucified, thou will only look upon the satisfying of these vain
lusts of thine.

Prove. 3.6. In all thy ways acknowledge God, and he shall direct thy paths. In
all thy ways think on God, or else thou may go to many duties in Religion,
but never be direct in thy going; thou may pray a thousand times, but never
be established in thy prayer: thou may go from Lecture to Lecture, and yet
never be established in thy service: thou may go about many things and never
be established in any thing, unless God be in all thy thoughts: a man may go
on in a course of Religion, but it is at haphazard, he is inconstant, and
unsteady in his course, unless in his heart he think upon God; and therefore
his end must needs be destruction.

This then may serve, first, for humiliation to the godly: secondly, for matter
of condemnation to the wicked.

humiliation; are vain thoughts thus damnable, that when they bear sway in the
heart, they make that man's end to be destruction? How then ought this to fill
the faces of them that have the Spirit of Christ, with shame and confusion, and
to make them in a holy manner to be confounded of themselves, and to think of
the emptiness, naughtiness, and vanities of their hearts? Beloved, thou can
not go to prayers, but abundance of vain thoughts will be about thee, like
wasps to assault thee; thou can not go to the Word, but these vain thoughts
will be a humming in thy ears; thou can not go about the works in thy
calling, but vain thoughts will haunt thee, and creep into thy meditations, and
take away the main burden of the work all the day long. Beloved, this should
make a godly man ashamed, and confounded in himself in the consideration
hereof. The Prophet David was so confounded and ashamed hereat, that had not
God poured in mercy and comfort into his soul, he had been distracted, and
should have despaired, considering the company of vain thoughts that lodged
within him, Psalm. 94.19. where he shows what abundance of distracting thoughts
he had; that if God had not sustained him with comfort after comfort, he had
even been been overwhelmed in despair by them.

Augustine says, a man's thoughts are not in his own power: the heart of man is
like tinder; and if the Devil cast a spark into it, thou can not hinder it
from taking fire; but thou may hinder it from burning further. A ship may
have leakes in her, and thou can not hinder the coming in of water into her:
but by thy pumping and industry thou may save her from drowning in the
water; even so evil thoughts, though they be rooted out, yet they will come in
again; A man's heart is like to the fig tree that grew out of the stone wall,
which Epiphanius speaks of; the branches were lopt off, and it grew again;
the boughs were lopt off, and it grew again; they cut down the body of it, yet
it grew again: they plucked up the roots of it, yet it grew again: till at last
the stone wall and all was fain to be pulled down: Even so it is with vain
thoughts in the heart; a man may lop them off by godly sorrow; he may cut them
down, and root them up by mortification, and yet they will be sprouting up, and
rising up again; till the whole body of sin be pulled down, and destroyed in a
man. Gregory speaks of them, and says, man may pluck them up, but yet not so
but that they will rise again.

The consideration hereof should humble us, and make us low in our own eyes:
Oh then think with thy self and say, Oh that my thoughts should be so base,
earthly and vain! what, have I not a God, a Christ, a heaven to think upon?
have I not excellent Commandments of my God, and thousands of sweet and
precious promises in Scripture to think upon? and must I be thinking on every
babble? of every straw, not worth the thinking on? Take the Apostles
exhortation, Whatsoever things be true, whatsoever things are honest,
whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are
of good report: if there be any ^ertue, if there be any praise, think on these
things: Phil. 4.8. What, are there so many virtuous things; so many holy and
pure things; so many admirable and glorious things-so many heavenly graces, and
divine promises* so many blessed passages of holy Writ to take up my mind? and
shall I spend my thoughts and time upon such vain and cursed things as will
yield me no profit? This should astonish the hearts of Gods people, and greatly
humble their souls.

matter of condemnation unto the wicked: let this doctrine strike terror into
the hearts of those men, that suffer their hearts to be taken up with vain
thoughts: as Peter said unto Simon Magus, so let me say unto them, Repent of
this thy wickedness, and pray unto God (verse. 8.) that if it be possible, the
thoughts of thy heart may be forgiven thee. The Apostle does not only wish him
to repent of his simony and briberie, but also of the least vain thoughts of
his heart: pray unto God, if perhaps the very thoughts of thy heart may be
forgiven thee: for beloved the very least vain thoughts that thou think,
without repentance is impardonable: there is an impossibility of remission of
vain and idle thoughts without true repentance.

Oh what fearful news is this to the world that lay not this to heart!
Beloved, may we not now run into the ears and hearts of all earthly men with
this point, whose minds and thoughts are earthly? Is it so that he whose
thoughts run habitually on the world, his end is destruction? Then they that
make no conscience what their thoughts are, what their imaginations are, what
they think of as they go up and down, how can such escape the vengeance of
hell? Tell me then what thy thoughts are; are they not of thy hawks and hounds,
of thy cattle and grounds, of thy gardens and orchards, rather then of Christ?
When thou walk in the streets, whereon run thy thoughts, but on thy
pleasures, and profits, and earthly delights? yea of every vanity, and every
delight can thou think, rather then of God and his Commandments. Thou come
to Church, thou prayest, and hear the Word of God; but do not vain thoughts
come along with thee? thou go home again, but do not vain thoughts haunt
and dog thee?

It is the brand of a wicked man, not to have God in all his thoughts, Psalm.
4.10. when goods and cattle, plough and cart, pleasures and outward
contentments are in his mind and thoughts; when ruffs and cuffs, houses and
dishes, tables and fair hangings, or any thing but God can take up their
thoughts; they can have thoughts of every thing, but of God they can think
none; this is the brand of a wicked man, that he has no blood of a Christian
in him.

It is a true description of a Pagan and Infidel, that has no knowledge of
Christ, to be vain in his imaginations, Romans 1.21. When they knew God, they
glorified him not as God, but became vain in their imaginations: vain in their
disputes, vain in their reasonings, vain in their thoughts; in their carriages
and disputations; so then though thou know God, and have things enough in
thy mind, that convinces thee that this God is to be worshipped; and
understandest the worship of God, and the commandments of Christ: yet if thou
glorifiest him not as God, giving thy heart and affections to him but art vain
in thy imaginations, thou dishonourest God. Hear what God says unto such, All
the day long have I stretched out my hand unto a rebellious and gainsaying
people, which walk in a way that is not good, but after their own thoughts, a
people that provoke me continually to my face. Isa. 65.2, 3. As if God had
said, I sent Prophet after Prophet, Minister after Minister, to instruct them
in the knowledge of my ways, I labored to convert them, and to bring them
home unto my self, and to work better thoughts in them; but still they are a
people that walk after their own thoughts, that provoke me continually unto my
face. There is never a thought of thine, but it is in the verse face of God,
both thought and imagined.

But some man may say, I think of God and of Christ, of faith and repentance,
and of calling on God, of mending of this and that course; I think of death,
and of my last account and every foot I have holy thoughts in my mind.

But beloved, give me leave, I pray you, for to speak something unto you,
which, it may be, may stick by you while you live: I will propound these four
things and distinctions unto you, which I will use.

First, what do thou think of God and of heaven? then tell me whether thy
thoughts be injective thoughts into thy heart, or thoughts raised by thy heart;
for there is a great deal of difference between thoughts injected and
thoughts raised: God casts good thoughts into a godly man's heart, which being
fit soil, it fructifies, and brings forth fruit. Again, God casts good thoughts
into a wicked man's heart, but because his heart is not sanctified, and
therefore no fit soil to harbor in, they die and vanish: God casts in, and
they cast out: God casts in again, and they cast out again: therefore if thou
have good thoughts, examine and try whether they be thoughts raised from thy
heart or no; see whether thy heart be a renewed heart, a sanctified, an holy
heart, fit to bring forth good thoughts every day. Beloved, a wicked man may
have a thousand good thoughts, and yet go to hell in the midst of them all. God
cast a good thought into the heart of the King of Babylon to go against Judah
and Jerusalem for to punish his people for their sins, and to avenge himself on
them for the breach of his Covenant: but what says the text? Howbeit he
thought not so. Isa. 10. No, his only aim was how to get honor, how to
enrich, to enlarge his territories, and to bring down the Nations under him,
and to make his name and fame to be spread, and declared through all the world.
So God casts many good thoughts into many a wicked man's heart to repent, and to
leave his drunkenness, his pride, his swearing and whoring, to be holy and
religious: howbeit he thinks not so, but he thinks how to eat and drink, how
to be proud and haughty; how to be rich and great in the world; how to be vain
and licentious: yea thy thoughts are vile and vain all the day long.

Oh that men were wise truly to understand this! the want whereof is the cause
why many thousands go to hell and are damned for ever. I will make it plain to
you: A wicked man reasons thus with himself; I confess, and it is true, I
sin every day against God, and sometimes drink a pot with my friend, though
sometimes I let fall an oath, and am overtaken in my infirmities* yet I thank
God, he has sanctified my heart; for I think of God and of Christ, and I often
call upon his name, and let my thoughts run on good things; God and heaven are
many times in my mind, and I am sorry when I do amiss, and the Lord has blessed
me with a large portion of outward things. Besides I see these and these signs
of grace in me, and therefore I think my case to be happy. And thus securely
they live, and so they go on, and so they die, and so go to hell and perish for
ever and ever. Here is the misery of it, many think of God, and of Christ, of
death, and of their last account, of heaven, of hell, of faith, and repentance,
of leaving sin, of crucifying their lusts, and practicing of holiness. Now
men think that their thinking of these things, is a part of their discharge,
when indeed they are Additions to, and pieces of their talents, which increase
their judgments. God casts in a thought of repentance, of holiness, of the
remembrance of death, and last account: Do thou find thy heart never the
better and holier by them? Then know it is only Gods haunting of thy heart, and
Gods calling upon thee, and Gods inviting thee unto repentance, to leave thy
sins, to come out of thy deadness and formality, to prepare for thy death
and judgment; and therefore I say, if thy heart now think not so, if thy heart
do not repent, believe, and grow more zealous, and thou art not drawn the
nearer to God; I say then, that the more of these good thoughts that thou have
had, the greater thy doom will be: if thou have had ten thousands of them, if
they have been only Gods haunting of thy heart, think thou then now of grace,
of God, of thy poor soul, which is not bettered by them, nor made holy, then
know they are pieces of thy talent, and it does make thy torments in hell the
greater.

thou have good thoughts, but the question is, whether they be fleeting or
abiding thoughts: Many think of God, of grace, of heaven, of the word of God;
and when they hear a Sermon, they will think of God; but these thoughts,
though they come into their minds, yet they go away presently, they are in and
out at an instant, in a trice, they pass away and are gone. Beloved, there are
two kinds of vain thoughts; 1. vain, because the substance and matter of them
is vain, and so all worldly thoughts are vain: 2. or else for their want of
durance and lasting: and so are all thoughts of heaven, of God, and grace, and
of Christ, it they vanish away, they are all vain thoughts, though they seem
otherwise. Haer what God says, Genesis 6.5. God saw that the wickedness of man
was great upon the earth, and all the imaginations of the thoughts of his heart
were only evil continually: [all the imaginations] great is the emphasis of
this word [all] all the thoughts: yea all universally, are only evil
continually.

But you will say unto me, Does not a wicked man think that there is a God:
why, that is a good thought; does he not think that this God is to be observed
and worshipped? why, this is a good thought; does he not think that sin is to
be forsaken? that is a good thought; does he not think of heaven, and of
Christ? how then are their thoughts only evil and that continually?

I answer, because all the thoughts of a wicked man's heart are vain: that is,
vanishing thoughts, not vain for the matter, which sometimes may be good and
holy, but vain because they soon vanish away; thoughts that come and tarry
not, that leave no impression in their hearts behind them, these are all vain
thoughts, according to that of the Apostle, The Lord knows the thoughts of
the wise that they are vain: 1 Cor. 3.20. Beloved, in a godly man's heart, when
a good thought comes, it abides and dwells a good while in him; and when it goes
away it leaves a good impression behind it; it leaves a sweet smell and savor
in the heart after it is gone, It Is made more holy, and sanctified by it. When
a good thought comes into a godly man's heart, it leaves the print of it behind:
when a wicked man has a good thought, he tosseth it up and down, and suffers
it not to stay, but presently puts it away: let a thought of the world come in,
and he can give it entertainment for seven days, yea for seven years, yea all
his life he sets his heart as a wide gate open to receive them, and to
entertain them: but if a thought of God, or of repentance, of holiness and
salvation come into his mind, he is tired out with it, and it soon vanishes
away; therefore so long as thy thoughts are thus vain, though for the matter
good, if thou have never so many of them, yet if they abide not, but thou
think and unthinkest them again; if they come and give thy soul a jog, and
so away; the more I say thou have of them, though thou have many millions, the
greater will be thy doom at the last day.

thou think of God, but the question is, whether thy good thoughts be
studied, or accidental thoughts; a wicked man that runs gadding in his
thoughts here and there, over the whole world upon this and that, and I know
not what, in the midst of a lottery of thoughts he cannot choose but stumble
upon some good: he thinks on God, he thinks on Christ, he thinks on heaven; but
it is by the by, these thoughts of his are not natural; but if he think of the
world, of his pleasures, of his outward delights and contentments, these
thoughts arise naturally out of his heart, they are his own. Now it may be a
thought of God comes by the way; But a godly man not only thinks of God, but
he studies how to think of God: It is his continual endeavor to bring his
mind to be fixed upon God; it is his whole care for to have good thoughts to
dwell habitually in him. There is an excellent phrase used to set it forth,
Malac. 3.16. They that feared the Lord spoke one unto another, and the Lord
hearkened and heard it, and a book of remembrance was written before him of all
them that feared the Lord, and thought upon his Name. Where I pray you for to
mark, that thinking upon Gods name, and the fear of God are joined together:
for thinking on God, comes from the fear of God; a godly man thinks upon God
and fears him; he thinks that God is always with him in every place, and he
trembles before him: he thinks God beholds all his thoughts and affections, and
he trembles at him: he thinks as he walks up and down in his way, as he is
employed in his calling, as he is performing of any duty of Religion, that Gods
eye is upon him and beholds him: and therefore he fears to offend and displease
him. A wicked man will swear and blaspheme the name of God, and by and by it
may be he will cry God mercy, and so he thinks of God. The man breaks out it
may be into wrath and malice, fury and passion; and then it may be a thought
will come into his mind for to cry God mercy for it, and thus he thinks of God:
The man is careless, earthly, dead, and lukewarm in the performance of good
duties; and because his conscience tells him it is not good, he will ask God
forgiveness: he will be proud, vain and rotten in his speeches, and then it
may be a thought will come into his mind to ask God forgiveness, and so he
thinks of God; he will think of the world, of his pleasures, profits, and of
his lusts and sins, and then it may be a good thought will come into his mind,
and then it may be he will think a little of God too. Beloved, this is carnal
and devilish thinking on God; thy thoughts then of God must be joined with
the fear of God.

Fourthly and lastly, thou think of God, but the question is, whether thy
thoughts of him be profitable or unprofitable thoughts: a godly man thinks of
repentance, and repents upon it: he thinks of calling upon God more faithfully
and fervently then he did before: and he accomplishes his thoughts: for he goes
about it, and his heart is the better for it: Thus it was with David when he
said, I thought on my ways, and turned my feet unto thy testimonies, Psalm
119.59. I thought on my ways (there was his good thoughts) and turned my feet
into thy testimonies, (there was the profit of his good thoughts.) But on the
contrary thou think on God, but God has never the more service of thee:
thou think of leaving of thy good fellowship, and merry companions; but for
all thy thoughts, thou retainest them still: thou think to give over all thy
deadness and luke-warmnesse, and to get more zeal and fervencie: yet day
after day, and year after year, thy heart is as dead, vain and secure as
before, as ever before. Examine thy self and see, thou have good thoughts
(thou say) but where is the profit of them? thou think of leaving thy
wrath, and of bridlling thy filthy passions: but art thou enabled by thy
thoughts to put up an injury the better? It may be thou think on death; but
is thy life the more holy and sanctified by it? Thou think of Christ and his
blood; but is thy heart purged by it? Oh the wretched misery of the most men in
the world, because of the unprofitablenesse of their thoughts! they have many
good thoughts, but they want the profitable use of them, they get no good by
them.

There is an excellent description of the thoughts of wicked men (though it be
Apocrypha,) The heart of the foolish is like a Cart wheel, and his thoughts
like the rolling Axletree. As the Cart wheel goes round all the day, and yet
remains on the Axletree; so is it with wicked men, their thoughts wheel and
wheel them up and down a thousand thousand times, their thoughts run upon
this thing, and then upon another thing, and so they roll up and down
continually, yet their heart is at the same pass it was still; an earthly
heart it was, and so it is still, a profane heart it was, and so it is still; a
carnal proud heart it was, and so it remains still; But let these know, that
the time hastens wherein God will judge them even for their very thoughts.

Where are they then that say thought is free? It it is free from men's
knowledge, and from men's Courts but not from Gods; they are not free from Gods
all-seeing eye, and know, ledge. Thou have tried me and known me^ ^aith the
Prophet) thou understandest my thoughts afar off, Psalm. 139. Beloved, as you
are in the Alehouse, or gaming house, as you walk abroad in the fields, as you
are employed in your callings, or about any holy duty, God sees all thy
thoughts what is going in, and what is coming out: there is never a thought in
thy heart, but God sees it; how then can thoughts be free? God will weigh the
thoughts of men, Prove. 16.2.

Beloved, what a fearful day will that he, when God shall take his Scales and
weigh (no man's bodies and estates, for then it may be that rich men and fat
and gross men will outweigh them that are better:) but he will take men's
thoughts and weigh them, he will weigh their souls: he will take men's good
thoughts, and put them into one scale, and their bad, earthly, carnal, and
unprofitable thoughts, into another scale, and to try which weighes heaviest:
Now if thy earthly and sinful thoughts weigh heaviest, then down thou go
into eternal damnation.

as thoughts are not free from Gods knowledge, so are they not free from Gods
Word; for Gods word can meet with them: for it is lively and mighty in
operation, and is a descerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart, Hebr
4.12. Does the word of God discern the thoughts of men's hearts? Then much more
does the God of this Word, and therefore how can thoughts be free?

they are not free from the condemnation of hell and damnation. I am he (says
God) that searches the hearts and reins, and I will give to every one of you
according to his works; or as some translations have it, according to your
thoughts: Rev. 3.23. Now if God will so severely punish thoughts, take heed
then how thou tetainest any evil thoughts.

I should here give you some means in the use, that so you might rid your
selves from vain thoughts.

love the word of God, if ever thou will come out of them; prize the truth of
God, and labor to get thy mind and thoughts to be^ set on better things; and
then the thoughts of the world, and all vain things will vanish away. This
course the Prophet David took, Psalm. 119.113. I hate vain thoughts, but thy Law
do I love. How came it to pass that he hated vain thoughts? namely, by loving
Gods Law: if he had not loved Gods Law and those excellent things therein, and
set his heart on them; he could never have hated vain thoughts: The way then
to break of thy league with vain thoughts, is to be in league with good
thoughts. Do thou complain of vain thoughts in prayer, in hearing the word,
in receiving of the Sacraments, and art thou stuffed and filled with them, that
thou can not think: upon God and holy things? thou do here by bewray thine
own rottenness and corruption. And therefore know, that if thou love the
Lord and his Word, and did set thy thoughts upon him, thou would never have
them so much employed about such base things.

thou must go unto God by prayer; there is no greater bridle to restrain a man
from vain thoughts, then this consideration, that he is to go to God. I speak
not this to the men of this world: Carnal men, who can rush into Gods presence
hand over head, without any fear or reverence, they can set upon any duty
without any preparation: but I speak it to the godly man, whose heart dreads
and stands in awe of God: Will thou let thy mind rove and run all the day on
worldly things? how then will thou call upon God? Do thou not know that this
is the cause of thy dullness, thy deadnes and wanderings of thy heart, when thou
art about any good duty, namely, because thou suffer thy heart to be lashing
out, and roving abroad on the world all day, no marvel if it keep his haunt at
night: and therefore thy heart being vain God will never hear thy prayer, Job
35.13. God will never bear vanity. Come thou to God with a vain prayer? God
will never hear it. Come thou with a vain ear to the hearing of the Word?
God will never hear it; or with a vain heart to the Sacrament? God will not
regard it. Lay this seriously to thy heart, if ever thou would have thy heart
to the duty thou art about, busy thy mind upon good things; for if thy heart
be accustomed to vain and worldly things all the day, it is no marvel if it
return to its haunt again at night.

Thirdly, consider that you have not so learned Christ: It is the Apostles
argument, Ephesians. 3. consider then what you have learned of Christ; has Christ
taught you so? has Christ taught you such a love, and given you such a
liberty, that you should love the world more then him, and employ and bestow
all your thoughts wholly in seeking after vain things? Has Christ taught you
such a faith as this? Has Christ taught you such a repentance as this, to have
your thoughts more upon the world then upon Christ? to repent of sin, and yet
never forsake sin? Have ye so learned Christ? Has he not taught you such a
faith as purifieth the heart, such a sanctification as cleanses the soul and
the mind, such an obedience as brings every thought into subjection unto
himself? Therefore if now thou should still retain thy vain, dead, earthly
and carnal thoughts, it is not to learn Christ: Christ teaches thee no such
doctrine, nor gives thee any such licentious liberty; but thou learnest of
the Devil, and of thine own heart: for all evil and vain thoughts arise from
these three heads.

variety and abundance of the thoughts of the world, which our Savior calls
the cares of this world.

the fountain of corruption in man's heart, the heart of man being always like
a sink, naturally running with filthiness, or like a living quickset, always
bearing: so is it with the heart of man, always imagining vain thoughts.

the damned malice of the Devil, and his fearful suggestions and temptations
both within and without: the Devil is fitly called a tempter and trier; for by
these suggestions and temptations he feels and tries men's hearts; and thereby
knowing to what they are most inclined, and which way they are soonest
overcome, accordingly he fits his temptations for to entrap them. Now these
thoughts are infinitely variable, according to the constitution, place,
quality, passions, affections, and conditions of men: as of the poor man in his
beggary, of the rich man in his abundance, of the Minister in his calling, of
the Magistrate in his, and so of all other men. Now the whole world is not able
to fill the heart; how then shall we number the thoughts of it? But for the
better understanding, we will rank them into these four heads, to show how
thoughts become vain.

Materially, men's thoughts are vain, when the matter of them is vain.

Formally, when though for the matter they are never so good, yet the manner of
thinking them is evil.

Efficientially, when the man that thinks them is vain.

the drift of the soul being carnal and vain, the soul thereby becomes vain
also.

material vain thoughts, are all thoughts of the world, of the works of thy
calling, of thy recreations, eating, drinking, sleeping, thoughts of thy wife
and children, and the like; they are vain thoughts, not sinful necessarily,
yet they may come to be sinful five manner of ways.

when we think of them primarily, that is, in the first place, when we think of
them before we think of God. Tell me then, what are thy first thoughts in the
morning? Hereby a man may know his thoughts whether they be good or evil.
Consider, I say, what it is that first presents it self unto thy thoughts:
certainly, that which the heart is most haunted withal, and most taken up
with, is most natural unto it: If the heart be carnal and earthly, it will
have carnal and earthly thoughts: if it be a godly and gracious heart, it will
labor to make God the first in his thoughts. I know the godly man fails in
many things, and many unruly thoughts in him may rebel; but it is the very
grief of his soul, and he will never rest nor be at quiet, till he has got
Balm from Gilead, strength from Christ for the subduing and crucifying of them,
even of those vain and sinful thoughts that stick closest unto their hearts,
and are most prone unto them naturally: so that it is the practice of a godly
man first in the morning to lift up his heart with his hand unto God; and when
he is up, his thoughts are wholly upon God. See this in David, who considering
that the Lord was present everywhere, made this use of it, When I awake I am
present with thee, Psalm. 139.18. His heart was lifted up to God, he did
endeavor to shake hands with God (as it were) in his holy meditations,
worshipping and adoring God with his first thoughts: he would be sure to give
God the flower and Maidenhead of his first service and thoughts; as soon as
ever he was awake, his heart was in heaven. This shows that the thoughts of
men that ^ive in their sins, are damnable thoughts? Thou that ar^ a drunkard, a
swearer, a profane person, a carnal worldling, that never have repented, I
tell thee, that the very thinking of thy meat and drink is damnable, the very
thoughts of thy recreations and of thy sleep, are damnable thoughts: to think
of the works of thy calling, yea of setting thy foot upon the ground, or of
any thing that God has commanded thee for to do, are all damnable thoughts.
Why? Because thou give not God thy first thoughts. Will thou think of thy
belly and back, before thou think of God and how to be converted unto him?
Will thou think of thy Markets and Faires, before thou ^hinkest of thy
reconciliation with God? The first thing that every soul is bound for to do,
is to get in with God: First seek the kingdom of God. says our Savior and the
righteousness thereof, Matthew. 6.35. Where our Savior does not forbid our
taking of thought for the things of this life, but that they should not be
sought after in the first place; so that our first thoughts and endeavors
should be after the Kingdom of heaven. Therefore all thoughts whatsoever, which
are conceived before a man be converted, and so thinks of God, are all
damnable thoughts.

when we think of them too usually (as Chrysostom speaks) because we think of
the universalitie of them. Beloved, it is lawful to think of the world and to
think of our trade and employments, to think of our corn, of our cat^ell,
fields, barnes, wives, children: for if God have commanded or commended these
things unto us, then surely he gives us leave to think on them, that so we may
accomplish our business the better; but let us take heed they be not too
usual with us: for we have souls as well as bodies, and there is a heaven as
well as an earthly business to think upon: thou art not to live here always,
therefore take heed that thy thoughts be not too usual and common upon the
things of the world let not earth and earthly things have too much of thy
thoughts. As the Prophet David seeing the thoughts of wicked men wholly to run
after the things of the world, he tells them, all their thoughts perish: and so
I tell you, if that your thoughts on the world run together with heap and
crowd, and then you bundle them up in bundles (as it were) they all prove
damnable, and shall perish.

if thou think of them too savourly: a carnall-minded man thinks savourly
of the things of the world, the thoughts of earthly things are savoury unto
them: a wicked man he will think of God and of the world: but which is the
savourest thought to him? He will think of Christ, of heaven, and of the word
of God, and of such a Sermon he heard, but alas, he finds no savor, taste,
nor relish in them; he finds no sweetness, joy, or delight in them: but when
he thinks of the world, of his gold and silver, of his lands and livings, Oh
these are merry thoughts unto him, ^hese are sweet unto him, and pleasant to
him, and his heart is not at home in his own nest; he can think of these seven
days, nay seven months, nay seven years together, and yet never be weary,
but his thoughts as full and as fresh as at the first: But bring him to a
Sermon, or to a prayer, and he is jaded pres^ntly, his heart is empty, and his
thoughts are at an end: For (says the Apostle) they that are after the flesh
savor the things of the flesh, Romans 8, 5. It is a true note of an earthly,
carnal, fleshly heart* to be thinking on earthly and vain things savourly.
Thou may think on the world, but it must be only with a cast of thy
thought^, as one that looks upon a thing with a squint eye: but when thou art
to think on God, or on the things of God; then thou must gather all thy
thoughts and affections, thou must lay all the powers of thy soul together,
and thou must employ them only to this work.

when we think of them without counsel; then (says Solomon) they come to
naught, when a man considers not aforehand what thoughts are necessary and
needful and so restraines and keeps off all impertinent thoughts: then his
thoughts will prove distrustful, carking thoughts, caring for the morrow,
contrary to the rule of Christ, Matthew. 6.33. Take no care for to morrow, let to
morrow care for it self. He does not forbid here Christian provident thoughts:
for godly, honest, and sober thoughts, are fitting and necessary, but he seems
hereby to cut off all distrusting, carking thoughts.

when they are thought needlessly. And here I will show how far a man may
think of the world; namely, so far as his necessary business requires. Suppose
a man's business be upon merchandise, it is lawful to think of it, and of his
shop and wares; but if thou would know how far; why so far as is it for
thy business; But if thou have so many of them, that thy heart is taken up
with them, and thy mind still on them, then they are sinful thoughts. There is
many a man that in following of his business bestows more thoughts then his
business requires, he has ten thousands of superfluous thoughts; but let such
remember the exhortation of the Wise man, establish thy thoughts by counsel:
counsel will tell a man when he has thought enough, and what thoughts are fit
for his employment. Not that any man can carry himself always in that golden
mediocrity or mean; but a Christians care must be daily more and more to pare
off all superfluous thoughts of earthly things.

Thoughts are vain formally, when though the matter of them be never so good,
yet the manner of thinking them is evil. It is possible that a wicked man go
to hell, though he performs the same things for the matter of them, that a
godly man does: a godly man comes to Church, so does a wicked man; a godly man
prays in his family, so does a wicked man; a godly man reads the Scriptures,
so does a wicked man; a godly man repeats Sermons, and conferres of good
things, so does a wicked man. There is no work that comes to the outward act,
that a godly man does, but a wicked man may do the same: here only is the
difference, in the manner of working. I will set it out to you by a place of
Scripture; In a great house (says the Apostle) there are not only vessels of
gold, and of silver, but also of wood and of stone, some to honor, and some to
dishonor, 2 Timothy 2.20. Mark how the Apostle here sets out the reprobate and
the elect, comparing them to vessels of honor, and dishonor: the vessels of
dishonor are of the same matter that the vessels of honor are of: suppose it
be pewter or silver, cast it into an honorable form, and it will be a vessel
of honor; but cast it into a dishonorable form, and it will be a vessel of
dishonor, for base and mean service; even so it is between a true Christian
and a mere formal professor, the matter of their service is one and the same;
suppose it be hearing the Word, or receiving of the Sacraments, prayer, or the
like, the substance and action is the same; but take the same prayer, and let a
godly man cast it in his form, and it is holy and prevails with God: let a
wicked man take the same prayer, and cast it into his dishonorable form, and
it becomes sinful, not regarded, and abominable in Gods eyes. For hearing of
the Word of God, the godly man hears, and the wicked man hears; the matter in
both is the same; the godly man he casts the Word into a godly mould, he
hears the Word, and he trembles at it; he hears the Word and believes it, he
hears the Word, and his heart bows to it, and resolves to practice it: a
wicked man he hears the Word too, but he casts it into a dishonorable
mould, he hears it with deadness and dullness, without trembling, without
faith and obedience. So a godly man may think thoughts of God, and so may a
wicked man think thoughts of God, the matter of both is good; yet the thoughts
of the wicked are vain, though he thinks of God, because he casts it into
his dishonorable frame: he fears not God, his heart trembles not at God, but
his heart is as full of dead earthly affections as before; he thinks of hearing
the Word, but it is after his own fashion, he thinks of praying, but he prays
with his own spirit, and not with the spirit of Adoption.

The Psalmist tells us, that the whoremaster, the drunkard, and the thief,
thinks of God, but it is after his own fashion: Psalm. 50.21. These things have
thou done (says God) and I held my tongue, and thou thoughtest that I was even
such a one as thy self: A wicked man goes on in his sins, and thinks that they
are not so devilish and abominable, as some say that they are: and he thinks
that God thinks so too; he is earthly, carnal, lukewarm, and dead-hearted,
and if he repent at the last, he thinks all will be well, and he thinks God is
of the same mind too: he goes on in his drunkenness, swearing, pride, and
hypocrisy; and he thinks if he do but remember to ask God mercy, and to cry,
Lord receive my soul, when he is going out of the world, he thinks he shall not
go to hell, but be carried to the joys of heaven, and he thinks God is of his
mind, that God thinks so too: But mark what the Lord says, I will reprove
thee, and set thy sins in order before thee. Oh consider this you that forget
God, lest he tear you in pieces, and there be none to deliver you.

should lay their heads together to think a good thought, yet they cannot: for
their hearts are vain hearts, sinful hearts, they may think of excellent
propositions concerning God, his worship, his word, and service; but so long as
the heart that thinks upon them is carnal and vain, they cannot speak that
which is good, as says our Savior: Matthew 12.34. How can you speak good
things? may not a wicked man read a Chapter in a Bible? are the words so hard
to be understood, and pronounced? cannot a wicked man take a Sermon and read
it, and hear a Sermon and repeat it? what are letters and syllables so hard to
be pronounced?

[How can ye that are evil speak good things]: no, no, a wicked man may read
Gods Word, and propound good questions, as well as a true Christian; but he
cannot speak good words, that is, he cannot speak him from a good heart; and
therefore his heart being carnal and vain, good words in his mouth are as a
jewel in a swines snout: It is a word indeed, but not a speech, when he reads
or pronounces Gods Word. Aristotle says, that speech is nothing but the
expression of that that is within the heart. Now then, if the word and truth of
God be not ingraffed in thy heart, if thy heart be not heavenly when thou
speak of heavenly things, thou do pronounce them, but not speak them. But
when thou speak of earthly things then thou speak to the purpose; because
thy heart is set upon them, and thy mind and the tongue go together, there is
no jarre or discord betwixt them: but if thy heart be not pure, though thou
speak good things, or holy things, yet in Christ sense thou speak them
not: For (say I) how can a vain, evil, corrupt heart think good thoughts? An
evil tree cannot bring ^orth good fruit (says our Savior); he does not say,
that an evil tree cannot be made good, for it may be graffed into another
stock; diverse ways there are to make it good: but so long as it is a corrupt
tree, it cannot bring forth good fruit; Do men gather grapes of thorns, or
st^ges of thistles? Do thou go to a drunkard, and think there to find
any religion in him? or to a whoremaster to find grace in him? Do thou go
to a swearer or a profane person, and think thou to find any fear of God
in them? Indeed sometimes there may be some moral good found in them, but they
are as a pearl in a dunghill out of its place.

Fourthly, all men's thoughts come to be vain, when the drift and end of the
heart and soul in thinking of them is vain.

But thou will say unto me, the end of my good thoughts is Gods glory. What?
is it not to Gods glory that we go to the Word and Sacraments that we pray and
give alms?

I answer* the end of every good work in it self is Gods glory; but is it the
end of the worker, speaker, or thinker? I make no question but the end of a
good action in it self, is the glory of God; so the end of prayer is the glory
of God, the end of all preaching and Sermons is the glory of God, the end of
giving of alms, and of all good thoughts, is the glory of God, but the end of
the man that prays and preaches, what is that? the end of the hearer and giver
of alms, what is that? the end of him that speaks well, what is that? Beloved,
must men have false and corrupt ends, which we will branch out into these three
heads.

For the first* men will be thinking and plodding from morning till night of
their worldly business: Now because they know they must think on God, to make
God amends, perhaps they will think on him at night, when they have dishonored
him all the day. So men will swear and swagger drink and be drunk, and when
they have done, say, Lord have mercy upon me, and so they think to make God
amends. What (beloved) will ye swear, swagger, drink, be drunk, and lie, be
secure and worldly, and then ask God forgiveness to make him amends? This is
to break Priscians head, that you may give him a plaster. Will you trespass
your neighbor, that you may ask him forgiveness? This is a damned and
devilish religion; yet this is the religion of many men in the world, you shall
have them keep days and weeks and years in the observation of the times of
Gods worship; they will keep the Sabbath in coming to Church, they will hear
Sermons, pray and think of God: but all this is to make God amends for the
wrong that they have done him: they know they have offended God, and therefore
they will do something to make him amends: like those wicked men in Jeremies
time, who did steal, murder, commit adultery, swear falsely, and burn incense
unto Baal; and walk after the gods whom they knew not, and then come and stand
before God in his house, which was called by his name, and said, We are
delivered, though we have done all these abominations. As if God should say
unto wicked men, What, will ye swear, steal, lie, and be earthly, giving up
your selves unto all manner of lewdness in the breach and contempt of my
commandments, and then think by making a prayer unto me, and by lifting up
your eyes unto me, and by giving your ears to hear my word, thereby to make me
recompense? No, no, I have showed thee, O man, what is good, Micah. 8.

the end of men's thoughts is commonly to collogue with God. Let a man be under
the cross, in calamity, pain, and misery, then God shall hear of him often,
then he will think of God, and of his sins: nay, the beastliest wretch in a
whole Parish, upon his sickbed, then, Oh how will he call upon God, then send
for the Minister, let him pray for me, read a chapter or some good book; then
God shall have service upon service, then he shall have the first, second, and
third course. But all this is but to be raised up again; and then when he has
received a little strength, he fall off again: like the Jews, who when God
slew them, they sought him: and they returned and enquired early after God;
nevertheless they did but d^ssemble with him with their mouths, and flatter
him with their double hearts, Ps. 78.34. There is many a man that seeks to God,
yea, that seeks to him with tears, and performs many a good duty, and yet he
does but flatter with God, he does it but to curry favor with him: he is
afraid of sickness, crosses, plagues, and death, and curses upon him, if he
should not do so: and therefore to prevent this, he will dissemble some
service to God.

to smother and choke their own consciences; their hearts think and tell
them, they must think of God, their consciences tell them, that they must have
some holiness, some religion; that they must keep the Sabbath in some sort,
that they must pray, and go to Church: and hence it is, that the drunkard,
swearer, whoremaster, will sometimes have thoughts of God, and will be
performing some outward acts of Religion, Why? his conscience otherwise would
not let him be at rest, but it is as the Devils bandog to drive him to it.

Thus when the Prophet commanded the people to worship the Lord, to reverence
his name, to hallow his Sabbaths; their consciences told them that they must
do so, or else all the threatenings of wrath and vengeance denounced by the
Prophets would come upon them, Hence it is that the Lord by his Prophet
exhorts, saying, Arise ye, and depart, for this is not your rest: your mind
has another haunt, you have this and that black lust, this is not your rest.
Does thy heart rest on God and good things? If thy heart be good and holy, so
that it takes up its rest in God, and in Christ, then it is well; but if thou
only turnest aside to good duties, and fallest as it were by chance upon holy
things; away, away (says God) this is not your rest. Aristotle says, that the
being of a thing cons^steth in the end of a thing. Therefore if the end of thy
thoughts and courses be earthly and vain, then certainly thy religion is
earthly and vain. Thou go up and down; what is it that thou look after?
Is it that thou may have grace, or that thou may follow thy calling, and
get thy living? is it this that thou would have, for which thou keep such
a digging and scraping, and such a laying up? Then thy end is carnal and vain,
and thy drift and end declares the truth of thy soul, that it is carnal and
vain.

THE JUDGMENT OF THE WORLD By SAINTS at the last Day.

DELIVERED And learnedly discovered in a Sermon preached By that vigilant and
painful Minister of the Word, WILLIAM FENNER, B.D. Sometime Fellow of Pembroke
Hall in Cambridge, and late Parson of Rochford in Essex.

London, Printed by T.R. and E.M. for J.S.

A SERMON OF Mr. WILLIAM FENNERS Upon this ensuing Text.
1 Cor. 6. part of the 2d verse. Know ye not that the Saints shall judge the
World?


THE Corinthians thought Paul had converted many poor mean men amongst them,
Chapter 1.26, 27. God has chosen the foolish things of the world to confound
the wise, and the weak things of the world to confound the things that are
mighty: yet the Nobles, the Lawyers, the Counselors, the chief men in the
City, the Apostle had not converted one of them, or at the least very few.
Brethren, you see your calling, who they are that be converted to the obedience
of the Gospel of Christ from the evil of their ways: rich not many noble,
some few there be, here and there one; but for the most part they are a company
of poor beggarly Christians: Now (it seems) these poor Christians having
controversies one with another, went to Law among themselves, and that before
unbeleevers. The Apostle condemns this their going to Law, and would have them
cease their suits and quarrels one against another before the unjust and
unbeleevers, and that by four Arguments:

by the shamefulnesse of it, verse 5. I speak it to your shame; as if he should
say, Are you such fools, that you cannot take up these matters among your
selves? that you cannot make references of your wrongs to mediate one to
another, but that you must go to Law before unbeleevers?

from the scandalousnesse of it. It is a thing so scandalous and offensive to
those that are without, that I wonder any of you dare be so bold as to go to
Law one with another. What will the world think? What, are these the men that
profess the Gospel? Are these they that have the Wisdom of God in them, and
that are led by the Spirit of God? And have they no more understanding in them,
then when they have any matter of controversy, they cannot end it among
themselves, but must go to Law before the unjust and unbeleevers? (as they
term them.)

from the uns^emingnesse of it, in the second verse. Do you not know that the
Saints shall judge the earth? What? has God made you Judges of the world, and
do you go to be judged by the world? Or, as Ambrose speaks has God
appointed you to be Judges of the men in the world, and are you not fit to be
Judges of the things of the world?

from the strangeness of it; Dare any of yuu? He speaks interrogatively
(verse. 1.) It is a strange thing that you should come to that impudency
against the Gospel of Christ; one would think that you should tremble and quake
at such a thing as this is. What, is there never a wise Christian amongst you?
never an understanding professor that is able to take up a controversy, or
decide and judge between his brethren? what a strange thing is this? Then he
backs it with four Arguments.

Because they wre Brethren, verse. 6. Brother goes to Law with brother.

Because it was about the things of this life What? has God made you Judge of
heavenly things, of Angels, and are you unfit to Judge of the things of this
life?

It was ab^ut small matters (ver. 2.) whereas you shall sit upon men and
Angels, and the weightiest matters in the world, the greatest things of Gods
law, judging them to the greatest penalty and punishment even to eternal
damnation: and are ye unworthy then to judge even of the smallest matters?

Because it was about such things, as the meanest Christian in the town might
have taken up, and have ended: Set up them that are least esteemed.

Do you not know, that the Saints shall judge the world?

the Saints shall judge the world.

It is an old truth, yea as old as the world it self* you may read it in the
fourth verse of Judes Epistle: That Eno^h the seventh from Adam prophesied,
saying; Behold the Lord comes with ten thousands of his Saints. God will not
only come to judgment himself, but he will come attended with all his
Saints, even with all the god^y, to execute vengeance upon all the world. So
our Savior told Saint Peter, and not only him, but all that follow him in the
regeneration: They shall sit on thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel*
Mat. 9.18. They shall judge the Nations, and have dominion over the people,
Wisd. 3.8.

How shall the Saints judge the world?

Ans. Not by pronouncing of judgment upon the world, for that Christ alone
shall do; Then shall the King say to them on his left hand, Depart ye cursed,
Mat. 25. But the Saints shall judge the world these four ways: They shall
judge the world, by their consent unto Christ's judgment, God trains up his
children in this world, and educates them, and tea^heth them how they may judge
the world hereafter; he teaches them in this life how to assent with his
proceedings in the world; so that they are able to say, Righteous art thou, O
Lord, and just are thy judgments* Psalm. 119.137. Now if the Saints be trained
in this life to assent unto Gods proceedings with the world, much more then
will they be able to know and consent unto Christ's judgment, when he shall
come with his Saints to judge the world: Now the Law says, that consenters are
agents: and therefore because the Saints shall consent to the judgment of
Christ, therefore they are said to judge the world. The Saints shall judge the
world by their applause of Christ's judgment: they shall not only give consent
unto the judgment of Christ, but they shall also applaud it and commend it:
when God shall say to all drunkards, swearers, liars, Sabbath Breakers, and to
all unbeleeving, impenitent, and graceles sinners, Depart ye cursed into hell
fire, then though it were his own father that begat him, or his mother that
bare him, though it were his own brother or sister, wife or child, that has
been as dear as his own life and soul to him; yet they shall clap their hands
for joy, and applaud the most righteous sentence of God upon them; and they
shall sing Hallelujah, salvation, and honor, and power, be to the Lord our God
for true and righteous are his judgments, Rev. 19.1, 2. Let them go accursed
as they are; for it is a righteous sentence passed on them. They shall judge
the world by their Majesty; they shall not only stand against the wicked, and
consent to, and applaud that sentence that Christ shall pass against the
wicked, but they shall be invested with robes of majesty, and with a diadem
of glory: then shall the righteous shine as the stars in the firmament, and
the wicked shall be amazed and astonished at the fight of them: as you may read
in that platform of judgment, Matthew, 25. where Christ sets his Saints over
against the world, that so the world may look upon them, and be confounded at
their sight. They judge the world by their lives and conversations; (as Ambrose
says rightly) then is the world judged by them, when as the courses and
manners of the world are not found upon them. Therefore it is a pretty
observation of Hilary (if it be the meaning of the Text) (I will not say it is)
upon the 2. Psalm; Be wise ^ee Judges: God has appointed you to be Judges, to
sit on his bench with his Son; learn then to be wise, get to be endued with
spiritual wisdom and understanding, and to shine in all integrity and
righteousness; and then turning his speech to the wicked, he says, Kiss the
Son lest he be angry, However it be yet this is a truth, that by the lives of
his Saints, he will judge the world; there faith shall judge the worlds
infidelity: their repentance shall judge the worlds impenitency; their
accepting of, and taking the Lord Jesus, shall judge their rejection and
neglect of Christ Jesus, their zeal shall judge the worlds luke-warmnesse, and
their holiness shall judge the worlds profaneness.


Bcause of the mystical union that is betwixt Christ and his Saint^; He is the
head, and they are his members; now that which the head does, we ascribe to the
whole body; when the head speaks, the whole body speaks; when the head sees,
the whole body sees: so when Christ judges the world, the whole body of Christ
may truly be said to judge the world. As much as you did it unto one of these
(says Christ) you did it unto me: so in as much as Christ passes sentence
even all the members of the mystical body of Christ judge with him.

in regard of compassion: I speak not of the word [compassion] as it signifies
[pitie] but of compassion of suffering with Christ, seeing that Christ was
reproched, contemned, hated, misused, and condemned by the world, the Saints
are likewise with him; seeing they partake of the afflictions, humiliations,
and debasements of Christ here* they shall also be made pertakers with Christ
in his glory. Here the wicked judge the Saints, and call them hypocrites, and
dissemblers, and laugh and scoff^ at them, and wonder at them, as the Prophet
brings in Christ speaking. Esaias. 8. Behold, I and the children that thou have
given me, are for signs and wonders in Israel: The wicked count them for
wonders and monsters in the world, judging them hypocrites and liers, which
have nothing in them but rottenness and dissimulation. Now the rule of like
for like shall take place here, and as they were judged by the world, so they
shall be Judges of the world.

for the great terror to all wicked men at the day of judgment: for as it is
with a thief, not only when the Judge shall command to hang him, but all the
Justices, and all the Country shall cry out, Hang him, hang him, he is judged
the more terrible; so God will not only say of all wicked and ungodly sinners,
Damn them damn them, but he will have all the Saints in heaven, and all the
Saints on earth to cry out, Away with them, away with them, let them be damned,
Psalm. 50.4, 5. This will make their judgment so much the more terrible.

the Saints shall judge the world, because God will so convince them, that
their mouths shall be stopped, they shall have never a syllable to excuse
themselves withal, when they shall see men flesh and blood as themselves are,
when they shall see men and women, that have lived in the same town, enjoyed
the same Ordinance of God, lived in the same family, that did partake of the
same blessings, and of the same crosses and afflictions with themselves,
subject also to the same corruptions and sins as themselves, when they shall
see these at Christ's right hand, they shall have never a word to excuse
themselves withal: As when the Apostles had healed the creeple ( Acts 3.) if
the people had judged them for wicked and pestilent men, the creeple would have
convinced them, and showed that they were of God; if they should have cried,
Root them out, the creeple would have condemned them, and told them, that they
did good. And when the wicked shall see the Saints at Gods right hand, will
they call them hypocrites and dissemblers? they themselves shall see, that they
are sincere; will they call them Puritans? why, they shall then see that their
purity stands them in good stead: then the ungodly shall not stand in
judgment, nor the sinners in the Congregation of the righteous, Psalm. 1.6.
Thus the point is clear.

instruction, whereby we may learn, that the Saints by their now being Saints,
do now judge the world: if by the lives of Saints then God does judge the
world, then there is never a Saint in a town, or City, or Parish in all the
Country, but he judges all the wicked that are about him: How? By living
godly, by hating the sins of the times, by keeping his or their garments
clean from the pollution of the world: For by doing this, he judges the world.
See it in Noah, Heb. 11.7. By faith Noah being warned of God, as yet moved with
fear, prepared an Ark for the saving of his house, by which he condemned the
world.

Could Noah be said to condemn the world by making the Ark? All the world did
not see him when he did it.

Noah making the Ark an hundred and twenty years, though it was not seen of
all, yet all the world must needs baar of it, it being such a strange thing.
Now he condemned the world, in that the whole world did not come unto Noah to
enquire of him in sober sadness, but rather mock^ him for building the Ark;
they thought him to be a peevish melancholy man, and not well in his wits, and
so scoft at him, saying, Will he make an Ark to swim upon dry land? whereas
they should have asked him soberly the cause why he did it; and if they had
done so, Noah no question would have told them, that the wrath of heaven was
upon the world, and that the floods of Gods vengeance were shortly to be
poured down upon us: and, because my heart has been naught, and I have
sinned and provoked the Lords wrath, I fear if I get not into this Ark which
the Lord has commanded me for to make, I shall perish. Now because they would
not come unto Noah to ask him this reason, therefore the world was condemned by
him: even so the Saints, by making an Ark for their poor souls, even by
getting into Christ, (as the Ark was a type of Christ without whom none can be
saved) the Saints, I say, by getting into Christ, do judge the whole world,
when they hear there be men that be no swearers, and no drunkards, and that
there be men that will pray, read, hear the word, confer of God and of
Christ, and that weep and mourn for their sins, that spend their times in the
mortification of their lusts, and endeavor after holiness and sanctification;
the whole world, I say, is judged by them. How? why, they should say: Sirs,
what is the matter that you do so run after Sermons? that you keep such a
stir about getting faith and repentance more then other men? that you pray,
weep, fast, and mourn, and are so strict in your works? If thus men would but
come unto Gods Saints, and ask them the reason of all these things, the Saints
of God would tell them, that the wrath of God would come upon them if they did
not do thus: they would never be saved, if they did not thus believe, and thus
repent, and thus pray, and walk thus holily and precisely, they should be all
damned. But the world it falls a mocking and a scoffing at them, and never
seeks to prevent the wrath of God; but it suddenly seiseth on them to their
destruction.

when there is any one sinner converted from the wickedness of his ways, and
is become a Saint, then all the world may know that there is a new Judge come
to sit upon them. See thou a drunkard, a swearer, a profane person converted
from his sins, and now walks soberly, holily, and purely? see thou a man
and a woman struck at a Sermon? Then know that unless thou come out of thy
sins, unless thou do repent, and walk holily, there is a new Judge added
to the rest, that shall judge thee. As our Savior told the Pharisees, If I
through Beelzebub cast out Devils, by whom do your children cast them out?
Therefore they shall be your judges, Matthew. 12.27. where Christ tells them,
that their children who were his Disciples (for some of the Pharisees children
did believe in Christ and follow him, and had power from Christ to do the same
works that Christ did;) Now they liked it well enough in their own children,
but they could not endure it in Christ: and therefore he tells them, that
their children, whom God had converted, and to whom he had given power to do
the same works that he did, even they shall be their Judges to condemn them:
And even so may it be with thee, thou that art a father or a mother, God having
converted any of thine own children, that child shall be thy Judge and condemn
thee, if thou repent not. It may be God has converted thy brother and sister,
and thou art not converted; thy own brother and sister shall condemn thee, if
thou do not repent and come out of thy sins.

it concerns all the world to take notice of every grace in Gods children,
There is never a grace of God in any of his Saints but it shall condemn the
world if it be void of it. The ways of the Lord are all judgments, because
they judge them that will not walk in them. Every grace, yea the very thoughts
of the righteous are called Judgments by Solomon, Prove. 12. You may know a
crooked thing by laying it to a straight line, and by that it is judged to be
crooked: so the thoughts of the righteous which are right, holy and pure, shall
judge the impure, unholy, and crooked thoughts of wicked men. Is the child of
God humble? His humility shall judge thy pride. Is the child of God meek and
patient in suffering of wrong and injuries? His meekness and patience shall
judge thy choler and revenge. Has the child of God says given him to believe
in the Lord Jesus? His faith shall judge thy infidelity. Has the child of God
the spirit of prayer given him? It shall condemn thee that praiest only with
thine own spirit. Has he zeal? His zeal shall judge thy luke-warmnesse,
Does his speech and communication administer grace to the hearers? It shall
condemn thee that speak of vain and idle things. Yea, all the actions of
the godly shall judge the wicked: and hence the Saints are said to do Gods
judgments, Zeph. 2.3. that is, they do according to Gods judgments whereby
he will judge the world: Thus they that do mourn, do judge them that do not
mourn: they that bewail their wickedness, and the sins of the times, judge
them that do not: they that fast, weep, pray, and humble themselves for the
miseries of the Church in these dreadful days, they judge them that make no
good conscience of their duties.

all the Texts of Scripture, all the whole word of God, that is it that begets
these Saints, and therefore they must needs judge the world, the word of God
begets men's hearts unto sanctification and holiness, whereby they become the
Saints: and therefore if they, then much more shall the Word it self judge the
world: and hence it is that all the words of God in the Scripture, are called
Judgments, Psalm. 105.5. And our Savior says. The word that I have spoken, the
same shall judge you in the last day, Joh. 12.48. The word that I have spoken*
where mark he does not say, The word which you have heard: No there are many
swearers, and drunkards, and profane ungodly wretches, that will not come to
Church to hear the word; there are many wicked men, and dead hearted
worldlings, and rotten livers, that will not be brought to hear Gods Word: it
may be at this present there is many whoremongers, drundards, and wicked
persons, that wallow in their filthiness? in the Alehouse, Game-house, or
Drab-house; or in the fields, or beds, or at their sports. Well, this word that
is now a preaching, whether they will hear it or no, shall judge them at the
last day. Now all the wicked in Ashford, that hear the word of God calling
upon them to repent, and to come out of their sins, but will not, or out of
contempt of Gods word, will absent themselves from it; this word shall judge
and condemn them. There is never a drunkard, swearer* or profane person,
though his pew be empty, but this word of God that denounces the eternal wrath
and vengeance of God upon them, if they come not out of their sins, this word
shall rise up in judgment against them and condemn them eternally. Oh that
they could but hear it! but the word that I have spoken shall judge you,
whether you hear it or not.

all the Ministers of God shall also judge the world. Son of man (says God
to the Prophet Ezekiel) will thou judge the bloody City? Yea, thou shall show
her all her abominations, Ezekiel. 22.2. As if he should have said, Son of man,
they are drunkards, will thou not tell them of it? They are whoremasters, will thou not tell them of it? They are filthy idolaters, will thou not tell them of
it? They live in their sins, and in their abomination, and will thou not tell
them of it? Son of man, tell them of all their abominations, and tell them
that they shall go to hell, if they repent not, tell them that they are damned
men if they go on, and come not out of their sins: Will thou not judge them
(son of Man?) Beloved, there is never a Minister in England, nor ever a Sermon
that is preached by them, but it judges every Parish, and every man and woman
in the congregation, that do not labor to do what is commanded them, and leave
undone what is forbidden them: I say it judges them, or else it is a judgment
unto them.

all those that despise the Saints, and that see not amiablenesse in their
faces. All the Country does reverence the face of the Judge when he rides
circuit; Let the Judge come into the Country, and all the Knights, Justices,
and Gentlemen in the Country will go out to meet him, and bow unto him; yet
these Judges are but Judges of a few rogues, malefactors, and peasants of the
Country: Alas, they are far from the dignity of the Saints? for the Saints
shall judge Saints and Angels: all the world Kings and Queens, Lords and Nobles,
and Capteins of the Earth, the poorest Saint in Christendom shall judge them.
The Apostle, or rather our Savior faith, to him that overcomes, and keeps
my words until the end, to him will I give power over the Nations, Rev. 2.26.
Whatsoever he be, if he do the works of Christ, and walk in the Ordinances of
Christ, shall have power over the Nations, not only to contemn their pomps
and vanities, their lusts and corruptions, but also to convince their
consciences, and to condemn their souls for ever.

what fools are the wicked that prepare not for these Judges? When the Judge
comes to an Assise, all men prepare for him; the Constables make ready their
Presentiments, the Juries are warned, and the Clerks make ready their Bills,
etc. sest the Judge should clap a fine upon them: and shall the Saints be
Judges, and do thou not prepare thy heart by grace? Do thou not get purity
and holiness against that day? Surely, if thou do not, the very Saints will
judge thee unmeet for heaven, and fit only to have thy portion in hell. When
Christ said, To him that overcomes will I grant to sit with me in my throne,
Rev. 3.21. He adds, Let him that has an ear hear: Will God make his Saints
to judge the world? Then let all wicked men give ear and hear what God says
of his Church: The Saints shall judge the world: therefore let all men take
notice of it, and prepare themselves for their judgment.

It condemns all those that do not see glory and majesty in the faces of Gods
Saints. There is majesty in the face of a Judge; yea a man may discover in them
a kind of a sovereign majesty. Even so the Saints of God have a majesty in
their courses, in their looks, in their thoughts, and in all their ways; and
in all these they shall judge and condemn the wicked. The wicked may give the
Saints nicknames and scorn, flout, contemn, and deride them now in this
life, but let me tell them, that how lightly soever they esteem of them, they
shall be their Judges: They may cry out against the Saints, as long since the
wicked Sodomites did against good Lot, Genesis 19.9. This fellow (say they) will
be our Judge: Why, what had Lot done unto them? Alas, he did nothing, but when
they would have done that Sodomish villainy against the two Angels that came to
him, Lot went to them and said, I pray you my Brethren, do not so wickedly. So
let the godly be in the company of wicked men, that abuse the good creatures of
God; say, I pray you my brethren, do not so wickedly, be not drunkards, be not
swearers; brethren, I pray you do not so vainly, nor so profanely use the name
of God in your mouths; I pray you my brethren, do not profane Gods Sabbaths;
do not lie, do not cheat, nor cozen; if you do these and these things, the
wrath of God will plague us for it, Oh then presently they cry out, Who made
you our Judges? As once the Hebrews did of Moses, Act. 7.39. Do thou call
Saints hypocrites and dissemblers, men that judge before the time? Thou fool,
were thou not as good to suffer the Saints to judge thee now, whereby thou
may see thy wretchedness and misery, and by faith and speedy repentance
prevent that doom, which otherwise they tell thee will come upon thee, as
hereafter, when if thou have not repented, thou shall never escape that doom
and vengeance, to which the Saints shall judge thee? What, will thou not suffer
them to call a drunkard a drunkard? an adulterer, an adulterer? a blasphemer, a
blasphemer? a carnal man, a carnal man? a worldly man, a worldly man?

It is a pretty observation out of Cyprian, that because Christ did reprove all
sorts of religions, and spared none, he reproved the Scribes, the Pharisees,
the Lawyers, the Soldiers, etc. and yet does not reprove the Priests, because
they were Judges of the people, not because he durst not, but he would not: If
thou revilest the Saints, thou revilest thy Judges. Take heed then, how thou
casts the least aspersion upon the Saints; do not say, they are rash Judges,
uncharitable censurers, dissembling hypocrites; for they shall be your Judges.
O that the people would hearken and be admonished in time, to prevent this
judgment. Our Savior says, that this is the condemnation, that light is come
into the world and men hate it, Joh. 3.19. But the children of God, whom God
calls the light of the world, these lights are come into the world, and men
love darkness more then the light. How can the wicked escape damnation, that
have so many thousand Judges to condemn them? If the malefactor that is
Indicted for murder or felony, cannot escape condemnation, that has but one
Judge to sit upon him: thou that art a wicked man, living in thy sins without
Christ, how can thou escape, that have so many millions of Saints to judge
thee, yea from Adam the first, till the last Saint that shall be upon the
earth? Surely the wicked shall never escape condemnation: for,

God the Father who judges by way of authority, he will condemn thee; all
judgment comes originally from him; he that has often commanded thee to
repent, and to come out of thy sins, he shall condemn thee, because thou
have not obeyed him.

God the Son, he will judge thee, who judges by way of dispensation, Act.
10. First Christ preaches to thee repentance and remission of sins, to which
if thou yield not, then know, that there is a day appointed, wherein he will
judge thee. That Savior that thou say thou desire, if thou part not with
thy lusts, he himself will be thy Judge that will condemn thee.

God the holy Ghost will judge thee; that Spirit that now strives and wrestles
with thee, that suggests good motions into thy heart, that puts thee in mind
of repentance, bidding thee leave and forsake thy sins, and live holily, but
if thou will not, this Spirit shall judge thee by way of conviction.

Word of God shall judge thee, and that by way of form, it being the
platform, according unto which Christ will judge the whole world. Now suppose
there be forty prisoners in the Jail together, one in for murder, another for
theft, another for treason, (that man that knows the Law, if there be equity
and justice in the Assise) he, I say that knows the Law, knows who shall be
hanged, or quartered, or burned, or set free; even so, Beloved, that man that
looks through the Scriptures, that reads this or that Chapter, this or that
sentence, may know that or this man will to hell, if he repent not. Say I this
of my self? or says not the Scripture as much? The fearful, and unbeleeving,
and all that love and make lies, shall be cast into that lake that burns with
fire and brimstone for ever, Rev. 21.8. By this text will the Lord Jesus come
and judge the world: and therefore as for all such as live and dye in their
sins, we may all know, that they shall be all damned in fire and brimstone
for ever. Hereby I know that all they that make no conscience of idle, vain and
earthly speeches, and reproachful words, they shall give an account for them
by this Text, Mat. 12.56. Does the Scripture say, that all the wicked shall be
turned into hell, with all the Nations that forget God? I know it shall be so
by that text, Psalm. 10. for all things shall be done according to the
Scriptures Romans 2.16. In that day (says the Apostle) when God shall judge the
secrets of men^ hearts by Jesus Christ, according to my Gospel; that is, just
as Gods Ministers preach; just as you find it written in the same Scriptures,
so will he judge at that day.

Beloved, there is never a Text throughout the whole Scripture, that commands
you to leave and forsake your sins, but it shall judge you, if you do not:
there is not one Text of Scripture, that commands performance of any holy duty,
but it shall rise up in judgment against thee, if thou perform it not. Does
the Scripture say, Be not drunk with wine, wherein is excess? Ephesians. ^.18. It
shall judge and condemn the drunkard that drinks excessively. Does the
Scripture say, Mortify your members which are upon the earth, fornication,
uncleanness, inordinate affecti^n^ evil concupiscence, and covetousness,
which is Idolatry? Col. 3.5. If notwithstanding these sins live in thee this
Text shall rise up and condemn thee to hell. Does the text say, That the
fathers to the children shall make known Gods truth, Esa. 28.9. Ephesians. 6.4.
Parents bring up your children in the nurture and information of the Lord? It
shall rise up in judgment and condemn those parents that have not instructed
their children to fear God. Does the tex say, Thou shall teach the word of God
unto thy children and that thou shall tal^e of it when thou sit in thy
house, and when thou go^st by the way, when thou lie down, and when thou
risest up? Deuteronomy. 6.7. It shall judge thee, because thou make no conscience of
holy conference. All these and the like Texts of Scripture, shall rise up and
stand in rank to condemn thee, that have not swayed thy heart, and framed thy
life according to the Scriptures.

Ministers of God shall sit as Justices in common (from the first Preacher of
righteousness unto the last.) Moses shall judge thee, Joshua, David, Esaias,
Jeremy, Hosea, Daniel, Paul, Peter, etc. they shall all judge you: just as Gods
Ministers judge you here, so will God; he will take all their Sermons, and clap
them upon the heads of all rebellious hearers, and so damn them for ever.

The Saints shall judge you; yea, all the Saints from one end of the world to
the other, they shall assist the just Judge of heaven and earth, and they shall
be interpretive Judges.

Beloved how can the wicked escape condemnation, that have so many thousands of
Judges, so many thousand exhortations and reproves, so many thousand
admonitions and invitations, so many thousand mercies and proffers of Christ?
When God the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, shall judge them, when heaven and
all the Angels in heaven, and all the Saints on earth, shall judge them, and
condemn them? How can thou escape? Is there never a drunkard in this
congregation? Is there never a swearer? never a profane person? never a
mocker? never a railer in this town, that refuses to hearken to the word? The
men of Niniveh shall rise up in judgment against them, and condemn them,
because they still live in their sins, notwithstanding they have had not
three days preaching, nor forty days space only for repentance, but many
years of grace calling upon them. The Queen of Sheba shall condemn many that
live in these sins, who went many hundred miles to hear the wisdom of
Solomon (for going and coming, it was well-nigh two thousand miles) but you
have the word of Christ preached in your ears, and saying, the Kingdom of God
is come among you; but you will scarce step out of your doors to receive it, or
take any pains for it. This one woman shall judge them. There will be no way
for the wicked to put off their judgment: then the sons of Eli shall have
none to advocate between God and them, none to cloak or cover their
wickedness; they shall then have no excuses for themselves: for would they
excuse themselves? the Saints shall judge them: would they send out excuses?
the Saints shall cut them off.

Would they in the first place say, Alas! I was ignorant, I knew not how to
pray, or to read, or to meditate on the Scriptures, nor to chatechize my
family; I was dull and blockish to conceive such points as were taught me; and
if I did live in sin, it was ignorance that taught it me, I was never
book-learned? Says Augustine, this Ignoramus that was as ignorant and as
little book-learned as thou, he eschewed those sins that thou live in, got
the anointing of Gods Spirit to anoint his eyes, to see and know the things of
God which thou have neglected to get; he shall condemn thee.

A second excuse is poverty. I have no means to live on; if I should run after
Sermons, I should beg my bread: I have a great charge to keep, and nothing but
my labor to maintain them: and therefore I cannot spare time for meditation;
I have no while to study the Scriptures, to pray and to mourn for my sins, and
to get grace. Well, the poor Cobbler that lives next door to Saint Anthony,
shall rise up and condemn thee; he was as poor as thou, and had as great a
charge to keep as thou: yet he mourned and wept, he got grace, and he set
time apart for prayer, reading, meditation, holy conference; he shall judge and
condemn thee.

Thirdly, they shall have no excuse by employment; I am a servant, I am
commanded to do this or that I find so much business to follow, that I cannot
find any time for such things. Another says, I have great employments, I have
many Irons in the fire, and therefore God, I hope, will be merciful unto me.
Well then, Cornelius that had as many and as great employments as thou, and
Eleazar ( Abraham's servant) who was a servant as well as thou, yet in as much
as they walked with God, and waited upon him in his ordinances, they shall
judge thee.

Fourthly, they shall have no excuse from their callings and trades, I am an
Inne-keeper, and if I should not suffer drinking, and swearing, and gaming, I
should not live. Another says, I am a tradesman and if I should ask at first
just so much as I could take, I should never bring customers to my price, and
so I should not live of my trade. Well, Rahab was an Inne-keeper, as well as
thou, and yet she lived by faith, and did not suffer such wickedness in her
house. So may a tradesman, that had the same trade, and the same employment
with thee, and as great a trade as thou, and yet have avoided these sins and
evils that thou fallest into: they shall judge thee.

Fifthly, they shall have no excuse from the times they live in. Alas (says
one) I live in wretched times, all the world is given to sin. Therefore if I
should be so strict and precise in my ways, if I should run after Sermons,
pray, sing Psalms etc. all the world would be against me. There are no
Professors of religion but are reproached and miscalled I should lose all my
friends, I should be hated and opposed; yea, it may be (the time being such I
should be accused to Councels, and have my life questioned; there is nothing
but disgrace and reproach and persecution; wherefore I was afraid, and did
dispense with my conscience. Ah wretch! that man that lived in those wicked
times in the same town with thee that had the same hatred and reproach that
thou wast afraid of, that has endured all the rebukes of Christ that thou wast
ashamed of, yet he went on, and continued unto the end; he shall judge thee.

just reproof of many of the Saints of God, because they are not so circumspect
and watchful over their ways, as they ought. Do thou judge others (says
the Apostle) and yet do the same things thy self? Romans 2.2. So may I say to
all such, Will you give way to sin? will you suffer your lusts and
corruptions to sway you, and not endeavor to root out or kill them rather? How
will thou then judge the world? How will thou then be able to rise up in
judgment against the wicked, to judge them for such sins wherein thou
allowest and live thy self? Surely God will never account thee for a Saint,
if he cannot judge the world by thee. Oh this should rent the heart and bowels
of those that go for Christians, that go for Saints, yet live not as the Saints
should live. If God cannot take thee, and judge the world by thee; if he cannot
take thy life, and judge the life of all Pagans, Infidels, all lukewarm
earthly, and secure sinners, he will not account thee for a Saint. This then
first condemns all unholinesse in the lives of them that be Saints. Beloved,
if we did but live like the Saints of God in holiness and purity in the ways
of God, the Lord would put such splendour and glory upon us, that would even
daunt the very face of our enemies, and make them stand amazed at Saints. But
it is the contrary with us, the glory of God is departed from us, Spain,
France, and other Nations fear us not: Why? The righteousness and purity of
Religion is departed from us. For you shall have a Saint come into the company
of a wicked man, and yet the swearer will not be afraid to swear before him:
the drunkard will not be afraid to be drunk before him: the filthy speaker
will not be afraid to utter rotten speeches before him: the lier will not be
afraid to lie before him: the worldly man will not be afraid to discover his
vanities before him by his carnal and filthy conference. Beloved, all this is,
because the Saints have lost their glory; if they did live as Saints ought to
live, the wicked would tremble to work wickedness before them. Though a wicked
man be a drunkard, and abuse the good creatures of God when no Saint is in his
company, yet if a Saint were present, he would tremble, and not dare to do it.
Though he were a swearer, a filthy talker, a vain worldling amongst his
companions; yet if he come in the Saints company, and the Saints stand in Gods
counsel, then would the wicked tremble and quake to do such things: then would
they lick in their tongues, and not dare to speak such blasphemous oaths, such
vain and unprofitable words, filthy lies and flanders. It is said of those
that gladly received the Apostles words, and were added to the Church, that the
fear of them came upon the world, Acts 2.41. What, did the Disciples go with
swords and guns, etc. to keep men in awe thereby? No, they continued in the
Apostles doctrine and fellowship, and did live according thereto, and this made
all the world afraid of them.

Secondly, this condemns the little difference that is betwixt the wicked of
the world, and some Sainis in their lives and manners: Beloved, is there so
little difference between the Judge and the prisoners, that any one need to
come and say, I pray you Sir, show me which is the Judge, and which is the
malefactor? Is there not a plain difference both in the apparel and carriage?
The one is in rich apparel, and the other in stinking and filthy clothes,
having his hands manicled, or his legs chained. But it is to be feared, that
many of the Saints have neglected holiness and purity in their carriage and
actions which they perform, that one can hardly tell which is a Saint, and
which is a reprobate. If a man deal with a Saint, and deal with a wicked man,
he sees no difference between them. Let a Saint do any action, either pray,
hear, or confer, let a wicked man do the like, there is such deadnes, such
carnality, such worldly-mindednesse, such luke-warmnesse of affection, that one
can hardly tell which is the Saint and which is the hypocrite. Beloved, if the
Saints did live like Saints, there would be as plain a difference between a
Saint and a wicked man, in their lives and behavior, as is hetwixt the Judge
and the Rogue that is to be judged by him. Have thou not con^dered my servant
Job* (says God) how that there is none like him in all the earth? Job 1.4.8.
If a man come to be a Saint indeed, there is never a wicked man in the Town and
Country, that lives and does as he does, and walks as he walks, nor prays as
he prays, nor hears the word as he hears it, nor that conferres or meditates
as he does, that believes and repents as he does, that strives against his
lusts as he does: there is none like him in all the world.

Thirdly, it condemns the scandalousnesse of many Professors in their
behaviors and actions. Oh how do wicked men insult and exclaim hereupon, to
see a Professor led away and overcome by some lust! What (say they) are these
they that are led by the Spirit of God? Are these your devout men? why, they
can covet and scrape as well as others; they can cosen and lie as well as
others. I, those that are your great Professors, and hot spurs, they are as
covetous, as worldly, as cruel as others, though they will not be drunk, nor
swear, yet they will cosen and lie, as well as others. The consideration
whereof made the Prophets heart to bleed in him, and to pray, Oh purge me from
my murder and adultery, and all other my secret sins, lest I cast mire and
dirt in the faces of thy children, causing them to bear the reproaches of my
sins. Oh let not those that seek thee, be ashamed for my sake, Psalm. 69. For
thy sake that live scandalously and offensively, for thy sake that live
covetously and scraping after the world, that art so unjust in thy dealings and
promises, mire and dirt, scandals and reproaches are cast upon the children.
For thy looseness, yea for thy carnal liberty it is that the true professors
of Religion are reproached, suspected, and hardly censured in the world. What
did Jacob when he was to walk with the people of the Land? Genesis 35.5.6. he
purged his house, and (says the text) the terror of God was upon all the
Cities, he made them all to tremble at him. I tell you, all the wicked in
Ashford would tremble at the Professors that live therein, if they did live and
carry themselves like Saints indeed. Oh if all those that did profess
themselves to be Christians, were Christians indeed; and that profess
themselves to be Saints, were Saints indeed, living in the power and
sanctification of holiness; then men would say of themselves, of a truth God
is in these men, Christ dwells in them, and the Spirit of God leads and governs
them indeed. If thou would judge the world, take heed so as the world judges
thee, and so thou with the world be condemned eternally. It is said that Herod
feared John, because he^ was a just man, Mark 6.23. So if all thy neighbors
did know that thou were a just man, a holy and conscionable man in all thy
ways, and in all thy actions, and that cannot endure swearing, lying, and
deceit; but did see that thou wast just, and one that feared God truly, they
would all fear thee.

THE PUNISHMENT Of Unworthy COMMUNICANTS At the TABLE of the LORD: DELIVERED In
a SERMON Preached, December. 7. 1628.

By that vigilant and painful Minister of the Word, WILLIAM FENNER, B.D.
Sometime Fellow of Pembroke Hall in Cambridge, and late Parson of Rochford in
Essex.

London, Printed by T.R. and E.M. for J.S.

A SERMON OF Mr. WILLIAM FENNERS Upon this ensuing Text.
1 COR. 11.30. For this cause many are weak and sick among you and many sleep.


THE Apostle in this Chapter taxes two abuses which were then amongst the
Corinthians: First, the unseemly habit of women in the Congregation, from the
first ver. to the 17. Secondly, the profane usage of the holy Communion, both
of men and women, from the 17. verse to the end of the Chapter: And herein,
from the 23. verse to the end of the 25. he sets down the Institution of the
Lords Supper; and thence raised a point of Doctrine.

whosoever would come to this holy Communion, they must examine themselves,
that so they may come worthily; else it were better that they never came.

So we read in the 28. verse; But let a man examine himself, and so let him eat
of that Bread and drink of that Cup: As if the Apostle had said, Unless a man
examine himself, and search his own heart, and find out his sins, and dive
into the secrets of his soul, to bring out his hidden corruptions, confessing
them and judging himself for them before the Lord, let him never presume to
come unto this holy Sacrament.

And then he proves it by three Reasons.

the end of the Sacrament; for it is the remembrance of the death and passion
of Christ: so it is in the 26. verse, So often as you eat of this Bread and
Drink of this Cup, you show forth the Lords death till he come. It is a reason
that the men of this world are not acquainted withal, and therefore it was a
good wish of a Reverend Father, that the Sacrament should never be ministered,
but there should be a Sermon, to teach men the nature of it, and to instruct
them in the Mystery thereof. We approach unto the Sacrament hand over head,
living in our sins, not showing by our coming, that Christ is dead; we say,
and we profess that Christ died for our sins, and yet notwithstaning our
sins live in us, as if Christ had not died for us, or as if we would
proclaim, that his death has had no effect in us. For were we dead with
Christ, then sin and the living occasions of sin, would be dead in us also.
My Beloved, we should never come to this Sacrament, but we should show forth
the Lords death thereby, that is, that Christ is dead (or, rather died) for
sin, and that sin is also dead in us.

the damned wrong we offer unto Christ, if we come in our sins, for we are
guilty of the body and blood of Christ, as it is in the 27. verse; nay, thou
sinnest against the Lord Jesus Christ not a jot less, then Pilat that
condemned him, then Judas that betrayed him, and the Jews that cried out,
Crucify him, crucify him; yea, thou art as much guilty, as if thy own hand in
thy own person had been imbrued in his blood. Now we know it is a horrible sin
to be guilty of the blood and murder of an ordinary man, yea of a very rogue;
how much more is it a great and fearful sin to be guilty of the body and blood
of the Lord Jesus Christ, the only and etrnall Son of God? yet come thou to
this holy Communion, and bring no less then the guilt of the body and blood
of Christ upon thy soul?

the woeful wrong and injury that man brings upon his own soul, that comes
unpreparedly without examination of himself; in the 20. verse, he eats and
drinks his own damnation; that is, he makes him self guilty of, and liable
to the same vengeance that the crucifiers of Christ had inflicted on them Good
had it been for that man (says Christ of Judas) if that he had never been
born: So may I say, Good had it been for that man and that woman, if they had
never been born, who come unworthily unto the Table of the Lord; for when they
eat of that Bread they eat their own bane; and when they drink of that Cup,
they drink their own damnation.

he condemns those that as they come, so they go away from the Sacrament; no
more holy, no more gracious then before; but as they come in their sins, so
they go away in their sins; they came drunkards, and they go away drunkards;
they came worldlings, and they go away worldlings; they came mockers, and they
go away mockers: they came in theit wrath, anger, malice, deadness,
hypocrisy, and luke-warmnesse and so they go away, still never the better, but
living in them as they did before: As in the 17. verse. You come together
(says the Apostle) not for the better, but for the worse: Whereas if they
would have come worthily, they should have gone away the better, they should
have received more grace and holiness ^o walk with God, more power and
strength against sin, and corruption; yea, the Lord would have ratified and
confirmed his Covenant with them; whereas living in contention, and not coming
with preparation, they grow the worse by the Sacrament. The Corinthians thought
that the Apostle would have praised them for their coming to Church, and
receiving the Sacrament: Shall I praise you? in this (says the Apostle) I
praise you not,

an use of terror against all those that dare come in their sins unto this
holy Sacrament of the Lord; for that man that comes in his sins unto the
Table of the Lord, 1. though he may think he receives the communion, yet he
does not: for this is not the Table of the Lord, but the Table of Devils. It is
true, thou receivest the Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ; hut yet
coming in thy sins, thou receivest not his body and blood, as of a Savior
to save thee from thy sins: Indeed thou receivest the body and blood of
Christ sacramentally; but it is as the Judge to condemn thee unto the pit of
destruction, for thy damned Impudency in coming so unworthily unto this holy
Sacrament. For that man cannot eat the body of Christ, that is not a member of
Christ; therefore thou must be a limb of Christ, if ever thou will receive
worthily.

2. If a man come unto the Sacrament, and come in his sins, he comes to his
own destruction: for though it be a sweet banquet for to refresh an humble and
weary soul, and to make it walk more cheerfully in the ways of God all the
days of his life: yet he that comes unto it in his sins, and receives it
in his uncleanness, speedeth thereby his own damnation, and receives it as
his viaticum to hell. The Apostle compares Baptism to the red Sea, 1. Cor. 10.
from which place Chrysostom says, that as the red Sea was a way for the
Israelites to pass through to Canaan, so it was as a grave to swallow up the
Egyptians to their destruction: So the Lords Supper is as a grave or open pit
whereby many plunge themselves into eternal destruction but as a chariot to
the godly to carry them to heaven.

coming in thy sins, thou make thy self liable to Gods temporary plagues
and judgments; as appears in my Text, For this cause many are sick and weak
among you, and many are fallen asleep, [For this cause] which is not one^y a
note of conclusion, but of the cause: For this cause, namely, because they
examine not themselves, but come in their sins and receive it unworthily. One
man has a disease in his body, that he lives not out half his days; another
sick and weak near unto death; a third is fallen asleep. Wherefore? why (says
the Apostle) for this cause of receiving unworthily the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper.

for instruction, that because the people of God as well as wicked men, are
guilty of unworthy coming to the Lords Table, therefore he exhorts them, that
if they would not have the Lord judge them, that they would judge themselves,
as in the 31. verse. For if we would judge ourselves, we should not be judged
of the Lord. If we would sit down and search our own hearts and try our own
spirits, and pry into our bosoms, and out with our old corruptions, and
unclean lusts and enter into a new covenant with God, of holy walking before
him for after time, if we would thus judge and condemn our selves, and
mortify our sins, coming with grace un^o this holy banquet, then we might
come with comfort unto this blessed Sacrament, assuring our selves that we
shall escape the judgment of the Lord. For those of the Corinthians whom God
struck with sickness, weakness, and death, it was to instruct others that are
well and in health, that they venture not to enter upon these holy mysteries
with unholy hearts, and unclean hands.

use of exhortation in the 33. and 34. verses: Wherefore brethren, when ye come
together to partake of the holy Communion, tarry one for another: As if he
should have said, Away with all your disorders, and come not with a temporal,
but with a spiritual appetite; provide not thy teeth, but thy heart for these
dainties: for this is not a feast for the body, but for the soul therefore away
with all your disorders and unseemly coming unto thi^ blessed Sacrament, take
heed and repent of this sin among you, and of all other sins which you know
your own consciences to be guilty of and so come unto this holy communion.

Now, the verse that I have read to you, is a part of that use of terror which
the Apostle makes against the unworthy receivers of the Sacrament; and it
contains Gods severe hand and judgment against those that come unworthily:
wherein note three things, First, the cause of their punishment, which is the
unworthy eating of the Communion: For this cause many are sick and weak among
you and many are fallen asleep, the punishment inflicted for this sin,
weakness, sickness, and mortality: For it seems (says Peter Martyr) that the
Lord sent a sore plague and pestilence among them for to revenge himself of
them for their abuse of the Sacrament for this cause. the delinquents, which
are you Corinthians: Many are sick and weak among you, and in them all others
that come unpreparedly to the Sacrament.


Chrysostom notes here, that our Apostle does not fetch here an Argument or
example of judgment from others, as he had done in the former chapter, but he
brings it from themselves, who sensibly felt the wrath of God upon them for
this very sin: As if the Apostle should have said How is it, O Corinthians,
that you dare venture to come unto the Communion so unpreparedly, and that you
have no more regard of so weighty business as is the receiving of the body and
blood of the Lord Jesus Christ? See you not the wrath of God upon your
dwellings, and the curse of heaven to take hold of your town? you see it this
very time, that some are weak and very sick amongst you* near unto death, and
others have been struck with death before your eyes, and the wrath of God is
not removed, but lies yet upon you: What will you always go on, and never
cease to provoke the Lord to indignation and wrath against you for your sins,
until his jealousy has utterly consumed you, and clean cut you off? And
howsoever many of you may think that this sickness, weakness, and mortality
comes upon you by chance, as from the infection of the air, or other secondary
causes, I tell you nay, but it is for this cause only, even your unworthy
coming to the Supper of the Lord. Whence we may observe this point of
instruction:

God does most severely punish the unworthy receivers of the Sacrament of the
Lords Supper.

He punished the Corinthians here with sickness, weakness, fevers*
pestilence, death temporal, and God knows how many with death eternal.
Theodoret observes, that the Apostle told them of a thing that was acted
amongst them, for if he had told them of such judgments as had been hid from
them, and not manifest before their eyes, as if they had not felt the sickness
in their bodies, and heard the bells tolling daily in their ears, they might
have thought that the Apostle had but lied unto them. So the people of Israel,
as we may read in 1 Cor. 1.2.3. verses, they were baptized in the Cloud and in
the Sea, and they did all eat the same spiritual meat and drink the same
spiritual drink; yet as it is in the fifth verse, with many of them God was
not well pleased. Nay, God was so wroth with them, that within the space of
forty years, many thousands of them were destroyed by death here and God
knows how many thousands of them in hell. For God speaks of hell, as well
as of death; and their sin was so great, that it made God confirm it with an
oath, that they should never enter into his rest. And Saint Cyprian says, that
the Lord has showed many miracles, and declared many fearful judgments upon
the unworthy receivers of the Sacrament.

Judas, who Ambrose thought received the Sacrament (though Hilary and others
that he did not, but only that he did eat the Passover, and was coming to
this Sacrament also) but see his doom, John 13. as soon as ever he received
the sop, the Devil entered into him; and so it is with all such as come to the
Communion in their sins without repentance, and unfeigned resolution of
walking ever after worthy of the Sacrament; I say unto all and every one of
them, that as soon as ever thou receivest the Bread and Wine into thy mouth,
thou receivest the Devil together with it; as soon as ever it goes down into
thy body, the Devil goes after it, and takes more full possession of thy
heart and soul.

in regard of the author of the Sacrament, who is Christ: and that not only as
he was man, (as the Papists would make us believe) but Christ as he was God did
institute the same. So says the Apostle in the 23. verse, The Lord Jesus
Christ in the same night that he was betrayed, ^ok bread and brake it, when he
had given thanks, and said, Take ye, and eat ye, for this is my body which
is broken for you. Now if the Lord Jesus did institute it, what a cursed thing
is it for any to defile it, and so sin against Christ? It is a damnable thing
to sin against God; but to sin against God, as he is God in Christ, is
damnably damnable. The holy Ghost in the second Psalm exhorts to kiss the
Son lest he be angry, and so thou perish: As if he should say, Adore the
Son, Adore the Lord Jesus Christ, and so come and eat of this Bread, and
drink of this Cup: for if he be angry, thou will surely perish; and if thou sin
against God, and so go out of the way, Christ upon thy repentance will set thee
in again; but if thou sinnest against God in Christ, who is the Way, the Life,
and the Truth, thou shall surely perish from the right way: for there is no
other way for to bring thee in again, Acts 4.12. Therefore woeful is thy case,
and miserable is thy condition if thou sinnest against Christ, profaning his
holy ordinances which he himself has instituted, and abusest and despisest
that blessed Spirit of his, that comes to seal unto thee the redemption that
he has purchased by his blood. Better had it been for thee that thou had
never been born: for if he be wroth, blessed only are all they that put their
trust in him, and come preparedly, unto his holy Ordinance, and that by faith
embrace the Lord Jesus Christ. But woe unto all profane persons that live in
their sins: if his wrath be but a little kindled, then woe to all drunkards,
swearers, and unclean persons; but blessed is that man that is come out of his
sins. For if his wrath be so terrible when it is but a little kindled, O how
much more fearful will it be when it is deeply incensed! Therefore if thou
come unto this holy Sacrament in thy sins, without due preparation and
examination, what do thou but even set the wrath of God burning upon thy
soul and body from the very bottom of hell?

When the Lord Delivered the Law upon Mount Sinai, he commanded the people to
sanctify themselves; yea if a beast did but touch the mountain, he must die
for the same, even be stoned to death, or thrust through with a dart, Heb. 12.
Much more then now, when the Lord does deliver the Gospel, especially the
groundwork and masterpiece thereof, the Lord Jesus Christ, and that in the
most blessedest manner that ever God exhibited himself unto man; how much more
does God require purity and holiness, that all such as come to receive the
Lord Jesus Christ in the blessed Sacrament, should be sanctified, purging their
hearts, and cleansing souls from all their sin and uncleanness? Should not a
beast touch the mountain where God did appear, and dare thou touch the body
of Christ, and drink his blessed blood in thy sins? The very Angels of heaven
will curse thee, and the clouds of heaven will pour down showers of vengeance
upon thee: for God has more severe punishments to inflict upon sinners under
the Gospel, then he used under the Law, though then he struck them with more
visible and sensible plagues and judgments then ordinarily he brings upon
men now: as Gebezi for his covetousness was stricken with leprosy; Corah,
Dathan, and Abiram, the earth opened her mouth and swallowed them up quick for
their rebellion against the Lord: Er and Onan were stricken dead for their
wickedness: Jeroboam had his hand withered for stretching of it forth to
strike the Lords Prophet. And though the Lord bring not such sensible
punishments now as he did then, ye he knows how to punish the world a thousand
times more then he did then, at this time. As a father has other kinds of
punishments for his son, when he is grown up, then he had when he was in
coats, and but a child; then a twigge or two would serve the turn; but if he
comes to man's estate, and then rebel against his father, it may be that he
will disinherit him, and cast him out of his family: So in former time God did
scourge and whip his people when they sinned against him; but now he has drawn
out his Church to this age, even to the age of the Gospel, he has severer
strokes of plagues and curses, wherewith to confound all profane and
impenitent sinners, that dare to abuse that blessed Sacrament of the Lord Jesus
Christ.

The second Reason is, in regard of the matter of the Sacrament, which is
Christ also; who as he was the efficient cause, so in regard of Sacramental
relation, he is the matter of the Communion, 1 Cor. 10.16. The Cup of blessing
which we bless, is it not the Communion of the blood of Christ? and the bread
which we break, is it not the communion of the body of Christ? Now the better
matter any thing is of, the more heinous is the defilement of it: A master will
not be so angry for casting his earthen vessels into the mire, as he will be
for casting his rich jewels. The Bread and Wine in the Sacrament, are the
blessed Communion of the precious body and blood of Christ, and dare thou to
defile them? Know thou not that thou do greatly increase the wrath of the
Lord against thy soul thereby? That soul whatever it was from Dan to
Beersheba, that came in his uncleanness to partake of any of those holy things
which the children of Israel hallowed to the Lord, whether he were man or
woman, rich or poor, that person was to be cut off from the presence of the
Lord, Levit. 12. whereto the Lord sets his seal for the confirmation thereof
(I am the Lord:) And as sure as I am the Lord, so will I see it accomplished.
So my beloved, let me say unto you of England, from Dover to Newcastle, or from
the o^e end of the town unto the other, that soul who touches any of these
holy things with an impure heart, and comes to partake of them with his
uncleanness upon him, living in his sins, and wallowing in his lusts,
casting off the fear of the Lord, and making no conscience to walk in Gods
ways, that soul shall surely be cut off that comes so unworthily unto the
Table of the Lord; not only the hand that takes it, and the mouth that eats
it, but even the very soul of him that so comes, shall perish from the
presence of the Lord. So Levit. 7.20. That soul that eats of the flesh of
the Sacrifices of peace offerings that pertain unto the Lord, having his
uncleanness upon him, even that soul shall be cut off from his people. Now
you know that all those sacrifices had relation unto Christ; but yet under the
Law they were but shadows, and typical relations, and were not so lively and
effectual means for the exhibiting of Christ, as the Lords Supper, is: And
therefore if such as came in their uncleanness unto them, were punished with
no less punishment then a cutting off from the fellowship with the Lords
people; what wrath and vengeance will the Lord bring upon thee that come with
thy uncleannes upon thee unto this holy communion? Augustine says, that man
that receives the Sacrament unworthily, receives a greater plague to his own
soul, and a greater torment to his own conscience, yea and heapeth up a store
of wrath unto himself against the day of wrath. [This is my body] and see the
bread broken before thy face, it should even make thee tremble and quake for to
look upon it, more for to touch it, and most of all for to taste it: for it is
the Communion of the body and blood of Christ; and how dare thou come in thy
sins for to defile it?

in regard of the form of the Sacrament, which is Christ too, for as he is the
efficient cause that instituted it, and as he is also the matter of the
Sacrament, so in the third place Christ is the form of the Sacrament also,
wherein the confirming grace of God is sealed up unto thee. Now as it is
treason for a man to offer contempt unto the Kings broad Seal; so certainly is
it high treason against this King of Kings, to contemn this blessed Sacrament,
which is the Seal of the righteousness of faith. If thou should clip the
Kings Coin, I will say that thou art a Traitor. Oh what a traitor art thou
then, yea, an accursed traitor in the account of God and Christ, if thou
clippest his holy Communion, if thou clip it of thy examination, and due
preparation, and so come hand over head, not regarding so holy an Ordinance!
Thou sinnest against the Court of heaven. That which Saint James speaks in
general of the whole worship of God [Draw near unto God] let me apply it in
particular unto this drawing near unto God in this holy Communion, James 4.8.
Cleanse your hands ye sinners, and purify your hearts ye double minded: Draw
near unto God in the hearing, reading and meditating on Gods word; draw near
unto God in prayer, and in this holy Sacrament, and receive it for your
amendment of life. [Draw near to God] I, that I will, (says the wicked man) I
will come to Church, and draw near unto the holy Communion. Will you so? (says
the Apostle:) No, first, Cleanse your hands ye sinners, and purge your hearts
ye double-minded: As if he should say, never think of drawing near unto God,
or setting foot on this holy ground, and handling those holy mysteries of
Christ, unless thou first purge thy heart, and cleanse thy soul from all thy
filthy lusts and cursed corruptions, lest otherwise thou coming in thy sins
with thy uncleanness on thee, and so receiving unworthily, thou eatest and
drinkest thine own damnation, (as our English translation has it) damnation
to thy self, and not to another. No, God forbid, that thou should by thy
unworthy coming, eat and drink condemnation to another, for thou that art a
child of God, and come unto the Table of the Lord with repentance, and a
sound measure of preparation, though others that sit in the same pew with thee,
for their profaneness eat and drink their own damnation, yet thou shall be
sure to receive the seal and assurance of thy reconciliation and salvation,
with free acceptance of God, through the Lord Jesus Christ; for every man shall
bear his own burden.

in regard of the end of the Sacrament, which is Christ also: For as he is the
efficient, material, and formal cause, so Christ is also the final cause of
the Sacrament: So it is in the 26. verse, As often as you eat of this Bread, and
drink of this Cup, you show forth the Lords death until he come. Not that
Christ may be eaten with the teeth, or corporally received in the Sacrament, or
as if he were there productively, or transubstantially, (as the Papists say);
no, the Apostle shows, that the end of the celebration of this Sacrament, is
for to show forth the death of Christ until he come.

unless we eat the body, and drink the blood of Christ really, and not the
cons^crated bread and wine, how can any man by this unworthy communicating,
eat and drink his own damnation, and make himself guilty of the body and blood
of Christ.

As often as you eat of this bread, and drink of this cup, you show forth the
Lords death till he come: Wherefore whosoever eats this bread or drinks
this cup of the Lord unworthily, shall be guilty of the body and blood of the
Lord; even for this cause, because it is the showing forth of Christ's death
till he come. Therefore if thou eatest and drinkest unworthily, coming in thy
sins, and resolvest to go on in them, that as thou were proud before thou
came to the Sacrament, so thou art still; as thou were choleric, angry, and
impatient before, so thou art still* as thou were lukewarm and dead-hearted
in Gods service before, so thou remain^st sti^l, remember I pray thee, that as
often as thou have come unto the communion in those thy sins, thou have made
thy self guilty of the body and blood of the Lord Jesus Christ. Therefore I
beseech you to look to it, and in time to repent, and pray with the Prophet
David, Ps. 51. Deliver me from blood-guiltinesse, O Lord, even from the blood
of thy Son, left one day it be laid unto thy charge, and required straightly
at thy hands. For, for this cause many are sick among you, and many weak.

Take notice (I pray you) then from whence comes all sickness, weakness,
and mortality, and the reason why the Lord does send so many kind of sorrows,
crosses, and miseries upon men; namely, because of the unworthy receiving of
the Lords Supper. So says Mr. Calvin, why do you wonder to see such wars,
and rumors of wars, that there is so many bloodsheds, so many Towns and
Cities ruinated, and so many Countries sacked and depopulated, so many
calamities come upon the Churches abroad, and so many plagues and scourges to
overrun Christendom at this day, is not the cause plain enough? men come unto
the Table of the Lord carelessly and unworthily. And, beloved, we shall never
see the Lord take away his judgments here from the earth, until we betake our
selves to a more diligent and holy receiving of the Sacrament. For this very
cause there are so many strange diseases amongst us, never formerly known or
heard of until these days, as the French Pox, the English Sweat, (as they
call it) that even the Physicians, themselves are blunted at them; and (as
Peter Martyr well observes) hence are all diseases, as plagues, pestilences,
(which were late amongst us) dropsies, bloody Flux, Agues, Apoplexies,
Convulsies, burning Fevers, and impostumes, etc. and all for this cause. One
man has fallen into a Fever, and we wonder at the cause whence he took it;
but in truth the communion has cast him into his Fever, and the Lord will
avenge himself on him for the same. Another is sick, and he thinks that a cold
has brought it upon him; but it is the unworthy receiving of the Sacrament
that is truly the cause of it. A third man dies before his time, even in his
full strength, before in the course of nature he has ended half his days;
but the cause is unworthy coming to the Communion, which has taken hold of
him, and cut off the thread of his life.

Many there be that expound these words in a spiritual sense, Many are sick
and weak, and many are fallen asleep, that is to say, many have their
consciences seared, and their hearts hardened, etc. and this is true also, that
because men come unpreparedly, they have their hearts hardened, and their
consciences seared, and their souls plagued with many spiritual plagues. But
it is as true also in temporal judgments, thou have had many afflictions, and
much sickness laid upon thee; but thank thy self for it; namely, because thou
have come unworthily unto the communion, thou have had much weakness in thy
body, which has cost thee much money, and weakened thy estate; but thy unholy
coming unto the Sacrament, is that which thou may thank for it. Thou have
been reproached and contemned, and endured much shame; but take notice of it,
that it proceeds from the foregoing cause, and that is a special reason why
the Lord has brought these and many other evils upon thee. Thou can say the
commandments (for the most part) by rote; but thou did never know the
mystery of this one commandment, Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy
God in vain: Beloved: the Communion is one of Gods own names, and how many
thousands are there in the world that take this name of God in vain? Is there
never a drunkard here in this congregation, that has been at the Sacrament? Is
there never a whoremonger, never a covetous worldling? Where is the man,
whosoever he be amongst you all, that is such a one? He is in the state of
damnation. Is there never a lukewarm and carnal Christian, that contents
himself with a formal worship, and a dead performance of holy duties, that
has no zeal for God, nor courage for his truth, but is careless of all Gods
commandments? whosoever amongst you are guilty of these sins, or any other,
and has come unto this holy Communion in them, they are the persons, that how
often soever they have received, so often they have taken this name of the Lord in
vain: And if I should examine this Congregation from the one end of it unto the
other, I fear that every pew would yield some one, If not many that have taken
a Communion (which is one of Gods names) in vain. Should I but examine thee
that come unto the Communion this day, how by the last Sacrament thou
receivedst, and the last Sermon thou have heard, thy faith is strengthened, thy
repentance renewed, and thy obedience is increased, and thy care doubled for to
walk with God? whether thou art made by them more zealous for God, more forward
in his worship and service, and every day more holy and heavenly minded; if
not, then thou have taken this Name of the Lord thy God in vain, and the Lord
will not hold thee guiltless, that is, the Lord will not take away the guilt
from thy conscience, but he will let thy sin lie open, and thou shall not be
cleansed from it nor justified by the very blood of Jesus Christ, but it shall
rest upon thee to thy utter ruin and destruction, unless thou forsake thy
sins, and so come preparedly unto this holy Table and banquet. I know here is
a covenant of grace, a sweet refreshing for every humbled soul that is hungry
and broken for his sins and for every poor distressed conscience: let all
such come and lay their sins upon Christ's cross and welcome: But if there be
any that come in their sins, and will not reform their live^, but be as they
came sinners, so they mean for to continue, the Lord himself will lay this
man's sins upon his own head, and they shall never be taken away from him but
Christ shall at the day of judgment pronounce him a guilty person, to his
eternal condemnation.

King Belshazzar that abused but the holy vessels of the Temple, and the Cups
thereof, what a dismal plague befell him for it? Dan. 5.27.28. God has
numbered thy Kingdom and finished it, thou art weighed in the balance, and art
found too light, thy Kingdom is departed from thee, and is given to the Medes
and Persians. So (beloved brethren) if any of you shall abuse this Cup of the
Lord coming to it with a filthy unclean heart, and polluted conscience, and
earthly affections, there is a handwriting against every soul that thus
comes this day unto the Table of the Lord: thou art numbered and weighed and
found too light: thou, O man, and woman, whosoever thou art that prophanest and
contemnest these holy things of God, thou shall be found out, and the Lord will
keep thee out by his spiritual plagues, and thy sin shall never be done
away, but be required at thy hands, and stand in everlasting record against
thee; O my brethren, that you would but seriously consider of it, and look
about you, it being so weighty a thing that so nearly concerns every one of
you.

But I would not have any poor broken heart and humble soul to mistake me, and
so-thereby be discouraged: but give me leave (I pray you) for to use the words
of the Brophet, though spoken in another sense, Psalm. 115. Not unto us, O Lord,
not unto us, but unto thy Name give the glory: So let me apply this doctrine
unto the comfort of all poor broken hearted sinners, and beat off all carnal
profane wretches that live in their sins; not unto you, O drunkards, and
swaggerers, not unto you whoremasters and unclean persons, that wallow in
ungodliness, I say not unto you, but unto the poor afflicted soul and contrite
spirit that lies bleeding and gasping under the weight of his sin, and that
trembles and fears being oppressed with the sense of its own unworthiness,
panting and breathing after Christ Jesus, and suing earnestly unto the Throne
of grace for mercy and forgiveness: unto thee only belongs this comfort, and
therefore take it home to thee, and know it for thy self. Art thou troubled
with a hard heart, and an unbeleeving soul, and art even wearied and tired out
with thy many sins and infirmities? Come thou with comfort unto this holy
Communion: for thou shall be sure to find saying good by it; to thee it shall
be a spiritual medicine to heal all thy diseases, and to cure all thy strong
and prevailing corruptions; and if thou come unto this holy Table of the Lord,
it shall make thee as it is recorded of Saint Laurence, able to suffer
Martyrdom, and to get victory over all thy unruly affections; yea at last thou
shall tread Satan thy arch-enemy under thy feet. Therefore be not dismayed: for
the Lord Jesus invites thee to come. What if thy infirmities be many, yet the
mercies of God, which he tenders to thee in this Communion, are many more.
Samson who was the strongest Soldier and Champion in his time that was in
Israel to overcome the Philistims, he yet began his strength in weakness,
being at the first overcome by a woman: So though the Lord intend to make thee
a strong Christian, he will make thee to begin in weakness to perfect thy
power; to begin in sin and misery, that he may make thee to end in glory. I
know Gods children here may receive temporal punishments, and bring temporal
scourges upon themselves, as we may see amongst the Corinthians here, but it
shall be for their good and amendment, namely, for their correction, and not
for their ruin and destruction; that so being chastened by the Lord, they
might not be condemned with the world. Therefore if thou come carelessly and
unprofitably, God will chastise thee with the rods of men, as he did Peter, who
receiving the Sacrament with his Master over night, yet the next day thrice
denied him; but God whipped his soul, and scourged his conscience for it, and
beat him black and blew, so that he went out and wept bitterly: Nay, he could
scarce wipe off that sin, and recover himself again whilst he lived.

Wherefore let us take heed of unprepared coming to the Sacrament; for God will
not hold such guiltless: Yea, if his own sons or daughters transgress
thereby; he will make them to feel the smart of it. But now to come to all
such as come month by month, hand over head, without any examination and
repentance, in their uncleanness and abomination, making no conscience of
their reformation, let me tell them that it shall be one of Christ's demands of
them in the day of judgment. How often have thou been at my Table? How often have
thou been partakers of that holy Communion which I gave unto thee? Have thou
come preparedly, or received worthily, or no? Have thou eat bread at my Table
with me, and lift up thy heel against me? Did I command, and thou woudst not
obey? Did I send my Ministers to thee to reform, but thou would not be
reformed? Did I check and reprove thee for thy pride, blasphemies,
drunkenness, covetousness, anger, wrath, malice, fornication, hyporcrisie and
hrophanesse in the matter of my worship? and yet would thou still live in
these sins? Where are all the Sacraments that thou have received? How have
thou behaved thy self? Where are the sins that thou have forsaken, and
pleasing corruptions that thou have abhorred? What grace and holiness have
thou received by the means thou have enjoyed? and how have thou manifested the
same through thy whole conversation? Oh! woe, woe unto thee, yea and a world of
woes unto thee, and unto all such as shall be silent and speechless to those
or the like demands of Christ: for they cannot say they have come out of their
sins, and have been reformed by the means of grace, and have received
spiritual nourishment and refreshing from the heavenly banquet of the
Communion of the body and blood of the Lord Jesus Christ.

A man will especially regard the last words of a dear friend, who is as a
man's soul, when he is to speak upon his deathbed, and will be careful to
remember them: and do thou not more regard the last Will and Testament of our
Lord Jesus Christ? We count it a horrible sin to alter the last Will of a man
that is dead. Beloved, the Lord Jesus, before he left this world, instituted
this blessed Sacrament at his last Will and Testament, and has given us a
charge, that as we would not eat and drink our own damnation by bringing the
guilt of his body and blood upon our souls, so that we should discern the
Lords body, and not come unpreparedly in our sins and abominations, without
reverence and respect of such holy and high mysteries, as if there were nothing
to be received and looked for after, then the bare and naked element of bread
and wine, or as if we did come to communicate with unclean Devils. O my
brethren, if you had but faith, you would be able to discern Christ in the
Sacrament; and therefore when thou come unto it, thou must prepare and
sanctify thy self for to communicate with him in those, holy Ordinances and
heavenly mysteries of his most precious body and blood: For if so be that thou
retainest thy sins, and so come unworthily unto this holy Table of the Lord,
thou art a great covenant-breaker with God: For thou never come unto the
Communion, but thou make and renewest thy covenant with God, wherein thou
promisest thus much or the like in effect. Lord, I have been formerly a
drunkard, but now I promise to give it over, and never to be a drunkard more; I
have been a scoffer at Religion, and a mocker and derider of thy children; but
now I faithfully promise (Lord) that I will never do so any more. I have been
wicked and sinful, disobeying and rebelling against all thy holy
commandments, and respected not thy judgments and thy promises, and have
been careless of thy glory: But now (Lord) as I eat this bread, and drink
this wine; so I covenant unto thee, and promise to thee, that I will amend all
my sinful ways, and become a reformed Christian. And as I ever look that the
body and blood of the Lord Jesus Christ represented in the elements, should
nourish my soul unto eternal life: so I promise to be disobedient to the
Devil, but faithful and obedient unto thee. I will stop my ears against the
alluring enchantments of the world, and wicked suggestions of the Devil; but I
will open them wide to hearken to thy voice, that I may obey thy commands. But
now as thou have made ir, so if thou have broken this thy covenant with God,
returning to thy former courses of sin and disobedience against him, know thou,
that this covenant of thine which thou have broken, shall stand in full force
against thee: for God will assuredly require it at thy hands: and all the
Sacraments which thou have received, thou have received them but as so many
seals and pledges of thy just deserved condemnation.

Do all that come unworthily unto the Sacrament, eat and drink their own
damnation? Then many hundreds, yea thousands are damned: Are all damned that
have eat and drunk unworthily?

Ans. No; but a man may eat and drink his own damnation three ways: First, in
regard of guilt and liablenesse unto Gods wrath: and so he that eats and
drinks his natural food, his dinner, supper, or breakfast in his sins,
eats and drinks his own damnation: yea, whosoever thou art, that come
unto this holy banquet in thy sins, in thy pride, choler, malice, wrath or
revenge, covetousness, hypocrisy, and deadness in Gods service, thou never
eatest a bit of bread, but thou eatest and drinkest thine own damnation; that
is, thou eatest and drinkest that which will witness against thee another day,
Deuteronomy. 28.16, 17, 18, 19 verses, etc. If thou will not hearken to the voice of
the Lord thy God, to observe and do all his commandments, then all these
curses shall come upon thee and overtake thee: Cursed shall thou be in the
City, and cursed in the field, cursed shall be thy basket and thy store. Now if
thy bread be cursed, then thou also art cursed that eatest it

Secondly, in regard of the seal and obligation in the conscience; so he that
eats and drinks the Sacrament in his sins, eats and drinks his own
damnation; that is, he eats and drinks that which seals up his damnation
against the great day of account. And thus many amongst us, and I fear the
most part of this Congregation, have eat and drunk their own damnation. But
this seal may be broken off, and God grant it may.

Thirdly, in regard of sigillation in heaven; and so he that eats and drinks
unworthily, and will not be reformed; he that receives the Sacrament time after
time, but still retains his sins, and will not be humbled for them, not forsake
them, he sets a seal in heaven upon his own damnation, that all the whole
world can never break off, but such a one most certainly is a damned creature.

And now (my brethren) God forbid there should be any such here, but that this
seal may be broken off: And O that God would put some strength into this
word, that it may be broken off by your godly sorrow for your sin, and
forsaking of them all: for if this seal be set on your damnation, why do I yet
speak unto you, and entreat and beseech you in the name of Christ to come home
and be reconciled to him? and I desire to stand here, as Jehoiadah set Porters
at the gates of the City, and of the house of the Lord, to keep off all those
that come in their uncleanness, 2 Chronicles. 23.19. So I stand this day as the
Porter of the Lord, to keep the Lords watch, that no profane wretch, no proud
hearted sinner, that means not to enter into a new course of life, that no such
one come unto this holy communion. I charge that as you will answer the guilt
of Christ's blood before Gods Throne, that thou meddle not with it. But now if
there should be any that would absent himself because he will the more freely
go on in his sins, let him know that such a one excludes himself from the
benefits and merits of Christ's death, and shall never have the benefit of a
Redeemer at the day of judgment; but shall perish in his sins for his
careless neglect and fearful contempt of so effectual and powerful means of
salvation and purging, as is the blood of Christ truly and really offered in
the Sacrament. Wherefore if thou come or come not, woe is thee, if so be
thou live and continuest in thy sins, and go on in thy unholy courses.

And now to conclude; as the Cherubim stood before Paradise with a naked sword
to keep Adam out, that he might not enter and so eat of the tree of life: so I
bring with me the sword of God, to run it up to the hilts in the heart and
bowels of every ungodly man, every rebellious and impenitent sinner this day,
that dares presume to rush upon this holy Ordinance of God, with a polluted and
unclean heart. Therefore let me exhort thee, that as thou tendrest the
eternal good of thy soul, so thou be careful not to eat the body of Christ,
nor drink his blood in thy sins, lest thou eat thine own bane, and drink
thine own curse: Nay, so doing, thy misery will be so great, as a good man
well weighing and considering of it, said, I profess I had rather have all my
veins cut open, and my blood spilt on the ground, then deliver the body and
blood of Christ unto a profane sinner: for why should I deliver his own bane
and destruction unto him? But now (my brethren and beloved) come out of your
sins, come and welcome, if you part with your lusts, and so you shall be sure
to have his blood to wash your heart, and cleanse you, his righteousness to
clear you, and cloth you, his graces to strengthen you, his spirit to heal
and to sanctify your hearts and natures; and the Lord Jesus Christ to supply
all good that is wanting in you. But if yet notwithstanding all this that has
been said, you will go on in your sins, and live as you did in your swearing,
whoring, lying, and drinking, and all manner of filthiness; and as you came
unto it unclean, so you depart away from it more unclean, and never make any
conscience of any reformation, I pronounce this day before God and his elect
Angels, that thou shall surely perish, and thy soul and body be damned and
tormented in the scorching flames of hell for evermore. Therefore hearken unto
instruction, and give ear unto council, now whiles that the Lord offers it to
you, that so you may not harden your hearts any more, but may hear and obey,
that your souls may live, and so coming together to this holy and blessed
Communion for the better and not for the worse, you may return home with the
blessing of children.

FINIS.
THE DVTIE OF COMMUNICANTS: OR, Examination required of every COMMUNICANT.

In a SERMON Preached, By that vigilant and painful Minister of the Word,
WILLIAM FENNER, B.D. Sometime Fellow of Pembroke Hall in Cambridge, and late
Parson of Rochford in Essex.

London, Printed by T.R. and E.M. for J.S.

EXAMINATION Required in every COMMUNICANT. A Sermon preached by Mr. WILLIAM
FENNER Minister of Gods Word.
2 COR. 11.28. But let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of that Bread
and drink of that Cup.


IN the latter part of this Chapter the Apostle treats of the Sacrament of the
Lords Supper: And first he reproves the Corinthians for their unworthy coming
to it, as we see in verse 18. There were Errors, and Schisms, contempt of the
poor, drunkenness, excess, disorder, and unprofitablenesse in the duties of
God: they waxed worse and worse by the Sacrament. All these, and sundry other
abuses were among them; so that they did not eat the Lords Supper aright as
they ought.

Secondly, he reduces them back to the first prime institution of it by Jesus
Christ, as we see in verse 23. that hereby they might both see how grievously
they had abused thy Sacrament, and likewise see how they might sanctifiedly use
it.

Thirdly, he shows the danger of unworthy receivers: and this he sets out two
ways: First, by the greivousnesse of the sin; such a person makes himself
guilty of the body and blood of the Lord, as we see verse 27. Secondly, by the
doleful consequence that follows upon it; He eats and drinks damnation to
himself, as we see verse 29.


The sum of the text
Now in this verse (that I may not trouble you with speaking of any more matter
then what is necessary for the present Theme) he shows how we may prevent,
escape, and avoid this danger; how we may take an order that we do not fall
into this grievous sin, that we do not plunge our selves into this grievous
misery: Let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of that Bread, and drink
of that Cup. A man must examine himself, sift his own soul, and labor to
prepare himself, before he dare to venture on this sacred business. In these
words, before we set upon the particular handling of them, we may observe,
Observe. 1. We must not rush upon the sacrament.
that We must not rush upon the Sacrament.

There must somewhat be done before we can receive it, Let a man examine
himself, and so let him eat of that Bread, and drink of that Cup. There are
none of the Ordinances of God, that a man may safely rush upon. Would thou
offer any sacrifice to God? but thou must stay first, and examine thy self,
whether there be not something yet undone: It may be thou have offended God in
something or other; It may be thou art out with thy brother; thou must first
go and be reconciled to thy brother, and then offer thy gift, Matthew. 5. So,
would thou reprove thy neighbor? Matthew. 5.
It may be there is somewhat out of order, some indisposednesse in thee, thou
art not yet in case to set on this duty; it may be thou art faulty, and guilty
thy self; it may be thou have a beam in thine own eye. First (says the Text)
pull the beam out of thine own eye, and then thou may see clearly to pull the
moat out of thy brothers eye, Matthew. 7.5. Matt. 7.5.
So would thou reform thy outward man? But it may be thy inward man is not
reformed; there is some lust in thy heart, some pride in thy will, some
stubbornness in thy spirit, some Idol in thy bosom; First, cleanse the
inside of the platter, Matthew. 23.26. Mat. 13.26
There is never an ordinance of God that can be done, but there must be
somewhat done first, a man must do something before, As in the choice of
Officers, as Ministers, or Deacons* other Officers in the Church, first, they
must be proved before they be chosen: so in all the Ordinances of God. Would
we come to the Sacrament? There is somewhat must be done first, we must
examine our selves, and root out all unsanctifiednesse, and indisposition, that
cannot stand with the right communicating in the Lords Supper. And so in every
other good duty.

Reason 1. Naturally we are not invited guests.
The reasons of this are:

First, because naturally we are not invited guests, we are not such as are
invited to the Lords Supper; we are children of wrath, and as long as we are in
such a estate, we cannot come aright to the Communion. This is childrens bread,
and it cannot be given to dogs. Christ, whenever he sets his dainties
before his people* he tells us for whom they are, Take, eat, this is my Body
that is broken for you. This is the Supper that is made for you, as it is in
this Chapter, verse 24. First we must prove our selves invited guests.

It is true, the Lord Christ invites every man to the Lords Supper; but he
invites him methodically, he must be in such an estate: but every man is not
so fitted: a man must be a member of Christ that means to partake of Christ's
death; he must be one that is in Christ, he must be able to prove that he is
ingraffed into Christ, he must be able to show the mark of the Lord Christ on
him. Simile.
As it is with some of your great dinners, and feasts in this City, you have
tickets, and all that are admitted to the feast, must show their ticket before
they are admitted; So thou must be able to show thy ticket, that thou have an
invitation from Christ, thou must have a mark, and token from Chtist that thou
come, and come with his warrant.

A second reason is, Reason. 2 We are indisposed.
though thou be invited, it may be thou art not disposed. If a man will do a
thing that he is naturally indisposed to, there must be somewhat done before
of necessity: So the Lords Supper, it is a thing that naturally we are
indisposed unto, therefore somewhat must of necessity be done first. Naturally
we are unholy, we are unthankful, and carnal, we are in our sins, strangers
from God, and the Covenant of God, and from the seal of the Covenant: all this
indisposition must be wrought out before we can comfortably come hither. If
Christ would have the very Chamber first trimmed, before he instituted the
Passover, and the Sacrament; much more will he have the soul disposed for
him, and the heart cleansed from all filthiness. If he that ate of the
Peace Offering being indisposed, having his uncleanness upon him, was to be
cut off from his people. Levit. 7.20. Levit. 7.20.
what will God do to such people as come hither in their uncleanness, and
indisposition, unsanctified, and unqualified? Reason. 3 Solemn preparations
required to the Sacrament.


Thirdly, suppose we were both invited and disposed, yet this is not enough:
This is a solemn Ordinance of God, and an ordinary disposition will not serve
the turn. Though every child of God be ordinarily disposed to every good word
and work, to pray, and to hear the word of God, he is prepared and furnished
to every well doing ordinarily and habitually? but a man must be disposed
further; There is a solemn preparation required to the Communion, as in Deuteronomy.
16.15. Deuteronomy. 16.16.
there were solemn feasts in the Law: so there is this solemn feast in the
Gospel, and there are solemn preparations required thereto. When we come to
the Communion, to eat the Lords Supper, it is not eating and drinking in
Christ's presence; for so may any reprobate do, and yet Christ may say to him,
Depart from me, thou worker of iniquity. It is not to come and sit in your
Pewes, and wait till the Bread come, and take it; and till the Cup come, and
drink it; so many a reprobate may do, and the Corinthians did, that did eat
and drink their own damnation: But there must be a solemn preparation to it,
to be sealed with the Spirit of Promise, to be righteous by faith in the body
and blood of Christ; For a man to be humble and empty of his sin, to be
thirsty after the precious blood of Christ, to be fed and built up in the
promises; It is a weighty thing to come to the Communion: a man must be a
worthy man* or else he has nothing to do here, As Solomon said of Adonijah, 1
King. 52.
If he be a worthy man, not a hair shall fall from his head; but if wickedness
be found in him, he shall die, 1. King 1.52. So if we be worthy men and women,
not a hair of our head shall fall to the ground, none of the curses shall
light on us, that light on unprepared persons: but if wickedness be found in
us, if we be guilty of any sin, if we live in any lust not mortfied; if there
be any profaneness in our lives, in our families, in our courses and
callings, though we catch hold of the horns of the Altar, though we partake of
these holy mysteries, yet we shall be so far from having any mercy, as that we
shall hasten our own ruin, we set a seal on our own judgment, and make our
case worse then it was before.

Let us take notice of it and never dare to rush on any of Gods ordinances.
Use. To take heed of rash performance of duties.
You know what became of the foolish man in the Gospel, that when they were
invited to come to the marriage Supper, he thought it was nothing but to come
with them that came, to crowd in with them, and sit down among the rest; he
considered not what he went about, that he might be prepared accordingly; the
event was this, he was cast out into utter darkness, Matthew. 22.13. It is
dangerous rushing on any of Gods ordinances. To rush upon prayer, for a man to
fall down upon his knees, and to utter any thing before the Lord hastily with
his mouth, not considering that God is in heaven, and he on the earth. A man's
word may damn his own soul, and pull vengeance on his own pate, his prayers
may prove a curse, his prayer for mercy may be turned into vengeance: So the
higher the service, 2 Samuel 15.17.
the greater the danger. As the servants of Abigail said to her, Consider what
you do, when evil was determined against them: so consider what you do when
you come to the Sacrament, you come to a weighty thing, to that that will
either set you nearer to the Kingdom of God, or to hell and condemnation. But I
let this pass, and come to the words themselves.

Let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of that Bread, and drink of that
Cup. In these words observe, Parts of the Text.
First, the matter of the duty commanded* that is, to eat of that bread, and to
drink of that cup. Secondly, the manner of doing the duty; not only to eat of
that bread, but so to eat; and not only to drink that cup, but so to drink.
Thirdly, the rule of direction how to come in a right manner to partake of it,
that is, by examining of our selves, Let a man examine himself, and so let him
eat of that bread, and drink of that cup. Fourthly and lastly, the benefit
following that direction, and that is in this word But; But let a man examine
himself. He had said before, He that eats and drinks unworthily, is made
guilty of the body and blood of the Lord; and, he discerns not the Lords
body, verse. 27. But, says he, as if he should say, if a man would prevent
this; if a man would take order that he be not guilty of the body and blood of
Christ, that he do not come undiscerningly to these heavenly mysteries, but
with comfort, and title to the promises, with hope and confidence and speeding
there of the benefits of Christ exhibited, then let a man examine himself, and
so let him eat of that bread, and drink of that cup.


Now I will pass over some of these points, Necessity of receiving the Lords
Supper.
namely, that we are to eat that bread, and drink that cup. There is a
necessity that we should receive the Lords Supper. I need not stand on this,
you know it is sufficiently proved by the Sacrament of the Law, which was the
forerunner of this Sacrament, that soul that did not partake of that, was to
die the death, he was to be cut off from Gods people, Number. 9.13. Number. 9.13.
If the Lord was so careful of those Sacraments that were inferior to these
(and yet they were of the same substance as these) that the man that neglected
to come to them, to partake of them, was to be cut off, to be excommunicated
from the people of God, and to be rent off from the Congregation of the Saints,
then how much more for these heavenly, and weighty, and glorious Ordinances of
the Gospel, which are far more glorious then them of the Law? But I will not
stand upon that.

I might here take notice too of the frequencie of the duty: The Lords Supper
to be received often.
for so it has dependence on those words formerly, As often as ye eat this
bread, and drink this cup, ye show the Lords death, and so that is, as often as
ye eat, do it in this manner. This is the command of God, that we often receive
the Lords Supper. Basil.
In the Primitive times St. Basil observes, that they ate it three or four
times in, a week, on Wednesdayes, Fridaies, and on the Lords day,; but that was
a time of persecution, I will not stand upon that. I think it not needful: But
it should be often, we should not trust it only upon Easter and Whitsontide,
and Christ tide, three or four times in the year.

Again, I might observe here from this mystery received, in that he calls it
Bread, I might observe against the Papists Transubstantiation, that the bread
received, is not transubstantiated, it is bread. And against that of receiving
in one kind. So let him eat of that bread, and drink of that cup: he does not
say, so let him eat of that bread only, but he directs the command in both
kinds. But I let this pass, and come to the seceond thing, that is, the manner
how we should do this duty.

Observe. The manner of performance of duties to be regarded
So let him eat of that bread, and drink of that cup.

It is not, first let him examine himself, and then let him eat of that bread,
and drink of that cup: But let him examine himself, and then SO let him eat:
implying, that examining a man's self helps, or ought to help a man to a right
manner: and when he has gotten a right manner, then to eat that bread, and
drink that cup; that he may do not only for matter that which the Lord
commands, but for manner as the Lords commands. Beloved, the Lord stands on
circumstances as well as duties: we are all racers, we run, but we must so run
that we may obtain, 2 Cor. 9.26. 2 Cor. 9.26
So pray that we may speed, so hear that we may be converted, so reprove that
we may be edified; so behave our selves in our places and callings, that we may
glorify God. It is not enough for a man to run, but he must so run, if he mean
to obtain. Every man will be speaking and doing good things; but so speak, and
so do, Jam. 2.12. ^am. 2.12.
The Lord calls upon us to have a care of the manner of duties, as well as of
the matter of duties. It is not enough that a man come to eat of that bread,
and drink of that cup, but so to eat, and so to drink of it, he must partake of
the Lords Table, and so as the Lord enjoins.

Now the Reasons of this are:

First, because the same Lord that commands the matter, commands the manner
too. Reas. 1. The Lord commands the manner as well as matter.
The Lord he will have his service well done, as well as done, he will have the
work well performed, as well as performed. It is not only the thing that the
Lord stands upon, but the right manner and kind of doing it.

When David persuaded his son Solomon to worship the God of his Fathers, he
bids him not only do the thing, but do it in a right manner, And thou my son
Solomon, 2 Chronicles. 28.9.
know thou the God of thy fathers, and serve him. Is that all? No, but with a
perfect heart, and a willing mind, 2 Chronicles. 28.9. He commands him to do it, not
only for the matter of it, but in the right manner of it. A man may serve God,
but if it be not with a perfect heart, and a willing mind, and with a
cheerful spirit; if he be not ready to every command, if he do not open his
ears to every rebuke, a man does not serve God at all. The manner either makes
all, or marres all.

Secondly, another Reason is, Reas. 2. Circumstances overthrow actions, as 1.
Prayer.
because circumstances overthrow actions, if they be not rightly and duly
observed. As for example: In Scripture prayer is an action commanded of God:
the Lord commands us to pray, that we call upon his name duly, every day, in
all our needs and necessities, upon all occasions continually. But now if we
pray not aright, not in that manner that the Lord has perscribed; if we pray
either with a guilty defiled conscience, with cold affections, with a dead
spirit, or without departing from iniquity, or without a pure heart: if a man
pray without the right manner of prayer, he marres all his prayer, it is a
howling, and not a prayer. They did not cry to me (says God) when they howled
on their beds, that is, when they prayed: but because they did not pray in a
right manner, the Lord calls it a howling, and not a prayer. Isai. 59.12.
We roar as Bears, in Isay 59.12. the Prophet nicknames it, speaking in the
person of the people, he calls it the roaring of Bears: The Lord had as lief
hear the barking of a Dog, or the grunting of a Swine, as a man that does not
pray aright, with a bleeding heart, with contrition of soul and spirit, with a
spirit of grace and supplication. When a man prays, and prays dot aright, his
prayer leaves that name, it is no more a prayer in Gods account.

2 Preaching.
And so preaching, it is an admirable action; but if a man do not preach
aright, if it be flattering with the enticing words of man's wisdom, or beating
the air, and to show his own learning, this overthrowes the action of
preaching, he preaches not Christ but himself; himself, not the Gospel,
though the Gospel be in his Sermon all over, yet himself he preaches, the
action is marred, the circumstance marreth it.

So in the Lords Supper, 3 Receiving the Sacrament.
if a man come not prepared, that he have not the Wedding Garment, that he be
not aright qualified according to the requisites of the Gospel, this is not to
eat the Lords Supper. Says the Apostle, When ye come together, this is not
to eat the Lords Supper: you think you eat the Lords Supper, you take the
bread and the cup, and can say, Blessed be God, and I pray God to bless me:
you may come and do these actions, but the action is altered, the action is
diversified when it is not done in a right manner.

So if a man come to reprove his brother, 4. Brotherly reproof. Matt. 7.5.
if himself be faulty, do you think this a sufficient reproof? No, it is
hyhocrisie. Thou hypocrite, Matthew. 7.5. his reproof of his brother is
hypocrisy.

So for men to tell one another of their faults, and to tell them with a spirit
of bitterness; this is not Christian dehortation, but biting one another, Gal.
5.15. Gal. 5.15.


And so for eating and drinking, beloved, 5. Eating and drinking.
eating is lawful, and drinking is lawful, and marrying and giving in
marriage, all these are lawful, yet if a man eat not aright, and drink not
aright, and marry in the Lord, and eat and drink with title to the Lords
creatures, that he have interest in the covenant of God, if Christ be not in
it, how shall he have comfort? Nay, that very nature of his eating is alrered,
his eating and drinking, and marrying is a sin. As our Lord Christ shows of
the old world, They did eat and drink, and were marrying and giving in
marriage, till Noah entered into the Arc, and the flood came and swept them
away, Mat. 24.37.
Matthew. 24.37. He reckons their eating and drinking among their sins, among the
reasons and causes why the flood came upon them, they did eat and drink, and
marry and give in marriage.

Was that the reason the flood came? And was that an argument of their
security? Did not Noah eat and drink and marry? And were not his sons married
that were in the Arc, and he a grandfather.

aright; therefore his eating and drinking is not brought in as a sign of
security, but of the old world, that were carnal and wretched people; it was;
because they did not eat and drink aright.

There be Rules in eating and drinking, in talking and discoursing, in doing
the duties of our callings: There be Rules how you ought to buy and sell, and
to do every good word and work. If these Rules be not observed, the Rules of
Gods blessed word, the actions themselves are altered; though the things be
commanded of God, yet they are cursed and abominable things, when the true form
and fashion of them is not regarded, though they be never so godly.

Simile.
A garment, though it be never so good, if the Tailor handle it not well, it is
marred in the making, if he bring it not to a right form, and make it in a
right manner, the man that is to have the garment, is disappointed. So Timber,
though it be never so excellent, though it be all Oak, or Elm, or whatsoever
tree, though it be never so fit for building, if the Artificer deal not well
in handling it, the inhabitant that comes there, may curse the day that ever he
came there: If it be not well built, it may fall on his head and kill him, and
all that belongs to him. So it is in all the Ordinances of God, and the matters
of Religion, we must not only do them for matter, but for manner too: for that
either makes or marres them.

Thirdly, another Reason is, Reas. 3. The right manner of doing duties gets the
blessing
because only the right manner of doing duties gets the blessing. A man may
pray a thousand times, and never be heard, he may hear a million of Sermons,
and never be converted, a man may come to all the Sacraments in the year, all
his life long, and never be sealed against the day of redemption. A man may do
the things, and never get the blessing; all the blessing lies in the right
manner of doing. Blessed is that servant, who when his master comes, shall find
so doing, Matthew. 24.48. Matt. 24.48.
He says not, Who when his master comes, shall find doing. Christ when he
comes to judgment, shall find many doing; it may be he will come in prayer
time, it may be he will come in the morning, when many thousands shall be at
their prayers in their families: it may be he will come at night, when all are
at prayer in their houses; it may be he will come on the Sabbath, when all the
Country is at Church, hearing of Sermons, he shall find many thousands
doing* and praying But blessed is that servant, whom his Lord when he comes,
shall find so praying so hearing, so receiving the Sacrament: He shall find
many believing but so believing gets the blessing: many professing but it is so
professing that gets the comfort. I say, all the blessings of God are promised
to the right manner of doing. Now, what is it, when we do duties, what do we
look for? Is it not for a blessing? Why do we do the duties, if we do not
do them so as we may get the blessing? Now except we observe the right manner
of doing them, all is to no purpose.

Reason. 4. Christ's example.
Fourthly, another Reason is, the example of Jesus Christ; Christ has given us
an example that we should do as he did: Now he did not only do that which
his Father bid him do, for ma^ter, but for manner, both in all the words he
spoke, and in all the deeds that he performed. For the words he spoke, As the
Father has said unto me, even so speak I, Joh. 12. And in Joh. 14.31. J^hn 12.
John. 14.31.
As the Father has given me commandment even so do I. Mark, he did not only
obey his Father in the matter of his command, but in the manner of it. And as
Christ has done thus, so all that are Christ's: all the servants of God in all
ages, they have been very careful, especially of the right manner of obeying
God. As it is said of Noah, Genesis 6 22, As the Lord commanded Noah, even so did
he, just as the Lord commanded him; he did not only make an Arc, but so he
made all the rooms: so he made it in the same form and figure, and in the
same similitude, just as the Lord set him down the pattern, even so did he.
So the Lord sets down the pattern of every good word and work, of all our
prayers, and Sermons, and hearing, and conference, and keeping the Sabbath, and
speaking holily: all our actions have their pattern set down in the word of
God. Now as we are to do the things, so we are to do them in the same
manner, as the Lord commands, even so must we do.

Fifthly and lastly, except we do it in a right manner, except as we come to
the duty, Reason. 5 From Gods glory.
so we come to the right manner, we can never glorify God; The glory of God
lies in the manner of doing of things. So let your light shine before men, that
they may see your good works, and glorify your Father which is in heaven,
Matthew. 5.16. Mark, the light must not shine only in our lives and
conversations; but so that the duty must be a means to the glorifying of God.
Now the means must have its proportion, and likeness, and nature, and mold,
and frame, from the nature of the end. Look how the end is that the duty
looks unto, so must the frame and fashion of the duty be: Now if the end of
all our actions be, that God may be glorified, that must put a form and
fashion upon every duty, that it may be so, that he may have glory. Suppose a
man pray every day in his family, and call all his household, his servants, and
wife and children, and all under his roof about him every morning and evening:
he may dishonor God by prayer every day on this fashion: if a man pray coldly,
and carelessly, for form and fashion, without faith, and life: he makes all the
ordinance of God vile, and all the work of God contemptible: his household
sleeps, one snorts it may be; another is infinitely profane, it may be; and
though there be diverse that would fain be quickened, and wakened, yet his prayer
is so cold* there is no life, nor heat* nor warmth in it, that God is
exceedingly dishonored, and all are thereby rather worse then better. So for a
man's preaching, though it be never so good a duty, yet he must labor to
preach so, as the Apostle speaks of his preaching and labor in the work of
the Ministry, how he may edify others, and save his own soul. So fight I,
not as one that beats the ^ire; but so as I may get the mastery: We must so
preach, that we may attain the conversion of the people; or else we may rather
do as Hophni and Phineas, the sons of Fli, that made the Table of the Lord
contemptible, and the Sacrifice of the Lord loathsome in the eyes of the
people: So may we do with the ordinance of God.

Take any duty of religion, if it be not done aright, God has no glory by it.
Suppose thou would reprove thy brother, and tell him of his fault* and check
him for his backwardness, or om^ssion of some duty, and for the commission of
some sin; if thou do not do it with a spirit of compassion, and bowels of
Jesus Christ, with an humble heart, with a feeling and a pure conscience; I say
thou gettest a blot to thy own self, and causest God to be ill spoken of, and
the very way of his name to be dishonored: This will be the effect of it; and
so in every other duty. And so I come to the use.

Is it so, Use. 1. To reprove those that barely do duties, without looking to
the manner.
that we must not only come to the Sacrament; but come aright; or do any
duty, but we must do it in a right manner? This servs to condemn that
natural popery that is in men's hearts, that is of opus operatum, of the deed
done; this is the religion of the Church of Rome, that so a man do the duty
(indeed it is better if it be done in a right manner, but) if it be done,
there is somewhat a man may look for by that. If a man come to the Sacrament,
the very eating of the Host, the very partaking of the body of Christ, they
make it meritorious: so the very hearing of so many Sermons, the very saying of
so many prayers, the very performanec of so many duties, the very thing it
self, nakedly considered, it is of some validity. This is rooted in the hearts
of men, we see it up and down, people do the duty, and think all is well
enough, when they consider not how it is done. People pray, but not with zeal;
they hear, but not with reverence: People come to the Sacrament, not for the
better, but for the worse, they come not in a right manner; and yet every one
hopes to speed, and builds himself on this, that God accepts of him. But this
is the folly of men's hearts; it is an evident argument that men go foolishly
to work in the ways of God. It is the brand of a fool not to be able to
observe circumstances. Aristotle the heathen, he says, it is the part of a
wise man to think of, and understand the manner of actions; as a wise man
says, he observes circumstances. It is a part of wisdom to observe the right
circumstances of every action, as it is Ephesians. 5.15. Walk circumspectly, that
is, accurately, as it is in the original, not as fools, but as wise. Mark,
he persuades them to a right manner of walking; not only to walk in a good
course, in praying, and hearing, in obedience and sobriety, in temperance,
faith, and diligence in our callings; but do it accurately, in a right manner;
do it as wise men, and not as fools, they do it in a wrong manner. It is the
part of a fool, I say, to do a thing, and to leave the right manner of doing
it. Now this is nothing with God, the Lord does not esteem any action, though
it be never so frequently done, except it be done with his own stamp, except
it have his own character upon it.

I remember a story in 2 Kings 17.26. The Assyrians there observed, that God
sent Lions among them, because they did not observe the right manner of the God
of Israel: they worshipped the God of Israel; but because they observed not the
right Manner of his word, he sent Lions among them, to tear and devour them
in pieces. So though we pray, and hear, and read, and profess, and have a
name that we live; and though we be taken for good people, and heap up duties
from day to day, and vie performances; and though we do them as many times as
the children of God; nay, though we could do them ten thousands times oftener
then they, yet if we do them not in a rightmanner, if we know not the manner
of the God of heaven, and earth, with humble hearts, and selfe-denying spirits,
with holiness of affection, and with purity of heart: if a man do them not
in a right manner, the Lord will tear him in pieces, and he shall have no
deliverance for all that.

Another use shall be, what may be the reasons why people are so willing
generally, Use. 2. The reason why men regard the matter and not the manner of
duties.
to do duties for the matter, and care not to do them in a right manner. It
will not be amiss a little to show the mystery of this thing: for we see every
man is willing to do duties, every man will be praying, and coming to Church,
many reprobates, and God knows how many carnal hearts are in this
congregation, some drunkards it may be, some adulterers, some it may be, that
committed whoredom the last night, some that have been swearing even now, and
deceiving in their shops, there are many carnal hearts: yet every man is
willing to do duties, to hear, and to pray. Now what may be the reason that
people are willing to do good duties, and yet are loath to come off with their
carnal hearts? There are four reasons.

The first is this, Reason 1. The matter of duties easy.
Because the matter of the duty is easy, but the manner is difficult. It is
an easy matter to pray, to say, Lord, I have sinned against heaven, and
against thee. Lord, I have sworn, I have been a drunkard. I have disallowed
the Sabbath, I have done this and that, I pray thee pardon and forgive me, and
give me thy grace; it is an easy matrer to do this. It is easy for a man to
come to Church, and mark what the Mi^iner says, and follow him from point to
point, and it may be go over it to his family. This is good, there are few
that come thus far. And so it is easy to come to the Sacrament, to take the
Bread and the Cup, and to pray for a blessing, this is easy; but, when a man
comes to a duty in a right manner, here is difficulty, when a man does it with
a How; Take heed How you bear. He does not call upon people to hear, that is
not the matter; there needs no great diligence for that: but if you will
consider How you hear, take heed to that. Here must be a great deal of
circumspection; the soul must be mavelous painful, a man must offer violence
to his own soul; a man must fight against his own will, a man must beat down his
own spirit, he must crucify his own thoughts, must mortify his own mind and
beat down his own soul. It is a hard thing to do it in a right manner, as the
Lord commands, if we consider now how to do it. This is certain, flesh and
blood cannot abide to take pains; if it can serve God with ease, and pray with
ease, that it will do; but for a man to weep before God, for a man to indict
his heart to the throne of grace, to rend his bowels before his Maker, to t^are
the caul of his heart upon his knees; for a man to vow to God, and pay them;
for a man to rid his hands of all the wages of iniquity, for a man to purify
himself as Christ is pure, for a man to wrestle with God, and to take grace
according to the covenant of grace, with life and power, to do it in a right
manner: here is religion, and this men cannot abide.

And so for the Sacrament, for a man to come in a right manner, Oh it is
difficult to flesh and blood; for a man to go and examine all his life, to
reckon up all his conversation, to anotomize himself from his cradle to this
moment; to consider how he has sinned in his calling, in his family, in his
shop, in his company, in his spe^ch, and in his life; to go and judge himself
of these, and condemn himself, and to accept of his own punishment, to go
and wrack his own thoughts, and crucify his own soul: Oh! this is hard, men
cannot abide this: therefore they go and take the matter, they observe that,
and leave out the manner.

Secondly, another reason is this, Reas. 2. The matter of duties may be done
with a proud heart.
because the matter of duties may be done with a proud heart; there is no duty
but a man may do it with a proud heart, and never be humble. A man may pray,
and use good words, and make good petitions, and have mavelous good language,
and Scripture phrases, and terms, and passages, and an admirable sweet tone,
and yet have a proud heart. A man may come and preach a Sermon, he may preach
so as that he may strangely affect the hearts of the people, and may make all
the people wonder and admire at the gracious words that come from his mouth,
and yet have a proud heart.

A man may hear, and hear often, and hear the best Preachers in the City, and
delight in hearing* and yet have a proud heart. A man may come to the
Sacrament, and sit to ones thinking, as devoutly as any in the Church, and pray
when the people pray, and give thanks when others give thanks, and have a kind
of moral faith in the Covenant, and a morrall application of the promises, and
yet have a proud heart. It is the manner of doing duties that humbles the
soul, as St. Paul says, Acts 20
Acts 20. You know in what manner I have been with you. Why, what was the
manner? In all humility of mind, says he, being among the Ephesians, preaching
to them in a right manner, leaving them the example of his own pattern, doing
all this in a right manner, he did it in all humility of heart. It is the right
manner of prayer that pulls down the heart before God. It is the right manner
of hearing the word, that makes a man melt at it. It is the right manner of
coming to the Sacrament, that makes a man feel the comfort of God, and the
promises of the Gospel, and to seek and find the admirable things contained in
it. Reason. 3 The matter of duties may be done, and yet a man be unholy.
It is the right manner that makes a man walk lowly with his God.

Thirdly, another Reeson is; Because the matter may stand with an unholy life.
A man may do a duty for the matter of it, and yet be unholy. This is plain; how
many thousands are there that pray, and yet are vain, and covetous, and
carnal? How many thousands hear Sermons, and yet are unprofitable? Ever
hearing, and never come to the knowledge of the truth. If they were injurious
before, they are injurious still; if they were cousners before, they are so
still, if they were drunkards before, they are so still. A man may receive the
Sacrament every month, and yet may have his lusts, and roll them as a sweet
morsel under his tongue; he may delight in his secret lusts, and go on in the
deadness of his heart. It is the right manner of worshipping of God, that
purges the conscience, and purifieth the soul, and makes a man that there is
no room for his corruptions, as you may see, 1 Thessalonians. 2.10. You your selves
know (says the Apstle) how holily and unblamably we walked among you. He
speaks there of his manner of walking, and he says to them, because it was in
a right manner, it was an holy manner; such walking as excluded all unholinesse
and profaneness. Flesh and blood cannot abide this. Men they love to pray and
be proud; they love to hear sermons, and to have their profit; they love to
profess religion, and still to carry their secret lusts in their bosoms.
People love this alife, to go up to Gilgall and transgress, to offer sacrifice
every new Moon, and every morning, and to find the labor of their hands, this
is right; but for a man to part with his iniquity, that is the thing that goes
against the hair.

Reas. 4. The matter of duties brings not the cross.
The last reason is, because the matter of duties bring not the cross upon a
man. A man may do all the duties of Religion, and never be persecuted for it: a
man may be as devout as the devoutest man under heaven, and yet no body hate
him for it, except he be devout in a right manner, and worship God in a right
manner. One man may reprove another that is wicked. A drunkard may suffer a
drunkards reproof, and be never the worse: A whore master may serve his queen
so, he may call her so, and yet not be spighted, because it is not right. It is
the right doing of it that brings the cross; 2 Timothy 2.10
as in 2 Timothy 2.10. Thou know my manner of life. It was that that brought
afflictions and persecutions.

We may see to this very day many thousands that seem devout men in the Church,
they will pray, and will hardly miss any time of prayer morning or evening;
and yet they are far from being persecuted: nay, many of them are maine
persecuters of the Gospel of God, enemies to the cross of Christ, adversaries
to the Saints of God. Act. 15.5.
We see it plain in Acts 13.5. we read there of devout women that raised
persecution against Paul. Mark, they were devout, and because it was not in a
right mann^r, they persecuted the Apostles, and set themselves against them
that were truly faithful. Though wicked men do not love to pray aright, yet
many of them are much for praying, they care not how much praying they have,
and when they are at prayers, they will pray over from the beginning of the
book to the end, they love it alife. But if they come to a prayer that moves
the heart, that rifles the conscience, that dogs a man into his bosom, that
lays a man flat on his face before God, they gnash their teeth at such a
prayer. So they love preaching too; I, it is true, if it be preaching that is
flaunting, and glosing, with the enticing words of man's wisdom: but if a man
preach to the consience, if he preach the pure naked word of God: and carry it
home to men's souls, this makes them gnash their very teeth, and they could
eat the Minister of God for his labor. It is the right manner of duty that is
accompanied with the cross.

Thirdly, Use 3. To labor to do duties aright.
if we ought to be careful to perform duties in a right manner, Let us be
exhorted in the fear of God, to go and quicken all our duties, to bring a
soul into so many bodies; we have bodies of praying, and bodies of hearing,
and bodies of receiving the Sacrament, and of good duties, let us get a soul
into them, labor to do them in a right manner. The bare duty is like a
carcass. It is a Proverb of the Jews, Prayer without preparation, it is as a
carcass without the soul, that is, a loathsome thing; so is prayer without
life, and without a right manner of pouring it forth. Let us labor therefore
in the fear of God, to pray, and pray aright, to hear, and to hear aright;
to seek God, and to seek him with all our hearts, aright, and to do every thing
in the right way.

Motives to perform duties in the right manner. 1. Motive. Numb. 11.14.
Let us consider, first, we do not partake of any ordinance at all, except we
do it in a right manner. I remember a fit place for this in Number. 11.14. It is
said there, The stranger shall eat the passover, and partake of it according to
the ordinance, and the manner of it. Where the Text puts in the Ordinance of
the Passover, and the Manner of it. For it is all one, they are Synonyma's. So
the Ordinance in every duty, Gods ordinance in praying, in hearing the Word, in
the Sacrament, in reproof, in every good duty, it is all one as the selfsame
thing. So that if we pray, and do not pray in a right manner, we have not
prayed, we do not partake of the ordinance. So when we come to the Sacrament,
the ordinance of the manner of it is all one; it is one complete concrete
action, we do not partake of it, except we partake of both.

2. Motive.
Secondly consider, it as nothing but hypocrisy, when a man prays* and does
not pray in a right m^nner; when a man does any duty to God, and not in the
right wise, it is nothing but hypocrisy, Mark how our Savior Christ sets
forth the hypocrisy of the Pharisee, Luke. 18.11. The Pharisee stood and
prayed thus with himself, he marks his manner of prayer; Luke 18.11
he does not say, He stood and prayed This, these words, but Thus he prayed, he
did not pray in a right manner: there was his hypocrisy, and that was the
reason he went home not justified.

3. Motive. Mat. 15 6.
Thirdly consider: it makes the Ordinance of God of no effect. Thus they make
the Commandments of God of none effect, Matthew. 15.6. He speaks there of
their duties that they did in a wrong manner, and their expounding the
Scripture, that they did in a wrong wise; and their sacrifice, their offerings,
and tithings, their precepts, and many things that were all done after another
fashion then God had commanded; therefore says Christ, Thus, they make the
Commandments of God of none effect. So we make all the duties of Gods worship
of none effect. We know there is never an ordinance of God, but it has great
effect if it be rightly performed. Prayer is of great effect, it is able to
rend heaven, it is able to pull down God to the soul, it is able to wrestle
out a blessing, to quicken the heart, to obtain of God every thing we want: but
if a man pray not aright, a man may pray, and go away never a whit the more
holy, nor more quickened, nor nearer to heaven, nor comfort. So preaching and
hearing, they are admirable Ordinances, what powerful effects have they
wrought when they have been done in a right kind? People have cried out and
been converted at them; and many a man has been pulled out of the power of
Satan to the Kingdom of Jesus Christ. They had royal glorious effects upon
many thousand souls. But what is the reason that our hearing is so in
effectual? Because we hear not in a right manner, this makes the Ordinance
of God of none effect, it makes Prayer of no effect, the word of no effect, the
Sacraments and Sabbaths of no effect; you see people partake of these things,
and are never the wiser.

Lastly, it cannot please God, it is only the right manner of doing duties
that pleases God, as in 1 Thessalonians. 4.1. As ye have received of us, How ye
ought to walk, and to please God, Mark, there is the manner, That ye may know
HOW to walk, and by that to please God. It is not enough for a man to walk in
good duties; that a man may do, and not please God: but (says he) ye have
received the manner HOW to walk and to please God. It is the manner How that
pleases God. A man may walk to hell upon heavens ground, Simile.
he may go to hell in the ways of God, it is possible. Suppose a man should go
and take (if it were possible) all the surface of ground between this place and
York, and lay it between this place and Dover, a man might go to Dover upon
York ground. So many a man lays the Ordinances of God in hell way: he walks
in the way to hell, and there he lays his prayers, and there his hearing, and
his good duties: he prays every day, and hears every day, and does good
duties every day, and yet walks to hell; he goes to hell on heavens ground.
The reason is, because he does the duty, and does not observe the manner how
he does it.

The third thing is, the rule of direction, how we may come to the right
manner of receiving the Sacrament, that is, by preparing of a man's self: and
the preparation is here set down by the specification of it, namely, in
examining himself. Let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of that
Bread, and drink of that Cup.

The general scope of these words, and the Apostles meaning in them, is this,
That

Every man must prepare himself before he come to the Lords Table. Observe. 3.
Every man must prepare himself, before he come to the Lords Table.


I cannot stand on this, I will only name it.

As in the sacrament of the Passover, there was preparation to the Passover.
In Joh. 19.14. it is said of the Disciples of Christ, that they made ready the
Passover. In Matthew. 26. they made the Lamb ready, and the room ready, and
themselves ready, and the Table ready, and every thing ready. So in the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper, wherein Christ is the true Pascall Lamb, when we
come to eat of him, we must make every thing ready, faith ready, and
repentance ready, and interest in the promises ready, and hunger and thirst
after these spiritual dainties ready, every thing must be ready: or else, like
a man that comes into the field to battle, that has not gotten his sword, or
his weapons ready, that is the way for himself to be killed: so it is when we
come to the Communion, and have not all things ready, it is the way to be
damned.

The Reasons of this are,

First, Reason. It is God ordinance
because the Sacrament is an Ordinance of God: Now all the Ordinances of God
require reparation, they are all spiritual, and naturally a man is carnal,
and therefore cannot be prepared. Simile.
As it is with wood, there is never a tree in the wood, but it is unprepared
for building. Is there any tree in the wood of the fashion of a Chimney, or of
a Lintell, or a Door? It must first be prepared, as it is Prove. 24.27. First
prepare thy work without, and then build thine house. So every ordinance is to
build a man up in the fear of God, in the grace of God: and in Religion: Now
man is naturally unprepared for it; First, a man must fell his wood, and then
cut it, and hew it even, and carve it, and plane it fit, and prepare it before
he build: So a man must hew down his own heart, he must humble his own
soul, and qualify all within him, and so be sanctified before he be fit.

As for example: In prayer, a man must be prepared to prayer before he pray;
he must prepare his heart, and then Gods ears will hearken to it. In Psalm.
10.17. The Lord will have the heart prepared before he hear the prayer. So it
is with the word of God, a man must be prepared before he hear it: As a man
that preaches must be prepared before he preach, as Ezra is said to prepare
his heart, Ezra 7.10. He prepared his heart to do the Law, and to teach it.
So a Minister cannot preach, except he be prepared beforehand, with a
commission from God* with preserving knowledge, with a coal from Gods Altar,
with a spirit of wisdom and understanding, with a law of kindness in his
lips, with meditation, and with a Theme fitted in his mouth for the people, he
must be prepared with a burning and a shining light; or else he shall not
edify the congregation: So it is with all other ordinances. For humbling of a
man's soul, a man cannot humble his heart, except he be prepared to it, Amos
4.12. Prepare to meet thy God, he speaks of humiliation. If a man would humble
himself before God, if he be not prepared, if his heart be not prepared to let
go the world, his worldly profits, and vain pleasures, and carnal
acquaintance, his wonted lusts, and former delights. If he be not prepared to
let these go, when he comes to keep a Fast, or to afflict his soul, and goes
along to do the duty, to lay himself down before Almighty God, some lust or
other will stick in his teeth, and intercept his heart, he shall never be able
to do it: as Samuel said to the people; If you will turn to the Lord, prepare
your hearts to do it, 1 Samuel 7. So it must be in all the ordinances of God,
and much more in the Sacrament.

Secondly, another Reason is, Reason. 2 Christ has made preparation for us in
the L. Supper.
because the Lord Christ has made great preparations to provide the Lords
Supper; therefore we must be prepared to eat it. You know what a great deal
of ado there was before this Supper was made. Christ must be incarnate, and
fulfill all righteousness, he must conclude it upon his suffering; he must
tread the wine press alone, and suffer himself to be beaten and rejected of
God, and men, and suffer death, the cursed death of the Cross, all these
things were concluded upon, before this holy and blessed Supper was provided.
Come (says he) I have prepared my dinner, Matthew. 22. Mark, Christ is fain to
prepare his dinner, he makes a great Feast: there was great preparation for it;
so there must be great preparation of our souls before we can come to this
holy banquet. It is true among men, there may be great preparation for a feast,
and little or nothing for the eating of it. Sometimes there are two or three
days preparation for a Feast, and it is eaten presently. The reason is,
because man naturally hungers after meat and drink, and he always provides
twice or thrice in twenty four hours, for eating and drinking: But the Lords
Supper is a spiritual banquet, a man is every day, and hour, and moment,
naturally unfit for it; and there is much ado to put an edge upon men's
appetites, and a keenness upon men's desires, that they may be fitted and
prepared for it.

Reason. 3 Christ looks for good entertainment.
Thirdly, another reason is, because the Lord Christ, when he administers
himself in this heavenly mystery, he offers to come into the soul, and he
looks for good entertainment; and therefore of necessity there must be
preparation for it. You see when a mortal man, an earthly Prince, or a Noble
man comes to another man's house, what a deal of preparation there is to
provide for him: there is meat made ready, and purging the house, and sweeping
the yard, and trimming up the very pales, and every thing, and making clean all
the Chambers, and riding out whatsoever fills it, and every thing that is out
of order is set in tune, And, what will my Lord think? and what will his
Majesty think? he will think he is slighted and contemned: And when he comes
in, it may be, his own children shall serve, and his own wife wait at the
Table; and there is running up and down of errands, and a great deal of ado
to give such a one entertainment. There is preparation to entertain a man, as
Saint Paul said to Philemon, I will that thou prepare me a lodging: how much
more when the eternal God shall come under a man's roof, and dine with him?

Lastly, Reason 4. It is part of Christ's last Testament.
Because the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, it is a part of Christ's last Will
and Testament. Now it is a terrible thing when we know our Lords will, and
prepare not for the doing of it. Look in Luke 12.48. he that knew it not, did
things worthy of stripes; but in verse 47. That servant that knew his Lords
will, and prepared not himself, neither did according to his will, shall be
beaten with many stripes, that man shall be damned with much damnation: he
shall be damned deeper then any body. Do thou know that the Lords Table, that
this blessed Sacrament, it is part of Christ's last Testament? and will thou not
prepare thy self for it, to get an humble heart, and labor for a holy life,
and seek for a thirsty soul, and vow upon new obedience, and enter into
Covenant with the Lord Jesus Christ, for a better kind of conversation for the
time to come? Will thou not go and examine thine own soul, and go and reform
whatsoever is amiss in thy family, in thy place and calling? Will thou not do
these things to prepare for this holy will of Jesus Christ? thou shall be
damned deeper then any body else, because this is a part of Gods last Will and
Testament, and thou know it, and therefore woe unto thee if thou prepare not
for it.

THE DVTIE OF THE REPROVER, AND The Persons reproved, SET FORTH In a SERMON
Preached, By that Reverend and faithful Minister of Gods Word, WILLIAM FENNER,
B.D. Sometime Fellow of Pembroke Hall in Cambridge, and late Parson of Rochford
in Essex.

London, Printed by T.R. and E.M. for J.S.

THE DUTY OF REPROVERS And Persons reproved, A Sermon preached by Mr. WILLIAM
FENNER Minister of Gods Word.
Pov. 29.1. He that being often reproved, hardens his neck, shall suddenly be
destroyed, and that without remedy.


THese words, by reason of the ambiguity in the Hebrew tongue, they bear two
expositions, and our English can suffer but one.

The first Exposition is this, He that reproves another, and hardens his
own neck, shall sudden^y be destroyed, and that without remedy. The othet is
as we have it here translated, He that being often reproved, hardens his
neck, shall suddenly be destroyed, and that without remedy.

I desire to speak of both these expositions, fot fear I should miss the true
sense of this Text.

For the first, it is a truth of God every where confirmed in the Scriptures,
that he that reproves another, and yet hardens his own hear, he does but
make a rod for his own back, he pulls sudden destruction upon his own self.

Then Secondly, there is no hinderance from the context, but that this may be
the meaning of the text: you know the Proverbs have little or no coherence,
except two or three chapters. Indeed there is a coherence in them, but
generally through the Proverbs there is none; so that if the text it self will
bear one exposition as well as another indifferently, the meaning none can
tell, only as it is hit.

Thirdly and lastly, the Text it self savours this exposition: for so the word
in the Hebrew is, A man of reproves, that hardens his own neck, shall
suddenly be destroyed, and that without remedy.

Now the Question is. Whether the wise man's meaning here be of the actual
reproof, the reproving of another; or of passive reproof, this is undetermined
which of these is meant.

A man can have no light from the coherence, none in the world; and from the
text it self, there is as much reason why we should expound it one way (even
almost) as the other. So that I say, for fear I should let go the true
meaning of the wise man. I desire to speak a little of the active sense. He
that often reproves another, and yet hardens his own neck, shall suddenly be
destroyed, and that without remedy. From hence I may observe, that.

A reprover (whether a Master or a Minister, Observe. 1. A guilty hardened
reprover, shall be destroyed.
or a Magistrate, or a Father, or a private Christian, be he what he will be)
that reproves another, and yet is guilty himself either in the same kind, or
else in another, or in any kind) and hardens his own heart in it, that man
shall suddenly be destroyed without remedy.

Take a Preacher that preaches strict doctrine to the people, that is very
zealous against their sins, he is up with hell and damnation against their
filthy courses: he preaches for quickening, but himself is not quickened; he
threatens judgments against hardness of heart, and yet he has a hard heart
himself; this man pulls destruction upon his own pate. He is like the
Pharisees, that imposed upon others grievous burdens and heavy to be born, but
would not touch them with one of their fingers themselves, Matthew. 23.4.

The Reason of this is, because

First such a reprover of sin, Reason 1. It is against his office.
it is against his office: the office of a reprover binds him to be blameless
as the Apostle speaks, A Bishop must be blameless, 1 Timothy 3.2. Every
Christian should be blameless; how much more Ministers, that bear the office
of reprovers? they should be blameless. Nay, if a man, though he take not the
office of a reprover, yet if he bear the person of a reprover (as every
private Christian must when God calls him to it: for every man may be called to
reprove) though he have no authority over another, though he be a private
man, he may bear the person though not the office of a reprover. Now a man
must be unculpable, and unblameable himself, or else he sins against his
person. If a man reprove another for being carnal, himself must be
spiritual, Gal. 6.1. If any man be overtaken with a fault, ye that are
spiritual, restore him. The reprover, the exhorter, and admonisher, must be
spiritual, if he would draw another to be spiritual.

Reason. 2 He cannot reprove to a right end.
Secondly, such a reprover as is guilty himself in that kind, or in any other
kind, he can never reprove to a right end. Why see thou a moat in thy
brothers eye, and considerest not the beam in thine own eye? Matthew. 7. verse.
3. Why (says he) to what end? what is that thou look at, thou art severe to
espy faults in thy brothers eye? To what end do thou reprove him? What is
the reason? What is the thing thou would have, that thou finddest fault with
him? Why see thou a most in thy brothers eye? As if he should say, thy end
can never be good, it cannot be to do thy brother good: for then thou
would do thy self good first: It is not because thou hate sin; for then
thou would detest thy own sin. It cannot be out of a good principle, or
to a good end. It is either because thou art a busy body in other men's
matters, or thou art censorious, thou love to be meddling; or because thou
hate thy brother, and would wreak thy malice on him; thou would fain
shame and disgrace him, and by beating him down, get thy self up; or thou
would get a cover to thy own conscience; it must be some such end, it
cannot be a good end. Christ puts it to a man's conscience, why he reproves his
brother, when he is faulty himself.

Thirdly, another Reason is, Reason 3 Not in a right manner.
such a reprover can never do it in a right manner, as Christ says, Matthew.
7.4. How will thou say to thy brother, let me pull the moat out of thine eye,
when behold a beam is in thine own eye? How will thou do it? In what fashion,
or sort? How will thou be able to bring this about? A man that is a reprover,
had need to have a very clear sight of his own, that sees another man's
faults, and will set another to rights; he had need to have a good judgment, to
see all the circumstances of reproof, and rebuke, that deals with another. As
long as a man has a beam in his own eye, as long as he has lusts in his own
heart, that will blind his judgment, and darken and cover his eyes and make him
that he shall not be able to see to go about it. How can thou possibly say
to thy brother, let me pull the moat out of thine eye, when there is a beam in
thine own eye?

A man that is to reprove another, a Master that will reprove his servant, or a
father his children, or a Minister that will reprove his people, or a
Magistrate that will reprove those that are committed to his charge, or any
brother that will reprove another, he must do it with a spirit of compassion,
with bowels of pity, with a sense and feeling: there is a great deal of
wisdom and discretion to be observed in this act. Now when a man has a beam
in his own eye, how shall he be able to do it? That man that is faulty and
guilty himself, either he must reprove too harshly, and rigorously, or too
sparingly, or too insultingly, he must do it in a wrong manner, it can never
be sincerely and truly done, as long as a man has a lust in his own heart, and
he himself is guilty and faulty, that is a reprover of his brother. Nay, the
party reproved, is helped to retort on him, How do thou tell me of pride, and
worldliness, and c^vetousnesse? Who so proud and covetous as thou? Thus a man
shall be ready to be hit in the teeth.

Reason 4. It is hypocrisy.
Fourthly, such a reprover is an hypocrite. It is no Christian reproof for a man
to do so. Will thou go and find fault with thy servant for his laziness in thy
service, when thou art lazy in Gods service? Will thou find fault with thy
brother for his pride, and thou art full of fashions? Will thou condemn the
sins of the times, and thou live in some lust? This is nothing but
hypocrisy. Thou make as if thou did stand so much for obedience to God;
and oh! there is this and that sin against God, when thy self is a sinner in
that, or in another kind; this is hypocrisy, as Christ says here, Thou
hypocrite, first cast the beam out of thine own eye, and then thou shall see
clearly to cast the moat out of thy brothers eye. Thou hypocrite: Mark, it is
an act of hypocrisy when a man goes to find fault with another, before he has
gone to redress his own soul; to purge his own conscience, and have shook
hands with the wages of iniquity his own self, before a man have done this,
it is hypocrisy to deal with another. For when a man reproves another he takes
a form upon himself of one that is zealous against sin, and an enemy to all
sinful practices: Now what is this but hypocrisy, when a man has not this in
him that he pretends? when a man finds fault with another pride, as if he were
humble forsooth, with another worldliness as if he were liberal; when a man
does so, he incurres the guilt of hypocrisy in reproving another.

Fifthly, another Reason is, Reason 5. It makes inexcusable.
because such a reprover is inexcusable, his reproving of another man's sin,
makes him inexcusable for his own, as the Apostle speaks, Romans 2.1. Therefore
thou art inexcusable, O man, whosoever thou art, that judge: for wherein thou
judge another, thou condemnest thy self, for thou do the same thing.
Mark, thy own mouth shall condemn thee; thou find fault with another man's
pride: it seems he is to be condemned for it, then God condemns thee for thy
pride. Thy pride is a fair mark for Gods justice, because thou condemnest
another. Do thou find fault with anothets hardness of heart, and ill will
and backwardness to any thing that is good, and yet thou art backward? Thou
exposest thine own soul to the judgment of God; thou have taught (as it were)
Almighty God how to condemn thee for thy own lusts and corruptions.

Reason 6 It is absurd.
Again sixthly, another Reason is this, because such a reprover is an absurd
person. It is absurd to reprove another, and be faulty ones self, as it is
Romans 2.21. Thou that teach another, teach thou not thy self? Thou that
preachest another should not steal* do thou steal? This is a strange absurd
thing, this reproof does not sound well in thy mouth: thou stealest, and
forbiddest stealing; thou preachest against adultery, and committest it; thou
speak against such and such sins, thou find fault with them in the
children of God, and art guilty thy self, or in thy children or servants, or
neighbors, and art obnoxious to them in thine own practice: this is an absurd
thing: these rebukes and reproves sound not well out of thy mouth.

Reason 7. It is impudency.
Lastly, it is a sign of impudency, Psalm. 50. What have thou to do to take my
covenant into thy mouth, when thou hate to be reformd, and have cast my
covenant behind thy back? And to the wicked God says, What have thou to do to
take my statutes or covenant into thy mouth, since thou hate instruction?
What have thou to do to reprove thy brother? If he be proud, what is that to
thee, as long as thou art proud thy self? thou go and slingest stones at
him: sling them at thine own heart first. It is a sign of impudency.

But it may be objected, Shall not a wicked magistrate punish sin, and a
wicked Minister preach against the corruptions of the times, and a wicked
master rebuke his servants, and a wicked father correct his children? Because
he is wicked himself, shall he make himself more wicked, and contract more
guilt upon his soul?

I answer, that such a man is in a dilemma; for the man is bound to reprove; in
regard of his office, and yet he is bound in conscience to go and amend
himself first. I say, he is bound to reprove all those that God calls him to
reprove, in regard of his office: but in regard of conscience he is bound to
go and amend his own fault first. Therefore if it be a Magistrate, such as sit
upon life and death, or Nisi prius, or any action between man and man, if he
condemn a malefactor, and there remember himself guilty, he is bound in
conscience to arise from the Bench, and go and amend his own sin. And we
that are Ministers, when we preach to the people, and remember our selves
guilty, let us lay our hands upon our mouths, at least in votis, before ever
we have the face to go and find fault with the people, it is necessary it
should be so. Therefore, I say, a man is in a dilemma, if he do not reprove
sin, it is against his office, and the person he bears, when God calls him to
it; and if he do reprove, then he sins against the command of God, that
binds him to be blameless that is to bear the place of a reprover.

Use 1.
The Use of this is, first, to let us see, that a man that reproves (I speak not
of Ministers only, or of Magistrates, or Fathers, but of every man that
reproves, either by tongue, in word, or in thought, if he find fault in this
thought with another man for his sins, and his strange doings) let him take
heed he does but pull a judgment upon his own head; he makes himself
inexcusable, as in Romans 2.3. the Aposte there speaking of this very point,
Think thou, O man, that judge him that does these things, and do them,
that thou shall escape the judgment of God? A man that judges another, and
does the same things, that man certainly shall not escape the judgment of God,
as his brother does not escape his judgment.

Use 3. To be unblameable ere we reprove.
Secondly, another Use shall be for counsel to every man and woman (for it is
every ones case, God has called every one of us to reprove one another,
Ministers to reprove the people, and Magistrates to judge between man and man,
and every neighbor is to reprove when he is called thereto. Now) let us mark
and observe this rule, let every one of us labor with all care and conscience,
to be unblameable, unoffensive, to go humble our own souls, to cleanse our
own consciences, that we may be able to perform this duty. Beloved, we wrong
our own souls, if we find fault with others, and suffer our selves to be
faulty.

When Paul was to preach to the people, knowing that his office of preaching
required reproving, you see lest he should wrong his own soul, how he labored
to be unblameable* says he, I beat my body down, when I preach to others, lest
I become a castaway.

Again as a man wrongs his own soul, so he dishonours God. It cannot be
unknown what an unthankful office, the office of a reprover is; the world
cannot abide reproof, The wicked hate the reprover in the gate Isa. 29.21. The
world is full of scorners, that hate reproof. Prove. 15.12. Though some men be
not so wicked as to hate reproof, yet at least they think hardly of them that
reprove; they think they usurp authority over them, and crow over them, or they
undertake to be their betters; as a reprover undertakes in that thing to be a
man's better. Now when a man is reproved, he is apt to think that his neighbor
crows over him, and excerciseth authority upon him, as if he would grow on
him, and be his Judge. You see Lot when he reproved the Sodomites, though as
gently as ever he could. My brethren, do not so wickdly, presently for all
that they thought hardly of him. What, will this fellow be a judge that came but
the other day to sojurn? Genesis 19. Presently they thought ha^dly of him. So we
see the Prophet, he does but find fault with Amaziah for his fault, and
presently the Kings eyes are blinded, and his heart hardened, Who made you of
the Kings counsel? 2 Chronicles. 25.15. he thought him a medler, that pried into
State-affaires, and into the Court and Kingdom. A man cannot reprove his
brother for his sin, but it is a thousand to one, if his brother be not
ready presently to pry into him and to look narrowly into his ways, to espy a
hole in his coat if he can, or to make one if he cannot: all men's eyes are upon
him, and they look strictly and straightly; and if any thing in the world be
amiss they will be sure to mark it, and to make more of it, to make mountains
of mole-hills. When the blind man did but find fault with the Pharisees and
reprove them a little for persecuting of Christ, what say they? Art thou
altogether conceived and born in sin, and will thou teach us? Joh. 9.34.
Presently they looked on his blindness, and birth, Certainly he is a viler
sinner then other men, and shall he go find fault with them? If we mean to
reprove another, let us labor to be unblameable, to be godly and holy, to
reform our own ways, let us be sure to purge our own famlies, to cleanse our
own souls, to rid our own hands of all the ways of sin and iniquity, lest
God be dishonored. The word of God will be flung in his own face back again,
and the reproof if it be never so sweet, and never so wise it will be retorted
in a man's own teeth* if he be not unblameable himself. And a man had need to
be humble, and low^y, and gentle, and meek, and to put on all bowels and
gentleness of heart, if he will reprove.

All sins are not to be reproved alike, some with sharpness, some with
lenity. He that is a Mountebank that will open a vein for every wheal and
pimple. Simile
The reprover is like them in Isaiah, when they deal with the Cummin and
Fetches, a little rod will beat them out, but when they come to the Corn,
Wheat and Rye, they beat them out with the Cart-wheele: So when we meet with a
hard-hearted spirit, we must use stronger corrosives to them, and gentler
admonitions and rebukes toward others that sin with a lesser and a weaker
hand. But this is a thing that a man must be mavelous careful that reproves.
Nay, let a man be unblameable for the present, if he have been faulty before,
if it were seven, or ten, or twenty years before, if it be known, it is a
thousand to one, but he shall be hit in the teeth with it when he reproves: you
committed adultery, and you did steal at such a time, if it were never so long
ago, Therefore St. Paul would not consent to take Mark with him in the
ministry. Acts 15. because he had been offensive to the Church before. We had
need be mavelous careful and wary if we will reprove.

I had thought to have named other Uses, but I leave this Exposition, and take
it as it is passively interpreted.

He that being often reproved, hardens his neck, shall suddenly be destroyed,
and that without remedy. The seceond xposition.
THough it may be expounded the other way, yet I rather incline to this. The
Reason is, Because this is the constant current of all Interpreters generally.
I meet but with one or two that expound it the other way; but all passively, He
that being often reproved, hardens his neck, etc.

Secondly, because the word in the origiall is, A man of reproofs that
hardens his own neck. Now, though it be indifferent whether it be active or
passive, yet look in the Scripture, and you shall find it more often passive
then active. A man of reproofs, that is, a man often reproved, in the passive.
As in Isay 53.3. Christ is a man of sorrows, not making others sorry, but made
sorry passively. And so in Dan. 9.23. It is said Daniel was a man of desires,
that is, not a man desiring other men, or other things, not actively desiring,
but passively, desired, beloved of God exceedingly. So it is said of Jeremiah,
Jerem. 15.10. he was a man of strife, not a man striving with others, but a man
striven with. So in 1 King. 2.26. A man of death, that is, not killing others,
but to be killed himself. It is taken more frequently in the passive sense; so
we may more boldly take it so. A man of Reproofs, that is, reproved again and
again, that has received diverse reproofs, and yet hardens his own neck,
shall suddenly be destroyed, and that without remedy. Here I might observe by
the way, this point of Doctrine, That, The Lord does not destroy man willingly.
Doct. The Lord does not destroy men willingly.


He says not, A man shall be destroyed without remedy; but a man when he has
sinned against God, when he has committed sin, and not only so, but when he
is reproved for his sin, and goes on. The Lord does not destroy a man nakedly,
but upon consideration of sin. God destroys not but for sin. Simile.
Willingly the Lord does not afflict any, Lament. 3. Mercy and punishment they
flow from God, as the honey and the sting from the Be; the Be yields honey of
her own nature, but she does not sting but when she is provoked: so the Lord is
gracious, and good, and favorable, and kind, and blesses his people from his
own nature, but he does not punish, and plague, and destroy, but being provoked
by sin and iniquity. I will not stand to follow this point, I let it go.

The text it self contains the great mercy of God in lending a man a reproof.

And what a great sin it is, what a great ill it is for a man to sin against
his reproof. The greatness of the ill is set down two ways: First, by the
great sinfulness of the thing, it is called the hardening of a man's own neck.
Secondly, by the greatness of the punishment that God inflicts upon this sin,
and that is, Observe. A great mercy to be reproved.
he will destroy him, and without remedy.


For the first, namely, what a great mercy it is for God to let a man be
reproved for his sins. It may be proved by many places of Scripture, only I
find in Scripture it is brought as an aggravation of sin when they sinned
against reproof, Hosea 5.2. says he, they are profound to commit sin,
though I have been a rebuker of them all. As if he should say, though I have
been so merciful as to show them the danger of sin, to tell them what would
come of their wretched courses: though I have called them to repentance, and
have given them warning what would be the issue of these things; yet for all
this, for all my mercy, they have gone on in their sins though I have
reproved them. This Though is a word of aggravation as we see in the speech of
Daniel to Belshazzar; Thou, O King, have not humbled thy self though thou
knew this: as if he had said, though the Lord let thee know the punishment
upon thy Father* and the plagues of Nebuchadnezzar thy grandfather, though the
Lord have let thee understand what it is for thee to exalt thy self against
him; yet thou art not humbled; he aggravates his sin, So, this aggravates a
man's sin when he goes on, notwithstanding he is reproved. The reasons are,

Reason. 1. Reproves come from love.
First, because when God reproves a man of sin: the reproof primarily comes
out of love; therefore when he reproved Laodicea, and told her she was
luke-worm, and said, I would thou were either hot or cold: And since she was
neither, he would spue her out of his mouth; he tells her whence the reproof
flowed; because I love I reprove: As many as I love, I rebuke, Rev. 3.19. It is
not out of ill will that I tell thee of thy lukewarmnesse, and threaten to spue
thee out of my mouth; I tell thee these things that thou may avoid that ill I
say, Gods reprofes flow primarily from love to men, whereby he would have them
lay aside their wretched courses, and avoid the judgments. Nay, it is an
argument of hatred when a man does not reprove his brother of sin. If God let
a man go on in sin, and never tell him of his drunkenness, nor never find
fault with his pride and security, never convince him, or wound, or touch him,
nor deal with him about his unsettled estate, and his rotten condition, it is a
sign God hates the man: but when God reproves a man from day to day, Man, thou
art a proud creature, thou shall to hell for thy pride, and hypocrisy, and
security, and harpnesse of heart: When the Lord reproves a man from day to
day, this is an argument of love; the other is an effect of hatred, not to
reprove. Thou shall not hate thy brother in thy heart, says Moses, but shall
in any wise reprove him, and not suffer sin to be upon him, Levit. 19.17.
Thou hate thy brother when thou see him sin, and do not warn him, and
know he is guilty of sinful courses, and do not reprove him; and when
thou have time, and place, and opportunity, and fit circumstances to reprove,
and yet thou will not do it, it is a sign thou hate thy brother; it is the
greatest degree of hatred one of them. If a man deny food for the body, and let
a man rather die of hunger, then he will give him meat, or let a man fall into
a pit, rather then he will prevent the mischief, a man is guilty of bodily
murder: but thou art guilty of the soul of thy brother, if thou let him fall
into sin. Thou think thy brother is harsh, he will not bear with thee, he is
hasty and testy: no, thou art in an error, That man that hates reproof, erreth,
says Solomon. Prove. 10.17.
Indeed a man should not be too sharp, but first tell his brother in private
that he is in an error: for reproof is a means of grace, it flows from great
love, it is the providence of God that has cast it about, that thou should
have reproof given thee; if thou have a heart to take it, it is an argument of
love.

Reason. 2 They tend to good.
Another reason is taken from the primary end of reproof, which is to bring a
man to good, to reduce him into a right way, to convert a man, to save his
soul, that is the primary end of reproof and admonition: therefore to go on in
sins contrary to it, must needs be a great evil. As Solomon brings in the
wisdom of the Father, Jesus Christ, calling upon people, O ye fools, how
long will ye love folly? turn at my reproof. Mark what follows, to what end;
I will pour my spirit on you. There is the end he tells them O ye fools,
wretched people without understanding, that go on in sin, and harden your
own hearts, that repent not, nor turn not to God, that will not submit to his
wisdom, nor embrace his word: ye fools, that wrong your own souls, oh turn
at my reproof. Why? This is the reason that God reproves a man on this fashion,
it is that a man may have the Spirit of God granted him. If thou have an ear
to hear reproof, and a heart to drink it in, and to wear it as a crown of
gold on thy head, and as a chain about thy neck, thou should have the Spirit
of God for thy labor: the Lord reproves thee that thou might return back,
and have his Spirit, and have mercy and forgiveness. This is all the ill will
that Gods Ministers bear thee, and all the hatred that reprovers show, when
they tell thee of thy sins whatsoever they be, that they may stop thy steps
from going down to Hell.

When the Lord sends thee Sermon upon Sermon, Preacher after Preacher, thou art
called on day by day, (as you here in this place) This is the infinite
goodness of God toward your souls; therefore your sin is infinite great, if
you do not amend, as the wise man says, He that hates reproof shall surely
die, Prove. 15.10. there is no remedy for that man, that man that puts off
repentance, God reproves him from day to day, on the Sabbath day, and on the
week days; he goes to this man, and there he is reproved; and to another, and
there he is reproved; and yet he goes on in this deadness and formality in the
ordinances of God, that man shall surely die, there is no remedy, he sins
against the infinite mercy of God.

Thirdly, Reason. 3 It is brutish to reprove then
there is no reason in the world why reproof should be taked otherwise then
with all willingness, and thankfulness, and cheerfulness. If a man have but
the reason of a man in him, he must needs take reproof in good part; he must be
a beast that does not judge well of him that reproves him. There is an
excellent place, Prove. 12.1. He that puts off reproof is brutish; he that hates
reproof, is a brute, that man has no reason in him. Art thou a swearer, and
art reproved for it? thy brother tells thee thou will be damned for it. Do
thou chafe at that man? thou art a beast, thou have no more understanding then
an Ox or an Ass. Simile
As it is with a horse when the Ostler comes to rub him, he kicks with the
heel; when he only beats off the dirt, he lifts up his hinder leg on him, and
it may be wounds him: so thou have no more understanding then a beast that
finds fault with one that reproves thee for thy sins. So that whatsoever thy
sin be, he that tells thee of it, there is no reason in the world but he should
be a dear man to thee. Me thinks of all men under heaven, godly Ministers that
are faithful in their place and calling, should be the dearest men to you upon
the face of the earth. Why? because they reprove you, and tell you of your
sins, and what will become of your souls, what will be the issue and
Catastrophe of all your ways. You that come to Church every day, may read a
Lecture in the Word of God, what will be your doom at the last day: you are
told of your pride, and adultery, of your whoredom and oaths, carnal
Gospellers of their secure and carnal condition, and common professors of
their formality, and other lusts that men are given to; you are told of all: I
say, the feet of Gods messengers should be beautiful; you should hug the
messengers, and put their reproofs in your bosoms, and let them have power and
efficacy on your souls; and go and put them in practice.

The Use of this is,

First, is it so, Use 1. The misery to want reprovers
that it is the infinite mercy of God to reprove men of their sins, to tell
them of whatsoever is amiss in their hearts and lives? let me tell you, First,
see here what an infinite punishment God is bringing upon that Kingdom when
he is taking away reprovers, from them: when God takes away reprovers, he
takes away all mercy and loving kindness. Therefore God when he threatened to
deliver up Judah, to curse that Kingdom, to plague them for their rebellion,
and utterly to give them over, he says he will take away the reprover; says
he to the Prophet, Thou shall be dumb, and not open thy mouth, thou shall not
be a reprover to this people, Ezekiel. 3.26. When the Lord would curse that
people, and bind them over to a reprobate sense, and deliver them to wrath, the
Prophet shall not be a reprover, he silences the Prophet. Or as Piscator
thinks, the or Angel
anger of God silenced him, or confined him to his house, that he should not
prophecy. So when God silences his Ministers, that he takes them from a place,
or threatens to take them away, it is a sign of heavy vengeance toward such a
people. It may be wicked people laughed at them, and made it a matter of
nothing, they were glad that Ezekiels mouth was gagged, and it were no matter
if the country were rid of a company of Puritans; though they had no such word
then, they had as bad, they think all is well: but the time will come that they
will curse the day that ever they provoked God to take away their Ministers; we
enjoy them by the mercy of God, other places have lost them, God knows how
soon we may lose ours. In Hosea 4.4. the Lord there when he would set out the
desperate estate of the children of Ephraim, he delivers them up to such a
state and condition, that none should reprove them, Let none reprove another.
If they will sin let them; if they will go on in idolatry, let them; if they
will harden their own hearts, let them; if they will die in sin, let them; if
they will perish, and be damned for ever, let them. Let no man reprove another.
It is a lamentable state.

Generally people are glad when the Land is swept of all the good Ministers,
and the good servants of God: they had rather hear a fine song in a Pulpit, of
one that preaches morally, or it may be preaches his own self, or the like,
but the time will come, when they shall say as Solomon says, It is better to
hear the reproof of the wise, then the song of fools, Eccles. 7.5. People
love alife to hear the song of fools. When a fool comes up and preaches, At
what time soev^r a sinner shall repent of his sin: And, Be not just over
much; and what need such ado? Her^ is more puther then needs, and abuse
places, and wrest Scriptures. As for example, the thief on the Cross was
saved at the last with a word or two; and they bring the example of the
Publican, that cried, God be merciful to me a sinner, and went justified to
his house rather then the Pharisee that made long prayers. And tush, what need
men be so zealous, and precise, and puritanicall, Whosoever calls upon the name
of God, shall be saved: people love alife such songs of fools: but the time
shall come when peoples eyes shall be opened, and their consciences awakened,
and then they will wish, O that we had heard the reproof of the wise.

The second use makes against those that despise the reproof of the wise, ye
despise not men, Use 2.
but God; ye have despised me, Prove. 1.30. You think you despise a poor
Minister, he is strict, and harsh with your souls, and presses these things
upon your conscience, and it may be, more then he has warrant to do: Against
despisers of reproof
so you think you do not despise God, but one only Minister: Nay, says
Christ, you have despised my reproof. When you despise them that Christ sends,
you despise him. This is an express and an explicit sign of a man's
everlasting destruction, when he despises reproof as in that speech of the
Prophet to Amaziah, I know that the Lord has determined to destroy thee,
because thou have not hearkened to my reproof, 2 Chronicles. 25.16. So I may say, I
know that God has determined to destroy a Nation, a City, or a people, when
they will not take counsel of Gods Messengers, when they will not hearken to
instruction: They have been called upon, national sins have been ripped up,
parochial sins have been spoken of, yet when they are told, they will not
be reproved. We that are the Ministers of God, know that God will destroy as
many as turn not at reproof. I let this pass.

I should now show the grievousnesse of this ill of standing out against
reproof: it is expressed two ways: The grievousnesse of stand^ng out against
re^roof.


First, in the sinfulness of it, to harden a man's heart.

Secondly, in the punishment; He shall be destroyed without remedy. And in the
destruction you may see here,

First, the unexpectedness of it, He shall be destroyed suddenly.

Secondly, the totalnesse of it, He shall be destroyed. The word signifies
to shatter all in pieces.

Thirdly, the irrecoverablenesse of it, without remedy.

Fourthly, the sutablenesse of it, his punishment is according to his sin.
Mark, as he hardened his own heart against God, so God will harden his heart
against him: as no remedy would turn him from his sin, so no remedy shall turn
God from his wrath: As his sin was in hardening his heart like a stone, so God
shall deal with him as a stone is dealt with, he shall destroy him. The word
in the original signifies broken to pieces as a stone is broken, that is, the
Lord will deal with him just in his own kind. Hence I might observe this
doctrine, that The Lord proportions punishments to men's sin. Doct. God
proportions punishments to sins.


Just as a man's sin is, so is the punishment. David sinned in numbering the
people, 2 Samuel 24.15. and God punished him in that, Pharaoh sinned in
destroying and drowning the males of the Israelites, God smote his firstborn:
He drowned their babes, and he himself was drowned in the sea. I might bring
abundance of examples.

Now the Reasons of this are,

First, Reason. 1 To show the eqvity of the punishment.
because hereby a man's punishment appear to be so much the more equal, and
worthy. Retaliation is a most equal punishment to the sin; there is no
inequality in it but this, that it is too merciful, An eye for an eye, and a
tooth for a tooth, hurn for burn, wound for wound. You know an eye is equal
for an eye: so when God punishes a man just in his own kind, quid for quo,
that as there was no remedy would turn him from his sin, so there shall be no
remedy shall turn God from his wrath. Herein Gods punishment appears to be
most equal, Revel. 16.5.6. Thou art righteous, O Lord, in that thou judge
thus: for she has shed the blood of thy Saints, therefore thou have given
them blood to drink, for they are worthy. Thou thirstedst after blood, there it
is for thee: so this is most equal, when men have dealt thus and thus with
God, when God shall deal so and so with thee, thou can not find fault. When a
man drinks as hebrews, and reaps as he sowes, and finds as he brings, what
inequality is here? It shall come to pass, that as when I called they would
not hear, so when they call, I will not answer, Zach. 7. When God calls upon
thee, and thou will not hear, afterward when thou call for mercy, if he do
not hear thee, it is just.

Reason 2. ^t stops a man's mouth.
Secondly, another reason is, because this stops a man's mouth, it convinces a
man's conscience; when a man's conscience finds that he is served in his own
kind, that he is paid in his own coin, it stops his mouth. As Adonibezek he had
cut off the thumbs and toes of 70. Kings: afterward he was served just so as
he had dealt with others; he had cut off their thumbs and toes, and made them
gather orts under his table; so afterward his thumbs and toes were cut off.
Now mark what his conscience says, Judge. 1.7. As I have dealt, so God has
dealt with me. As if he had said, God knows wherefore the children of Judah
have done this: they know not why they cut off my thumbs, and the reason why
they cut off my toes; God knows what they looked at in punishing me thus: but
Gods just providence has dealt thus with me; in this kind I served others.
This is so palpable a punishment, so equal and just, that though the sin were
committed twenty years ago, yet a man's conscience will find out his sin twenty
years after. As Joseph's brethren they sold him, and after cast him into a pit,
two and twenty years after, when Joseph was harsh with them, see what their
conscience says; Doubtless we are guilty of our brothers blood, when we saw
the anguish of his soul, and he besought us, and we would not hear. As if
they had said; What is the matter why the man is thus harsh? he never saw us
before, why should he be so harsh, and we be strangers? Nay, says conscience,
you are well served, remember you were harsh to your brother; if you dealt so
with him, marvel not if you be dealt so with. And after, when they came to
their Inn, and found their money, they wondered, What is this that God has
done? Their conscience, I warrant you, hit them in the teeth: without doubt
they thought the money that they took for selling of their brother, had humbled
them as a Ghost: did not we pay the man money for his corn that we bought?
Nay, says conscience, you are rightly served, here is the money you sold your
brother for, (though it were not so) without doubt conscience upbraided them.
Naturally we are apt to find fault with Gods judgments and quarrel, but when
conscience sees the equity of them, we have nothing to say.

Thirdly, all the standers by may see the equity of it, when the punishment is
according to the sin: Nay, Divinity makes this argument, that there is a God
to judge the earth, because men are punished in their own kind. I will show
you one example of Abimilech, that wretch, that slew seventy of his brethren
upon one stone, Judge. 9.7. afterward when he came to stand under the tower of
Abel, a woman flung a piece of a millstone upon his head, and killed him: This
was strange all the standers by might say, that Abimilech should be killed with
a stone: no question the woman thought nothing, she flung the stone because she
had nothing else to fling; it was strange that it should hit him so pat, it
might have hit another as well as him; the stone might have fallen to the
ground as well as on him; and that it should be by a woman, and a millstone too:
Milstones are not used on the top of a Tower, and a millstone broken that a
woman could lift it, and that he should be killed by a millstone, and not with a
sword; nay, might all the standers by say, This God has done, he was the son
of a strange woman, and a woman has killed him; he killed his brethren upon
one stone, and now a stone has killed him; all the world might be able to say;
This God has done.

The use of this is,

First, let no creature in the world complain of Gods dealing, if he punish us
according to our kind; he that kills with the sword, shall be killed with the
sword. He that stops his ears from hearing the poor, what shall his
punishment be? He shall cry and not be heard. He that shows no mercy, how
shall he be punished? He shall receive no mercy James ^.13. Woe to thee that
spoyledst, and wast not spoiled: when thou ceasest spoiling, others shall
spoil thee, Isai. 33.1. Judge not, (says Christ;) what if I do? Then thou
shall be judged. Thus God recompenceth the fruit of a man's doing. Here is no
Momus can complain; no Aristarchus, that can find fault with the justice and
judgment of God.

Secondly, it is not amiss to consider and see how God proportions punishments
to (...) In Kind, In Quantity, In Quality, In Time, In Place, and other
circumstances.


In kind: He shall eat the fruit of his own ways, that is, he shall be
punished in kind. It is a similitude from a tree, every tree brings forth
according to its own kind; if it be an Apple Tree, it brings forth Apples; if
a Crab-tree, Crabs, a Pear Tree, Pears: So every sinner shall be punished in
their kind, a Minister shall be punished in his kind, wicked Masters in their
kind, servants in theirs, rich in theirs, poor in theirs: if a man be a
drunkard, he shall be punished in one kind; if he be an adulterer, in
another: Every man shall eat the fruit of his own ways. Every sin brings an
homogeniall punishment, according to the nature of it. I cannot stand to follow
this, though it be very clear in Scripture.

Secondly, it is in Quantity; God proportions the punishment according to the
sin; he that sowes sparingly, shall reap sparingly; but he that sowes
bountifully, shall reap bountifully. Little sins, little punishments; and
great sins great punishments. There are little sins, moat sins, gnat sins,
and there are Camel sins: so there are little and great punishments, some meet
with many, some with fewer stripes. Just according to a man's sins, so the
Lord shapes out the punishment, for great sinners, great plagues, and for every
one according to his own measure. God has a pair of Balance that he means to
weigh men in: As he weighed Belshazzar, so he will weigh thee, and look how
much sin thou put in one scale, so much punishment God will put in the
other; he will not abate thee one oath, not one idle thought, not one breach of
the Sabbath, not one neglect of hearing the Word, or of other duties: the Lord
will put wrath in one balance, as thou put sin in the other; he will
make the scales even to a hair: as he dealt with Belshazzar, He will lay
righteousness to the line, and judgment to the plummet, and weigh thee out in
the scales, and thou shall have just according to thy sins.

As the Lord deals with his own people, he will not abate so much as a cup of
cold water, but it shall be rewarded: he will reward all, from the greatest to
the least; so he will deal with the wicked, there shall no sin pass
unpunished.

Again, ^here is a proportion in the Quality* If Adam sin in eating, he shall
be punished in eating; If the women of Judah sin in apparel, they shall be
punished in apparel, Isay 3.24. In Wisd. 11.16. a man shall be punished in that
that he sins in; if Absalom sin in his hair, he shall be punished in it;
Nebuchadnezzar might find his sin in his brutish condition, and the Prodigal
might find his sin in the Hog-trough: So if thou find thy self in want,
consider if thou have not wasted thy means, if thou have not been vain in
building, and prodigal in spending, or gaming, or unnecessary bounty, and
immoderate liberality, beyond thy means: Art thou punished in thy Trade, or
Children, etc. see if thou have not sinned in them: for where there is sin, God
will proportion the punishment to the sin.

Fourthly, God proportions the punishment to the sin in regard of the time. The
same hour that Belshazzar was drinking and quaffing in the Temple, the same
hour the hand of God was upon him; if it be not upon thee the same hour, it
may be to morrow at the same hour. It may be thou have sinned this day at such
an hour, it may be God may strike thee to morrow at the same time, or this day
seven-night, it may be the next year. Nebuchadnezzar was warned of his pride
this year, and the same time twelve month the Lord drove him from among men.
So in Acts 13.42. one Sabbath day the Jews heard Paul preach and went out
before the Sermon was quite done they were not able to stand to the blessing;
the same day seven-night the Lord made the Apostles shake off the dust of their
feet against them, and leave them to a reprobate sense.

Fifthly, the Lord proportions his punishments to the place. It is strange many
times, that the drunkard should get his death in the same Alehouse where he
got his liquor. In Judge 7. in that story of Oreb and Zeeb, Oreb at the rock
Oreb, devised against the children of Israel, and upon the same rock he was
killed, And Zeeb another persecuter of the children of God; so the Psalmist
calls them, he at the Wine Press of Zeeb, took victuals from the children of
Israel, and in the same place his own life was taken away.

Just as Judges and Magistrates at this day, they hang up men where they have
done the villainy. As they do with Dogs and Cats, they carry them to the place,
to the Cellar or the Buttery where they do the mischief. But the beasts
themselves, though they have no reason, are able to pick out the meaning of it.
The Lord punishes sinners in the same place. Here where thou have been deaf to
hear the word of God, when thy heart rises against the Preacher, in the same
place (it may be) the Lord will deliver thee up to a reprobate sense. In the
same place, at the Lords Table, where thou come unworthily, thou shall eat
and drink thine own damnation.

FINIS.
Poscript.
THe same Author has another Book in the Press entitled, The Sacrifice of
the Faithful: OR, A Treatise showing the nature, property, and efficacy of
zealous Prayer, Together with some Motives to Prayer, and helps against
discouragements in Prayer.

Together with seven Profitable Sermons on diverse texts of Scripture.


