A BRIEF EXPOSITION OF The EPISTLES of PAUL TO THE PHILIPPIANS AND COLOSSIANS.

By JAMES FERGUSSON, Minister at Kilwinning.

1 Timothy 3. 16. And without controversy, great is the mystery of godliness:
God was manifest in the flesh, justified in the Spirit, seen of Angels,
preached unto the Gentiles, believed on in the world, received up into glory.
John 17. 3. And this is life eternal, that they might know Thee the only true
God, and Jesus Christ whom Thou have sent. EDINBURGH: Printed by Christopher
Higgins, in Harts-Close, over against the Trone-Church, 1656.

TO THE READER.
CHRISTIAN READER,
WE do offer unto thy view in the following Exposition, an Essay of a Reverend
Brother, the Author of this Piece, toward the opening up of two parcels of the
holy Scriptures, in such a way as both the sense and use thereof may be given
so briefly as may be. And albeit he did after such entreaty, scarcely permit
these first fruits to appear in public: Yet we are not afraid (being well
aequainted with him) to recommend it to thy favor able acceptance: And are
confident that thou will find in it, that measure of solidity and sweetness,
joined with perspicuity and briefnesse, as may help thee to converse more
profitably with God, speaking in his Word to his Church, and excite thee to
bless God for him, and the pains he has taken for thy good: We hope also that
by thy acceptance hereof, he shall be encouraged to give further proof of the
Gift and Grace of God in him, by opening more of that precious Treasure; Yea,
and that others also may be thereby invited to put their hand to so necessary
and useful a work upon the whole, (or, at least, the most difficult and most
profound) Scriptures, That so the Lords People (whose callings and necessary
affairs do force them to make most use of this brief way of writing) in their
ordinary reading and meditation on the Scriptures, may have an easy help,
ready at hand, to furnish them with matter of meditation, and direction for
their uptaking and applying of the Scriptures, according as their duty and
present case may require: And this, We say, without prejudice to those, whose
ability to buy, and leisure to read, shall suffer them to make use of other
larger Commentaries of holy and learned men. But howsoever, This way of brief
Exposition of Scripture, among other means, We humbly conceive may prove a
profitable help to propagate the knowledge of the Gospel, and to vindicate the
truth of the Religion professed in this Island, when men, even of an ordinary
capacity, shall see that We profess in Our CONFESSION OF FAITH nothing, but
what immediately rises from the text of Scripture, and what is very often
confirmed and inculcate therein. As the Lords stirring up of his Servants to
lay out their talents, in this and the like way, for the good of his People, is
unto us a token for good in these times of so great distemper; So the improving
and making use of these means would yet further ^onfirm all the lovers of Sion,
that notwithstanding all that We have met with, yet there is hope Our provoked
Lord will dwell among us, and continue the course of his mercy toward this
Island: We say, provoked Lord, because as it is obvious to the observation of
all the Godly on the one hand, with what tenderness and loving kindness the
Lord does follow his process and pleading of his controversy with his Church
in these Islands, for our slighting of Christ, and of the offer of so rich
grace in Him; and how He seasoneth our sad afflictions, by continuing of the
Gospel preached, and by stirring up His faithful Servants, specially in
ENGLAND, by their godly and learned Writings, to s^rengthen all who are on the
way toward Him, and to reclaim others from their wanderings; So it is too too
manifest on the other hand how openly He is provoked by the great abuse of
these mercies; and that the more we are corrected, we revolt daily more and
more: for, by how much more light does break forth, men love darkness and
follow it so much the more. Whence it is that Atheism, Irreligion and Profanity
do every where abound, and that the Lord (justly recompencing men's wantonness
of wit, love of their lusts more than of God, and their not receiving the love
of the truth) has let loose so many errors and delusions, and give^up so many
to be misled thereby. All which, as (...)ey ought not to be lightly looked
upon, but as grievous sins, and sad punishments of sin; So they ought to stir
up all those, who would approve themselves to be his hidden ones, to mourn in
secret, and to stand in the gap, lest these evils come to a greater height, and
ripen us for yet sadder plagues, if we do not entertain more heartily, and
improve the light, while we have it, more diligently. And for our
encouragement, we may be confident, that the Lord, who knows how to be good to
such as seek Him, in the worst of times, whatever may befall the Lords People
for a season, shall make Truth still at last to triumph; And that the Labors
of His Servants shall not be lost, nor their expectation perish for ever. We
shall detain thee (Christian Reader) no longer in the entry, but requesting Him
from whom every good and perfect gift comes, that He would fit and incline
many more to put hand to this Work, and would bless this little Piece and the
like means, to thy eternal welfare. We remain in Him,

From Edinburgh, June 15. 1656. Thine, to serve thee in the Gospel, DAVID
DICKSON, GEORGE HUTCHESON.


A BRIEF EXPOSITION Of the Epistle of PAUL to the PHILIPPIANS.
The ARGUMENT.
PAUL having planted a Church at Philippi, a City in Maccdonia, Act. 16. 12.
And now understanding by their Minister Epaphrodittis, that they remained
constant in the Doctrine of the Gospel, although under some hazard of seduction
by false Teachers, he writes this Epistle unto them; the scope whereof, is, To
excite them unto constancy, and further progress in faith and piety (having
removed the scandal which might arise from his present sufferings) Chap. 1. And
particularly to the study of humility and unity, Chap. 2. And to beware of
false teachers, Chap. 3. After which, he exhorts them, to the practice of
some Christian virtues, commending them for their benevolence: And so
concludes the Epistle with some salutations, and his Apostolical benediction,
Chap. 4.

CHAP. I.
THis Chapter has three parts: In the first whereof (after the Inscription,
ver. 1, 2.) he exciteth, and encourages them to constancy and progress in
faith and piety; partly, by showing the good esteem which he had of them,
manifested by his praying to God, and blessing him for them, ver. 3, 4. and
that because of their constant good carriage ^nce their first embracing of the
Gospel, ver. 5. and ^^cause of his persuasion of their perseverance, grounded
on Gods saving work of grace begun in them, v^^. 6. the evident signs of which
grace he perceived in ^^em, ver. 7. which made him sincerely love them, ver. 8.
And partly by his seeking growth in grace from God to them, ver. 9, 10, 11:

In the second part of the Chapter, lest his present affliction might prove a
stumbling block in their way, he shewe^^, that the Gospel had gained much by
his sufferings already, to ver. 19. That it should have no loss, but advantage
thereby in time coming, to ver. 25. And that he was very confident that his
trouble should have an happy issue, in his deliverance from imprisonment, for
their future benefit, to ver. 27.

In the third part of the Chapter, he exhorts them to constancy and unity,
ver. 27. And to courage under sufferings, by several arguments, unto the end of
the Chap.

Verse. 1. Paul and Timotheus the servants of Jesus Christ, to all the Saints in
Christ Jesus, which are at Philippi, with the Bishops and Deacons.
IN this verse is the Inscription, declaring who was the Author of this
Epistle, together with the joint asserter of the Truths contained in it, and to
whom it was written. Doct. 1. Christian sobriety does teach us to speak
sparingly of our own credit and authority, except when weighty reasons do urge
thereto: for, although Paul does design himself often from his office of
Apostleship, when he writes to these Churches where his Apostolical authority
was questioned (1 Cor. 1. 1. compared with 1 Cor. 9. 1, 2.) yet here he does it
not: because these Philippians did not call his Apostleship in question. 2.
Unity and concord among Ministers in giving joint testimony to the same Truths,
does add a weight unto what they preach, in the esteem of their hearers: for,
Paul joyneth Timothy with himself in the Inscription of the Epistle, that the
Truths contained in it, appearing to be attested by them both, might have the
more weight with the Philippians; Paul and Timotheus. 3. Preachers of the
Gospel are in a special manner the Servants of Christ, as being wholly
dedicate, 2 Timothy 2. 4. and perpetually, (Luke 9. 62.) astricted to his more
immediate service: As servants were of old to their masters, so were Paul and
Timotheus the servants of Jesus Christ. 4. It is abundant credit, and does
commend a man sufficiently unto those who really are Christ's, that he is known
to be a servant of Jesus Christ: for, Paul seeks, and expects to be had in
due regard for this, That he and Timotheus were servants of Jesus Christ. 5.
The whole bulk of those visible Churches, unto whom the Apostles did write, is
designed by the name of Saints: partly, because some among them, and those the
better, though usually not the greater part, were really Saints, and inherently
holy, Rev. 3. 4. for whose cause the whole Community are called Saints: partly,
because it is the duty of every one within the Church, and the end of their
calling, to be holy, Levit. 11. 44. and partly, because all and every one
within the visible Church, are federally and externally holy; in so far as God,
by entering Covenant with them, has separated them from other people, as
dedicated unto him for his worship and service: So whole Israel is said to be
sanctified, Exodus 31. 13. and the child procreate of parents, whereof one is a
Believer, is called holy, to wit, by this external and federal holiness, 1 Cor.
7. 14. And thus Paul, writing here to the visible Church, calls them Saints
at Philippi. 6. As, to make a man internally and spiritually holy, it is
necessary he be in Jesus Christ, united to him, and drawing influence from him
by faith, Job. 15. 5. So to make a man externally holy, to be called and
esteemed federally holy, as every member of the visible Church is said to be
holy, and in Christ, requires a visible and external union with Christ,
consisting in external covenanting and serious professing of Truths relating to
him; the effect of which union is the communication of common gifts, unto every
one according to his measure, 1 Cor. 12. 6, etc. for this cause the Apostle
here calls all the professed Christians in Philippi, Saints in Christ Jesus.
See John 15. 2. which supposes some to be in Christ, to wit, in the way
presently mentioned, who yet may be found fruitless, and consequently
unregenerate. 7. The dignity and parts of a Minister, or of any Church Officer,
do not exempt him from a necessity of being taught, exhorted, reproved and
comforted: for, Paul directs this Epistle (wherein he teaches, exhorts,
etc.) as to the people, so to the Church Officers; to Bishops and Deacons. 8.
The Bishops mentioned in Scripture, are nothing else but ordinary Pastors, and
Overseers of particular Flocks, of whom many might be, and were in one City,
such as Philippi; which could not have been, if they had been trusted with the
actual oversight of many Congregations, and of whole Provinces, as is now
alleged by those who distinguish betwixt Bishops and Pastors, and make them
Office-bearers of a higher degree in the Church: for the Epistle is directed to
the Bishops at Philippi. 9. As the Lord Christ has appointed some
Office-bearers in his House for the oversight of the souls of his people, as
Ministers, and Elders, here designed by the name of Bishops, or Overseers; see
Act. 20. 17. compared with ver. 28. So he has appointed others, to take
inspection of their bodily necessities, that those who are indigent may be
supplied by their care, and the charity of the Flock, who are here called
Deacons. See Act. 6. 1, etc.

Verse. 2. Grace be unto you and peace from God our Father, and from the Lord
Jesus Christ.
He saluteth them most Christianly, by wishing unto them Grace, that is, Gods
favor, as the fountain; and Peace, that is, peace with God, peace with their
own conscience, peace one with another, and all sort of prosperity, as streams
flowing from that fountain: and all this he seeks from God through virtue of
the merit and intercession of Jesus Christ. Doct. 1. Gods grace and favor is
the root and fountain, from which, peace with God, with our own conscience, and
all sanctified prosperity, and peace among our selves, do flow: for, all those
are understood here by peace, which Paul wishes unto them as the fruits of
Gods grace, joining Grace and Peace. 2. In seeking things needful from God, we
would look unto him, not as standing disaffected to us and at a distance from
us, but according to the nearest relations, which we can reckon our selves to
have unto him: So Paul eyeth God as his and their father, reconciled through
Christ; from God our Father. 3. Whatsoever comes from God to Believers, is
conveyed unto them by virtue of Christ's merit, (whereby he has purchased all
things for them, Isa. 53. 5.) and of his intercestion, whereby, he applies his
purchase unto them, Heb. 7. ^5. Whence it is, that he asks from God the
Father, but through Jesus Christ.

Verse. 3. I thank my God upon every remembrance of you, 4. Always, in every
prayer of mine, for you all, making request with joy.
The Apostl's scope being to excite those Philippians unto constancy, and
further progress in faith and piety, does for this end wisely make known the
good esteem which he had of them, in so far, that whenever they came to his
remembrance, which was very frequently, and especially in prayer, he was
constrained not only to pray, but to bless the Lord for them. Doct. 1. It
should be the frequent subject of a Ministers thoughts, to observe how the work
of God does thrive among his Flock: So was it with Paul: for, saying, upon
every remembrance of you, it is certain he had many remembrances of them. 2.
When a faithful Minister sees the people of his charge thriving by Gods
blessing upon his labors amongst them, it must needs be to him the matter of
much joy and thanksgiving; how sad soever his case be otherwise: So, the
Philippians profiting makes Paul (though a prisoner) glad; making request with
joy. 3. Then is our joy, for things comfortable and pleasant unto us, rightly
expressed, when it runs out in praises and thanksgiving unto God: for, so does
Paul express his joy; I thank my God. 4. Then will a man the more cheerfully
bless the Lord for favors bestowed upon others, when he looks upon God as
reconciled to himself: for, hereby Paul is helped not a little to give thanks,
when he looks upon God, as his God; I thank my God. 5. As a Minister should
rejoice for spiritual favors already bestowed upon his Flock; So also he
should pray for what is inlacking: for, Paul does both; making request with joy.

Verse. 5. For your fellowship in the Gospel from the first day until now.
He gives reasons for his joy on their behalf: whereof the first, is, Their
embracing the Gospel (whereby they were brought unto fellowship with Christ and
his Church) and that so readily after the first preaching thereof amongst them;
together, with their constancy therein unto that very time. Doct. 1. There is a
real fellowship and communion, which those who embrace the Gospel have one with
another, 1 John 1. 7. and all of them with Christ, 1 John 1. 3. which
consists in those nigh relations, and the exercise of mutual duties founded
upon these relations, under which one of them stands toward another, 1 Cor.
12. 25. and all of them toward Christ, and Christ toward them, Revel. 3. 20.
Hence he calls their embracing of the Gospel, their fellowship in the Gospel.
2. That a people, or person does readily assent to the call of the Gospel, and
remains constant in the profession of, and obedience unto it, is matter of
thanksgiving and praise unto God: for, this was Paul's joy for those
Philippians; even their fellowship in the Gospel from the first day until now.
3. It is not fit that any man, especially a Minister, should boast much of the
reality of grace in any upon a profession newly taken up, until after a times
trial, it be seen how the person holds up in his profession, by walking
equally in the latitude of duties, and constantly in variety of cases and
conditions, lest happily he be afterward ashamed of his confidence: Therefore,
Paul does not boast much of those Philippians, until he take some proof of
them; from the first day until now.

Verse. 6. Being confident of this very thing, that he which has begun a good
work in you, will perform it until the day of Jesus Christ.
A second reason of his joy, was, The confidence which he had of their
perseverance in grace unto the end, and of their being carried on by the same
power, which did begin the work of grace in them. This he speaks unto the
whole Church, not as if every one in it, to his certain knowledge, in the
judgment of infallible verity, had been truly gracious; But, because in the
judgment of charity (which supposes the best, where it has any probable
appearance, and no evidence to think otherways) he found it equitable to think
so of all, especially, being persuaded that there were many such among them, in
whom only this and the like expressions were verified, which were spoken
generally unto all. See 1 Cor. 6. 11. compared with Chap. 11. 21. Doct. 1. They
who have received grace, shall never totally lose it, but undoubtedly persevere
therein to the end: for, Paul is confident of this very thing, to wit. Of their
perseverance. 2. The certainty of the Saints perseverance, is not grounded upon
the stability of their resolutions, Psulm. 73. 2. nor yet upon the stability of
gracious habits in themselves, Rev. 3. 2. But upon the power of God, which is
engaged for their preservation against all opposition: for the ground of his
confidence is, that God is engaged for the thing; He who has begun a good work
in you, will perform it. 3. The work of grace is not perfected at the first,
but has its own beginings, progress, and accomplishment at death; He that
has begun, will perform it until the day of Christ. 4. The whole progress of
this work, from the first step unto the last, is all from God, and from no
power of our own free will; He who has begun, will perform. 5. Albeit grace in
Believers will be perfected at the time of their death, Heb. 12. 23. when their
soul shall be presented before Christ their Judge, and carried up to be with
him; yet the complete consummation of their blessed estate in soul and body is
reserved till Christ's second coming, wherein he shall raise up their bodies in
an incorruptible estate, unite them to their souls, and carry up the whole man
with him, to put on the capestone on that work of grace begun here: for this
cause, says he, He will perform it until the day of Jesus Christ, not only of
their particular judgment, but specially of his second coming.

Verse. 7. Even as it is meet for me to think this of you all, because I have
you in my heart, in as much as both in my bonds, and in the defense and
confirmation of the Gospel, ye all are partakers of my grace.
A third reason of his blessing God for them, cleari(...) and confirming the
former, is, He conceived himself bound to judge of them all as truly gracious,
and such as should persevere unto the end, by reason of his hearty affection
toward them; which, together with his judgment of them flowing from it, was
grounded upon the evident signs of grace in them (the same grace for kind,
which he himself had) in so far, as they had in a special mannerowned him and
in their own sphere joined with him, both in his sufferings and actings for the
defense and confirmation of the Gospel. Doct. 1. Where sincere love is among
Christians, there will be a communion of prayers, praises, and of good hopes:
for, from this that he had them in his heart, he infers, it was meet, or,
just for him to do all the foresaid duties for them. 2. That which knitteth the
hearts of Christians in the straitest tie of mutual love, is, not so much
carnal respects and natural relations, (2 Cor. 5. 16.) as the real evidences of
Gods grace in the person loved: for, Paul had them in his heart, because they
were partakers of his grace. 3. Albeit no precept, or practice, in the whole
Scripture, does evince, That visible Churches are to be constitute of those
only, who ought to be accounted truly gracious by discerning Christians;
(Matthew. 13. 28, 29, 30.) Yet this impedeth not, but the Gospel has been so far
blessed in some places, as that the whole members of some particular Churches,
by their godly and sober conversation, have given positive evidences of true
grace in them, even to very discerning Christians; and that the Gospel may have
the same effects in some particular Churches is yet possible: So Paul thinks it
meet to judge of them all at Philippi, as truly gracious, to wit, all who were
of age; It is meet for me to think this of you all. 4. The judgment which one
Christian passes upon the inward gracious estate of another, is not always
according to the verity and truth of the thing; but it is grounded upon, and
flowing from charity, which hops the best in things which are uncertain, (1
Cor. 13. 7.) and so may be deceived: Thus Paul does not affirm possitively that
they were all gracious, only it was meet for him to judge so of them, and that
because of his charity and affection toward them, which did, and justly might,
preponderat with his judgment in the present case; because I have you in my
heart, says he. 5. There must be some positive, though not infallible,
evidences, of the inward work of grace in a person, before we can warrantably
pass a judgment, even from charity, upon him, as truly gracious: for, Paul
groundeth his charity upon such evidences; in so much as both in my bonds, etc.
6. It is the part of each professor, to avow, support, speak for, join with,
and by all lawful means defend those who are suffering for the truth of the
Gospel, or employed any other way for the defense or confirmation thereof; for,
they were partakers with him, both in the defense and confirmation of the
Gospel. 7. When a person, living otherwise without offense, is zealous for the
Truth of God, owning those who do suffer for it, contributing his uttermost to
uphold it, even when the powers of the world would bring it down, and does not
draw back for fear of any hazard; it is ground sufficient for Charity to judge
of that person, as truly gracious: for, Paul thinks it meet to judge so of
those Philippians, because they owned him, both in his bonds, and confirmation
of the Gospel.

Verse. 8. For God is my record, how greatly I long after you all, in the bowels
of Jesus Christ.
He confirms what he spoke (ver. 7.) of his sincere love toward them, by
taking God to witness, how much he was affected toward them with a truly
Christian love. Doct. 1. The most secret inclinations, and motions of our
inward affections, are plain and naked before God: otherways Paul would not
have appealed unto him as witness of the sincerity of his love and affection,
saying, God is my record. 2. The taking of an Oath, or appealing to God the
searcher of hearts, as a witness to the truth of what we affirm, is not
unlawful; but in some cases a duty: for, God is my record, says Paul. 3.
Though the taking of an oath be lawful in some cases, yet not for every trivial
business, but for grave and weighty causes: for, here Paul does it for a
weighty cause, even to procure and facilitate this peoples attention to the
Gospel, and to secure the success of his pains among them, as appears from
the scope, in order to which he persuades them of his hearty affection: for,
says he, God is my record, how greatly I long, etc. 4. The mutual love of
Christians should not be camal, for selfish and worldly reasons and ends only,
but spiritual; A love like unto Christ's for fervency and sincerity; a love,
whereof Christ is the author, and having Christ's honor and the spiritual good
of those who are loved for its main ground, motive and end: for, that is to
love in the bowels of Christ. 5. Christian love among Christians, does evidence
it self much in Christian fellowship, as occasion offers: for, in place of
saying, how he loved them, he says, how be longed for them, as desiring to
evidence his love that way, if he had opportunity.

Verse. 9. And this I pray; that your love may abound yet more and more in
knowledge, and in all judgment.
He exciteth them yet more unto further progress, by seeking those things from
God to them, wherein he would have them to advance and grow; as namely, Love to
God and their neighbor, together with knowledge, and the spiritual sense or
tastings of Gods goodness and love: for, the word rendered judgment, does also
signify spiritual sense and experimental knowledge. Doct. 1. There can be no
such measure of grace attained, but further progress ought to be endeavored:
for, he prays that those Philippians (whose graces he has presently
commended) may abound more and more. 2. Love unto God and our neighbor,
especially unto those who are Gods, is so necessary, 1 Cor. 13. 1. so
comprehensive, Matthew. 22. 37, 39. and meets with so many things to extinguish
it, Matthew. 24. 12. that we are not easily to be satisfied with a small measure
of that grace: for he prays, that their love may abound. 3. Such love and
zeal are commendable and to be sought after, as have a proportional measure of
knowledge going along with them: for he prays here, that their love may
abound in, or, with knowledge. 4 There is a spiritual sense and experimental
knowledge, whereby we find what Scripture speaks of Gods goodness verified
in our selves: for, so much is understood here by all judgment, or, sense. 5.
This sense and experimental knowledge, would be sought after, as the most
effectual mean to beget, entertain and increase the love of God in those who
are his: for he prays, that their love may abound in, or, with sense.

Verse. 10. That ye may approve things that are excellent, that ye may be
sincere, and without offense till the day of Christ: 11. Being filled with the
fruits of righteousness, which are by Jesus Christ unto the glory and praise of
God.
Here four ends are subjoyned; for attaining whereof, he would have them
abounding in the three forementioned graces. 1. That they might be endued with
a spirit of discerning betwixt Truth and Error, right and wrong: for, so the
former part of ver. 10. is to be read, that ye may try things that differ: of
which trial, the approving of things that are excellent, (as the word is
rendered in our Bibles) is the commendable effect. 2. That they might be
sincere without any mixture of sinful byasse in their choice of things after
trial. 3. That they might be kept from being occasions of stumbling unto
others, ver. 10. And, 4. That they might abound in good works undertaken and
gone about in the strength of Christ, and tending to Gods glory as their main
scope, verse. 11. Doct. 1. That a Christian may be thoroughly fitted to judge of
things controverted, there is more required than notional light in the brain,
to wit, Practice according to what he already knows, and some experimental
knowledge and taste of divine Truths in his own heart: for, the Apostle, with
knowledge, requires, abounding in love and sense, that so they might try those
things which differ. See Heb. 5. 14. 2. Such knowledge as enableth a man to
discern betwixt Truth and Error, right and wrong, is then worthy to be sought
after, when sincerity in choosing what is right, and rejecting of what is
wrong, is joined with it: for, he conjoyneth those two, Ye may discern things
that differ, and be sincere. 3. It should be one of our main desires, (whatever
be our wrestlings with corruption within our selves) that yet it may not break
forth to the offense of others: So Paul prays, that they may be without
offense. 4. No shorter term ought to be assigned unto our growth and daily
progress in holiness than the day of our death; for, then, and not till then,
shall grace be completed, Heb: 12. 23. Thus he prays, they may abound more
and more, unto the day of Christ; that is, Either the day of every man's death,
so called, because of the particular sentence or judgment, which is passed by
Christ upon every man immediately after death, Luke 12. 20. and 23. 43. or, the
day of Christ's second coming, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 2. And this he will have the term-day
of their endeavor to continue sincere and without offense: because the final
and open acquittance of the Elect from sin and misery shall be reserved until
then, Matthew. 25. 33, 34. 5. It is not sufficient for Christians to walk without
offense, by abstaining from what is grossly evil; but they must also set about
the doing of what is good: being filled with the fruits of righteousness. 6. It
is not the doing of one good work, or of some few, which will sufficiently
evidence a man to be righteous, except he aim at the constant practice of
everything which is good: for, that is to be filled with the fruits of
righteousness, or with good works, whereby the sincerity of our righteousness
is tried, as the tree by the fruits, Luke 6. 44, 45. 7. That a work be truly
good, or, a fruit of righteousness, it is necessary that the work be done by
one who is in Christ by faith, and by virtue of strength drawn from Christ:
for, these fruits required are by Jesus Christ, that is, by strength drawn from
him: which presupposes the person to be ingrafted in him, Job. 15. 4. 8. It is
necessary also for a good work, That the doer of it have Gods glory for his
main scope, and not vain glory, credit, or any by-respect: otherwise he is an
empty vine, bringing forth fruit unto himself, Hos. 10. 1. So they are to be
unto the glory and praise of God.

Verse. 12. But I would ye should understand, Brethren, that the things which
happened unto me, have fallen out rather unto the furtherance of the Gospel.
In the second part of this Chapter, lest they should have stumbled at his
present suffering, and feared lest thereby the Gospel should have been totally
extinct; he shows, first. That the Gospel had received much advantage already
by all those sad things, which had befallen him. Doct. 1. It is the duty of
Christ's Ministers, as to forecast what may prove a stumbling block in the way
of the Lords People, to retard them in their christian course; So, by all means
to endeavor the removal of it: Thus Paul wisely foreseeth, and carefully
labors to remove that offense and discouragement, which Christians were apt
to take from his sufferings; But I would ye should understand, etc. 2. So wise
and powerful is God in working, that what is intended by adversaries to obscure
his glory, and to mar his work, He makes it tend to the further clearing of
the one, and promoving of the other; which holds chiefly in the sufferings of
his servants for Truth, whereby the Lord has promoved the Gospel frequently as
much as by their preaching: So Paul's sufferings had fallen out to the
furtherance of the Gospel. 3. That Truth is a gainer by our saddest sufferings,
is sufficient reason for contentment under them: for, Paul rests satisfied,
and would have others satisfied also with this, That all his sufferings had
fallen out to the furtherance of the Gospel. 4. The observing of the advantage
that comes to the Gospel by the suffering of the Saints for Christ's Truth,
serves greatly to remove the scandal of the cross: for this end would the
Apostle have them to understand that what had befallen him, was for the
furtherance of the Gospel.

Verse. 13. So that my bonds in Christ are manifest in all the Palace, and in
all other places.
He gives two evidences, that advantage had come to the Gospel by his
sufferings; First, his bonds, or the Gospel which was the cause of his bonds,
was made famous in Nero's Court, and els-where, whileas every one almost,
enquiring after the cause of his sufferings, did learn somewhat of Christ and
the Gospel by that mean. Doct. 1. That the Gospel gets entry in the Houses
of Kings and great men, is a great advantage and furtherance to it: for, this
he reckons as one advantage, even that the Gospel by his bonds was manifest
in all the Palace. 2. An occasional report, and general fame of Christ and the
Gospel, may, through the blessing of God accompanying it, take some by the
Heart, to whom that report does come: for, by the very occasional mentioning of
the Gospel, as the cause of Paul's sufferings, some were made to enquire and
learn so much of it, as made them fall in love with it: else he would not have
thought the manifesting of his ^onds had tended to the furtherance of the
Gospel.

Verse. 14. And many of the Brethren in the Lord waxing confident by my bonds,
are much more bold to speak the Word without fear.
A second evidence, is, That contrary to the expectation of enemies, (who
concluded that Paul one of the chief Apostles being put in bonds at Rome, no
Minister should have the courage ever to preach again) many Ministers of Jesus
Christ, having heard of his constancy under sufferings, were encouraged to
shake off fear, and preach Christ more boldly than ever. Doct. 1. The Gospel,
and glad tidings of Salvation through Jesus Christ, is the most excellent word
that ever sounded in a lost sinners ear: Therefore, it is called, The Word, by
way of excellency, as if there were no other word besides worthy of the name.
2. This tends much to the furtherance of the Gospel, when Preachers of it are
men of courage, not fearing their own personal sufferings, if so they may get
Christ advanced, and the Gospel published: for, this is given as an evidence of
the furtherance of the Gospel, even their speaking of the Word without fear. 3.
The observation of God's upholding others under sharp sufferings, should make
us courageous in avowing that Truth for which they suffer; as knowing, God who
helped them, will not be inlacking to us, if we be put to suffer for the same
cause: for, the Brethren in the Lord waxed confident by his bonds. 4. As among
all Christians, so chiefly among Ministers, there is a relation of fraternity
in Christ, whereby they are tied to walk as Brethren; by loving one another, 1
John 4. 21. admonishing one another, Lev. 19. 17. standing for the just credit
one of another, Jam. 4. 11. and working to the hand one of another, for
carrying on the work of their Lord Christ, 2 Cor. 6. 1. Hence they are called,
Brethren in the Lord.

Verse. 15. Some indeed preach Christ even of envy and strife, and some also of
good will. 16. The one preach Christ of contention, not sincerely, supposing to
add affliction to my bonds: 17. But the other of love, knowing that I am set
for the defense of the Gospel.
Because it might have been objected, That many of those forementioned
Preachers, of whom he boasted, were but naughty men, and small friends to Paul;
He answers, first, granting, many indeed did preach Christ from a spirit of
envy against Paul, to outstrip him, and of contention and strife, hereby
raising a sinful emulation amongst the Ministry, while every one labored who
should have maniest to applaud him, and from a malicious purpose and desire to
procure harder usage for Paul, if not his death, being now in bonds; supposing,
the more the Gospel was preached, Nero would be the more incensed against him:
Yet herein he comfort himself, that all the Preachers were not of that
stamp, there being many besides them, who preached Christ from love, and
good will toward Christ, and Paul his prisoner, aiming sincerely at the good of
the Gospel; for the defense whereof, he was now in bonds. Doct. 1. They may
preach Christ unto others, who are but hollow-hearted men themselves: for, so
were those who preached Christ, even of envy and strife. 2. Such is the power
of unmortified corruption, that it will make a man's most excellent gifts, and
the exercise of them in the choicest duties of divine worship, subservient to
his basest lusts: for, some even preached Christ out of envy and strife. 3. The
Lord takes notice, not only of the matter which Ministers do preach, whether
it be Truth or Error; but also, of the manner how, the ends for which, and the
motives from which they preach: even whether they preach Christ from envy and
contention, or, from love and goodwill: for, here Paul takes notice of it. 4.
An immoderate sinful desire after applause, together with the lust of envy
because of the gifts and estimation of others, is a sin, whereof those who
preach Christ are sometime guilty: for, here some preach Christ out of envy.
5. The Ministers of Jesus Christ had need to resist the very first motions of
the forementioned evil; seeing, where it is once rooted in the heart, it will
make a man prostitute his parts and gifts; yea, the very preaching of Christ,
to the service of it: So those of whom the Text speaks, having once given way
to a spirit of sinful emulation against Paul, they rest not, until they even
preach Christ out of envy. 6. Where there are self-seeking men in the
Ministry, making a trade of their excellent preaching and other exercises of
their gifts and parts, (mainly to get themselves much thought of, and others
vilipended) unity cannot long continue in the Church of Christ: but, such
spirits, before they fail of their intent, will rather trample upon the
Churches peace: for, those two are conjoined, they preached Christ out of envy
and strife. 7. Though a man preach Truth, and exalt Christ in preaching Truth;
yet if he do it from a spirit of envy, to get others decryed, and himself
extolled, he is but an unsincere rotten-hearted hypocrite (notwithstanding of
all his preaching) in Gods sight: for, those men preached Truth, else Paul
(ver. 18.) would not have rejoiced in their preaching; yet, seeing they
preached of envy, they are spoken of as unsincere, and unfaithful Preachers,
who preached not sincerely. 8. Envy, and sinful emulation, because of the
parts and esteem of others, is a cruel and unsatiable lust, thirsting after the
very blood of those against whom they have emulation: for, those men who envied
Paul, would gladly have added affliction to his bonds, and have stirred up
Nero, by occasion of their preaching, to have taken his life. 9. Though some
that preach Christ are but hollow-hearted men, yet all are not so; and the
sincerity of those that are honest, is sufficient comfort against those
discouragements which might arise from those who are otherwise: for, though
some preached Christ out of envy; yet Paul comforted himself in this, that
others preached of good will. 10. This is prais-worthy in a Minister, when he
is stirred up to preach from love to Truth, good will to the work, and to
Christ whose work it is, endeavoring what in him lies to encourage all, even
the meanest who have their hand at the Work: for, that is here commended, even
to preach Christ of good will and love, to wit, love to Christ, to Truth, and
unto Paul. 11. An honest heart will respect those much, whom love to Truth has
brought to any suffering, or hardship: for, therefore did those honest
Ministers preach from good will unto Paul, knowing he was set, or, did lie (to
wit, in prison) for the defense of the Gospel. 12. The sufferings of the Saints
for the Gospel, are real preachings, and are speaking apologie^ and defenses
for the power and truth of the Gospel: I am set (says Paul) for an apology of
the Gospel, as the word is in the original.

Verse. 18. What then? notwithstanding every way, whether in pretense, or in
truth, Christ is preached, and I therein do rejoice, --
He gives a second answer unto that which might have been objected, to wit,
Whatever they aimed at in their preaching, yet Jesus Christ was made known by
them: and this made him glad. Doct. 1. The blessing of the Word preached, does
not depend upon the honesty and saving grace of the Preacher: A graceless
Minister, may (through Gods blessing upon his own Truth) be an instrument of
much good unto others: for, they who preached Christ in pretense only,
pretending love to Christ, but really seeking their own applause, were surely
doing good unto some; else Paul would never have rejoiced so much that Christ
was preached by them. 2. The apparent diminution of our own esteem and credit
ought not to be much regarded, if high esteem of Christ be upon the growing
hand: Paul regarded it not; notwithstanding, says he, that is, though they
seek to over-shadow me, yet Christ is preached, and I rejoice. 3. The man whose
heart is inflamed with love to Christ's honor, and the salvation of lost
sinners, so as not to value his own particular hazard, being put in the
balance with those, may expect to find much joy and comfort under his saddest
sufferings: for, Paul, being thus disposed, rejoices, though in bonds: I
therein do rejoice.

Verse. -- 18. yea, and will rejoice. 19. For I know that this shall turn to my
salvation through your prayer, and the supply of the Spirit of Jesus Christ.
That he may yet further prevent their stumbling at his sufferings; he shows,
That, as the Gospel had gained much thereby already, it should gain yet more;
and that his joy in that respect should not be taken from him; and that,
because he knew, partly from Scripture, and partly also, as it appears, from
special revelation, that this, to wit, all the machinations of his adversaries
against him, should be so ordered of God, as that by the renewed supply of
furniture from the Spirit of Christ, obtained by their prayers, his salvation
should be advanced by them; where by salvation we understand, not only his
eternal well-being, but his constancy also in avowing Truth, and the
preservation of his temporal life for the time, as he clears afterward: the
contrary of both which was aimed at by his envious brethren, their design
being, as it seems, either to drive him, through his own fear, unto apostasy
from Christ, or otherwise to incite Nero to put him to death. Doct. 1. A
suffering Christian, especially a Preacher, may attain, not only to present
sweetness and joy under a bitter cross; but also to a sweet strong persuasion
of the continuance of that joy in the time to come: for, Paul not only
rejoices in the mean time, but also confidently resolves, I will rejoice. 2.
The joy of a Christian under a cross is grounded, not only upon good presently
enjoyed and felt, but also upon that, which by faith is apprehended as yet to
come; so Paul rejoices, and promises to rejoice, because he knew by faith,
that this should turn to his salvation. 3. So powerful and wise is God in
working, that out of the eater he can bring meat, by ordering our sad
afflictions so, that our salvation both temporal and eternal, shall be advanced
thereby: thus was it with Paul; I know that this shall turn to my salvation. 4.
That Christians are kept constant under sad sufferings, and made to advance in
the way toward salvation thereby, proceeds neither from the nature of the
cross, nor yet merely from the power of inherent grace; but chiefly from the
actual influence and renewed supply of furniture from the Spirit of Christ:
for, that this did turn to his salvation, was, through the supply of the Spirit
of Jesus Christ. 5. Prayer conscientiously gone about, is an excellent mean for
drawing from God through Christ the choicest of his mercies, not only to our
selves, but also to others, for whom we pray: So, through the prayer of those
Philippians, supply from Christ was to be communicated to Paul. 6. They who
pray best and most spiritually, are not most taken up with the conceit of their
own prayers: for, Paul imputes his receipts more to their prayers, than to his
own; though none will question but he prayed as much, and as well as any of
them: through your prayers, says he.

Verse. 20. According to my earnest expectation and my hope, that in nothing I
shall he ashamed, but that with all boldness, as always, so now also Christ
shall be magnified in my body, whether it be by life or by death.
Paul's envious adversaries aimed at two things; either to drive him to
apostacy, or to incite Nero to take his life; and in the preceding Verse it is
showen, that Paul knew they should be disappointed in both these: Now he
explaineth his knowledge and persuasion of their disappointment in the first,
and shows the ground of that persuasion. His persuasion had two parts; the
Negative part is, No terror of flesh should ever make him deny the truth, as a
man ashamed of it. The Positive is, That he should continue in the stout
avowing of truth, and magnifying of Christ, whether he died or lived: The
grounds of this his persuasion were, hope in Gods Word, his earnest
expectation, flowing from his hope and bypast experience. Doct. 1. To turn our
back upon truth, for eschewing of suffering, says as much, as that we are
ashamed of Christ and his truth: and there fore they who do so, may expect that
Christ will be ashamed of them. See Luke 9. ver. 26. hence in place of saying,
he will not deny truth in any thing, he says, in nothing I will be ashamed. 2.
Christians in the case of trial especially, would be very strict and precise,
so as not to recede from the least point of truth or duty. Thus the Apostle
resolves, I will be ashamed in nothing. 3. The first step toward defection
is, a declining of, and relenting in the professing and bold avowing of truth,
when God calls us to it: and to avow truth boldly, as occasion offers, is a
sovereign mean to keep us from being ashamed of it. For, Paul opposes those
two, his being ashamed of truth, and his bold avowing of it; the latter as
preventive of the former: in nothing I will be ashamed; but that with all
boldness. 4. The avowing of truth boldly under persecution, tends much to
the magnifying of Christ his truth, for which we suffer; and his strength which
bears us up under sufferings, being thereby much commended: Hence he calls
his boldness for truth, under his bodily sufferings, a magnifying of Christ;
so now also Christ shall be magnified in my body. 5. A Christian is not to
hesitate much in the matter of his death or life, if so he may get Christ
magnified by either of them; for, Paul stands not much, if so Christ be
magnified, whether it be by death or life. 6. The hope of a Christian, having a
word of promise for its ground (Psalm. 130. ver. 5.) shall never be
disappointed: for, Paul concludes all this should turn to his salvation, and
that he should be carried through under sufferings, because there being a
general word of Promise for it, Romans 8. ver. 28. he hoped in that word;
according to my hope, says he. 7. Then is our hope of the right stamp, and
truly Christian; when being founded upon the Word, it exciteth the heart
earnestly, and by all lawful means to pu^sue after the thing hoped for; so the
Apostl's hope is joined with earnest expectation: the word signifies, the
expectation of a thing with head and neck stretched out, as pressing to be at
it. 8. The frequent experience of Gods being nigh unto us, and honoring of
himself by us in former trials, is a ground for hope to rest upon, that he will
not leave us in the present strait; so Paul gathers present confidence from
former experience: that as always, so now also, etc.

Verse. 21. For to me to live is Christ, and to die is gain.
He gives a reason of his indifferency, whether to die, or to live, of which
he spoke, ver. 20. to wit, if his life be prolonged, unto him to live is
Christ, that is, Christ was to be the scope of his life, he having destinated
it wholly to his service; but if he die, death should be gain and advantage to
him. Doct. 1. Then, and in no other case, is poor silly life worth the having,
when the extolling of Christ is the main scope at which we aim in our life;
For, this makes Paul indifferent to live, or not to weary of life: for unto me
to live is Christ, says he. 2. Who ever has dedicated his life to get Christ
exalted by it, will find death it self to be great gain and advantage, as being
thereby freed from sin and misery, Rev. 14. ver. 13. and admitted unto the full
enjoying of Christ 1. Cor. 13. ver. 12. unto all eternity 1 Thessalonians. 4. ver.
17. for, unto Paul to die is gain; because unto him to live was Christ.

Verse. 22. But if I live in the flesh, this is the fruit of my labor: yet what
I shall choose, I wot not.
He explaineth the first member of the preceding verse, showing, if he should
live any longer in t^is corruptible flesh, this or that life should be the
fruit of his labor, that is, the gaining of souls to God by his labor, should
be the scope of his life: and then declares his former indifferency to be
such, that he knew not whether to choose death or life, though it were given
him to his option. Doct. 1. The manifold infirmities accompanying this mortal
fading life, do not impede the labor of Gods faithful servants from being
fruitful, in order to the honor of Christ, and good of the Church; the wisdom
of God judging it most convenient to commit this heavenly treasure to earthly
vessels, and to bring about the great work of saving of souls, not by sinlesse,
holy, and uncorruptible Angels, but by poor weak men, who carry about fading
flesh as our selves, 2. Cor. 4. ver. 7.) So if Paul had lived in the flesh, his
labors should have had fruit that way: if I live in the flesh, this is the
fruit of my labor. 2. Who ever knows ought of a life to come, and of a right
unto it, cannot but speak contemptibly of the life which now is, while he
compares the one with the other; so Paul, as contemning this life, being
compared with that, calls it, a living in the flesh, 3. A man may be so
persuaded of a life of glory after death, upon the one hand, and so convinced
of the great advantage, which may come to the Church by the prolonging of his
life, upon the other hand, that if to die or live, were given to his wish, he
could not easily determine himself, which of them to choose: So is it with
Paul; what I shall choose, I wot not, says he.

Verse. 23. For I am in a strait betwixt two, having a desire to depart, and to
be with Christ, which is far better: 24. Nevertheless, to abide in the flesh,
is more needful for you.
He professes his strait, showing there were weighty reasons on both sides:
When he looked on death, therein he saw his own particular advantage, even to
be still with Christ; when he looked upon life, therein he saw advantage to the
Church, and hence arises his strait what to choose, or refuse. Doct. 1. Death
is not a destruction of the godly, but a separating of the soul from the body,
a flitting from one place to another, a releasing of the soul from the
captivity of the body, wherein it was enclosed, and a setting of it at liberty:
for, Paul makes use of a word to express death, rendered here to depart, which
signifies to dissolve things before conjoined, to change our abode, or, our
dwelling, to set sail for another Country, and to be released from prison. 2.
It is lawful, yea and in some respects a duty for Christians, not only
frequently to think upon death, but also to long after it; for, Paul has a
desire to depart. 3. Then is our longing after death commendable, when it
proceeds not from desperation, or wearying of the cross which God has laid
on (Jonah 4. 3, 4.) but from a desire to be with Christ: for, here those are
conjoined. I desire to depart and to he with Christ. 4. The souls of men and
women are not annihilated after death, neither do they sleep until the
Resurrection; nor are they detained by the way from immediate passing into
glory, if they have been Believers, as the souls of others do enter into
everlasting condemnation: for, Paul knew nothing of a Purgatory after death;
but he expected presently to be with Christ. 5. There is no proportion betwixt
the choicest contentments (even those that are spiritual) which can be attained
here, and that exceeding weight of glory which the Saints shall enjoy
hereafter, the latter does so far exceed the former: for, to be with Christ,
says Paul, is far better. 6. Though Christ be present with, and dwell in the
hearts of Believers by faith, even while they are here, Ephesians. 3. 17. yet all
that presence and nearness, is but a distance and kind of absence, being
compared with that measure of nearness to, and presence with him, which shall
be enjoyed hereafter: the former being but mediate, through the glass of
Ordinances, 1 Cor. 13. 12. frequently interrupted, Psalm. 30. 7. and no ways
full, 1 Cor. 13. 12. But the latter shall be immediate, 1 Cor. 13. 12.
constant, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 17. and so full, that they who shall enjoy the meanest
degree, will find no inlack, Psalm. 17. 15. for, he says after his departure,
he will be with Christ, as if he had never enjoyed his presence until then. 7.
The Church of Christ has much advantage by enjoying of faithful Ministers, and
suffers much by their removal; for, my abiding in the flesh is needful for
you, says Paul. 8. It is only the public good of the Church, and others of
whom we have charge, and not particular contentment which can be enjoyed here,
that ought to cast the balance of our affections toward a desire of having
our life prolonged: for, only this has weight with Paul, while he says, to
abide is more needful for you.

Verse. 25. And having this confidence, I know that I shall abide and continue
with you all, for your furtherance and joy of faith. 26. That your rejoicing
may be more abundant in Jesus Christ for me, by my coming to you again.
Having showen (ver. 20, etc.) that his adversaries should be disappointed of
what they aimed at in the first place, which was to drive him unto apostasy;
he shows here they should be also disappointed of what they designed, in the
next place, which was the inciting of Nero to take away his life: for, from
what he has presently said, how useful the continuance of his life should be
to the Church of Christ, and withal having probably a special revelation of
the thing, he expresses at least his confidence (if not his certain
persuasion) that not only his life for this time should be preserved, but also,
that being set at liberty, he should come and remain with them; and all this
that they might be further promoved in the way to Heaven, especially in the
grace of believing, ver. 25. and have more abundant matter of gloriation in
Christ, having received a new proof of his power, and good will in delivering
of Paul from death, and sending him unto them, ver. 26. Doct. 1. The Lord in
mercy often prolongeth the life of useful instruments, and keeps them from
Heaven the longer, that the Church may reap advantage by their labors: So Paul
was to abide and continue with them all. 2. A faithful Minister, though he be
not tied to submit to the loss of Heaven and salvation; yet he ought
contentedly to spare the enjoyment of it for a time, if so be his life may do
good to the Church of God: for, Paul is content upon this account that his life
be prolonged: having this confidence, I know I shall abide. 3. God always can,
and sometimes does so calm the rage of persecutors, that they do not execute
the evil by them intended against his Servants, whom he still preserves and
does deliver from death and bonds, so long as he has work for them: for, says
Paul, having this confidence, I know, etc. His confidence, that he should be
delivered, does import, that God may deliver when he pleases, and that at
least, considering the present posture of affairs, it was very probable that he
should be delivered: If it do not also import a certainty of faith, grounded
upon some particular revelation, that it should be so: for, the word most
frequently signifies an assured confidence. See 2 Timothy 4. ver. 16, 17, 18.
Where Paul does seem to insinuate, that after his first captivity and
compearance before Nero, he was set at liberty, and did preach the Gospel among
the Gentiles; though he was afterward apprehended and put to death. 4. They who
have received a great measure of gifts and graces, and have the opportunity of
enjoying the fellowship of others, should improve their time and parts, in
their place and station, for the spiritual advantage of those with whom they
converse: for, so does Paul look on his continuance with them, that it should
be for their furtherance. 5. As there is no grace, wherein Christians ought not
to aim at progress and growth, 2 Pet. 3. 18. So, especially, they would labor
to grow in faith, as being that grace, which by it is growth, is cause of growth
in all other graces; it is the mouth which sucketh the milk of the Promises:
and therefore Satan obstructeth our growth in that grace most, Luke 22. 31, 32.
Hence the Apostle would aim at their growing in this grace especially: for your
furtherance and joy of faith, says he. 6. As there is a joy of sense, Job. 16
24. So there is a joy arising from the solid satisfaction which the heart does
receive from laying hold on Christ and the Promise, Psalm. 60. 6. which is here
called the joy of faith. 7. The several instances of Christ's kything his power
and good will in the delivery of his Church, or of any particular member
thereof from a desperate strait, should be improved for strengthening of our
faith, and increase of holy boasting and gloriation in God: for, Paul shows
the fruit of his deliverance should be the furtherance of their faith, and that
their rejoicing might be more abundantly in Jesus Christ for him; that is,
because of Christ's power and good will to them, manifested in his delivery. 8.
Where there is sympathy with Christian sufferers under their cross, there will
be a sharing with them also in all the choice advantages, which are to be
obtained by their delivery: for, the Philippians did partake with Paul in his
bonds v. 7. and as a fruit hereof, they are to reap much spiritual advantage by
his delivery from them: that your rejoicing may be more abundantly, etc. says
he: 9. The more unexpected mercies are, before they come, the more of God will
be seen in them, and the more of joy in God will be because of them, when they
come: for, Paul was a gone man in humane appearance, being prisoner at Rome,
and his delivery almost hopeless, and therefore their rejoicing was to be the
more abundant in Jesus Christ by his coming to them again.

Verse. 27. Only let your conversation be as it becomes the Gospel of Christ:
that whether I come and see you, or else be absent, I may hear of your affairs,
that ye stand fast in one spirit, with one mind, striving together for the
faith of the Gospel.
In the third part of the Chapter, he exhorts them. That whatsoever should
befall him, they would mind their duty, by living like the Gospel: which
general exhortation he brancheth forth in two Branches: first, That they would
maintain Truth with perfect Unity among themselves in the joint defense of it,
which should be great matter of joy unto him, whether he should come and see
it, or only hear of it, being absent. Doct. 1. There is nothing concerns
Christians wherewith they should be taken up so much, as how to beautify the
Gospel which they profess, by a holy conversation suitable unto it: for this
is the only thing he would have them minding: and that more than any thing
which concerned him; Only let your conversation be as it becomes the Gospel.
2. As there is nothing which gladdeth a faithful Minister more than the holy
life of those that are committed unto his charge: So the joy and contentment of
an honest Minister, should be conscientiously sought after by the people: for,
he uses this as an argument to incite them to walk as becomes the Gospel,
that his hearing, or seeing of it, would make him glad, that whether I come and
see you, or else be absent, I may hear of your affairs: which words do not
necessarily import his doubtfulnesse of his coming, contrary to what he seems
to speak, ver. 25. he only hereby shows. 1. that they were not so much to be
taken up with that, whether he came or not, as with their own duty. Secondly,
how much their living like the Gospel would refresh him, so that although he
should be deprived of that comfort, which he was confident to enjoy in their
fellowship, yet, to hear of their Christian conversation, would refresh his
spirit under that want. Doct. 3. This is one part of a conversation becoming
the Gospel, to be zealous for truth, standing to, and striving for the defense
thereof against error, and unstability in truth, which reflect as much on the
Gospel, as profanity of life: for Paul explaineth this conversation, which
becomes the Gospel, by a standing fast, and striving for the faith of the
Gospel, that is, for the doctrine of faith held forth in the Gospel. 4. It
concerns Gods people much, to be thoroughly one among themselves in this
conflict for truth against error: therefore does he press them so much to be
one, while he says, that ye stand fast in one spirit, with one mind, striving
together; where every word expresses a part of this unity, to wit, union in
spirit, or judgment and opinion; union in mind or affection; and union in
design and endeavor, while they strive together.

Verse. 28. And in nothing terrified by your adversaries, which is to them an
evident token of perdition, but to you of salvation, and that of God.
The second branch of living like the Gospel (which also explaineth the first)
is a spirit of courage under sufferings from the enemies of truth, which he
presses from the consideration of two things, which they might read in their
courageous sufferings, to wit, namely, that their so doing, portended
destruction to enemies, and salvation to themselves. Doct. 1. As the people of
God have always some to be their adversaries for truth; so they may attain to
such a high pitch of courage, that the utmost of adversaries malice and rage,
will not terrify them, to wit, so as to drive them from their duty, or to make
them take any sinful course for their own safety, Nehem. 6. ver. 11. Therefore
are they exhorted to it, as a thing attainable, that they be in nothing
terrified. 2. Faithless fears and saintings of spirit, because of the boasts
and threats of adversaries, are exceedingly unsuitable for those who live under
the Gospel: for this is one part of that conversation, which becomes the
Gospel, to be in nothing terrified by adversaries. 3. The more of sufferings
for truth the people of God are made to under-go, and the more there be of
Christian courage, and holy contempt of enemies rage and boasts under
sufferings, there is the more evidence of delivery unto the Church, and of
ruin here and hereafter to her enemies, which is to them an evident token of
perdition. 4. Christian courage under sufferings for Christ and his truth
(which always pre-supposeth faith in Christ, ver. 29.) though it be not,
meritorious of heaven; yet it evidenceth our right unto it: but to you of
salvation. 5. It is of Gods free grace, and from his special disposing, that
crosses and sufferings for truth (which in themselves look like displeasure and
wrath from the Lord) should contribute any thing unto the salvation of the
sufferer, or be a promising evidence of it: this much is meant by the last
words, and that of God.

Verse. 29. For unto you it is given in the behalf of Christ, not only to
believe on him, but also to suffer for his sake.
Here is another argument exciting them unto Christian courage under sufferings
for truth, to wit, That nothing was required of them, but what was given unto
them: for, as grace to believe in Christ, so grace to suffer courageously for
Christ, was a part of Christ's purchase for them, and for his sake to be gifted
over unto them. Doct. 1. To believe in Jesus Christ, or to suffer christianly
for him, goes beyond the reach of natural strength. It is an honorable gift,
and that freely given; for it is given unto you to believe, and suffer, says
he. 2. All favors, especially saving graces, are given unto us in behalf of
Christ, as being purchased for us by his merit, Isa. 53. ver. 5. and applied
unto us through virtue of his intercession, Heb. 7. ver. 25. for, it is given
in behalf of Christ. 3. Faith in Christ must go before Christian suffering for
Christ: so that to suffer for him, is of greater importance, and in some
respects more honorable, than simply to believe in him; for, he not only
says, it is given to believe, in the first place; and then, to suffer; but
there is a gradation in his speech from the less to the more, not only to
believe, but also to suffer. 4. This may encourage very cowards to be stout
under Christian-sufferings, that grace to suffer, and all things necessary to
make us suffer aright, are purchased unto our hand, and freely given unto us in
behalf of Christ: for, this is the force of the Argument contained in this
verse: for unto you it is given, etc. 5. Then are sufferings truly Christian,
and an evidence of salvation, when as the sufferer is first a believer, so his
sufferings are for Christ's sake, that is, for his truth, as the cause for which
1. Pet. 3. ver. 14. and from love to him, as the motive from which they suffer.
1. Cor. 13. 3. For his sake.

Verse. 30. Having the same conflict which ye saw in me, and now hear to (...)e
in me.
He gives a third reason to enforce the same duty, to wit, That their sharpest
sufferings would put them in no other condition then that, wherein he himself
was, as partly they saw when he was at Philippi: see Act. 16. ver. 19. etc. and
partly they had heard by the relation of others since. Doct. 1.
Christian-courage under sufferings for truth, will not be kept up without a
battle and conflict; what from a fainting discouraged spirit within, Heb. 12.
12. what from the rage of persecutors, Act. 9. 1. and Gods hiding of his face
without, Psalm. 44. ver. 24. So Paul speaking of his sufferings, calls them,
an agony or conflict: having the same conflict. 2. The Lord may for wise
reasons leave his most precious servants to wrestle under a suffering case for
a long time together; for Paul was a sufferer at Philippi, and continues to be
so when he is at Rome, a long time after that: what ye saw in me, and now hear
to be in me. 3. This may add no small encouragement under sufferings for
truth, that nothing befalls us, but what is common to men, yea, to the
chiefest of Christ's servants and Ministers: for, this is Paul's scope to
encourage those Philippians, because he himself was in the same case with them:
Having the same conflict, which ye now hear to be in me.

CHAP. II.
IN the first part of this Chapter, the Apostle exhorts them with much
vehemency, to union and humility, ver. 1, 2. And disswadeth from contention
and vainglory, ver. 3. and self-love, v. 4. First, from Christ's example, v. 5.
whose divine glory before his Incarnation is set forth, v. 6. his Incarnation
and state of humiliation, v. 7, 8. and his exaltation, v. 9, 10, 11. Secondly,
from their bypast obedience, v. 12, 13. After which he repeateth the
dehortation, v. 14. enforcing it from the advantages which were to follow, v.
15, 16. the last whereof, to wit, his joy, ought in reason to have much weight
with them, v. 17, 18.

In the second part he comfort them; first, by a promise of sending
Timotheus, v. 19. whom he commends unto them, to v. 24. Secondly, by the
expression of his hope, that he himself should see them shortly, v. 24. And
thirdly, by sending their own Minister Epaphroditus unto them presently, v. 25.
and that upon several weighty reasons, v. 26, 27, 28. from which he exhorts
them to receive him with all due respect, v. 29. and because he had with great
pains attended him at their direction, v. 30.

Verse. 1. If there be therefore any consolation in Christ, if any comfort of
love, if any fellowship of the Spirit, if any bowels and mercies; 2. Fulfill ye
my joy, that ye be like-minded, having the same love, being of one accord, of
one mind.
THe Apostle, being to press unity and love, uses a most vehement
exhortation, and a kind of rhetorical adjuration, That if they had ever found
by the means of his Ministry, or did expect to find any of those consolations,
which are to be had in Christ: If they had ever enjoyed, or expected to enjoy
any comfort of mutual love and concord among themselves; If they had ever found
any fellowship with God, by co(...)on of influence from his Spirit, or, if they
would no^ (...) that fellowship for the time to come; If they ^ad any pity or
compassion upon him a prisoner for Christ; He obtesteth them by all those, and
as they would give proof of all those, so they would complete the begun joy
which he had in them, by their unity and concord among themselves, which he
sets forth in four diverse expressions, to be distinguished thus. The first,
that ye be like-minded, signifies in general, their unity in judgment, love,
affection, and action: which is sub-divided in the three particulars following.
The second, having the same love, expresses unity of will and mutual
affections. The third, unity of design and endeavors. The fourth, unity in
judgment and opinion. Doct. 1. The most famous, and prais-worthy Churches have
their own failings and infirmities: So this Church, though highly commended,
Chap. 1. yet has had their own differences and alienation of minds, renting of
affections, and carnal emulations flowing from their differences, as appears
from this vehement exhortation to concord and unity. 2. As unity and concord is
necessary in it self, and at all times: (Hence the Apostle does so earnestly
press them unto it) So it is most necessary and comfortable, especially in
suffering-times: Therefore the Apostle, having spoken in the close of the
former Chapter, of those sufferings which they were to undergo for Christ and
Truth, infers as a conclusion from thence this exhortation unto unity, If
there be therefore, etc. 3. As they who have received any spiritual good from
Jesus Christ, by the Ministry of the Word, ought to have those in high
respect, whom the Lord has made instrumental for their good; and to evidence
that respect unto them, chiefly, when they are in a suffering case: So the
servants of Jesus Christ ought to improve any personal respect or weight which
they have with people, for working of them up toward that, wherein their
spiritual good does consist: for, Paul obtesteth them by all that good, for the
working whereof in them, his ministry had been instrumental; as also by that
compassionate and tender respect which they did owe unto him, being now in
bonds, that they would tender his joy and comfort; and chiefly that they would
evidence their respect unto him, by seeking after unity and concord, which was
more for their own good, then his; and is here mainly pressed-after by him, the
fulfilling of his joy being sought-after only as a mean to that end, and as an
argument to persuade the thing pressed: If there be any consolation in Christ
etc. if any bowels and mercies; fulfill ye my joy, that ye be like-minded,
says he. 4. So necessary is unity and concord among the people of God, that
the enjoyment of Christ's presence, and of spiritual consolation flowing from
it; the reaping of any spiritual advantage, by the communion and love of the
Saints; the entertaining of fellowship with God through the operation of his
Spirit in us, do in a great part depend upon it: our own differences, carnal
emulations, renting of affections, cross and contrary actings, do in a great
measure obstruct all those, by making Christ withdraw his presence, 2 Cor. 13.
11. and one of us coldrife and useless unto another, Gal. 5. 15. and by
grieving the Spirit of God, Ephesians. 4. 30. compared with 31. Hence the Apostle
obtesteth them by all those, that (...) would fulfill his joy, by being one
among themselves; and so insinuates a necessary connection betwixt their unity,
and enjoying of these things, while he says, If there be therefore, etc. ver.
1. Fulfill ye my joy, in being like-minded, ver. 2. 5. The utmost endeavors of
men and devils to sad the hearts of Christ's faithful servants, cannot
altogether mar their joy: Fulfill ye my joy, says he; which imports he had
some joy already. 6. The success of the Gospel among the Churches of Christ
will be matter of joy unto a public spirited Christian, even in the midst of
all his particular crosses and sufferings: for, the fruits o^ the Gospel among
these Philippians spoken of, chap. 1. gave occasion to this begun joy unto Paul
amidst his personal sufferings, which he does here obtest them to fulfill:
Fulfill ye my joy. 7. However a Church do otherwise flowrish in gifts, graces
and all kind of sympathy with Christian sufferers, (as this Church did, chap.
1. v. 6, 7.) yet so long as they live in strife and contention among
themselves, they give not so much matter of joy unto a true lover of Jesus
Christ by the former, but they give as much matter of grief by the latter:
Hence he bids them fulfill his joy, by being like-minded. There would be always
a mixture of sadness, and defect in his joy, notwithstanding the many good
things which they already had, if this were not. 8. That unity and concord
among societies, and especially among the Churches of Christ, may be solid and
lasting; there would be an union of will and affections, without laying them
out on contrary and cross objects; an union of designs and endeavors, without
mutual counterminings, which follows upon the former; and there would be an
union in opinion and matter of judgment, as the fountain of the other two: this
is it he presses, first generally, being like-minded; and then particularly in
the other three expressions, having the same love, being of one accord, of one
mind.

Verse. 3. Let nothing be done through strife, or vainglory, but in lowliness
of mind let each esteem other better then themselves.
He disswadeth them from two vices destructive to unity, to wit, contention and
vainglory; and exhorts them to humility, or lowliness of mind, a grace,
whereby a man thinks meanly of himself, and highly of others. Doct. 1. A
contentious spirit, which makes it a man's element to differ from others, and
to carry on his point, by out-wearying of others with jangling and strife, is a
notable unfriend to unity, and so to be eschewed by all, who would be esteemed
lovers of peace. Hence having exhorted them to union, he dehorteth from doing
any thing through strife. 2. The lust of vainglory (whereby a man pursues
more after applause from men to himself, Joh. 12. ver. 43. and to be esteemed
of above others, Joh. ver. 9. than the honor of God, or to be approven of him)
is the mother of contention and strife, and a great unfriend to union and
peace; it being a lust which carries alongs with it a spirit, which will not
cede to truth, Joh. 5. v. 44. together with an evident contempt of all others,
being compared with the man himself, who is tainted with this evil, 2 Chronicles:
18. ver. 23. Hence he forbids acting from a principle of vainglory, as they
would eschew strife, and so entertain union and peace: let nothing be done
through vainglory. 3. So ordinary is it for God to plague selfseeking spirits
with disappointment, Luke 14. ver. 11. so unconstant and unchangeable is
popular applause, Joh. 12. ver. 13. compared with chap. 19. v. 15. and so
little is there in any man to be puffed up with, 1* Cor. 4. ver. 7. that all
glory of this kind is but vain glory, or, but empty glory, as the word in the
original does bear. 4. The grace of humility, does not consist in an affected
strain of words and gestures, Matthew. 6. ver. 16. but being seated in the heart,
it makes a man think meanly of himself, or, of any thing that is his: thus the
word signifies, and is here rendered lowliness of mind. 5. Where this grace of
humility is, it contributeth much for unity and peace, and is inconsistent with
a carrying on of our point from a principle of vain glory, or through strife:
for, he prescribes humility as an antidote against those evils, and a
sovereign mean for attaining unto, and entertaining of union and peace: but
through lowliness of mind, etc. 6. So conscious should we be of our own
infirmities, 1 Timothy 1. ver. 15. so modest in the esteem of our own graces and
virtues, Romans 12. ver. 3. so far from prying into, or aggreaging the
infirmities of others, Prove. 10. ver. 12. so much should we esteem of their
known graces and virtues, Act. 15. ver. 8. and so prone in charity to believe
there may be much more good in them, then what appears, 1 Cor. 13. ver. 7.
that we ought to esteem any other, for what we know of him, to be better then
our selves: for, let each esteem others better then themselves, says he. 7.
Where Christians are of the forementioned temper, it speaks true humility,
and contributeth much for union and peace: for, the Apostle, having enjoined
lowliness of mind in order to unity, injoyneth the practice thereof in these
terms, let each esteem others better then themselves.

Verse. 4. Look not every man on his own thing, but every man also on the things
of others.
He dehorteth from a third vice destructive also of union and peace, to wit,
self-love, whereby we regard only our own honor and profit, wholly neglecting
the concernments of others: He exhorts also to the contrary virtue. Doct. 1.
Self-love, or, respect to our own things only, being joined with contempt and
mis-regard of the interest of others, is a great enemy to union and peace: for,
while he presses unity, he dehorteth from self-love; looking not every man to
his own things. 2. The procuring, maintaining and advancing of our neighbors
good estate, in his profit, honor, fame, and all spiritual blessings, should
be aimed at and endeavored by us with the same accuracie and diligence, which
we use in reference to our selves; and where Christians are of this temper, it
contributeth much for union and peace: for these are the things of others,
which he exhorts every man also to look unto, or, accuratly aim at, as one
shooting at a mark: for so the word bears. 3. A Christian is so to look upon
the concernments of others, as not to neglect these things which concern
himself: for he commands, look also on the things of others; also, or,
jointly with your own things.

Verse. 5. Let this mind be in you, which was also in Christ Jesus.
The Apostle presses all the beforementioned virtues from Christ's example,
which he propounds here in general for their imitation. Doct. 1. Christ's
example in these things which concern our duty, is a most excellent, Matthew. 1^.
29. unerring, 1 Cor. 11. 1. and effectual pattern, 2 Cor. 3. ^8. to be imitated
by those who profess themselves to be his; Let the same mind be in you which
was also in Christ Jesus. 2. This should commend a grace, or, virtue unto us,
and make it lovely, that jesus Christ by his practice, has given to us a
pattern of it: for, the Apostle presses these virtues, because they were
eminently to be seen in Christ; Let the same mind be in you etc. 3. Exemplary
humility, tender respect to the concernments of believers, with a most earnest
desire after the Churches peace, both with God, and amongst believers
themselves, were eminently to be seen in Christ: for, he says, this mind (to
wit, that humble, loving, uniting and modest mind, whereof he spoke in the
preceding verses) was also in Christ.

Verse. 6. Who being in the form of God, thought it not robbery to be equal
with God: 7. But made himself of no reputation, and took upon him the form of a
servant, and was made in the likeness of men. 8. And being found in fashion as
a man, be humbled himself and became obedient unto death, even the death of the
cross.
He in largeth and explicateth the example proposed, to this sense, That Jesus
Christ before his incarnation, being true God, clothed with divine Majesty,
and so in all things equal with God the Father, ver. 6. did nevertheless hide
his glory, assuming to himself the nature of man, with all the sinlesse
infirmities thereof; so that, sin only excepted, he was in all things like unto
other men, v. 7. and being thus incarnate, and found by all who conversed with
him, to have all the true properties of a real man, he voluntarily submitted
himself to under-go whatsoever was enjoined him by the Father, as necessary for
the Redemption of mankind; in which obedience to the Father, he persevered
even to the death; and in end did crown it by under-going the cursed death of
the cross, v. 8. Now, Christ did under-go all this for our good, and the
making up of our peace with God, and one with another in God: So, here is in
Christ great humility and condescension, and such respect unto the good of
others, that in some sense he did prefer them unto himself; together with a
most earnest desire after the Church's peace, which are the virtues pressed
from Christ's example, by the Apostle upon these Philippians. Doct. 1. Jesus
Christ had a being or subsistence before his Incarnation; who being, or,
subsisting, which is spoken of him before his Incarnation. 2. That being and
subsistence which he then had, was truly divine: He was from all eternity true
God, adorned with divine glory, splendor and majesty: see Prove. 8. 22* 23.
etc. Who being in the form of God: by which of necessity must be understood the
substantial form, or, very divine Essence, as clothed with divine glory and
majesty, there being no accidents in God. 3. Jesus Christ is God equal with
the Father, having the same divine Essence: for, the divine Names, divine
Properties, Works and Worship, are ascribed unto him: See 1 John 5. 20. Joh. 2.
24. Joh. 6. 40. and Joh. 5. 23. Thus he is said to be equal with God. 4 The
divine Essence, glory and majesty, which Scripture does ascribe unto Christ, do
justly and naturally belong unto him, and is not usurped by him: for, it is no
robbery for him to be equal with God. 5. The Father and the Son are one only
God; it being impossible there should be two Gods, or any thing equal with
God, which is not God himself: now, Christ is equal with God. 6. Jesus Christ,
though having still the same divine Essence with the Father, yet was always a
distinct Person from him, even the second Person of the blessed Trinity; See 1 John 5. 7. for equality is only in these things, which in some respect are
distinct: and he is equal with God. 7. Then is ones abasement a virtue, and
worthy to be imitated, when it is voluntarily under-taken for the glory of God
and the good of others, and not when it is constrained, or only imposed upon
us, as a just punishment for our self-exalting, or any other sin: Christ's
humility propounded here for our imitation, was such, as is imported in the
sense and scope of these words; he thought it no robbery to be equal with God:
The drift whereof, is, to show, that Christ, knowing himself to be the true
God, and not to have usurped that divine honor, did willingly under-go that
low condition, and was not constrained to it, as a punishment for usurping upon
that, which was not his own by right, as the Devils were thrown down from
Heaven because, as is commonly conceived, they would by robbery have usurped
divine honor, or to be equal with God. 8. Jesus Christ, the Eternal Son of
God, in the fullness of time, became man, and was incarnate: for so is meant by
his becoming of no reputation, and taking on him the form of a servant. 9. It
was Jesus Christ, the second Person in the Godhead, who did take on him the
nature of man, and was incarnate; and not the Father, or the Holy Spirit: for,
it is Jesus Christ here spoken of, who took on him the form of a servant: See
Romans 1. 3. 10. Jesus Christ, by his Incarnation and assuming the nature of man,
did empty himself of that divine glory, splendor and majesty, which before he
had: not by ceasing to be what he was but by assuming something to himself,
which before he was not, to wit, the humane nature: in which respect, as being
now God-Man-Mediator, he is less than the Father, Joh. 14. 28. under the
infirmity of which nature, he did hide for a time his divine glory, so that
very little of it did appear, and to some few only, Isa. 53. 2. he became of no
reputation. In the Greek, it is, he emptied himself. 11. Such was the love of
Christ unto lost sinners, Joh. 15. 13. and to the glory of his own and his
Fathers mercy, to be manifested in their salvation, Joh. 17. 4. that willingly,
and of his own accord, without any constraint (except that of love) he laid
aside his glory, and became low and empty for their good: for, he made himself
of no reputation. 12. Jesus Christ, the second Person of the Godhead, did
assume to himself the true and real nature of man, having the same essential
properties with the natures of other men: for, he took upon him the form of a
servant, and was made in the likeness of men: which likeness denotes, not
only a similitude in outward show and appearance, but in the very essential
parts: See Genesis 5. 3. 13. Christ assumed to himself the humane nature, not as
it shall be in glory, perfectly glorified; but as clothed with sinlesse
infirmities, even such as are in us the punishment of sin; and did dimit
himself to be one of the lowest condition of men: for, he took upon him the
form of a servant, and not of a glorified Saint. 14. Though Jesus Christ did
take upon him the whole nature of a man, consisting of a true body, Heb. 2. 14.
and a reasonable soul, Matthew. 26. 38. Yet he did not assume the person of a
man; so as to be two Persons, one as God, another as Man: he is one Person
still, the humane nature subsisting in the second Person of the Godhead: so, he
took to himself not a servant, but the form, or, nature of a servant, and he
remains the same he, or, person, after incarnation, which he was before: be
took to himself: See Luke 1. 35. 15. Though there be but one Person in Christ;
yet there are two distinct Natures, the Divine, and Humane, without confusion
or mixture, every one reserving their own distinct properties: so he took on
him the form of a servant; but did not change the form or nature of a servant,
to the nature of God: See Luke 2. 52. Joh. 2. 24. 25. 16. The truth and reality
of Christ's humane nature, was evidently known unto those who did converse with
him, by the fashion and proportion of his body, and the whole strain of his
carriage and actions, they being such as are in, and use to be gone about by
other men: for, so much is meant by his being found in fashion as a man. 17.
Jesus Christ, though God equal with the Father, and so above all Law given
unto men, yet being incarnate, did take upon him the yoke of obedience unto the
Father's will revealed in the Law; that by the obedience of one, many might be
made righteous: see Romans 5. 19. And became obedient unto death; where his death
is spoken of, as the term of his obedience, or, as but one part of it at most,
the rest consisting in his performance of what the Law, both Moral and
Ceremonial did require, and is commonly called, his Active Obedience: see
Matthew. 3. 15. 18. So great is the guilt of sin, Deuteronomy. 27. 26. so strict is that
obligation, to under-go eternal wrath, which lies upon us for sin, Matthew. 5.
18. that no less could pay our ransom, and satisfy provoked justice, than the
shameful, painful and cursed death of the Son of God: for, in order to our
Redemption, he behoved to be obedient unto death, even the death of the cross.
19. Such was the love both of the Father, Job. 3, 16. and of the Son, Joh. 15.
13. to man's salvation, that for bringing it about the Father appoints the
Son to die; and the Son willingly became obedient to the Father, ^^en to death.

Verse. 9. Wherefore God also has highly exalted him, and given him a name
which is above every name: 10. That at the Name of Jesus every knee should bow,
of things in heaven, and things in earth, and things under the earth: 11. And
that every tongue should confess, that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of
God the Father.
The Apostle prosecutes this argument taken from Christ's example, showing, That
seeing Christ did humble himself so low, God has exalted him highly, to wit,
in his resurrection, 1 Cor. 15. 4. ascension, Mark 16. 19. and pl^cing the man
Christ at his right hand, Ephesians. 1. 20. and has made that divine glory of his
which was hid in the days of his humiliation, shine forth, by making it
manifest, That whole crucified Christ, God and man in one person, is the only
begotten son of God: this is the Name above every name, ver. 9. The ends of
bestowing of this high honor upon Christ, were, first, That all reasonable
creatures in heaven, earth, or hell, might adore and worship him as true God,
to wit, some willingly as the Elect: others by constraint, as the Reprobate
shall do, when made to stand at the Tribunal of Christ the Judge, to receive
their doom, ver. 10. The second end is. That all these creatures may not only
subject themselves unto him, but also be made openly to profess this crucified
Jesus to be that which he is, even JEHOVAH, Lord of all things, the only
begotten Son of God: all which glory to be bestowed on the Son, should detract
nothing from the glory of the Father, but add unto it, ver. 11. Doct. 1.
Whosoever is willing, for the glory of God and good of others, to part with his
own credit, when he is called to it, may expect from the Lord to have his loss
and suffering in that, richly recompensed: So was it with Christ, he humbled
himself, and was obedient, and therefore God highly exalted him. And it is the
very scope of the Apostle hereby to excite the Philippians to humility, and
self-abasing for the good of others: because, as Christ after his humiliation
was exalted, so might they expect to be exalted also in their own kind. 2. The
Lord Christ having abased himself to the lowest degree of misery, which he
engaged to undergo for our Redemption, was afterward (and that by virtue of
the Covenant of Redemption, see Isa. 53. 10.) exalted by the Father, to the
highest pitch of divine glory: so he makes his exaltation depend upon his
humiliation, the one as the necessary consequence of the other; wherefore God
also highly exalted him. 3. Through virtue of the personal union betwixt the
divine and humane nature in Christ, those things which are proper only to the
one nature, are ascribed unto and spoken of the whole person: So here, though
somewhat of this high honor, bestowed on Christ in his exaltation, be verified
only in the divine nature, to wit, in so far as this exaltation speaks the
manifestation of divine glory and majesty, which was before hid: and though
somewhat of it be verified only in the human nature, in so far, as it includes
his resurrection and ascension; yet the whole of it is ascribed unto the whole
person: for, he exalted him, to wit, the person Godman, and has given him a
name: So that divine glory and majesty, though it be not in the humane nature,
yet is, and does shine forth in that person, which is man; and though not the
Godhead, yet the person, who is God, did rise from the death, and ascend from
earth to heaven. 4. As the giving unto Christ a name, which is above every
name, does prove him to be true God, enjoying honor and majesty truly divine:
for, what else can be meant, by a Name above every name? So, the bowing of
every knee unto him, as of right belonging unto him, does evince the same
truth: for, hereby is intended that divine honor, due to God only, should be
given unto him, as appears from Isa. 45. 23. compared with Romans 14. 10, 11. 5.
This Name, which is above every name, or, the Divine Nature, Divine Properties,
Majesty and Splendour truly divine, is said to be given unto Christ, not, as if
in the days of his humiliation he had not been God; or, as if the humane
nature after the resurrection had been endued with the divine properties; but
because his divine majesty, before hid, was now manifested, and the humane
nature so highly honored, that though it be not changed into the divine, yet
that person who is man, is true God, and was to be acknowledged as such. 6. The
worship and honor due to God, though it consists mainly in the inward
affections of faith, love, fear and joy, Joh. 4. 24. yet it does not exclude
the manifestation of these affections by the outward gestures of the body, such
as bowing of the knee, and confessing with the mouth. 7. Externals in worship
are no infallible discriminating evidences of these who have true grace, from
those who have it not: for here, at the Name of Jesus every knee shall bow,
both of Elect and Reprobate; and every tongue shall confess. 8. The disgrace,
contempt and reproach which Jesus Christ did meet with when he was here upon
earth, do contribute much for making his glory illustrious now: therefore he
says not, at that Name which is above every name, but, at the Name of Jesus
(which before his resurrection was contemptible, and almost execrable,) every
knee shall bow. 9. However a small part of the world only does acknowledge
Christ to be God and Lord, being compared with those who acknowledge him not;
yet his glory shall be still upon the growing hand, until all reasonable
creatures in Heaven, Earth, or Hell, subject themselves unto him, and
acknowledge him to be the only begotten Son of God: for, to him every knee
shall bow, and every tongue shall confess, whether of things in heaven, as
Angels, and the Souls of them who sleep in the Lord; or things on earth, as Men
yet alive; or things under the earth, as Devils and damned souls: For, though
Angels and Spirits have neither corporal knees, nor fleshly tongues; yet they
have some means whereby they are bound, and shall, whether they will or not,
express and testify their subjection to our Lord and Savior: All which shall
have its full accomplishment at the last day, when Devils and damned men shall
be made to stand at the Tribunal of Christ to receive their doom: see Romans 14.
11. 10. To bow the knee, and uncover the head at the pronunciation of the
syllables of the name Jesus, is but a superstitious custom and will worship,
having no warrant from this Scripture: for by the name of JESUS, is not to be
understood the naked syllables, sound, and letters of that word, but the glory
and majesty of the Lord Christ, who (notwithstanding of that reproach which he
did meet with in the days of his flesh) shall one day be acknowledged by all;
otherwise, if the letter of the words be precisely stuck to how shall Angels
and Spirits bow the knee, who have none? 11. As the giving of divine honor to
Christ does no ways impair the glory of God the. Father: so, whoever
detracteth any thing from the honor of God the Son (as those Heretics do, who
deny his Godhead) they in so far detract from the glory of God the Father: for
the bowing of the knee, and confessing with the tongue, that Jesus is the Lord,
is to the glory of God the Father.

Verse. 12. Wherefore my beloved, as you have always obeyed, not as in my
presence only, but now much more in my absence; work out your own salvation
with fear and trembling.
The Apostle, from this excellent example of Christ, so sweetly enlarged, and
by a new argument taken from their bypast obedience, when he was present with
them, presses, and enlarges the former exhortation, exciting them to make
constant progress in the way of salvation, and that with fear and trembling:
whereby he dehorteth them from security, pride and presumption, vices opposite
to these virtues of modesty and humility, which from the beginning of the
chapter he has been pressing in order to union. Doct. 1. Then do we take a
right view of Christ's most excellent example, when the beholding of him makes
us walk like him, by imitating him in these virtues, which were eminently in
him: so Paul, having enlarged the example of Christ, exciteth them to the
imitation thereof; Wherefore my beloved, says he. 2. A Minister may, and in
some respects ought to commend the People of God committed to his charge, for
their willing obedience unto the Word of the Lord from his mouth; yea, and make
known even to themselves the good esteem he has of them: so does the Apostle
here, as ye have always obeyed, says he. 3. Whatever approbation one
Christian receives from another, or from their judicious discerning Minister,
it should be made use of as a spur to excite to further diligence; and is not
to be rested upon, as if having it we had enough: for so the Apostle
commands, as ye have always obeyed, now much more work out, etc. 4. The
less we have of outward excitements to our duty, and the more of
discouragements to drive us from it, we ought to be the more intent upon it; as
hereby giving evidence of our sincerity, that what we do, flows not merely
from outward principles, but from inward respect and love to that which is
commanded: so the Apostle bids them, now much more obey in his absence, when he
was not present to excite them to go forward; and many seducers were now
discovered to draw them backward, that hereby they might evidence the sincerity
of that obedience which they gave unto him when he was with them present, as
not being eye-service unto Paul, but from respect to the command of an
omnipresent God. 5. In times of schisms and heart-divisions, it is too ordinary
for people to be taken up with trifles, neglecting those things wherein their
salvation is most concerned: his pressing of them to workout their own
salvation, imports, that through their divisions this work was much
neglected. 6. If people were employed as they ought about that great work, how
to get their own souls saved, they would be less in Church-renting, and
dividing one from another for matters of smaller importance: therefore he
presses them to work out their own salvation, that he may hereby divert them
from their contention and strife. 7. Heaven is not to be expected by the lazy
and negligent, or such as draw back: There must be a working, and a working of
it out: whereby is meant, the employing of all our abilities and endeavors, to
practice all those means that God has appointed for the accomplishment of our
salvation, Luke 13. 24. and a constant continuance in the practice of them,
until heaven and salvation be actually bestowed, Matthew. 24. 13. This is to work
out our salvation: and so the word signifies to carry on a thing begun to its
full end. 8. However Scripture does condemn that fear in Believers, which
causes diffidence, doubting and despair, Matthew. 8. 26. yet there is a fear
opposite to carnal security, and to presuming on our own strength, which
carries along with it a sollicitous care about, and diligence in every thing
which is our duty, Psalm. 5. 7. together with humility and diffidence in our
selves, Romans 11. 20. This is a fear and trembling which is lawful and here
commanded as most necessary for carrying on the begun work of salvation unto a
perfect close: Work out your own salvation with fear and trembling.

Verse. 13. For it is God which works in you, both to will and to do of his
good pleasure.
He gives a reason why they ought to work with fear and trembling, holding off
the extremes of lazy security, and carnal confidence: because the beginning,
progress and accomplishment of every good work is from God working freely; and
therefore they were not through security to neglect the motions of his Spirit
in them to good, nor yet be puffed up with conceit of their own strength. Doct.
1. The very first motions unto and beginnings of any thing which is spiritually
good, are the work of Gods grace: for, he works in us, not only to do, but
also to will, and that by infusing into the soul a power to will that which is
good; and by actuating that power, making us actually to will: So, he not only
gives new supernatural faculties, but also the use and exercise of them. 2.
Though the first motions and beginnings of that which is spiritually good be
wholly from God; yet he does not constrain, or by force necessitate the will
unto it, but by his omnipotent power he moves sweetly, and works effectually
upon the will, so that he makes it willing to will that good which is by him
intended: he works in us to will. 3. The natural faculties and powers of the
soul, are not made useless by grace, as if they were laid aside to do nothing,
the grace of God in us in the mean time doing all things; The will of man is
indeed renewed by grace, and the will being thus renewed, does also work: for,
he works in us to will: we do will, being wrought upon by God. 4. The
operation of Gods Spirit in working grace, is more than naked moral swasion,
which consists only in propounding of the object, and holding forth inducing
considerations to make the will close with that object, there being still an
indifferency left to man's free will to accept or refuse, as likes him best:
There is besides this a real influence from the Spirit of the Lord upon the
will; a pull of omnipotent power, whereby the will is moved infallibly and
certainly to close with the object: for, he works to will, and so determines
the will. 5. Not only are the first principles of, and motions unto that which
is spiritually good from the influence of Gods grace; but also the flowing
forth of these motions, and acting according to these gracious principles, does
flow from the same free grace of God working powerfully in us: for, as he
works to will, so also to do. 6. This powerful work of God, whereby he
works the beginnings, increase, and accomplishments of grace in us, is
altogether free, flowing from his good will and pleasure, and is not merited by
any thing wrought by us, Romans 11. 35. His giving of more grace, is not merited
by our use-making of the first grace, Jam. 4. 6. nor yet the first grace by the
right use of our natural parts, Ephesians. 2. 1. for, he works of his good will and
pleasure. 7. Though Christians be exhorted to the diligent performance of all
commanded duties; yet this impedeth not, but the beginning, progress, and
accomplishment of every work spiritually good, is wholly from God; for,
exhortations show what we ought, but not what we are able to do: hence, though
they are commanded, ver. 12. to work out their own salvation; yet, it is
affirmed here, it is God who works. 8. To ascribe, with Scripture, the whole
work of grace in us, to God as the author, is a strong engine to batter down
all confidence in our own strength, and to shake off carnal security, and stir
us up to diligence: so far is it from rendering men lazy and secure: for
having exhorted them to work out their own salvation with fear and trembling,
and so to shake off security and self-confidence, he gives this as a reason,
It is God that works in you, etc.

Verse. 14. Do all things without murmurings, and disputings.
He repeateth his dehortation from dissension and discord; setting forth
divisions by their two usual and bitter fruits, to wit, private backbitings,
and public contentions or st^ife. Doct. 1. Private backbitings, secret
whisperings, and venting of mutual mistakes to the prejudice one of another, as
they are unseemly among Christians; so they are the ordinary fruits of division
and discord in the Church: for, these are the murmurings from which he
dehorteth. 2. Public fruitless contests, hot debates, bitter reflections, are
in like manner unseemly among Christians, and another ordinary fruit of
division and discord: for, these are the disputings here spoken of.

Verse. 15. That ye may be blameless and harmless, the sons of God, without
rebuke, in the midst of a crooked and perverse nation, among whom we shine as
lights in the world: 16. Holding forth the word of life, that I may rejoice in
the day of Christ, that I have not run in vain, neither labored in vain.
He presses obedience to the former exhortation, because of the many and great
advantages following hereupon; namely, That hereby, as by one mean, they should
attain to live. 1. so, as none could justly blame them. 2. so, as they should
do no harm unto others. 3. so, as to enjoy convincing evidences of their
sonship and adoption. 4. so, as to stop the mouths of a number of godless
Pagans, by holding forth in their profession and practice the way to life
revealed in the Gospel, that those poor Pagans, among whom they lived, might
fall in love with it; and 5. so, as Paul might have matter of joy in their
salvation by his Ministry at the day of judgment: Which advantages as they were
to follow one upon another, so all of them would be promoved much by their
unity and concord, and obstructed much by dissension and discord. Doct. 1.
Where a spirit of pride and contention, together with private whisperings and
public hot debates, falls in upon a Church, it will be found hard for any,
who is engaged in that strife, to carry himself so, but somewhat worthy of blame
will escape him: for he makes their living blameless, to be the fruit of
doing all things without murmurings and disputings: that ye may be blameless.
2. It is no small difficulty also for any, who is so engaged, to watch over his
own spirit with that circumspection and tenderness, but he will upon some
occasion be doing hurt unto others; either by admitting groundless reports,
and entertaining jealousies of them, or speaking to their disadvantage himself;
or not standing for their just credit, when they are reproachfully spoken of by
others, or by bitter reflections, or some such like thing, 2 Cor. 12. 20. for
he makes harmless living a fruit of unity, that ye may be harmless. 3.
Division and strife, together with the sinful effects which these produce in
peoples spirits, do often grieve the Spirit, and darken these evidences of
adoption and sonship, which Believers, being in a calm and peacable temper of
spirit, use to see most clearly: for, he makes their being the sons of God, or
the evidencing of their sonship, depend upon their doing all things without
murmurings: that ye may be the sons of God. 4. There is nothing which makes
Atheists and enemies of the Gospel take more occasion to vomit out their spite
and malice against it, and the professors of it, than the schisms and sidings,
murmurings and backbitings, public contests and bitter reflections, which are
among Christians themselves: for, he makes the stopping of the mouths of
godless Pagans to be a fruit of unity and peace within the Church: that ye may
be without rebuke, in the midst of a perverse nation. 5. It seems good unto
the Lord for wise reasons, at sometimes to measure out the lot of his precious
servants among a multitude of godless profane Atheists: for, those
Philippians did live in the midst of a perverse nation. 6. It concerns those,
who are so disposed of, to walk the more circumspectly, that no occasion may be
given to wicked men to wound the Gospel through their sides: for, so he
enjoyneth, that ye may be in the midst of a perverse nation without rebuke. 7.
Whatever be a man's carriage otherwise for civility, policy, moral or natural
parts; yet so long as he imbraceth not the Gospel, but remains an enemy unto
it, he is in Gods esteem but crooked, perverse, froward, and nothing worth: So,
all who lived at Philippi, except the Christians, are ^ere called, a crocked
and perverse nation: though doubtless many of them did excel in natural and
moral parts. 8. Then do we stop the mouths of enemies unto truth, when our
conversation, for piety unto God, and righteousness unto our neighbor, is
such, as may discover unto them their failings, and point out that good way
wherein they ought to walk: for, he shows how we may be free of their rebukes,
even when we shine as lights in the world. 9. There is a duty lying upon
Christians of thirsting after, and laboring to bring about the salvation of
these among whom they live, though never so wicked and perverse: so, they were
to shine as lights: and by their profession and practice, to hold forth the
word of life in their several stations, even in the midst of a crooked and
perverse nation. 10. Suitable practice joined with profession, puts such a
majesty and splendor upon Truth, that every Christian walking orderly is the
same to profane men, among whom they live in order to their conviction, and
discovery of their sin, and pointing out the lovely beauty of the way of
Holiness; which the Sun and Moon is in the Firmament in order to the
discovering of things hid by natural darkness: for, says he, ye shine as
lights in the world, holding forth. 11. There is no life worthy to be so
called, being compared with the life of grace here, and of glory hereafter,
Gal. 2. 20, there is no way of attaining this life, but by Jesus Christ, whom
to know is life eternal, Joh. 17. 3. and there is no way to know Christ but by
the Gospel, Romans 1. 1, 3. This is imported while the Gospel, which holds out
Christ, is called by way of excellency, The Word of Life. 12. The office of the
Ministry, being faithfully gone about, is so painful, weighty, and full of
labor, that it may take up any one man wholly, and will prove as wasting of
his natural spirits, as any other employment which can be chosen: hence the
Apostle expresses his pains taken in the Ministry, by running in a race, and
other strengthconsuming exercises: for the word rendered labored, signifies
exercises of that kind; that I have not run, neither labored. 13. However, the
pains of a faithful Minister will not be lost as to himself, and from the Lord,
Isa. 49. 4: yet they may be in vain, as to the peoples profiting, and in regard
of any comfort which he enjoys from the fruits of his labors upon them: this
is here supponed as possible, while he says, that I have not run in vain. 14.
The glory which shall be put upon gracious souls in the day of judgment, will
add to the glory and joy of these faithful Ministers, by whose labors they
were gained unto God: hence Paul exhorts them to unity, to live blameless,
without rebuke, shining as lights: that, says he, I may rejoice in the day of
Christ.

Verse. 17. Yes, and if I be offered upon the sacrifice and service of your
faith, I joy, and rejoice with you all. 18. For the same cause also do ye joy,
and rejoice with me.
He shows the bringing about of his joy in the day of the Lord Jesus, ought
to have weight with them; because of his earnest desire after their spiritual
good: which was such, that if, as he had been isntrumental for bringing them
to Christ, by faith in him, so his blood should be shed for confirmation of
their faith, and sealing of his own ministry or service; his death upon that
account should not be grievous, but joyous unto him, and that because it should
tend to their advantage and joy: and therefore he binds it upon them, as
their duty, to joy and rejoice with him, that is, to do that which would tend
to his comfort and joy; especially, that they would walk christianly, study
humility, and live in concord and unity, which ver. 2. he called the fulfilling
of his joy. Doct. 1. The sacrifices acceptable unto God, under the New
Testament, next to that of Christ his offering up himself upon the cross, Heb.
9. 14. are, when Christians being made to judge themselves, and so, as it were
slain by the service and ministry of the Word, are chased to lay hold by faith
on that sacrifice of Christ's, and offer up themselves wholly to be spent and
wasted in his service, Romans 12. 1. for, the Apostle here speaks with allusion
to the Leviticall sacrifices, making their faith, or giving themselves over to
God in Christ by faith, the sacrifice, and his ministry or service, the
sacrifizing knife: by the means whereof, they were as it were killed and
offered up, being made to die to their own righteousness and sinful lusts,
and to flee unto God in Christ by faith; upon the sacrifice and service of your
faith. 2. However persecuters, in shedding the blood of Gods People, for their
adherence to truth and duty, do aim at no further, but to satisfy their own
cruelty and rage, Matthew. 14 3. yet the Lord intends a more high and noble
end, to wit, that hereby believers may be more confirmed in the faith of that
truth for which they suffer: for, if Paul should be offered up by death, he
fore-seeth that it would be upon the sacrifice of their faith: he speaks, as
was said, with allusion to the ancient way of sacrifizing, where wine and oil
were poured out upon the meat offering, that the sacrifice might be entire and
complete, according to what the Law did prescribe, Levit. 2. 7. 15. so, the
shedding of his blood, should tend to accomplish the spiritual sacrifice of
their faith, they attaining thereby a strong confirmation to it: If I be
offered up, or, poured forth upon the sacrifice, etc. 3. Ministers would preach
nothing to God's people, but what they dare seal the truth of with their blood,
if God call them to it: so Paul is ready to have his blood poured out upon the
service of their faith, that is, for confirmation of his own Ministry, by
means whereof, faith was wrought in them. 4. When God does call a man to
suffer, and makes use of his sufferings for confirmation of any part of
Gospel Truth, and for edifying the body of Christ, he ought to rejoice in his
Cross, as if it were his Crown: so Paul, I joy and rejoice. 5. The ardent zeal
and affection, which we see in others, toward our salvation and spiritual good,
should incite us to be as affectionate toward it our selves: so, from this,
that Paul was so much taken up with their spiritual advantage, as to die for
it, he presses them to take part with him; Wherefore, do ye also joy with me,
to wit, in that wherein he did rejoice, which was in their Christian
conversation, unity and concord among themselves.

Verse. 19. But I trust in the Lord Jesus, to send Timothe(...) shortly unto
you, that I also may be of good comfort, when I know your state.
In the second part of the Chapter, the Apostle promises, if the Lord Christ
should so judge fitting, to send Timotheus unto them: and that not only for
their good and advantage to be reaped by his labors, in composing their begun
differences, and stopping the mouths of gainsayers; but also for his own
comfort, as hoping at Timothe's return, to hear their affairs to be in a better
posture, than they were for the present. Doct. 1. The presence and assistance
sometimes of one man eminent for piety, parts and reputation, will prove so
steadable to the Church, laboring under schism and feared persecution, that
the very intimation of a purpose to send such a one, will add much spirit and
courage unto those who are honest: therefore Paul, to keep them from fainting,
makes known his purpose to send Timotheus. 2. All our promises and purposes,
are to be undertaken with submission to the will of Christ, and grounded upon
his power and strength (and not our own) for bringing of them unto timeous
performance: so was Paul's purpose to send Timothy: I trust in the Lord Jesus
to send; whereby he does not express a hope, or confidence of faith, but only
of charity and love to the Church's good, 1 Cor. 13. 7. which made him hope
that God would bring about that particular, which tended so much to their
advantage, although he had no certain promise for it to build faith upon. 3.
The crosses and comforts of a Christian, endued with a truly public spirit,
depends not so much upon those things which are of particular concernment to
himself, as those which are of public concernment to Jesus Christ, and to his
Church in the World: so Paul's comfort, though now in bonds, depended much upon
the state of this Church at Philippi: I may be of good comfort, when I know
your state, says he.

Verse. 20. For I have no man like-minded, who will naturally care for your
state.
He commends Timotheus from his affection toward them, in so far, that he
came not short of the Apostle himself, or at least, resembled him most in his
sincerity and diligence in seeking after their spiritual good. There was no
man like-minded to Paul, except Tmotheus alone: for he is excepted, as appears
from ver. 22. Doct. 1. It contributeth much for the good success of a
Minister's pains among a People, that he be looked upon by them, as one who
will thirst after their good, more than any thing else: so Paul being to send
Timothy, represents him as such; he naturally cares for your estate. 2.
That a Minister may be fitted to do good among a People, he would place before
himself the pattern of the Apostles; and so far as in him lies, set himself to
imitate them in that care, diligence and affection, which they had toward the
Church of Christ: for, herein is Timothy commended, I have no man like-minded.
3. Then does a Minister imitate the Apostles in watching over their flock;
when, first, the state of souls is the object of his care, he cares for your
state: Secondly, when their care is more than ordinary, and in a sort anxious
and solicitous: even a care, which in other things would be sinful; the Greek
word signifies such a care. And thirdly, when it is such, as is natural and
kindly, arising, not from constraint, 1 Pet. 5. 2. but from love to the party
cared for, being such, as is the care of a parent toward his child: who will
naturally care, says he.

Verse. 21. For all seek their own, not the things which are Jesus Christ's.
He further commends the care, which Timotheus had of them: It was such, that
he postponed his own particular affairs, to the work of Christ among them,
wherein he was singular; almost all others, who were with Paul, refusing (as
would appear) to undertake so long a journey, from the too great respect they
had to their own case and profit. Doct. 1. So near is the relation betwixt
Christ and the Church (such as is of the husband to the wife, Rev. 21. 9. of
the Head to the Members, Ephesians. 1. 22. of the King to his Subjects, Matthew. 21.
5.) that both their concernments are one; what concerns them, concerns him:
so, the under-taking of so long a journey, for the advantage of the Church at
Philippi, which all declined, except Timotheus only, is here called, a seeking
the things of Jesus Christ. 2. This commends a man's zeal for Christ much,
when the luke warmness of others does not blunt his edge; but, though all
should be for their own things, yet, he alone will be for the things of Jesus
Christ: for, herein is Timotheus commended. 3. Our own things, that is, worldly
ease, profit, credit, pleasure; and the things of Christ, wherein his honor,
and the public good of his people is much concerned, are often in two contrary
balances; respect to the former, making us frequently to neglect the latter:
for, so are they here opposed: their own things, not the things of Christ. 4.
Though Christians may, and justly ought, to seek their own things, with
subordination to the things of Christ I Tim. 5. 8. Yet, they may not seek their
own things, in opposition to the things of Christ; that is, so, as for respect
to the former, to neglect the latter: for, Paul condemns not the seeking of
their own things simply; but, that through seeking of them, they did not seek
the things of Christ. 5. A Christian, and especially a Minister, ought to be so
disposed, that no private interest, or concernment of his own, should so far
weigh with him, as to make him, for respect unto it, shift, or refuse any
thing, which Christ does call him unto, for furtherance of his Work: for,
herein is Timothy commended; and, for want of this disposition, the rest are
blamed: all seek their own things. 6. The Lord, by putting Professors upon
hazardous, troublesome, and expensive employments for Christ, discovers often
in many, too much love to self, and little love to Christ, which otherways
would have lain undiscovered: so, the motion of this long journey to Philippi,
did discover in the most part of Paul's companions, that they did seek their
own (...)d not the things of Christ.

Verse. 22. But ye know the proof of him, that as a son with the father, he has
served with me in the Gospel.
For proof of all, he appealeth to their own experience, concerning Timotheus,
while he preached the Gospel with Paul at Philippi, as a son with the father;
which speaks both his modesty, as also, that he was likeminded with Paul, in
all things following his example. Doct. 1. A Minister's own carriage, if it be
modest, Christian and ministerial, will speak more to his commendation among
judicious Christians, than all the recommendations which he can have from
others, although these be in their own place useful and lawful: but ye know
the proof of him, says he, I need not speak much for him. 2. The calling of
the Ministry, is a service; and Minsters are servants to Christ, for the
Church, and not lords over their faith, 1. Pet. 5. 3. so Paul and Timothy did
serve in the Gospel. 3. Those who are of older standing in the Ministry, and
thereby have attained a good measure of respect, parts, experience and
prudence, should not despise these of later standing, but acknowledge them as
fellow servants: so Paul, though a great Apostle, and the elder Minister, yet
acknowledges Timothy as his fellow servants: he has served with me in the
Gospel, says he. 4. These who are of late standing in the Ministry, ought to
honor the aged, as the son does the parent, obeying their counsels, and
following their example in those things which tend to the edification of the
Church: so did Timothy honor Paul: as a son with the father, he has served
with me in the Gospel.

Verse. 23 Him therefore I hope to send presently, so soon as I shall see how it
will go with me. 24. But I trust in the Lord, that I also my self shall come
shortly.
He concludes from what is said, his purpose to send Timothy, having once
seen how himself should be disposed of, in relation to his present imprisonment
and bonds, ver, 23. and withal, gives them hopes, that he himself being set
at liberty, should give them a visit shortly, ver. 24. Doct. 1. Those who have
power of sending forth Ministers to Flocks, should send such as (other things
being equal) are most willing to spend and be spent for the Peoples good, and
are best known unto, and approved of by the Flock, for their modesty,
diligence, zeal to the gaining of souls, and for their other parts: for, Paul
having shown Timothy to be such, concludes, him therefore will I send. 2. A
Minister may then postpone the public good and comfort of the Church to his
own particular, when his particular comfort may carry alongs with it a
sufficient future recompense of larger comfort to the Church, for her present
loss and delay: so Paul keeps back Timothy for a time to attend himself,
expecting that probably he should be liberate himself shortly, that by the
certain knowledge of his being set at liberty, they might be the more
comforted: so soon as I shall see how it will go with me. 3. The running upon
hazard, and drawing on of a cross by our former zeal for Christ, and diligence
in his work, should not make us repent of what we have done; nor yet draw back
from doing the like, when ever any new opportunity is offered: so Paul
resolves to go from the prison, to his work again: I my self shall come
shortly. 4. Whatever may be said from Chap. 1. v. 25. concerning Paul's
persuasion, grounded upon special revelation of his delivery from prison, yet
it appears, nothing was revealed to him of the time, when his delivery should
be: and therefore in this place, when he would limit it to a short time, he
speaks not with so full persuasion: I trust in the Lord to see you shortly,
says he.

Verse. 25: Yet I supposed it necessary to send to you Epaphroditus, my brother
and companion in labor, and fellow-souldier, but your messenger, and he that
ministered to my wants.
The Apostle in the mean time sends back their own Pastor Epaphroditus, who
had been sent to Paul with some supply, and to minister unto him in the prison:
And lest the Philippians should have thought, that either he had deserted Paul,
or, that Paul had not thought him worth the keeping, he shows, that he had
expressly sent him back, and commends him as a worthy man, from five
honorable epithets. Doct. 1. There is a relation of fraternity among
Christians, as all being born over again through the virtue of the same spirit,
Ephesians. 4. 4. within the bosom of one common mother the Church, Gal. 4. 26. having
all interest in God, as their Father, Romans 8. 15. and in Jesus Christ, who is
the firstborn among many brethren, Romans 8. 29. for, Paul calls Epaphroditus,
a brother, as he was a Christian. 2. As the Ministerial employment is a
painful laborious work; so these who are employed in it, should be
fellow laborers, working to the hands each of other: for, in respect of the
Ministerial calling, common to both, he calls him his companion in labor,
or, co-worker. 3. Though every Christian will have a battle, Ephesians. 6. 12. yet
faithful Ministers, who are as Standard-bearers, or, Sentinels, Ezekiel. 3. 17.
and march in the front before the Lord's People, 1 Timothy 4. 12. have a peculiar
battle of their own for truth and piety, against profanity and error: with
respect to which battle, he calls him fellow-souldier. 4. To be employed by
the Church, and sent upon her affairs, if it were but for conveying of their
charity unto those for whom it is appointed, is an honorable employment, even
to an Apostle's companion: for, Paul commends him from this, that he was the
Churches messenger, to wit, for carrying of their charity to Paul, Chap. 4. 18.
5. To be in any measure useful for, and serviceable unto an honest sufferer for
Christ, is matter of no small commendation: for, Epaphroditus is commended from
this, that he ministered unto Paul in his wants.

Verse. 26. For he longed after you all, and was full of heaviness, because that
ye had heard that he had been sick.
The reasons, why Paul thought it necessary to send Epaphroditus unto them, are
subjoyned in this and the two following verses; whereof the first is taken from
Epaphroditus his great desire to be at his Charge, together with his great
grief and heaviness for them, as knowing they would be exceedingly weighted
for him, having heard that he was sick. Do. 1. A faithful Minister's
affection unto, and longing after his absent Flock, will go beyond his desire
after family, friends, and other relations: for his longing after them all, his
whole Flock; and not his natural friends only, was that which necessitated Paul
to send him home: he longed after you all. 2. The affection of a Minister unto
his Flock, and to their advancing in the way of grace, ought to be such, that
even when through necessity of sickness, or of other lawful employments, he is
withdrawn from them, he may yet still long to be among them: so Epaphroditus,
though detained by sickness, and his necessary attendance upon Paul, yet longed
after them all. 3. There ought to be that love and sympathy betwixt Minister
and People, as to make each of them grieve for the affliction and grief of
another: so the Philippians hearing their Minister was sick, are weighted with
it, and he knowing they would be grieved for him, becomes full of heaviness
for them: he was full of heaviness, because ye had heard he was sick. 4. Grief
or heaviness of mind, because of the hand of God upon our selves, or others,
is not inconsistent with christian patience and submission to providence!
Patience moderateth those passions, but does not destroy them: so Epaphroditus
is commended from this, that he was full of heaviness, because of their grief.

Verse. 27. For indeed he was sick nigh unto death, but God had mercy on him:
and not on him only, but on me also, lest I should have sorrow upon sorrow.
He shows the report of Epaphroditus his deadly disease was true, and
commends the especial mercy of God, both to Epaphroditus and himself; whereby
the one was restored to health, and the other thereby delivered from further
occasion of great grief. Doct. 1. The Lord does sometimes suffer his preclous
servants to fall in dangerous diseases, not exempting his most faithful
Ministers, who, by reason of their labors in the work of the Lord, and the
many discouragements whereby their spirits are assaulted in it, (Isa. 49. 4.)
are as much liable to diseases and infirmities of body as any other: for indeed
he was sick. 2. The Lord does sometimes suffer his servants to fall into
desperate dangers, for which there is no humane remedy, that his mercy may be
the more seen in their delivery: so he was sick near unto death; his disease
was deadly and incurable by humane art: hence his restoration to health is
looked on as an act of Gods mercy; but God had mercy on him. 3. That God
preserves the life of faithful Pastors, is an act of no small mercy,
especially unto those who enjoy the benefit of their labors: and the removal
of such by death, should be looked upon as no small stroke: but God had mercy;
and his removal by death would have been sorrow upon sorrow, even to Paul. 4.
Seeing death, considered in it self, is terrible, Psalm. 55. 4. the reward of
sin, Romans 6. 23. and a privation of present life, Jam. 2. 26. Deliverie from
it, though but for a time, is a mercy even to believers, who by death lose
nothing, but gain much, Chap. 1. v. 23. especially if their delivery from death
be a mercy unto others: hence it is that Epaphroditus his delivery from death
was a mercy even unto himself, but God had mercy on him. 5. A work of mercy
ordinarily goes not alone, but carries many mercies along with it; some to
the person himself upon whom the work is wrought; and some to others who are
concerned in him: Thus the mercy that was manifested to Epaphroditus in his
recovery, was a mercy also to Paul; and not on him only, but on me also. 6.
Then do mercies weigh with us as they ought, when we look upon the sad effects
which would have followed upon the not bestowing of such a mercy: Thus Paul
takes a view of the extremity of sorrow which the death of Epaphroditus would
have caused unto him, which makes him look upon his recovery as a mercy; but
on me also, lest I should have sorrow upon sorrow. 7. So merciful is God, that
though sometimes he causes grief unto his dearest servants, yet he considers
their weakness, and does not overcharge them with sorrow: so he spared the life
of Epaphroditus, lest Paul should have bad sorrow upon sorrow. 8. Courage under
sufferings for Christ, and rejoicing in God may well consist with moderate
sorrow and heaviness, because of cross dispensations: for, though Paul has
professed often his great joy under his bonds (a^ chap. 1. v. 4, 18.) yet he
was not free of sorrow; lest I should have sorrow upon sorrow, which supposes
he had some sorrow already.

Verse. 28. I sent him therefore the more carefully, that when ye see him again,
ye may rejoice, and that I may be the less sorrowful.
Having given and enlarged one reason for his sending Epaphroditus, he adds
other two. First, That the Philippians, having seen their faithful Minister,
whom they once took for dead, might rejoice. Secondly, That Paul's own grief
might he somewhat eased, their Minister being once restored to them, of whom
they were deprived for his cause. Doct. 1. True love and christian friendship
protracteth not favors, but does timeously what should and may be done for
those unto whom it pretends: so Paul sends him timeously and carefully,
that is, presently after his recovery: I sent him therefore the more carefully.
2. The weights and griefs of the godly do prove an occasion of rejoicing
afterward; their evening of sorrow, ends in a morning of joy: So, the grief
which these Philippians had, because of their Pastors sickness and
apprehended death, ends in joy, when they see him in health again: that when
ye see him again, ye may rejoice. 3. It will be somewhat burdensome to an
ingenuous spirit, whatever otherwise be his straits, that others should suffer
prejudice, and be at any loss by reason of their kindness unto him: So it was
matter of sorrow unto Paul, that those Philippians, because of their respect
unto him, were so long deprived of their own Minister: this was the sorrow
which he was to be eased of by his return: that I may be the less sorrowful.
4. It is sufficient for modest, submissive, and exercised Christians, to meet
with some mitigation of their sorrow, though it be not removed from them
wholly: So Paul looks on this as satisfactory to him, that of the great weight
of sorrow and affliction, wherewith he was pressed, a part was to be removed:
that I might be the less sorrowful, says he.

Verse. 29. Receive him therefore in the Lord with all gladness, and hold such
in reputation:
From what he has said of Epaphroditus, he exhorts them to receive him with
all joy, and to give all due honor and respect unto him, and to such Ministers
as he was. Doct. 1. The carriage or deportment of people toward faithful
Ministers, should not be as unto private friends; but as to public persons
representing Christ, as sent from Christ, and as Ambassadors in Christ's
stead: for this is to receive them in the Lord, which Paul here commands. 2.
There cannot a richer blessing be bestowed upon a People, than that of a
faithful, painful, and loving Minister; therefore Paul bids them receive him
with all gladness, as if he had been all the friends they had in the world
restored unto them from death to life. 3. When the Lord does bless a People
with such a Minister, they ought to esteem highly of him, as of a precious
Jewel, and pearl of price; as they would not by their ingratitude and loathing
contempt, provoke the Lord to plague them with his removal, Matthew. 10. 23.
hold such in reputation, or, esteem of such as precious. 4. As it is Satan's
great design, to bring a faithful, painful Minister to disgrace and contempt,
Zech. 3. 1. So it is the duty of all, who wish the thriving of piety, and the
Church to be secured from profanity and error, by all means to uphold the
credit of that calling, together with the lawful authority and due respect of
these who carry themselves faithfully in it: so Paul commands, that such he
held in reputation.

Verse. 30. Because for the work of Christ he was nigh unto death, not regarding
his life, to supply your lack of service toward me.
He gives a reason why they ought to receive him gladly, because he had in a
sort mis-regarded his life, and brought himself to the door of death, for the
work of Christ, that is, by his watching, travel and pains taking, to minister
unto Paul in his necessities, doing his utmost* that Paul should want no
necessary duty, no more tha^ if all the Philippians had been present attending
him at whose direction he did what he did, and which they would have done
themselves, if they had been present. Doct. 1. Not only the preaching of the
Word, but also the performance of the duties of humanity, civility, and charity
unto those who suffer for truth, is the work of Christ, and that, not only
because such works are particularly enjoined by Christ, Heb. 13. 3. but what is
done unto any such, is accounted done to him: See Matthew. 25. 36. 40. So
Epaphroditus his attending upon Paul in prison, is called, the work of Christ.
2. Then may a man have a good conscience under his sickness and bodily
infirmities, yea, and death it self, when his well-ordered zeal for Christ,
has brought them on: for, Epaphroditus is here commended, that for the work of
Christ he was near unto death; he had no evil conscience therefore in bringing
sickness upon himself. 3. However God loves mercy better than sacrifice, and
wills no man foolishly and rashly to be prodigal of his own life and health,
no not under pretense of doing service unto him, 1 Timothy 5. 23. Yet there are
some cases, wherein he calls men to the performance of some duties, and which
they should be willing to go about, although they should evidently perceive
most certain hazard of life and health to ensue thereby: such are the duties of
owning those who suffer for Christ, contributing to the supply of their outward
necessities, when they cannot be supplied otherwise, the faithful discharging
of any public employment, wherein we are entrusted: those were the duties, for
performance whereof, Epaphroditus regarded not his life, wherein he is here
commended, for the work of Christ he regarded not his life to supply your lack
of service. 4. As it sometimes falls out, that through distance of place, or
other insuperable difficulties, the children of God cannot manifest that
cordial affection by their own presence and personal attendance, which they
carry unto those who suffer for truth: so they ought to supply that in-lack, so
far as is possible by others, who, representing them, may go about these duties
of humanity and charity, in their name: Thus there was no want of affection in
these Philippians toward Paul, only there was a lack of service, they not
being able, though otherwise willing to attend him because of distance of
place, and they direct their Pastor to supply this lack of their service
toward him^

CHAP. III.
IN the first part of this Chapter, having premitted an exhortation to rejoice
in the Lord Christ, v. 1. he exhorts them to beware of false teachers, who
gloried in circumcision, v. 2. showing, that not they, but he, and other true
believers had right to that title, v. 3.

In the second part, being to oppose his own practice, to their dangerous
opinions in the matter of Justification, he shows, he had as much to boast
of, as they, v 4. which he instanceth in eight privileges, v. 5, 6. In none
whereof he did now place any confidence, v. 7. nor yet upon any thing
imaginary, without Christ; confirming this his resolution and practice, by
showing the advantages to be hereby gained, namely, 1. access to Christ, v. 8.
Secondly, his being judged, not according to his own righteosnesse, but
Christ's, v. 9. Thirdly, experimental knowledge of the worth and power which
is in Christ, v. 10. And fourthly, his attaining to the glorious resurrection
of the just, v. 11. And obviateth a mistake, showing he had not yet attained
unto perfection in the knowledge of, and conformity with Christ; but that it
was his aim, v. 12. which he inlargeth and clears by a similitude taken from
runners, v. 13, and 14.

In the third part, he exhorts them to follow his example, leaving place for
God to give a more full manifestation of any thing which was doubtsome, v. 15.
providing they did walk peaceably and tenderly, v, 16. and so having repeated
the exhortation, v. 17. he inforceth it, because 1. there were many, whose
example was not to be followed, to wit, the false Apostles, whom he sets
forth in their blackest colors, v 18, 19, Secondly, his own example was worth
the following, v. 20. and he, with such as he was, to be rewarded gloriously,
v. 21.

Verse. 1. Finally, my Brethren, rejoice in the Lord. To write the same things
to you, to me indeed is not grievous, but for you it is safe.
THat he may guard those Philippians against the Errors of the false Teachers
in the doctrine of justification, he premits an exhortation to rejoice in the
Lord Christ, as the author, purchaser, and worker out of their salvation, and
all their other happiness; excusing himself for his often inculcating of the
following admonition, because it was not wearisome unto him, nor yet
unprofitable for them. Doct. 1. Unity in judgment and affection would be so
pressed upon us by others, and endeavored by our selves, as not to prejudge
the purity of doctrine: for, having pressed unity, chap. 2. he presses purity
of doctrine as much in this. 2. According as people are tainted with, or
tempted unto Error, so should Ministers be more or less in the public
refutation of it: Thus the Apostle, writing to the Galatians, enters a just
dispute with the false Apostles, urging reasons, and answering objections,
because many in that Church were already seduced by them, Gal. 3. 1. But here,
because the Philippians were only tempted unto, and not much overtaken with
Error, he does not so much dispute, as admonish and exhort. 3. To rejoice in
Christ, that is, to keep our hearts affected toward him, and the doctrine
which speaks of him, to be constantly and with delight making our recourse
unto him, and employing him as the author, procurer, and worker out of all our
happiness here and hereafter, is a choice guard against any Error, which is
contrary unto those Truths relating to him: for, the Apostle being to guard
against Errors in the doctrine of justification, premitteth this as a
foundation to the whole work, rejoice in the Lord. 4. It is not sufficient to
know what Jesus Christ is, what he has done for us, or what use may, and
should be made of him; except that the knowledge which we have of him do
produce suitable affections in the heart toward him: for, having made Christ
known, chap. 2 v. 6, etc. he infers from thence with a finally that their
hearts should rejoice in him, the word says as much as there remaining one
thing yet necessary. 5. The often repeating and frequent inculcating of such
points of Truth as are most for edification of the hearers, ought neither to be
burdensome to a Minister, nor yet wearied of by the people: so, to inculcate
often the following admonition was not grievous unto Paul, neither were they to
weary of it, because unto them it was safe. 6. Temptations unto Error; for, the
most part are covered over with such pious pretenses, Col. 2. 23. and lovely
baits, Gal. 6. 12. that there is need of many guards and frequent warnings to
keep them off; so the Apostle thinks it necessary to reiterat again and
again, both by preaching while he was present, and now by Letter while he is
absent, this following exhortation, To beware of false-Teachers: But for you it
is safe.

Verse. 2. Beware of dogs, beware of evil workers, beware of the concision.
He exhorts them particularly to beware of false-teachers, who did labor to
conjoyn, in the matter of justification, the righteousness of works with that
righteousness which is of Christ by faith; whom he calls, first, Dogs,
because of their barking against the sincere Doctrine of the Gospel, and their
railing against the orthodox Preachers thereof; and this all, to get wherewith
to satisfy their unsatiable greed. Secondly, Evil workers; because under
pretense of working well to establish Truth, and build up the Church, they did
what in them lay to destroy them both, and were men of wicked lives, ver. 19.
However they pretended much zeal for the Law of Moses, and good works. Thirdly,
Concision, alluding to Circumcision, whereof they gave out themselves to be
Patrons and defenders, and designed themselves by it, Gal. 2. 12. which name he
takes from them, as being unworthy of it, and calls them concision, as it
were, the destroyers and renters of the Church. Doct. 1. There ought to be a
spirit of wise and godly zeal in faithful Preachers, against the spreaders of
Errors, how great soever their reputation be among the people: so Paul calls
them Dogs, etc. 2. That Ministers may guard the Lords People against seducers,
they would labor to undeceive them, by taking off the vizard of piety, zeal,
and other seeming virtues, under which the spreaders of Errors do usually lurk
that so they may be seen in their own colors; thus they pretended to purity,
to be patrons of good works, and upholders of Circumcision, one of God's
Ordinances; and the Apostle taking off the vizard, calls them profane dogs,
evil workers, and concision, or, Church-renters, under pretense of pleading for
a divine Ordinance. 3. It is the Duty of the Lords People to know and discern
those who preach Truth, from those who preach Error, that they may cleave to
the one and flee from the other: beware of dogs; the word signifies see, and
know them; and from knowledge, eschew them. 4. It is not unbeseeming piety, to
use merry words, witty and pleasant allusions; yea, and upon some occasions,
piercing jests or taunts; providing always there be no scurrility or
baseness, Ephesians. 5. 4 for, as often elsewhere, 1 King. 18. 27. So the Spirit of
God here makes use of such, while alluding to Circumcision, he calls them
Concision, giving them a name like in sound, but much different in the usual
signification, and as much to their disadvantage.

Verse. 3. For we are the Circumcision, which worship God in the spirit, and
rejoice in Christ Jesus, and have no confidence in the flesh.
He gives a reason why he did not daign them with the name of Circumcision;
because not they, but he, and true Believers had right to that title, they only
having the thing signified by circumcision, whereof he makes three parts:
first, Worshipping God with the inward and spiritual affections of a renewed
heart: Secondly, Confiding in Christ alone for salvation, as being the
substance of all these shadows: Thirdly, A denying of confidence in any of
these fleshly privileges, or in any thing but Christ. Doct. 1. Though fair
pretenses to piety and purity of Worship be always on the side of those who
err from Truth, Matthew. 7. 15. yet the reality of that piety unto which they
pretend, is frequently to be found in those who oppose them most: so was it
here, We are the Circumcision; that is, we have the reality of that Ordinance;
and they only a pretense unto, and shadow of it. 2. Circumcision, and the rest
of those Levitical Ordinances may be said in some sense yet to continue, in so
far as the thing signified by them does remain: for, therefore Paul calls
true Believers the Circumcision, because they had the thing signified by it, We
are the Circumcision, who serve God in the spirit. 3. Circumcision was
instituted for this end, that by the outward cutting off the flesh the People
of God might be carried on; first, To cut off the sinful fleshly affections of
their heart, that so with renewed spirits they might serve God. And secondly,
To lay hold on the blood of the promised Messiah for pardon of sin, and
salvation: for, Paul mentions those two as the thing signified by
Circumcision, We worship God in the spirit, and rejoice in Jesus Christ. 4.
Though it was sufficient for Paul to oppose the inward Worship of the heart to
the practice of Circumcision, once an Ordinance, but now abolished; yet it
follows not that outward Ordinances, while standing in force, may upon that
account be wholly neglected, Genesis 17. 14. for if the outward rite of
Circumcision had been yet in force, his pretending to the thing signified,
would not have justified his omission of it. 5. External performance of
commanded Worship, without inward exercise of the spirit in faith, love, hope,
and mortification of fleshly lusts by the power of Gods Spirit, is scarce
worthy of the name of Worship to God, neither will it be owned by him as such:
for, it is this exercise of the spirit unto which Paul gives the name of true
Worship; We are the circumcision, which serve God in the spirit. 6. We should
so go about commanded Duties in spirit and truth, as not to rest upon, or glory
in them, but in Christ alone and his righteousness, as the only meritorious
cause of our salvation: So, though they worshipped God in the spirit; yet we
rejoice in Christ Jesus, says he. 7. Confidence in Christ for salvation, and
upon any other thing besides him; such as are outward privileges, external
performances, are so inconsistent with, and opposite to one another, that if
the one be, the other cannot be: so Paul opposes them here; We rejoice in
Christ Jesus, and have no confidence in the flesh.

Verse. 4. Though I might also have confidence in the flesh. If any other man
thinks that he has whereof he may trust in the flesh, I more.
The Apostle in the second part of the chapter, being to demonstrate the vanity
of relying upon any thing besides Christ in the point of justification, from
his own practice, shows; 1. That he had as much to boast of, upon the account
of outward privileges, as any of his adversaries; yea, or any other
whatsomever, if he had found it safe to venture his salvation on such a bottom;
and this he declares, first, in general in this verse. Doct. 1. The Lord in
his deep wisdom raises up such, as are most fit to oppose seducers, who come
not short of them in any thing whereof they glory most; that even wherein they
glory they may be found but as others: see 2 Cor. 11. 12. Thus, against those
who boasted so much in their outward privileges, as to oppose them unto
Christ's righteousness in the matter of justification, he raises up Paul to
batter down both their pride and error, who had as much matter of boasting that
way as they, or any other: Though I might have also confidence in the flesh. 2.
Then may a man commend himself by making notour what he has of graces, parts,
or privileges, equally with, or above others, when his doing so tends to
beat down the vain glory of those who boast more of what they are than is meet:
for, Paul here declares at length his outward privileges, wherein he would
yield to none: which he could not have done without ostentation, except it had
been to show the vanity and pride of his adversaries. 3. The glory and praise
of safet^ from Gods wrath, which men do promise unto themselves from their
parts or privileges, as they are opposed unto Christ, is not so much in
reality as in men's own conce^pt and fancy; therefore, he says not, If any
other man has, but, if he think he has whereof he might trust in the flesh.

Verse. 5. Circumcised the eighth day, of the stock of Israel, of the tribe of
Benjamin, an Hebrew of the Hebrews: as touching the Law, a Pharisee: 6.
Concerning zeal, persecuting the Church: touching the righteousness which is
in the Law, blameless.
What he spoke in general of his ceding to none in those things, whereof his
adversaries boasted most, he makes now to appear by reckoning forth eight
privileges. As first, he was circumcised, and so a member of the Church, Genesis
17. 11. Secondly, The eighth day, to wit, after his birth, and so no Proselyte
or Convert from among the Gentiles, Exodus 12. 48. Thirdly, Of the stock of
Israel, and so not the son of a Proselyte, who used to be circumcised the
eighth day, Genesis 17. 12. Fourthly, Of the tribe of Benjamin; whereby he shows
the certainty of the former, by pointing at his particular tribe; as also the
nobility of his race; the first King of Israel being of that tribe, 1 Samuel 10.
20, 21. And that he came of that tribe, which with the tribe of Judah clave to
the house of David, and the true Worship of God at Jerusalem, after the revolt
of the ten Tribes. Fifthly, An Hebrew of the Hebrews, to show his descent from
Abraham, called the Hebrew, Genesis 14. 13. without any mixture of blood by
marriage with foreign Nations, which might be exactly known by their public
Registers, wherein was marked the several descents of particular families,
Ezra. 2. 62. Sixthly, As touching the Law, a Pharisee, and so for his
profession most strict; the sect of the Pharisees pretending to more
strictness than any other: see Act. 26. 5. Seventhly, For his zeal to the Law
he was most fervent, and so, that without respect of persons he persecuted the
Christian Church, who were looked upon as destroyers of the Law. And eighthly,
As to his personal obedience unto the Law, his conversation was blameless; he
could not be justly taxed by men, who see no further than the outside, 1 Samuel
16. 7. Doct. 1. Those things which natural men, especially the finer sort of
hypocrites, rely upon, before they come to Christ, are such, as are here
reckoned forth, and may be reduced unto three heads; first, Church privileges;
such were the first five. Secondly, Strictness and zeal in profession; such
were the sixth and seventh. Thirdly, A life free from scandal, and as to men,
blameless; such was the eigth: for Paul mentions all those, as props
whereupon men who are destitute of Christ do rely; yea, and himself did once
place his confidence in them, as appears from v. 7. Those things were gain unto
me. Doct. 2. A profession of more than ordinary strictness in religious
observances, is no infallible mark of grace: for, natural men without Christ,
yea Churchrenters and dividing Sects, such as were the Pharisees, may pretend
to it: So Paul once, to wit, when he was out of Christ, and a renter and
persecuter of the Church, boasted in this, That he was a Pharisee, that is, one
of that Sect, which pretended to more nor ordinary strictness. 3. Where men do
once engage themselves in Sects and Schisms, their furious zeal will drive them
on to prosecute their nearest relations, and those who have nearest interest in
Christ, if they oppose themselves to their damnable Errors; and to place the
very substance of Religion, and of doing service unto God, in their persecuting
of them: So Paul being a Schismatic Pharisee, did persecute all who were of
the Church without distinction; and mentions his so doing, as one p^op of his
confidence and boasting, before he came to Christ; concerning zeal, persecuting
the Church. 4. Natural men, yea bloody persecutors may attain to freedom from
any outward vice, and to such a conversation as will be in the sight of men
altogether blameless: So Paul, even when persecuting the Church he was, as
touching the righteousness which is of the Law, blameless.

Verse. 7. But what things were gain to me, those I counted loss for Christ.
Having shown what he had to boast of, he declares his esteem of all those
things, to wit, That however when he was in an unconverted state he relied upon
them for salvation as much as any other; yet now, having seen nothing would
redownd unto him thereby, but a real hurt and damage, he had taken his
confidence from off them, and wholly placed it on Christ. Doct. 1. It is a
matter of great difficulty for any man, especially in an unconverted estate, to
excel in parts, privileges, or in a blameless life beyond others; and not
rely on them, as that which will bring them to Heaven; and so in effect put
them in Christ's place; for, those things were gain to Paul; he thought to
merit Heaven by them. 2. Whatever a man does rely upon without, or besides
Christ for righteousness and salvation, he will, when rightly enlightened, see
a real loss and hurt to be in it: So, those things were counted loss by
Paul; because not only they could not effectuate that for which he did rely
upon them; but also his confidence in them, and the esteem which he had of
them, impeded him much from coming to Christ, those I counted loss. 3. There
is that in Christ, and only in him, wherein a soul thoroughly touched with the
sight of sin and deserved wrath, will find full and solid satisfaction in order
to righteousness and salvation: So Paul, being thus touched, Act. 9. 6. takes
his confidence from off all those things, placing it only on Christ: he counted
them loss for Christ; that is, that he might know him, gain him, and be found
in him, being clothed with his righteousness, as he explaineth afterward.

Verse. 8. Yea doubtless, and I count all things but loss, for the excellency
of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord: for whom I have suffered the loss of
all things, and do count them but dung that I may win Christ.
What he has presently spoken of, taking his confidence from any thing in
himself, and placing it wholly upon Christ, he repeateth again and again, and
extends it also to all things imaginable without Christ: which things however
in themselves excellent, yet being compared with excellent Christ (and as to
the point of placing confidence upon them) were but loss and damage unto him:
and however the taking of his confidence from off them, was difficult for him,
and a very suffering upon his part, yet he had done it, and in the mean time
did not repent himself of it, counting them as very dung in the forementioned
respects; and this all, that he might gain Christ. Do^^. 1. In the matter of
our justification before God, we are not only not to rely upon our
Church-privileges, or our works seemingly good before conversion; but also are
not to place our confidence even in these works which are really good, as being
wrought in us by the Spirit of God after our conversion: for Paul makes his
speech to rise from those things which he had, being yet in nature to all
things, even not excepting those which he had, being now converted, although
before that time he had done many things, which were really good, Yea
doubtless, I count (in the present time) all things loss. 2. Before a man do
quite his own righteousness, and all his other props of vain confidence, to
rely wholly upon Christ, he must first know somewhat of Christ's worth and
sufficiency to do his turn; so Paul has some knowledge of a matchless
excellency in Christ, which serves as a motive to make him undervalue all
other things, to be at him: for the excellency of the knowledge, etc. 3. The
bare knowledge of Christ's excellency and worth, is not sufficient for
righteousness and salvation, except the heart by falth fasten upon, and adhere
to him, being so known: for, the word knowledge, according to the custom of
the Hebrew language includes the acts of the will, and affections following
upon it, Psalm. 1. 6. and so it is afterward expounded in these words, that I
may gain him, be found in him, having his righteousness. 4. He that has taken
his confidence from off his own righteousness, and placed it wholly upon
Christ, may and should plead interest in Christ, and boast of him as his: so
does Paul; the knowledge of Christ my Lord. 5. A man will not attain to quit
his own righteousness, and his other props of vain confidence, to be-take
himself wholly unto Christ, until he be made to do it: the Law and a wakened
conscience must drive him out of those lurking holes, before he quit them, Romans
7. 9. hence, he says, for whom I have suffered the loss of all things, that
is, as the merchant suffers the loss of his goods, by casting them away in
the time of a storm, which is sore against his heart if he could do otherwise
and were not through fear of the loss of his life driven unto it: the
original word signifies such a suffering of loss as this. 6. So excellent is
Christ, that all things compared with him, and set in opposition to him, have
that much of baseness in them, that hardly a word base enough can be found to
express them: so, he counts, even all things, compared with, and opposed to
him, not only loss, but dung. 7. So complete is that satisfaction which is to
be found in Christ, when he is thoroughly ventured upon for righteousness and
salvation, that the man which has so done, needs not, yea, will not repent
himself of so doing; or, for under-valuing, quiting, and trampling upon every
thing which impeded him from closing with him: for, Paul, who had suffered the
loss of all things for him, taking a review of what he had done, sees no
reason to recede from it; and herefore in the mean time says, I do count them
but dung. 8. Our closing with Christ by faith for righteousness and salvation,
having denied confidence unto any other thing besides him, is a grace, the acts
whereof would be often repeated, avowed and stood to; because it grows and
rises higher the more it is exercised: So Paul in these two Verses, repeateth
it thrice, and his speech does still rise by degrees; those I counted loss,
yea, I count all things but loss, and do count them but ^ung, says he. 9.
There is no gaining of Christ and his righteousness except we renounce our own
first: and the more of loss and damage we see in our own works, parts and
privileges, the more fully and freely the heart be taken off from relying on
those, there is the more ready access to close with Christ; and thereby, to
get all that is in him made out own: for, Paul; by counting all those loss,
and not otherwise, gains Christ: that I may gain Christ.

Verse. 9. And be found in him, not having mine own righteousness, which is of
the law, but that which is through the faith of Christ, the righteousness
which is of God by faith:
He has shown one advantage by renouncing confidence in himself, to wit, his
gaining Christ: here is a second, that hereby in the day, when God shall search
sinners, chiefly in the day of general judgment, he should be found by God,
incorporated in Christ; and sentence should pass upon him, not according to
his own inherent righteousness, which consists in personal obedience unto
the law, but according to that imputed righteousness of Christ's, freely
gifted by God, and received by faith. Doct. 1. It shall go well with those, and
those only, in the day of exact search and trial, especially in the day of
general judgment, who shall be found in Christ: for this is the great
advantage of his counting all things loss, that I may be found in Christ. 2.
Whoever has once sincerely closed with Christ by faith, shall constantly
remain united to, and ingrafted in him: for, the Apostle supponeth, that once
having gained Christ, he shall be found in him at the last day: and be found in
him. 3. As there is no compearing before God in the great day to a man's own
safety and comfort, without some righteousness of one sort or other; so there
is no inherent righteousness consisting in a man's own personal obedience unto
the Law, which can secure him from the dint of God's anger and justice:
therefore, says he, not having mine own righteousness, which is of the law,
that is, not relying on it, as that which would commend him to God^ and all
righteousness inherent, even that which is wrought in us by the Spirit of God,
is called our own, because it is really in us, 2 Pet. 1. 8. and we our selves,
being wrought upon by God, do really concur for the working of it, v. 12. 4.
Not only works done in obedience to the Ceremonial Law, or by men in their
unrenewed state, are useless, as to the justification of a sinner; but even
those also, which are performed by the truly godly and regenerate, in obedience
to the Moral Law: for, Paul quiteth all that righteousness, which could be
called his in the mean time, when he had been now of a long time renewed: not
having mine own righteousness. 5. That righteousness which can sufficiently
secure a man in the great day, from the dint of God's wrath and justice, is
only Christ's, to wit, that righteousness which was inherent only in him,
and but imputed unto us, Romans 5. 19. That which is through the faith of Christ,
says he; that is, faith laying hold on Christ. 6. This righteousness which
can secure a lost sinner from the stroke of justice, has relation unto God in
a particular manner, as being the righteousness of that Person, who is God,
Jer. 23. 6. that only righteousness which is accepted of God, Matthew. 3. 17.
and the imputation whereof to unrighteous sinners, being found out by the only
wise God, Matthew. 11. 25. The righteousness which is of God. 7. There is no
gain to be had from this righteousness, by a lost sinner, except he lay hold
on it by says: therefore it is called the righteousness which is of God by
faith. 8. The grace of faith, does justify, and make a sinner righteous, not
as it is our work: for, so it is a part of our righteousness which is by the
Law; seeing the Law commands faith, 1 John 3. 23. but as it apprehends
Jesus Christ and his righteousness: not having mine own righteousness by the
Law, but that which is of God by faith, says he.

Verse. 10. That I may know him, and the power of his resurrection, and the
fellowship of his sufferings, being made conformable unto his death.
A third advantage to be reaped by renouncing confidence in all things without
Christ, is, That hereby he should, and in part did experimentally know the
worth that is in Christ, and find the power of his resurrection, raising him
from the death of sin to the life of grace, as also somewhat of that comfort and
joy which is in suffering for him, and with him in his mystical body; and so
should be made conform to Christ's death, as holding forth a resemblance of it.
Doct. 1. Besides that knowledge of faith which Believers have of Christ,
whereby credit is given to the Word, because of the authority of him whose Word
it is, Job. 20. 29. there is an experimental knowledge, whereby Believers, from
his effectual working in them, do find and taste him to be that which the Word
affirms of him, Psalm. 34. 8. It is the knowledge the Apostle here aspireth
unto, that I may know him, and the power of his resurrection. 2. The more a man
attaineth to see the loss and vanity of all things without, and in comparison
with Christ, and to rely wholly upon Christ, He will attain to the more
experimental knowledge and lively sense of the worth and power which is in
Christ; for this is one advantage which he reapeth by counting all things loss
for Christ: that I may know him, to wit, experimentally. 3. To rely wholly upon
the righteousness of Christ for justification, and nothing at all upon our
own, conduces much to the increase of holiness, and in no ways does prejudge
it, Romans 3. 31. for, the fruit of not having his own righteousness, but
Christ's, is his knowing by experience the virtue of Christ's resurrection, in
raising him from the death of sin to the life of grace: and the power of his
resurrection. 4. The sufferings which Believers do undergo for Christ, and for
his Church, are a partaking with Christ in those his sufferings which he still
endures in his mystical body, the Church: for, so much is taught by those
words, the fellowship of his sufferings, to wit, which he endures in his
mystical body, the Church; see Col. 1. 24. 5. As justified persons are not
exempted from sad sufferings, such as others of Christ's mystical body, the
Church, are exercised with; so they enjoy a desirable sweetness in them when
they meet with them: Paul expects this, else he would not have desired to
know the fellowship of his sufferings. 6. The experience and taste of this
desirable sweetness, is only felt by him, who by denying his own
righteousness, and laying hold upon the imputed righteousness of Christ, has
made his peace with God: for, the fruit of Paul's counting all things loss to
gain Christ, is his knowing by experience that sweetness which is in the
communion of his sufferings. 7. An holy man patiently undergoing a cross for
Christ, is an evident resemblance of Christ's death, who notwithstanding that he
was sorely assualted by men, Luke 4. 29. and Devils, Matthew. 4. 3. Yet remained
holy, harmless, undefiled, and separate from sinners, Isa. 53. 9. preferring
his Fathers glory, and good of Believers, to his own ease and immunity from
sufferings, Matthew. 26. 39. So Paul, by partaking of his sufferings, should be
made conform to his death. 8. This may make the most bitter cross lovely, and,
in a sort, desirable unto an unholy man, that hereby he is made the more like
unto his Lord and Master: for, this makes Paul aim at the fellowship of his
sufferings, even that thereby he was to be made conformable unto his death:

Verse. 11: If by any means I might attain unto the resurrection of the dead.
Here is a fourth advantage to be reaped by renouncing confidence in all things
but Christ, to wit, hereby, and by exercising himself in holiness, and patient
suffering for Christ (whereof ver. 10.) he should, though with much difficulty,
attain unto the glorious resurrection of the Just, and have his portion in it:
for, he means here the resurrection proper to Believers only, as 1 Thessalonians. 4.
14, etc. Doct. 1. The gain of closing with Christ and his righteousness,
reaches further than to any thing within time; it accompanies a man in death,
preserves his dust in the grave until the last day; at the which time it shall
raise him up, and make him partaker of the glorious resurrection of the Just:
for, Paul propounds all this unto himself, as the fruit of his closing with
Christ, while he says, I may attain unto the resurrestion of the dead. 2.
However our closing with Christ's righteousness by faith gives a right to, and
an interest in that blessed resurrection, and all the glory which is then to be
imparted unto Believers, Job. 3. 36. Yet there is a way of holiness, and
patient enduring of the cross, by which Believers must walk unto it: for, he
propounds the knowledge of Christ's resurrection, and fellowship of his
sufferings, ver: 10. as the way leading to it: If by any means, etc. 3. As
there is no small difficulty for any of the lost sons of Adam, to attain unto
this blessed resurrection; so where the reality of it is believed, difficulties
will but kindle desire, and quicken our diligence to be at it: for, the
Apostle, If by any means, imports not his doubt of the thing, or of his
partaking of it; only hereby he would set out the great difficulty of attaining
unto it, together with his ardent desire, and unwearied diligence to be at it:
If by any means, says he.

Verse. 12. Not as though I had already attained, either were already perfect:
but I follow after, if that I may apprehend that for which also I am
apprehended of Christ Jesus.
Having shown the advantage flowing from closing with Christ, he holds forth
more of his own practice, and thereby shows the duty of a man already
ingrafted in Christ, which is, from the sense of his own shortcoming in the
knowledge of Christ, his imperfection in grace, and conformity with Christ to
endeavor constant progress, and to aim at no less than perfection in all
those; that being the scope which the Believer is called to aim at, when he is
first laid hold upon by Christ in his effectual calling. Now the Apostle
propounds this his practice to obviate a mistake which might arise from his
former speech, as if he had been perfectly instructed in the knowledge of
Christ, and fully conform unto him already, and so needed not to busy himself
about Christ further, but might aspire after an higher perfection by conformity
with the Ceremonial Law, as the false Apostles did. Doct. 1. So ingenious is
Error and apt to lay hold upon any thing which may make for its own defense,
that it will take advantage to shelter it self by that which is spoken in
direct refutation of it: for, as is said, Paul sees a necessity to guard what
he has presently spoken against the urgers of Circumcision, lest thereby they
should have fastened upon him that which would have made for their advantage,
Not as if I had already attained, says he. 2. They who have made greatest
progress in the knowledge of Christ and in conformity with him, are far short
of what they should be: so was Paul, Not as though I had already attained. 3.
Believers ought to be sensible of this their imperfection, and sometimes also
acknowledge it; that hereby they may be kept humble, made to aspire unto
further growth; and others may be preserved from dangerous mistakes of them, or
of the high esteem which otherwise they may seem to have of themselves: so
does Paul, not that I have already attained. 4. Then are we rightly sensible of
our falling-short of what we should be, when we are not thereby discouraged,
but rather incited to make swifter progress toward the mark; but I follow
after, says he. 5. Though perfection in holiness be not attainable in this
life, yet we are to aim at no less: Paul followed after, that he might
apprehend, to wit, that perfection which was yet wanting. 6. That there is any
motion toward that which is spiritually good, proceeds wholly from Jesus
Christ, whose grace does first lay hold upon us in our effectual calling, when
we were dead in sins and trespasses, Ephesians. 2. 1. and having infused principles
of a new life in us, we are made to bestir our selves in the way of holiness:
Paul is first apprehended of Christ, and then he follows after to apprehend.

Verse. 13. Brethren, I count not my self to have apprehended; but this one
thing I do, forgetting those things which are behind, and reaching forth unto
those things which are before. 14. I press toward the mark, for the prize of
the high calling of God in Christ Jesus.
He does again acknowledge his own short-coming, and shows also his constant
endeavor after perfection, which he inlargeth and clears by a similitude
taken from runners in a race, who, without looking behind, to count how much
of the way is already past, as carried on with such a vehement desire to
promove in the way, that they bend their bodies forward, having their heart,
eye, and whole course, straight toward the end of the race, until they attain
unto it: Thus was Paul carried on in his christian course, being encouraged by
the hopes of the rich reward unto which he was called, and which was purchased
for him by Jesus Christ. Doct. 1. There is much divine wisdom and prudence
required in Ministers, as in all the duties of their calling, so especially,
while they are about to fasten conviction of guiltiness upon any; left they do
irritate their corruptions in stead of curing them. Thus the Apostle wisely
points out the vanity of their conceit, who looked upon themselves as having
already attained unto perfection in the knowledge of Christ, not by his
express taxing of their pride and vanity, but by professing his own humility:
I count not my self to have apprehended. 2. They who have made furthest
progress in the knowledge of Christ, are usually most sensible of their own
imperfections, and most forward in the acknowledgement of them, when God's
glory, and the edification of others call them unto it: So Paul, who (v. 10.)
had nothing so much in his desires as to know Christ, and so doubtless knew
much of him, yet stands not again and again to acknowledge his own
short-coming and ignorance: I count not my self to have apprehended. 3.
Progress in the knowledge of Christ, and holiness is to be minded seriously
and above all other things, not superficially, and upon the by only: so it was
Paul's one thing: this one thing I mind, or do. 4. The approved exercise of a
Christian endeavoring progress in the way to Heaven, is much like to the
carriage of those who are running in a race. First, as the runner casts not
back his eye to reckon how much of the way is already past; so the Christian
who would advance to any purpose, though he may take a review of what he has
already done, so as therein not only to see his own short-comings, for
humiliation, but also to see matter of praise unto God, and encouragement unto
himself, 1 Cor. 15. 10. Yet he is not so to be taken up with it, as to rest
upon it, be puffed up with conceit because of it, as if he had already done
enough, or any other way which may retard him in his further progress: in
which respects Paul did forget those things which were behind, as if he had
done nothing. Secondly, as the runner is most taken up with that part of the
way which he is yet to run, and bends himself forward in it: So the Christian
who would make progress, must be much in counting what of his way is yet
before him; what sins are yet to be mortified; what duties are yet almost
untouched; what hard exercises he may yet be called to undergo; and the more he
sees of that kind, he is to take the more pains for advancing forward: so was
Paul reaching forth unto those things which were before. Thirdly, as the runner
holds his eye upon the mark, and steereth his whole course in order to it,
without turning aside, or, halting, because of difficulties in the way: So the
Christian who would make progress, must fix his eye upon the end of his race,
which is perfection in holiness, levelling all his actions and endeavors at
that mark, pressing forward through all difficulties, discouragements and
stumbling blocks which are in the way betwixt him and it: So did Paul; I press
toward the mark. 4. As the thoughts of the prize and worth of the reward, do
add spirits to the runner, making him run more swiftly; so there is a rich
prize, a free reward of grace, though not of merit, to wit, Heaven and glory,
Romans 6. 23. which the Christian who would make progress to purpose, should
have much in his thoughts; that thereby he may be heartned against all
hardships and discouragements, faintings and failings, which he will be
assaulted with, and tempted unto: So did Paul; I press for the prize of my
high calling. 5. Though Heaven and glory be given as a reward to those only,
who continue in their christian course, until they come unto the end of the
race; yet it is not merited by their running and persevering: for, as it
depends upon their effectual calling, which has not its rise from man's low
endeavors, but from above, even from God's high grace: so it is conveyed unto
them through the merits of Jesus Christ: thus it is the prize of the high
calling of God in Jesus Christ.

Verse. 15. Let us therefore, as many as be perfect, be thus minded: and if in
any thing ye be otherwise minded, God shall reveal even this unto you. 16.
Nevertheless, wherei^ we have already attained, let us walk by the same rule,
let us mind the same thing.
In the third part of the Chapter, he exhorts even those of them, who either
had made, or seemed unto themselves to have made furthest progress, to follow
his example, and be of the same mind with him in the particulars
beforementioned: and because some of them, being seduced by the false
Apostles, were of a contrary mind in some things, he gives them ground of
hope, that God, who had brought them to the knowledge of the Gospel, would
reclaim them from this their error, and discover unto them the danger of it,
v. 15. but withal he exhorts them unto unity and orderly walking, according
to the Canon and rule of Scripture in those things wherein they were yet
harmonious, keeping mutual love, and holding off further rents than were
already made. Doct. 1. Though none can attain unto absolute perfection in
holiness, yet as there are several degrees in grace; so there is diversitle of
growth among Christians; some are but weak, infirm, and babes in Christ, 1 Cor.
3. 1, 2. others are come to greater ripeness, endued with a larger measure of
grace, and confirmed by much experience, who being compared with the former,
are here called perfect: Let us as many as be perfect. 2. The greatest
perfection attainable in this life, is, to renounce all considence in our
selves, to rely wholly upon Christ, and from the sense of our own imperfection
in grace, to be constantly aspiring to a greater measure: for, this he
prescribes unto the choicest Christians to be exercised in; Let us, as many as
are perfect, be thus minded. 3. The approven exercises of holy men mentioned in
Scripture, are a clear glass, wherein we are to see our duty and strong
encouraging motives to make us go about it; examples being of more force, than
bare and naked precepts: So Paul draws an argument from his own practice: Let
us therefore, etc. that is, being sensible of small progress, and of a great
way yet before us, let us press forward: for, so was lie minded, as he shows
in the preceding verse, and so would he have them minded in this verse. 4.
There are usually some within the visible Church, who, being be-misted with
error, do not come up to give through assent unto all divine truths: Paul
supponeth so much; if in any thing ye be otherwise minded. 5. We are to deal
more tenderly with some of those who are be misted with error than with
others; as 1. We are to keep charity toward them, and express our charity of
them, that God who has begun to inlighten them in other things, would discover
unto them those truths, whereof they are yet ignorant: such is the Apostle's
charity here, God shall reveal even this unto you: even this, as he had
revealed other things already. Secondly, they are to be waited on patiently,
without proceeding to the severe exercise of Discipline, until some competent
time at least be given, wherein, through Gods blessing upon their own
endeavors, and the labors of others with them, they may attain to the
knowledge of those truths, whereof they are ignorant; or otherwise be made
unexcusable: This is supponed to have been Paul's mind toward those to whom he
speaks, the Lord will reveal even this unto you. Doct. 6. Every one who
erreth from truth, is not to be used with this tenderness; as 1. not seducers,
but those who are seduced: for, the Apostle has spoken, v. 3. and does speak
afterward otherwise of seducers. Secondly, it is only those who are seduced,
not in fundamental truths, which are absolutely necessary; but in others,
which are not so necessary: for, the Apostle supponeth those, whom he would
have thus used, to have attained unto the knowledge of fundamental truths
according to the Canon of Scripture: Nevertheless in what we have attained,
etc. So that their error did ly only in some circumstantial truths, relating
to those greater ones; as he seems also to import, while he says, if in any
thing, any be otherwise minded: besides that it appears from the body of the
Epistle, the false Apostles had prevailed with few or none in this Church to
draw them on to their grossest errors. Thirdly, as their error is only in
inferior truths; so, they must not be so devoted unto their own opinions, as,
from a desire to propagate them, to rent the Church, and make schisms in it:
but, are to walk in a joint and orderly practice with others in those things
wherein they do agree: not creating strife and division, whether in affection
or practice, about those things wherein they differ; for, this may be taken as
a condition of the forbearance to be given, and of God's revealing further unto
them: Noverthelesse, or only if we walk by the same rule, and mind the same
thing. So there is no ground here for a boundless toleration of all heretics,
sect-masters, seducers of others; nor yet to all those who are seduced; except
their carriage do evidence them to be studious both of truth and peace. Doct.
7. As it is only God who can reveal truth unto those who are over-taken with
error, by his blessing upon ordinary means, made use of for that purpose: so
there are promising grounds of hope that he will do so unto some, to wit, those
unto whom he has discovered many soul-saving truths already, and who are
laboring by their orderly walking according unto those truths, to edify both
themselves and others: Paul's hope is, that God will reveal even this unto them;
not by any immediate revelation, or any other way without the Word; but by his
blessing upon the Word preached, and their own endeavors, Isa. 8. 20. And that
because he had revealed much unto them already, imported in the words even
this, or, also this, and withal subjoyneth the condition, whereunto we have
attained, let us walk, to wit, unitly and orderly, as soldiers keeping rank,
without disturbing one another. 7. The Church of Christ, ought not upon every
difference of judgment, to be rent in Schisms and Factions, setting up a
Church against a Church, or, using cross endeavors, for under-minding and
down-bearing of one another; but unity and orderly practice according to an
uncontroverted rule, so far as is possible, is to be kept, notwithstanding of
different judgments: for this the Apostle exhorts unto; Let us walk by the
same rule. 8. Upon divided practice, because of different opinions in a Church,
there does necessarily follow further division and renting, both in judgment
and affections: for, Paul having exhorted unto joint practice, he subjoyneth,
Let us mind the same thing, that is, Let us keep unity, both of affection and
judgment, to wit, in those things wherein we do yet agree; importing, this
cannot be, except there be a joint practice.

Verse. 17. Brethren, be followers together ^f me, and mark them which walk so,
as ye have us for an example.
He repeateth the former exhortation, that they would follow his example; and
encourages them from this, That he was not his alone; many faithful Servants
of Christ did walk as he did; whose example he propounds unto them as a mark
to aim at. Doct. 1. As the examples of holy men, registered in Scripture, are to
be imitated by us, to wit, so far as they have been followers of Christ, 1 Cor.
11. 1. so we are to be followers together of them; every one helping up
another, and far from falling in rents among our selves, under pretense of
giving respect to men, some more to one, and others more to another, 1 Cor. 1.
12. this the Apostle aims at, while he says, he followers together of me. 2.
As there are some whose steps are to be followed, and whose way in order
thereunto is to be diligently eyed, as the scope which the archer aims at;
(for so the Greek word, rendered Mark, does signify) So, it is not every one
we should so imitate, but those only who have walked in the steps of the holy
Apostles, and other choice Servants of Christ: Mark them, says he, which walk
so, but how? as ye have us for an example. 3. However the way of God be in it
self lovely, and worthy to be chosen, Psalm. 19. 7. though few or none did walk
in it, Josh. 24. 15. yet, that this way is made a beaten path by the multitude
of those who have made it their choice, is no small encouragement and motive to
make us walk in it; every example being as a standing witness to confirm from
experience, that all which Scripture speaks of that way, is real truth, Heb.
12. 1. for, so he draws an encouragement from this, That not only he, but
diverse others did walk in that way, Mark them that walk so.

Verse. 18. (For many walk, of whom I have told you often, and now tell you even
weeping, that they are the enemies of the cross of Christ: 19. Whose end is
destruction, whose God is their belly; and whose glory is in their shame, who
mind earthly things.)
He gives reasons to enforce the exhortation. 1. There were many, whose
example was not to be followed, to wit, the false Apostles: From following of
whom, that he may deter them, as he had often before, so he does now in great
grief (as seeing the Church of Christ pestered with such false Teachers) point
them forth in their blackest colors: First, As being enemies to the cross of
Christ, because they opposed the virtue of Christ's sufferings, by which alone
salvation is obtained, Gal. 5. 2. and because they pressed the observation of
the Levitical Ceremonies, that, gratifying the Jews thereby, they might shift
Christ's cross, or persecution for the Gospel, Gal. 6. 12. Secondly, Eternal
destruction should be their reward, if they persisted in that damnable
doctrine, without repentance. Thirdly, They were beastly bellygods, as being
acted not from a principle of love to God, or to the salvation of men, but
their own fleshly appetite, that they might have wherewith to fill their
bellies, Romans 16. 18. Fourthly, They gloried in their wickedness, and in the
multitude of these whom they had perverted, Gal. 6. 13. whereof they should
rather have been ashamed, and which in the end should turn unto their shame.
And finally, all their endeavors reached no higher, than things earthly,
riches, honor, pleasure^, applause, and such like; while as Heaven, and things
heavenly (however much pretended unto) were little minded by them: And so he
leads them to gather, that such were men not worthy to be followed. Doct. 1.
The Lord does sometimes suffer Seducers to multiply in a Church, thus to punish
the small respect which has been given to Truth, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 10, 11. and that
those who are approved, may be made manifest, 1 Cor. 11. 19. for, many walk,
etc. 2. The abounding of such Seducers ought not in reason to detract any thing
from the respect which is due unto sincere and orthodox Preachers; yea, such
will be the more esteemed of by all sincere lovers of truth: for, Paul makes
this a reason, why such men as he should be imitated; Be followers together of
me, etc. v. 17. for many walk, says he, that are enemies, etc. 3. It is the
duty of Christ's faithful Ministers to give frequent warning unto the Lord's
People of their hazard from spreaders of Errors and wicked Seducers, pointing
them out in the blackest colors, that people may not be ensnared by them: so
does Paul here; Of whom I have told you, and now tell you, they are enemies of
the cross of Christ. 4. What ever Ministers do of this kind, ought not to flow
from hatred or evil* will to the persons of men, a desire of venting
reproaches, petulancy of spirit, or such like, Jude 9. but from pure zeal to
the Churches weal, and from grief of heart to see the Church of Christ pestered
by them: thus was it with Paul; of whom, says he, I do now tell you, even
weeping. 4. In times of trial for Truth, there will not be some wanting (and
those in no small reputation for piety and parts) who are carried on to embrace
those Opinions in the matter of Religion, which lie furthest off the dint of
persecution, even although these Opinions be erroneous and destructive to the
doctrine of the Gospel; for so, and in those respects those men were enemies to
the cross of Christ. 5. Not only does profanity and vice draw down destruction
and wrath upon those who live in them, Col. 3. 6. but also Errors against Truth
are damnable, and bring destruction, if not repented of, chiefly to the
mali^ious authors and factious spreaders of them, for base designs, fairded
over with fair pretenses, Romans 16. 17, 18. So says the Apostle of those
masters of Error, whose end is destruction. 6. That is interpretatively a man's
God, which is the last end of all his actions, and upon which all his care, his
thoughts and endeavors run most, whether it be a man's belly, the world, his
credit or friends: hence it is said, whose God is their belly. 7. There are
many who pretend fair for God, and the good of souls, and yet will be really
found to be but self-seekers, making a net of a fair outside, to catch worldly
pleasures, riches and honors: and this is most frequently to be found in those
who spread Errors; Whose God is their belly, they mind earthly things. 8. The
chief endeavor of those who walk in a sinful way, (chiefly in a course of
error) and the thing which they hunt most after, as their highest credit and
glory, is, to have many carried along with them in it; for, this was their
glory here spoken of; whose glory is in their shame. 9. The Lord shall sooner
or later make that same very thing, wherein such men glory most, to be their
shame, either by making them to be truly ashamed of it, as a fruit of their
repentance, Romans 6. 21. or by rubbing shame upon them for it here, or
hereafter, as the just reward of their sin, Hos. 4. 7. in which respects he
affirms of them, whose glory is in their shame.

Verse. 20. For our conversation is in Heaven, from whence also we look for the
Savior the Lord Jesus Christ: 21. Who shall change our vile body, that it may
be fashioned like unto his glorious body, according to the working whereby he
is able even to subdue all things unto himself.
Here is a second reason exciting them to imitate the Apostle and such as he
was. Their conversation and expected reward were much different from that of
the false Apostles; and therefore as the latter were to be eschewed, the former
were to be followed. As to their conversation, it was not on things earthly,
but in Heaven, and that because Christ their head, their glory, their
happiness, is there, whom they did expect to come one day from thence, not as
a terrible Judge, but as a tenderhearted Savior, ver. 20. And as for their
reward, it should not be destruction, but salvation and glory: their bodies
(for the present, vile, humble and low, as being obnoxious to death, corruption
and a deluge of miseries, 1 Cor. 15. 42, 43.) should be changed by the Lord
Christ, so that being freed from these base qualities, and endued with the
contrary glorious ones, 1 Cor. 15. 42, 43. they should be made conform to
Christ's glorious body. And l^st any should look on such a change as impossible,
he leads them unto the consideration of Christ's divine power, whereby he
will destroy death, and the grave, and subject all things unto himself; and so
can easily work that glorious change in our vile bodies, v. 21. Doct. 1 The
conversation of those, who would have themselves propounded as Patrons for
imitation by others, ought to be such, as that of the Apostle was; who,
exciting the Philippians to follow him, gives this for a reason, Our
conversation is in Heaven. 2. Believers have right to Heaven, as to their City,
Faith being the Burgesse-Ticket which gives an interest in the Privileges of
it, Joh. 3. 36. We have our conversation in Heaven, or We do live as
Free-Burgesses of that City, so will the Original bear. 3. They are therefore
to converse and live as free Denizens of that City, so, that though they be
mixed with Hypocrites, Matthew. 13. 30. and carry about earthly bodies, 2 Cor. 5.
1. standing in need of earthly sustentation, and subject also to the common
calamities of an earthly life, 1 Cor. 15. 44. Yet with their heart and
affections they are to be aspiring daily toward Heaven, Col. 3. 1. living in
all things so, as it becomes those who have present right unto it, and one day
shall get full possession of it, 1 Jo^. 3. 3. for, so lived the Apostle; We
have our conversation in Heaven, or, We do live as Free-Burgesses of that City.
4. Jesus Christ in his bodily presence, is now in Heaven, and not in Earth;
for, says he, from whence we look for a Savior. 5. Jesus Christ at the end
of time is to come from Heaven, and judge the world, 2 Timothy 4. 1. from whence
we look, etc. 6. This second coming of his, although it be abhorred, and hated
by wicked Atheists, Act. 24. 25. he being to come unto them as a terrible
Judge, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 8. yet it is the matter of the Godlie's expectation; a thing
hoped for, and much longed after by them: from whence also we look. 7. The
reason why his second coming is so much looked for by the Godly, is, Because he
is to come, not as a sinpursuing- Judge unto them, but as a Savior with
perfect salvation, and healing under his wings: We look for a Savior. See Heb.
9. 28. 8. The consideration of this, That Christ is in Heaven, and to come as a
Savior from thence, has an Adamantine virtue to draw up the thoughts and
affections of the Believer thither: for this is given as a reason why their
conversation was in Heaven; from whence we expect a Savior, says he. 9. Our
bodies now since the fall, (Genesis 3. 19.) are vile and base, liable to death and
corruption, to several sores and sicknesses; our vile body. 10. That vileness
and baseness which is in our mortal bodies, is properly ours, as being
contracted by our sin, by which they were brought down from that glory wherein
they were created, Romans 5. 12. Thus our vile body, or, (as it is in the
Original) bodies of our vileness: the vileness is more ours, than the bodies
are. 11. The bodies of Believers, however they be now vile and base, and
subject to as many miseries as the bodies of others are; yea, and are liable to
the cross for Christ, Matthew. 10. 18. which the bodies of the wicked are not.
Gal. 6. 12. yet Christ in the last day shall work a glorious change in them, a
change, not in their substance and proportion of members; for we shall still
have an organick body with distinct members, Job, 19. 27. but delivered from
those base and low qualities which sin has subjected them unto; and adorned
with the contrary glorious qualities, such as immortality, 1 Cor. 15. 42. and
splendour, 1 Cor. 15. 43. impassibility, 1 Cor. 15. 44. and agility and
lightness, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 17. So that neither sickness pain, hunger, or death
shall be able to assault our glorified bodies, Matthew. 22. 30. This is the
change here spoken of: Who shall change our vile body, that it may be fashioned
like unto his glorious body. 12. Though the body of Christ now in Heaven be
glorious, being adorned with as much glory as a created body can be capable of;
yet it is not endued with the essential properties of God, so as to be
omnipotent or omnipresent: (as the (...)biquitaries do affirm) for our bodies
shall be fashioned like unto his glorious body: and yet none can rationally
assert, That they shall be adorned with any of the essential properties of God.
13. The resurrection of our bodies, and transforming of them thus gloriously
after they shall be turned unto dust, and eaten with worms, Job, 19. 26. as it
is a thing almost incredible, and to flesh and blood wholly impossible, Act.
17. 32. so the consideration and faith of divine omnipotency, which is engaged
to bring it about, will make all doubts of that kind evanish, as knowing
nothing is impossible unto God: so Paul, that he may confirm them in the faith
of this great point, leads them to the power of God, according to his
working, whereby he is able even to subdue all things unto himself. 14. There
is nothing within the reach of divine omnipotency which shall be left
unessayed, rather than the Believers glory, both in soul and body, should
remain uncompleated: for which he says, whereby he is able: it is supposed,
that if it be within the compass of divine ability, it shall be done.

CHAP. IV.
IN the first part of this chapter, Paul exhorts the Philippians unto some
christian virtues, to wit, To constancy, v. i. to concord, v. 2, 3. to rejoice
in the Lord, v. 4. to moderation of mind, v. 5. to beware of anxious
heart-cutting diffident care, and to give themselves to prayer and praises, v.
6. for so they should have much of Gods peace, v. 7. and generally, to every
thing which was praiseworthy, v. 8. which he inforceth from his own example,
and the fruit which should follow hereupon, v. 9.

In the second part, he commends them for their benevolence toward him in
his strait, excusing the delay, v. 10. and clears himself from dejectedness
of spirit under want, v. 11, 12, 13. and yet shows their gratuity was
acceptable, v. 14. which he amplifieth by mentioning their liberality toward
him in former times, v. 15, 16. and purges himself from an indirect intention
to excite them to the bestowing of more, v. 17. showing what he had already
received did abundantly satisfy him, v. 18. for which their gratuity, he
promises unto them a recompense from God, v. 19.

In the third part he concludes the Epistle, first, with a doxology, v. 20.
Secondly, with some mutual salutations, v. 21, 22. And thirdly, with his usual
farewellwish, v. 23.

Verse. 1. Therefore, my Brethren, dearly beloved and longed for, my joy and
crown, so stand fast in the Lord, my dearly beloved.
FRom what Paul has said in the former chapter, he infers a vehement
exhortation, enforced by a number of affectionate compellations, That they
would remain constant in the doctrine and practice of the Gospel, so as they
had done hitherto, and as he had presently prescribed, chap. 3. Doct. 1. So
ready are we to weary in well-doing, Gal. 5. 7. so unwearied is the Tempter in
his assaulting of us, what by reiterating old tentations, what by presenting us
with new ones, 1 Pet. 5. 8. That even those, who for a long time have given
great proof of their constancy both in profession of Truth, and practice of
Duties, are not so far beyond the reach of backsliding, but they stand in need
of frequent and vehement exhortations to make them stand on their guard against
it: So Paul exhorts those Philippians to constancy, notwithstanding they had
already given large proof of it; so stand fast in the Lord. 2. The faith of
glory, and rich reward which is laid up to those who persevere unto the end, is
a strong motive unto constancy and perseverance: so, from what the Apostle
spoke in the close of chap. 3. of that glorious change to be wrought upon the
bodies of Believers, he infers, So stand fast. 3. As a peoples profiting by
the Ministry of the Word, ought to indear them unto a faithful Pastor; so a
Minister may, without imputation of flattery, make it known unto the people,
and that in the most pathetick way, how much they are esteemed of by him; that
hereby he may excite them to further progress. And this use only should be
made by people of the approbation of their faithful discerning Pastors, or of
any other whose approbation they think worthy to put a price upon: Thus the
Apostle here gives them a number of affectionate compellations, all of them
breathing forth his respect and love unto them, such as Brethren, as being
professors of the same faith; dearly beloved, being such as for their piety had
much room in his heart; and longed for, his absence from whom was his burden;
my joy, the remembrance of whom made him sing under all his sufferings; and my
crown, they were as an ornament unto him, his glory and diadem, being gained to
Christ by his Ministry, and having remained constant, when others had fallen
away.

Verse. 2. I beseech Euodias, and beseech Syntiche, that they be of the same
mind in the Lord. 3. And I entreat thee also, true yoke fellow, help those
women which labored with me in the Gospel, with Clement also, and with other
my fellow laborers, whose names are in the book of life.
He speaks to two women, who being of some note in that Church, did in some
things, as appears, relating to Religion, differ as well the one from the
other, as both of them from the Doctrine publicly professed in that Church;
Them he exhorts, that laying aside their contention and strife, they would
endeavor peace and unity betwixt themselves, such as God would approve of,
ver. 2. And because divisions of that kind are not easily composed, he
exhorts some one of his once-fellow-labourers in that Church, to contribute
his endeavors for helping them to union, because they had been useful to him
in their stations, while he was preaching the Gospel, and planting a Church at
Philippi, with one Clement, and some other private Christians; all which in
charity he did judge to be truly gracious, and in the number of Gods Elect
Children. Doct. 1. It is the duty of Pastors to instruct, exhort, rebuke and
comfort, not only the whole Church in general, but also particular persons by
name, as occasion offers, and their necessity requires: so does Paul, I
beseech Euodias, and beseech Syntiche. 2. Difference of judgment among
professors, in things relating to Religion, is of dangerous consequence, as
being an occasion of strife and discord, of alienation of heart and affections,
2 Cor. 12. 20. as causing hurtful diversions from that which should be our
main work, to wast our precious time, and the edge of our spirits upon things
less necessary, 1 Timothy 1. 4. Paul looks upon this difference as worthy to be
taken notice of, even by an Apostle; I beseech, says he. 3. It is very casual
for such differences to fall in among professors, who have been other wise
pious and useful in the Lords work: thus Euodias and Syntiche, who helped Paul
in the Gospel, falls at ods among themselves: I beseech Euodias, etc. 4.
Peace and unity in the Church, and among all the members of the Church, is a
thing much to be studied for and sought after: I beseech they be of the same
mind. 5. But by all means it would be seen to, That the composing of the
Churches differences be an union in the Lord, and such as he will approve of:
so he beseeches them to be of one mind, but, in the Lord. 6. We ought to make
use of our familiarity with, and interest in others, to set them upon
employments honorable unto God, and profitable unto the Church of Christ, and
the true members thereof, so far as their station will permit, and their
abilities can reach: so Paul makes use of his entireness with one above the
rest (whom he calls his true-yokefellow, because, as appears, of their being
jointly employed in the work of the Ministry, as Oxen drawing under one yoke)
to set him upon the reconciling of those two, who were at distance, and I
entreat thee also true yoke fellow. 7. As Church-divisions, though easily
fallen into (Act. 15. 37, etc.) are not easily cured; so it is the duty of all,
who have power and parts, to employ them all for the curing of them, and this
especially, when the scandalous rent is among such who have been reputed
gracious, and have proved steadable to the work of God in their several
stations: hence he exhorts to help those women to union, because they had
labored with him in the Gospel. 8. As the Gospel, when it first comes in
power to a place, meets with no small opposition; so it is the duty, not only
of Ministers but also of private Christians, and that of both sexes, keeping
still their own stations, 1 Cor. 14. 34. to contribute their uttermost for
making of the Gospel successful: so did they at Philippi, who labored with
me in the Gospel, with Clement also, and with other my fellow laborers; the
word rendered Labored, signifies to strive as wrestlers, who make use of all
their strength. What their labor was, is not expressed, but certainly it was
such as became them in their stations. 9. The Lord knows who are his with as
great certainty, as a man knows those of his family, whose names he has
written in a book: so much is imported by this phrase, whose names are written
in the book of life; not that God has, or stands in need of any such book
for the help of his memory; the speech is only metaphorical, bearing this much,
That God has foreordained them to life, and so knows certainly they shall
be saved, as if their names were all enrolled. Sec 2 Timothy 2. 19. 10. Though
none can pass a certain and infallible judgment upon others, whether they
belong to the election of grace, or not, Romans 14. 4. yet there may, and ought
to be a judgment of charity passed upon all, and every one of such, as elected
and chosen, whom we see constant in the doctrine of Faith, studying to be holy
themselves, and contributing their utmost for promoving the work of God among
others; for Paul, from the judgment of charity, pronounces of such, whose
names are written in the book of life.

Verse. 4. Rejoice in the Lord always: and again I say, Rejoice.
He exhorts most earnestly that they would not suffer themselves to be drawn
off from that necessary duty of rejoicing in the Lord, pressed, chap. 3. v. 1.
But that under all conditions, and at all times they would make conscience of
it. Doct. 1. It is not only the Lords allowance, but also his command unto his
people, which they are to obey, under hazard of disobedience, to rejoice in the
Lord, that is, from the consideration of the excellency of Christ in himself,
Cant. 5. 10, etc. and his usefulness unto them, Psalm. 118. 1. together with
their interest in him, Cant. 2. 16. and the observation of his providence and
care toward them, 1 Samuel 17. 37. to keep their own hearts, not only free from
anxiety and discouragement, but feeding also upon the sense and sweetness
which flows from all those considerations: for, this is the duty of rejoicing
in the Lord, which he here presses. 2. This is a duty constantly to be made
conscience of under all cases and conditions, whether prosperous or adverse:
there being always grounds of rejoicing to the believer, though not in the
world, nor in himself, yet in the Lord, and in what the word holds forth of
him, Joh. 16. 33. if he by his own untender walking, or misbelieving
discouragement, do not mar his access to the right use-making of those
grounds, Psalm. 42. 11. Rejoice always says he. 3. It is not easy to work up
the heart to the conscientious practice of this duty, especially at all times:
hence he doubleth the exhortation, thereby pointing out how averse we are from
this duty: Rejoice always, and again I say rejoice.

Verse. 5. Let your moderation be known unto all men: The Lord is at hand.
He further exhorts them in all their affairs to the exercise of moderation,
whereby they should rather remit somewhat of what was their right according to
the rule of strict justice, then do any real hurt unto others, and that
because of Gods presence, to wit, by his providence presently, and by his
second coming to judge the world, before it be long. Doct. 1. It is the duty
of Christians, not always to exact the rigor of what in strict Law they may
claim unto, whether in seeking reparation of injuries, Col. 3. 13. and
repayment of debts, Ex. 22. 25, 26. or in use-making of recreations, and any of
their allowed liberties, Gal. 5. 13. but are to remit somewhat of their right,
as the necessity of their neighbor, Ex. 22. 25, 26. or his edification calls
for it, Romans 14. 21. for this is the moderation here exhorted unto, let your
moderation be known. 2. However Christians are not to hunt after applause or
vainglory, by setting forth the good things which are in them to the public
view, Mat. 6. 1. 6. 18. yet they are not under pretense of eschewing that evil
or the suspicion of it, to cover all they do from the view of others; but are
bound to make their good works manifest, that others therein may see their
duty, and have matter of blessing God on their behalf: See Matthew. 5. 16. Let
your moderation be known, etc. 3. The forementioned advantages by making our
good works manifest, are most effectually produced, not so much by speaking of
the good which we do, as when the work speaks for it self unto those who do
behold it, and chiefly unto such as find benefit by it: thus they were to make
their moderation known unto all men, to wit, by giving real proof of it. 4.
Although these duties flowing from intimate society and near relations, be due
only to such, who stand under those relations unto us, 1 Timothy 5. 8. yet none,
whether good or bad, are to be excluded from their just interest in those
duties which are grounded upon common equity, such as are duties of charity,
justice, mercy and condescendence unto humane infirmity: of which sort is this
moderation here spoken of: let your moderation be known to all men. 5. God is
still present by his providence for the help of those that fear him, Psalm. 145.
18. and is hasting unto his second coming, when he shall judge the world in
righteousness, Rev. 22. 20. The Lord is at hand. 6. The consideration and
faith of Gods nearness, as said is, may encourage Christians much to the
exercise of moderation in all their affairs, as knowing whatever present
prejudice they may sustain by their christian condescendencie in remitting
somewhat of their own right, rather than to hurt or scandalize others, it will
be abundantly made up by the providence of God working for them in the mean
time, and his complete righting of all wrongs in the day of his second coming,
Mark 10. 29, 30. for, this is the argument, whereby he presses moderation; The
Lord is at hand.

Verse. 6. Be careful for nothing: but in every thing by prayer and
supplication with thanksgiving, let your requests be made known unto God.
Here is a further exhortation to beware of anxious heart-cutting diffident
care, about things worldly, and the success of what we do undertake in our
lawful Callings: for curing whereof he prescribes this remedy, that in the
conscientious use of their Callings, they would have recourse unto God by
prayer, wherein by supplicating for good things, by deprecating deserved wrath,
and thankful acknowledgement of mercies already received, they might pour out
their hearts in God's bosom, leaving the disposal of all their affairs upon
him: Doct. 1. However there be a lawful care about things worldly not
prohibited, but frequently commanded, Romans 12. 11. Yet there is a care not
lawful, to wit, when 2 man exceeds in care; and so, as to care for nothing
but the world, Psalm. 49. 11. and so, as to keep himself upon a continual rack,
as fearing want of success in what he does, Psalm. 37. 5. and so, as to join
issue with any thing, though never so sinful, for preserving or bringing about
the thing cared for, 1 Timothy 6. 9. This excessive care is sinful, and here
forbidden; be careful in nothing. 2. As this excessive care does hinder the
exercise of moderation, by driving men to the utmost of rigor in all their
dealings with others, as fearing, lest by the smallest condescendencie, they
undo themselves: so nothing contributeth more to make a man merciful, gentle,
and condescending to the necessity and good of others, though even to his own
seeming prejudice than to keep his heart above this anxious, vexing, diffident
and heart-cutting care: hence unto the former exhortation of making their
moderation known to all men, he subjoyneth this as an help, be careful in
nothing. 3. The best remedy against this excessive diffident care, is, not to
run upon the other extreme of casting by all lawful care and diligence, Matthew.
4. 7. but that in the conscientious use of our lawful employments, we make our
address unto God by prayer, deprecating deserved wrath, asking for desired
success, blessing him for favors already received, and so to leave the burden
of all our care upon him: this is it which the Apostle prescribes; but in
everything by supplication and prayer, etc. 4. All our Prayers would be so
composed, as that they may be known to God, that is, approved of him, and so
proceeding from the sense of our want, 1 Kings 8. 38. put up in the Name of
Christ, John 16. 23. and for things according to his will, 1 John 5. 14. Let
your requests be made known unto God. 5. There are several sorts of Prayers
set forth here, by three distinct expressions; for the word requests, is
general to all the kinds: First, there is Prayer, whereby we seek those
things which we want from God, acknowledging how unworthy we are of them.
Secondly, there is supplication, whereby we deprecate evils and judgments,
whether felt or feared, acknowledging our sins, whereby we have deserved them.
Thirdly, there is thanksgiving, whereby we bless God for favors already
bestowed; by prayer, and supplication, and thanksgiving. 6. Blessing of God for
favors received, is necessary to be joined with prayer and supplication, there
being constant matter of thanksgiving under all conditions, v. 11. and to
suppress that fretting, quarrelling, and impatient humor, which often venteth
it self against God in our prayers and supplications, where thanksgiving to God
for favors received, is not joined with them, Psalm. 77. 7. compared with v.
10, 11. Hence the Apostle commands, but in every thing by prayer and
supplication, with thanksgiving, let your requests be known unto God.

Verse. 7. And the peace of God. which passes all understanding, shall keep
your hearts and minds through Christ Jesus.
For enforcing the former exhortation, he subjoyneth a promise, that upon their
so doing, the peace of God (a mystery so deep, that it transcendeth the reach
of natural reason) should, as with a guard of armed soldiers, defend their
understandings, will and affections, against the assault of any temptation,
which might otherwise drive them to discouragement, and vexing diffident cares
and fears of suffering from men, upon their exercise of moderation in all their
actions. Doct. 1. There is a calmnesse and tranquillity of spirit attainable by
believers, flowing from their peace made with God in justification, and wrought
in a believer by the Spirit of God, (hence it is called, the peace of God)
which goes beyond the reach of all created understanding to comprehend, it
being a thing almost incredible, that those who are most under the lash of
divine rods, should yet have Gods peace; who of all others are most tossed with
storms and tempests, should yet enjoy a sweet calm in their own mind; who are
often destitute of all things, should yet be as little anxious, as if they
enjoyed all things. A Christian is made up thus, of so many seeming
contrarieties, that no wonder the Apostle does speak here of this peace of God
as passing all understanding. 2. This peace of God cannot be preserved, but in
the due practice of commanded duties, especially in the exercise of prayer:
for, it is promised, if they be diligent in prayer, v. 16. the peace of God
shall guard their hearts. 3. Where this peace is entertained, it does
marvellously guard the whole soul, wit, will and affections from being overcome
by, or disquieted much with the apprehension of losses or injuries, whether
felt or feared: This peace with God, and with a man's own conscience in God, is
of such excellent worth, that so long as it is enjoyed, no other loss is much
valued; for, it is promised as a guard against the forementioned heart-cutting
care; The peace of God shall guard your hearts. 4. All that is in man,
especially his soul, and every faculty of it, is as so many patent ports to
receive most dangerous temptations, so that there must be a guard set to defend
every one of them, otherwise the temptation gets most ready passage: thus
much is imported, while he says, the peace of God shall keep, or guard your
hearts, that is, the will and affection; and minds, that is, the
understanding: It is a Metaphore taken from Military affairs, where Guards of
Soldiers are placed at the Ports of Cities, or weaker parts of the walls, to
stop the Enemies entry. 5. However preservation against the on-sets of
temptation, be a promised fruit of diligence in the use of prescribed means;
yet all the efficacy of those means comes through Jesus Christ and his virtue
working with them, who therefore would be eyed above means: hence this safety
from the temptation, though promised upon their diligence in prayer; yet it is
through Jesus Christ.

Verse. 8. Finally, brethren, whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are
honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever
things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good report: if there be any
virtue, and if there be any praise, think on these things.
Because those Christians at Philippi lived among Heathens, in whom there were
some things worthy of imitation, as many other things were not; therefore the
Apostle exhorts them to several things, relating chiefly to the adorning of
Religion, and making of it lovely unto those Heathens; and particularly that
they would diligently consider, and from consideration, imitate every thing
among them, which was true, honest, just, pure, and of good report: providing
only, that those things of good report, were not vices, but real virtues, and
so, truly worthy of praise. Doct. 1. It is the duty of Christians, especially
of those who live among haters of Religion, and such as seek all occasions to
speak evil of it, to set themselves to search, find out, and, as it were, to
cast their account by what means and carriage they may adorn Religion most, and
make it lovely unto others, and accordingly to carry themselves in all things:
so, while he is exhorting those Philippians to adorn Religion by their
carriage, he injoyneth them to think on those things; the word signifies, to
search out a thing diligently, by comparing one with another, as Accompters use
to do. 2. Christians are not to be so scrupulous as to reject things true, and
in themselves good, though professed and practiced by men, who are otherwise
extremely bad: so, he exhorts them to think upon, and imitate every thing
which was true and honest, even among the the Heathens. 3. It is the duty of
Christians, to discern truth from error, rejecting the latter, and adhering to
to the former, Ephesians. 4. 14, 15. to speak nothing but truth in their ordinary
communication, Ephesians. 4. 25, and to perform what they promise, Psalm. 15. 4. for,
they are to think upon whatever things are true. 4. It is the duty of
Christians so to walk, as by the whole strain of their carriage, they may gain
respect to their persons and profession from others, all their conversation
savouring of nothing but gravity, as being far from scurrility, lightness and
vanity in their apparel, words, deeds, and all their behavior, 1 Timothy 2. 9,
10. for those are things honest, or grave, as it is in the Original, which he
exhorts them to consider. 5. Christians ought to consider, and accordingly to
perform what things are just, that is, whatever we are bound to do unto others,
whether to God or man, Matthew. 22. 21. whether by the Law of Nature, 1 Timothy 5.
8. or of Nations, Ruth 3. 13. by reason of our place or station, Neb. 6. 11.
whether the things we owe be determined by paction, as such a sum of money, or
so much grain, Col. 4. 1. or only to be determined according to the rules of
prudence, equity, or charity, Col. 4. 1. whether it be fear or honor, Romans 13.
7. goodwill, Romans 13. 8. or somewhat further: so as none be defrauded of that
which is his own; for those are the things just, which he wills them to think
upon. 6. Christians who would adorn the Gospel, must study purity and chastity
in all the parts of their conversation, being far from any thing in their words
or actions, which may savor of obscenity, or any bitter root of uncleanness
within, Ephesians. 4. 29. for those are the things pure, or chaste, which he exhorts
them to think upon. 7. However Christians are not to venture on things sinful,
for humouring of those among whom they converse, 2 Pet. 2. 7, 8. yet they are
bound, in so far as with a good conscience they can, to commend their persons
and profession, even to wicked men, by their lovely, affable, and condescending
carriage, Tit. 3. 2, 3. for, those are the things lovely, which he wills them
to mind. 8. Though Christians are not to hunt after the applause of men, Gal.
1. 10. yet, lest the Gospel be evil spoken of through them, and they in
capacity to serve God in their stations by doing good unto others, they are to
walk so as they may be deservedly spoken well of, eschewing every thing which
tends to make their names stink and unsavory unto others, 1 Pet. 2. 2. hence
he commands them to mind things that are of good report. 9. A Christian may
not presently close with every thing which is well reported of, or may gain
applause unto himself among those with whom he lives, Luke 16. 15. But except
the thing in it self be the exercise of some virtue, and truly worthy of
praise, he is to reject it and abhor it, although it be never so much cried up
by others; for, he exhorts them to mind those things which are of good
report, but with this caution, if there be any virtue or praise in them.

Verse. 9. Those things which ye have both learned and received, and heard and
seen in me, do: and the God of peace shall be with you.
He presses the former exhortation, 1. from his own example; he had both
preached and practiced those things, as they themselves were witnesses. 2. From
the fruit following; hereby they should enjoy more constant communion with God,
and more of that inward peace, whereof God is author. Doct. 1. It is the duty
of Ministers, who would prove faithful, to be much in pressing upon their
hearers the substantial duties of Religion, not insisting so much upon notional
cases, or any other thing relating less to peoples practice, Tit. 3. 9. Of the
former sort were those, spoken of, ver. 8. which to inculcate by preaching, was
one great part of the Apostles task, as appears from the many expressions
here used: Those things which ye have both learned, received, and heard. 2. It
is the duty of Ministers, not only to press duties by preaching, but to
practice what they so press by a holy life, whereby people may see that in
them, which they hear from them, see 1 Timothy 4. 12. So did Paul, Ye have both
learned and seen in me. 3. A people are the more bound, and should be the more
stirred up to go about commanded duties, that they are under a Minister, whose
doctrine is lively and his life exemplary: for, Paul makes his practice an
argument to excite them to their duty; Those things which ye have both learned,
and seen in me. 4. A Christian keeping himself in the exercise of good works,
and practice of commanded duties, may expect much of Gods gracious presence,
and of that tranquillity and peace of mind, whereof God is the author, under
the strongest tossings of turbulent times: for he inforceth this exhortation,
Those things do, from this promise, the God of peace shall he with you.

Verse. 10. But I rejoiced in the Lord greatly, that now at the last your care
of me has flourished again, wherein ye were also careful, but ye lacked
opportunity.
In the second part of the chapter, the Apostle shows how much he rejoiced
at, and was affected with their benevolence sent unto him, after so long delay
of time; excusing also the delay, as imputing it to the calamity of the times,
which deprived them of an opportunity, and not to want of good will in them,
which he did never question. Doct. 1. As it is the lot of most eminent
Christians sometimes to stand in need of help and supply from others: so it is
their duty thankfully to acknowledge those whom God has made helpful unto them
in their strait: so does the Apostle here, But I rejoiced in the Lord greatly,
etc. 2. A spiritual heart and wise observer of providence, will find matter of
much joy in God, and of praise unto him, even in those things which to an
ordinary eye would not seem to be of so much worth: so Paul looks upon this
gratuity as a matter of rejoicing in the Lord greatly, because he saw much more
in it than the thing it self, to wit, A reviving of the root of grace in these
fruits of charity, which before appeared as withered and gone; I rejoiced in
the Lord greatly, says he, that your care of me has flourished. 3. Though
there may be in those who are truly gracious, a sad cessation from the exercise
of grace, sometimes through want of opportunity as here, and sometimes also
through their falling into several sins, 2 Samuel 11. 4. yet the seed of God
remains in them, there is life and sap at the root, which through Gods
blessing in due time will bud up and bring sorth the former fruit; now at last
your care of me has flourished; the word is borrowed from trees, which seem in
Winter to be dead and withered, and in the Spring revive again. 4. How long
soever a mercy be delayed, and postponed, a godly heart will see in it matter
of thanksgiving both to God, and also to those from whom as instruments, the
mercy is conveyed: so did Paul, I rejoiced, that now at last your care of me
has flourished. 5. It were the wisdom of Gods people to watch for the
opportunity of doing good, and make use of it; seeing even those who would do
good may ere long be deprived of opportunity to do it: ye were careful, but ye
lacked opportunity. 6. The want of an opportunity, not through our default,
does excuse and justify the forbearance, for a time, of a positive duty, if so
good will be present, see 2 Cor. 8. 12. from this, Paul excuses them, ye
wanted opportunity, says he. 7. It is the part of christian charity to excuse,
so far as prudence will permit, that which may seem to be the neglect of
others, expounding things doubtsome favorably, and imputing their omissions to
the want, not of good will, but of opportunity: so does Paul, wherein ye were
careful, but ye wanted opportunity.

Verse. 11. Not that I speak in respect of want: for I have learned in
whatsoever state I am, therewith to be content. 12. I know both how to be
abased, and I know how to abound: every where, and in all things I am
instructed, both to be full, and to be hungry, both to abound and to suffer
need. 13. I can do all things through Christ which strengthens me.
Lest they had mistaken the Apostle, as if his so much joy for their gratuity
had argued him to have been of a dejected spirit through reason of want; he
clears himself, denying his joy to have proceeded from any thing of that kind,
and that because he was gifted from God with full contentment under every
condition, ver. 11. and so he reckons several particular conditions, under
which he had learned to live contentedly at all times, and in all places: As
first, under disgrace, and abundance of worldly applause. Secondly, store of
meat and drink, and utter scarcity and want. Thirdly, under his abounding
generally in all things necessary for food, raimemt, lawful pleasures and
recreations, and a sparing measure of all those things, ver. 12. And lest, by
what is said, he might be looked upon as a vain arrogant boaster, he points
at the fountain from whence he was furnished, to wit, The power and virtue of
Jesus Christ inabling him ver. 13. Doct. 1. A seeker of God, espcially a
Christian Minister, would be careful, lest he do or say any thing whereby he
may incur the suspicion of being too much desirous of things worldly, or of
being too much dejected and cast down through the want of them: there being
nothing which makes the Gospel to be worse spoken of, than the sin of
Covetousness in the Preachers, or Professors of it: hence Paul does so
carefully clear his former words from savouring of any thing of that kind; not
that I speak in respect of want, says he. 2. The Child of God is subject to
change of conditions in things outward, being sometimes in credit, sometimes in
disgrace; sometimes rich, sometimes poor; sometimes sick, sometimes in health;
sometimes enjoying all things necessary for his sustentation and life,
sometimes almost wholly deprived of them: so was it with Paul, I know how to be
abased, and how to abound, etc. 3. Whatever be the several changes, wherewith
the Lord does exercise his own, they are to be contented under them, to wit, so
as not to grudge and repine against God, Job, 2. 9, 10. or to give way unto
heartlesse dejection of spirit under adversity, Pro. 24. 10. though they may
use lawful means for delivering themselves from it, 1 Samuel 30. 9. and so, as
not to be puffed up by prosperity, Job 31. 25. nor forget the Lord, Prove. 30.
9. and despise others who want, Job, 31. 13. Thus Paul learned in every state
therewith to be content; he knew how to abound, etc. 4. This great Lesson of
Contentment under every estate, is a thing whereof all by nature are ignorant,
none have skill in it except they learn it: Paul did learn it, I have learned.
5. The knowledge of this Lesson is attained, not so much by reading Books, and
infixing in our memories directions to that purpose; as by frequent change of
condition, and the Lords blessing of our changes for begetting in us
experimental knowledge, how to carry our selves in each condition: thus Paul
did learn this Lesson, I have learned and am instructed; The latter word
signifies, to be initiated in holy things, or religiously taught: so there is
a piece of divine skill necessary for teaching folk this lesson. 6. The
tentations which attend a prosperous condition are so many, such as pride, 1 Timothy 6. 17. disdain of others, Jam. 2. 6. and security, Luke 12. 19. The duties
which are required in it, are so many, such as thankfulness to God, 1 Chronicles.
24. 10. beneficence to all men, 1 Timothy 6. 18. humility and sobriety of spirit
in the managing of it, Jer. 9. 23. and laying our account to meet with changes,
Job, 3. 25. and the many distractions which do accompany it, and tend to the
hindering of those duties, are so subtle and insinuating, 1 Timothy 6. 9. that
there is no less need of divine art for carrying of our selves ^right under
prosperity, than there is for such a christian carriage under adversity: so
Paul must be instructed, how to be full, and how to abound, as well as how to
be hungry, and how to suffer want. 7. Man's natural faculties are renewed, but
not destroyed by grace, or laid asleep, as if Christ himself did all things,
and we nothing: for Paul says here, that he did; the action did flow from an
inward principle of a renewed will and understanding, I am able to do. 8 The
power by which renewed souls do work, is wholly Christ's; not only the habits of
grace are from him, but also the actuating of those habits does flow from his
special influence: through him that strengthens me. 9. There is a kind of
omnipotency in a Believer, being supported by Christ's strengthening power; so
that there is nothing within the compass of his christian calling, and for
which there is a Covenant-promise for through-bearing, there is no such thing
unpossible for him to do: I am able to do all things. 10. This note of
universality, All, whether applied to persons, or things, is not to be taken
every where in its larger sense, but to be astricted to the clear meaning of
the place where it is, and the exigency of other Scriptures: so Paul says, I
am able to do all things, which cannot be extended to all and every thing
without limitation (there being many things simply impossible to be done by any
creature) but must be restricted to all those things which consist in the
exercise of christian moderation under all dispensations, or at most, to all
things within the compass of his christian calling, and for which there is a
covenant-promise for through-bearing: see 1 Cor. 6. 12. and chap. 9. 22. by
which rule, that passage, 1 Timothy 2. 6. is to be expounded.

Verse. 14. Notwithstanding, ye have well done, that ye did communicate with my
affliction.
Having guarded upon the one hand against their suspecting of him to have been
too much dejected through want, he guardeth against another mistake, as if
their gratuity had been little acceptable unto him; by showing they had done
well in doing what they had done, and sharing with him in his sufferings for
Christ. Doct. 1. There is nothing which men can do, wherein they are not liable
to mistakes: for, even while they are clearing themselves of one mistake, they
are in hazard thereby to run under another, as Paul was here. 2. The danger of
being mistaken, should hinder no man from going on in his duty, he is to do
what he can to take off mistakes, and in the mean time be going on in what is
right: so Paul, having cleared himself, proceeds in his duty, commending
those Philippians for their charity; and thereby wipeth off another mistake,
which might have risen upon his guarding against the former; Nevertheless, ye
have done well. 3. Though the Children of God be supported with courage from
himself, to be content with, and to undergo their present lot; yet this must
not make others neglect to help them in their strait, because in so doing they
do but what is their duty: neither should it make themselves neglect the offer
of supply from others, or vilipend it when it is received; this were to tempt
God, by neglecting means of help, because of Gods goodness in supporting under
want of means, when they could not be had. Thus, though Paul was enabled
through Christ to be content with his hard lot; yet the Philippians give him
help, and are therein approven and highly commended by him; Nevertheless, says
he, ye have done well. 4. It is the duty of all to prove confortable unto those
who are suffering for truth, by supplying of their necessities according to
their power: they did well in communicating with Paul's affliction. 5. They who
make conscience of this duty, do hereby share in the afflictions of those who
suffer for truth, as if they were suffering the same things, and for the same
cause with them: so the Apostle affirms, because of their gratuitie, they had
communicated with his afflictions.

Verse. 15. Now ye Philippians know also that in the beginning of the Gospel,
when I departed from Macedonia, no Church communicated with me, as concerning
giving and receiving, but ye only. 16. For even in Thessalonica ye sent once
and again unto my necessity.
The Apostle shows himself mindful, not only of the present favor, but
also of their bypast liberality toward him, ever since he began to preach
the Gospel among them; and this not only when he was laboring among
themselves, but also when he was at Thessalonica; and withal does guard
against their suspecting of him, as too greedy in receiving so frequently from
them, by showing he had received nothing as a reward for his work from any
other Church in those parts; for the truth whereof, he appealeth to their own
knowledge. Doct. 1. There is a rule of equity to be kept betwixt Pastor and
People, that, as he bestows upon them spiritual things by preaching of the
Gospel, so they should furnish him with things carnal, by giving an honorable
maintenance, 1 Cor. 9. 11. and this a faithful Minister may expect and crave,
not as a mere gratuity, but as due debt, 1 Timothy 5. 17. this is imported in the
phrase here used by Paul, when speaking of maintenance which was bestowed on
him by those he labored amongst in the work of the Gospel, he uses the
expression of giving and receiving, which is used by Merchants, who in their
Books of Accounts, do mark what they give out, and what they receive in, as the
due price of their ware. 2. Though maintenance be most due for Ministers; yet
such is the peevishness and greed of many, that hardly can they be driven to
quit any thing for up-holding of the Gospel, though even an Apostle Paul were
preaching among them: this Paul did find, no Church did communicate with me, as
concerning giving. Though it may be also, the Apostle did for bear to receive
any thing from others, were they never so willing, for the reasons mentioned, 1
Cor. 9. 15, 16, 18, 19. 2 Thessalonians. 3. 8, 9. 3. A faithful servant of Jesus
Christ, who is taken up with a desire after the gaining of souls, will digest
many unkindnesses of that sort, passing them over as he best may, especially so
long as the Lord provideth for him otherwise, as he usually does, making some
to show the more of kindness, that others show but little: so does Paul meekly
pass over his not receiving from those other Churches, mentioning with
thankfulness the help which he received from Philippi: no Church communicated
with me, but ye only. 4. This speaks much to the commendation of a People,
when the general neglect of duty by others, does not only not make them
neglect their duty, but also exciteth them to be more forward in it: for, from
this are the Philippians commended; no Church did communicate with me, but ye
only; and ye sent once and again; they did not look so much unto that which
others did, as what they themselves were bound to do. 5. As the Lord may suffer
his choicest servants to be driven to worldly straits through want of things
necessary; so, usually he makes providence to tryst with their necessity, and
answers it by those who are least obliged, when others who are more bound,
does take no notice of it, or, they cannot conveniently make use of their help:
so, even in Thessalonica, ye sent once and again to my necessity; when the
Thessalonians, to whom he was preaching, neglected him; or, he could not
receive from them, the Philippians sent him supply.

Verse. 17. Not because I desire a gift: but I desire fruit that may abound to
your account.
He does yet guard against their suspecting him of greed showing that his
praising of their liberality, and charging of others with ingratitude, was not,
that thereby he might incite them to give him more, but that they might be
encouraged to grow more and more, as in all grace, so in this of liberality,
whether toward him or others: the advantage thereof should accresse to
themselves, more than to any other. Doct. 1. One action in it self good and
lawful, may be reckoned unto the worker, either as sin, or duty, according to
the end which he proposes to himself in it: so Paul's commending of their
liberality, was in it self good, but if his end proposed, had been only, or
mainly, that thereby he might excite them to give him more, his action had been
base and sinful; and therefore he purges himself of it, not that I desire a
gift: but his intent being mainly to promove their salvation by stirring them
up to their duty, his action is commendable; and therefore he owneth this as
the thing intended by him, but I desire fruit that may abound to your account.
2. As Ministers ought in prudence to speak to the just commendation of any
good, which they observe in people, v. 14. So, a pious heart will not be
thereby puffed up, or rendered secure, as if he had done enough; but rather
excited to make further progress: I desire fruit that may abound. 3. The more
a man does abound in good works, and especially in the works of charity toward
such as are in misery, the greater shall be his reward in Heaven, though not of
merit, yet of grace, Romans 6. v. 23. for, their fruit of charity should abound
to their account. It is a Metaphore taken also from the Books of Merchants: our
good deeds are marked as in a Compt-book by God, and he will give out
accordingly.

Verse. 18. But I have all, and abound, I am full, having received of
Epaphroditus, the things which were sent from you, an odor of a sweet smell, a
sacrifice acceptable, well pleasing to God.
That he may remove all suspicions of that kind, and praise their liberality
yet further, he shows, that their gratuity carried by Epaphroditus, was
received of him, and did abundantly satisfy, as being sufficient, yea, more
than sufficient for the present strait, and that hereby they had done as
acceptable service unto God, as those who under the Law did offer up a
sacrifice perfumed with sweetest incense. Doct. 1. Though a man be never so
trust-worthy in himself, and never so much trusted by those who do employ him;
yet he ought in wisdom to guard against any sinistrous suspicion which may be
taken up against his honesty and faithfulness: so Epaphroditus, though their
Minister, and doubtless in great reputation among them, as a man who would
have been loath to convert any of their public charity to his own private use;
yet returns not until Paul give it under his hand, that he had received the
whole sum from him, I have all, or, I have received all, as it is in the
Original: he knew not but times and peoples esteem of him might change, and he
might be brought to an account, or at least some might vent their own
suspicions of him privately, to under-myne him. 2. Where there is frugality to
manage, and the grace of contentation with what the Lord is pleased to bestow,
a little portion of things worldly, will be thought sufficient: so, though a
covetous man, and prodigal spendthrift, does never think he has enough; yet
Paul does think it; I abound, and am full, having received the things which ye
sent. 3. However there are no expiatory sacrifices for sin to be offered up by
Christians, Christ having offered up himself once for all, Heb. 9. 28. and
though the outward rite of sacrifizing in any kind be now abolished, all those
rudiments ceasing with the nonage of the Church which was under the Old
Testament, Act. 15. 10. yet the substance of the Eucharistick sacrifice used
among the Jews, or the thing which was pointed out by that sacrifice, does yet
remain as a moral duty, never to be laid aside, to wit, an evidencing of our
thankfulness to God for favors received, which is done in part, by giving a
part of what he has bestowed for the help of others who are in a strait; for
Paul in this sense calls their charity an odor of a sweet smell, a
sacrifice. 4. Seeing our charity and beneficence unto those who are in straits,
is a part of our christian sacrifice: Then, first, it must be willingly
bestowed, and not through constraint, 2 Cor. 9. 7. Secondly, It must be offered
unto God in obedience to a command, and to evidence our thankfulness unto him,
and not to the creature, not to the Idol of our credit and estimation, or for
other selfish ends, Matthew. 6. 2. Thirdly, It must be offered on the right
altar, to wit, Christ, (see Heb. 13. 10) that through his worth the offering
may be accepted by God; for, all those were requisite unto orderly and
acceptable sacrificing: see Lev. 22. 19. Exodus 22. 20. and 20. 24. Doct. 5.
Though there be no such measure of obedience attainable here, with which the
Lord will be so well pleased, as to judge the performer to be perfect, or
adjudge him to eternal life for the worth that is in it, Romans 3. 20. Christ's
obedience and sacrifice only being acceptable, and thus well-pleasing unto him,
Romans 5. 19. yet he may be so pleased with his obedience, as to judge him
sincere in what he does, and to look on his performance, as his own gracious
work in him; and that is, when the thing performed is in it self good, Psalm.
89. 30, 31, 32. done by a man in Christ, Joh. 15. 4. by strength drawn from
Christ, Joh. 15. 5. and for the right end, Gods glory, and not worldly
applause, Matthew. 6. 5. In this respect he calls their beneficence, An odor
of a sweet smell, acceptable and well-pleasing unto God.

Verse. 19. But my God shall supply all your need according to his riches in
glory, by Christ Jesus.
For their further encouragement, he promises unto them from Scripture-grounds
(see Psalm. 41. 1.) that God should recompense them for what they had given, and
that abundantly, even in this life according to their necessity, not for any
worth or dignity in their work, but of his own free grace through Christ. Doct.
1. Scripture promises made of old, are still in force, and in all aftertimes
appliable unto any endued with those qualifications which they had unto whom
those promises were first made: so Paul applies that promise (Psalm. 41.) made
unto those who were charitable in David's time, unto those Philippians; but my
God shall supply all your need. 2. That general promises may be the more safely
and with the greater comfort applied to our own, or the particular case of
others, we would search into such grounds as may be most promising for faith to
rest upon in expectation of the thing promised: so the Apostle, to help their
faith to close with this promise, lays down two grounds: 1. Gods sufficiency
in these words, according to his riches; he has whereupon to do it. 2. His
engagement upon his credit and honor in those words, my God, as if he had
said, He is the God whose Ambassador I am, and so cannot in honor but
recompense you for what ye have given to me in my strait. Doct. 3. Those who
enjoy most of the world, cannot promise unto themselves, but they may be driven
to straits: for, he supposes even they might be redacted to straits, while he
says, my God shall supply all your need. 4. The more beneficial any have been
unto the poor servants of Christ in the time of their abundance, they may
expect the more that God will be forthcoming unto them by his providence in
the day of want: my God shall supply all your need. 5. The Lord in dealing with
his people, does not look so much at their worth and deserving, as what is
fitting for his own glory, and most beseeming for such a glorious God to do: so
he shall supply your need in glory, that is, liberality, as the magnificence of
such a glorious King does call for. 6. Whatever recompense the Lord is pleased
to give unto the good works, or alms-deeds of his Children, whether here or
hereafter, it proceeds not from the merit, or dignity of the work, but from
the merits of Jesus Christ, in whom they are as members in the head: Christ
has purchased all; and good works are only the rule according to which his
purchase is distributed: so he shall supply all your need by, or, in Jesus
Christ.

Verse. 20. Now unto God and our Father be glory for ever and ever. Amen.
The Apostle, in the third part of the chapter, concluding the Epistle, first,
in contemplation of all the former mercies, ascribes lasting praise and glory
to God, as God, and as the Father of Believers, through virtue of that gracious
Covenant made between him and them in Christ. Doct. 1. Though we can wish no
real worth and excellency to be superadded unto that which God has: for, he
wants nothing, Neh. 9. 5. Yet it is the duty of Christians to be much in
wishing, that those excellencies which are in God, may be more and more shining
forth, Isa. 64. 2. and that the hearts of men and Angels may highly esteem of
him because of them, Psalm. 107. 8. for, this is the glory which the Apostle
wishes unto God, and by his practice teaches others to do the like; Now unto
God be glory. 2. That Christians may be much and real in this wish, they would
seriously consider that worth, excellency, and goodness of God manifested to
themselves in his works, particularly in his works of creation and general
providence, in relation to which he is here called GOD; but most especially in
the works of Redemption and Salvation purchased for, and actually bestowed upon
lost sinners: in relation to which he is here called Our Father; that so our
own hearts being once affected and filled, even to overflowing, we may with
greater fervency and sincerity break out with this wish, That the same
excellency, and more of it may be manifested unto, and constantly acknowledged
both by our selves and others: So the Apostle, having considered his many
favors spoken of through the whole Epistle, and looking on him as God and our
Father, breaks out in this wish, Now unto God, and our Father be glory. 3.
The servent desire of real Saints to have the excellency, worth and goodness
of God manifested, and accordingly acknowledged, are in a manner boundless, as
being circumscribed by no time or place: there is no less than boundless
everlasting glory comprehended in their wish; glory for ever and ever: whereby
is usually expressed eternity and endless duration, see Psalm. 10. 16. Rev. 22.
5.

Verse. 21. Salute every Saint in Christ Jesus: the Brethren which are with me
greet you. 22. All the Saints salute you, chiefly they that are of Cesar's
household.
Secondly, In the conclusion, there are mutual salutations and commendations:
some were to be saluted by them in his name, others who were with him did
salute, or remember themselves unto them, of whom he reckons three ranks.
First, Those who were in Churchoffice, called Brethren, ver. 21. Secondly, The
private Christians, or Church Members, which were at Rome. And thirdly, More
especially he designeth Cesars household, to wit, some of his Servants and
Courtiers, who were Converts. Doct. 1. External duties of civility tending of
their own nature to entertain and increase love among men, are not to be
neglected by Christians; of which sort are civil salutations: Though civility
and good manners be not Religion; yet Religion destroys them not, but
injoyneth them: So Paul, and those primitive Christians, did mutually salute
each other; Salute every Saint. 2. Whatever a man be in his inward condition
before God, or in his outward condition worldly, whether rich or poor, noble or
ignoble; yet, so long as he stands a Churchmember, a Minister should put
that respect upon him, and do those duties to him which are due unto one in
such a relation; for, he injoyneth them, in his name, to salute every Saint,
that is, all the Church Members, who are Saints all of them by external, or
sederal sanctity, or holiness: according to which, in regard of the Covenant
made betwixt God and the visible Church, every one professing subjection unto
that Covenant are separated from other people, and in a particular manner
dedicated unto Gods service, Exodus 31. 13. Now that Saints are taken in this
latitude here, is very probable: for, if the command had been to salute only
those, who are Saints by inherent holiness, how could it have been obeyed?
for, real saving grace cannot be known infallibly by another, and so inevitably
they should have saluted many Hypocrites in place of Saints, passing by others
who were Saints indeed. It may indeed bear thus much, That if any had more real
evidence of grace than others, the Apostle would have himself more specially
remembered unto such; but this is not all, for he will have them saluting every
Saint, and so those who were well known unto them to be such: Neither does the
words following, in Christ Jesus, militate against this sense; for, even those,
who are externally and federally Saints, are in Christ by an external and
visible union, consisting in the serious profession of those Truths which
relate to him; the effect of which union, is, the communication of common gifts
of the Spirit to every one according to their measure: see Job. 15. 2. Every
branch in me which bears no fruit, which supposes some to be in Christ in
the way mentioned, who yet are fruitless branches, and so unregenerate. 3.
Christian charity will so far cover the infirmities and failings of others; as
not to disown them as Brethren, nor yet neglect those christian duties which we
owe unto them, or are obliged to do for them as Brethren; for, although (chapter 2.
v. 20, 21) he complains of all who were with him, except Timotheus only, that
no man was like-minded, and all did seek their own things; yet nevertheless,
he does in their name salute the Philippians, calling them Brethren; the
Brethren which are with me greet you. 4. So powerful is the Gospel being
accompanied with Gods blessing, Romans 1. 16. that it will set upon and enter the
Houses of greatest Persecutors, and carry some of their chiefest Minions
captive from their very elbow: some even of bloody Nero's house are converted
by the Gospel: those of Cesars household. 5. Such is the courage and valor of
spirit with which the Lord does endue sincere professors of the Gospel, that
they will dare to hold up a Banner for Truth, even under the nose, and within
the gates of most bloodthirsty raging Persecutors: for, some of Nero's House
upon all hazard perform those duties which their christian calling tied them
unto: chiefly they that are of Cesar's household do greet you.

Verse. 23. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all. Amen.
Thirdly, He concludes with his usual farewel-wish, to which he affixeth his
Amen. Doct. 1. Gods grace is the sum of all which a man needs to wish either
for himself or others; for his grace is, first, Gods favor, as the fountain of
all which is good, Ephesians. 2. 8, 9. And, secondly, the streams of grace inherent,
and increase in it, flowing from that fountain, 2 Pet. 3. 18. And what want i^
there where those are? So Paul summeth up all his desires in this one, The
grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you. 2. Gods grace and favor, which
reconciled souls do enjoy, together with the whole bulk of graces inherent,
which flow from it, are all purchased unto us by Christ's merit, and applied by
his intercession; and therefore is justly called the grace of our Lord Jesus
Christ. 3. Our prayers and wishes unto God should proceed from such
deliberation of mind, Matthew. 20. 22. such ear^estnesse of heart and affection,
Jam. 5. 16. and such confidence of an answer according to the tenor of the
promise, Jam. 1. 6. that we may understandingly and incerely affix our Amen
unto them; So does the Apostle, Grace be with you all.

Amen.
A BRIEF EXPOSITION Of the Epistle of PAUL the Apostle to the COLOSSIANS.
The ARGUMENT.
EPaphras, having founded a Church at Colosse, (chap. 1. v. 7.) a city of
Phrygia in the lesser Asia, near to Laodicea and Hierapolis, chap. 4. v. 13.
and perceiving the truth of the Gospel preached by him, to be impugned; partly,
by some converted from Judaisme, who urged the Ceremonies of the Law, as
necessary to salvation, chap. 2. v. 8 -- partly, by some converted from
Gentilisme, who, from principles of abused Philosophy, did urge the
worshipping of Angels, and other superstitious rites, grounded only upon humane
tradition, chap. 2. v -- 8. 18. He informs Paul, now prisoner at Rome (chap.
4. v. 3.) of the case of this Church: whereupon Paul writes this Epistle unto
them. His scope wherein, is, (often prefacing, to v. 12. chap. 1.) to confirm
that doctrine which was preached unto them by Epaphras, to the end of chapter 1.
and to guard them against all the forenamed errors, contrary to that
doctrine, chap. 2. and to incite them to the study and practice of holiness,
both in the general and special duties of Christianity, chap. 3. and to v. 7.
of chap. 4. After which he insisteth upon some particular affairs, such as
recommendations, salutations, and some directions, to the end of chap. 4.

CHAP. I.
IN the first part of this Chapter (after the inscription, v. 1, 2.) he
insinuates himself upon their affections, and makes way for his main purpose:
First, by showing he did give thanks to God for them, v. 3. being moved thereto
by the report of their spiritual graces, v. 4, 5. Secondly, by commending them
for their fruitfulness, v. 6. and their Pastor Epaphras unto them, v. 7, 8.
Thirdly, by showing he prayed also to God for them: 1. for increase of
knowledge, v. 9. 2. for growth in holiness, v. 10. and 3. for courage under
sufferings, v. 11.

In the second part, he gives a brief sum of saving doctrine; wherein he
declares, how God does fit the Elect for Heaven, v. 12. by calling them
effectually, v. 13. and pardoning their sin, v. 14. Next, he describes Jesus
Christ the Redeemer of the Elect, from his internal relation to God, as being
his Image, v. 15. -- his external relation unto all things created, as being
before them, v. -- 15. their Creator, last end v. 16. and their upholder, v.
17. and from his relation to the Church, as being her Head, etc. v. 18. and
from his furniture to the Office of Mediator, v. 19. especially to reconcile
man with God, v. 20. which general doctrine of reconciliation, he applies
unto the Colossians, v. 21, 22.

In the third part, he exhorts them to continue in this doctrine, confirming
the same; First, from the authority of his Office, v. 23. which, together with
the doctrine preached by him, was confirmed by his sufferings, v. 24. and from
his call to the Office, v. 25. Secondly, from the worth of the doctrine in it
self, v. 26, 27, and thirdly, because it was the same doctrine which he himself
preached, v. 28. with great pains, and much divine assistance, v. 29.

Verse. 1. Paul an Apostle of Jesus Christ, by the will of God, and Timotheus
our brother, 2. To the saints and faithful brethren in Christ, which are at
Colosse, grace be unto you, and peace from God our Father, and the Lord Jesus
Christ.
IN these two verses, is, the inscription of the Epistle, containing, first, a
description of those who sent it, from their names and adjuncts, v. 1.
Secondly, of those to whom it was directed; from the place of their habitation,
and three excellent Epithets. Thirdly, the Apostle's usual salutation, v. 2.

From the persons who sent the Epistle; Learn 1. How free and powerful must
divine grace be, which of a persecuting Saul (Acts 8. v. 3.) did make an
Apostle Paul. 2. In the first beginning of the Christian Church, there were a
certain kind of Office-bearers, named Apostles, who were called immediately by
God, Joh. 20. 21. had infallible knowledge of the doctrine of the Gospel, by
immediate inspiration from the Spirit of God, Joh. 16. 13. were not tied unto
any certain charge, further than rules of prudence did direct, Matthew. 28. 19,
were gifted with power to work miracles for confirmation of their doctrine,
Mark 3. 15. the glad tidings of grace being then but new, Joh. 1. 17. And did
occasionally exerce the duties of all the Office-bearers of the Church, Acts 4.
35. Of which Apostles, Paul was one: Paul an Apostle. 3. Jesus Christ the
Mediator, is entrusted with the work of sending out Ministers to his Church;
for, he is the Churches Head, Ephesians. 5. 23. unto whom it belongs to provide all
things necessary for the body: hence Paul is the Apostle of Jesus Christ, as
being sent by him. 4. The Father's will and Christ's, do fully agree in that
which tends to the Churches good, as here, in sending forth an Apostle, Paul
is an Apostle of Jesus Christ, by the will of God. 5. None ought to intrude
himself upon any Office, much less upon an Office in the Church, without an
orderly call: Paul is an Apostle of Jesus Christ by the will of God. 6. It
concerns a Minister to be so clear in the matter of his Call, that he may be
able to avow it unto others, especially when his Calling is questioned, Am. 7.
14, etc. when he has to do with those that know him not, as here, chap. 2. v.
1: and when he meets with contempt and other discouragements in the discharge
of his Calling, Jer. 17. 15, 16. So Paul upon some, or all of these occasions,
avoweth his Calling: An Apostle of Jesus Christ. 7. The most gracious, able,
and eminent Christians, should be, and ordinarily are so disposed, as not to
despise the less eminent and weaker; but giving them all due respect, are to
take their assistance in any thing wherein they may be useful; especially,
seeing God has not given all things unto every one, and the meanest have
somewhat whereby they may prove steadable to the best, 1 Cor. 12. 21, 22. So
Paul joyneth Timothy with himself in the Inscription, though Timothy was not an
Apostle, or Penman of Scripture; because he being well known unto those
Colossians, his assent might add the more weight unto that which is written,
and that hereby Timotheus might be yet more commended unto them, as being so
highly honored by such an eminent Apostle; for which cause also Paul gives
him the name of Brother, they being fellow laborers in the Gospel; Timotheus
our Brother.

From the description of those unto whom the Epistle is directed, Learn, 1.
Though all the members of the visible Church be externally Saints, and
federally holy, 1 Cor. 7. 14. yet there are some, who, besides that relative
holiness, are really Saints, inherently holy, and endued with gracious virtues
and qualifications, and such God respects most; for whose sake mainly he
sends his word unto others, 2 King. 3. 14. for, Paul writes to the Saints in
this latter sense mainly, though not excluding the former. 2. Whoever are
Saints, are also faithful, and Believers; whoever are Believers, are also
Saints; and so far and in the same sense that a man is a Saint, he is a
Believer also: they who are externally Saints, and federally holy, do profess
at least the doctrine of Faith, either personally, or parentally; and they who
are inherently holy, are also inherently and savingly Believers, as not only
professing the doctrine, but also assenting to the truth of it, and embracing
it in their hearts; and again, all such Believers are really changed from sin
to holiness: So these two are here conjoined, as being of equal extent; To the
Saints, and faithful. 3. All Saints and Believers, are also Brethren, because
of their professing the same Religion, and worshipping the same God, Deuteronomy. 17.
20. because of their brotherly love and affection, 2 Thessalonians. 4. 9. because they
have one Father, God, and one elder Brother, Jesus Christ, Joh. 1. 12. and
because they are all ingrafted in one mystical body, and quickened by one and
the same Spirit, Ephesians. 4. 4. as natural Brethren have their birth from the
self-same parents; so the Saints and faithful are also Brethren. 4. There is no
sanctity, faith, or fraternity of any moment unto salvation, except it be
founded upon Christ, flowing from him, and relating to him: whatever is of
those among Heathens, and men otherwise destitute of Christ, is only
counterfeit, not real; civilizing, not saving, Mat. 5. 46. so they are Saints,
Faithful, Brethren in Christ. 5. After Christ's incarnation and death,
free grace has enlarged it self much beyond its ancient bounds: for, whereas
before, the bounds of the people were according to the number of the children
of Israel, Deuteronomy. 32. 8. there is now a Church of Saints and faithful brethren
at Colosse.

From the salutation, Learn, 1. Gods favor and free grace is to be sought
after in the first place, whether for our selves or others, and all other
things which tend to our happiness here, or hereafter, as streams flowing from
that fountain; thus Paul wishes for grace first, and peace next. 2. Where Gods
grace and favor is obtained, all other things prosperous will undoubtedly
follow, in so far as God sees them to conduce for our good, Matthew. 7. 11. as
appears from the connection between the good things wished for by the Apostle:
Grace be unto you, and peace. 3. Gods grace and favor, together with all good
things flowing from it, is the peculiar allowance of those who lay claim to God
as theirs, according to the tenor of the Covenant of grace: for, Paul, in
seeking grace and peace, owneth God as Father; from God our Father. 4. As God
has fullness of grace, and of all things necessary, to be conveyed unto lost
sinners; so there is no access unto him, to receive of that fullness from him,
but through Jesus Christ, who is Mediator betwixt God and man, 1 Timothy 2. 5.
for, he wishes grace from God the Father, through Jesus Christ.

Verse. 3. We give thanks to God, and the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
praying always for you.
That the Apostle may excite those Colossians to constancy and progress in
faith and piety, and in order thereto, procure their attention and benevolence,
he shows that he and Timothy, did make conscience of giving thanks to God on
their behalf; and this they did always when they prayed for them. Doct. 1. So
apt are people to reject Truth, when there is any prejudice against the
Preacher (1 King. 22. 8.) that whosoever would preach to any good purpose must
labor so to bear in upon peoples affections, that they may have ground to
conceive of him, as of one that loves them; this the Apostle does here through
the whole Preface unto the 12. verse. 2. As it is our duty in relation to God,
Matthew. 9. 8. so it speaks much our hearty affection unto others, when the
graces of God, parts, and abilities that are in them, do not produce carnal
emulation or envy, Numb. 11. 29. nor flattering commendations of the men
themselves, Job, 32. 21. but furnishes us with matter of thanksgiving unto
God: Thus Paul does evidence his affection to those Colossians; We give thanks
to God. 3. God is the Father of Jesus Christ, not only as God, by an eternal
generation and communication of his whole essence unto him in a way unspeakable
Ps. 2. v. 7. but even also as man through virtue of the personal union of the
two natures in Christ, and in a special way, which does far excel all other
ways, whereby he is a father to other men and angels, Luke 1. 32: thus God and
the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, are one: for, the particle and, is
exegetick of the same thing, and not copulative of things different. 4. In all
our performances we should eye God, with a respect had to Jesus Christ; seeing
the Father is well pleased only in him, both with our persons and duties,
Matthew. 3. 17. for, in giving thanks, he eyeth God, with a relation to Christ:
We give thanks to God, and the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. 5. Then is the
fittest time to give thanks to God for favors bestowed, when our hearts are
somewhat elevated to God, and our affections somewhat warmed in the duty of
prayer; and the duties of prayer and praise do mutually contribute for the help
one of another: thus the Apostle gave thanks, always praying for them, that
is, always when he prayed for them: for so are the words to be ordered, and
not praying always, as if he had been constantly praying for them.

Verse. 4. Since we heard of your faith in Christ Jesus, and of the love which
ye have to all the saints.
He declares the reasons of his thanksgiving, to wit, those spiritual graces
which were eminent in them: of which he instanceth two, and does illustrate
them from their principal object, faith in Christ, and love to all the saints.
Doct. 1. Where there is saving grace in any, there is sufficient ground of
rejoicing in God for them, whatever be their case otherwise: and where this is
not, there is little besides but matter of grief; all other things without
this, being but a curse and snare unto them, Tit. 1. 15. So Paul gives thanks,
having heard of their faith and love. 2. Of those spiritual favors, the
enjoyment whereof, is a ground of thanksgiving; faith is among the first: for,
thereby we are united unto, and have communion with Christ, Ephesians. 3. 17. hereby
we are justified, Romans 5. 1. and our hearts purified, Acts 15. 9. and all our
performances accepted, Heb. 11. 4. So he thanketh God for their faith, in the
first place. 3. Though there be no Scripture-truth, unto which, being once made
known, the grace of faith gives not a firm assent Acts 24. 14. yet Jesus
Christ, and those truths which speak of him, are the principal object of
saving and justifying faith; and therefore it is called, faith in Jesus Christ.
4. There is a necessary connection betwixt the graces of faith and love, the
former without the latter being dead, Jam. 2. 17. and the latter without the
former, being not real, but in appearance only, or at the best but a moral
virtue, and no saving-grace, Matthew. 5. 20. so they are here conjoined, of your
faith in Jesus Christ, and your love. 5. Though Christians are bound to love
all men, even their enemies, Matthew. 5. 44. yet seeing God is to be loved
chiefly, and all others but in subordination to him, Matthew. 22. 38, 39. it
follows, that those are to have most of our love, who resemble God most;
therefore the love of those Colossians was chiefly toward the saints. 6. We
are to lay out our love upon Saints, as they are Saints, for the reality or
appearance of good in them and not for other by-respects only, or mainly, as of
kindred, friendship, or favors bestowed by them, Matthew. 5. 46. neither are we
to withdraw our affection from any such, because of their infirmities, their
differing from us in opinion, or personal injuries received from them, 2 Cor.
12. 15. for so their love was to all the saints, none being excepted.

Verse. 5. For the hope which is laid up for you in heaven, whereof ye heard
before in the word of the truth of the Gospel:
He shows the cause moving them to persevere in those graces, to wit, the
hoped-for reward of glory preserved for them in Heaven, and made known unto
them; yea, and the hope whereof was wrought in them, Romans 10. 17. by the word
of truth, that is, the Gospel. Doct. 1. The believers portion is not given him
in hand, he has it only in hope: for, it is called, their hope, a thing only
hoped for. 2. The believers portion is laid up for him, and safely kept for his
use, and that in a most sure place, to wit, in Heaven, where neither moth, nor
rust does corrupt, nor thieves do break through and steal; which is said up, to
wit, safely, as a parent would hide a treasure for the use of his child; so
does the word signify, which is laid up for you in Heaven. 3. As there is
little to be expected and hoped for on earth by a man who will live godlily,
except temptations and crosses, 2 Timothy 3. 12. so he eying of this rich reward
of glory laid up in Heaven, is a strong encouragement to persevere in faith,
love, and other graces: and it is lawful for Christians to have an eye to this
reward, as a motive to duty: providing, 1. it be not looked at as a thing to be
merited by their obedience, Romans 6. 23. Nor 2. As the only or chief motive, 2
Cor. 5. 14. thus they were encouraged, not from any thing earthly, but from the
hope which was laid up for them in Heaven. Doct. 4. That ever Heaven and glory
should be enjoyed by any of lost mankind, was a thing that Nature's light
could never have dreamed of, except God himself had made it known by his Word:
thus he mentions the hearing of this rich reward by the Word preached, as the
mean whereby it was made known unto them, whereof ye heard in the Word. 5. It
is the word preached which the Lord does ordinarily bless, as his instrument
for begetting saving faith, and the hope of glory in us: the word not only
propounding and making known to the understanding, the object of those graces,
which was before hid; but the Lord also, at, or after the hearing of this Word,
infusing them into the heart, Acts 16. 14. Thus he mentions the hearing of
it, as the mean also, whereby the saving hope of this reward was wrought in
them: whereof ye heard before in the word. 6. Though the whole Word of God be
true, Ps. 19. 9. as being the word of him who cannot lie, Tit. 1. 2. yet the
Word of the Gospel is eminently the Word of Truth, as having Christ for its
main subject, who is the way the truth, and life, Joh. 14. 6. and being
confirmed by the Testatours blood. Joh. 18. -- 37. for, says he, in the word
of truth, that is, of the Gospel. 7. It is this Word of the Gospel, the
preaching whereof does make known unto us, and works in us that blessed hope:
the Word of the Law, as distinct from the Gospel, does only damn, 2 Cor. 3.
6, 7. but the Word of Grace, revealed in the Gospel, brings salvation, Tit.
2. 11. So the Apostle speaking of that glorious reward, he adds, whereof ye
have heard in the word of truth, that is, of the Gospel.

Verse. 6. Which is come unto you, as it is in all the world, and brings forth
fruit, as it does also in you, since the day ye heard of it, and knew the grace
of God in truth.
Having mentioned the Gospel, he commends it, and the Colossians jointly with
it: 1. The Gospel preached to them by Epaphras, was the same which was preached
by the Apostles through the world. 2. It had brought forth fruits of an holy
life in those who heard it, especially among them. 3. Those fruits were timeous
and constant. Every one of which particulars, may be looked upon as an
additionall cause of his thanksgiving to God for them. Doct. 1. God brings
the Gospel unto a people before they send for it: he is found of them who
sought him not, Isa. 65. 1. which is come unto you, says he. 2. This is matter
of praise to God, when the light of the Gospel breaks up, where before it was
not, and is accompanied with early and constant fruits of humility, faith,
love, and other graces, among those to whom it is preached: for, those are
reasons why he thanked God for them: which is come unto you, and brings forth
fruit, etc. 3. Christ can most swiftly drive the chariot of his Gospel when he
pleases, as appears from this, that within a few years after his death, it was
in all the world, that is, in all the Airts and principal parts of it, and in
opposition to that astricted dispensation under the Old Testament. 4. This may
serve abundantly to commend a doctrine preached, so that hearers may safely
venture on it, as the truth of God, that First, It is the same which the
Apostles did preach through the world, which may be known by their writings, 1 John 1. 3. although it differ much from that which is taught in the Romish
Church, or any other particular Church on earth. Secondly, That it brings
forth fruits of an holy life, as the Gospel has always some of those fruits,
among some of them who heard it; and no other doctrine, whether humane
Philosophy, moral precepts, or the Law it self, as distinct from the Gospel,
can thoroughly and inwardly sanctify those who have the knowledge of it, Heb.
10. 1. Thirdly, That the fruits brought forth by it, are early and constant,
not as the morning dew, which passes away: for, the Apostle, from these three,
commends that doctrine which Epaphras had taught them; as it is in all the
world, and brings forth fruit since the day, etc. Doct. 5. That the doctrine
preached may be fruitful among a people, it is required, First, That not only
they hear it, but also believe it: for, by knowing, is meant believing; see
upon Phis. 3. 8. since the day ye heard and knew. Secondly, That use be made
of, and hold laid chiefly upon the free grace of God through Christ; this is
pointed at, while he gives unto the Gospel the name of grace, in relation to
bringing forth of fruits: and knew the grace of God. Thirdly, That as the
Gospel would be sincerely taught by Preachers, without any mixture of error;
so it would be heard, believed, and the grace which is offered by it, employed
by people sincerely, not hypocritically, by pretending only to do, when really
they do not: for, the word in truth may relate both to Epaphras his sincerity
in preaching, and to their reality in practicing what was professed by them;
and knew the grace of God in truth, says he.

Verse. 7. As ye also learned of Epaphras our dear fellow servants, who is for
you a faithful Minister of Christ: 8. Who also declared unto us your love in
the Spirit.
Having commended the doctrine, he commends the Preacher, Epaphras, in
opposition to the false Teachers, who, it is like, did labor to weaken his
authority, because he was not an Apostle. He is commended, First, From his
relation to Paul, as being dear unto him, and a fellow servants with him.
Secondly, From his office, as being a Minister, enlarged from his fidelity in
it, and relation to them, ver. 7. Thirdly, From his respect unto them,
evidenced by the good report which he had brought to Paul of them. Doct. 1.
Whoever loves the success of the Gospel, would by all means labor to beget
and entertain a good understanding betwixt a faithful Minister and his flock:
for, to this end, does Paul commend Epaphras, as his dear fellow servants, etc.
2. Ministers especially, should be so far from bearing down the deserved
estimation of others, and envying of their zeal in the Lords work, lest it may
detract somewhat from them, (Phil. 1. 15.) that the more zealous a man be for
God, the more diligent and faithful in the work of gaining souls, he ought, and
will (if they themselves be honest) have a greater share of their affections:
so, because Epaphras was faithful, he is dear unto Paul; our dear
fellow servants, who is a faithful Minister. 3. Whatever odds there be among
Ministers in their gifts and parts, they ought all to draw together in one yoke
for advancing of the Lords work; seeing there is work for all, Matthew. 9. 37.
and the meanest may be helpful, 1 Cor. 12. 21. So Paul looks on Epaphras as
his fellow servants, though he was much above him for estimation and parts. 4.
As the dignity of the Ministerial-Calling is such, that it challenges
reverence and respect from all, unto those who are entrusted with it, 1 Timothy 5.
17. So, a Minister who would be respected either by God or man, ought to be
faithful, eying his Masters glory in the first place, and not his own, 1 Pet.
4. 11. and promoving to his uttermost the spiritual good of those who are
committed unto his charge, by omitting nothing which may conduce for that end;
doing nothing which may hinder it; preferring their profiting to his own
profit, pleasure, and ease, 1 Cor. 10. 33. yea, and upon all hazard preferring
their profit to their sinful humors, Gal. 1. 10. and where this is, it
commends a Minister much; so Epaphras is commended in that he was a faithful
Minister. 5. As people would respect all the Servants of Jesus Christ, Phil. 2.
29. so chiefly those who are their own Ministers, and actually trusted with the
charge of their souls: for, he will have them respecting Epaphras, because he
was their own Minister: who is for you a faithful Minister. 6. To speak unto
the deserved commendation of those that are absent, without detracting any
thing from their just worth, is praiseworthy, and evidenceth a man's
faithfulness much toward those of whom he so speaks: as the contrary does
argue a man to be unfaithful, Jer. 9. 4. for, this was an evidence of his
being faithful for them; he also declared unto us your love, faith he. 7. Then
is love praiseworthy, when it is in the spirit, or spiritual, that is, wrought
by the Spirit of God, Gal. 5. 22. when it is in a spiritual, or renewed heart,
1 Pet. 1. 22, 23. and drawn out by spiritual considerations and motives,
chiefly such as the work of grace already in the person loved, Gal. 6. 10. or
some hope at least that this work may yet be, where it is not, 1 Cor. 13. 7.
and not by carnal, natural, or civil motives only, Matthew. 5. 46. for which
reasons their love, is said to be in the Spirit.

Verse. 9. For this cause we also, since the day we heard it, do not cease to
pray for you, and to desire that ye might be filled with the knowledge of his
will, in all wisdom and spiritual understanding.
Having shown how he had thanked God for them, he mentions now his praying
for them: and this as a further mean to procure their good will. In this verse
is, first, the cause moving him to pray, to wit, that he heard by Epaphras of
their love. Secondly, the manner of his prayer, it was timeous, constant, and
servent. Thirdly, the first of those things which he prayed for, to wit,
increase and fullness of the knowledge of Gods revealed will: which knowledge
he divides in two. First, wisdom; whereby we know celestial mysteries
revealed in Scripture. Secondly, understanding, whereby, as it is distinguished
from wisdom, we know our duty, and the right way of reducing all our
knowledge to practice. Doct. 1. As the graces of God's Spirit in any, are
matter of thanksgiving to God; so they are incitements also unto prayer for
those who have them: for, the graces of the best are but imperfect, 1 Cor. 13.
9. subject to decay, Rev. 2. 4. and may be abused, 2 Cor. 12. 7. Hence Paul
takes occasion from their graces, for which he had blessed God, verse 4. etc.
to pray to God for them: for this cause we pray. 2. As our praying to God for
others, does evidence much our affection to them; so, the expressions of our
sympathy that way, would be timeously begun, and constantly continued in: Thus
Paul, to testify his affection toward this Church, shows, he prayed for
them, and that timeously: Since the day we heard it, and constantly, we cease
not: which is not to be understood, as if he had done no other thing but that,
he had a rooted desire after their good, which was always expressed by him in
prayer, when opportunity did offer. 3. The knowledge of God's will revealed in
Scripture, is to be studied above the knowledge of any other thing besides; as
being more sublime, 1 Cor. 2. 6, 7. and so more pleasant, yea and more
profitable, verse 27. nor any other: for, whileas he prays, that they may be
filled with the knowledge of Gods will, he speaks of his revealed will Deuteronomy.
29. 29. 4. They who know most of God's will revealed in Scripture, come far
short of what they should know; there is a fullness of knowledge which is
attained by none, 1 Cor. 13. 12. but should be aimed at by all: for,
notwithstanding the Apostle had heard of their knowing the grace of God, verse
6. yet he prays here, that they may be filled with the knowledge of his will.
5. Our desires after spiritual good, would be enlarged, and in a manner
insatiable: great things would be sought from God; for, he is a great King, Ps.
95. 3. whom it becomes to give largely; so he seeks, that they may be
filled. 6. As wisdom, or kowledge of divine mysteries, and of the things of
faith, is requisite: so also is understanding, or knowledge of our duty, and of
the right way to go about it; with due respect had to time (Ps. 1. 3) place
(Ecc. 5. 1) company (Ps. 39. 1) and other circumstances, Luke 8. 18. upon the
right ordering whereof, the goodness of an action depends much, Ps. 50. 23.
In all wisdom and understanding. 7. The knowledge, wisdom and
understanding, mainly to be sought after, is spiritual that is, of things
spiritual, 1 Cor. 2. 2. attained unto by spiritual means, as prayer, hearing,
reading, and meditation, Psalm. 119. 18. Prove. 1. 8. and produced in us by the
Spirit of God upon the use of those means, 1 Cor. 2. 10. for, he says, in all
spiritual wisdom etc. 8. There is no part of this spiritual knowledge and
wisdom, the attaining whereof is not to be endeavored by us: some truths are
indeed more necessary to be known than others, Heb. 6. 1. yet we are not to
slight the knowledge of any revealed truth, Acts 20. 27. In all spiritual
wisdom and understanding.

Verse. 10. That ye might walk worthy of the Lord unto all pleasing, being
fruitful in every good work, and increasing in the knowledge of God.
He prays, secondly, for increase of holiness to them, or, for such a
conversation, as is worthy of the Lord: which he brancheth forth in three:
First, their aiming in all things to please him, as the scope of all their
actions. Secondly, fruitfulness in good works. And thirdly, growth in the
saving knowledge of God. Doct. 1. Spiritual knowledge, wisdom, and
understanding is to be sought after, not to be puffed up with (Coloss. 2. 18.)
or, to rest upon it, Luke 12. 47. but that we may order our practice according
to it: for, the end why the Apostle did pray for knowledge to these Colossians,
is, that ye may walk worthy of the Lord. 2. It is not every sort of walking
which is required as the fruit of knowledge; but a walking worthy of the Lord,
which does not import a dignity or worth in our walking, to recompense the
Lord, but only a beseemingnesse, and not repugnancie to that state whereunto
we are called by him (as the same word is well rendered, Phil. 1. 27.) which
may consist with many failings and sins of infirmity, where there is
selfjudging for them, Romans 7. 14. 3. That we may thus walk worthy of the Lord,
it is required, first, that there be an habitual purpose at least in every
action, and an actual purpose in actions more solemn and weighty, to please
him by our obedience to him: for, so the Apostle explaineth walking worthy, to
wit, unto all well-pleasing. Secondly, there must be fruitfulness following
upon his pains toward us; and this must be in works which are good, as being
commanded or warranted by God for the matter, Isa. 29. 13. and gone about in
the right manner, chap. 3. v. 17. and no good work is to be omitted, unto which
we have a calling from God, Luke 12. 14, Being fruitful in every good work.
Thirdly, as fruitfulness in good works makes much for the increase of
knowledge: so, if we would walk worthy of the Lord, we must be growing in
knowledge: Ignorance in professors, dishonours God as much as fruitlessnesse:
for, increasing in the knowledge of God, is joined with fruitfulness, and both
of them required, in order to their walking worthy of the Lord.

Verse. 11. Strengthened with all might, according to his glorious power, unto
all patience and long-suffering with joyfulnesse.
In order to their walking worthy of the Lord, unto all well-pleasing, he
prayed thirdly, that they being furnished from above with power, might
patiently endure whatsoever afflictions they should meet with in the way of
their duty, and that with joyfulnesse. Doct. 1. God is well-pleased with, and
much honored by those who are christianly, and upon right grounds, patient
under the cross, and cheerful: for, in order to their walking worthy of the
Lord, unto all well-pleasing, spoken of v. 10. he prays that they may be
strengthened unto all patience and long-suffering, in this verse. 2. So many
are our spiritual adversaries, Ephesians. 6. 12. so many are their onsets from all
hands, 2 Cor. 2. 11. and so necessary is it to overcome not only one, but all,
Heb. 12. 4. that no less is required than might, and all might, for carrying
the victory in this Christian warfare: for, the Apostle prays for it: being
strengthened with all might. 3. This might, and all might, wherewith Christians
are furnished, is not their own, they are but weak and infirm in themselves,
even though renewed and sanctified, Romans 7. -- 18. their strength must be
sought by prayer from God; and, it flows from no other fountain than the
power of God: for, Paul seeks it by prayer, and points at the power of God,
as the great Magazine from whence it comes: according to his glorious power.
4. The power of God, whereby believers are strengthened, is always glorious,
as being still victorious over strongest adversaries, Romans 8. 37. and making
weak believers to overcome principalities and powers, 2 Cor. 12. 9. According
to his glorious power. 5. Christian strength and fortitude, is best seen under
saddest sufferings: and when crosses and hardships are entertained with
patience, and continued crosses with long-sufferings, or with patience drawn
out in length, it speaks much of christian strength and courage: for, the
effect of their being strengthened with all might, is, all patience and
long-suffering. 6. There is an allnesse, or universality, which ought to be in
this grace of patience. First, with respect to the subject; it ought to quiet
the whole man, his hand, his tongue, his heart, Psalm. 37. 1. Secondly, to the
grace it self, as being without any mixture of passion, so far as is possible,
I am. 1. 4. Thirdly, with respect to crosses of all kinds, Heb. 12. 4. And
fourthly, It ought to be extended to all times, so long as the cross
continues, Heb. 11. 27. Unto all patience. Doct. 7. Our patience must not be
unwilling, and, as it were, extorted by force, but ought to proceed from a
joyful mind, as knowing all things work together for our good; and that one day
we shall be above the reach of sufferings, Matthew. 5. 12. Long-suffering with
joyfulness.

Verse. 12. Giving thanks unto the Father, which has made us meet to be
partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in light.
The Apostle, in the second part of the chapter, being to propound a short sum
of christian doctrine, does by way of thanksgiving, make mention of God the
Father his gracious work, whereby he makes the Elect fit to partake of Heaven,
the bright and glorious Inheritance of the Saints. Doct. 1. Christian joy, if
of the right stamp, does vent it self, not in lascivious expressions, or
gestures, Ephesians. 5. 4. but in thanksgiving to God: for, having spoken of their
long suffering with joyfulnesse, he shows from his own example, how their joy
should be expressed, to wit, by giving thanks to the Father. 2. The serious
consideration of the admirable work of our Redemption, may make a man rejoice
under the saddest of crosses: for, he points at the reason of their
joyfulnesse, to wit, the work of our Redemption, whereof he here speaks. 3.
So admirable is the work of our Redemption, and so much of mercy, Romans 5. 8.
justice, Isa. 53. -9, 10. and divine condescendence is manifested in it, Joh.
3. 16. that Paul can hardly speak of this subject without giving of thanks to
God, and exciting of others to do the like: Giving thanks to the Father. 4.
Heaven is a lightsom and splendid Inheritance, full of the light of knowledge,
1 Cor. 13. 12. joy, Psalm. 16. 11. and glory, Dan. 12. 3. for, it is Heaven
whereof he speaks, while he says, the inheritance in light. 5. Heaven is the
portion of those only, who are Saints: no unclean thing shall enter there: for,
it is the inheritance of the Saints. 6. As the greatest blessing, such as
Heaven, and all that is in it, are communicable to lost sinners; so, that any
comes to Heaven, proceeds not from his own merit or worth, but from Gods
free gift: for, it is called an Inheritance, or, as it is in the Original, a
Lot, in allusion to the Land of Canaan, where every Tribe enjoyed a portion,
not according to their own choice or worth, but as God did measure out unto
them by lots; see Josh. 18. 10, etc. 7. None who are unfit or unmeet for
Heaven, gets access to it: He makes us meet before we partake of that
Inheritance. 8. Every man in his natural state, is unfit for Heaven, as being
under Gods curse, Gal. 3. 13. an heir of Hell and wrath, Ephesians. 2. 3. He finds us
unmeet, and makes us meet. 9. It is not in the power of fallen man, being dead
in sins and trespasses (Ephesians. 2. 1.) to quicken himself, and come to God,
whereby he might be meet for such a glorious Inheritance; it is only God who
thus makes lost sinners meet: who has made us meet.

Verse. 13. Who has delivered us from the power of darkness, and has
translated us into the Kingdom of his dear Son.
He explaineth how God does make us meet, to wit, by drawing us out of that
corrupt state of nature, wherein we were detained as slaves, and translating us
into the state of grace, called Christ's Kingdom, as Romans 14. 17. This he does
in our effectual calling. Doct. 1. Man's natural state, is a state of darkness,
without the light of saving knowledge, 1 Cor. 2. 14. solid comfort, Isa. 57.
21. or true holiness, Ephesians. 2. 2. which in Scripture is called light, Matthew. 5.
16. for our natural state is here called darkness. 2. Every man is kept in
slavery under the power of sin and Satan, Ephesians. 2. 2. so long as he continues
in that his natural state; we are even under the power of darkness. 3. The
affections of man by nature are so far engaged to this sinful state, and so far
a slave unto it, that except he be plucked out by the strong hand, there is no
freeing of him from it: so far is he from rescuing himself by any power
preserved in his own free will after the fall of Adam: He must deliver us by
main force, or, pluck us away, as the word signifies: from the power of
darkness. 4. Though God does not constrain the will of man by force, yet he
imployeth omnipotent power to remove his unwillingnesse, and to make him
willing to obey his call, Ephesians. 1. 19. Who has delivered us. 5. There is no
middle state betwixt the power of darkness, and the state of grace: all who
breathe, are either in the one, or the other: the Apostle mentions no other
state, but the Power of darkness and the Kingdom of his dear Son. 6. The state
of grace, and Gods favor, is called a Kingdom: because by grace the hearts of
men are subdued to God, as King, whose Laws are full of equity and moderation,
Psa. 19. 7. and who moves the wills of men sweetly, as being willing subjects
in the day of his power, Psalm. 110. 3. and does not drive them on by tyranny or
force. 7. The state of grace, is, the Kingdom of his dear Son, who is appointed
of the Father to be head of the Church, by whom all do enter that do come to
the Kingdom, Joh. 14. 6. and all grace is derived from God the fountain,
through him; yea, he dispenses grace and glory as he thinks fit, Act. 5. 31.
even he whom the Father loves dearly, and through whom all the subjects of
this Kingdom are dearly beloved also, Mic. 5. 5. The Kingdom of his dear Son.

Verse. 14. In whom we have redemption through his blood even the forgiveness of
sins.
He explaineth further how we are meet for Heaven, and delivered from the power
of darkness, to wit, by our Redemption in Christ, from sin, Satan and wrath,
by virtue of a price paid by the Mediator to the Fathers justice, even his
blood, which Redemption he explaineth from its principal part, remission of
sins in justification: for, Redemption is not here taken for the laying down of
the price by Christ (as Luke 2. 38.) but for the fruits flowing from it, not
for that complete redemption and freedom from sin and misery, which the godly
shall enjoy at the last day, Romans 8 23. Ephesians. 4 30. but for that measure of
freedom which Believers do enjoy here by faith, so that remission of sins is a
principal part of it. Doct. 1. As all men by nature are in a state of bondage
to sin, Satan, and wrath; so there is no freedom from this state, except
Redemption go before: the word Redemption supponeth both these. 2. No way of
Redemption could be accepted but that which is by giving of a ransom and
recompense for the wrong done by sin unto Divine Justice: there is no
redemption, but through blood. 3. None was fit to give this ransom but Jesus
Christ, God and Man: In whom, to wit, Christ, we have redemption. 4 Nothing
performed by Christ could be a sufficient ransom for this end, except he had
crowned all his other actions and sufferings, by laying down his life, and
undergoing a bloody and violent death: for, we have redemption through his
blood; not as excluding his former obedience, but as being the complement and
crowning of it, Romans 5. 18, 19. 5. Though Jesus Christ did pay this ransom unto
God, Ephesians. 5. 2. and not to Satan, whose slaves we are by nature; yet, by virtue
of the ransom paid, we are delivered from Satan's slavery, and sins dominion:
for, the Apostle clearing what he had said, ver. 13. of our being delivered
from the power of darkness, he gives this as a reason, In whom we have
redemption through his blood: When God the just Judge was satisfied, Satan the
Jailer, and unjust Tyrant, did lose his right to keep us longer in bonds; so
that Christ does justly deliver the Redeemed Ones from him by force, Heb. 2.
14. Matthew. 12. 29. 6. Though Christ by his obedience and suffering, did pay
unto the Fathers Justice a sufficient ransom for our Redemption; yet we do not
actually partake of that freedom until we be in him, and by faith united to
him: In whom we have redemption. 7. Sin is the fountaincause of our slavery and
bondage, so that it must be removed before our bondage cease: thus, speaking of
our Redemption, he instanceth it in the remission of sin. 8. Because sin is a
debt, obliging us either to pay an infinite price, or to undertake eternal
wrath, Genesis 2. 17. therefore, that sin might be removed, the Son of God
behooved to shed his blood for our ransom: We must have redemption through his
blood, otherwise there is no remission of sin. 9. When this ransom is laid hold
upon by faith, and we thereby ingrafted in him, the guilt of sin is freely
remitted, and we completely pardoned; so, being in him, we have forgiveness of
sins.

Verse. 15. Who is the image of the invisible God, the firstborn of every
creature.
The Apostle, having mentioned our Redemption, does here fall upon a
description of the Redeemer, and this, both, that in his worth the
worthlesnesse of all other things, whether of Angels, or dead Ceremonies, upon
which the false Apostles did place equal honor with Christ (chap. 2. v. 8.)
might be seen; as also that the sufficiency of his blood, in order to the
redemption of sinners, might the better appear, as being the blood of such an
one who is here described; First, From his internal relation to God: He is the
image of the invisible God, as well in respect of his eternal generation, being
the express image of the Father, Heb. 1. 3. as also, that being made man, God
the Father did in him, and by him, as a lively image, set forth unto us his
glorious attributes of wisdom, mercy, righteousness and power, John 14. 9.
Secondly, From his eternal relation to all things created; He is the firstborn
of every creature, as being from all eternity begotten of the Father before any
thing was created, and Lord and Heir of all the creatures, as the firstborn
was among the Brethren, Genesis 27. 37. Doct. 1. The knowledge of Christ's worth,
does contribute much to confirm and illustrate the doctrine of man's Redemption;
the excellency and fullness of Christ, being that strong Basis and cornerstone
to uphold, and the great mean to carry on, and thoroughly to effectuate that
admirable work, 1 Cor. 3. 11. Hence, speaking of man's Redemption, he inserteth
in this verse and the three following, this excellent description of Christ,
Who is the image, etc. 2. As the Divine Nature considered in it self is
invisible, it being impossible with bodily eyes to behold him at any time; yea,
and also with the eyes of the mind, except indirectly, while we'are in this
life, 1 Cor. 13. 12. so the first person of the Godhead is conceived to be in a
special manner invisible; because he did never, at least very seldom, appear in
any visible shape to men, as the Son did frequently to the Patriarchs, and at
his incarnation unto all; the holy Spirit did also appear in the form of a
Dove, Matthew. 3. 16. and of fiery tongues, Acts 2. 3, 4. for, the Father is here
meant, while he says, the image of the invisible God. 3. As the Son is of the
same essence, and one God with the Father; so he is a distinct person from him:
for, he is the substantial image of the Father; and an image must be somewhat
distinct from that, whereof it is an image. 4. We cannot take up God aright,
savingly, or to our comfort, but when we look upon him, as he is represented in
the Man-Christ; without whom, God is a consuming fire to sinners; and in whom
he is well pleased: So the man Christ is the image of the invisible God, a
glass wherein we may behold him. 5. Jesus Christ is true God, having an
eternal being; he is not, as he is God, in the rank of Creatures, but has a
Lordship and Dominion over them all; so much is in these words, the firstborn
of every creature: he is firstborn, who was Lord over his brethren, Genesis 27.
39. but not first created; and so there is no ground from this Scripture, to
reckon him among the Creatures.

Verse. 16. For by him were all things created that are in heaven, and that are
in earth, visible and invisible, whether they be thrones, or dominions, or
principalities, or powers: all things were created by him, and for him. 17. And
he is before all things, and by him all things consist.
He prosecutes the relation which Christ has to things created, holding him
forth, First, as their Creator; illustrated from a threefold division of
things created: First, from their place, things in heaven, and things in earth.
Secondly, from their natures, visible or invisible. Thirdly, he divides the
Angels, one kind of the invisible creatures, in thrones, dominions,
principalities, and powers; whereby probably is meant the several degrees and
dignities of Angels; but what those are in particular, is wholly unknown to us.
Secondly, he sets him forth as the last end of all the Creatures, v. 16.
Thirdly, as being before them all in time, and so explaineth how he is the
firstborn of every creature: and Fourthly, as the upholder of all the
creatures by his power and providence, v. 17. Doct. 1. How bent men are to have
but low thoughts of Christ, and of the ransom paid by him for the redemption
of sinners, appears from the Apostle's multiplying of conceptions, to set
forth his excellency and worth. 2. Jesus Christ is eternal God, and so his
blood of infinite worth, all things being created by him, as is twice affirmed
in this verse, which can be said of none but God, Genesis 1. 1, 3. As the Father
has created all things, Genesis 1. 1. and upholdeth all things being made, by the
word of his power, Acts 17. 28. so does also the Son; all those external works
are common to the whole three Persons, who are only distinguished by their
inward Personal properties, and order of working: for, by him, to wit, the
Son, were all things created; and by him all things consist. 4. There is
variety of Creatures of different kinds, and different excellencies, that man
may see somewhat of God in every kind, (Ps. 104. through the whole) and have
somewhat whereupon to exercise every one of his external senses, and every one
of his inward faculties for that end: there being things visible, and so
subject to sense; and things invisible, which cannot be taken up but by the
understanding: things that are in heaven, that are in earth; visible,
invisible. 5. All things created, even the most excellent, not excluding the
glorious Angels, and those who most transcend others in power and glory, are
created by Christ, the work of his hands: and so not only are in the rank of
Creatures, but of his Creatures, and would be so looked upon by us; that he may
have his own room in hearts, all other things being contained in theirs; for,
Paul (that they might not detract any thing of the honor due to Christ, by
giving it to Angels) extolls him as the Creator of Angels, and of all things,
thereby depressing them as poor, weak, dependent Creatures; by him all things
were created, that are in heaven, that are in earth, visible, invisible,
whether they be thrones, etc. 6. All things are created for Christ; the
manifestation of his glory as God, being the chief end of all, so that he is
the Alpha and Omega of them all, Rev. 1. 8. all things being as from him, so
for him. The setting forth of his glory is a rent due by all Creatures, and is
accordingly performed by them: some give it in an active way, as Saints, and
Angels, Rev. 19. 1. some in a passive way, as damned men, and Devils, Romans 9.
17. and all in an objective way, as having God's glorious attributes exerced
about them, and shining forth in them, in some one, in some another; in the
Elect, mercy; in the Reprobate, justice, Romans 9 22. and in all the Creatures,
wisdom, power, and goodness, Psalm. 19. 1. for, says he, all things were for
him. 7. All things created, whether in Heaven or Earth, visible or invisible,
as they have their first being from Christ by creation: so they are continued
and preserved in that their being, by his providence: if he should but
withdraw his upholding hand, they would quickly return unto their first
nothing, Ps. 90. 3. for, by him all things consist.

Verse. 18. And he is the head of the body, the Church: who is the beginning,
the firstborn from the dead, that in all things he might have the pre-eminence.
He describes Christ, thirdly, with relation to his Church, showing first he
is her Head. Secondly, the beginning, root, and fountain cause of the Church,
and of all the spiritual graces thereof. Thirdly, the first who rose from the
dead, never to taste again of death, the only one that ever rose by his own
power, and who shall raise again all his members, whereby his glory is made
famous in all things, death it self not being excepted. Doct. 1. There is the
same relation betwixt Christ and his Church, which is in the natural body
betwixt the head and the members: Christ, as man, being of the same nature with
the Church, Heb. 2. 14. the same holy Spirit, which poured out grace on him,
Ps. 45. 2. without measure, Joh. 3. 34. acting and residing in his members,
Romans 8. 9. 11. all spiritual life and motion, Col. 2. 19. yea, the common
influences of the Spirit, flowing from Christ to the Church, Ephesians. 4. 7. there
being an indissoluble tie betwixt Christ and every Believer, Joh. 10. 28.
Christ being of much more worth than the Church is, and sufficiently instructed
with power and right to prescribe Laws unto, and to govern and save the Church,
Ephesians. 5. 23, 24. the Church again being subject to Christ's rule and Government,
Ephesians. 5. 24. and, if separated from him, would be wholly dead, as deprived of
all spiritual life and motion. Joh. 15. 4. for which causes, Christ, and only
Christ, is the Head of the Church. 2. Jesus Christ is the first beginning,
root, and fountain-cause of the Church, as being that second Adam, from whom
all that new spiritual birth does flow, 1 Cor. 15. 45. and whose virtue,
purchased and applied by him, renews the heart, and makes the graces of the
Spirit bud up in it, Cant. 4. 16. so, in relation to the Church, he is called,
the active beginning, or first principle and author thereof, who is the
beginning. 3. As Jesus Christ was once among the dead; so, he arose by his own
power from death, to immortality and life, whereby he has so vanquished death,
that it must render up all his followers, 1 Cor. 15. 54. each of whom shall
rise again from death by that same virtue, whereby Christ did raise up himself:
for, in this respect, he is the first-begotten from the dead, 1 Cor. 15. 20. He
makes them partake of his Resurrection, as the firstborn did give the rest a
share of his Fathers goods, whereof he was Heir. 4. There is nothing of Christ,
no not his very cross and death, whereby his dignity and worth is not made
famous; he having by death, destroyed him who had the power of death, Heb. 2.
14 and thereby made death it self a passage unto life: for he is the firstborn
from the dead, that in all things, even death it self not being excepted, he
might have the pre-eminence. 5. A holy soul, zealous for the glory of Christ,
will make this his study, to gather matter for extolling Christ, even from
these things which would seem to obscure his honor most; thus Paul is not
content to have him advanced in his works of Creation and Providence; and in
his Headship over his Church, except he show, that even his death did bring
honor to him, in relation to which, he says, that in all things he might have
the pre-eminence.

Verse. 19. For it pleased the Father, that in him should all fullness dwell,
20. And (having made peace through the blood of his cross) by him to reconcile
all things unto himself, by him. I say, whether they be things in earth, or
things in heaven.
The Apostle gives a reason why the Redeemer Christ was to be such a Person,
as is before described, taken from the Father's will and pleasure, that he
should be one filled with all fullness, both of the Godhead dwelling in him,
chap. 2. 9. and of the graces of the Spirit without measure, Joh. 3, 34. that
so he might be thoroughly furnished to discharge that great work of Mediation,
in reconciling the universality of the Elect. (whether already glorified, or
yet upon earth) to a provoked God, having removed the enmity which was betwixt
God and them, by the merit of his sufferings. Doct. 1. The restoring of broken
man to friendship with God, and all things tending to it; especially, that
Jesus Christ, the second Person of the Trinity, should under-go the work of
Mediation for that end, was a thing well-pleasing unto and appointed by the
Father, upon which is grounded the Father's acceptance of what he did for us,
as if we had done it our selves, which otherwise he might have rejected: It
pleased the Father. It Is an emphaticall word in the Original, implying no
less than an unexpressible affection to, and liking of a thing. 2. That any be
the Churches Head, it is necessary that he be full of God, and of all created
graces, even both God and Man; and therefore it is no less than blasphemy for
sinful man, Pope, or any other, to assume this Title unto himself: for, giving
a reason of this, among other things, why Christ is the Churches Head, he
says, for it pleased the Father, that in him all fullness should dwell;
importing that none destitute of this fullness, is fit to be the Head of the
Church. 3. God calls none to any Office, but such as he fitteth for it; for,
being to employ Christ for reconciling all things to himself, it pleased the
Father, that in him all fullness should dwell. 4. Christ the Mediator, is
endued with all fullness of the Godhead and created graces: In him did all
fullness dwell. 5. No less furniture nor this fullness was required for the
through discharging of the Mediatory-Office, and making up of friendship
betwixt a provoked God, and rebellious Man; for, in order to that, in him all
fullness did dwell. 6. Man now fallen, was once in a state of friendship with
God: for, reconciliation is the making up of old friendship, and by him to
reconcile. 7. All mankind did fall from the state of favor and friendship
with God, through Adam's transgression, Romans 5. 12. for, reconciliation
supponeth breaking off of friendship, and by him to reconcile. 8. As friendship
with God may be again recovered; so, the first motion of it comes from God,
who received the wrong, and not from us who gave it: It pleased the Father by
him to reconcile. 9. Nothing engaged God to make or prosecute such a motion,
but his goodwill and pleasure; no need he stood of our friendship, nor any
loss which could come to him by our enmity and hatred. Joh 22. 2, 3, 4. It
pleased the Father to recon^ile all things unto himself. 10. Though Christ, and
grace be intended for, and accordingly does light only upon few, Matthew. 7. 14.
yet the Gospel and Promise, by which Christ and free grace is revealed and
offered, is drawn up in the most comprehensive expressions, and this, that none
may hereby be excluded from laying hold on Christ and free grace, but such as
do exclude themselves, Hos. 13. 9. To reconcile all things, whether things in
heaven, or things in earth; by which broad expressions, is meant only the
Elect (for, there is an universality and world even of those, 2 Cor. 5. 19.)
and not all the Creatures, not Devils, or Reprobates, Joh. 17. 9. Yea, to speak
properly, nor yet the Elect Angels, who having never sinned, was never
reconciled; though improperly they may be said to be so, in so far as through
Christ they were confirmed in grace, being put beyond all reach and possibility
of sinning. 11. As the making up of friendship betwixt God and fallen Man,
could not be without a Mediator: so, none in Heaven or Earth could be in all
things fitted to mediate in this matter, but Jesus Christ, God and man; by him
to reconcile. 12. The making up of this friendship did stand the Mediator no
less than his blood; he did bear the chastisement of our peace, and laid down
his life by a most shameful, painful, and cursed death; that so the justice of
God being completely satisfied for our wrong, we might enjoy Gods peace and
favor with life: for, he shows the way how he reconciled all, having made
peace (which is all one with reconciliation) through the blood of the cross,
that is, his blood shed upon the cross.

Verse. 21. And you that were sometime alienated, and enemies in your mind by
wicked works, yet now has he reconciled, 22. In the body of his flesh through
death, to present you holy and unblamable, and unreprovable in his sight.
What he spoke of reconciliation in general, he applies to the Collossians in
particular, hereby to make way for the following exhortation; and having shown
the miserable state wherein they were by nature, as being not only strangers,
but enemies to God, and that because of sin in them, He declares the gracious
change wrought in them, they being put in a state of friendship with God, which
Christ had purchased for them, by taking on a true body, subject to fleshly
infirmities, though without sin, Heb. 4. 15. and by suffering death in it, and
all this that they might be presented free from all sin, and perfect in
holiness before God in the last day. Doct. 1. That general Truths may not be
without fruit, being looked upon as remote from us, Ministers would labor
prudently to apply them to the particular state, and several cases of hearers;
so does Paul here, You has he reconciled. 2. As those who are at peace with
God, were once in as desperate an estate as others: so it concerns them who
are delivered from that state, and would have the sense of that mercy kept
still lively and fresh, and not be puffed up with their present good condition,
despising others, to be frequently minding that woeful case wherein they were
when first free grace did lay hold upon them; so Paul, to commend this
peacemaking mercy in God, does mind them: they were sometimes alienated, and
enemies in their mind. 3. The state of man by nature is most miserable; as
being first, estranged from God, having no spiritual communion with him, Genesis
3. 8, 9. 24. nor any right or claim to that happiness which flows from the
the enjoyment of him, Psa. 58. 3. So, they were sometimes alienated, to wit, by
Adams fall, as the fountain-cause. Secondly, they are enemies to God, as
fighting against Gods revealed will, Romans 6. 19. and hating God, Romans 8. 7.
though not as creator and preserver of the world, yet as he is a just Judge,
armed with vengeance against those who do wickedly; and God is an enemy to
them, Isa. 63. 10. who, though he love his Elect even in their unregenerate
state with an everlasting love, Ephesians. 1. 4. yet so long as they are unrenewed,
and have not fled to Christ by faith, he cannot adjudge them to eternal life,
or look upon them any other way, than as men under an actual obligation to lie
under the curse of the Law, which is eternal wrath; so, they are enemies.
Thirdly, As the cause of this enmity betwixt God and man, is no wrong done on
Gods part, (Mic. 6. 3.) but man's own sin, and wrong done by him to God: so the
great part of man's misery by nature, consists in this his sin, whereby the
chiefest part of him, even his soul, and all the faculties of it, to wit, his
reason, (Ephesians. 4. 18.) will, and affections, Genesis 6. 5. (all of which are here
signified by the mind) are wholly corrupted, from whence does flow all his
actual wickedness, and so much of it, that every action of his is polluted,
as proceeding from such a silthy fountain; Enemies in your mind by wicked
works. Doct. 4. As there is nothing in us to bud or buy free grace with; so
bypast misery, though arrived at the height of enmity against God, will not
impede Jesus Christ to work a miracle of mercy, where he intends to be
gracious: so, you who were enemies, yet now has he reconciled. 5. The
reconciliation of the Elect unto God, is not from eternity, nor the time of
Christ's death, nor at any time before the sinner does believe in Jesus Christ:
Election indeed is from eternity, Ephesians. 1. 4. and satisfaction for sin was given
to the Father's justice by Christ upon the cross, Joh. 19. 30. but
justification is not until the selfcondemned sinner assent to the bargain, and
enter himself heir unto Christ's purchase by faith: for, he speaks of them as
now being reconciled, having embraced the Gospel, when before they were
enemies. 6. The second person of the blessed Trinity, in order to our
reconciliation with God, behoved to be incarnate, taking on a true fleshly
body, not in appearance only, and subject to all the common and sinlesse
infirmities of flesh: reconciled in the body of his flesh. 7. It was necessary
also in order to our reconciliation, for Jesus Christ to suffer death in his
body; that thus Christ our surety, and one of the same nature with us, being
seized upon, we the principal debtors might be absolved and set free, Joh. 18.
8. yet, now has he reconciled in the body of his flesh through death. 8. As
reconciliation with God has holiness of life following on it; so the
sanctifying of those who are reconciled, is a work undertaken by Christ, which
he is to carry on from one degree unto another, until he complete it at death,
and so present the justified person holy, unblamable, and unreprovable in his
sight, that is, Perfectly sanctified, as the multiplying of words to one
purpose does import, which is not to be accomplished until death, no, nor
fully in both soul and body joined together, until the day of his second coming.

Verse. 23. If ye continue in the faith grounded and settled, and be not moved
away from the hope of the Gospel, which ye have heard, and which was preached
to every creature which is under Heaven, whereof I Paul am made a Minister.
In the third part of the chapter, he exhorts them to persevere in the faith of
the former doctrine, not questioning the truth thereof, nor quitting those
hopes of good things to come, which was begotten in them by it; and that,
because what he had spoken of their reconciliation, did depend upon their
perseverance, and the doctrine was the same with that which at Christ's command
was taught through the world by Apostles, and which he himself was called by
God to preach among the Gentiles. Doct. 1. Though a Minister may speak to a
mixed multitude indefinitly, sometimes as to regenerate persons, 1 Cor. 6. 11.
because the better part are so, Mal. 3. 16, 17. And sometimes as to
unregenerate, Deuteronomy. 29. 4 because the greater part ordinarily are such, Matthew.
22. 14. yet it is safest for him always to guard what he so speaks by
propounding some marks and qualifications of those to whom the thing spoken
does belong; l^st people stumble by conceiving their state to be either better
or worse than really it is, Rev. 3. 17. So Paul having spoken (verse. 22)
indefinitly of them all, as being reconciled, he does now restrict his speech
only to those who had saving faith, and would persevere in it; If ye continue
in the faith. 2. All those who are reconciled to God, having fled to Christ by
faith, shall undoubtedly persevere unto the end, as being kept by the power of
God through faith unto salvation, 1 Pet. 1. 5. for, he makes the reality of
their reconciliation depend upon their faith; You has he reconciled (ver. 21.)
if ye continue. 3. Exhortations unto perseverance are to be pressed upon, and
the danger of Apostasy to be held forth even unto those, whose perseverance is
in it self most certain; these being means whereby the Lord works
perseverance in them: for, here is such an exhortation unto those who were
really reconciled, and so should undoubtedly persevere; and the danger of
not-obeying hinted at, to be no less than to die in a state of enmity to God;
If ye continue in the faith. 4. It is not sufficient once to assent to the
truth of the Gospel in our understanding, and to embrace the good things
offered to us by it in our will and affections, but we must persevere in so
doing; for, this is the faith of that doctrine in which he exhorts them to
continue, as faith relates both to the will and understanding: If ye continue
in the faith. 5. That Christians may continue constant in the faith of the
Gospel, as well by assenting to the truth of it, as by embracing the good
things offered by it; it is not sufficient to have some fluctuating opinion
about the truth of it, but they must endeavor a rooted and well grounded
persuasion that it is the undoubted truth of God, Ephesians. 4. 14. Nor is it
sufficient to embrace the good things offered slightly, conditionally, or with
a reserve; but sure hold would be taken of them, as we would grip to a thing
upon life and death, 1 Timothy 1. 15. This firmness and fixednesse of faith, both
in the understanding and will, in order to perseverance against the blasts of
tentations and trials, is set down in the words, grounded and settled. The first
is a metaphor taken from edifices, whose foundations use to be laid upon sure
ground; the other taken from seats, in which they who sit are unmovable: If ye
continue in the faith grounded and settled. 6. As the hope of life eternal, and
of those other good things held forth in the Gospel, is a grace which is hardly
maintained; there being so many blasts of several tentations to drive us from
it, Luke 22. 31, 32. So nothing tends more to the strengthening of hope, than
fixednesse in the grace of faith: and as we turn fluctuating and irresolute in
the point of believing, so will the grace of hope be more or less shaken: for,
these two are conjoined, continuing in the faith, grounded and settled, and not
being moved away from the hope of the Gospel. 7. It is the duty of Ministers to
keep up the credit and esteem of their fellow laborers among their Flocks;
(though they be much inferior for parts and graces unto themselves) if so they
teach sincerely the same truth, that the work of God may succeed the better in
their hands; for, probably because the person and doctrine of Epaphras, as
being no Apostle, but an ordinary Minister, was the less esteemed of by many;
Paul conciliates respect to them both among those Colossians, by showing the
doctrine preached by him, was the same with that which was taught by the
Apostles to every creature under Heaven, that is, to all Mankind, the most
noble of creatures, and to some of all sorts of men, not in Judea only, but
also among the Gentiles, which ye have heard, to wit, by Epaphras, and which
was preached to every creature under Heaven. 8. As none ought to take on the
Calling of the Ministry, but such as are called to it; so, much weight is not
to be laid on the testimony of those who run, and are not sent: for, Paul being
to confirm the doctrine preached by Epaphras from his own authority does
mention his calling; whereof I Paul am made a Minister. 9. The testimony of a
called Minister to the truth of a doctrine ought to have its due respect;
whereof I am made a Minister. 10. The testimony of no particular man
whatsoever, ought to be further trusted, nor it does agree with that Gospel
which was preached by the Apostles to every creature under Heaven: for, Paul,
to make his testimony bear weight, mentions not only his Calling, but also
that he preached the same doctrine, which was preached unto every creature;
whereof I Paul am made a Minister, says he.

Verse. 24. Who now rejoice in my sufferings for you, and fill up that which is
behind of the afflictions of Christ in my flesh, for his Bodies sake, which is
the Church.
Having confirmed the truth of his doctrine from the authority of his own
Apostleship, ver. 23. he now confirms his Apostleship from his sufferings and
christian courage under them, removing also thereby the scandal of his
sufferings, in respect they were his share of those sufferings which are
measured out by the providence of God to be undergone by mystical Christ, the
Church; and that they were for the Colossians, and the whole Churches good.
Doct. 1. Christians and Ministers of the Gospel chiefly, are to be so far from
shunning sufferings, when God calls them to suffer, or from grudging, or
heartlesse discouragement under sufferings, (Luke 9. 26.) that they ought to
think it their glory to suffer any thing for Christ and Truth, and so to
rejoice in sufferings: And Gods Servants may attain to such a frame of spirit
as this is under sufferings; So did Paul; who now rejoice in my sufferings,
says he. 2. As people are apt to stumble and cast at the Gospel, because of
contempt, reproach, and other hardships under which those who preach the Gospel
do for the most part labor (Mat. 13. 55, 56 57.) their stumbling might be in
reason prevented, if they would consider, that all those sufferings are
occasioned in a great part by them, in so far, that if it were not for respect
to the souls of people, Ministers might do much to shift the cross, as well as
others; Paul removed the scandal of his sufferings, thus; My sufferings are for
you, says he. If he had not preached the Gospel to the Gentiles, he might have
been free of the cross. 3. The sufferings of Paul, and of any other Saint, are
the sufferings of Christ, and the filling up of his sufferings: not as if
Christ's personal sufferings for the redemption of sinners were imperfect, and
so to be supplied by the sufferings of others, see Heb. 10. 14. but such is
that sympathy betwixt Christ and Believers, Acts 9. 4. and so strict is that
union among them whereby he and they do but make up one mystical Christ, 1 Cor.
12. 12. that in those respects the sufferings of the Saints, are his
sufferings, to wit, the sufferings of mystical Christ, which are not perfect
nor filled up, until every Member of his Body endure their own allotted portion
and share: I fill up that which is behind of the sufferings of Christ. 4. All
that Paul, or any of the Elect suffers, are but small relicts, being compared
with that which Christ has suffered, as the drops upon the brim of the cup:
the great wave of affliction did first beat on him, and being thereby broken,
some small sparks of it only do light upon us; I fill up that which is behind,
or the relicts and hinder parts of the sufferings of Christ. 5. The cup of
affliction and sufferings goes about by course and round: as Christ did drink
of it first, the Apostles only standing by, Joh. 18. 8. so their course came
next, 1 Cor. 4. 9. and thus it has gone from hand to hand ever since: all are
not made to drink of it at once, that some may still be in a capacity to pity,
help, and sympathize with others, 2 Cor. 8. 14. so the word rendered fill up,
signifies to do a thing in our own course or turn. 6. As the personal
sufferings of Christ were for the Churches redemption, and to satisfy the
Fathers justice for the sins of the Elect, Act. 20. v. -- 28. which he did
completely, Joh. 19. 30. So the sufferings of the Saints are also for the
Churches good, though not for her redemption or expiation of sin, neither in
its guilt nor punishment, 1 John 1. 7. yet to edify the Church by their
example, Jam. 5. 10. to comfort her under sufferings, 2 Cor. 1. 6. and to
confirm that Truth for which they do suffer, Phil. 2. 17. In which respects
Paul affirms his afflictions were for Christ's bodies sake, which is the
Church.

Verse. 25. Whereof I am made a Minister according to the dispensation of God,
which is given to me for you, to fulfill the Word of God.
He confirms his Apostleship yet further, from his calling to that Office;
and withal gives a reason of his suffering cheerfully for the Churches good;
he was called to be a Minister unto the Church, chiefly among the Gentiles, of
whom these Colossians were a part, and that by the appointment of God; that he
might open up and preach the word of the Gospel fully, or that God by his
Ministry might fulfill that word of Prophecy and Promise of calling the
Gentiles in the days of the Gospel, Zech. 2. 11. for, to fulfill the word of
God, may be taken either of these ways. Doct. 1. The greater honor, or the
more eminent office a man does enjoy in the Church, he stands under stricter
obligation to undergo affliction for the Churches good, and may expect to meet
with the more of a suffering lot: for, this engages Paul to rejoice in his
afflictions for the Church; of which Church, says he, I am made a Minister. 2.
Ministers are but Gods Stewards and Servants under him, who being the great
Master of that Family, which is his House and Church, 1 Timothy 3. 15. will have
all things ordered in it, especially the number of Office-bearers, their
calling to, and their carriage in their Office (Ephesians. 4. 11. 1 Timothy 3. 1, etc.)
according to his own will and prescript; so Paul was made a Minister according
to the dispensation of God; the word dispensation, signifies the ordering of
things belonging to a Family by him who is Master of it. 3. Though the Apostles
were not tied by virtue of their Office unto any certain nation or place, their
charge being the broad world, Matthew. 28. 19. yet because every one could not
actually, and with advantage to the Church, discharge their Office toward all;
therefore either by divine appointment, or mutual agreement, they did divide
their Charge among them, Gal. 2. 7. yet so, as every one might exercise their
Apostolic Authority in every place, as occasion offered, even without a
particular Call from the Church, Act. 10. 34. which ordinary Pastors cannot do
without the bounds of their own Charge, 1 Cor. 14. 48. In this respect Paul was
to exercise his Apostleship among the Gentiles; which is given to me for you,
says he. 4. The Ministers of Jesus Christ must preach the Word of God, and his
full Word, keeping up nothing of the Word, Act. 20. 27. and employ the
uttermost of their parts, time and pains in so doing, 1 Timothy 4. 15. for, this
is to fulfill the word of God, according to the first sense given in the
Exposition. 5. What ever word of promise is given to the Church, though it be
never so unlikely, it must and shall be fulfilled in Gods time; for, Paul is
made a Minister to fulfill the word, that is, the word of promise for calling
of the Gentiles, according to the latter sense.

Verse. 26. Even the mystery which has been hid from ages, and from
generations, but now is made manifest to his saints.
He confirms the truth preached by Epaphras further, from the worth which is
in it self, by showing it is an ancient doctrine, ^id from the former ages of
the Church, but now made manifest in the fullness of time to his holy Apostles
immediately, and by them to all other saints, Ephesians. 3. 5. Doct. 1. The Gospel, or
doctrine of Christian Religion concerning Christ his Incarnation, Natures,
Person, Offices, Death, Resurrection, and Salvation thereby acquired unto lost
sinners, (1 Timothy 3. 16.) is an ancient doctrine, as having been before ages and
generations, though not revealed; which has been hid from ages. 2. This
doctrine is a mystery, a thing in it self dark and secret, so that Nature's
light would never have found it out, except it had been made manifest, yea, and
is scarcely capable of it when it is revealed: and more particularly, the
counsel of God in calling of the Gentiles to the fellowship of the Gospel,
without tying them to circumcision and the other duties of the ceremonial Law,
was wholly hid from the Gentiles themselves, and from the greatest part of the
Jews, who dreamed of no such thing, yea, the Prophets themselves did know but
little of it: for, this is a part of the mystery whereof he speaks chiefly
here; even the mystery which has been hid from ages: See Ephesians. 3. 3. 5, 6. 3.
Divine mercies are upon the growing hand; Christ and free grace in its full
extent, was but dark under the old dispensation, as being covered with a vail
of many ceremonies, 2 Cor. 3. 13. but now the vail is removed, Christ and free
grace are clearly preached, and shine forth in their native beauty and luster;
but now is made manifest. 4. Though the Gospel be now made manifest, yet they
are only saints and truly gracious, who attain unto the full, through, and
saving knowledge of it, 2 Cor. 4. 3, 4. wicked men have some insight in it, but
they know it not so, as to prize it, 1 Cor. 1. 18. so as to believe it, and
venture their Heaven and happiness upon it, Joh. 5. 40. nor yet so, as to walk
like it, Matthew. 7. 22, 23. Thus it is a mystery made manifest unto the saints.

Verse. 27, To whom God would make known what is the riches of the glory of this
mystery among the Gentiles, which is Christ in you, the hope of glory.
He shows, that the cause of this manifestation was God's will and pleasure,
and withal commends and explaineth the thing manifested, as being a rich and
glorious mystery, the sum whereof is Christ himself, who, dwelling in us by
faith, is the hope of glory. Doct. 1. That the doctrine of salvation through
Christ, was so long hid from the Gentiles, and but obscurely propounded to the
Jews, and now in the fullness of time made manifest; and, that it is revealed
to one Nation, and not to another, and works effectually in some, and not in
others, (Matthew. 11. 25, 26.) proceeds from God's good will and pleasure, so
that it is a matter full of ^emerity and rashness to inquire unto any higher
cause; the Apostle rests on this, to whom the Lord would make known. 2. As the
Gospel is a mystery, so it is a rich one, wherein God lays out the great and
unsearchable treasures of his mercy, goodness and grace. Joh. 1. 17. and the
embracers of this doctrine are made truly rich, as being restored unto favor
with God, clothed with a perfect righteousness, Rev. 3. 18. having received a
new right unto all the creatures through Christ, Tit. (...). 15. those are
riches, without which the whole world is but miserable beggars. Rev. 3. 17.
what is the riches of this mystery. 3. The Gospel is a mystery full of glory,
no doctrine manifesting more of God's glory in all his attributes of mercy,
wisdom, justice and truth. Luke 2 14. and they who embrace it, are made thereby
glorious, as having a promise of a ^ight unto, yea, and begun possession of
glory now, Joh. 3. 36. and shall attain to the full possession of glory
hereafter, 1 John 3. 2. for, he speaks of the glory of this mystery. 4. It
is no small mystery, that Christ should take up house with, and dwell in
sinners; this mystery, says he, which is Christ in you. 5. Jesus Christ is
the Sum of the Gospel, in whom there is much hid and glorious riches, no less
than treasures of wisdom and knowledge, chap. 2. v. 3. So the Apostle,
explaining what is this mystery, and the riches and glory of it, gives Christ
for all, which is Christ in you. 6. Christ dwelling by faith in the hearts of
people here, is the hope of that glory to be possessed hereafter, as being the
Author of that hope, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 16, as also the earnest of that glory, Ephesians. 1.
14. the full accomplishment whereof, shall be the full enjoying of him, Phil.
1. 23. whom we do now enjoy but in part, and by faith, 1 Cor. 13. 12. Christ in
you the hope of glory.

Verse. 28. Whom we preach, warning every man, and teaching every man in all
wisdom, that we may present every man perfect in Christ Jesus.
He returns to that argument, which he used formerly to confirm the doctrine
preached to them by Epaphras, taken from his preaching of the same doctrine
himself, and shows the principal subject of his preaching was Christ,
together with the way how he preached him, laboring to rectify the will by
warning, and to inform the judgment by instructing, concealing nothing of that
saving wisdom revealed in Scripture; and this without respect of persons,
endeavoring hereby to bring all men to Christ, by a lively faith, (not to the
Angels and Legal Ceremonies, as the false Apostles did) that so they might be
made perfect in him. Doct. 1. As the main subject of Ministers preaching ought
to be Jesus Christ; so, the reproving of sin, exhortation to duty, instruction
in knowledge, is no ways inconsistent, but agrees well with the preaching of
Christ: for, Paul's preaching did run upon both those, whom, says he, to wit,
Christ, we preach, warning and teaching. 2. Ministers in their reproofs and
pressing of duties, would beware of drawing people off Christ, to seek a
righteousness in themselves; but would thereby labor to drive them to Christ
for righteousness, to cover the guilt of the sin reproved, Romans 10. 4. and for
furniture to enable them to go about the duty which is pressed, Romans 13. 14.
that so while they warn and exhort, they may be still preaching Christ; thus
did Paul, whom, to wit, Christ, we preach, warning and teaching every man. 3.
The understanding of man by nature is dark and wholly blind in the things of
God; else there were no need of teaching: and his will and affections are most
perverse and backward; else there were no need of warning; warning every man,
and teaching. 4. The great part of a Minister's work lies in those two, to
inform the understanding by teaching. and to rectify the will and affections
by admonition, rebuke and consolation, which here goes under the name of
warning: and these duties are to be discharged by a Minister unto all within
his charge, without respect of persons; warning every man and teaching every
man. 5. As it is the duty of a Minister to conceal nothing of saving truth
revealed in Scripture: so, all saving truth, and especially the doctrine of
Jesus Christ revealed in the Gospel, contains in it much wisdom, yea all
wisdom, so that any other wisdom without this, is nothing else but mere
folly; for, this makes men wise unto salvation, 2 Timothy, 3. 15. So he taught
every man in all wisdom, that is, in the doctrine of the Gospel. 6. The
public Ministry is God's ordinary mean for the reducing of straying and
wandering sinners, to Jesus Christ; that being clothed with his
righteousness, and renewed by his holy Spirit, they may be made perfect in
him, and presented so in the last day; that we may present every man perfect in
Jesus Christ. 7. It ought to be the great end which all Ministers should aim
at, to get all of those who are committed to their charge (as being ignorant of
God's secret decree concerning any of them, 2 Timothy 2. 19) so brought to Christ,
that every man may be presented perfect in him; this was Paul's aim.

Verse. 29. Whereunto I also labor, striving according to his working, which
works in me mightily.
He further commends his Ministry, First, from his great pains taken for
bringing about the end of it aforementioned, by laboring and striving; the
first word expresses his great labor in doing, by traveling through so many
N(...)ions, preaching so frequently, disputing so accurately with the
adversaries of truth, 1 Cor. 15. 10. The second expresses his patience under
many hazards and sufferings, 2 Cor. 11. 23. Secondly, from the most effectual
help, whereby God did assist him, and bless his Ministry with success
wherever he came. Doct. 1. The gaining of souls to Christ, is a work which
cannot be effectuated without great labor and pains; yea, and great wrestling
and strife, what with men's corruptions and humors, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 2. what with
manifold discouragements arising from within a man's self, 2 Cor. 7. 5. and
what with multitudes of crosses and sufferings, which Satan's malice does
usually procure unto faithful Minister, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 18. So that whosoever
proponeth ease, pleasures, riches and honor unto himself in the Ministerial
Calling; if so he be faithful, he will meet with disappointment: he must resolve
to labor in the Word, and under crosses for the Word; Paul found it so;
whereunto, that is, that he might present souls unto Christ I also labor, (the
word signifies, to labor unto weariness) striving. 2. All the labor and
striving of Ministers will not prevail to the gaining of souls, without divine
assistance, and Christ's effectual working with their labors; striving
according to his working, says he. 3. When Ministers meet with any success in
their Ministry, they are not to be puffed up with it, or ascribe the praise to
their own diligence, piety or parts, 1 Cor. 15. 10. but are to acknowledge
thankfully God's helping hand in it; So does Paul, his working, which works
in me mightily. 4. The many hardships and sufferings, or extraordinary pains
and labor which attend the Ministerial Calling, ought not to deter any from
it, who is other ways fitted and called; because there is divine help,
corroborating strength, and answerable furniture allowed unto, and will be
forthcoming for those who are employed in it; so did Paul find in his own
experience: his working, which works in me mightily, says he.

CHAP. II.
IN the first part of this Chapter, the Apostle makes way for the refutation
of some errors, by an insinuating Preface; wherein he shows, what a conflict
he had for them, v. 1. that they might be comforted, united, and grow in the
knowledge of Christ, v. 2. whose fullness is held forth, v. 3. and that they
might be guarded against seducers, v. 4. And because of his affection unto
them, v. 5. He exhorts them therefore to adhere to the doctrine received, v. 6.
prescribing some helps for constancy, v. 7.

In the second part, he refuteth some contrary errors, reducing them to three
heads, abused Philosophy, superstitious rites, and Mosaicall ceremonies, v. 8.
which he refuteth jointly, from the fullness which is in Christ, v. 9. and our
being complete in him, v. 10. He refuteth the necessity of Circumcision in
special, because in Christ, we have the thing signified by it, v. 11. and an
external seal, to wit. Baptism in the place of it, v. 12. Christ had renewed
them without it, v. 13. and abrogate the whole ceremonial Law by his death, v.
14. yea, and triumphed over all their spiritual enemies, v. 15.

He concludes therefore against their subjecting of themselves to that yoke, v.
16. because Christ, the substance of those shadows, was come, v. 17. He argues
against the second head, to wit, worshipping of Angels, from the ignorance, and
pride of those who pressed it, v. 18. and their impairing the honor of Christ,
as Head, v. 19. He argues against the superstitious rites, giving some
instances of them; because they were freed from the Mosaicall rites, v. 20, 21.
and they thereby placed Religion in things perishing, without any authority,
except humane, v. 22. and takes off some fair pretexts, whereby their Patrons
did defend them, v. 23.

Verse. 1. For I would that ye knew what great conflict I have for you, and for
them at Laodicea, and for as many as have not seen my face in the flesh.
THe Apostle, being to refute some errors contrary to the former doctrine,
makes way for his work; and yet again insinuates upon their affections, by
letting them know, that he was no less solicitous in all his actions and
sufferings, that they, their neighboring Church at Laodicea (to whom he
wills this Epistle to be read, chap. 4. v. 16.) and all other Churches, whom
he had never seen in the face, might be established in the truth, than he was
for those, among whom he had frequently conversed. Doct. 1. When a people does
once incline to error, so ready are they to mistake those who would labor to
reclaim or establish them, (Gal. 4. 16) that a Minister would use more than
ordinary diligence to insinuate upon their affections, and guide dexterously
against mistakes and prejudices, when he is to meddle with any thing of that
kind: So the Apostle, beside his general preface to the whole Epistle, uses
here a particular one, when he is to refure some errors, wherewith this Church
was most infested. 2. Though the men of this world be little solicitous for
those with whom they have not particular acquaintance, Matthew. 5. 45. and
Christans are sometimes too apt to mis-judge those who are dear unto God,
according to this rule; yet so many are the ties among the Members of Christ,
(1 Cor. 10. ^7.) that, as it is the duty of every one to promove the good of
others (even though they had never seen them) so there are some who do make
conscience of this duty; for, the Apostle supponeth, that those Colossians were
apt to judge of him, as minding their case little, however he minded the case
of others, chap. 1. v. 29. and therefore he shows his solicitous care for
them also; and this, that the mistake might be removed; as is imported by the
causall particle for, which knitteth this purpose with the former; for I would
that ye knew. 3. As faithful Ministers will necessarily have a sighting life,
and many sore conflicts both in body and spirit: so, to make it known unto the
people, what sore travel they endure of this kind, if it be not out of
ostentation and desire of applause, (2 Cor. 10. 18.) is lawful and profitable:
for, hereby people are made to bear burden with their Minister, excited to
mind their own salvation the more, (the care whereof lies so heavy upon
their Pastors) and disposed for the more ready receiving of the word from their
mouth: So Paul, I would ye knew what great conflict I have for you. 4.
Ministers in speaking of their affection toward people, and of their pains
flowing from it, and Christians also in making known their respects one to
another, should beware of flattering those to whom they make their respects and
affections known, and would guard carefully against the very suspicion thereof:
So Paul, lest he should incur any such suspicion, joyneth not only those of
Laodicea, but also all other Churches, as partaking equally of his Apostolic
care; and for them at Laodicea, and as many as have not seen my face.

Verse. 2. That their hearts might be comforted, being knit together in love,
and unto all riches of the full assurance of understanding, to the
acknowledgment of the mystery of God, and of the Father, and of Christ.
He gives reasons of his great conflict for their confirmation in the Truth,
and why he made them know so much; hereby they should reap much solid comfort,
their hearts should be inseperably knit together in love, and attain to a large
measure of rooted and experimental knowledge of the mystery of the Gospel.
Doct. 1. All men are naturally destitute of solid comfort, and even the People
of God, when driven to extremities, (chiefly when the truth of the Gospel, from
which they did draw their consolation, is questioned) do find their comfort
much brangled: That their hearts might be comforted, says he: So, for the time
their comfort was shaken, the truth of the Gospel being by those Masters of
error questioned. 2. It is only the doctrine of the Gospel which setleth a
disconsolate and afflicted spirit most: and to have that doctrine confirmed,
when erring spirits would call it in question; and to know also that others,
dear to God, sympathize with us in our strait, contributeth much to our
establishment and comfort: so the Apostle's care and pa(...)s to have them
established in the truth of the Gospel, which was then questioned, and the
manifestation thereof to them, did contribute for their comfort; That their
hearts might be comforted. 2. Unity of heart and affections in the Church, is
so necessary, that the want of it does obstruct much that solid comfort, which
might other ways be reaped by the Gospel: for, he suspendeth their comfort,
upon their being knit together in love, as a piece of timber joined by a
Carpenter; for, so the word signifies. 4. Unity of heart and affections,
depends much upon union of judgments and constancy in Truth: where there is
discord in the understanding about main and substantial Truths, there can be no
through and lasting concord of the will and affections: for, he makes their
being knit together in love, one fruit of their constancy in Truth, for
procuring whereof his conflict was. 5. Christians are not to rest contented
with the knowledge of common and easy principles of Christianity, (Heb. 6. 1.)
but are to grow in the knowledge of other more difficult truths, such as relate
to various cases, and the defense of Truth against Adversaries; and growth in
these, does follow upon perseverance in Truth: for, such a growth is meant by
the riches of understanding here spoken of, as another fruit of constancy in
Truth. 6. Neither are they to rest upon a fluctuating doubting knowledge, but
to endeavor a full persuasion and assurance, both of the truth of the Gospel
in general, and of their own particular interest in the promises thereof: and
this also is attained by stability in the Truth: for, it is the full assurance
of understanding here spoken of as another fruit of constancy. 7. Neither are
they to rest upon simple knowledge of Gospel Truths, (Matthew. 7. 21.) but are to
know them with affection and love to them; they are to take a proof of the
truth which is in them and so from experience to know them: this much is
imported in the word rendered acknowledge, signifying to know again, and with
knowledge above ordinary. 8. As God is the author of the Gospel, his eternal
wisdom having found it out, Ephesians. 3. 10. and as Christ was the Fathers
Ambassador to preach and reveal it, Matthew. 12. 18. So God, and the Father, and
Christ are the prime object of the Gospel: the unity of the Godhead, and
distinction and order of the persons, the incarnation of Christ, his person,
natures, and offices, his saving benefits, and love to sinners (which are all
in themselves dark and mysterious) being plainly revealed therein; hence the
Gospel is called the mystery of God, and of the Father, and of Christ.

Verse. 3. In whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge.
The words are read by some as relating to the Gospel, in which is contained
the knowledge of all things necessary to salvation, both of those which are
only to be known and believed, and of those which are also to be practiced: but
they are taken more commonly as relating to Christ, in whom, as in a house of
store, is laid up all saving knowledge, to be imparted unto those who labor to
know him. Both senses come to one, Christ being the main object of the Gospel,
and both tend to the same scope, which is to hold forth a sufficiency in Christ
and the Gospel, in order to the salvation of sinners, without the help of
Angels, or vain traditions; the necessity of whose help was urged by the false
Apostles. Doct. 1. There is in Christ and the Gospel, sufficiency of knowledge
in all things necessary to salvation; Christ being the very way to life, Joh.
14. 6. and the Gospel that doctrine, which holds forth this way completely
Joh. 20. 31. Christ having also received the habits of all created knowledge,
as of all other graces without measure; that thereby he might be fitted as
Mediator to bestow the grace of saving knowledge upon all the Elect in a
competent measure, Joh. 1. 16. In whom are all the treasures. 2. The knowledge
of Jesus Christ is a thing most precious, and most enriching of those who have
it: hence is it called treasures. 3. Notwithstanding of all that is revealed of
Jesus Christ; yet his worth is unsearchable; the most able of created
understandings cannot reach the depth thereof; so, in whom are hid all the
treasures. 4. This fullness of knowledge ascribed to Christ, makes nothing for
the Ubiquitarian error, as if Divine omniscience were inherent in the humane
nature: for, though it should be granted, that by these treasures were meant
Divine omniscience; yet he says not in which humane nature, but in whom, that
is, in his person (to wit, according to the Divine Nature) are hid all the
treasures.

Verse. 4. And this I say, lest any man should beguile you with entising words.
He gives a further reason of his so great care to establish them in the Truth
or of his mentioning that fullness of knowledge, which is in Christ and the
Gospel; that hereby they might be guarded against all Seducers, who intended to
draw them from Christ and the simplicity of the Gospel, whether by false
arguments or insuaring persuasions. Doct. 1. As Satan does endeavor to sow the
seed of Error, wherever the Gospel is preached; so Ministers should guard
people as well against error in opinion, as against prophanity of life; the one
being damnable as the other, 2 Pet. 2. 1. Thus does Paul here, This I say, lest
any man beguile you. 2. Ministers should labor to instruct their people well
in the positive grounds of Christian Truths especially in the knowledge of
Christ and that fullness of sufficiency which is in him, as a most sovereign
antidote against all those Errors which tend to draw the minds of people from
him: And whosoever would meddle with the study of controverted truths without
hazard and to any good purpose, ought first to drink in the knowledge of those
positive grounds: for, the Apostle proceeds in this method, first,
instructing them in those; and next, dehorting them from contrary errors: and
this I say, lest any man should beguile you. 3. As Satan labors to engage
ablest wits in the way of errors; so, when such are engaged they spare no pains
for seducing of others, abusing their parts and gifts, otherwise profitable for
that end, to wit, that they may blind the understandings of people by
sophistical arguments, which conclude not what they seem to hold forth, and
lead captive their affections by deceitful and insinuating persuasions; so,
those Seducers against whom the Apostle does here guard, were men endued with
logic and eloquence both which they abused, for seducing the people; the
first, by using false arguments, lest any man deceive you; the word signifies,
to deceive by not-concluding arguments; The second, by using subtle
persuasions, called here, intising words.

Verse. 5. For though I be absent in the flesh, yet am I with you in the spirit,
joying and beholding your order, and the steadfastness of your faith in Christ:
He gives another reason of his solicitous care for them, to wit, the inward
affection which he carried to them: hereby also he anticipateth an objection,
how he who lived at such a distance, and was unacquaint, could take upon him to
prescribe unto them; and shows, though he was absent from them in body, yet
he was present with them in spirit, both by his affectionate minding of them;
and, as it seems by the knowledge which he had of their affairs, through
extraordinary revelation, see 2 Kings 5. 26. and while he commends the
present appearance of Gods grace in them, he does indirectly exhort them to
hold on and persevere. Doct. 1. It is not always given unto Gods children, to
enjoy the bodily presence of those who might be profitable unto them; for,
though I be absent in the flesh. 2. But there is a spiritual presence, which
may and ought to be entertained in case of bodily absence, which consists in
mutual minding of the case of others, (2 Cor. 7. 3.) in being sutably affected
with their case, whether it be good or bad, (Heb. 13. 3.) in praying to God
for, and by all lawful means procuring the good of others, chap. 4. 12, 13.
and especially Ministers should never be totally absent from their flocks; but,
as Paul, being absent in the flesh, ought to be thus present with them in the
spirit, and be sutably affected with their case, as he was; joying and
beholding their order. 3. Where the lives of Professors within a Church are
orderly and pious: where the order of Church Government is in vigor and
flourishes; where there is unity in a Church, every one keeping his station,
and helping others in their station, as a wellordered Army with banners: as
each of those does contribute to the rest; so, all of them concurring, makes
the Church a joyful object to beholders: for, Paul did joy beholding their
order, to wit, in holy walking (2 Thessalonians. 3. 6.) in exercise of discipline,
(Tit. 1. 5) and in their unite on-going, Cant. 6. 10. 4. Where the order of
Church Government chiefly, is in vigor, it contributeth much for keeping
Professors steadfast in their assenting unto, and avowing of the doctrine of
faith: Christ's Discipline, is a strong hedge to defend his doctrine: so,
beholding their order, he beholds also the steadfastness of their faith.

Verse. 6. As ye have therefore received Christ Jesus the Lord, so walk ye in
him.
He concludes the Preface, exhorting, that as they had received Christ, to
wit, in their judgments, by assenting to the truths which were delivered unto
them by Epaphras concerning him, chap. 1. v. 7. and in their hearts, by
esteeming of, adhering to, and believing in him, chap. 1. 4. and in their
practice, by setting about those duties which such receipts called for from
them, chap. 1. 6. And, as in all those, they had taken Christ for their only
Lord and Lawgiver, not as a conjunct only with Moses and the Angels; so they
would continue constant, and make progress in all those. Doct. 1. Jesus Christ
is the sum and substance of all saving doctrine, (1 Cor. 2. 2.) the marrow of
all the promises (2 Cor. 1. 20.) the fountain, furniture, and main scope of an
holy life, (Ephesians. 4. 21, 22.) so that the receiving of him, is the thing most to
be aimed at in all the Ordinances, as that which makes our knowledge complete,
our faith saving, our obedience acceptable: for, here, the Apostle's pointing
at their practice in all those, gives this as the compend of all, as ye have
received Christ. 2. It is not sufficient that Christ be once received in our
understanding, affection and practice; but there must be constancy and
progress made in receiving of him: for, the word walk imports thus much; so
walk. 3. The example of progenitors, and our own former practice, lays on a
strong tie to continue constant in our profession and practice if it be a
profession of truth, and practice of duty: for, the Apostle argues from their
own former practice, as ye have received, so walk. 4. No custom, though never
so ancient, no example of progenitors, or former practice of our own, ought to
make us continue in any practice, which is sinful; or doctrine, which is false
and erroneous: for, he exhorts them to continue in this doctrine, not simply,
from the receiving of it; but because they had received Christ the Lord in it,
and so it was true and orthodox doctrine. 4. As the life of a Christian ought
to be in a perpetual motion from sin to holiness, from the World to Heaven;
so, Christ is the way, through which he must move: for, he commands walk in
him; he must be in him by faith, and so reconciled, Romans 8. 1. the truth of
Christ must be the rule of his walking, Ephesians. 4. 21, 22. and he must walk by
virtue of influence which comes from him, Phil. 4. 13.

Verse. 7. Rooted and built up in him, and stablished in the faith, as ye have
been taught, abounding therein with thanksgiving.
He prescribes some means for attaining to constancy and progress; First,
stability of faith in adhering firmly to Christ, and that truth wherein they
were taught. Secondly, abounding in this grace. Thirdly, thanksgiving for the
same. The first doctrine which arises from the scope, is already marked, chap.
1. v. 23. Doct. 4. to wit. Doct. 2. The gripe which faith does lay upon Christ,
is like unto that which the tree has in the ground, and so is most sure: for,
though the top of the tree does shake, yet the root remains firm, and its
firmness is from the solidity of the ground, through which the roots are
spread; its fruitfulness also is by virtue of sap conveyed from the ground by
the roots; so, the stability of Believers, flows from Christ, Jo. 10. 28, 29.
and sap and influence is conveyed from him by faith, for making them fruitful,
Jo. 15. 5. Thus the firmness of their faith is set forth by a Metaphor taken
from trees deeply rooted: rooted in him. 3. The bond of faith, whereby
Believers are knit to Christ, is like that whereby the edifice is fastened to
the foundation; the foundation upholdeth the house, so does Christ the
Believer, Matthew. 16. 18. The rest of the building is made conform to the
foundation; so, the copy of a Believers life is taken from Christ, Matthew. 11.
29. the stones of the building, by taking band with the foundation, are fastened
one to another; so faith takes band upon Christ, and in him with others who
are Christ's, 1 Job. 1. 7. for, faith is set forth with relation to Christ, by
a second Metaphor taken from edifices strongly founded; built up in him. 4.
There is an innovating humor in people, flowing from itching ears, 2 Timothy 4.
3. whereby they weary of old truths, and hanker after newfangled errors,
arising from little conscience made to practice according to those truths, Joh.
7. 17. This the Apostle guardeth against, by exhorting them so often to
continue in the doctrine already received; as ye have been taught, says he. 5.
As there should be stability, so there would be growth in faith, even to
abounding therein. Faith grows in breadth, by extending our knowledge and
assent to more divine truths, Heb. 6. 1. it grows in hight, when one degree of
faith is made a step unto a further, as faith of dependence unto assurance, 2
Pet. 1. 10. it grows in length, when its acts are not interrupted, but
constant, Job 13. 15. and it grows in depth, when it grows more rooted and
solid; whereof before chap. 1. v. 23. And as this growth even to abounding in
faith, is necessary to make a man constant in the faith, so it is prescribed
for this end; abounding therein. 6. Thanksgiving for what we have received of
faith already, is an effectual mean to make us constant, grow and abound
therein, which holds also in all other graces; abounding (...) with
thanksgiving,

Verse. 8. Beware lest any man spoil you through philosophy and vain deceit,
after the tradition of men, after the rudiments of the world, and not after
Christ.
Having ended the Preface, he stateth the controversy, reducing those
Impostors, whereof he would have them to beware, lest they should be made a
prey of by them, unto three heads. First, Abused philosophy, whereby under
pretense of reason (which was indeed but deceiving) several things; and
particularly, as it appears from ver. 18. the worshipping of Angels was
pressed upon them, contrary unto the Word: all which doctrine he rejects as
vain and deceiving. Secondly, Superstitious and foolish rites, obtruded as
parts of divine worship, having no other warrant but custom, antiquity, and the
authority of men. Thirdly, Levitical rites, and Mosaical ceremonies, which were
earthly and carnal rudiments, or beginnings fitted for the infancy of the
Church under the old Testament: all which he rejects upon this general
reason, they were not according to the doctrine of Christ, and did draw away
Christians from him. Doct. 1. Christians are Christ's flock, and the doctrine
of the Gospel a sheepfold, wherein so long as they remain they are safe, and
when they depart from it, they fall in the hands of seducing Heretics, who
make a prey of their souls, thirsting after, and rejoicing as much in the
drawing of people away from Truth, as Robbers and Thieves do when they carry
away the spoil of another man's goods; lest any man spoil you; It is a metaphor
taken from notorious thieves who carry away the straying cattle. 2. Though
Philosophy, as it speaks the knowledge of truth found out by Natures light,
and an accurate way for finding out the same, be not to be rejected, it being
in all the parts of it a very useful help for attaining to the more exact
knowledge of religious truths revealed in Scripture: and this same Apostle
frequently making use of it in his accurate method, insinuating proems, accurat
and syllogistick argumentations; and that often from common philosophic
principles, Act. 17. 28. yet if Philosophy be taken for the errors of
Philosophers, and if those be obtruded for truths; or, if it presume to reject
all religious truths, such as the greatest mysteries of christian Religion,
which are not conclusions grounded upon, and flowing from Natures light; or
generally, when it is not kept as subservient to Scripture, but presumes to
lord it over them; Philosophy so taken, and in those cases, is a very dangerous
deceiver in the things of God, and so would be eschewed: for, the Apostle does
not simply condemn Philosophy, but the abuse of it, even that which is
deceiving and vain; through Philosophy and vain deceit. 3. The traditions of
men, whereby external rites without the authority of the written Word, are
obtruded as worship to God upon the Church, having no other warrant but
antiquity, custom and humane authority, is the most vain and useless doctrine
which ever was taught, and no ways to be submitted unto; so this vain deceit
is after the traditions of men. 4. The Mosaical Rites and Legal Ceremonies, as
they were prescribed by God unto the ancient Church, to be the first A. B. C,
and easy Rudiments of Religion, fitted for the then infant-state of the
Church; so the binding power of them all (Christ the substance being come and
suffered) does cease: yea, the practicing of them now, the light of the Gospel
having clearly shined forth, is sinful, and to be eschewed, as speaking
really, and by virtue of their first institution, that Christ is not yet come
in the flesh, Gal. 5. 2. for, by these Rudiments, or, Elements of the world, of
which he would have them to beware, is meant those Legal Ceremonies, see Gal.
4. v. 3, 9. After the Rudiments of the world. 5. The way of Christ, and of
men's own natural wisdom, will not weld together so as to make up a perfect
mixture: if it be their way, he will not own it for his: for, those false
Teachers did not quit Christ wholly, but would have joined other things with
him, and yet the Spirit of God calls their way a deserting of him; And not
after Christ, says he.

Verse. 9. For in him dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily.
He refuteth all those Impostors, first jointly, because Christ alone is most
perfect, and by consequence his doctrine also; as having God fully in his
Essence and Attributes inseperably residing in his Person, and this bodily or
personally, the Divine Nature, having assumed the humane unto the unity of his
Person; for, the word Body, is often taken for the Person, as 2 Cor. 5. 10. so
that it were folly and impiety to seek salvation in any thing, but in Christ,
and in the doctrine taught by him. Doct. 1. There is nothing more effectual for
making us adhere to Christ and Truth, than the consideration of that worth and
fullness which is in him; for, the Apostle holds out the fullness of the
Godhead in Christ, that they may not be drawn away from him: for in him
dwells, etc. 2. The more a man does exercise himself in speaking or thinking
of Christ, his heart and mouth will be the more enlarged upon that subject:
for, this being the third time which the Apostle has spoken of this fullness,
first, chap. 1. v. 19. next, chap. 2. v. 3. and now here, we find his speech
rises still higher. 2. We learn hence several things of the Person and Natures
of Christ; as first, that he is true man: for, the Godhead dwells in his
humane Nature, as in his Temple. Secondly, he is also true God, and so the same
God with the Father; for, the fullness of the Godhead, not a portion of God
only, or the glorious effects of his power, or his particular gifts and graces,
but his complete essence dwells in him. Thirdly, That he is a distinct person
from the Father, the whole Godhead being incarnat, not as absolutely
considered, but as it is in the Person of the Son: for, it is in him, to wit,
in Christ, not in the Father, that the Godhead dwells bodily. Fourthly,
Though there be two Natures in Christ; yet he is but one person: for, the
Godhead dwells in him bodily, that is, personally, or by virtue of the
personal union. Fifthly, This union is inseparable: for, the Godhead dwells
in him, as in his fixed proper house. Sixthly, Notwithstanding of this union,
the two Natures remain distinct, as the inhabitant is distinct from the house
wherein he dwells. Seventhly, That God does hold out himself in the Person of
Christ God-man, as in a glass, to be taken up and transacted with by lost
sinners, or, the drift of the purpose is to show that the fullness of he
Godhead resideth in him, so as that we may make use of that fullness thoroughly
for our salvation, and that there is no need of any thing to be added to him.

Verse. 10. And ye are complete in him, which is the head of all principality
and power.
Here are other two arguments: First, Christ is not only full in himself, but
all who are in him by faith, are complete through him, as having from him all
things necessary for salvation. The second argument is against the worshipping
of Angels in particular, which he resuteth from Christ's prerogative above the
Angels, as being their Head and Lord, upholding and ruling them as his
creatures, chap. 1. 17. and preserving them in the state of grace through
virtue of his mediation, Job, 4. 18. and employing them for the Churches good,
Heb. 1. 14. and therefore they are but his servants, and the best of them but
our fellow servants, and therefore ought not to be worshipped, Rev. 22. 8, 9.
nor are they mediators betwixt God and us, that being an honor due to him
only, who is their Head, 1 Timothy 2. 5. Doct. 1. We are in our selves empty
things, being destitute of every thing which might commend us to God: in him we
are complete, and so in our selves empty. 2. There is a fullness in Christ to
be communicated unto all, who being sensible of their own emptiness, do by
faith lay hold upon him; in whom we are complete: which compleatness consists
in the enjoyment of sufficiency of means for salvation prescribed by him, Heb.
3. 2. and in the imputation of his most perfect righteousness, and in the
begun renovation of our nature by the Spirit of Christ, 1. Cor. 1. 30. which
shall be still upon the growing hand till grace be crowned with glory, Ephesians. 5.
27. 3. Though there be a complete fullness in Christ the Mediator from whence
we may supply our emptiness; yet we cannot partake of that his fullness,
except we first be in him, and by faith be united to him: so, in him we are
complete. 4. The greatest powers and most noble of creatures, being compared
with Christ, are but in the rank of subjects and servants: He is the head, even
of principalities and powers. 5. According to the different degree of
excellency which is in Christ and the creature, we ought to esteem highly of
the one, and meanly of the other: thus he is the head even of principalities
and powers: The scope whereof is to show, that he should have the honor which
is due to him, and they are to be kept in their own place.

Verse. 11. In whom also ye are circumcised with the circumcision made without
hands, in putting off the body of the sins of the flesh, by the circumcision of
Christ.
In this verse, and the verses following, he clears how we are complete in
him, and reasons against the Mosaical Ceremonies, especially Circumcision,
upon their observation whereof, they were tied unto all the rest, Gal. 5. 3.
therefore he mainly oppugneth it. The argument is, Believers have in Christ the
thing signified by that Ordinance, to wit, spiritual circumcision in the heart,
which consists in the putting off, by the power of Christ's Spirit, that
corrupt mass or body of manifold sins flowing from our innate corruption or
sinful flesh; so that there was no need of that carnal circumcision by hands,
in cutting off the flesh of the foreskin: which is a good consequence against
the urgers of circumcision under the new Testament, where these shadows (Christ
the substance being come) are abolished, especially seeing they urged it upon
this pretense, That the Gentiles could not be purified without it. Doct. 1. In
every Sacrament, such as Circumcision once was, there is an outward sign, which
is given by Christ's Ministers, and some inward grace signified by it, the
author and worker whereof is only Christ himself; So there was the outward rite
of Circumcision by the hands of men, and the inward grace of mortification
without hands; and by the Circumcision of Christ, that is, by the inward power
of the Spirit of Christ. 2. There is no saving grace enjoyed by Believers but
what they have in Christ, to wit, as the fountain, Joh. 1. 16. as the procurer
and purchaser of all grace for us, Romans 6. 6. and as the applier of his own
purchase to us, Act. 5. 31. So, in him we are circumcised. 3. As our manifold
actual sins do flow from the fountain of original corruption, frequently called
flesh, (Romans 7, and 8.) So the whole bulk of sin is fitly compared to a body,
because of the weight of guilt which is in it, Romans 7. 24. and the soul is
wholly compassed by it, as it is with our natural body, Genesis 6. 5. yea, and the
whole members of the body are made instruments of it, Romans 6. 19. Thus he
says, The body of the sins of the flesh. 4. They who are in Christ, must be
about the work of putting off this body, setting against, not only some one sin
or other, but the whole mass and body of sin; putting off the body of the sins
of the flesh. 5. This sinful body is already put off and laid aside in some
sense by real Believers, to wit, in its guilt, Romans 8. 1. in its dominion and
reign, Romans 6. 14. in the Believers sincere purpose and honest resolution, 2
Cor. 7. 11. as also in his hope, that one day it shall be put off wholly, 1 John 3. 2. So the Circumcision which Believers already have in Christ, is
designed A putting off the body of the sins of the flesh.

Verse. 12. Buried with him in Baptism, wherein also you are risen with him
through the faith of the operation of God, who has raised him from the dead.
He does further enlarge the former reason, whereby he also pre-occupieth an
objection against our compleatnesse in Christ, by showing we have in Christ,
not only the thing signified, but also an external initiatory seal, to wit,
Baptism in the place of Circumcision now abolished; the fruits of which seal
are mortification of sin, and vivification in grace, by virtue of the death and
resurrection of Jesus Christ, being laid hold on by faith, which is wrought in
us by the mighty power of God; so that there was no place left for
Circumcision. Doct. 1. The Sacrament of Baptism under the new Testament
succeeds to Circumcision under the old, and is to be administered to Children
born within the visible Church, as Circumcision was to Infants of eight days
age then, Genesis 17. 12. for, not only both do seal the same Covenant of grace,
and are initiatory seals of it, but also Paul shows that the Christian Church
is as complete now in Christ, as the Jewish Church was, though we want
Circumcision, because we have an Ordinance as good as it was, to wit, Baptism:
Now if Baptism did not belong to Infants, we should not yet be so complete as
they were, seeing the Covenant was sealed by Circumcision both to themselves
and their little ones: Buried with him in Baptism. 2. Regeneration consists of
two parts, to wit, first, Mortification of sin, which ought to be a through and
constant work, here set forth by our being buried, which speaks more than
death: And secondly, Vivification, or quickening in grace, set forth by our
rising again. Doct. 3. Both those parts of Regeneration are sealed in Baptism,
not as if we were of necessity to suppone that those are already in the person
to be baptized, but because Baptism obliges the baptized person to set about
these, and seals up the whole Promises on Gods part, even those which are for
sanctification and grace; so that whenever the party baptized shall lay hold by
faith upon the Promise, he has God engaged by word and seal, to make it out;
thus Circumcision was a seal of the righteousness of faith, Romans 4. 11. and yet
it was not to be supponed that every Child of eight days age had actual faith:
Buried with him in Baptism, wherein ye are also risen. 4. Though the Sacraments
do seal up grace to us in the way presently mentioned; yet they do not confer
grace upon us by any proper virtue of their own, nor yet is there any principle
of power in us which can reach the effectuating of such a work, Ephesians. 2. 1.
although the Sacraments do strongly tie us to the working of it, as said is: It
is only the death, burial, and resurrection of Christ, which is the
fountaincause of our dying to sin and living to God, in so far as by the merit,
efficacy and example of the former we attain unto the latter; in which respect
we are said to be buried with him, and risen with him. 5. It is no less than
the infinite power of God which works faith in us, and neither Sacraments, nor
the Death or Life of Christ will avail to the subduing of sin, and quickening of
grace, except Jesus Christ be laid hold upon by faith: We are buried with him
by faith, and faith is the operation of God. 6. In our acting of faith in God,
we are not to lay hold upon him in a general confused notion, but should eye
that in God most, which is most conducing unto that purpose for which we do
employ him: Thus, speaking of faith, as it imployeth God for quickening in
grace, he casts an eye to that work of God, whereupon our quickening in grace
depends most, even his raising of Christ from the dead.

Verse. 13. And you being dead in your sins, and the uncircumcision of your
flesh, has he quickened together with him, having forgiven you all trespasses.
He gives a further reason against the necessity of circumcision, to wit, when
they were dead in sin, and without circumcision, as being Gentiles, see Ephesians. 2.
11. God had quickened them with Christ, making them partake of the life of
grace, purchased by him here, and giving them right to the life of glory
hereafter, having pardoned all their sins freely for his sake. So, there was no
necessity, but rather it would be impiety to return unto Circumcision now,
especially seeing it was urged by the false Apostles, as a necessary mean to
get their natures purified, and their sins pardoned. Doct. 1. Every man by
nature, through sin is in a state of death, he is thereby spiritually dead, as
being deprived of all grace, union and communion with God, (chap. 1. 21.) he is
also judicially dead, as lying under the sentence of death, pronounced by the
Covenant of Works, Genesis 2. 17. And you being dead in your sins. 2. As this
state of death does totally disable us from quickening our selves, it is only
God who quickens: so, no misery of the creature, though never so
comprehensive, as extending it self both to our outward and inward state;
though never so desperate, as being past all remedy by humane help, will
impede God from doing good, and bestowing of the choicest good. Thus, though
they were miserable for their inward state, as being dead, and so incurable by
humane Art; and for their outward state, as being in the uncircumcision of
their flesh, or, uncircumcised Gentiles, yet God does quicken them. 3. Whenever
a man believes in Christ, he is in the same moment of time united to Christ,
and so, that all which he did or suffered, as sustaining our person, or, which
he procured for our behoof, as being our Head, whether in his death, burial,
or resurrection, is imputed to us by God, and a right unto them derived to us,
as if we had been personally present with him all those times, and given our
consent to his doing of all those things in our name, and for our behalf: hence
is it that He is said to have quickened these Colossians together with him,
though Christ had risen from the dead, some years before their coversion. 4.
There is no spiritual life attainable, except our obligation to wrath by the
pardon of sin, be removed; you has he quickened, having forgiven you all your
trespasses. 5. This pardon, though dearly purchased by Christ, Matthew. 26. 28.
yet it is freely bestowed upon us; having forgiven you, the word signifies,
freely forgiven, as coming from a root which signifies grace. 6. Pardon of sin
is also universal, as leaving no sin unpardoned to him who does believe and
repent, Psalm. 32. 5. having forgiven you all trespasses.

Verse. 14. Blotting out the handwriting of ordinances that was against us,
which was contrary to us, and took it out of the way, nailing it to his cross:
The Apostle illustrates the benefit of pardon, and brings an argument
against the Ceremonial Law in general, by showing, God had not only forgiven
the debt of sin, but Christ also by his death, had destroyed their obligation
to wrath, because of sin, making it altogether useless, ever to give faith in
Law against them; which obligation he calls, the handwriting of ordinances
which was contrary to us; alluding to written obligations among men, for sums
of money, or such like, wherein there is the body of the Writ, and the Debtors
subscription: answerable to which, there is in this handwriting; First, the
obligation it self, to wit, the Covenant of works, and condemning power of the
Law, Gal. 3. 10. Secondly, our assent and subscription to this obligation,
which is the sentence of every man's conscience against himself, whether of Jew
or Gentile, whereby he assents to the equity of that curse which the Law
pronounces, Romans 2. 15. But particularly, and over and above to the Jews, this
subscription was the practice of the Ceremonial Law, which being separated
from Christ and looked upon as service acceptable to God in it self, as it was
gone about by many of the Jews before Christ came, and so urged by the false
Apostles upon the Gentiles; the practice (I say) of the Ceremonial Law so
considered, was nothing else but a public testification of their own guilt:
for example, by killing a beast was testified, that they deserved to die
themselves; and seeing the dispute is in this place against the Ceremonial
Law, this handwriting in ordinances, is to be taken mainly in this sense,
although we are not to exclude the former: now the argument concludes
strongly, that seeing the debt is paid, the obligation cancelled, it were
madness and impiety to renew it again, as those did, who practiced the Legal
ceremonies. Doct. 1. There is an obligation above the head of every man,
through virtue of the curse of the Law, binding him over to under-ly eternal
wrath for sin, assented unto, and as it were subscribed by the voice of every
man's conscience, and by the practice of the Ceremonial Law unto the Jews:
for, this is the handwriting of ordinances here spoken of. 2. This obligation
must be cancelled, and so the condemning power of the Law abrogate, before sin
be pardoned, and our right to Heaven obtained: for, with respect to the
impeding of those, it is said to have been against us, and contrary unto us. 3.
None but Christ could destroy this handwriting; because none other was able to
satisfy the sum contained in it. Heb. 10. 9. for, he speaks of Christ, while
he says, blotting out the handwriting in ordinances. 4. It stood Christ no
less than his life, to get this bond destroyed; for, he behooved to pay the
sum, before the condemning power of the Law could cease, Joh. 3. 16. and to
produce the substance, before those Legal shadows could evanish, Heb. 9. 12.
both which required his death; so he is said to nail it to his cross. 5. It is
a matter of no small difficulty, to get the conscience of wakened sinners
quieted, and their hearts persuaded, that their obligation to wrath, because of
sin, is removed; therefore the Spirit of God uses so many expressions to
assure their heart in this matter; the handwriting is blotted out, as it were
crosse-strokes are drawn through it; but, left the heart suspect it may be yet
legible, therefore he adds, it is removed and taken out of the way; but, left
happily it should be again found and produced, he adds yet, it is torn,
destroyed, and nailed to the cross, and so made fully useless ever to
witness any thing against the Believer. 6. Though Christ did complete this sum
contained within this handwriting, while he was hanging on the cross, so as
the Father's justice had no more to seek of Christ the Cautioner, Joh. 19. 30.
in which sense, he did even then meritoriously destroy this handwriting, yet
the obligation stands still in force against the sinner, till he enter
himself Heir by faith unto Christ's obedience and death; for, this was the
order agreed upon betwixt the Father and the Son: according to which, the
fruits of his death were to be applied, to wit, by faith, Joh. 3. 16. So, it is
clear from Verse 13. those Colossians were dead in their sins before their
renovation, which was long after Christ's death.

Verse. 15. And having spoiled principalities and powers, he made a show of them
openly, triumphing over them in it.
He in largeth the present argument thus, that Christ by destroying that
handwriting, has spoiled, disgraced, and triumphed over all our spiritual
enemies, especially Satan the great General, and his whole Army of sins,
temptations, death and hell which fights under his banner, and this even by
his sufferings: wherein he alludeth to the ancient custom of Conquerors, who
did dis-arm then captives, having joined them by two, or more, in chains, made
them march before, to their public shame and disgrace, they themselves coming
after in their triumphing chariot; so did Christ: having spoiled principalities
and powers, made a show of them, etc. Doct. 1. The power of Devils is very
great, as being spiritual substances, strong and mighty Angels, Jude v. 6.
having the world and sin under them, as their subjects, Ephesians. 2. 2. Thus from
their power they are called principalities and powers. 2. This great power of
theirs is wholly employed to oppose the work of man's salvation; for, they are
spoken of here as opposits. 3. Satan's power over souls, does flow from the
sentence of condemnation pronounced by the Law against sinners, and consists in
that dominion which sin has obtained over them: for, upon the blotting out of
that handwriting, he was spoiled of his power, as appears from the connection.
4. Jesus Christ having satisfied the Fathers justice, and thereby not only
enervated the Law's condemnatory sentence, v. 14. but also obtained from the
Father, That sin should no more have dominion over the redeemed ones, Romans 6.
14. he has spoiled the Devil of that great power which once he had; so that,
though he can, and does tempt Believers, yet he cannot overcome them; though he
hold them in exercise, he cannot mar their salvation, 1 Cor. 10. 13. he may
bruise their heel, but cannot break their head: Thus with Christ's blotting out
the handwriting, is conjoined his having spoiled Principalities and Powers. 5.
Christ does bring about his most gracious works in a way which seems most
unlikely to carnal sense: so that no eye, but that of faith, can take him up:
what other eye could take up Christ as doing all this upon the cross? when the
Jews and Roman soldiers were spoiling him, and parting his garments, that he,
even then, and by being spoiled, was spoiling principalities and powers; when
they were putting him to shame and disgrace, that he, even then, was making a
show of Satan openly, and was rubbing disgrace upon him, overcoming him with
his own armor; and when they were triumphing and insulting over him, that even
then, he was triumphing over all the Devils in hell, as having by his death
given the dead blow to their power and kingdom, and so overcame them, by
suffering himself to be overcome by them; triumphing over them in it, to wit,
in his cross. 6. How dear soever the work of our salvation did stand to
Christ, it was matter of no small joy unto him to have it throughed, and those
who were enemies to it destroyed: for, while he is bleeding, and racked with
pain upon the cross, he is yet rejoicing and triumphing, and that because this
work was thriving: he triumphed over them in it; the cross was as a chariot of
triumph to him.

Verse. 16. Let no man therefore judge you in meat or in drink, or in respect of
an holy day, or of the new moon, or of the sabbath days.
He draws a conclusion from the former arguments: That seeing the Ceremonial
Law was now abolished, therefore none should take upon them to judge or condemn
others for the not observing any of these Ceremonies; or, if any would be so
presumptuous, the people of God should not regard their injunctions or
censures: and of those ceremonial observances, he gives two instances; the
one relating to that difference to be kept among Meats, according to Numb. 6.
3. the other relating to that difference observed in Days: Days observed
among the Jews were chiefly of three sorts; First, anniversary, that returned
every year, here designed by the general name of an holy day. Secondly, Lunary
or monthly, which returned every month, as the first day of every new moon.
Thirdly, weekly, which returned every week, and on the seventh day of the week:
all which are now abrogated, even the Jewish seventh day Sabbath; and the
Lord's day, or, the Christian firstdayes Sabbath, substitute in its place, 1
Cor. 16. 2. Doct. 1. What ever Christ has purchased by his death, ought to be
stood to, and made use of: for, upon the abolition of the ceremonial Law by
Christ's death, he infers, Let no man therefore judge you. 2. Christ the
Lord has given no such power unto any, to make that a part of worship, binding
the conscience, which he has not commanded; Let no man judge you. It relates
to the false Apostles, that they should not enjoin. 3. When men presume to
prescribe laws binding men's conscience, we are not to obey what they enjoin, or
regard much what they judge of, or inflict upon us for disobedience: let no man
judge you. It relates also to the people that they should not obey such
injunctions. 4. There is an abstinence from meats politic, which the
Magistrate injoyneth for civil ends; there is an abstinence medicinal, which
Physicians prescribe for preservation or recovery of health; and an abstinence
Ecclesiastical, when God by his providence, and voice of his Church, calls
his people to fasting and mourning: all those sorts of abstinence are lawful;
but to abstain from meat upon pretense of holiness and conscience, as if some
meats were unclean, or less holy in their own nature than others, 1 Timothy 4. 4.
or, as if simple abstinence at any time were a thing acceptable to God in it
self, without respect had to the end for which it is enjoined, Isa. 58. 5. This
is sinful and unlawful; Let no man therefore judge you in meat or drink. 5.
Though the first day of the week is constantly to be sanctified by all the
Christian Churches, and that by virtue of a divine command, 1 Cor. 16. 2.
Christ's example, Joh. 20. 19. and Apostolic practice, Acts 20. 7. and other
days also, or parts of days are to be sanctified, when God, by his more than
ordinary judgments or mercies, does occasionally call to humiliation or
thanksgiving, Mark 2. 20. Yet not only is the keeping of the Jewish set Feasts
and Fasts sinful, but by more than paritie of reason, the setting apart of
days to the honor of Saints and Angels, the keeping holy of any day not
appointed by God, for some supposed sanctity in that day more than in another;
or, as if simple abstinence from work, were in it self acceptable to God, is
also unlawful; Yea, the dedicating of fixed anniversary days, whether for
humiliation or thanksgiving, so as not to take that day again for worldly
employments, if God by his providence did call us to it; or, if by change of
dispensation he call us unto an exercise contrary unto that, for which the day
is set apart: such dedication of days is also unwarrantable, as having no
example in the Church of the Old Testament, not yet from the practice of Christ
and his Apostles, and has in it some kind of limiting of the Almighty, to make
the course of his providence to answer our appointed times; (...) none judge
you in respect of a holy day. 6. Christians in the point of obedience to God,
and of not subjecting their consciences to the will of men, ought to be very
precise; In respect of a holy day: in the Original it is, in the part of a
holy day; the false Apostles, it seems, urged to sanctify a part of those
days at least, if not the whole; but Paul will not have them yielding, no not
to a part.

Verse. 17. Which are a shadow of things to come, but the body is of Christ.
He strengthens the conclusion by an additionall argument, the meaning
whereof is: those Legal Ceremonies were but dark shadows of things to come, to
remain only until Christ, who is the truth, body and substance of them should
come; so that to observe them under the Gospel, were in effect to say, that
Christ the Body is not yet come. Doct. 1. Though some of those Legal
Ceremonies were commemorative of things past, Exodus 13. 8. yet the main use of
them all, was, to lead the Church which then was, to the consideration of
things to come, to wit, Christ, grace, and the doctrine of the Gospel: so by
the difference of meats was signified, that the Jews were a distinct people
from all other Nations, Acts 10. 11. 23. which distinction was to be taken away
by Christ; their Festival days, as the Passover, did shadow forth our
spiritual delivery by Christ, 1 Cor. 5. 7. and the Sabbath, our eternal rest,
etc. which are shadows of things to come. 2. The knowledge which the ancient
Church had of Christ, was but very dark and confused, being compared with ours,
such as the designation of a Body by its shadow, they had but shadows of things
to come. 3. How much virtue must there be in Christ, whose very shadow, some
obscure and confused notions of him, did afford abundant life and comfort unto
all such as were then saved: for, all that they enjoyed, was but shadows of
things to come. 4. Whatever good was hid under those Legal shadows, we have it
all fulfilled and made manifest in Christ and the Gospel: some of them shadowed
forth moral sanctity, and this Christ has clearly taught, and in his own
person fulfilled; some pointed at the expiation of sin, and this Christ by his
life and death has merited; some did presignifie eternal life, and the
participation of it by real Believers, and this Christ in the Gospel has
clearly unfolded; so the Body is of Christ.

Verse. 18. Let no man beguile you of your reward, in a voluntary humility, and
worshipping of Angels, intruding into those things which he has not seen,
vainly puffed up by his fleshly mind.
He reasons now against the first sort of Impostors, mentioned ver. 8. to
wit, abused Philosophy, whereby they did press the worshipping of Angels,
which he dehorteth from, because those Heretics did usurp the place of Judges,
to prescribe in the matter of worship, thereby making Christians lose their
reward of Heaven, by departing out of the way which leads to it; and because
they did cover their heretical spirits, and damnable error of Angel-worship by
a show of humility and arguments drawn from it, and did determine boldly in
those things whereof they were wholly ignorant; and because they were puffed up
with arrogance and pride, arising from the gifts of their fleshly and corrupt
mind. Doct. 1. Error and Idolatry, especially in Gods worship, is a fearful
sin, depriving those who are bewitched with it of the reward of Heaven and
happiness: for, the pressers of Angel-worship, did beguile them of their
reward. 2. Such is the mad zeal of those who are the patrons of Idolatry, as to
press their idolatrous opinions and practices with so much authority upon the
consciences of people, as to adjudge them to condemnation if they receive them
not; let no man deceive you of your reward: the word signifies let no man play
the Judge over you, defrauding you of your reward, and is taken from the unjust
dealing of Judges and Umpiers in Races, who would by their authority press men
to run out of the way, as they would not lose the prize, and in the mean time
make them lose. 3. It has been, and yet is very usual for vilest Heretics to
cover themselves with a more than ordinary show of humility and self-denial in
the whole strain of their carriage; that so they may deceive the simple, Romans
16. 18. Those Heretics did lurk under voluntary humility. 4. The more of
self-denial men of erring spirits do pretend to, they are the more dangerous,
and the more to be eschewed; so did the Apostle enjoin the Colossians to beware
of these Heretics, so much the more as they pretended to a voluntary humility.
5. Though a duty, or virtue, were never so good in it self; yet when men do
place it in those things, wherein God does not, it is a sin; for they made
worshipping of Angels to be humility, pretending it were presumption to go to
God at the nearest, without the mediation of those blessed and glorious
creatures: and it was voluntary; a humility of their own invention, and
therefore God makes it a part of their wickedness. 6. Though we are to give
civil worship to men in place and authority, or who excel in gifts and graces,
Exodus 20. 12. which ought to be given also to glorisied Saints and Angels, in
so far as to think reverently of them, to bless God for his goodness to them,
and the good which he does unto us by them, and to long to be in that state of
happiness which they enjoy; yet religious worship, as importing the subjection
of our minds and consciences unto that which we worship, belongs only unto
God, Deuteronomy. 6. 13. and to give it as the Papists do, unto any creature, whether
Saint or Angel, is no less than gross Idolatry: for, it is condemned here:
And the worshipping of Angels. 7. Nothing ought to be received for a part of
worship, and much less to be pressed by us upon others as such, the consonance
whereof with the mind of God is not fully known and thoroughly understood; so
they are condemned for pressing those things on others, which they did not
understand themselves; intruding into those things which they had not seen. 8.
It is the nature of Heretics to be most bold and peremptory in those things
whereof they understood least: boldness, confidence and ignorance, are the
usual companions of Heresy, Jude 10. So they intruded into those things which
they had not seen; it is a word taken from the bold and losty going of those
who acted the persons of Kings in Stageplayes. 9. As pride and self-conceit are
the usual attendants of Heresy; so there is often much of pride and
self-seeking, where folk pretend to more than ordinary self-denial and
humility: Vice is then arrived at the highest degree, when it seeks to vail
it self under the pretense of the contrary virtue, Isa. 66. 5. So those
Heretics, who pretended much to humility, were puffed up with their fleshly
mind. 10. The mind of man is wholly corrupt and fleshly, and cannot but
miscarry when it takes upon it to judge and command in the things of God,
according to the principles of natures light; hence he calls the mind
fleshly, or corrupt, with relation to divine worship. 11. There is nothing by
which a man will be more readily puffed up than the inward gifts of the mind,
if they be not sanctified, such as wit, knowledge, eloquence, memory, etc.
hence he makes their pussing up to slow from the mind; vainly puffed up by his
fleshly mind.

Verse. 19. And not holding the head, from which all the body by joints and
bands having nourishment ministered, and knit together, increases with the
increase of God.
Here is another argument against the worshippers of Angels, in that they
impare the honor of Christ, as head of his Church; making Angels to share with
him in it, while-as they employed them as Mediators with God to obtain grace
and salvation, when Christ alone does discharge the office of an Head
completely, from whom the whole Body of the universal Church, being knit to him
the Head, and one to another by the Nerves and Sinnews of one common Spirit,
does receive spiritual nourishment and increase in the graces of Gods Spirit.
Doct. 1. So jealous is Christ in the matter of his own glory, that he will not
suffer any other to share with him in it: if Saints, Angels, Pope, or any other
be made use of as conjunct colleagues with, and helpers of Christ in his
Mediatory office, he cease to be a Mediator at all unto those who so do; thus
will they give but a share of the honor due unto Christ, as Head, to the
Angels: they are said not to hold the head, or to be separated from the head,
and the virtue which flows from it. 2. What ever relation is taken on by
Christ toward his Church, whether of King, Head, Husband, Brother, Friend, or
any other, he will be really forthcoming according to all which that relation
does import; So, as Head, he does all that which the head does to the natural
body: he furnishes us with life, motion, spiritual nerves, arteries, etc. from
whom the whole body, etc. 3. That sufficient influence for grace, and spiritual
nourishment may be conveyed from Christ the head, to sinners, it is necessary
that they be unite and knit to him, to wit, by the Spirit of Christ, Phil. 3.
12. and the grace of faith, Ephesians. 3. 17. for, those are the joints and bands, by
which this nouvishment is ministered; he speaks with an allusion to the nerves
and arteries of the natural body, whereby it is knit to the head, and has life
and motion conveyed unto it. 4. There is a band of Christian love wrought by
the Spirit of God, by which all the members of Christ's mystical body are knit
together: for, Love is the band by which they are knit together, chap. 3. 14.
Doct. 5. The more of spiritual influence Believers do draw from Christ, they
will band the better among themselves; for, their being knit together by joints
and bands, as the members of the natural body by their respective ligaments,
does depend upon their receiving of nourishment from the head; from whom the
body having nourishment ministered, and knit together. 6. Growth and increase is
required in the members of Christ's body; and an increase, not in pride and
conceit of gifts, but in knowledge, humility, faith, patience, and other graces
(2 Pet. 1. 5.) which come from God. This is to increase with the increase of
God, that is which comes from God. 7. This Christian increase and divine
growth, is attained unto by keeping strict union with Christ, and communion
with his Members: for, their increasing with the increase of God, supponeth
nourishment ministered from the Head, and themselves knit together by joints and
bands.

Verse. 20. Wherefore if ye be dead with Christ from the rudiments of the world:
why, as though living in the world, are ye subject to ordinances? 21. (Touch
not, taste not, handle not:
He reasons now against the third sort of Impostors, mentioned v. 8. to wit,
ridiculous and superstitious rites and opinions in worship and doctrine. He
proponed those Impostors, v. 8. in that order, wherein they did break up first
in the world; but in the refutation he alters the method, meddling with that
first which had most of seeming reason for it. His first argument against this
head, is to this purpose, That seeing, as he has already proven, they were
freed from the Leviticall Ordinances, (called rudiments of the world: see v.
8.) which were instituted by God himself, by what pretext of reason could they
submit to superstitious rites, appointed by men? as if they were living in the
world, that is, subjected in their consciences to the dictates of men v. 20. Of
which ordinances he gives one instance in the matter of meats, and speaks in
the person of some one of those superstitious Rabbis, discharging the people
to touch, or rather for eschewing tautologie, and as the word does also
signify, to eat a little of such a meat; then, to taste it; lastly to handle
it, v. 21. Doct. 1. Through virtue of Christ's under-taking to die for
believers, and the Father's acceptance of his death for them, it follows,
that all those benefits which were purchased by his death, do as much belong
unto them upon their laying hold upon him by says, as if they themselves had
died; Yea, as to this effect they are reckoned to have died with him: thus they
were dead with Christ to those ceremonies, and so they had no more power over
them, than the Laws of men have over those who are dead: because Christ having
by his death fulfilled what was typisied by them, and so purchased freedom to
his people from that yoke, they had as much right to that purchased freedom,
as if themselves had died for it; if ye be therefore dead with Christ, etc. 2.
Our being freed from the tie of the Ceremonial Law and ordinances thereof,
though appointed by God, does much more liberate us from the yoke of
significant rites and religious ceremonies, which are only instituted by men:
he did not abrogate his own Ceremonies, that men might appoint theirs: and as
it is sinful for men to enjoin such; so it is no less sinful, and a very
betraying of that liberty which Christ has purchased, Gal. 5. 1. to give
obedience to any such injunctions: for, he reasons from the abolishing of the
ceremonial Law, to our not-subjecting of our selves to any ordinance of that
kind: if ye be therefore dead, why are ye subject to ordinances? 3. The authors
of superstition are very diligent to have their superstitious fooleries
punctually practiced, and their commands for that end exactly obeyed. Thus he
brings in the Masters of superstition delivering their injunctions, as it were
to every man in particular: touch not, in the singular number. 4. There is no
end of superstitious injunctions, when once given way to: they do both multiply
and grow also more strict; so here, first, they forbid them to eat; secondly,
to taste; thirdly, not so much as to bandle, 5. Satan uses most frequently to
lay snares and gins in those things whereof men have most frequent use,
especially in our meat and drink: he drives some to sin in those by excess,
Isa. 5. 11. Others by placing Religion in simple abstinence from them, under
pretense of a more than ordinary mortification; So did these Doctors who
commanded, eat not, taste not, handle not.

Verse. 22. Which all are to perish with the using) after the commandments and
doctrines of men.
He adds two other arguments against those superstitious rites, especially
the placing of Religion in abstinence from meats; First, they are appointed for
the use of man, and perish in the using, 1 Cor. 6. 13. Secondly, all such
ordinances are but traditions of men, Matthew. 15. 9. Doct. 1. We should use all
things for that end for which God has appointed them: Religion is not to be
placed in those things which God has only destinated for a natural or civil
use, as the wearing of such an habit, abstinence from such and such meats: for,
the Apostle reasons against the placing of Religion in meats, because they
are appointed only for a natural use; which all are to perish with the using:
2. This does not militate against the religious use of Bread and Wine in the
Sacrament: for, God has appointed those Elements to be so used: and the two
arguments in this verse are to be taken jointly, that no humane authority can
enjoin the use of, or abstinence from, such a sort of meat, as a part of
religious worship; which all are to perish with the using, after the doctrines
of men. 3. Though Church-Judicatories have power to determine time, place, and
other circumstances of worship, which are common to religious and civil
actions, and are left undetermined by the Word, as being almost insinite, and
often changeable upon several occasions, 1 Cor. 14. 40. Yet the Lord has
given no such power unto men, whether the Civil Magistrate, Church guides, or
any other, to enjoin any thing as service to God in it self, which he has not
appointed; nor yet to command any thing to be gone about as a religious
ceremony, or significant rite in his worship: all such ceremonies were
expressly prescribed by God under the Old Testament, so that it was not
lawful to add anything unto what was commanded them, Deuteronomy. 12. 32. and the
rule of worship must be no less complete under the New Testament, Heb. 3. 2.
and 5. 6. So, those rites were to be rejected for this same very cause, they
were the commandments and doctrines of men.

Verse. 23. Which things have indeed a show of wisdom in will worship and
humility, and neglecting of the body, not in any honor to the satisfying of
the flesh.
He mentions three fair pretenses, whereof use was made to plead for, and
commend those superstitious rites; First, they were will worship; a giving of
more to God than he required. Secondly, the practicing of them, was an evidence
of peoples humility, in their submissive obedience to the injunctions of
superiors. Thirdly, their voluntary and excessive abstinence from meat, sleep,
and their other laborious bodily exercises, did tend to mortification, and was
a part of mortification, in neglecting of the body, which the most part of men
strive so much to pamper: all which the Apostle, having spoken sufficiently to
this purpose already, does refute in one word, to wit, that they had only a
show or pretext, but no soliditie of reason or wisdom in them; and adds
another reason against the practice of those rites, because thereby they
withheld that honor or just care: (see 1. Tim. 5. 3.) from the body, which
ought to be had in the satisfying the necessities thereof. Doct. 1. There is no
error, the maintainers whereof have not somewhat to say in its defense, whereby
they labor to extol it as most heavenly and excellent; Thus the doctrine of
those superstitious rites pretended to wisdom, that is, heavenly and
excellent doctrine. 2. All that can be said for any error, being rightly
weighed, will be found but mere pretexts, fair shows, and no soliditie of
reason; they had but a show of wisdom. 3. As men do like well to serve God
with their own inventions, thinking they do thereby give unto God his whole
due, and somewhat more: So God will acknowledge nothing for service done to him,
but what himself has required; he approves willing worship, but not
will worship; for, it is here rejected, notwithstanding the fair show of
wisdom which is in it. 4. For men to give blind obedience unto the commands
of Superiors, though it pretend to humility and devout submission of mind; yet
it is not real humility, but a prostituting of our souls and consciences to
the wills of men; So this humility or submissive disposition, which was their
second pretense, has but a show of wisdom in it, and is not real. 5. Though
watchings, fastings, and other bodily exercises are profitable, and may be
lawfully used, if they be referred to the right end for bringing the body in
subjection, 1 Cor. 4. 27. lest through too much satietie it take loose reins to
sin; and that hereby we may be helped to call on God more ardently, Joel 1. 14.
providing there be due moderation in using of them, Josh. 7. 10. Yet the
excessive and immoderate use of those, disabling the body from being
serviceable to the spirit, and the placing of worship in them, being considered
in themselves, and without relation to the forementioned ends: The neglecting
of the body thus, though it has a show of reason for it, yet it has no more
but a show or pr^text, and is a real sin before God: which things have a show
of wisdom, neglecting the body. 5. As there is an excessive pampering of the
flesh, which is sinful, and forbidden, when provision is made for it to
fulfill the lusts thereof, Romans 13. 14. So there is a lawful and necessary
care of the flesh or body, whereby things necessary for food and raiment are
provided for and bestowed upon it, in so far, that strength and health be not
in-lacking for dischargeing the duties of our calling: and they who deny this
care and honor to it, though even upon a religious pretense, do sin against
God; so he condemns those superstitious rites in this, that many of them did
carry with them the neglect of this care; not in any honor to the satisfying
of the flesh.

CHAP. III.
THe Apostle (having asserted the truth of the Gospel, and refuted some
contrary errors) exhorts them next unto suitable practice. And in the first
part of this Chapter, he presses upon them general duties belonging to all
conditions of men.

And first, he exhorts unto all those duties, in the bulk, under the name of
seeking Heaven, and things heavenly, and of neglecting things on earth. First,
because of Christ's being there in great state, v. 1, 2. And secondly, because
they were dead to sin, and things under Heaven. And thirdly, though their
spiritual life was now hid, v. (...). yet it should kyth afterward, v. 4.
Next he presses those general duties in two particular branches; as first,
mortification, reckoning forth several sins to be mortified; first, more
carnal corruptions, v. 5. and arguments are used, v. 6, 7. Secondly, more
spiritual corruptions, v. 8, 9. -- by an argument taken from their
regeneration, v. -- 9, 10. Which he clears by removing those things which
have no influence upon regeneration, v. 11. Next he presses vivification, and
the exercise of several virtues; whereof he gives some examples,
intermingling diverse arguments, to v. 16. where he inciteth to the study of
Scripture, and gives a general rule for all our actions, v. 17.

In the second part, he presses some duties belonging to Christians, as they
are members of Families: First, the duties of wives, v. 18. Secondly, of
husbands, v. 19. Thirdly, of children, v. 20. Fourthly, of fathers, v. 21.
Fifthly, of servants, v. 22, 23, which are enforced by a promise, v. 24, and a
threatening, v. 25.

Verse. 1. If ye then be risen with Christ, seek those things which are above,
where Christ fitteth on the right hand of God. 2. Set your affection on things
above, not on things on the earth.
He exhorts from the ground (held forth chap. 2. v. 12.) of their being risen
with Christ, that they would earnestly seek, know, and from knowledge, delight
in things which are above, to wit, Heaven, happiness, and all spiritual
graces; and not in things earthly, such as riches, honors, pleasures, together
with those superstitious rites placed in things earthly and perishing, whereof
he spoke before; and that because Christ their Head, their Husband, is above,
at the right hand of God, completely glorified, and entrusted with full power
to dispense all things for his peoples good, Ephesians. 1. v. 20. 22. Doct. 1. Our
serious minding of the main and substantial duties of piety and
righteousness, would serve to divert exceedingly from unnecessary debates
about, and practizing of superstitious ^ites and ceremonies in divine worship:
for, the Apostle (having reasoned against those chap 2.) subjoyneth this
exhortation, to set their affections on things which are above, as a most
excellent diversion from them. 2. The doctrine of salvation and free grace, is
then rightly learned, when the fruits of an holy life do flow from the
knowledge of it; other ways, the grace of God is turned into wantonness, Jude
v. -- 4. So Paul (having given a short sum of saving doctrine) exciteth to
holiness of life, as the most suitable fruits of such doctrine: seek the things
which are above, etc. 3. As Heaven and glory: so the saving graces of God's
Spirit are things above; as coming from above, James 3. 17. and elevating the
heart of him who has them, above things earthly, to entertain communion with
God here, that he may live above with God for ever, Phil. 3. 20, 21. Thus they
are said to be above; seek the things which are above. 4. Heaven, and saving
graces which lead to it, are to be sought, and diligently sought: seek the
things which are above. The word signifies a diligent search, and is applied
to those who are vehemently desirous to have that which they seek, 1. Pet. 5.
-8. Mark 12. 12. 5. That Heaven and things heavenly may be thus sought
diligently, we must know somewhat of the worth which is in them, and from
knowledge put a price upon them: Set your affection on things above. The word
rendered affection here, in the Original comprehends the operations of the
understanding, will, and affections: So it is to know them, from knowledge to
affect them, and so to seek them, 6. Things earthly, and things heavenly, are
in two contrary balances; so that the more of the heart is given to the one,
the other gets the less: for, he opposes those two, Set your affection on
things above, not on things on earth. 7. Though we may use the world, and
things worldly, yea, and seek them moderatly, that so we may have the use of
them, 1 Timothy 5. 8. yet they are to be sought in subordination, and not in
opposition to things heavenly: They must not be sought as our last end and
furthest shot, Psalm. 49. 11. not by unlawful means, Ephesians. 4. 28. or, with
neglect of God's worship, Matthew. 6. 33. not so but to reverence and submit to
God, when he crosses and disappointeth us in them, Job 1. 21. for, in this
sense he commands. Set your affection on things above, not on things on earth.
8. Not only are real Believers risen with Christ; First, judicially, Christ's
resurrection (as all his other actions, wherein he sustained our person) being
imputed to us, so, as to obtain what was purchased by them: See chap. 2. v. 20.
doct. 1. And secondly, in their own persons, all Believers being really and
personally quickened and raised from the death of sin, to newness of life, by
virtue of Christ's resurrection, Romans 6. 4. as that, whereby he evidenced his
purchasing of holiness for them, by his death, which he does afterward bestow
upon them. But besides, all the Members of the visible Church are in some sense
risen with him, in so far as they are actually tied by their professing and
interest in him, 1 John 2. 6. and by the Covenant sealed in their Baptism, Romans
6. 2, 3. to make use of the virtue purchased by his resurrection, for raising
of them up from the death of sin, to the life of grace, for, he supponeth they
are risen with Christ: If ye be therefore risen with Christ. 9. From this it
follows, that all within the visible Church, whether regenerate, or
unregenerate, are to make use of this consideration of their being raised with
Christ, as a strong argument to make them seek after Heaven, and endeavor
holiness of life: the latter sort being engaged to make use of the power of
his resurrection for this end and having Heaven and holiness purchased for
them, if they will but by faith slay unto him: the former sort having an actual
right unto those things already, as being judicially risen with him, and the
begun life of holiness bestowed upon them, by virtue of his resurrection, and
more of that virtue, for completing of what remains, in readiness to be
communicated unto them, if they will but employ it by faith: for, from this
ground he inforceth holiness; If ye be therefore risen with Christ, seek those
things, etc. 10. Jesus Christ in his Humane Nature is now in Heaven, and not
upon earth; else the Apostle's argument would not hold, to seek things which
are above, because he is there. 11. The love which Christians do bear unto
Christ, ought to be such, that the very place where he is, ought to be lovely
for his sake: their affections being wholly set upon it, and upon those things
which are in it, and slow from it, or tend toward it: for, so he reasons,
Set your affection on things above, where Christ is. I 2. The great glory which
Christ our Head injoyeth in Heaven, together with the power and authority put
upon him for the Churches good, especially for bestowing of grace and glory,
Acts 5. 3, is a strong encouragement to make the Members of the Church, and
chiefly real Believers, set about the study of holiness: for, this glory and
power of his, is signified by his sitting at the right hand of God, Ephesians. 1. 20,
21, 22, 23. and from this he reasons, that they should seek those things
which are above, whereby he compriseth all those duties wherein holiness
consists, even from this, that Christ is sitting there at the right hand of God.

Verse. 3. For ye are dead, and your life is hid with Christ in God. 4. When
Christ who is our life shall appear, then shall ye also appear with him in
glory.
He gives further reasons to enforce the exhortation; First, they were
spiritually dead to sin, and by consequence to those earthly things, so, as not
to place their happiness in them, or to be sinfully eager in seeking after
them. 2. Though their spiritual life, whereof they were partakers by their
rising with Christ, was for the time hid under crosses and infirmities; yet it
was surely kept for them by God in Christ, v. 3. and should hereafter
gloriously appear in Christ's second coming, v. 4. Doct. 1. Real Believers are
spiritually dead, not in sin, Ephesians. 2. 1. but to sin, Romans 6. 11. the dominion
and reign of sin being shaken off, Romans 6. 14. and its strength much weakened
by the power of grace, Gal. 5. 17. though not totally subdued, Romans 7. 18. and
Christ having undertaken to subdue it wholly in them, Ephesians. 5. 27. And all the
members of the Church (though not as yet real Believers) have engaged
themselves to employ the strength of Jesus Christ for the subduing of sin;
whence in some sense, to wit, judicially by obligation, they may also be said
to be dead: for, the Apostle supponeth of all of them, every one in his own
way, that they were thus dead: for ye are dead, says he. 2. The consideration
of this, that we are thus dead to sin, is a strong argument for the
not-inslaving of our affections to things earthly: for, that would argue sin to
be yet reigning, and were an adding of fuel to sin, for keeping of it alive,
after we have under-taken to be its death: It Is used as an argument here to
that purpose: for ye are dead. 3. The spiritual life of grace here, and of
glory hereafter, is a life desirable, and only worthy of the name of life, our
natural life being but short, uncertain, and common to us with devils,
reprobates, yea and with beasts; and so unworthy to be called life, being
compared with this, 1 Timothy 5. 6. Our life is hid, says he, speaking of this
spiritual life, as if there had been no other life but it. 4. This spiritual
life, though really enjoyed by Believers, as having grace in possession, 2 Pet.
1. 4. and a right to future glory, Joh. 3. 16. yet it is hid: the cross which
accompanies godliness Act. 14. -22. together with the many out-breakings and
infirmities of the godly, Gal. 6. 1. and the nature of this life, which
consists in things spiritual, as adoption, justification etc. Gal. 2. 20.
those things make this life not at all discernable by the wicked, 1 Cor. 2. 14.
yea, and hardly by the regenerate man himself, who is carried much to judge of
things according to sense, Ps. 73. 13, 14. So our life is hid. 5. Though this
life be hid, yet it is surely kept, being hid with Christ in God, as out of the
knowledge, so out of the hazard of the world: God the fountain of all grace and
glory, having given all the fullness thereof unto Christ the Mediator, Joh. 3.
35. from which fullness he is to bestow so much as is fitting for our condition
here, Act. 5. 31. reserving the rest to be forthcoming for us in glory
hereafter. 1 John 3. 2. It is hid with Christ in God. 6. So near is that union
which is betwixt Christ and Believers, that he is their life: His life and
theirs are in a kind one, Gal. 2. 20. he having purchased this life for us, 1 John 4. 9. and possessing the fullness of it in himself, Joh. 14. 6. that he
may communicate it unto them, Joh. 5. 40. and having communicated the first
principles and seeds of it already, Romans 6. 11. besides that, he is the object
of this life, their happiness and life consisting in their knowing and
enjoying of him, Joh. 17. 3. for, when Christ who is our life, says he. 7. As
Christ now in his bodily presence is removed from us: so he is again to appear,
when he shall come the second time unexpectedly, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 2. and with great
glory, accompanied with Angels, and flames of fire, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 8. to judge the
quick and the dead, 2 Timothy 4. 1. when Christ shall appear. 8. There is a state
of glory, both in soul (1 Cor. 13. 12.) and body (Phil. 3. 21.) waiting for the
people of God: then shall ye also appear with him in glory. 9. This glory of
theirs is to be suspended until Christ's second coming: There will be always
somewhat in-lacking till then; but then their glory shall be complete, which
should make us long for it, Phil. 3. -20. Then shall ye also appear with him in
glory. 10. The faith of approaching glory at Christ's second coming, is a strong
argument to make us wean our affections from things earthly, and endeavor
earnestly the study of a holy life: an Heir of a Kingdom will not be much taken
with petty pleasures, his mind is so carried up to higher things: for, Paul
presses them to set their affections on things which are above, because, says
he, ye shall also appear with him in glory.

Verse. 5. Mortisie therefore your members which are upon the earth:
fornication, uncleanness, inordinate affection, evil concupiscence, and
covetousness, which is idolatry:
He proponeth the former exhortation more particularly, by branching out the
Christian man's task in two; First, mortification of sin; and presses them to
mortify or put to death their members, not of their natural body, for, that
were a sin against the sixth Command, but of the mass of corruption, or body of
death, which was in them, to wit, their corrupt lusts and affections, which are
said to be upon the earth, because they draw the soul down toward earth:
whereof he mentions some, which are carnal and fleshly, as tending to
fulfill our unlawful pleasures, fornication, uncleanness, etc. Doct. 1. The
work of mortification, whereby a sinner sensible of the evil of sin, (Act. 2.
37, 38.) does honestly resolve, (Job 34. v. -31.) and accordingly endeavor, (2
Cor. 7. 11.) to subdue sin thoroughly, root and branch, or to put it to death;
and this not only one sin, but all known sins, Hos. 14. 2. eschewing carefully
the occasions of sin, Job 31. 1. and using all means which may tend to the
subduing of it; such as prayer, (2 Cor. 12. 8.) hearing of the Word, (1 Pet. 2.
1, 2.) yea, and in some cases, fasting, Mark 9. 29. But chiefly, acting faith
in Christ for strength, Phil. 4. 13. This is a work so necessary, that the life
of glory to be manifested at Christ's second coming, cannot be attained
without it: for, from what he said, v. 4. of their appearing with Christ in
glory, he infers, Mortify therefore, etc. 2. This work of mortification is
not perfected at an instant: So much of this body of death remains still in
life, that the best of Christians must make it their daily task, to mortify
their members, though they be already mortified in part for, v. 2. they were
dead, and yet he commands here, Mortify your members. 3. Scripture-commands
for mortifying of sin, do not evince a power in men unrenewed, to obey what is
commanded; if we consider that such commands are given, even to those who are
already renewed, and are hereby enjoined to carry on the begun work of
Mortification toward some perfection, from a principle of habitual grace
already infused in them: They are indeed directed also to the unrenewed, who
are hereby taught what they ought, but not what they are able to do, Jer. 13.
23. and are also enabled to do what they ought; the Lord making use of those
exhortations, as means for conveying of strength to do that which he commands
to be done; So, speaking unto them who were dead, v. 2. he prescribes,
Mortify your members. 4. There is a body of sin, and corrupt nature in us, to
which our particular vices, sinful lusts, motions and affections are as
members; Our corrupt nature and will making use of them, and working by them,
as the natural body does employ its members: besides that, sin does spread it
self through all the members of our body, making each of them servants unto
iniquity, Romans 6. 19. Hence he says, Mortify your members, meaning those
sinful lusts and affections. 5. Not only are the outward acts of fornication,
or filthiness, betwixt parties, both free from the yoke of marriage, to be
eschewed; and of uncleanness, whereby are usually signified all other sorts of
filthy lusts, Romans 1. 24. but also that impotencie of mind, whereby
temptations to lust do easily take impression, and are not much resisted, set
forth here by inordinate affection, or, (as it may be turned) softness of
mind; which yields easily to the temptation: fornication, uncleanness,
inordinate affection. 6. Yea, the first inordinate motions of lust in the
heart, which are not followed forth after deliberation and advice, and are set
down under the name of evil concupiscence; even those are to be mortified:
evil concupiscence. 7. We do then set against sin to some purpose, when we
pursue it to the den, and labor to pluck it up by the very roots, withdrawing
from those things which add fuel to it; for he will have them going from the
outward acts of filthiness to the inward root: evil concupiscence; and to set
against covetousness also, whereby lust is sed and nourished; evil
concupiscence and covetousness. 8. Covetousness, which consists in an
immoderate desire to acquire or keep worldly riches, is a sin which all
Christians are to mortify; not only because it provideth oil to make all
other sins burn; but it has a kind of idolatry in it, as drawing our love,
trust, fear, and joy, from God and his service, to be taken up with, and laid
out upon wealth, and riches, more than any other sins: and covetousness which
is idolatry.

Verse. 6. For which things sake, the wrath of God comes on the children of
disobedience.
He presses the exhortation by arguments. The first is taken from the wrath of
God, manifested in its sad effects upon those who have continued contumacious
and impenitent under those sins. Doct. 1. Unbelief of divine promises and
threatenings, and obstinat impenitency under sin, go together; the latter
following upon the former: for, disobedience signifies both misbelief, and
contumacy, or disobedience. 2. It is not sin in it self so much, as obduration
in it, which draws down wrath, chiefly lasting wrath upon the sinner; For
those things wrath comes upon the children of disobedience, or children of
contumacy. 3. Whatever judgments be already inflicted upon wicked men, they
have ground to look for more; for, wrath comes in the mean time, and is still
coming upon the children of disobedience. 4. Though the Lord be sometimes wroth
with the truly godly because of sin; yet he is not wroth for ever, Isa. 57. 16.
he debateth with them but in measure, Isa. 27. 7, 8. The wrath which is due
unto, and is accordingly poured forth upon contumacious sinners, is of another
kind; as being everlasting, without any mixture of fatherly mercy, and flowing
from sin-pursuing justice, Matthew. 25. 4. for which cause he holds forth that
wrath, which comes on the children of disobedience, as being most terrifying.
5. As the consideration of the terror of divine wrath is a strong awband to
restrain from sin; So it is most moving, when considered in the sad and woeful
experience of those who have found the doleful effects of it: for, he
mentions the effects of this wrath upon others to fear them, 6. Sin keeps
so much of its old interest in the best; and even Believers sometimes are so
much overtaken with spiritual deadness, (Isa. 64. 7.) that there is need to
present the terror of divine wrath unto them, to fear them from sin, and excite
them to duty: for, the Apostle proponeth the terror of divine wrath, even to
those believing Colossians.

Verse. 7. In the which ye also walked sometime, when ye lived in them.
Here is a second argument taken from their bypast long continance in these
sins, when they lived in them, or, were in their natural state. Doct. 1. It is
not some more, or fewer particular acts of a man's life, but his ordinary strain
and way, according to which, sentence is to pass upon his state, whether it be
good or bad: It was their walking in sin, and making a daily trade of it, which
argued them to be in nature, or living in sin. 2. Before a man's effectual
calling, there is no difference betwixt him and the most godless man that is,
so as to make God his debtor either by promise, or because of any worth which
is in him to give him grace, Romans 11. 35. for, as long as those Colossians were
unconverted, they were as much inslaved to sin, as the most obstinat of natural
men are: In which ye also walked. 3. A man's walking in sin, or his ordinary
strain of breaking forth in the outward acts of it, depends upon his living
in sin, or upon the inward power and dominion which sin exerceth in him, even
as natural life is the cause of outward motion; So that the best way to curb
the outward acts, is, to strike at the life and power of sin within; In which
ye walked when ye lived in them. 4. Our calling to mind of bypast sins, and
our long continuance in them, should not be without an holy indignation at
them, and at our selves for them, so as to scar us from them in time coming:
for, the Apostle mentions their bypast continuance in those sins, as one
argument to scar them from them.

Verse. 8. But now you also put off all these, Anger, wrath, malice, blasphemy,
filthy communication out of your mouth. 9. Lie not one to another, --
He returns to the former exhortation of mortifying sin, and exemplisieth it
in another sort of corruptions, to wit, those which are more spiritual, whereof
he mentions six; The first three are sins of the heart, the rest are sins of
the mouth. Doct. 1. So deceitful are our hearts in adhering to sin, even when
they seem to quit it, Psalm. 78. 36, 37. that we should not be easily satisfied
with our mortifying, or subduing of it: for, Paul (having commanded them to
mortify and kill sin, ver. 5.) he bids them here put it off, which speaks
somewhat further, to wit, a removing of it quite out of sight, as we do dead
bodies, when we bury them: for so the word sometimes signifies. 2. Though all
sins be not alike thoroughly mortified, there being some more deeply rooted than
others, Psalm. 18. v. -- 23. yet the grace of mortification strikes at all
known sin, and spares none; for, it opposes sin, as it is sin. Genesis 39. v. --
9. and so all sin: So the Apostle commands, But now also put you off all
those. And the particulars after mentioned are not for restriction, but for
instance, or, example. 3. In the work of mortification we are not to rest upon
the subduing of these sins which are gross and fleshly, but are to proceed
against more spiritual sins also, which have as much of guilt in them before
God, (Gal. 5. 20.) though not so much of infamy before men; So the Apostle
exhorts to put off anger, wrath, etc. 4. Anger, which (as distinguished from
wrath and malice) is an unjust desire of revenge, is a sin unbeseeming
Christians, and so to be put off; chiefly when wrath is joined with it, which
(as it is distinguished from anger) points at the gorging and swelling of the
blood about the heart, which fireth the eye and tongue, even that passionate
commotion which uses to accompany anger, transforming a man to a very beast,
thrusting him forward to act some mischief, Luke 4. 28, 29. and banishing the
Spirit of God, Ephesians. 4. 30, 31. Put off anger, wrath, etc. 5. But then is anger
and wrath most dangerous and unbeseeming Christians, when malice is joined,
which (as it is distinguished from anger and wrath) is rooted anger, and
continuing wrath, making a man implacable, and obstructing the current of
pardoning grace, Mark 11. 26. and making all he does in Gods service to be lost
labor, Matthew. 5. 23, 24. Put off malice. 6. Sins of the tongue and outward
man, are to be mortified, as well as sins of the heart; they being in some
respect more dangerous, Matthew. 18. 7. because more scandalous: Put off
blasphemy, filthy communication, etc. 7. The right order to be kept in
mortification, is, to begin with the heart, and from thence to proceed to the
tongue and outward man: for, he commands them to put off heart evils in the
first place, anger, wrath, and malice; and the evils of the tongue, as
blasphemy, etc. in the next. 8. Disgraceful and contumelious speaking against
our neighbors, as it is the result of anger, wrath and malice: so it is a sin
to be mortified, as very unbeseeming Christians: whether it be by open railing,
secret backbiting, Pro. 26. 22. by derision, or jearing at their sins and
infirmities, to shame them, Ephesians. 5. 4. or by imprecation, cursing of, and
wishing evil unto them, Romans 12. 14. for, seeing the rest of the evils mentioned
here relate to our neighbor, as their immediate object; we conceive the word
blasphemy relates to him also, and is to be taken for disgrace in words
uttered against men, as Romans 3. 8-: Blasphemy. 9. Filthy speaking, or speaking
of those things which belong to the lust of uncleanness, is unbeseeming
Christians, and so to be mortified, as an evidence of a rotten heart, Mat. 12.
34. and because it makes the heart more filthy, infecting also the hearers, 1
Cor. 15. 33. the heart of man being as powder to the fire, easily taken with
such tentations; And filthy communication out of your mouth. 10. The sin of
lying, whereby one speaks that which he knows to be false, is a sin also to
be mortified: and this indefinitly, whether we mean the hurtful lie, tending to
our neighbors prejudice; or the officious lie, tending to our profit; or yet
the sporting lie, tending to recreation or delight: Scripture condemns all
without restriction, Revel. 21. 8. and 22. ^5. and all of them violate that
natural order which God has appointed betwixt the mind and the tongue: lie not
one to another.

Verse. 9. -- seeing that ye have put off the old man with his deeds: 10. And
have put on the new man, which is renewed in knowledge, after the image of him
that created him.
Here is a further argument, enforcing the exhortation, taken from the work of
regeneration, to which, all of them were engaged by their Profession and
Covenant sealed in Baptism, and which was really begun in those who were true
believers among them, whereof he assigns two parts: First, the putting off
the old man with his deeds, that is, our natural corruption, conveyed unto us
by carnal generation, and actual sins flowing from thence, v. -- 9. Secondly,
putting on the new man, that is, new and spiritual qualities, whereby our
corrupt nature is renewed, the saving and operative knowledge of God in Christ,
being imparted to it, which work, God by his creating power does carry on, that
thereby he may repair his defaced Image in man. Doct. 1. From this, that our
original corruption is called an old man, and is said to be put off, by a
Metaphore taken from clothes, we learn several things of the nature and power
of it; first, original corruption spreads it self far, even through the
whole man, soul (Genesis 6. 5.) body, Romans 6. 19. and all; therefore is it called
a man. Secondly, Not only is it born with us, but has its rise from Adams
fall, Romans 5. 12. It then took life, and is conveyed since from father to son,
unto all descending from Adam, Ps. 51. 5. by ordinary generation, Luke 1. 35.
hence it is called an old man; as also because in the godly it is drawing
toward expiration and upon the declining hand, Romans 7. 20. Thirdly, it
adhereth very closely to us, as a man's garments, and more closely than any
garment, yea, nor a man's skin: for, humane art can draw off the one, but only
the power of God can free us from the other, Romans 7. 24. Fourthly, it is not of
the substance or being either of soul or body, it is only an adventitious
quality, Eccles. 7. 29. for it is compared to garments. And fifthly, as old as
this corruption is; yet it is very active and restless; not as other things,
which as they grow in age, so fall more quiet; but this old man has his deeds.
And sixthly, as near unto us, as far spread through us, as old and active as
this corruption is, the Child of God gets it put off, though not fully, yet
in its guilt, Romans 8. 1. and in its esteem and reign, Romans 6. 14. in his
resolution, Romans 7. 19. and in some measure in his practice, and execution, 1
Cor. 6. 11. This is supponed here, seeing ye have put off the old man. Doct. 2.
According as the old man of our inbred corruption is put off, and weakened
within; So, actual sins flowing therefrom, are weakened without. The old hand
and tongue are inconsistent with a renewed heart; ye have put off the old man
with his deeds. 3. From this, that gracious and spiritual qualities are called
the new-man, and said to be put on as new garments, we learn several things
relating to the nature of grace: First, it spreads it self as far through the
whole man, as sin does, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 23. So it is called a man. Secondly, it is
not born with us, Ephesians. 2. 3. neither comes it from the first, but second Adam,
Christ Jesus, Ephesians. 2. 8. and is upon the growing hand, toward its full
strength in the godly, 2 Cor. 4. 16. therefore is it called new. Thirdly, it
adhereth closely to us, as sin did, 1 John 3. 9. and yet is not natural to us,
but an addition to our nature, 1 Cor. 4. 7. we are naked without it, and it is
a beautiful ornament to the soul, as new garments are to the body, Rev. 3. 17,
18. from which the Metaphore is taken; and have put on. Doct. 4. We once had
this new man, those gracious qualities, at our first creation: for, God made
man perfect, Eccles. 7. 29. which is renewed. It signifies, to restore a thing
deformed and antiquated, to its ancient form and beauty. 5. Those gracious
qualities were all lost unto us, to wit, in Adam: the Lord dealing with him in
that first Covenant, as with a public person, representing all who were to
come of him, Romans 5. 12. This is supponed, while he says, which is renewed. 6.
It is Christ's aim in giving grace, to recover that in his own which was lost
in Adam: which is renewed, or restored to its ancient form and beauty; and
after the image of him, etc. that is, the Image of God which was lost in Adam,
Genesis 5. 3. and did consist in perfect conformity to God's Law, in both the
Tables thereof, and accordingly is set forth by righteousness and holiness,
Ephesians. 4. 24. 7. The recovery of that which was lost in Adam, as it is begun in
the first instant of regeneration; So, it is not completed at first, but is a
continued action, even unto death; which is renewed: It imports a continued
action, the word being in the present time. 8. The sum and compend of this new
man, is, the knowledge of God in Christ, not theoretick and notionall only,
but practical and operative, which works such a change both in the outward
and inward man, that the grace of God in Christ, is really acknowledged by us
in our mind, affection and work, Ephesians. 4. 21, 22. renewed in knowledge or
acknowledgment; for, so the word signifies, and is rendered, 1 Cor. 16. 18. 9.
So dead are we by nature to holiness and grace, that no less than creating
power is required to work it in us; the image of him who created him. 10. There
is not any argument more moving and effectually exciting unto holiness of life
with a sincere Christian, than that which is taken from his engagement to it by
profession, and the first beginning thereof wrought in him already by the
Spirit of God: for, this is the scope, that they would mortify and put off
such and such sins; seeing they had put off the old man, and put on the new.

Verse. 11. Where there is neither Greek nor Jew, circumcision nor
uncircumcision, Barbarian, Scythian, bond nor free: but Christ is all, and in
all.
He amplifieth, clears and strengthens the former reason taken from
renovation, by removing false causes of helping or hurting us before God in
that matter; such as first difference of Nations. Secondly, the observation of
Mosaicall Ceremonies, the practice whereof, as of a thing indifferent, was
allowed for a time unto the Jews, Romans 1. 5. until they should be honorably
buried by the more clear and universal propagation of the Gospel. Thirdly,
polished civility and humane learning, which flourished among the Greeks, to
whom all other Nations were Barbarians, chiefly the Scythians, as being more
rude and unpolished than any other Nation. Fourthly, the different conditions
of life, as of Master and Servant; under which are comprehended all the
different states of men in things of this life: of all which he affirms that
(however some of those differences had their own weight under the Old
Testament, yet) now every man, in every state, was alike unto God in the point
of renovation and salvation through Christ: the having of those things did help
no man, and the want of them did hurt no man, Christ being all, which in point
of Religion can commend us to God. Doct. 1. It is usual for men to dream that
they will be the better liked of by God, because of outward relations,
privileges and accomplishments, which they enjoy beyond others: as that they
are of such a Nation and stock of people, Matthew. 3. 9. that they enjoy such
privileges, Jer. 7. 4. that they are tight and smooth in their outward
carriage, Luke 18. 11. that they are great, wise and rich, Joh. 7. 48. for, it
is to obviate this apprehension, that those words are added, showing that the
having of those things does not help: Where there is neither Greek nor Jew. 2.
It is usual also for men to conclude, that God will take the less notice of
them for the want of those things, as that they are come of an evil kind,
Matthew. 8. 8. unpolished and rude in their naturals, Joh. 7. 49. poor and base,
Mark 5. 28. for, it is to obviate this apprehension also, that he shows, the
want of those does not hurt: Where there is neither Greek nor Jew. 3. Though
under the Old Testament God did dispense grace, and the means of grace, with
respect had to different Nations; yea, to the several sexes, and the outward
conditions of men; the Jews being then his only people. (Psalm, 147. 19. 20.)
and among them the Males (Genesis 17. 10.) and freemen, (Levit. 22. 10.) being
admitted to enjoy some privileges, which the Females and bondmen enjoyed not:
And though the Lord does yet under the New Testament, allow and command, that
civil respects be put upon men, according to their different degrees, (Romans
13. 7.) and has not abolished all Church-privileges either, which are to have
their own weight and use with Christians, Acts 2. 39. yet he does not regard
any of those in the matter of regeneration; so, as either to give grace the
more readily, or to dispense with the want of grace, or, with intermitting the
exercise of grace, because of having those things; or, to withold grace the
more, or, to think the less of it where it is, because of the want of those
things; Where there is neither Greek nor Jew. 4. Jesus Christ is all, which God
regards in the matter of regeneration: what is inlacking through want of
privileges or outward eminency, is made up in him; and what natural men
expect from those, is to be found in him, and much more: for, he is all, to
wit, which is required in this matter: whatever a man be otherwise, he is
well, and commended sufficiently to God if he have him; and he is naught if he
want him, even him, who is made of God, wisdom, righteousness,
sanctification and redemption, 1 Cor. 1. 30. and this not only, because he
has merited all, but by his Spirit he applies all to, and works all in, us:
but Christ is all. 5. Before Christ be thus all unto the soul, he must first be
in us; not personally, as the Godhead is in the Humane Nature, chap. 2. 9. but
spiritually, he being united to us, and we to him by faith, Ephesians. 3. 17. So, he
is all in all. 6. Christ in uniting himself to sinners, has no exception of
persons, because of outward respects; he will neither respect, nor reject the
poor for their poverty, nor the great for their dignity: he is all in all.

Verse. 12. Put on therefore (as the elect of God holy and beloved) bowels of
mercies, kindness, humbleness of mind, meekness, long-suffering:
Thus far of mortification, from v. 5. The second branch of a Christian man's
task, is, the putting on, and exercising of several virtues, whereof he
numbereth five in this verse: the first three, respect our neighbor in misery;
the last two, respect our neighbor also, but as having injured us; and he
presses them from their election, sanctification, and state of favor with
God. Doct. 1. It is not sufficient to cease from doing evil, but we must also
learn to do well: and the same arguments which enforce the one, do also enforce
the other; for (having pressed upon them to mortify sin in the verses
preceding) he exhorts them to do good in this verse; and that by the same
argument, as appears from the illative particle therefore: put on therefore. 2.
There is a necessary connection betwixt the new man, or, habits of grace in the
heart, and the exercise of Christian virtues in those duties which we owe to
our neighbor: for, from what he has said verse 10. of their having put on the
new man, he presses upon them the exercise of those virtues; put on therefore.
3. The knowledge of our election in its own nature, is so far from making us
loose the reins to profanity, that it lays on a strict obligation to lead an
holy life; So he reasons from their election to the exercise of those
virtues: for, those arguments, as it seems, speak only to the truly gracious
among them: put on therefore, as the elect of God. 4. Then do we rightly pass
sentence upon our selves as elected, when our holiness does kyth: for, he
joyneth these two, the elect of God, holy; the latter as the evidence of the
former. 5. Our having holiness, and our knowing so much, is a strong argument
to excite unto more holiness; So he reasons from their being holy, put on
therefore as the elect of God, holy. 6. The Lord's love of complacencie toward
us, whereby he delights in those who are truly gracious, approving of his
own graces in them, Joh. 14. 21. should constrain us to love him again, and
kyth our love in the exercise of those graces which he calls for in relation
to our neighbor: for, he calls them beloved, to wit, with the Lords love of
complacencie, seeing it is distinguished from his eternal love of election;
and reasons from their being so beloved: Put on as beloved. 7. We ought to
have a most inward sense of, and sympathy with the misery of others; put on
bowels of mercy: the word expresses such an intense motion of the heart and
soul, that the very fleshly bowels are commoved by it. 8. Our sympathy with
others under misery, ought not to be inward only, but outward also, by
helping them in their misery according to our power, which is here expressed by
kindness, which they were to put on. 9. The grace of humility, whereby a man
from the sense of his own infirmities, has a moderate esteem of himself,
(Phil. 2. 3.) and desires that others should have such an esteem of him also,
(1 Cor. 3. 5.) is most necessary, ^as making way for more grace, 1 Pet. 5. 5.
humbleness of mind. 10. The grace of meekness, which makes a man tractable,
so that he is not easily provoked with the fooleries, infirmities, and lesser
wrongs done unto him by others: as also long-suffering, which moderateth anger,
even under greater injuries; both of those are necessary graces: for, hereby we
are made to bear with the infirmities of others, and so to cure them, Gal. 6.
1. we are kept from avenging our selves, Romans 12. 18, 19. and in our patience
made to possess our souls, Luke 21. 19. put on meekness, long-suffering.

Verse. 13. Forbearing one another, and forgiving one another; if any man have a
quarrel against any; even as Christ forgave you, so also do ye.
He recommendeth the practice of meekness and long-suffering, which consists
in bearing with and pardoning even of real injuries done by others, and
persuades them unto it, from Christ's example in pardoning us. Doct. 1.
Christians are not so perfect, but they will be in some things unpleasant: yea,
and sometimes injurious to others. This is supponed while they are commanded to
forbear one another. 2. It is the duty of Christians, mutually to tolerate and
forbear one another, even though they be injurious: for, hereby a man
overcomes himself and his own corrupt nature, which thirsts after revenge,
Prove. 16. 32. hereby he overcomes and shameth the party who did him wrong, 1 Samuel 24. 17. and keeps God's way in overcoming of him, Romans 12. 17. 21.
forbearing one another. 3. It is not only required of Christians to forbear
avenging of themselves, but also to forgive and pardon those who have done them
wrong; which, besides ceasing from private revenge, does import the banishing
of malice and desire of revenge out of the heart, yea, and loving those who do
us hurt, Luke 6. 27. forgiving one another. Only the Magistrate is not hereby
bound up from executing his office against public offenders; nor yet private
men are discharged from having recourse to the Magistrate, for attaining
restoration to their right, and reparation of their wrongs; providing they be
not acted with private spleen, and a spirit of rigor, (Phi. 4. 5.) but with
zeal to justice, and pity to their party; lest he, and others also be hardened
in mischief: for, magistracy is God's ordinance, Romans 13. 4. and so may be
employed by Christians. 4. Duties of forbearance, and forgiving wrongs, ought
to be mutual; there being no man who has not somewhat which makes him the
object of those duties, James 3. 2. So, forbearing one another, is required. 5.
The forementioned duties are also to be gone about by all, toward all,
without exception of persons or quarrels: the rich are to perform them toward
the poor, as well as the poor toward the rich: for, he speaks indefinitely,
both as to persons and injuries; If any man have a quarrel against any. 6. The
more a man attains to know, that Christ has pardon^d himself, he will be the
more inclinable to show forgiveness unto others: hence he speaks confidently
to such, even as Christ forgave you, so also do ye. 7. The example of Christ is
a most convincing pattern for exciting us to pardon and forgive one another, if
we consider either the greatness of those wrongs which he pardons, (Isai. 1.
18.) or our baseness who do injure him, (Isai. 40. -22-) or, his omnipotency
to right himself of the wrongs done unto him, Matthew. 10. 28. Hence the Apostle
holds forth this pattern: even as Christ forgave you, so also do ye.

Verse. 14. And above all things put on charity, which is the bond of
perfectness.
The Apostle, following the Metaphor taken from garments, exhorts them to put
on the grace of Charity, as the upper garment above the rest, and so more
precious than the rest, commending it from this, that it is a tie or bond,
which knitteth all the Members of the Church together, and makes all their
several gifts and graces cohere, and so be useful for the public good;
whereby the Church is made a perfect Body, able to discharge those actions
which are competent to it. Doct. 1. The grace of Charity, whereby from the
fountain of love to God, we do love our neighbor, (Matthew. 22. 37, 38.) is a
most necessary grace: for, whatever we do without it, is not the exercise of
any saving grace, but at the best only of a moral virtue 1 Cor. 13. 2, 3. and
the acts of all other virtues relating to our neighbor, are commended by it,
and so are ascribed to it, 1 Cor. 13. 4. etc. Hence the Apostle commends to
put on charity, as the upper garment above all those. 2. As the Church, while
rent a sunder, is a disjoynted and lame body, unfit for discharging those
actions which are competent to it (the rent and scattered members not working
together for the Churches good; but rather employing their parts, and abusing
their esteem for graces to their own mutual prejudice) So, such is the nature
and power of this grace of Charity, that it knitteth together all these
scattered Members, and makes their graces and gifts subservient to the good one
of another, and chiefly to the good of the whole; so that the Church is hereby
made a complete entire body, which was lame without it. In this sense Charity
is called the bond of perfection.

Verse. 15. And let the peace of God rule in your hearts, to the which also ye
are called in one body: and be ye thankful.
He exhorts, first, unto a peaceable frame of spirit toward others, such as
God approves of; so that when any strife should arise among them, it might be
overruled, and as it were, judicially composed by this peaceable temper: and
this, because they were called by God to entertain peace, and were all Members
of one Body. And secondly, he exhorts unto mutual thankfulness for favors
received; for, as all the former duties relate to men as their immediate
object; so, it would seem, this of thankfulness must relate to man also. Doct.
1. The virtue of peace, importing a sweet quieting of a man's own turbulent
affections, such as pride, envy, malice, etc. Isai. 11. 13. and a peaceable
inclination toward the procuring and preserving of concord with others (Heb.
12. 14.) is most necessary for Christians: and let the peace of God rule. 2. It
is not every peaceable frame of spirit which is to be sought after, but that
whereof God is the Author and approver; which for attaining unto, or preserving
of concord, will dispense with the loss, not of truth and holiness, (Heb. 12.
14.) but only of what is our own, especially with the restraining and curbing
of our sinful and turbulent humors, 2 Cor. 12. 20. So it is the peace of God,
to wit, whereof he is Author and approver, which should rule. 4. Our esteem of
peace ought to be such, that when any contention does arise, our love to peace
may presently comp^sce it, if it be possible, or at least, order all our
actions, which we are put to for our own necessary defense until it be
composed, (Genesis 13. 8, 9.) let the peace of God rule in your hearts: It is a
Metaphor taken from Judges in plays or strifes, unto whose decree all were
bound to stand. 5. Christians are called in a singular manner, to put on this
peaceable temper; for, Christ does frequently enjoin it, Joh. 13. 34. nothing
marreth their work more, than the want of it, whether the thriving of grace in
their own heart, or the success of the Gospel toward others, 1 Cor. 3. 3.
they are called to be members of an excellent society, and so ought to be
peaceable in it, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 13. To which also ye are called. 6. The invisible
Church of real Believers is one mystical body, knit by faith to Christ their
head, Ephesians. 3. 17. and by the bond of love among themselves, Joh. 13. 35. and
the visible Church is one politic body (1 Cor. 12. 27.) conjoined with Christ
the head, and amongst themselves by the external profession of the same Truths,
which union is sealed by their partaking of the same Sacraments, 1 Cor. 10. 17.
In one body. 7. The consideration of this, that Christians are one body, is a
strong argument to excite unto peace; In one body. 8. Gratitude and
thankfulness for favors received from others, so as in our affections to
prize the receipt, to acknowledge it unto the bestower, and to recompense it
according to our power, and as the necessity of the benefactor, or common
decency does require; this is a virtue necessary for Christians, as for other
causes, so that peace may be kept; peace being broken, as frequently for
injuries received; so sometimes for favors not recompensed, 1 Samuel 25. 7, 13.
Therefore, unto the exhortation to peace, he subjoyneth, and be ye thankeful.

Verse. 16. Let the word of Christ dwell in you richly in all wisdom, teaching
and admonishing one another in psalm^ and hymns, and spiritual songs, singing
with grace in your hearts to the Lord.
The Apostle having spoken of many virtues, and it being almost impossible to
speak of all, he exciteth them to the diligent study of Scripture, as the rule
of all virtues; showing also what use they should make of Scripture. First, for
themselves, that they might be made completely wise by it. Secondly, for
others, that they might teach and admonish them by it. Thirdly, in relation to
God, they might take matter for spiritual praise unto him from it. Doct. 1.
Ministers should excite people to the diligent study of Scripture: and people
ought to be diligent in the study of it, so as they may become familiar with
it, and it may sink down through the ear and brain to the heart, and reside in
it, being fixed there by frequent reading, hearing, meditating upon, Psalm. 1.
2. and conferring about it, Ps. 119. 46. whereby also they may attain to a
copious measure of the knowledge of it: for, says he, Let the word of Christ,
that is, chiefly the Gospel, Heb. 2. 3. not excluding other Scriptures: (for
the Prophets were inspired by the Spirit of Christ, 1 Pet. 3. 19 and did also
write of Christ, Joh 5. 39. So that whole Scripture is the word of Christ:) and
let it dwell in you: it is a metaphor which speaks inward receiving of it, and
familiar conversing with it; and let it dwell richly, or, copiously, in you. 2.
There is that in Scripture, which is sufficient to make a man completely wise
unto salvation, as containing all things necessary to be believed, or
practiced, 2 Timothy 3. 15. for, this is the first fruit to be reaped by the study
of Scripture, it affords all wisdom; In all wisdom. 3. It is not only the
duty of Ministers, but also of private Christians, keeping themselves within
their station, and not usurping upon the Ministerial Calling, (Romans 10. 15.)
privately to teach and instruct, as also to admonish, and reprove one another:
and the knowledge and wisdom which they draw from Scripture, is to be employed
for this end, next after the advancing of their own salvation, and not for vain
ostentation, profane jesting, or idle jangling, 1 Timothy 1. 4. 6. In all wisdom,
teaching and admonishing. 4. The duties of teaching and admonishing among
private Christians, ought to be mutual; there being none so complete for
knowledge, so straight in his practice, but he stands in need to have those
duties performed sometimes to him by others; admonishing one another. 5.
Singing to God with the voice, is a profitable Ordinance of Gods Worship under
the Gospel; as not only holding forth that which the Word read does, but also
staying the heart upon the sweet and lively meditation of the matter which we
sing, and is most natively directed to the glorifying of God, as its proper and
immediate scope: singing, etc: 6. The Psalms of David, and other scriptural
Songs in the in the old Testament, may, and ought to be sung in this part of
Gospel Worship: for, says he, in psalms, hymns, and spiritual songs, singing,
etc. or rather, singing in psalms, hymns, etc. for so the words may be
rendered: now all agree that hereby are designed the Psalms of David, and other
scriptural Songs, though there be some difference about the kind of Songs,
which are intended to be expressed by every one of those in particular. 7. That
this piece of Gospel Worship may be gone about acceptably, First, Our Songs
would be spiritual, and this not only for the matter, but because of the
assistance of Gods Spirit, and of a spiritual frame of heart which is required
for singing aright, Ephesians. 5. 18, 19. Secondly, They would carry with them a kind
of delectable edification to the hearers, as being sung with grave and
melodious tones, and so, as the matter which is sung may be understood by
others, 1 Cor. 14. 15. This is to sing with grace, or, in a delicious and
edifying strain, so is the word taken, chap. 4. v. 6. Thirdly, Except the heart
and inward affection be stirring in this duty; the outward grace, and
delectation, which is in it, serves for no purpose: singing in your hearts.
Fourthly, In singing, the heart ought to be taken up immediately with the
thoughts of praise unto God, arising from the consideration of the matter,
which will always furnish a heart rightly disposed with some thoughts of that
kind: singing in your hearts to the Lord.

Verse. 17. And whatsoever ye do in word or deed, do all in the Name of the Lord
Jesus, giving thanks to God and the Father by him.
He gives a common rule for all our actions, that they be undertaken in
Christ's Name, and that thanks be given to God the Father through Christ for
the event or success of them. Doct. 1. Christians are not left to their
liberty, neither in things necessary, nor yet altogether in things of their own
nature indifferent, neither in their words nor deeds, nor yet their thoughts
(for those are deeds or actions of the mind and inward man) to do as they
please in them; but are tied to walk by a rule: and particularly they are to be
ruled by Christ's command, with in-calling of his help, and aiming at his glory
in what they do; for, doing in his Name, imports all those three, Matthew. 18.
20. Luke 10. 17. Psalm. 31. 3. and however it be impossible to have an actual
purpose to glorify him, and employ his help actually for every thought, word
and deed; yet the heart would be habitually inclined to do all things in his
strength, and for him; and in solemn and weighty actions there ought to be an
actual purpose of this kind; And whatsoever ye do in word or deed, do all in
the Name of the Lord Jesus. 2. They who do all things in Christ's Name, will
have still abundant matter of thanksgiving to God in the close of their action,
whatever be the event; do all things in the Name, etc. giving thanks. 3. We
ought to acknowledge thankfully our obligation to God for the success and
event of our lawful undertakings. Not sacrificing to our own net, or burning
incense to our own drag, Hab. 1. 16. Giving thanks to God, and the Father, or
God, who is the Father: (see upon chap. 1. ver. 3.) which excludes not the
other two persons; but the Father being the fountain of the Deity, from whom,
as the prime author, all good things are derived to us, by mediation of the
Son, the holy Spirit working them in us: Therefore, that the order both of
nature, and of operation may be pointed at, for the most part we express the
Father both in our prayers and praises, not excluding the other two persons. 4.
There is no address to the Father in any duty whether of prayer or praise, so,
as to be born through, or accepted in it, but through Jesus Christ: giving
thanks to God, and the Father by him.

Verse. 18. Wives, submit your selves unto your own husbands, as it is fit in
the Lord.
In the second part of the chapter, from this verse to the end, he treats of
these duties which relate to Christians, as they are members of a family; and
as there are in every complete family three pairs, to wit, Husband and Wife,
Parents and Children, Masters and Servants; whereof the latter is always
inferior to the former: so he points at the duty of each of those, and still
begins with the inferior first, because their duty, through the subjection
which is in it, is more difficile, and being made conscience of, is a strong
motive unto the superior to go about his duty also: and first he presses upon
wives their duty, to wit, subjection to their husbands, from the convenience of
it; and qualifieth their subjection, that it be in the Lord. Doct. 1. It is not
sufficient for Christians to go about general and common duties of
Christianity, but those other duties which belong to them as being in such a
state of life, to wit, as Magistrates, Ministers, Husbands, Wives, etc. must be
in a special manner made conscience of: for, the Apostle having exhorted unto
those common virtues, does now pres^e such duties as concern Christians in
their particular vocations: Wives, submit your selves, etc. 2. It is much for
the advantage of Religion, that particular families be well ordered, the whole
Church being made up of those; hence he presses much those duties which belong
unto Christians, as they are members of families; Wives, submit your selves,
etc. 3. The sum of a Wives duty unto her Husband, is, subjection, which
comprehends a reverend esteem of him, Ephesians. 5. 33. respective speaking of him,
and to him, 1 Pet. 3. 6. and obedience to him in things lawful, 1 Pet. 3. 5, 6.
Wives, submit, or, subject your selves. 4. However a woman's own husband may
come far short of others in parts, gifts, and every other thing which deserves
reverence and subjection, 1 Samuel 25. 17. yet because of the Ordinance of God,
and that peace may be kept betwixt man and wife, she is to submit to her own
husband, respecting none so much as him, depending upon none, and following the
counsel and direction of none so much as his; for so the Apostle commands,
Submit unto your own husbands. 5. Whether we consider the Ordinance of God
injoyning, or the infirmity of the woman, as being of the weaker sex, or the
great inconveniency of jealousy, hatred and strife which follows upon the
denying of this subjection, it will be found most convenient, equitable and
just, that wives be subject unto their husbands, as it is fit. 6. The
subjection which a wife does owe unto her husband, is in the Lord Christ, so
that in the first place she is to subject her self to Christ, and from love
unto him, to subject her self to her husband; whence it will follow, that she
is to obey him only in things lawful, and to look upon her subjection as
service done unto Christ, which may give her comfort against an unkind return
from her husband: for, he says, as it is fit in the Lord.

Verse. 19. Husbands, love your wives, and be not bitter against them.
He exhorts husbands to love their wives, as the sum and fountain of all
other duties which they owe unto them, and forbids bitterness toward them.
Doct. 1. As the Lord has not tied inferiors to their duty, leaving superiors
at liberty to do what they will in theirs; So the mutual discharge of duty
betwixt superiors and inferiors, man and wife, parent and children, master
and servant, is a great encouragement for every one to set about their own
duty, as having not only the command of God for it, but an answerable return
from those to whom they do that duty; hence, having pressed upon wives their
duty. he does the like unto the husbands, and so in the rest: Husbands, love
your wives. 2. The sum of an husbands duty toward his wife, is, to love her:
there ought to be love in affection, and that most ardent, Ephesians. 5. 25. and love
kything in its effects, so as that he delight to dwell with her, Pro. 5. 18,
19. so, as that he lovingly direct and instruct her, 1 Cor. 14. 35. and so, as
he provide for her in all things according to his power, which either her
necessity, or dignity of her rank does call for, 1 Timothy 5. 8. Husbands, love
your wives. 3. Bitterness in husbands toward their wives is a sin to be
eschewed much: he is to eschew bitterness in his affections, so as not to hate
her, or cold-risely to love her, Ephesians. 5. 29. bitterness in words, so as not
for light causes to upbraid her, or speak contumeliously of her, Pro. 5. 18.
And most of all, bitterness in deeds, which consists in giving her little or
no trust in the family, Pro. 31. 15. and withholding from her things necessary
for her supply, 1 Timothy 5. 8. and in beating her, which is contrary both to the
Law of God (Ephesians. 5. -29.) and Nature, so that very Heathens did abhor it: be
not bitter against them. It Is a word taken from unsavory meats, pointing that
his conversation in all things should be delicious, sweet, and meek.

Verse. 20. Children, obey your parents in all things, for this is Wel-pleasing
unto the Lord.
He commands children (under which, according to the Scripture Phrase, are
comprehended sons and daughters in law, etc. Ruth 1. 11, 12.) to obey their
parents in all things, to wit, which are not forbidden by God; and that because
hereby they do acceptable service to God. Doct. 1. The sum of childrens duty
toward their parents, is obedience: the Greek word signifies obedience
flowing from inward respect and reverence, which is to be testified by reverent
speaking of them, and to them, Pro. 30. 17. by giving obedience to their just
commands, and by thankful recompensing of them, chiefly if they fall in
straits, 1 Timothy 5. 4. Children, obey your parents. 2. Age, or length of days
does not exempt children from this duty: Children indeed, who are
foris-familiate, are not tied to cohabit with parents, and to care for their
affairs according to their direction, Genesis 2. 24. (which children under the
care of parents are tied unto, as being members of the family, Genesis 37. 12,
13.) but they are bound to reverence their parents, and be thankful to them as
their necessity requires: for, the word rendered Children, signifies all who
are begotten, whatever be their age: Children, obey your parents. 3. The
obedience which children owe to parents is of very large extent, even to all
things, to wit, not forbidden of God, Ephesians. 6. 1. which limitation is insinuated
here in the reason of the command, for this is wel-pleasing unto the Lord: but
it extends to all other things; as, if the thing commanded be good, or in its
own nature indifferent; yea, even their rigid and seemingly unreasonable
commands in things indifferent, are not to be disobeyed, (Genesis 22. 6.) if they
cannot be otherwise diverted: Obey your parents in all things. 4. As obedience
to parents is very acceptable to God: for, it is enjoined in the first Command
with promise, and in the second Table, Ephesians. 6. 2. So, that children may obey
their parents aright, it is necessary that their hearts be touched with some
reverence toward God, and a desire to please him, which will make them
endeavor to please their parents in God, and thereby do service to God: The
argument used to enforce obedience, b^areth this much; for this is well
pleasing unto the Lord.

Verse. 21. Fathers, provoke not your children to anger, lest they be
discouraged.
Because parents are apt to abuse their parental authority, and chiefly the
fathers, Therefore he injoyneth them to use it moderately, not irritating their
children lest they turn heartlesse and discouraged. Doct. 1. Fathers are so to
use their authority over their children, as not to give them just cause of
irritation, whether by denying unto them that which is their due in food,
raiment, or means of education, 1 Timothy 5. 8. or by commanding things in
themselves unjust, 1 Samuel 20. 31, 34. or by unjust and rigorous commands about
things in their own nature indifferent, or inveighing with bitter words against
them, chiefly when there is no cause, 1 Samuel 20. 30. and lastly, by beating
them either unjustly, when there is no fault; or immoderatly, when there is a
fault (for just and moderate correction is necessary, Pro. 13. 24.) Fathers,
provoke not your children to anger. 2. As parents by too much indulgence
toward children make them sluggish, petulant, or profane, Pro. 29. 15. So by
their immoderate severity, they make them dull to action, heartlesse and
discouraged, from whence do flow sicknesses, and death; yea, and sometimes
desperate contumacy: the consideration whereof should make parents deal more
gently with them, though they are always to keep up their fatherly authority:
for, this is given as a reason of the prohibition, lest they be discouraged.

Verse. 22. Servants, obey in all things your masters according to the flesh;
not with eye-service, as men-pleasers, but in singleness of heart, fearing God.
He enters here upon the duty of servants, whereon he insisteth, not only
because their condition was most hard, as being for the most part bought
slaves; but also, it seems severals of them, under pretense of Christian
Liberty, did shake off the yoke, their masters being unconverted Pagans;
whereby Satan did labor to make the Gospel odious: Therefore Paul exhorts
them to obey their masters (who had power over their flesh and bodies) in all
things lawful: and that not only when their masters were present, as labuoring
merely to please them, but in sincerity of heart, as fearing the all-seing eye
of God. Doct. 1. The freedom purchased by Christ, and offered in the Gospel, is
spiritual, to wit, from the condemning power of the Law, Gal. 3. 13. from the
dominion of sin, Romans 6. 18. and the legal ceremonies, Gal. 2. 4. But it is not
bodily: the Gospel does not meddle with a man's outward estate; as it finds
him, whether Master or Servant, so it leaves him, 1 Cor. 7. 21: for some of
those Colossians were Servants before conversion, and they remain so after
conversion: Servants, etc. 2. The dominion which Masters have over Servants, is
only in things temporal, and of the flesh; it is not over the conscience; in
which respect there is only one Lord and Master, Matthew. 23. 8. and Lawgiver,
James 4. 1^. for, they are called masters according to the flesh, to denote the
extent of their mastership. 3. As the sum of those duties, which servants owe
to their masters is, obedience, which supponeth respect and reverence: So, this
obedience is of large extent, to wit, to all things not forbidden of God, even
their rigid commands are not to be contemned, 1 Pet. 2. 18. obey in all things
your masters. 4. When servants seem respective to their masters person, and
careful of what concerns him, himself being present; or, when they know the
thing which they do, will come otherwise to his knowledge, but at other times
are unfaithful or careless, this is a sin much to be condemned, as evidencing
they seek no more but humane approbation, so as if they can get the eyes of men
sylored, they regard not the anger of God: for, this is eye-service here
condemned and he calls those who are guilty of it, men-pleasers: Not with
eye-service as men-pleasers. 5. Servants ought to serve their Master, and to
mind his business in singleness of heart, that is, whether their master be
present or absent; whether their actions come to his knowledge or not, they may
be always most seriously affected toward the thriving of his affairs: In
singleness of heart. 6. It is only the impression of the awe and fear of God
upon the heart, which will make a servant mind his masters business thus:
Service in singleness of heart, is not to be expected from wicked servants,
lestitute of the fear of God: but in singleness of heart, fearing God.

Verse. 23. And whatsoever ye do, do it heartil^y, as to th Lord, and not unto
men:
He qualifieth the obedience required, that it be hearty and willing, without
grudging: because therein they ought to eye God, more than man: for, the
negative particle does not deny simply, but comparatively; so that as to the
Lord, and not to men, is, to the Lord ^ore than to men, as Mark 9. 37. Doct. 1.
Servants should do their service willingly, carefully, readily and pleasantly;
for then do they it from the heart, otherwise it is neither acceptable to God,
nor men: for, though man do not see the heart, yet heart-unwillingnesse does
kyth in a backward and unpleasant carriage; Whatsoever ye do, do it heartily.
2. Servants should so go about their duty to men, as therein to look unto God,
more than man, by doing it, because God commands it, and in the way wherein
he does command it, and in making conscience of their duty to man out of
conscience to God, even when masters fail in theirs, 1 Pet. 2. 18, 19. And
except servants eye God thus, they have but small encouragement otherwise to
do their duty heartily: for he commands them to do as unto the Lord, and not
unto men, in order to make them do heartily.

Verse. 24. Knowing that of the Lord ye shall receive the reward of the
inheritance: for ye serve the Lord Christ.
That he may excite servants to their duty, he uses some arguments: the first
taken from that free retribution of the heavenly Inheritance, which Christ
shall give unto those who serve him in their calling, and to believing servants
among the rest. Doct. 1. There is no calling so mean or base, which is lawful,
and piously gone about, wherein a rich reward is not to be expected from God;
even Servants shall receive the reward. 2. So poor is the reward which servants
have to expect from their Masters, and what is promised, is often so slightly
paid, that for their encouragement, they would cast their eye frequently upon
the reward of this heavenly Inheritance: for, the Apostle holds it out to be
eyed by them, while he says, of the Lord ye shall receive the reward of the
inheritance. 3. In Heaven there is no distinction of servants and sons: all are
children and heirs who are there: even servants shall receive the inheritance of
sons. 4. Whatever reward is promised to any work of ours, it proceeds not
from the worth which is in the work, but from God's free grace, who freely
promises; for, it is the reward of an inheritance; the word signifies, an
inheritance obtained by lot, wherein least of man is seen. 5. Promises have no
influence to excite unto duty, except the truth of them be known and believed:
divine Truths are looked upon by many as fancies; hence there is so much
preaching of them, and so little wrought by them: Knowing that of the Lord. 6.
As Christ will have none to serve him for nothing: so, the meanest service that
is, being done with the right qualifications, is service done to Christ: for,
so speaks he here of servants; ye serve the Lord Christ, and hereby assures
them of the reward.

Verse. 25. But he that does wrong, shall receive for the wrong which he has
done: and there is no respect of persons.
Here is a second argument taken from Gods judgment to come, whether upon
Masters or Servants who do wrong, confirmed from this, that God is no accepter
of persons. Doct. 1. Hope of reward is not sufficient to draw men to their
duty, except they be also driven to it by the fear of punishment: for, so much
is grounded upon those words, as they speak to Servants, to whom the promise
was but presently proponed; but he that does wrong, shall receive. 2. So just
is God, that he will not pass by those wrongs which are least thought of by
men: such are the mutual injuries of Masters and Servants: for he, whether
Master or Servant, that does wrong, shall receive for the wrong. 3. The Lord
keeps a proportion betwixt sins and strokes, so that the more wrong a man
does, the sorer shall his punishment be, Heb. 10. 29. for he shall receive his
wrong, that is, a just retribution according to his wrong. 4. It is usual for
people to conceit of somewhat in themselves for respect to which they will not
be so dealt with by God, as others, though they be alike guilty; some do thus
conceit of their riches, some of their poverty, some of their parts: s^e doct.
1. upon v. 11: For, his vindicating God from having any such respect to
persons, imports, that it is usual for men to have contrary thoughts of him.
5. There is no such respect of persons with God; he will spare none for outward
respects, as being free of all those base passions, which make men wrest
judgment for respect to persons: he fears not the great, he is not
preposterously compassionate toward the poor, he coveteth not the gold of the
rich, and has no interest divided from that of eternity and justice, Genes.
18. 25. So that with God there neither is, nor can be respect of persons.

CHAP. IV.
IN the first part of this Chapter, the Apostle (having set down the duty of
masters toward servants, v. 1.) exhorts those Colossians unto several
duties, as to prayer, v. 2. and to pray for himself in particular, v. 3, 4. and
to circumspect walking toward Heathens, v. 5. and to aim at delectable
edisication in their discourse, v. 6.

In the second part he declares, why he sent Tychicus and Onesimus unto them,
whom he highly commends, v. 7, 8, 9.

In the third part, are, first, salutations, whereof some were sent to the
Colossians from three of the Circumcision, who are described, and commended, v.
10, 11. some from their own Minister Epaphras, whom he highly commends, v.
12, 13. some from Luke and Demas, v. 14. and the rest from Paul himself to the
Laodiceans, v. 15. And secondly, some directions unto them for use-making of
this Epistle, v. 16. and that they would admonish their Minister, v. 17. and so
he puts a close to the Epistle, v. 18.

Verse. 1. Masters, give unto your servants that which is just and equal,
knowing that ye also have a Master in heaven.
THis verse seems to be a part of the preceding Chapter, whether we look to
the purpose which goes before, or to that which does follow; wherein he
exhorts masters to give unto their servants that which they were obliged,
whether by strict Law and condition, or by the Law of charity and christian
meekness; and that, because they had a Master in Heaven, who would reckon with
them if they did otherwise. Doct. 1. Masters ought to give unto their servants
that which is just, that is, what they are tied unto by the rule of strict
justice; a^ first, food competent to their service and state, Prove. 31. 15.
Secondly, their hire, James 5. 4. And thirdly, work, wherein they are not to
press them rigorously, and above their power, Prove. 12. 10. nor yet suffer
them to be altogethe^ idle, Prove. 29. 21. For, says he, Masters, give unto
your servants that which is just. Doct. 2. They are also bound to give unto
them that which is equal, that is, what they are tied unto by the rule of
charity and christian meekness; as first, to see that they serve God, which is
enjoined to Masters in the fourth Command. Secondly, not to do all with them by
boast and terror, as if they were beasts; but to draw them on with meekness,
as being of the same nature with themselves, Ephesians. 6. 9. Thirdly, not to be
tyrannical, by making their will an absolute rule for them; but to hear them
when in modesty they produce reason to the contrary, Job 31. 13, 14 Fourthly,
to have respect unto their infirmities by caring for them when they are sick,
Matthew. 8. 6. Yea, and fifthly, to let somewhat fall beyond condition unto those
who are faithful, Prove. 1 ^. 35. Give unto your servants that which is equal.
Doct. 3. A right to Heaven and the heavenly Inheritance, ought not to prejudge
a man in what is due unto him of things worldly: A right unto the one, does not
enevate, but rather establishes their right unto the other; and so they may
without offense seek and plead for what is due unto them: Thus notwithstanding
that Heaven is promised (chap, 3. v. 24) to godly servants, yet masters are
commanded to give them that which is just and equal. 4. The greater that men
are in the world, they stand in more need to have the terror of God perseuted
unto them, that thereby they may be excited to their duty: for, as he proponed
a comfortable promise unto the poor servants, (chap. 3. v. 24.) so he boasts
masters with the consideration of God's greatness, knowing that ye also have a
Master in heaven. 5. Superiors and masters should so carry themselves, as
remembering they have one above them to call them to an account; knowing that ye
also have a Master in heaven. 6. We would so represent God unto our selves, as
may serve best to restrain from sin, and put us upon our duty: for, to enforce
the exhortation, he proponeth God unto them, as their master in heaven, which
speaks his absolute dominion, 2 Chronicles. 20. 6. his omniscience, Psalm. 11. 4.
his holiness, Isai 57. 15. and his omnipotency, Psalm. 115. 3. So that their
sin could not be hid from him; his holy nature did hate it, he had both right
and power to punish it: ye also have a Master in heaven.

Verse. 2. Continue in prayer, and watch in the same with thanksgiving.
He exhorts unto the exercise of prayer, and to some conditions required for
the right discharging of this duty. As first, Instant and vehement persevering
in it. Secondly, Watchfulness and fervency. Thirdly, Thankfulness. Doct. 1.
The exercise of prayer is necessary for the right performance of commanded
duties; it being a mean, in the use whereof, covenanted strength and influence
is conveyed unto us, Matthew. 7. 7. without which we can do nothing: for, unto
the former exhortations, he subjoyneth, Continue in prayer. 2. We ought to
continue and persevere in this exercise, opposing all tentations mightily which
tend to make us quite it; Continue in prayer. The word signifies to continue
with strength, so as no labor or toil do make us weary, or give it over. Which
continuance relates first to the disposition of the heart, being still kept in
a sitnesse to go about that duty, when occasion offers; and next to the
actual exercise it self, that it be sometimes every day at least gone about,
and always, when there is opportunity, though we are not to quite all other
duties, that we may be wholly, constantly, and only in this, see 2 Samuel 9. 13.
Doct. 3. That this exercise of prayer be discharged aright, watchfulness is
required, a watchfulness especially of the mind; and this first, before we
come to the duty, watching for an opportunity of praying, searching out and
observing those things which may furnish matter for prayer, as Gods mercies,
and our own escapes. Secondly, in the duty, that we be intent upon it, our
graces kept in exercise while we are at it, and what is Gods dealing with the
soul in it may be observed, as if he straiten, give liberty, hide his face, or
show himself gracious. Thirdly, after the duty, as what answers we receive; and
lest we be overtaken either with pride for doing well, or with discouragement
for our coming short; And watch in the same. 4. Thanksgiving for favors
already received, ought to be joined with prayer, as a choice argument whereby
to plead and prevail for new ones. (Psalm. 44. through the whole) yea though we
should not prevail for the time, yet we owe thanks in that he has been
sometimes entreated, and is only delaying now, until a more fit time, wherein
he may give that which is sought, Psalm. 43. 5. Watch in the same with
thanksgiving.

Verse. 3. Withal, praying also for us, that God would open unto us a door of
utterance, to speak the mystery of Christ, for which I am also in b^nds: 4.
That I may make it manifest, as I ought to speak.
He recommendeth one particular unto their prayers, to wit. That they would
deal with God for him and other faithful Ministers; that in that time of
persecution chiefly, wherein he was made a prisoner for Truth, they might be
endued with a spirit of boldness and freedom in the delivery of their message;
the subject whereof was most precious, as being a mystery, and a mystery of
Christ and so a most necessary and profitable mystery, v. 3. And that he might
be gifted with plainness in preaching, and with all other properties requisite
in an able and faithful Preacher, v. 4 Doct. 1. Christians are bound to pray
for others as well as for themselves, and chiefly for their Ministers, and for
every one, as they are less or more instrumental in the work of Christ; so
Paul, who was much employed in the work of the Gospel, enjoyneth, Withal,
praying also for us. 2. Those only are sit to pray for others, who are making
conscience to pray for themselves: for, the Apostle, having exhorted them, v.
2. to pray indefinitly, (which certainly contains principally the duty of
every man's praying for himself) here subjoyneth, Withal, and also praying for
us. 3. Whatever a Minister be for abilities and graces, it becomes him well to
seek the help of Gods people committed to his charge, for his further inabling
to go about the duties of his Calling, and especially he is to seek the help of
their prayers: for, even Paul seeks this from those Colossians; Withal,
praying also for us. 4. In times of persecution chiefly, a faithful Minister
will be more anxious and careful for the thriving of the Gospel, and work of
God, than for his own particular interest: If it go well with the Gospel, come
of him what will, he is well; So Paul (though lying in bonds) urges upon them
to pray, not so much for his own liberty, as the Gospels; not that the prison
doors might be open, but that God would open to them a door of utterance. 5.
Holy boldness and freedom is much to be wished for in a Minister; that so he
may speak all seasonable Truths, Acts 20. 27. and to all persons, 1 Timothy 5. 20,
21. and at all times, 2 Timothy 4. 2. and may speak them as the Truths of God with
courage and authority, 1 King. 22. 14. This holy boldness and freedom is meant
by the door of utterance, as the Apostle himself expounds it, Ephesians. 6. 19, 20.
That God would open unto us a door of utterance. 6. There are many difficulties
to be overcome before a man can attain unto this holy boldness, and those
such, that only God can remove them: There is a difficulty to find out
pertinent matter, and to vent it when it is found; partly, through want of
courage; partly, through the suspending sometimes of divine influence: and
there is a difficulty to vent it rightly; that is, first confidently, arising
either from want of experience, or from an evil conscience. Secondly,
pertinently, through want of prudence. Hence Paul, speaking of this holy
boldness, uses the metaphor of a door, and of a door shut until God do open
it: That God would open unto us a door of utterance. 7. As Christ in his
Person, Natures and Offices, and the Gospel, which treats of those, is a
mystery: So Christ and the Gospel should be the main subject of a Ministers
preaching: He ought so to preach the Law, and press duties, as that the due
relation betwixt Christ and those may be clearly held forth; Christ being the
end of the Law for righteousness, Romans 10. 4. To speak the mystery of Christ
8. Persecution for the Gospel tends to the advantage of the Gospel; the more
it is suppressed, the more it grows. Paul is in bonds, and yet he preaches,
Act. 26. 29. Doct. 9. Then are people chiefly to bear burden with their
Ministers by praying to God for them, when they are under persecution for the
Gospel: for, Paul mentions his bonds, as an argument exciting them to pray:
for which I am also in bonds. 10. It is a great part of a Ministers task, as to
preach, so to make what he preaches, plain unto the people, by dimitting
himself in the whole convey of his purpose, for method, (2 Timothy 2. 15.) style,
(1 Cor. 2. 4.) and close application, (2 Timothy 4. 2.) so far as is possible unto
the capacity of the meanest; That I may make it manifest, says he. 11.
Besides this holy boldness and plainness, there are many other things which a
Minister would advert to in preaching, as that he preach pertinently to the
conditions of all, Isa. 50. 4. that he speak affectionatly and with pity, even
to the most stubborn, ^er. 4. 19. and patiently, not wearying for want of
success, 2 Timothy 2. 25. and zealously, with indignation against sin, Isa. 58.
1. and frequently, 2 Timothy 4. 2. and self-deni^dly, 2 Cor. 4. 5. These, and many
other things requisi^, are all summed up by Paul in this comprehensive
expression, As I ought to speak.

Verse. 5. Walk in wisdom toward them that are without, redeeming the t^^e.
He exhorts them to wise and circumspect walking, with relation chiefly to
the Heathens among whom they did live, who were without the visible Church; and
that in order to this, they should close with every opportunity of doing well,
and particularly wherein they might gain any of those In^idels to Christ,
though with much loss to themselves in things wo^ldly. Doct. 1. It is not
sufficient for Christians to pray much, or go about the duties of Gods
immediate worship, except they also set about other particular duties of an
holy life; So, besides prayer, he injoyneth, walk in wisdom. 2. There is great
wisdom required in a Christians carriage toward those who are without, to wit,
unconverted Heathens without the Church; and by proportion those who evidence
their non-regeneration by a profane life within the Church, (Tit. 1. 16.) lest
we skar them from Christ, giving them occasion to speak evil of Religion, 1.
Tim. 5. 14. or we ourselves be infected by them, 1 Cor. 5. 6. Walk in wisdom
toward those who are without. 3. The loss of credit, riches, ease, or not
coming up to the full extent of our christian liberty, and that which is our
right in things worldly, is not to be stood upon, rather than we lose the
oportunities of doing good, chiefly of gaining a godless man to Christ: for,
by the loss of these things, we are to redeem the time, or, opportunity: It Is a
Metaphor from Merchants, who prefer the least profit that may be to their
pleasures and ease, closely following their business, when the merkats are
best.

Verse. 6. Let your speech be always with grace, seasoned with salt, that ye may
know how ye ought to answer every man.
He directs them how to order their speech and ordinary conference, so, as it
may always carry along with it delectable edification unto the hearers, being
seasoned with the salt of holy and divine wisdom, whereby they should acquire
ability and prudence to answer pertinently in any thing whereof they should be
ques(...)d, chiefly about the grounds of Christiantie. (...)* (...). We are not
le^t to run at randon in our ordi(...) courses, so, as to speak idly, Matthew.
12. 36. much (...) profanely, Ep(...). (...). 9. but are at all times, and with
all persons, to have an eye to the good of those with whom we speak, so, as
both to delight and edify them by our speech: for, this is to speak with
grace; see Ephesians. 4. 19. Let your speech be always with grace. 2. That our
speech may be with grace, and so both delight and edify the hearers; The salt,
not of bitter and satyrick jesting, (Ephesians. 5. 4.) but of divine wisdom, is
required, that noisome, putrefying, and profane discourse may be eschewed, and
what we speak may be so ordered upon an exact survey of time, place and
company, as it may prove most savorie and acceptable unto the hearers: for,
this is the use of salt, to extract putrefying humors from meats, and make them
delicious to the taste, fit for digestion, and good for nourishment; seasoned
with salt. 4. As Christians should endeavor that measure of knowledge, whereby
they may be enabled to give a reason of their faith unto those who ask them:
So, it is not sufficient to answer materially to that wherein we are
questioned, except we answer in the right manner also, that is, confidently,
understandingly, reverently and gravely, not jestingly: for, he says not, that
ye may know with, but how to answer. 5. The habituating of our selves to
edifying discourse in our ordinary strain, is a profitable mean for growth in
knowledge and the through understanding of those things which we know: for, the
fruit to be reaped by speaking always with grace, is, that ye may know how ye
ought to answer every man.

Verse. 7. All my state shall Tychicus declare unto you, who is a beloved
brother, and a faithful minister, and fellowservant in the Lord: 8. Whom I
have sent unto you for the same purpose, that he might know your estate, and
comfort your hearts: 9. With Onesimus a faithful and beloved brother, who is
one of you. They shall make known unto you all things which are done here.
In the second part of the Chapter, the Apostle (having commended Tychicus from
the esteem which he had of him, and from his ministerial calling) shows, he
had sent him to them, to give them certain information concerning his own case,
and to return unto him certain information concerning theirs; and that he might
prove comfortable unto them by his presence, preaching, and otherwise, v. 7,
8. And joyneth Onesimus with him in the Commission, whom he also commends as
a faithful Christian, beloved of Paul, and, as it would seem, their own
countryman, v. 9. Doct. 1. It concerns a Minister much to be of a good
report among, and wellesteemed of by People; that so the Word may be the more
readily received from him: for this cause, Paul, being to send Tychicus to
comfort their hearts, commends him much unto them, as a Christian, whom he
himself loved dea^ly, who is a beloved brother; as a Minister who was faithful
for his Master, a faithful Minister; as one, whom Pa^^ had associated to
himself sometimes as a colleague in the work of the Ministry, Acts 20. 4. And
fellow-s(...)t in the Lord. 2. It is good to be rightly informed of the state
of those who are sufferers for Christ; that we may accordingly sympathize with
them, Heb. 13. 3. be preparing for the like sufferings, Joh. 15. 20. and
encouraged by their constancy, Phil. 1. 14. for, Paul sends Tychicus to
inform them of his case. 3. The carriage of those who suffer for Truth, ought
to be such, as they need not be ashamed who should know of it; Paul sends
Tychicus to declare all his state unto them. 4. Public and common reports,
especially of things at a distance, are not much to be trusted: A man may
easily wrong both himself and others, by being too credulous of such: Hence
Paul sends Tychicus to inform them certainly of his case; All my state shall
Tychicus declare unto you, and whom I have sent unto you for the same purpose.
5. It concerns a Minister prudently to inquire and seek to know the state of
those who are committed unto his charge; that he may be the^^by directed how to
speak to their state: for, he sends Tychicus to know their estate. 6. The
carriage of people ought to be such, as they need not be ashamed that those who
are over ^^em in the Lord, come to the knowledge of it: for, he sends
Tychicus, that he may know their estate. 7. A Christian sufferer for Truth,
ought not to be so much taken up with his own particular concernment, as not to
be affected with the trials and sufferings of others, though possibly they be
much lighter than his own; So Paul, though now in bonds, sends Tychicus to
strengthen and comfort those Colossians under their present trial, from the
false teachers; and comfort your hearts. 8. As true grace will bring a man to
esteem and credit, chiefly with those who themselves are gracious, and
sometimes with others also: for, it cutteth off those vices which make men
contemptible, and adorneth with the contrary virtues: So, where true grace is,
it will make a man reckon interest in all those who have grace, and testify
his affection unto them, whatever has been their carriage formerly, and
notwithstanding of any present disparity which may be among them otherwise:
for, here Onesimus, whom many take to be the same who is mentioned in the
Epistle to Phtlemon, and so was once a fugitive servant, is now, being
converted, entrusted with an honorable Commission, and is owned by this eminent
Apostle, as his beloved brother; with Onesimus a faithful and beloved brother.
9. Though grace in a person be the main thing which should commend him to us;
yet other natural and civil relations, ought to have their own deserved
weight: Grace does not dissolve such bonds, but rather strengthens them; So
Paul commends Onesimus unto them from this, that he was one of them.

Verse. 10. Aristarchus my fellow-prisoner saluteth you, and Marcus sisters
son to Barnabas (touching whom ye received commandments; if he come unto you,
receive him) 11. And Jesus, which is called Justus, who are of the
circumcision. These only are my fellow-workers unto the kingdom of God, which
have been a comfort unto me.
Here are salutations sent to the Church at Colosse, by three of those who were
in Paul's company, and they are described, first, severally from their
respective names and other adjuncts; next jointly from their Nation, they were
Jews; from their pains in promoving the Gospel; and from their usefulness to
Paul himself. Doct. 1. Distance of place should not cool those affections of
love and good will, which ought to be among Christians: for, those salutations
were outward expressions of their inward love, and they do salute, though at a
distance. 2. As little mercy is to be expected from persecuters; So, the cross
of Christ, and suffering for Truth, is a thing not to be ashamed of: for, Paul,
as it were, glories in the style of Prisoner, though he was used as a captive
slave: Aristarchus my fellow-prisoner: the word signifies, a captive of war.
3. As real friendship does not expire with prosperity; So, the sharpest
sufferings of God's people, have some sweet ingredient in them: for, Paul has
a fellow with him while he is prisoner, even Aristarchus, who was his companion
in travels, Acts 19. 2. and 20. v. 4. and now does not quit him in his
sufferings: Aristarchus my fellow-prisoner. 4. Such love and respect should be
had to those who are faithful Instruments in the Church of God, that even
those who have relation to them, ought to be the more respected, chiefly, if
they walk in their steps; So, Mark is commended from this, that he was sisters
son to Barnabas, who was separated for the work of God, Acts 13. 3. 5.
Notwithstanding a man has fallen, to the grief and scandal of others; yet,
after evidences given of his amendment, he ought to be received and conversed
with as formerly; So Mark, otherwise called John, did desert Paul and
Barnabas, Acts 13. 13. whereupon arose that hot contention betwixt those two
Apostles, Acts 15. 37. But now having given proof of his remorse for what he
did, he is recommended by Paul to those Colossians: Touching whom ye have
received commandments, if he come unto you, receive him. 6. As folk should not
follow the multitude of the kind, from whom they are descended, in an evil
course; So this tends much to a man's commendation, when he breaks off his
evil kind, and is not carried away with them: for, those three were of the
Jews, a people for the most part, enemies to the Gospel, Romans 11. 28. who are
of the circumcision, which is mentioned for their commendation, that though
they were Jews, yet they had become Christians, and companions of Paul under
his affliction. 7. There is no way which leads to the Kingdom of Glory, but
that which is held forth in the Gospel, Acts 4. 12. And Christ does rule in the
world by the Gospel subduing thereby the hearts of men to live by his Laws
(Psalm. 110. 3.) written in the Gospel, Romans 2. 16. and exercising Government
and Discipline in his visible Courts, according to the Rules prescribed by the
Gospel, Matthew. 18. 17, 18. Therefore the Gospel in this place is called the
Kingdom of God, See Matthew. 4. 23. Mark, 4. 11. Fellow-workers unto the Kingdom
of God. 8. This makes much unto a man's commendation, when he has any hand in
the promoving of this Kingdom, and especially when his discouragements are
many, and encouragements few, from the example of others who should join with
him in that work, and do it not: for, they are commended from this, that they
only of the circumcision were Paul's fellow-workers unto the kingdom of God.
9. It appears hence how small ground there is for the Pope's pretended
supremacy and head-ship over the Church; the main Pillar whereof, is, that
because Peter was Bishop at Rome, therefore the Pope must be his successor:
now, beside that, they can never prove Peter to have been Head of the Church,
it is certain that he was not at Rome, when Paul wrote this Epistle, there
being only there then those three of the circumcision, who were his
fellowlabourers unto the Kingdom of God: Neither is there any word in Scripture
to prove, that ever Peter was at Rome, but much to the contrary. 10. The most
eminent servants of God in time of persecution, have need of comfort,
encouragement and up-stirring: so ready are the best to saint in the hour of
temptation, Dan. 11. 35. but God in mercy, does not suffer them to be destitute
of some, who are comfortable and encouraging unto them, when their necessity
calls for it: for, says he, Which have been a comfort to me: The word
signifies, they had been for comfort, counsel or encouragement unto him;
which supponeth, that even Paul had need of those sometimes. 11. As most eminent
Christians are ready to acknowledge, with thankfulness, how steadable any are
made unto them in their suffering case; So it is matter of no small
commendation, to be in any measure helpful, by counsel, advice,
encouragement, or comfort unto those who are suffering for Christ, and any part
of his Truth: for, herein are those three commended, that they had been a
comfort unto Paul, as is acknowledged by himself.

Verse. 12. Epaphras, who is one of you, a servant of Christ, saluteth you,
always laboring fervently for you in prayers, that ye may stand perfect, and
complete in all the will of God.
Here are salutations directed from Epaphras, who is described from his
Country, his Office of the Ministry, and his affection to those Colossians,
testified by his servent and constant praying to God for them, that they might
be gifted with perseverance in universal, sincere and hearty obedience to the
will of God. Doct. 1. A Minister ought not to omit any duty of civility,
tending to keep a good understanding betwixt him and his flock: for, Epaphras,
who was their Minister. (chap. 1. v. 7.) saluteth them. 2. The power of a call
from God and his People, ought to make a man venture upon apparent
inconveniences, which other ways he were obliged to eschew: for, Epaphras
their own Countreyman, had embraced a call to the Ministry among those
Colossians; though Christ shows, a Minister is in hazard to meet with
dis-respect in his own Country, Joh. 4. 44. who is one of you. 3. As it is the
duty of a Minister, not only to preach unto, pray with; but also to pray for
his flock, and that always when opportunity offers: So, an honest Minister,
who makes conscience of this duty in earnest, will find it to be no easy
task, considering how indisposed he is sometimes to pray for himself, Matthew.
26. 40. and how many in the flock pray not for themselves, Matthew. 13 47. etc.
and so are an heavy burden unto any who would pray for them; and how many they
are also, concerning whom God will not be be entreated, Matthew. 22. 14. Thus
Epaphras was a ways laboring fervently for them in prayer. The word
signifies, to be striving in a battle, and in an agony for them. 4. A
Minister ought not to rest satisfied, that he himself preaches Truth plainly,
or that the people committed to his charge, attain thereby to the knowledge of
Truth; but practice and obedience to the will of God so known, must be added,
together with perseverance and constancy in their begun obedience, lest by
their falling away, they lose themselves, and disgrace the Truth: for, he
prays that they might stand perfect and complete in all the will of God. 5.
It is neither the pains of a Minister, nor resolution of a people, Romans 9. 16.
but the power of God, which works constancy in the way of holiness, against
the stormy blasts of several temptations: for, Epaphras prays unto God for
it, that they may stand perfect and complete in the will of God. 6. Approven
obedience to the will of God, and that which is to be aimed at, is that, which
is, 1. perfect, to wit, with a perfection of parts, or sincere, and not
hypocritical; that ye may stand perfect. 2. (...)earty and willing, the
affections being, as it were, filled with, and carried on by the command; and
complete, or, filled. It Is a Metaphor from sails filled with wind. 3.
Universal, as having respect unto all the Commandments; In all the will of God.

Verse. 13. For I bear him record, that he has a great zeal for you, and them
that are in Laodicea, and them in Hierapolis.
He confirms by his own testimony, what he presently spoke concerning the
zeal, or, fervent and burning care (for so the word signifies) which Epaphras
had of them and their neighboring Churches. Doct. 1. Men in place and
eminency, are bound to give a testimony to the graces and gifts of any whom
they know to be deserving; that so the person of whom they testify, may be in
better capacity to do good unto others, with whom such a testimony will have
weight: for, Paul gives as it were a testimonial unto Epaphras, I bear him
record, etc. 2. It Is a great part of a Minister's commendation, that, he be
zealous or fervently careful for the spiritual good of his flock; So Paul
bears record, that Epaphras had a great zeal for these Colossians, the people
of his charge, chap. 1. v. 7. 3. A Minister's zeal ought to be extended toward
others of Christ's Members, than those of his proper charge, and chiefly unto
those Churches which ly nearest unto him, as being in a nearer capacity by
their good or evil example, to advance or retard the work of God among his own
flock: So, Paul bears record, that Epaphras had a great zeal for those in
Laodicea, and Hierapolis, which were neighboring Churches.

Verse. 14. Luke the beloved Physician, and Demas greet you.
Here are some salutations sent from Luke and Demas. Doct. 1. As Christ, when
he is about to supply his Church with a Ministry, will take men of any
calling, whom he pleases to choose, and make them Ministers: So, worldly
advantage is not to be stood upon when Christ calls: for, Luke, the same, as
it seems, who wrote the Gospel, was before a Physician, and had now become a
Minister; though his former calling would have advantaged him more, chiefly at
those times when Civil Authority did allow no maintenance for Ministers; Luke
the beloved Physician. 2. Men in place chiefly, should lay out their love and
respect so wisely, that it may tend to a man's commendation to be respected by
them, as being known to lay out their affection upon none but such as are
worthy of it; So Paul calls Luke, beloved, to wit, by him, that hereby he may
commend him to them; Luke the beloved Physician, 3. There are many fair
Professors within the Visible Church, who may afterward turn Apostats, who so
long as they keep the mask of a Profession, will not be behind with the best in
external duties, yea, and often do outstrip others: for, this Demas, (whom
many take to be the same who is spoken of, 2 Timothy 4. 10. to have turned
Apostate, and as some write, an Idolatrous Priest) is here among the first in
saluting those Colossians: And Demas greet you. 4. Though judicious Ministers
may have their own fears, concerning such forementioned Professors; yet so
long as they continue in the external duties of Christianity, they ought to
give unto them that outward respect which is given unto others: but withal,
Ministers would be sparing to engage much in the commendation of any, whom they
have ground to suspect will prove such, until time try what they are: for,
Paul writes the salutation of Demas among the rest, though it is like he had
his own fears concerning him; for, he commends him not as he did the rest;
And Demas greet you.

Verse. 15. Salute the brethren which are in Laodicea, and Nymphas, and the
Church which is in his house.
The Apostle directs them to salute in his name, the Christians at Laodicea,
that so they might be prepared to hear this Epistle with greater attention: And
above all the rest he saluteth one. Nymphas (a man eminent for plety) and the
Church at his house; whereby may be meant both a Congregation of Christians, to
whom he had given his house for a place of public assembling to Divine
Worship; As also, his own Family, who were piously instructed, and orderly
governed, as if they had been a Church. Doct. 1. People are not so to make use
of the respect and affection which a public Minister carries unto them, as to
make others equally deserving, jealous of him, as if he did carry no such
respect unto them: for, the Apostle imployeth those Colossians, to salute in
his name the brethren which were in Laodicea, as if he had said, Let them know,
I carry the same respect unto them, which I carry unto you. 2. However a
Minister be tied to respect all the Members of the Church, and to evidence so
much, by discharging all common duties toward them; yet he is bound to put
some more respect upon those who are more eminent for piety among them; that so
by his countenancing the appearances of piety, he may make it the more
desirable and lovely: for, Paul saluteth Nymphas in particular. 3. As the
Primitive Church had not the countenance of Civil Authority to provide, upon
the Public expense, places for the Congregation to meet, and public
maintenance for Ministers: So, such was the servor of love to the Gospel then;
that private Christians did contribute largely and freely for the up-holding of
it: Charity did move to give more then, than force of Law can now: for, Nymphas
gives his house to be a public Place of meeting for the Church: and the Church
at his house. 4. Masters of Families should so train up their household, in the
exercise of Divine Worship, and in a godly conversation, by instructing the
ignorant, 1 Cor. 14. 35. rebuking and censuring the disobedient and profane,
Psalm. 101. 7. and by discharging all duties of worship, competent to the Master
of a Family, and causing his Family to join with him, Josh. 24. -- 15. that
they may deserve the name of a Church: So much is imported by those words, the
Church at his house, as they contain a designation of his Family.

Verse. 16. And when this Epistle is read amongst you, cause that it be read
also in the church of the Laodiceans: and that ye likewise read the Epistle
from Laodicea.
He directs them, that, after they have read this Epistle themselves, they
would cause it be read in the Church of the Laodiceans, who, being their
neighbors, were infested with the same errors; And that some other Epistle,
written from Laodicea, either from the whole Church, or from their Ministers,
as it seems unto Paul, informing him of their case, should be read by the
Colossians, for better clearing of some passages in this Epistle. Doct. 1. As
Scripture is to be read and perused even by private Christians; so, the
doctrine contained in Scripture, even that which is expressly directed to some
particular Churches or persons, is of universal use unto all others: Thus they
are commanded, having read this Epistle themselves, to cause read it in the
Church of Laodicea, as being useful for them also. 2. The helps of other men's
writings, may, and should be made use of for the better understanding of
Scripture: for, this Epistle from Laodicea, was not written by Paul himself,
who had never been there, chap. 2. v. 1. but by the Laodiceans themselves: and
Paul will have it read for the further clearing of this Epistle, which was
written by himself: And that ye likewise read the Epistle from Laodicea.

Verse. 17. And say to Archippus, Take heed to the ministry which thou have
received in the Lord, that thou fulfill it.
He directs them to admonish their Minister Archippus, (who in the absence of
his Colleague Epaphras had the more burden, and it seems, had fallen somewhat
slack) both to consider the nature and weight of the Ministerial charge with
which he was entrusted by Christ, and that he would faithfully discharge all
the parts of it. Doct. 1. There is no ground from this Scripture, for placing a
power of jurisdiction in People over their Ministers, to call them to a
judicial account, and to inflict the censures of the Church upon them: for,
all that is here said, infers no more than an admonition from charity, which
any private Christian might have given to their Minister, and not an
authoritative censure or rebuke: Paul speaks otherwise, when he would
establish any power of that kind; As 1 Timothy 6. 17. Charge them that are rich,
etc. but here only, Say unto Archippus. 2. As the best of Ministers are ready
to fall slack in their duty, and have need of up-stirring, they have so much to
do, 2 Cor. 2. -- 16. and for the most part see so small fruits of what they do,
Isai. 49. 4. So it is the duty of people to have an eye upon their Minister,
how he discharges his Office, and when they see a fault in him, to tell
himself of it, admonishing him for it: but withal, they would do this in love,
and so, as they may evidence all due respect, both to his Person and Function:
for, he directs them to Say unto Archippus, take heed to thy ministry, and
not back-bite or rail upon Archippus. 3. That a man may conscientiously go
about his calling, he would know the nature of such a Charge, and what it
requires: Particularly a Minister would know; First, that his Calling is a
Ministry, a laborious service, or a working, as it were, through dust and
mire: for, so the word signifies. And secondly, that however the designation
of the person unto the Ministry be from man, Acts 6. 3. and 14. 23* yet the
Office it self is from Jesus Christ, to whom he must be countable for his
carriage in it: for, says he, Say unto Archippus, take he^d to thy ministry,
which thou have received in the Lord. Doct. 4. It is not sufficient for any
man, chiefly for a Minister, to know the nature of his Calling, and what it
does require, unless also he make conscience to discharge it when it is known,
and to discharge all the parts of it, that so he may fulfill it; that thou
fulfill it: so were they to say to Archippus.

Verse. 18. The salutation by the hand of me Paul. Remember my bonds. Grace be
with you. Amen.
This verse contains the conclusion of the Epistle, which he shows, was
written with his own hand, and not by a Secretary, as the rest of the Epistle
was: And in it, having saluted them, he craveth, they would remember his bonds,
and wishes unto them God's grace and favor, with all spiritual benefits
flowing from it. Doct. 1. Satan's malice, and man's impudence, did come to that
hight, even while the Apostles themselves were alive, as to endeavor the
corrupting of Scripture, by calling that Scripture which was not: for, to
prevent such impostures, Paul writes the salutation with his own hand, that
the Epistle may be known to be his, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 17. The salutation by the hand
of me Paul. 2. God has sufficiently provided in his Word, against the
forementioned evil, by putting such marks upon Scripture, as may be a clear
difference betwixt it and all humane writings; Paul's own handwriting did
serve for such a mark in his Epistles; The salutation by the hand of me Paul:
And though this mark does not extend unto all Scripture, neither can it give
faith now, the first Copy of his Epistles being lost; yet there are other marks
or arguments taken from Scripture, whereby it does sufficiently evidence it
self to be the Word of God, as the consent of all its parts, though written at
diverse times, and by several hands; the fulfilling of its prophecies; the
majesty and simplicity of the style; the power of its doctrine. etc. 3. As the
most eminent servants of Christ may be put to personal sufferings for Truth;
So, it is the duty of all Christians to remember them under their sufferings,
so as to pray to God for them, v. 2, 3. to see the worth of Truth, for which
they suffer, in their resolute under-going of the cross, and suffering for it,
Acts 21. 13. so as to fore-arm themselves for the like sufferings, Job. 15. 20.
and to supply them also in their outward necessities, Phil. 4. 14. In order to
all those, it seems, Paul has desired them to remember his bonds. 4. Though
Christians may use an ordinary form of words in saluting of, and expressing
their best wishes unto those with whom they converse; yet they ought to be
real, and not formal only in using of it, as understanding what they wish,
and being affectionate and sincere in their wish: for, Paul does affix his Amen
unto his ordinary farewell wish: Grace be with you.

Amen.
FINIS.

