XXIX CHOICE SERMONS On several Texts of Scripture. Preached By that Reverend
and Faithful Minister of Gods Word, WILLIAM FENNER, B. D. sometimes Fellow of
Pembroke Hall in Cambridge, and late Minister of Rochford in Essex.



LONDON, Printed by E. T. for John Stafford, at the Sign of the George at
Fleet-Bridge. 1657.

The Epistle to the godly Reader of these pious SERMONS.
THE Author of these ensuing Sermons, Master William Fenner, was so deservedly
famous in the Church of God, and so well known unto me in particular, and one
to whom I was so much obliged, when he was living, as that I could not think
it sufficient to give a bare Imprimatur unto his Sermons, but have added this
Testimony also, that thereby all good People might be encouraged to read these
Works of his, whose life and conversation was a continual Sermon, and who
spent himself in Studying and Preaching, and whose memory will be ever
precious unto

Your loving friend Edm. Calamy.

TO THE READER.
Good Reader
THE Author of these Sermons, having served his time, and being fallen asleep,
The lot is fallen upon me to appear in their behalf, and to seal unto their
worth and usefulness for public service, as far as thou please to seal
unto my judgment and faithfulness in such a case, with thine opinion and
approbation. For the truth is, that the strength and value of my testimony
concerning them, is like to extend no further, than thine does concerning me:
So that if I add any thing to their credit and estimation in the world, by my
recommendation, it is by the mediation of thine ingenuity and fairness toward
me. But if thou shall please to be at any reasonable cost in the reading of
them, and lay thy judgment and conscience as close to the spirit, as thou must
thine eyes to the letter of what thou read, I make no question but I shall
be the gainer, and not they, by this engagement of my self for them. True
worth, especially when it overcomes and breaks out of the cloud of obscurity,
always returns more than what it receives from any man's testimony: neither is
there any method or trade so proper or certain, whereby to raise an estate of
honor and reputation to a man's self, as the bestowing or casting honor and
reputation upon other, so he be careful and dexterous in the choice of his
subject. John Baptist by giving testimony only to one, Jesus Christ, out-grew
the common stature of those that are borne of women; in true greatness, Matthew.
11. 11. And yet there was little or nothing (in effect) added to Jesus Christ
himself by his Testimony, John. 5. 34. It is an ingenuous and inoffensive way
to serve our selves out of other men's excellencies, by advancing them: neither
do the generality of men in their practice, more generally consent upon any
principle of reason and equity, than this, To recompense such men with terms of
honor, who are unpartiall and free in subscribing and acknowledging the worth
and eminency of others. And as many that are but of mean condition in the
world otherwise, yet maintain themselves comfortably, by trimming and dressing
the Gardens and Orchards, and Vineyards of rich and wealthy men; so many men
that want other personal abilities and excellencies of their own, subsist upon
terms of a convenient reputation, only by vindicating, adorning, and setting
forth the endowments and graceful parts of other men.

The subject or argument of diverse of these Sermons, is partly that Noble and
high importing strain of Christian devotion; Preparation for that solemn
enterview of Jesus Christ in his death, at his Table; The great severity of
Gods proceedings against despisers of admonitions and reproof. Both theames of
savoury consideration for all those that love not death; and more especially
for those, who desire not only to be saved, but to be saved upon sweeter,
and more comfortable terms than as by fire, 1 Corinthians 3. 15. Those that
were chastened with weakness, and sickness, and death amongst the
Corinthians, 1 Corinthians 11. 30. were yet saved, verse 32. but this was as by
or through fire; though they did not perish, were not consumed by the flames of
Gods displeasure against them, yet they were sorely scorched with them, the
smell of this fire was strong upon the garments of their flesh; They discerned
not the body of his Son Jesus Christ, in his Ordinances; but in stead of that
holy, reverend, and deepe-dyed behavior, which was due unto it, both from
their inner and outward man, as being a creature of the highest and deepest
sanctification that ever God sanctified; Sanctified not only to a more
excellent and glorious condition, but also to many ends and purposes of far
higher and dearer concernement, both for the glory of God, and benefit of Men
themselves, than all other creatures whatsoever, whether in Heaven or in Farth;
They handled and dealt by it in both kind^s, as if it had been but a common or
unsanctified thing; thus they diserned not the Lords body. And as they
discerned not his body, so neither did God (in some sense) discern theirs; but
in those sore strokes and heavy judgments which he inflicted on them, had them
in no other rgard or consideration, than a if they been the bodies of his
enemies, the bodies of wicked and sinful men; thus drawing the model and
platform of their punishment (as usually he does) from the structure and
proportion of their sin. And if the moral or spiritual seeds and originals
of our outward and bodily afflictions, as sicknesses, and weaknesses, either
upon our selves o^ ours, declining estates, losses, etc (which still lie deeper
than the natural) were but carefully and narrowly sought out, it is much to be
feared we should find a great part of them (at least) in the bowels of the
same Sin, so frequent amongst us, I mean, of Not discerning the LORDS Body.
The just and righteous God builds up the breaches that we make upon the honor
belonging to the body of his Son, with the runies of that Honor, which he
had given unto ours in health, strength, life, and many other outward comforts
and supports. But thou will hear more of these things in the Sermons
themselves; the wholesome Admonitions and Reproves wherein contained, with the
rest of that heavenly provision for thy Soul, which shall find here gathered
together, and laid into thine hand, I heartily wish may be sanctified unto thee
by the highest hand of the Sanctifier: that so thy sins and corruptions may
fly seven ways before that Spirit of power which here pursues them, and thou
never presume to return back again unto them more. The God whom we serve, is
able to perform this great petition, by Jesus Christ. To whose grace the peace
of thy soul is faithfully and feelingly commended, by

That poor and unworthy servant of Christ and his Church, T. Goodwin.

THe learned Author of these Sermons (now with God) has given much proof of
his clear knowledge, and great experience in the Mystery of godliness by his
labors already published: yet, if any shall desire a further Testimony of
either, these Sermons will give it in full measure, pressed down, and running
over; and therefore I subscribe their publication for common good.

Joseph Caryl.

The Authors Preface upon these ensuing SERMONS.
THe cause of that little Heavenlinesse which is in the profession of
Christianity, is the want of Meditation. Many can meditate cursorily, but that
is not enough: it must be a sticking meditation that must affect the heart That
place in a Pet. 2. 8. is mavelous pregnant, it was the means why Lot was so
touched with the abominations of Sodom, That righteous man dwelling amongst
them, in seeing and hearing their ungodly deeds, vexed his righteous soul from
day to day. Many heard and saw too besides Lot, and were not vexed: Why? Other
matters stuck in their thoughts, they never thoroughly meditated on it; but he
vexed himself, that is, the meditation of those evils, and bringing them home
to his Soul, vexed him.

The word is a fit word, implying two things*

First, the searching and examining of a thing, his meditating heart examined
their sins: how many they were, how grievous, how damnable, how likely to pull
down some vengeance or other upon them.

Secondly, the wracking or vexing upon trial; so it was with Lot, he observed
all their evils, and weighed them in his soul, and then he wracked his spirit
with the considertaion of them. The Evangelist uses this very word for
tossing; this word that is here put for vexing, he puts for tossing a ship on
the seas, Matthew 14. 24. The ship was tossed with the waves: so meditation did
toss his soul with vexation, sometimes down to the deep; O miserable wretches
that we are! or, How brutish, host beastly, and how hellish are our sins?
Sometimes up; O that the Lord would humble us and spare us! Sometimes over head
and ears in the storm; O fool that I was to choose my dwelling amongst such men.

These meditations vexed his soul: Many have studied meditations, and yet yet
are not acquainted with this cordial meditation: many Ministers that study
Divinity all the day, that study the Word all the week, that study their
Sermons all the year, may yet for all this, be carnal Ministers: why? Because
their meditation is but inventing and mental meditation; this meditation is a
practical meditation, the thing meditated feeds the heart: that meditation is
like a fluttering Pheasant, that flutters before their eyes, it feeds their
eyes indeed, but never feeds the stomach, as long as they neither catch or eat
it. The saving mystereis of God flutter before their eyes, and before their
understandings, they feed their eyes with knowledge, but never feed their
souls unto everlasting life, unless they fowl for it, dress and digest it in
their hearts.

There is an apt word, Genesis 24. 63. Isaac went out to meditate in the field:
the original has it, to signify ^^^nall conference, his mind conferred with
the truth, and the truth with him, a mutual working he wrought upon the truth,
by meditating of it, and it wrought upon him by leaving an impression upon his
soul: this is a rare practice in the world, and yet as necessary as most, it
is the art of the soul in being heavenly, it is the inuring of thee to every
good duty; for by meditation a man comes to have his mind and heart fixed upon
every thing that he would; would he pray? he that has inured his heart to
meditate, his mind is fixed in his prayer. Would he receive the Sacrament? He
that has inured his heart by meditation, his mind is fixed in the Ordinance.
David that was excellent at meditation, had a fixed heart, Psalm. 57. 7. Psalm.
112. 17.

The Contents and Heads of the following SERMONS.
The Contents of the first SERMON, Haggai 1. 5.
THe Preface, showing the usefulness of Meditation, together with the danger
in neglecting it. The opening of the Te^t in several particulars, page 1.
Doctrine, Serious Meditation of our sins by the word, is an especial means for
to make us repent, 2. The definition of Meditation, in four particulars, ibid.
1. It is an exercise of the mind, ibid. 2. A settled exercise of the mind, ibid.
3. It is to make a further enquiry into all the parts of the truth, ibid. 4. It
labors to affect the heart, 3.
Two Reasons.
1. Because Meditation presses all Arguments home to the heart, ibid. 2.
Because Meditation fastens sin close upon the soul, and makes the soul to feel
it, 4. 1. Use. For the reproof of several sorts of men that are loath to put in
practice this so necessary a duty, 5.
Four lets of Meditation.
1. Vain company, 6. 2. Multitude of wordly business, ibid. 3. Ignorance, 7.
4. That natural averseness that is in the heart of man unto it, ibid.
This averseness of heart consists in three things,
1. In the carelessness of the heart, ibid. 2. In the runnings and revings of
the heart, ibid. 3. In the wearisomenesse of the heart in meditation, 8. 2.
Use. For terror unto all those that dare sit down in security, never at all
regarding this soule-searching duty, ibid.
Four means or helps to Meditation.
1. With all seriousness tell the soul that thou have a message from the Lord
unto it, 9. 2. Observe fitting times for meditation: viz, 1. The morning, ibid.
2. The night, 10. 3. The evening, ibid. 4. When the heart is after some
extraordinary manner touched with Gods word or providence, ibid. 3. Call to
mind what evil thou have done ever since thou wast born, ibid 3. Rouse up thy
heart, and thoughts as high as heaven, ibid. 3. Use. For reprehension of those
that meditate upon their sins, and how they may with the more freeness to
commit sin. 11.
Four grounds upon which Meditation must be raised.
1. Meditate on the goodness, mercy and patience of God, that you have often
abused by your sins, 12. 2. Meditate on the justice of God that you have so often
provoked, 13. 3. Meditate on the wrath of God that you have so often kindled,
ibid. 4. Meditate on the constancy of God, who is a constant hater of all sin,
14.
Four directions how to carry Meditation home to the heart.
1. Weigh and ponder all the foregoing things in thine own heart, 15. 2. Strip
sin, and look upon it stark naked, and in it is own colors, 16. 3. Dive into
thine ownsoule, and search thine heart to the quick, ibid. 4. Prevent thine own
heart by meditation, and tell thy soul that it will one day wish, that it had
not neglected this so necessary a duty, 17.
Four duties to be discharged that we may put life to Meditation.
1. Let Meditation haunt and dog thy heart with the promises and threatenings,
mercies and judgments of God, 18. 2. Let Meditation trace thy heart in the
same steps, and run over all thy duties discharged, 19. 2. Let Meditation hale
thy heart before Gods Throne, there to power out thy complaints before the
Almighty. p. 20. And let thy complaint be 1. Full of sorrow, 21. 2. A full
complaint of all thy sins, ibid. 3. A complaint aggravating all thy sins by all
their circumstances. ibid. 4. A self condemning complaint, wherein the
complaint of Ezra is illustrated in eight particulars, 22.
4. Let meditation when it has searched out thy case, and made it appear how
woeful it is, cast thee down before God, 23.
Four Motives to stir up the soul to Meditation.
Consider it is the part of a fool not to meditate: It is madness for a man to
walk on in a course, and not to consider whither it will tend, 24. 2. Consider,
not to meditate is the brand of a Reprobate, ibid. 3. He that meditates not,
robs God of his honor, 25. 4. All the service that a man performs unto the
Lord, will be abominable, if he meditate not before it, and after it. ibid. The
reason why we have so many vain thoughts in our holy exercises, is, because we
prepare not our hearts thereunto by meditation.
The Contents of the third SERMON; Proverbs 1. 28.
1. THe opening of the context in five particulars, 29. 2. The opening of the
words of the Text in four particulars, 30. 1. Doctrine. Those that will not
hear the Lord when he calls upon them by the ministry of his word, and voice
of his Spirit, the Lord will not heart them, when in their misery they call
upon him. 21.
Three Reasons of the point.
1. The law of Retaliation, of rendering like for like, requires it. ibid. 2.
Because Gods two Attributes of Mercy and Justice, have their season in this
life, and when Mercy has acted her part, then comes Justice upon the stage
for to act her part. 32. 3. Because it is Gods manner for to do so in temporal
things, and therefore much more in matters of grace and salvation. 33. God
gives to men a day; and no Man nor Angel knows how long this day lasts, or
when this season of grace shall have an end, 35. And as there is a personal
day, so there is a National day, 36. Objection 1. A man may be called at the
eleventh or twelfth hour of the day, 37. Answer, Those that were called at the
first hour, came in at first hour; those that came in at the twelfth hour, were
not the same that were called at the first hour, ibid. Objection 2. The day of
grace lasts as long as the day of life. ibid. The Objection is cleared under
three particulars, Answer, And it is answered, that the day of grace may end to
a particular man long before his death, 1. Because God may harden a man's heart,
38. 2. Because God may sear men's consciences. ibid. Objection 3. Suppose I go
on in my sin, and repent upon my death bead, will God hear me? Answer, The
answer is negative, 39. Objection 4. Suppose I humble my self by fasting and
prayer, will not God hear that? The answer is negative, if thou neglect the day
of grace, ibid. Object. 5. At what time soever a sinner repents, he shall find
mercy. Ans. It is true if he repent from the bottom of his heart, but a man may
have many a degree of repentance, and yet never repent from his heart, ibid.
Self* love may make a man do much, ibid. 2. Doctrine. It may be this very day,
even this particular Sermon, this instant hour may be thy day, that art now in
the sins, that if thou repent not at this very one Sermon, thou neglectest
eternal life for ever, 40.
Four Reasons of the point.
1. Because Gods patience is in his own breast, and who can tell how long it
will last? ibid. Wherein Joel 2. 12. is opened in five particulars, ibid. 2.
God usually gives some signs of death beforehand, 41. But the day of grace
may end, and a man never have any warning of it, Because Gods patience gives
no marks or inkling of its ending before it ends, ibid. 3. Because God keeps
a strict account how many opportunities he has vouchsafed, 42. 4. Consider, it
is a wonder that the day of grace is not ended already, and that thou art not
now in hell. 43.
The Contents of the fourth SERMON, upon upon Philip. 3. 18, 19.
1: AN Explaination of the several parts of the Text in five particulars, 43.
Doctrine. That those whose minds and thoughts run habitually on earth and
earthly things, their end must needs be destruction, 44. 6. Reasons. 1. The
curse of God is the desert of vain thoughts, ibid. 2. The curse of God is the
event of vain thoughts, ibid. 3. The man whose thoughts are habitually on the
things of the world, can never truly repent, 47. 4. Because that man whose
thoughts run habitually on earthly things, has no part in Jesus Christ, 48. 5.
Because so long as a man's thoughts run habitually on things of the world, that
man has no true love of God in him, ibid. 6. Because so long as a man's
thoughts run after the world he can never depart from his sins, 49. 2. Uses. 1.
For humiliation, because these vain thoughts bearing sway in the heart, they
make that man's end to be destruction. 50. 2. For the terror of those men who
suffer their hearts to be taken up with vain thoughts. 51. Objection. But I
think of God and of Christ, of faith and repentance, 52. Answ. 1. Consider
whether thy good thoughts be merely cast into thy heart, or whether they be
raised by thy heart, ibid. A wicked man may have a thousand good thoughts, and
yet go to hell in the midst of them. 53. 2. Thou have good thoughts, but
consider whether they be fleeting or abiding thoughts, 54. There are two kinds
of vain thoughts: 1. vain, because the matter and substance of them is vain;
2. vain, for want of durance and lasting, though not vain for the matter of
them. ibid. 3. Thou think of God, but consider whether thy thoughts be
studied or accidental thoughts, 55. A godly man not only thinks of God, but
he studieth how to think of God, ibid. 4. Thou think of God, but consider
whether thy thoughts of God be profitable, or unprofitable thoughts, ibid.
Thoughts how free, and not free: Free from men's knowledge and men's Courts: Not
free 1. From Gods knowledge, ibid. 2. They are not free from Gods word, ibid.
3. They are not free from the wrath of God, 57.
Three means, in the use whereof we may rid our selves of vain thoughts.
1. Love the word of God, ibid. 2. Go unto God by prayer, ibid. 3. Consider,
thou have not so learned Christ, 58.
All vain thoughts arise from these three Heads,
1. From the variety and abundance of the thoughts of the world, ibid. 2. From
the Fountain of corruption that is in men's hearts, ibid. 3: From the damned
malice of Satan, and his temptations both within and without. ibid.
Thoughts become vain four manner of ways.
In respect of the Matter. In respect of the Form. In respect of the
Efficient. In respect of the End. 1. Thoughts are Meterially vain, When the
matter of them is vain, ibid. Such are the thoughts of the world, our calling
or recreation: these are evil, 1. When we think of them primarily, that is,
before we think of God, 59. 2. When we think of them too usually, too often,
ibid. 3. When we think of them too savourily, 60. 4. When we think of them
without counsel, ibid. 5. When they are thoughts needlessly, ibid.
2. Thoughts are vain formally, when though the matter of them be never so
good, yet the manner of thinking them is evil, 61. It is possible for a man to
go to hell, though he perform the same things for the matter of them that a
godly man does, ibid. 3. Thoughts are vain efficiently, when the heart that
thinks upon them is earthly and vain, 62. 4. Thoughts are vain, when the
drift and end of the soul in thinking on them is vain. 63. Wicked men will be
thinking of God, 1. To make God amends for their dishonouring of him by their
wicked thoughts, ibid. 2. To collogue with God, and to flatter him, 64. 3. To
smoother and choke their own consciences. ibid.
The Contents of the fifth SERMON; 1 Corinthians. 6. 2.
1. AN Explanation of the Text, together with the veses foregoing and
following, 67. Doctrine, The Saints shall judge the world, 68. Objection. How
shall the Saints judge the world? 69. Answer. 1. By their consent unto Christ's
Judgment. ibid. 2. By their applause to Christ's judgment, ibid. 3. By their
Majesty; then shall they shine as stars in the firmament, and the wicked shall
be amazed at the sight of them. ibid. 4. By their lives and conversations,
their accepting of the Lord Jesus Christ, they shall judge the worlds rejecting
of him. ibid.
Three Reasons of the point.
1. First, because of that mystical union that is betwixt Christ and his
Saints, so when Christ judges the world, the whole body of Christ may be said
to judge the world. 70. 2. In regard of their sufferings with Christ; as they
are judged by the world, so they shall be judges of the world, ibid. 3. For the
greater terror to all wicked men at the day of judgment, ibid. 4. Because the
mouths of wicked men may be stopped, and that they may have no excuse for
themselves. ibid. Use 1. For information in five particulars. 1. Hence we may
learn that the Saints by their now being Saints, do now judge the world. 71.
Wherein, Heb. 11. 7. is cleared from an Objection. 2. Hence let the world
learn, that when any one sinner is converted, there is one Judge more to sit
upon them. 72. 3. Hence we may learn, that it concerns all the world to take
notice of every grace in Gods children, because there is never a grace in any
of the Saints, but it shall make for the condemnation of them that want it.
ibid. 4. Learn hence, that if the Saints, then much more the word that begets
them, shall judge the world. 73. 5. Learn hence also, that the Ministers of
God by every Sermon they preach, shall judge the world. ibid. Use 2. For to
condemn the world, who see not an amiablenesse in the faces of the Saints, who
shall one day be their Judges, who shall judge both Saints and Angels. 74. 2.
This shows the folly of the wicked, who prepare not for these Judges. ibid.
Lastly, it condemns all those that do not see glory and majesty in the face
of. Gods Saints, he that revileth the Saints, revileth his Judges, ibid
Who shall judge the World.
1. God the Father by way of authority, all judgment is originally from him.
75. 2. God the Son by way of dispensation. ibid. 3. God the holy Ghost by way
of conviction. 76. 4. The Word of God by way of form, it being the platform,
according to which Christ will judge the whole world. ibid. 5 All the Ministers
of God shall sit as Justices in common. 77. 6. All the Saints from one end of
the world to the other, shall assist the just Judge of Heaven and Earth. ibid.
So that the wicked shall not be able to plead: ibid. 1. Their Ignorance ibid.
2. Nor their Poverty. ibid. 3. Neither their sinning at their masters command,
78. 4. Neither Callings or Trade. ibid. 5. Neither the sinful times they live
in. ibid.
Use 3. First for the just reproof of many of the Saints of God, because they
are not so circumspect over their ways, as they ought; how will they be able
to rise up in judgment against the wicked for such sins as they them selves
live in? ibid. 2. It may serve to condemn some of the Saints of God in regard
of that little difference that is to be found betwixt the wicked of the world,
and them in their lives and manners, it is hard to tell which is a Saint, and
which is a Reprobate, by their conversations. 3. It may serve to condemn the
scandalousnesse of many persons in their behavior and actions. 80.
The Contents of the sixth Sermon, on 1 Cor. 11. 30.
Doct. 1. FRom the 18. v. that whosoever will come to the holy Communion, they
must examine themselves, that so they may come warthily. 83. The Apostle gives
three Reasons of it. 1. From the end of the Sacrament. 2. From the wrong men
offer to Christ, if they come in their sins. ibid. 3. From the woeful wrong
that a man does to his own soul, that comes without preparation. ibid.
The Uses of the point are these.
1. For the reproof of those, that coming unpreparedly, get no spiritual
strength thereby. ibid. 2. For terror to unworthy receivers. 85. 3. To show
they make themselves liable to Gods temporary plagues. ibid. 4. For instruction
to examine our selves. ibid. 5. He concludes with an use of exhortation. 86.
An Explanation of the Words.
Doct. 2. God does most severely punish the unworthy receivers of the Lords
Supper. 87.
Four Reasons hereof.
1* Because Christ himself instituted it. ibid. 2. Because Christ is the
matter of it, and therefore the more heinous the defilement. 89. 3. Because
Christ is the form of it, wherein confirming grace is sealed to the soul. 90.
4. Because Christ is the end of the Sacrament. ibid. Use 1. For Instruction;
showing whence sickness, weakness, etc. come. 91. From whence comes hardness
of heart, etc. 92. Use 2. For comfort unto every poor afflicted soul, etc. 93.
Use 3. For terror to those that come unpreparedly. 94. Object. Do all that come
unworthily eat and drink their own damnation? Answ. A man may eat and drink his
own damnation three ways. 1. In regard of guilt and liablenesse to Gods wrath,
96. 2. In regard of the seal and obligation in the conscience, ibid. 3. In
regard of the sigillation in heaven. ibid. Lastly the conclusion, denouncing
terror to all those that dare rush upon this holy ordinance, 205. But for
comfort to all them, who with all diligence set upon the preparing of their
souls for this great Ordinance. ibid.
The Contents of the seventh SERMON, on 2 Cor. 11. 28. The words of the Text
explained.
Doct. 1. WE must not rush upon the Sacrament. 102. There are none of the
Ordinances of God that a man may rush upon without examination. ibid.
Three Reasons hereof.
1. Naturally we are not invited guests to the Sacrament. ibid. 2. Though we
are invited, yet it may be we are not disposed: for, naturally we are strangers
to God and the covenant of God; all this indisposition must be wrought off
before we can come comfortably to the Sacrament. 103. 3. This is a solemn
Ordinance, and therefore an Ordinary disposition will will not serve the turn,
ibid. Many a reprobate may eat and drink in Christ's presence, ibid. Use. To
forewarne men lest they unpreparedly rush upon any of Gods Ordinances,
especially upon the Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ. 104. The text
divided into four parts.
The matter of the duty. ibid. The manner how to be performed. ibid. The rule
of direction concerning it, ibid. The benefit of following that rule. ibid.
Doct. 2. There is a necessity that we should receive the Lords Supper, and
receive it often, 105. Doct. 3. The manner of performance of duties is to be
regarded, ibid.
Five Reasons hereof.
1. The Lord commands the manner as well as the matter, 106. 2. Circumstances
overthrow actions, if they be not rightly and duly observed, ibid. Its instanced
1. In grayer, ibid. 2. In preaching, ibid. 3. In receiving the Sacrament, 107.
4. In brotherly reproof, ibid. 5. In eating, drinking, and marrying, ibid.
3. Because only the manner of doing duties gets the blessing, 108. 4. Because
Christ himself is an example unto us in this, he did not only obey his Father
in the matter of his commands, but in the manner of them, ibid. 5. Because
otherwise we cannot glorify God, ibid. Use. 1. First, to condemn that natural
Popery that is in the hearts of men, etc. 109. Use 2. For discovering why
people are so willing to do duties for the matter and not for the manner. 110.
The Reasons of it are these.
1. Because the matter of duties is easy, but the manner is difficult. ibid.
2. Dutres for the matter of them may be done with a proud heart, 111. 3. They
may be done with an unholy life, 112. 4. The matter of duty brings not the
cross; and may zealous for the matter, and persecutors of goodnes^e, ibid. Use
3. To exhort men to labor and perform duties aright. 113.
Three Motives to persuade people to perform duties after a right manner.
1. Because no Ordinance at all else can be effectual unto us, ibid. 2. All is
but hypocrisy, if the manner be not regarded, ibid. 3. It is only the right
manner of duing, duties that pleases God, 114. Doctrine. 4. Every man mast
prepare himself before he come to the Lords Table, 115.
Four Reasons hereof.
1. Because the Sacrament is Gods ordinance, ibid. 2. Because the Lord Christ
has made great preparation in providing it, 116. 3. Because Christ in this
ordinance offers to come into the soul, and he looks for good entertainment,
ibid. 4. Because the Sacrament is a part of Christ's last will and Testament,
therefore when we know our Lords will, we must prepare for the doing of it,
117.
The Contents of the eighth SERMON, upon Proverbs 29. 1. 1. A double exposition
of the Text.
Doctrine FRom the first exposition, viz, He that reproves another, and is
guilty himself in the same kind, or in any other kind, and hardens his own
heart in it, that man shall be destroyed without remedy. 122.
Seven Reasons hereof.
1. Because the office of a reprover binds him to be blameless, ibid. 2.
Because such a reprover as is guilty himself, can never reprove to a right end,
ibid. 3. Neither can he do it in a right manner, 123. 4. Such a reprover is an
hypocrite, ibid. 5. Such a reproving of another man's sin, makes him inexcusable
in his own, 124. 6. It is an absurd thing for a person to reprove another for
that whereof he is guilty himself, ibid. 7. Such a reproving is a sign of
impudency, ibid. Objection. Shall not a wicked Magistrate or Minister reprove
others, etc? 125, Answ. He is bound to reprove, in regard of his office, but it
bound in conscience to amend himself first, ibid. Use 1. For instruction:
first, Let every reprover take heed lest he make himself inexcusable, ibid. 2.
Let him endeavor to walk unblameable and inoffensive, ibid.
Two Doctrines from the second Exposition of the Words, viz.
Doctrine 1. The Lord does not not destroy man willingly, but for sin. 127.
Doctrine 2. It is a great mercy for man to be reproved for his sin. 128.
Three Reasons of second Doctrine.
1. Because reproofs primarily come from love, ibid. 2. They tend to the good
of a man's soul. 129. 3. Its brutish not to take reproofs in good part. 130.
Use 1. First for information, that God is bringing destruction upon a Kingdom,
when he takes away reprovers from them: ibid. Use 2. For the reproof of those
that despise the reproof of the wise; they despise not men, but God. 131, The
grievousnesse of their sin who stand out against reproof, is aggravated under
several heads. 132. Doctrine 3. The Lord proportions punishments to men's sins.
ibid.
Three Reasons of the third Doctrine.
1. Because hereby a man's punishment appears to be so much more equal and
worthy. ibid. 2. This stops men's mouths, and convinces their consciences.
ibid. 3. All the standers by may see the equity of it, when the punishment is
according to the sin, 133. Use 3. For instruction. 1. To teach men notto
complain of Gods dealing with them, if their punishment be (for the the kind
of it) according to their sin, but rather let them learn to see Gods immediate
hand in it. 134. 2. To teach men to consider how God many times proportions
punishments to sin, 1. For Kind, ibid. 2. For Quantity, ibid. 3. For Quality,
135. 4. For Time, ibid. 5. For Place, ibid.

The Contents of the ninth SERMON, Isaiah 55. 7*
Doct. 1. THose whose minds, or thoughts, run habitually on earthly things, are
yet in the state of misery. 139.
Four Reasons.
1. Because a man is in the state of misery till he has repented, and until a
man has forsaken his vain thoughts, he has not repented. ibid. 2. Because a
man is in a state of misery until he is in Christ, and a man is not in Christ
till his thoughts be sanctified. ibid. 3. Because a man is in the state of
misery that does not love God, and a man can never love God until he forsake
his vain thoughts. 140. 4. Because that man is in a state of misery that does
not forsake sin, and a man can never forsake sin till he leave his vain
thoughts. ibid. 1. Because vain thoughts are great sins, ibid. 2. They are
sins of the highest part of man, ibid. 3. They are the breach of every
Commandment, ibid. 4. Because they are the strength of a man's soul, the first
born of original corruption, ibid. 5. Because they are the dearest acts of
man. 141.
Doct. 2. It is hard for men to forsake their sinful thoughts. ibid. 1.
Because it is hard for to reform the inward part, ibid. 2. Because thoughts
are partial acts, and run on in every action. ibid. 3. Because thoughts are
inward, in the heart. 142.
Use. 1. For men to examine their thoughts, ibid. A man may know whether he be
a child of God, or of the Devil, by his thoughts. ibid. 1. Because men's
thoughts are the free acts of the heart, ibid. 2. They are the immediate acts
of the heart, 143. 3. They are continued acts of heart, ibid. 4. They are the
univocall acts of the heart, ibid. 5. They are the swiftest acts of the heart,
144. 6. They are the peculiar acts of the heart, ibid. 7. They are the greatest
accusers, or excusers of the heart. ibid. Use 2. For direction, If sin in
thought be so great, how horrible then is sin in the act? 145. Use 3. For
exhortation, to consider 1. What great reason we have to set our thoughts on
God. 146. 2. What thoughts they are that God calls for. ibid.
The Contents of the tenth SERMON on Luke 9. 23.
THe words of the text unfolded and opened in several particulars. 151. Doct.
The first action to be performed of every Christian is to deny himself ibid.
Reason 1. From Christ's example, he denied himself, 152. 2. Christ denied
himself for us, therefore we must deny our selves for him. ibid. 3. This
Christ enjoins to all that will come after him, ibid.
What is meant by a man's self.
1. A man's corrupt will, wit and reason, 153. 2. All his lusts and corruptions,
ibid 3. Not only a man's corrupt self, but a man's good self in some respects,
154. Selfe-denying is opposite to selfe-seeking, ibid.
There are five things in selfe-seeking.
1. It is an head lust. ibid. And that appears, 1. Because it is a leading-lust
to all lust ibid. 2. Because self is the cause of all other lusts of the
heart, 155. 3. Because self is an in lust, it runs along through all the lusts
of the flesh. ibid. 4. Self is a make-lust, a man would never break out into
lust, were it not for self, ibid. 5. Self is a lust that is in request. ibid.
2. Selfe-seeking is a selfe-conceited lust, that is,
1. When a man has a conceit of himself, 156. 2. Of his own gifts, ibid. 3.
Of his own actions. ibid. 4. Of the state that he is in. ibid.
When as a selfe-conceited man
1. Has no real worth in himself, 157. 2. He will not stand to the judgment
of those that can judge him. ibid. 3. He has too high a conceit of himself,
ibid. 4. He rests in the judgment of himself. ibid.
And the Reasons of this are these*
1. Because sinners are fools. 158. 2. Men are borne fools, ibid. 3. Men are
well-conceited of their own estate. ibid. 4* The Lord gives up many to a spirit
of slumber. 159.
The woeful case of a selfe-conceited men.
1. Because the Scripture calls selfe-concei^ 1. Only a thinking. ibid. 2. A
superstition. ibid. 3. A shadow. ibid. 4. An Imagination. ibid. 5. An
Appearance. ibid.
2. So long as a man is well conceited of himself, Christ has no commission to
call him. 160. 3. Christ rejoices that he has no commission to call such.
ibid. 4. The self conceited man is in the broad way to hell. ibid.
The Contents of the eleventh SERMON, upon Luke 11. 9.
THe opening of the Context. The words of the Text opened. 164. Doctr.
Importunate prayer is a restless prayer* 165. Reason 1. It will take no
privative denial, it must have some Answer. ibid. 2. Not a positive denial,
not a contrary answer. ibid. 3. It will take no contumelious repulse. 166. 4.
It is in a holy manner a kind of impudent prayer. ibid.
3. Reasons why we must pray importunately.
1. In regard of Gods Majesty, God respects it. 167. 2. In regard of Gods
mercy, it is a disgrace to Gods mercy to beg it coldly, 168. 3. In regard of
our selves, else we should never esteem mercy. 169.
4. Reasons why men are not importunate in Prayer.
1. Because men account prayer a penance. ibid. 2. Most men content themselves
with formality. ibid. 3. Men are Gentlemen beggars. 170. 4. Men have wrong
conceits of prayer. ibid. 1. They have high conceits of their own prayers.
ibid. 2. They have mean conceits of their sins* 171. 3. They have base thoughts
of God. ibid. 4. Thee have wrong conceits of Importunity. ibid,

The Contents of the twelfth Sermon, on Luke. 11. 9.
6. Signs whereby we may know whether our prayers be importunate.
1. IMportunate prayer is evermore the prayer of an importunate man. 175. 2 It
is the prayer of a pure conscience. 176. 3. It is a prayer that is full of
strong arguments, 177. 4. It is a stout prayer, ibid. 5* It is a wakefull
prayer, ibid. 6. It is an assurance-getting prayer, ibid.
7. Marks of Prayer that is not importunate.
1. It is a lazy prayer. 178. 2. It is not powered out from the heart, ibid. 3.
It is a praying only by fits, ibid. 4 It is a silent prayer, he is silent in
that he should most insist upon. 179. 5. A seldom prayer. ibid. 6. A lukewarm
prayer. 180. 7. By-thoughts in prayer keep prayer from being importunate.
By-thoughts in prayer arise,
1. From corrupt nature. ibid. 2. From nature as it is curbed, ibid. 3. From
Satan. ibid. 4. From spiritual sluggishnesse, 181.
8. Motives to Importunate Prayer.
1. Because prayer enables a man for duties, ibid. 2. Prayer is the compendium
of all divinity, 182. 3. Prayer is a man's utmost refuge, ibid. 4. Prayer is
that which Gods people have, though they have nothing else. ibid. 5. Prayer
has the command of mercy, ibid. 6. Prayer is Gods delight. 183. 7. Importunate
prayer is a willing prayer. ibid. 8. Importunate prayer is the only faithful
prayer. ibid.
6. Helps to importunity in Prayer.
1. Labor to know thine own misery. ibid. 2. Be sensible of thy misery, ibid.
3. Observe how Gods people pray, ibid. 4. Get a stock of prayer. ibid. 5.
Labor to be full of good works, 184. 6. Labor to reform thy household. ibid
The Contents of the thirteenth SERMON, upon Col. 1. 10.
THe words explained according to a double sense, 187. Doctr. Those that
profess Christ, must walk worthy of Christ. 188. Reason 1. Because it is
Christ that calls us to be Christians, ibid. 2. Because it is the Gospel of
Christ whereby we are called, 289. 3. Because by the Gospel we are called to
repentance, ibid. 4. Because if we walk not worthy of Christ; God will not hold
us to be his servants. ibid. 5. If we walk not worthy of Christ, then it will
be for the glory of God to cashiere us, 190. 6. If we walk not worthy of
Christ, we put an indignity upon him. ibid.
Five Motives to walk worthy of God.
1. If we do walk worthy of God, then we shall answer all the labor and cost
that God has been at, 193. 2. Then we shall walk with God in white, 194. 3.
Then we do not disappoint Gods account, ibid. 4. Then we shall be importunate
beggars, and so worthy of mercy. ibid. 5. Then we shall add humiliation to
every duty we do perform, ibid.
2. If we do not walk worthy of God, then
1. We walk worthy of destruction, 195. 2. Then we are guilty of the death
of Christ, ibid. 3. Then we shall be condemned. ibid. Use. We must be as it
were even of the very nature of God. 192.
The Contents of the fourteenth SERMON; on Col. 1. 10.
IT is possible to walk in all manner of pleasing unto the Lord, 200. Reas. 1.
Because God is not a rigorous God, ibid. 2. There is a way, wherein if we walk,
we shall please God. ibid. 3. The Lord has showed us this way, ibid. 4. Many
have walked in this way before us, ibid. Doct. It is a fit duty to please God.
ibid. Reason 1. Because God is a great King. 201. 2. His pleasure is a good
pleasure. ibid. 3. Christ who is our better did th^se things that pleased God.
ibid. 4. If we do not please God our consciences will condem us. ibid. 5. It is
a duty most suitable to humane society. ibid. Doctr. Pleasing of God is a large
duty. 202. Reason 1. It is the end of all our duties, ibid. 2. It is the most
acceptable of all duties, ibid. 3. It is unconfinable to place or time, ibid.
4. It is in all things without limitation, ibid. 5. It is an everlasting duty,
203. 6. It is the whole duty of the new man, ibid. Doctr. It is a necessary
duty to please God, ibid. Reas. 1. Because* we have no saving grace unless we
labor to please God* ib. 2. We are in a woeful case if we do not please God,
ibid. 3. If we do not please God, we are continually in danger of the wrath of
God. Use. To condemn, 1. Those that please not God, ibid. 2. Those that please
men, ibid. 3. Those that please themselves. 205.
The Contents of the fifteenth SERMON, on Luke 23. 42.
EXtraordinary cases never make a common rule. 209. That a wicked life will
have a cursed end, this is the ordinary rule. ibid. Yet in some extrtardinary
cases it may be otherwise, 1. When God is pleased to show his prerogative
royal. ibid. 2. When a sinner has not had means of salvation in his life, but
only at his death. 210. 3. When a sinner shall be made exemplary. ibid. 4. When
the Lord may be as much honored by a man's death, as he has been dishonored
by his life. This repentance of the thief was extraordinary: as is proved by
five arguments. 1. Because it was one of the wonders of Christ's passion. ibid.
2. We read not of any other that was converted at the last hour, as the thief
was, 211. 3. Because of the suddenness of it. ibid. 4. In regard of the
Evangelicall perfection of it. Containing, 212. 1. His penitential confession,
ibid. 2 His penitential profession, ibid. 3. His penitential satisfaction,
ibid. 4. His penitential self-denial, ibid. 5. His penitential faith. ibid.
6. His penitential resolution. 213. 7. His penitential prayer. ibid.
5. This repentance was extraordinary in regard of the incomparablenesse of it.
ibid. Use. To condemn those that rely upon this example. 214. This example is
once recorded that none might despair, and but once that none might presume.
215. None, because of this example should defer their repentance. 1. Because
this thief had not the means of life and grace before. 216. 2. Because we never
read that this thief put off his repentance till the last. ibid. 3. Because at
that time God was in a way of working miracles, 218.
The Contents of the seventeenth SERMON, on Psalm. 147. 3.
THe words of the Text opened, 223. What is meant by wholenesse of heart, ibid.
What is meant by brokennesse of heart, 224. Doctr. Christ justifies and
sanctifies, Or heals the brokenhearted, 226.
Four Reasons.
1. Because God has given grace unto Christ to heal the brokenhearted, ibid.
2. Christ has undertaken to do it, ibid. 3. Christ has this in charge to bind
up the brokenhearted, ibid. 4. None but the broken hearted will accept of
Christ, ibid. Several objections are answered, 227. 228, 229.
Three Reasons why Christ will heal the brokenhearted.
1. This is the most seasonable time to be healed, when the heart is broken,
232. 2. It is the most profitablest time, ibid. 3. It is the very nick of time,
the heart can never be healed until it be broken, ibid.
Three signs of a broken heart.
1. A breaking from sin, 234. 2. A breaking in it self with sorrow, ibid. The
history of Zacheus conversion is opened in seven particulars, ibid. 3. When the
heart is broken, then it will stoop to Gods word in all things, 237.
The Contents of the eighteenth SERMON, on Isaiah 57. 1.
The words of the Text explained.
Doct. ALl men must die, 241. Reason 1. Because God has so appointed it, 242.
2. Because all men and women are of the dust, ibid. 3. Because all have sinned,
ibid. 4. Because as death came into the World by sin, so sin might go out of
the world by death, ibid.
Two Objections against this are answered. ibid. Use 1. Let no man look to be
exempted from death for his righteousnese, 243. 2. Hence we should learn to
draw our hearts from this present world, ibid. 3. To teach us to prepare our
selves for a better life, ibid. Doct. The death and loss of good men must be
laid to heart as an especial cause of grief and sorrow, 244, Reason. 1.
Because the instruments of Gods glory are taken away, ibid. 2. Because of the
great loss that others have by their death, ibid. 3. Because of the evil to
come; for while they live, they are as a wall to keep off the wrath of God,
ibid. Use 1. To reprove those that rejoice at the death of the righteous, 245,
2. To inform us what a loss it is when the righteous are taken away, ibid.
Doct. When God will bring any great judgment upon a people or Nation,
ordinarily he takes away his faithful servants from amongst them, 146. Use 1.
To inform us of Gods extraordinary love to his Children, ibid. 2. To inform us
that when the righteous are taken away, we are certainly to expect some great
judgment from God to fall upon us, ibid.
The Contents of the nineteenth SERMON; on Jeremiah 14. 9.
THe opening of the context in many particulars. 251. Doctr. God many times
does cast off a people, 252.
Four Signs of Gods casting off a people.
1. When he takes away his love and respect from a people, 253. 2. When he
takes away his providence from them. ibid. 3. When he breaks down the walls of
Magistracy and Ministry. ibid. 4. When he takes away the benefit of both these
helps. ibid. Use 1. To teach us to cast off security. ibid. Doct. It is the
importunate desire of the Saints of God still to keep God present with them.
255. The presence of God is the particular favor of God, which he expresses
in his ordinances, ibid. 1. This question is answered, Whether a man may be
saved without preaching, 256. 2. This question is answered, who they are that
are weary of God, 257. Use. To rebuke Gods people for their neglect, in not
striving to keep God, who seems to be departing, 258. Quest. How may we keep
the Lord amongst us. 260. Answ. 1. We must be sure to prepare a room for him.
ibid. 2. We must give him content. 261. 3. We must make him welcome. ibid. 4.
We must be importunate with God to tarry, and account it a great favor if he
will stay. 262.
The Contents of the twentieth SERMON, on Lament* 3. 5. 7.
THe opening of the words, in which are three properties of effectual Prayer.
165. 1. The unsatiablenesse of it till it be heard. ibid. 2. The sensiblenesse
of it whether it be heard or no* ibid. 3. The supply it has against danger,
and discouragement. 166. Doct. 1. An effectual prayer is an unsatiable prayer.
ibid. Quest. Must a man always pray? Answ. A man must give over the Act of
prayer for other duties, but he must never give over the suit of Prayer. 267.
Rules to know whether our Prayers be unsatiable or no, 1. It it an earnest
begging Prayer, ibid. 2. It is a constant prayer, 268. A godly man's prayer is
not out of his heart, till the grace he prayed for be in, ibid. 3* It is a
prayer that is ever a beginning* ibid. 4. It is a proceeding prayer, it winds
up the heart higher, and higher. ibid. 5. It is a prayer that purifieth the
heart, ibid. It is more and more fervent. 169. And more and more frequent.
ibid. It will take time from lawful recreations, and from the lawful duties
of our calling. 270. And it will add humiliation and fasting to prayer. ibid.
Use. To condemn those who pray for grace, and yet sit down before grace is
obtained. ibid. Such prayers are 1. Endless. 271. 2. Fruitless. ibid. Doct.
2. A godly soul is sensible of Gods hearing or not hearing his prayer. 272.
Quest. How can the soul know whether it speed in prayer or no* Answ. 1. When
God gives a soul further and further ability to pray, it is a sign that God
hears it. ibid. But if the soul have no heart to continue its suit, it is a
sign that God never means to hear that man's prayer. ibid. 2. The
preparedness of the heart to prayer, is a sign that God means to hear. 273.
3. Gods gracious look is a sign that he will hear: for sometimes God answers
his people by a cast of his countenance. ibid. 4. The conscience of a man will
answer him, whether God hears his prayer or no. 274. But a man's conscience may
be misinformed. 275. A wicked man may have a truce, though no true peace in his
conscience. ibid. 5. The getting of the grace that a man prays for, is a sign
that God hears his prayer. ibid. But God may give many temporal blessings, and
common graces, yet not in love, but in wrath, 276. 6. If a man have Faith given
him to believe, it is a sign that God hears him, ibid. Good works are good
signs of Faith, but they are but rotten grounds of Faith. ibid. Object. Every
Promise runs with a condition. ibid. Answ. 1. The Promise is the ground of
Faith, and the way to get the condition. 277. ^. Faith is the enabling cause to
keep the condition, ibid. Two things do much hurt in Prayer, 1. Groundless
encouragement. 2. Needless discouragement. 278. Doct. 3. God would not have
any Christian soul to be discouraged in prayer. 279* A definition of
discouragement, ibid.
Four Reasons why we should not be discouraged in prayer.
1. Because discouragement hinders the soul in prayer. ibid. 2. Discouragement
takes away the strength of the soul in prayer, 280. 3. If we have fearful
apprehensions of our sins, so as to think they will never be forgiven, we can
never pray aright. ibid. 4 If we have any secret despair* we can never pray to
any purpose, ibid. There is a double desperation, 1* Of infidelity* which draws
the soul from God. 2. Of extremity, which puts life into a man's prayers and
endeavors. 282. A man never prays well till he feel himself undone. 283. We
should take heed of discouragements; for 1 Discouragements breed
melancholinesse in the soul. 285. 2. They breed hard thoughts of God, ibid. 3.
They will cause a man to think that God hates him, 286. 4. They will bring a
man to despair. ibid. Ministers should not preach the pure law without the
Gospel, 287. Secret discouragements in the heart, 1. They take away the Spirit
in the use of the means, 288. 2. They drive us from the use of means, ibid. 3.
They make a man continually to pore on his sins, so as he shall never be able
to get out of them. 289. 4. They breed nothing but sorrow. ibid. 5. They leave
the Soul in a maze, that it knows not whither to turn it self. 290. They
whisper into a man a sentence of of Death, and an impossibility of escaping.
ibid. The conclusion of the whole. 291.

The Contents of the one and twentieth SERMON, on Romans 8. 22.
EVery creature has a threefold goodness in it, 1. A goodness of end. 295.
2. A goodness of nature, ibid. 3. A goodness of use. 296. There be four evils
under which every Creature groaneth. 1. The continual labor that the Creature
is put unto, ibid. 2. The creature sometimes partakes of the plagus of the
ungodly. ibid. 3. The Creature has an instinctive fellow-feeling of man's
wretchedness. 297. 4 Because they are rent and torn from their proper
Masters, ibid. Doct. Every creature groaneth under the slavery of sin. ibid.
Not only under the slavery of sinful men, but so far as they minister to the
flesh of the Saints, they groan under them, ibid. Object. Did ever any man hear
any unreasonable creature groan under sin? Answ. It is spoken
Hyperbolically, to declare the great misery the creatures are into serve
sinful man. ibid. 2. Analogically in regard of a natural instinct of blind
reason; that is in all the creatures. ibid. 3. It is spoken by way of
supposition, if they had reason, they would groan 298. 4 Intelligently,
because a man cannot wrong the creature, but he wrongs God in the creature.
ibid. 5. Specifically, because the Godly come before God in the behalf of all
the creatures, and mourn for the abuse of the creatures; 299.
Four reasons why the Creatures groan.
1. Because they are distracted in their service. ibid. 2. Because of the
unprofitablenesse of their service. 300. 3. Because of uncessantnesse of their
service, ibid. 4. Because of that misery and woe the creatures lie under* ibid.
Every creature has, 1. A specificall end, 301. 2. An ultimate end. ibid
A wicked man has no right unto the creature. ibid. But he has. 1. A civil
right. ibid. 2. A providentiall right, ibid. 3* A vindicative right, 302. 4. A
Creatures right as he is a creature, ibid.
But he has no filial right, no son-like right in Christ. ibid. Use. To show
that wicked men have little cause to be merry at any time, because there is
nothing near them, but groaneth under them, 303. All creatures groan to God
for vengeance to be poured upon the wicked ibid. And these groans are 1.
Upbraiding groans, 305. 2. Witnessing groans, ibid. 3. Accusing groans, 307. 4.
Judging and condemning groans, ibid.
Use. For exhortation. 1. To take heed how we do abuse the Creatures of God.
ibid. 2. Take heed of sinning against God by the Creatures, ibid. 3. Take heed
of setting thy heart upon the Creature. ibid. 4. Use all the Creatures in
humility and thankfulness. 308. 5. Use the Creatures as so many Ladders to
help thee to climb up toward heaven, ibid.
The Contents of the two and twentieth SERMON; on John 2. 6.
THE opening of the words in four particulars, 313. Doct. A true Christian
walks as Christ walked 314. A man must first be in Christ, before he can
walk as Christ walked. Object. Can any man walk as Christ walked? 315. Answ.
None can walk as Christ walked in regard of equality; but in regard of
similitude they may. ibid. The life of Christ should be the Example of our
life, ibid. Christ came into the world to redeem us for our justification, and
to be an example of life unto us for our sanctification. 316. This Question
answered. viz. What it is to Walk as Christ walked, 317. Four reasons of the
point. 1. Because as Christ came into the World to justify the ungodly, so he
came to conform them to his Image, ibid. 2. Because in vain we are called
Christians, if we be not imitators of Christ, and live as he lived, 318. 3.
Because all that are in Christ, are Members of his body, therefore they must
have the same life, and be quickened by the same Spirit. 319. 4 Because of
that near relation that is betwixt Christ and every one of his Members. 320 Use
1. To show that all men that live not the life of Christ, do blaspheme the name
of Christ. 321. Of all sins under Heaven, God cannot endure the sins of them
that take the name of Christ upon them. ibid. Doctr. Every Minister is bound to
preach home to men in particulars. 322.. Reas. 1. Particulars are most
operative. ibid. 2. Particulars are most distinct, and most powerful. 324. 3
Particulars are most sensible. ibid. Doctr. Every Minister is bound to preach
so as to make a difference betwixt the pretioas and the vile. 325. Reas. 1.
Because, otherwise a Minister prophanes the holy things of God. ibid. 2.
Otherwise he cannot be the Minister of Christ. 326. 3. Otherwise he is like to
do no good by his Ministry. ibid.
The Contents of the three and twentieth SERMON, on John 3. 20.
THe Context opened in four particulars. 1. What man's natural estate, and
condition is without Christ. 331. 2. Gods gracious provision for man's
salvation. ibid. 3. The condition required, viz. Faith, 332. 4. The reprobation
of the world if they do not believe. ibid. But Christ is neither the efficient,
nor deficient cause thereof* ibid. But the cause of their damnation is from
themselves, proved 1. By their own conscience. ibid. 2. By experience, ibid 3.
By reason, 333. In the words are two parts, 1. The wickeds rejection of the
word of grace. ibid. 2. The cause of that rejection. ibid. viz 1. First from
the qualification of their persons. ibid. 2. From the disposition of their
Nature, ibid. Doctr. A wicked man hates the word of Gods grace, yea grace it
self. ibid. This hatred is 1. An actual hatred. ibid. 2. It is a passion of
the heart. ibid. 3. It causes the heart to rise up against an union with the
word, 334. This union of the word is set in opposition 1. To general
preaching. ibid 2. To merciful preaching. 335. 3. To preaching, when the
minister is dead. ibid. If the World do not hat^ a righteous man, it is either
1. Because he is a great man, 337. 2. Because he is a man of admirable wit, and
knowledge. ibid. 3. Or because God gives him favor in the eyes of the world,
ibid. 4. This hatred causes the heart to rise against that which is repugnant
to its lust. ibid. A wicked man may love three kinds of preaching. 1. Eloquent
preaching, that savours more of humanity then of Divinity, 2. Impertinent
preaching, ibid. 3. Now and then some preaching, to satisfy the cravings of
his Conscience, ibid. Reason 1. A wicked man hates the word, because he hates
all truth, even the very being of the word. 339. 2. Because he hates the very
nature of the word. 340. Because he cannot endure the knowledge of the word.
ibid. All natural men hate the word. 1. Because no entreaties, no beseeches
can possibly reconcile them. 341. 2. Because neither money, nor price can make
them friends. ibid. 3. Because all the love in the World cannot unite them
together. 343. 4. Because neither the love of God, nor the blood of Christ will
soder them together. ibid. Every natural man had rather be damned then leave
his sins, rather go to Hell then be a new creature. 344.
The Contents of the four and twentieth SERMON, on Isaiah 42. 24.
THe words contain five things. 1. The Author of the destruction. 350. 2. The
causes of it. ibid. 3. The judgment it self. ibid. 3. The people on whom it
was inflicted. ibid. 5. The effects of it, ibid.. Doctrine 1. God is the Author
of all judgments that befall a Nation, 351. Use 1. For comfort to Gods
children, seeing God is the orderer of all events, ibid. Use 2. For terror to
the wicked, that God whom they hate shall be their judge. ibid. Use 3. To
learn in all calamities to look up unto God, 352. Doctrine. 2. Sin and
disobedience against the Law of God, is that which brings down punishments, and
judgments, upon a Nation, Church, or People, ibid. Use 1. To discover the
weakness of our Land, in what a poor condition it is by reason of sin, 353.
2. To show who be the greatest Traitors to a kingdom. ibid. 3. To teach all of
us to set hand and heart, Prayer and tears on work against sin, ibid.
Especially it concerns th^se that are in places of Authority. 354. Doctrine 3.
The Lord often times brings fearful, and unavoydable judgments, and
punishments, upon his own professing people, 335.
Four signs of Judgment a coming.
1. When the Ministers of God with one voice, foretell judgments to come, 856.
2. When sins of all sorts do abound, ibid. 3. When the Devil and wicked men
cast in bones of dissension, ibid. 4. When all men's hearts begin to fail, 357
Three Directions, what is to be done in such times.
1. Let us shake off the love of all things here below. ibid. 2. Let us lay our
heads upon the block, and be willing that God should do what he will with us,
358. 3. Let us pray and cry mightily to God before we dye, even all the time we
have to live, for mercy, peace and truth, ibid. The Church of England like the
ship of Jonah, 359. The Authors Admonition to the People, ibid. More then
ordinary Faith requisite for these times of danger, ibid.
The Contents of the five and twentieth SERMON, on Heb. 11. 28.
THe Coherence of the text with the context, 363. Doctr. 1. That it has heen
the property of wicked men, and is still, to think whatsoever the godly have,
is to good for them, 364. Reasons 1. Because God has chosen them out of the
world, ibid. 2. Because the wicked know not the godly, ibid. 3. Because the
wicked measure others by themselves, ibid. 4. Because there is, and ever will
be a contrariety between the seed of the woman, and the Serpent, 365. Use 1.
This should teach godly men when they are hardly dealt with, not to be
discouraged, ibid. Use 2. Though the world deal hardly with you, yet see that
you do not measure like for like, ibid. Doctr. 2. The world and the things of
the world are of little worth, 1. In respect of God, 1. Because they can not
make us the better esteemed with God, 366. 2. They cannot assure us of Gods
love, ibid, 3. They do not make us the more mindful of God. ibid. 2. In
respect of themselves, 1. They cannot enrich a man's soul with grace, 367. 2.
They are not able to free a man from any spiritual evil, ibid. 3. They cannot
give any solid content, ibid. 4. We can hove no assurance of them, 368. Use. To
teach us to take off our hearts and affections from pursuing the things of this
life. 369. Doctrine 3. True believers ure persons of great worth, ibid. 1. In
respect of the worthy names that are given to them, ibid. 2. In respect of the
great prince that is paid for them, ibid. 3. In respest of the consciences of
the wicked, 370. 4. In respect of the privileges that God has been pleased to
dignify them withal, ibid.
Which are these,
1. Their Royal descent, ibid. 2. Their Royal attendance, ibid. 3. Their hig
places, ibid. 4. Their extraordinary fare, ibid. 5. Their Royal apparel.
ibid. 6. Their freedom from debt, ibid. 7. Their free access to the throne of
grace, ibid. 8. All thigs work together for their good, 371. 9. They are Gods
beloved ones, ibid. 10. They have the free use of Gods Creatures, ibid* 11.
They are a safeguard to the places where they live, ibid. 12. Great things are
reserved for them in the world to come, ibid. Use 1. This serves for terror to
the wicked who wrong the children of God, ibid. Use 2. To teach us to esteem
such men as are persons of so great worth. 372. Use 3. To direct us how we may
be honored of God, scil. by honoring such as he honors, ibid. Use 4. This
serves to comfort the godly, however disgraced here, ibid. Use 5. To teach us,
that if we account our selves of that number, we be careful to walk worthy of
the Lord, 373.
The Contents of the six and twentieth SERMON, on Genesis 6. 3.
THe words opened. 377. Doctr. 1. The Lord does mightily strive with a company
of poor rebels, 378. Doctr. 2. There is a time when God will strive no more
with men, ibid.
This handled in six particulars.
1. Proved by testimonies of Scripture, 379. 2. The manner shown, h^w God is
wont to deal with rebellious people, ibid. 3. God at length gives men over to
their lusts, 380. 4. God hardens such men as he has given over, ibid. 5. God
lets such men build upon false bottoms, 381. 6. God witholds such means as he
had formerly afforded them. ibid.
What persons they are whom God thus deals with; shown in four particulars*
1. Those that have lived long under the means of grace, and have not profited
by them. 372. 2. Those that have had much means and many secret workings of the
Spirit, and have not made good use of them. ibid. 3. Those that have much
grieved the good spirit of God, in bringing in some sin contrary to the light
of conscience, and the suggestions of the good spirit, ibid. 4. Such as have a
vile, and contemptible esteem of the Gospel and the Ministers thereof, 383.
The grounds of this point* or why God gives men over, and will strive with
them no more, are taken*
1. From the justice of God. ibid. 2. From the wisdom of God, ibid.
Several Objections propounded and answered. 386. Use 1. Seeing that God
strives with some men and at length gives them over, go home and bless God
that he has not dealt so with thee, ibid. Use 2. Take heed there come not a
time when God will strive with thee no more, 387. Use 3. Woe to the wicked who
are thus left, ibid.
Their case is miserable in three respects.
1. Because if God forsake thee, all forsakes thee, 388. 2. When God goes,
restraining grace goes. ibid. 3. If God leaves thee, common protection leaves
thee, ibid.
The Authors Exhortation.
Redeem the time and yield to the good motions of Gods spirit,
Four Motives to it.
1. Consider the fearful condition of such as are given over* 389. 2. Consider
the great danger of putting off, ibid. 3. Consider the time past and present,
ibid. 4. Consider that though God shouldbe all the day long calling, and egging
^s on, yet our lives are but short. ibid.
The Contents of the seven and twentieth SERMON; on Colos. 3. 5.
THe Text explained and divided. 394. Doctr. 1. If we look to have any benefit
by, or interest in Christ, we must mortify our sins and corruptions. 396.
Three Reasons.
1. Because Christ is a Savior, to save us from our sins, 397. 2. Because it
is impossible for sin and grace to subsist in one subject, 398. 3. Because it
is impossible to enter into the kingdom of Heaven, if we mortify not our sins.
ibid. Use 1. To condemn all such as go on in their old courses of deadness
and security, 399. Use 2. To teach us that it is not enough to let sin dye in
us, but we must kill it, 400. Use 3. To teach us that the work of our
Redemption is no easy work, as many men think it, ibid. Use 4. To teach us to
examine our selves, whether we have mortified our sins or no, 402.
Which may be known by these marks,
1. They that have mortified their sins, do live in the contrary graces
ibid. 2. They that are mortified indeed and in truth, are dead to every sin,
403.
The Contents of the eight and twentieth SERMON, on Isaiah 58. 4.
TWo things mainly considerable in the Chapter, 1. The prophets Commission, 2.
The execution of his duty, 407.
Three divine truths in the Text and context.
1. Hypocrisy in a day of fasting and prayer* takes away the life of the duty.
408. 2. False and slight Hypocrites will be frequent in fasting and prayer,
409. 3. Fasting rightly performed, will put an edge upon every duty, especially
upon prayer. ibid. Doctr. 1. Hypocrisy in any duty takes away the life of the
duty, ibid.
Arguments to prove that it is so*
1. Because all falsenesse and hypocrisy is directly against the nature of
God, 410. 2. Hypocrisy gives a blow to the ordinances of God, 111. 3.
Hypocrites do pervert the ordinance, ibid. Use 1. For reproof of those aerie
and outside duties that we perform ibid. Use 2. For information, to teach us
how to fast aright, 412.
Motives to fast in sincerity.
1. Consider your selves as upon your deathbeds, when duties hypocritically
performed will be corrosives in stead of cordials. ibid. 2. Because if you
bring any duty to God without sincerity it is nothing. 413. Three Rules tending
to this.
1. Consider, whether the work you this day come about, do spring from living
principles. ibid. 2. Whether your opposition to sin be carried on strongly and
unchangeably. 414. 3. Whether you more mind how God accepts you, then what he
gives you ibid.

The Contents of the nine and twentieth SERMON, upon Job 30. 31. 32.
Doctr. REsolution to reform should be upon the hearts of them that smart
under the rod of the Lord. 417. In the prosecution of this doctrine three
things are treated of, 1. What kind of reformation it must be, that we are to
resolve of, under the rod. 418. 2. What arguments should prevail with us to
bring us to this resolution, ibid. 3. What course we should take in reforming,
ibid.
For the first, we are to consider those six particulars.
1. That our reformation must have reference to God* who uses the rod* ibid,
2. Our work in reforming must be guided by God himself. 419, 3. We must reform
in one particular as well as in another. ibid. 4. We are not only to reform
what we our selves know to be amiss, but to inquire and be willing to be
informed by others. ibid. 5. We should so resolve to reform, as to bind our
selves by solemn covenant for the future, ibid. 6. We are not only to do it
jointly with a Family, a Town, a City, but severally every one by himself
alone, 420.
For the Second, take these Arguments or Reason to persuade you to reform; and
they are of two kinds*
Some in relation to God. 1. Because God calls for Reformation under
Correction, ibid. 2. Because it is for our sins that God corrects us. 421. 3.
God is just and gracious in every stroke that he lays upon us. ibid. 4. He
knows our frame and how much we can bear. ibid. 5. God is no respecter of
persons, 422. 6. Our reformation is the end that God aims at in correcting us,
ibid. 7. God counts himself honored in his peoples reformation. ibid. Others
in relation to our selves, and they are either driving, 1. Because not to
reform under the rod, is a sign of unspeakable foolishness, 423* 2. It is a
sign of extraordinary brutishness. ibid. Or drawing arguments, 2. Because to
reform; is the way to gain the comfort of the Lord, 425. 3. If we reform,
our sufferings will turn to our joy and everlasting comfort. 425.
For the third, the course we are to take in reforming.
1. We are to inform, our selves from Scripture concerning the sinfulness and
ugliness of that from which we are to reform, 426. 2. We are to be deeply
humbled for what ever we can discover to be out of order, in our minds or
actions, ibid. 3. We must enter into a Covenant with God, that having reformed,
we will sin no more. 427.
The Titles and Texts of the several SERMONS contained in this Volume.
THe Use and Benefit of Divine Meditation. HAGGAI 1. 5. Now therefore says the
Lord of Hosts, consider your ways. page. 1. Another sermon upon the same Text,
HAGGAI 1. 5. The Danger of deferring Repentance. PROVERBS 1: 28. Then shall
they call upon me, but I will not answer: they shall seek me early, but they
shall not find me. p. 29. Vain Thoughts Arraigned at the Bar of Gods Justice.
PHIL. 3. 18. 19. For many walk of whom I have told you often, and now tell you
weeping, that they are the enemies of the cross of Christ, whose end is
destruction, whose belly is their God, whose glory is their shame, who mind
earthly things. p. 43. The Judgment of the World, by the Saints at the last
day. 1 COR. 6. 2. Know ye not that the Saints shall Judge the world? p. 67. The
Punishment of unworthy Communicants. 1 COR. 11. 30. For this cause many are
weak and sick among you, and many sleep. p. 83. The Duty of Communicants. COR.
11. 28. But let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of that Bread, and
drink of that Cup. p. 101. The Duty of Reprovers, and Persons Reproved. PROVE.
19. 1. He that being often reproved, hardens his neck, shall suddenly be
destroyed, and that without remedy. p. 121. The Misery of Earthly Thoughts.
ISAIAH. 55. 7. Let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his
thoughts, and let him return unto the Lord, etc. p. 139. The Necessity of
Self-denial. LUKE 9. 23. And he said unto them all, If any man will come after
me, let him deny himself, etc. p. 151. The Efficacy of importunate Prayer. LUKE
11. 9. Ask, and it shall be given unto you; seek, and you shall find, knock,
and it shall be opened unto you. p. 163. Another Sermon on the same Text. LUKE
11. 9. The Necessity of Gospel-obedience. COLOS. 1. 10. That you might walk
worthy of the Lord unto all pleasing, being fruitful unto every good work. p.
187. Another Sermon on the same Text. COLOS. 1. 10. A Caveat against late
repentance. Lu 23. 42. And he said unto Jesus, Lord remember me when thou
come into thy Kingdom. p. 209. The Sovereign Virtue of the Gospel. PSALM.
147. 3. He heals them that are broken in heart, and binds up their wounds.
p. 223. A Funeral Sermon. ISAIAH 57. 1. The Righteous perish* and no man
lays it to heart, and merciful men are taken away, none considering that the
Righteous are taken from the evil to come. p. 241. The Signs of Gods
forsaking a People. JEREM. 14. 1: And we are called by thy Name, leave us not.
p. 251. The Sacrifice of the Faithful. LAMENT. 3. 57. Thou drewest nigh in the
day that I called upon thee, thou said, Fear not. p. 265. The Misery of the
Creatures by the sin of man. ROMANS 8. 22. For we know that every Creature
groaneth with us also, and travelleth in pain together unto this present. p.
295. The Christian, his Imitation of CHRIST. 1 JOHN. 2. 6. He that says he
remains in him ought even so to walk as he has walked. p. 313. The Enmity of
the wicked to the light of the Gospel. JOHN 3. 20. For every man that does
evil, hates the light, neither comes he to the light, least his deeds should
be reproved. p. 331 Gods Impartiality in his Judgments* ISAIAH. 42. 24. Who
gave Jacob to the spoil and Israel to the Robbers? Did (...) I the Lord? (...)
The great dignity of the Saints. HEB. 11. 28. Of whom the world was not worthy.
p. 363. The time of Gods grace is limited. GENESIS 6. 3. And the Lord said, My
spirit shall not always strive with man, because he is but flesh, and his days
shall be an hundred and twenty years. p. 377. A Sermon for spiritual
Mortification. COLOS. 3. 5. Mortify therefore your members which are upon the
earth, fornication, uncleanness, inordinate affection, evil concupiscence and
covetousness, which is Idolatry. p. 393. The sinfulness and danger of
Hypocrisy. ISAIAH 58. 58. 4. the later part. Ye sha'l not fast as ye do to day
to make the voice to be heard above. p. 407. Reformation under Correction, the
way to prevent desolation. JOB 34. 31. 32. Surely it is meet to be said unto
God, I have borne chastisements, I will not offend any more, That which I see
not, teach thou me, if I have done iniquity I will do it no more. p. 417.
A SERMON OF The use and benefit of Divine MEDITATION.
HAGGAI 1. 5. Now therefore says the Lord of Hosts, Consider your ways.
THe Prophet reproves the people because they could find in their hearts to
mind their own houses, and yet were careless of the house of the Lord: the Lord
had sent a drought and a famine, and sundry punishments upon them for ^
this thing, and yet they laid it not to heart; and therefore he sends Haggai
the Prophet unto them to call them to repentance; and (which is an admirable
course, and little thought of in the world) he begins with holy meditation and
consideration: Now therefore thus says the Lord, consider your ways; that is,
both in regard of the course of them, your wicked ways; and also in regard of
the bitter fruit of them, your wretched and unprosperous ways. Here be two
things very remarkable according to the Text;

1. The repetition and enforcing of it again; for he urges it again, Consider
your ways, in the seventh verse.

2. The benefit that came by it; it brought them to repentance; for they all
obeyed the voice of the Lord, and the words of the Prophet, verse, 12. So that
the Doctrine from hence is this, That

Serious meditation of our sins by the Word, is a special means to make men
Doct. 1.
repent.

Meditation is a settled exercise of the mind for a further inquiry of the
truth, and so affecting the heart therewith, and therefore their be four things
in meditation.

The first is an exercise of the mind, not barely closing with the truth,

Secondly, as it is an exercise, so it is a settled exercise, it is not a sudden

every closet, and every cupboard, and every angle of it. Here is my sin, here
is my uncleanness, and here is Gods anger, here is the woeful evil that will
follow upon it, and here is a remedy against it. Meditation searches into all
the lofts and closets of the truth. The entrance of thy word gives
understanding unto the simple. Ps. 119. 30. The ingress (as one expounds it) or
going into thy word, gives understanding; the wicked stand looking upon the
truth without the doors, but it is the ingresse, or going into the truth, that
gives understanding. Indeed the truth is like a neat Palace, (says
Chrysostom) the Spirit of God is like the light of the Sun that shines into
it; the wicked they stand without, like fools peeping in at the windows, and
there be many thousand of pearls that are not manifest unto them: the house
seems dark to them that stand without. Thou must enter into the word, and into
every particular truth in it, and go up stairs, and down stairs, and have an
eye into every room. There thou shall find humility, there contrition, there
conversion, there Christ and his Spirit in one closet, there all his Jewels in
that, and that box; all is manifest within doors.



The first Reason is, because meditation musters up all weapons, and gathers
Reas. 1.
all forces of arguments for (...) press our sins, and lay them heavy upon the
heart: This usury is (...) good, when meditation, like usurers, who grind and
suck (...) of the needy, and are not content with their Principal, bu^ (...)
have consideration for every pound they lay out; yea for every shilling, and
that for every week, and every month, and every quarter, and every year: the
poor man could be content to pay the principal; but to exact use upon use,
this kills him; so meditation exacteth upon the soul, and holds it to use
upon use. You have committed evil in a corner, but you shall ^^t carry it away
so. Item, it was against the knowledge of God revealed* Item, against many
mercies received* Item, against many Judgments threatened, against many checks
of conscience, against many Vows and Promises; remember that, O my soul, Item
for that, and Item for this; Item for every lust, and every circumstance, thus
often, and in this place, and at that time, in that manner So meditated the
prodigal. Look Luke. 5. 17.
as it is in wars, were there but many scores come against an Army, they might
be conquered; or many hundreds, they might be resisted; but if many thousands
should come against a small Army, it would be in danger indeed. Meditation
leads a whole Army of arguments, a whole Army of curses, miseries,
judgments, commandments against the soul, how ever one misery or plague will
not knock it down, but the soul may brook it, and go away with it: but
meditation brings a great Armado of arguments, and tells the soul, God is
against thee, and against thy ways: God is against thee where ever thou art,
or what ever thou do. Then the heart begins to cry out, as Elisha his
servant did, Master, what shall we do? 2 Kings 6. 15. So many horses against
us, so many charets, and so many men against us? Master what shall we do? so
many sins, and so heinous; so many judgments and so heavy; and so many evils,
and spiritual maladies! Oh, what shall I do to be saved! that I should commit
sin against a God that has damned innumerable Angels, millions of Kings,
Princes, and Nobles! that I should commit it against this God, so merciful to
me, so gracious, so patient, so good to my soul! that I, wretched rebel, should
for a cup of drink refuse heaven! for a lust not worth a straw under my foot,
cast off Christ, and grace, and all! how shall I do? Then the soul stands in a
maze.

The second Reason is, because meditation having hundled up all Items against
the soul, and brought it in all bills of account, it fastens s^^ upon the soul;
I mean it makes the soul feel it, so that it must needs be convinced without
any evasion. Meditation deals with a man as Elisha dealt with the messengers of
the King Joram; the murderer he was coming to do mischief to the Prophet, and
the prophet did shut the door, and held him fast at the door, 2 Kings 6. 32.
and then he made him know that the evil was from the Lord, before he could
stir: so meditation, when the soul would fain out of doors into its old course
again, it shuts the door upon it, and holds it fast: Meditation tells the soul,
this evil is from the Lord upon thee, O my soul, if thou stir in or out upon
this or that lust any more, this evil, that course, that vengeance and
damnation; if ever thou stir forth, thou losest thy mercy, thou losest Christ,
thou losest all possibility of comfort. Stir not out, if thou do, thou will
rue it. Sometimes when men hear the Word, they go away touched, they resolve
not to commit sin again as they have done; yet when they are gone, it works
not, but the heart recoyls again, and turns to its old pass, The reason is,
because they meditate not upon the Word, they fasten it not upon their
consciences.

It is with the word as it is with a salve: if a man that has never so good a
salve, that will heal any thing in four and twenty hours, if a man should do
nothing but lay it to the wound, and take it off, lay it on and take it off, it
will not heal the wound: and no marvel, Why? he will not let it lie on, the
best salve will not heal the soar, nor eat out the corruption, unless it be
bound on and let lie: so it is with the Word, many a soul hears it; heart,
conscience, affections, all touched: but when he is gone out of the Church, all
is gone, his affections dye, his heart dies, and his conscience becomes
unfruitful: Why? he is still removing of the salve, and will not let it lie on,
and therefore the Word over-powers not his corruptions; the Word is like the
salve; conviction of conscience is like the laying on of the salve; meditation
the binding of it to the soar.

St. James compares a slight hearer to a man that looks into a glass, who soon
forgets his visage, but a good hearer does two things: First, he stoops down
and looks into it, to take a perfect view of his estate; Secondly, he continues
looking into it, James 1. 25. he does not leave the glass behind him, but he
carries away the glass with him: This man shall be blessed in his deed.

If the pills be never so bitter, yet let a man swallow them speedily, there is
no great distaste; but if a man chew a pill, it will make him deadly sick. Thy
sins are like those pills, they go down very pleasingly, because thou
swallowest them: thou swallowest down thine oaths, lies, ignorance, pride, thou
swallowest down the threats of the Lord, but if thou would chew these bitter
pills, and meditate and ruminate, and chew the cud, drunkenness would be as
bitter as hell; swearing and security, and Saboath breaking, would be as bitter
as wormwood; thou durst not go on in them, they would make thee look sourely
upon them for ever: like a man that has chewed a pill, he can hardly ever see
a pill, but his stomach rises against it. Behold, I will hedge up thy way with
thorns, Hos. 2. 6. I will not be so precise (says the heart) I will go on as I
have done, I will go after these and these courses; I will hedge up thy way with
thorns (says God,) meditation is Gods instrument, and sets a thorn in the way
to every sin, to bring the heart back again. Would the heart lash out into
luke-warmnesse? Meditation sets a thorn in the way; God will spue thee out of
his mouth. Would the heart sally forth into any sin? Meditation sets a thorn in
the way, Cursed art thou if thou do err from Gods Commandments. The heart
cannot step forth into any lust, but meditation meets it with a thorn, this
curse, and that curse, this plague, and that plague. Would the heart reach at
mercy in its sin? Meditation pricks it; mercy is vengeance unto thee, so long
as thou hankrest after sin. Would the heart reach after Christ in his sin?
Meditation pushes it back with a thorn: no Christ for thee, but a severejudge,
so long as thou itchest after thy vanities.

What shall we think of them then, which are loath to practice this duty? Most
men are loath, though they be willing enough to meditate on their Use ^.
worldly affairs. The Mariner meditates and considers his course by his
Compass, or else he might soon run on the quicksands; a Pilgrim is full of
thoughts, what? am I in my right way? He never comes to a doubtful turning,
but he stands in a study and muses, O which is my right way? The Merchant
meditates, and his mind runs on his Countbook, or else he is soon bankrupt: The
voluptuous man his thoughts run on his pleasure: the drunkard on his cups, the
proud man on his credit. But it is one thing to look to that which is thine,
and another thing to look to thy self, Take heed to your selves, says the
Lord, Deuteronomy. 11. 16. Deuteronomy. 12. 30. Deuteronomy. 4. 9. Exodus 34. 12. as if he should
say, think on thy self, and of thy poor soul; let thy Meditation run on thy
poor soul. The heart is untoward unto this duty, and as unwilling as a Bear to
be brought to the stake: the Bear would rather be rambling abroad then be
baited: so men had rather let their hearts ramble about any thing, then bait
them for their sins; yea men scoff at it, saying, shall we always be poring on
our sins? shall we run mad? shall we drive our selves to despair? cannot men
keep themselves well while they are well?

The poor man he has no time for this tedious duty: the rich man he needs it
not, the wicked they dare not; so no man will, No man repented him of his
wickedness, saying, What have I done? Jer. 8. 6. no man would meditate and
think with himself, what is my case? how stands my condition before God? what
evil have I done? in the Ark and in the old Law if there were any beast that
chewed not the cud, it was a sign of an unclean beast: the word implies the
bringing up of their meat into their mouths again, and sitting down to chew it
again. But now men like unclean beasts, swallow down the food of their souls
unchewed, and will not meditate thereof, that it may turn to good nutriment;
but like Cormorants, they take it down by wholesale, and are never the better?
So the Word is to them as the Quails to the Israelites, while the flesh was yet
between their teeth, ere it was chewed, the wrath of the Lord was kindled
against them, and smote them them with a very great plague, Number. 11, 33. So the
Word of God sticks in their teeth, ere they chew it, or meditate upon it, the
wrath of God falls upon them, and strikes them with a very great plague of
hardness of heart, and leanness of soul. But the truth is: you that will not
now see your sins nor meditate on them, you shall see them, and meditate on
nothing but on fear, Lord when thy hand is lifted up, they will not see, but
they shall see and be ashamed, Isaiah 26. 11.

Now the Lets of serious meditation are, First, vain company. When Let. 1.
Peter saw the people touched, Acts 2. 37. he said unto them, Save your selves
from this untoward generation, verse 40. as if he should say, If you love your
selves, God has touched your hearts, suffer not Satan and these wicked
instruments, to steal away these impressions of terror from your Souls If ever
you love your souls. sort not your selves with this untoward generation. See, as
it humbles you, so let meditation follow upon it, so that it may still humble
you. Ill company brings a man to the gallows (as the proverb is) and ill
company will bring a man to hell (say I:) and meditation cannot be admitted to
it. David would not have a wicked man to abide in his sight, when he was to
meditate: he wished that there were never a wicked man in the world; much less
would he keep company with them My meditation of him shall be sweet; let the
sinners be consumed out of the earth, and let the wicked be no more: Bless thou
the Lord, O my soul, ps. 104. 35.

The second Let is, multitude of worldly businesses. A dream (says Solomon)
Let 2.
comes through multitude of businesses, Eccles. 5. Multitude of businesses
causes the mind so to run on them, that they do even dream of them in their
sleep, as Lucretius, Seneca, Claudian, and many others of the hearthens have
observed. He that over-imploys himself, his meditations of heaven are dreaming
meditations; his thoughts, dreaming thoughts, he can never seriously meditate
on the good of his soul. Many ingrosse businesses into their hands never
thinking they have enough, they are so greedy after the world, and so careless
of heaven. So they make their hearts like high-way-ground: the word sown in
their hearts, is like seed sown in the highway, where is such a throughfare,
and a broad Carriers road of earthly affairs, that all the word and meditation
thereof is trodden down as the grass in the highway, which cannot grow, so
neither meditation in a busie-bodied heart. For a good meditating mind, (Nemo
ad illam pervenit occupatus, says Seneca) no man ever came to it surfeited
with employments. David although he had abundance of State Affairs, both his
hands full, yet he would not to be overcharged, but that he might meditate in
Gods word: My hands also (not all down to business only in the world, but also
up to thy Law) will I lift up to thy commandments, which I have loved, and I
will meditate on thy statutes. Psalm. 119. 48. Take not too much upon thee, like
those grasping worldlings, that will have a finger in a hundred things: Martha,
Martha, thou art cumbred about many things, but one thing is needful, and Mary
has chosen the better part, Luke 10. 41. ^*
and what was that one thing? Mary was sitting and meditating in, and pondring
Christ's words, not (as Theophylact expounds it) as if we would say, Martha,
Martha, thou art cumbred about many dishes, but one thing is needful only,
only one dish, though indeed so it be, yet he here speaks not only of one dish,
but of many cares which hinder that one necessary duty of hearing and
meditating of the word of God.

Thirdly, ignorance. A man cannot meditate of a thing he knows 3*
not; nor thou of thy sins, if thou be not skilful in Gods Catalogue of thy
sins; nor of mercies and promises, if thou be not verst in them; nor of his
Precepts, if thou be not expert in them. the Psalmist proves that he had more
knowledge than all his teachers: Why? because he used to meditate. I have more
understanding then all my Tutors, for thy testimonies are my meditation, Psalm.
119. 99.

Fourthly, averseness of the heart: The heart is like the swine, meditation 4*
is like the yoke: the Hog would fain get into forbidden fields for to grub
them; the yoke that hinders him; but he cannot abide it, every step he takes,
he lifts up his foot to strike it off if he could; so the heart would fain
break through hedges, and get into forbidden ways, and if thou would
meditate, it would every moment lift up it is heel to put thee besides it. If it
cannot put thee besides it, it will mar it if it can, and therefore David praid
to God to settle his heart upon the right, and put his yoke upon him, or it
would never be steadfast else upon meditation. Let the words of my mouth, and
the meditation of my heart be ever acceptable in thy sight, O Lord, my strength
and my* redeemer; Psalm. 19. 14.

This averseness of the heart consists in three things: First, in the
carelessness

Secondly in runnings of it: the heart is like a vagrant rogue, he would it was
meditating and imagining vain things, verse 1. and when they saw they were to
be tied up, Tush (say they) let us break their bonds asunder, and cast their
cords from us, verse 3. What, do Ministers call us to such strictness,
thinking to imprison our hearts in their stocks? away with their bonds, no, we
will have none of it.

Thirdly, in the wearisomness of the heart: It is as weary of meditation, as

This may serve for terror unto all those, who for all this that has been Use
2.
spoken, dare sit down without it; yea, the world will not believe these
things, nor meditate therein* yea, they blame Gods messengers, that call so
sore upon them. Habakkuk was so served; he preached the mercies of God to the
humble, and the judgments of God to the wicked: they ask him why he was so
mad? well (says the Prophet) I will stand upon my watch, and see what the Lord
says unto me, that I may answer to them that reprove me, Hab. 2. 1. What did
the Lord tell him? Write the vision, and make it plain upon Tables, that he may
run that reads it, verse 2. Will they not believe? Will they rove? Will they
not meditate steadily upon these things? Will they not let their hearts stay
and meditate and consider? The vision shall be so plain, that he that runs may
read it. If thou will not stay, and meditate herein, the word is so plain to
thy condemnation, that if thou did not but think of it with a running
thought, thou may read thine own vengeance, thine own woes, in regard of the
multitude of them. He that runs by a way full of holes and pits, though he
stand not meditating where are the pits, yet he may run and see them. The book
of God is full, leaves and cover, and all, of woes against thee, Lam. 2. 10. It
is written without, there thou may read thy sins written; it is written
likewise within, there thou may read thy plagues.

Secondly, in regard of the greatness of them, he that runs along, and lo a
great town on fire, though he stay not to meditate on it, what or where it is,
yet he may run and read it: so is the curse of sinners a great curse, Zeph. 1.
10. he that runs may read it.

Thirdly, in regard of the proximitie and neernesse of them. He that runs, if
a sword come out at his throat, though he does not stop to meditate, what is
this at my throat, yet he cannot but see it. Behold the Judge stands before
the door, James, 5. 9. Take heed how thou grudgest, or sinnest in any
particular; behold the Judge stands before the door; behold it and meditate
on it with thy heart; if not, he is nigh enough, thou can not step out of
doors unto any sin, but though thou runnest, thou must needs see the Judge that
will Judge thee, I^eming thy sins, noting thy ways, observing thy courses,
ready to unhasp the door on thee, to hale thee unto hell in thy sins. Whose end
is destruction? Why? Even those that mind earthly things, Phil. 3. 19. If thy
mind and meditation run more on thy ground, cattle, goods, kitchen, house
business, earthly talk, discourses, thoughts, more than of heaven, thy end is
destruction. If thy thoughts will not stay here, do but run, and thou may
read it: Think not that I am come to destroy the Law or the Prophets, I am come
to fulfill them, Matthew 5. 17. Some (says Chrysostom) might think now Christ
is come, it is no matter though we not be so strict, Christ is enough. Think
not thus (says Christ) but rather think and meditate that I am come to fulfill
it may self, and to see it fulfilled in those I mean to save, so as to make it
a rule of their lives. Themistocles said, he could not sleep in his bed for
continual thinking and meditating on Miltiades his Tryumphs; And how can thou
sleep in thy bed, if thou would but meditate on these places of Scripture?
Retire thy self apart, there is no casting up of man's account in a crowd: Let
me alone, I am busy; so we use to say, when we would be private.

Thou must do with thy soul as Ehud did to Eglon, who said, I have a Means 1.
secret errant to thee, O King, and so all went out, and he said: I have a
message from God to thee, and so stabd him at his heart, Judges 3. 19. So (for
Ehud was a type of Christ, says Lavator) I have a secret errant to thee, O my
soul, and so let all go forth: I have a message from God to thee, a message of
wrath for thy Pride, a message of wrath for thy vain hopes: Thus, says the
Lord; Cursed art thou, O my soul* stab it to the heart with this spiritual
Dagger, wound it with the blade and haft and all, till thou have let out the
fat and the dirt, the filth and iniquity all out. The Prophet speaking of men's
looking on Christ whom they have pierced, this meditating and laying to heart
that they have crucified the Lord Jesus, says that they shall mourn every one
in private, the house of David apart, and their wives apart; the house of
Nathan apart, and their wives apart; the house of Shimei apart, and their wives
apart; every family apart, and their wives apart, Zach. 12. 2.

The second means, if thou would meditate aright, observe the Means 2.
times of privacy,

First, the morniug, that is the best time for study: David chose the morning
for meditation, Psalm 5. 1. 3. Let them hear this, (says Chrysostom) that
arise betimes in the morning to serve their Hoggs and their Dogs, their
bellies and their backs, before they serve God in meditation or prayer, unless
it be the mumbling and roaring a few [Lord have mercy upon us] that pray not
till after many other businesses, it may may be, not then neither. David prayed
and meditated in the morning. In the morning thou washest thy face and thy
hands, but thy soul has more need, which thou washest not: in the morning thou
put thy clothes on thy body, but thou put not on afresh the new man
upon thy soul; in the morning thou shakest off sleepiness from thine eyes, but
thou shakest not off drowsiness from thy soul. Thou look into the glass in
the morning, to see if thy face be as it should be; but thy soul is not
composedly looking into the glass of Gods word. In the morning loook up in
prayer, look up in thansgiving, look up in meditation.

Secondly, the night too; O Lord, I meditate on thee in the night watches,

Thirdly, In the evening; I prevent the night watches, that I might meditate,

Fourthly, when the heart is touched at a Sermon or Sacrament, or observing

Thirdly, Rub up thy self and thy memory; call as much to mind as thou Means 3.
can, what evil thou have done ever since thou wast born, what in the womb,
what in the cradle, childhood, youth, age; what a servant, what a Master; what
as a servant, what as a son, what as a neighbor, what as an inferior, what as
a superior; either in thought, or word or deed; how often thou have omitted
good duties, or done them by halvs; Item for this; and Item for that. They
shall remember themselves and turn unto the Lord, Psalm. 22. 27. First, they
shall remember themselves, and say, what have I done. O wretch! how carelessely
have I lived! Secondly, so meditating, they shall turn unto the Lord. Many say,
Oh! they cannot remember their sins. They lie in a thousand particulars: for
they can remember to commit them well enough. See Lam. 3. 19. 20. 21. our Greek
translation turns it, I spoke to my self, and meditated: as if they should say,
O what a rebel have I been! how unthankful, how unprofitable under all the
means of grace! I may thank my sins for all the plagues of the Almighty that
are upon me: if he had damned me, I had been well served. What follows? The
heart bowed, and was humbled, as it is in the text.

The fourth means. Rouse up thy heart. As it is with the eye of the Means 4.
body, so it is with the eye of the Soul: when a man would look wistly upon a
thing, as if he would look through it, he sets his eye on it, as Paul set his
eyes on Elymas, Ah thou child of the Devil, thou, etc. Acts 13. 9. Meditation
is the setting of the eye of the soul upon a thing: set thine eye upon thy
self, and say, Ah thou child of the wicked, why has Satan filled thy heart!
O wretched heart! whence had thou thy self-love? had thou not it from the
Devil? God might do well to send thee to the Devil, if thou love so to be
his Broker. Set thine eyes steadfastly upon thine own ways, and thou shall see
infinite hellish evils in thy sins.

The third Use is for Reprehension. What is more usual than this, Use 3.
that men make slight account of their sins? Nay, when God tells them in their
hearts, Thou shall not do this, thou shall not do that, yet they meditate and
think, Why may I not? Samuel bid Saul stay for directions from him, before he
sacrificed unto God. It seems that God spoke to his heart. Stay till Samuel
comes to direct thee: yet Saul forced himself to disobey, and to do Sacrifice,
1. Sam. 13. 12. he was bold, as Vatable turns it; he confirmed himself, as
Pagnin translates it: he thrust himself upon the doing of it; God forbad him,
he would do it: God urged him in his conscience not to do it, yet he would do
it: God again whispered to him not to do it, yet he forced himself to do it;
as if he should say, I hope I may do it, I have stayed seven days wanting an
hour, or a piece of an hour; and a little piece breaks no square: No? God
rejected Saul for that venture; God would have forced him by meditation, O no,
do it not by no means: he made him think, Oh, it is against Gods
commandments, I may not do it. No, but nevertheless he forced himself to do
it. Thus God deals with thousands and millions in the world: Be not a drunkard;
God flings the meditation into the conscience, yet a drunkard thou will be. Be
not a drunkard again; a drunkard notwithstanding thou will be: Be not again;
they force themselves, they will go to the Alehouse. And so of all other sins.
If men will cast off this work of meditation darted into their souls, they cast
off their own mercy. God tells them, pray not, hear not, offer not without
directions from me; they dread not the commandment, they will: I trust prayers
are good, I will say them. Thus they will not meditate, or if they do, they
break it off before it comes to any strength or perfection: yea, Gods own
servants, that desire to look toward Sion, is not this your complaint often? I
cannot find sin heavy: I confess the word discovers it to me, but I cannot
be troubled for it. Look as it is with men in the world, if five hundred pound
weight be laid upon the ground, if a man never pluck at it, he shall never feel
the weight of it. Your sins are not many hundreds, but many thousands, yea
many ten thousands: self-love, security; hardness of heart* base fears, etc.
it is impossible to reckon them. The least vain thought that ever you imagined,
the least vain word that ever you uttered, were weight enough to press your
souls down to hell; Therefore what are so many sins and so great, and so often
committed? What are they? they are as heavy as rocks and mountains; yet ye feel
them not so heavy. Why? Ye weigh them not; if ye did, ye should find them
heavier than the sand, as David did when his sin was ever before him (Psalm.
51. 3.) that is, his sin was ever in his thoughts, and in his meditation, his
sin was ever like a huge Millstone before him, and he was ever tugging and
pulling to remove it out of his way.

Object.
I, but you will say, How shall I come to feel my burden?

Answer.
I answer, three things are here to be discovered;

First, the ground upon which our meditation must be raised.

Secondly, the manner how to follow it home to the heart.

Thirdly, how to put life and power into it.

The ground I refer to these four heads:

First, meditate on the goodness, patience, and mercy of God, that has were
mine, and that I should deal thus unkindly with him, even nature rebukes me.
This serious meditation will help to break thy heart.

The second ground of meditation is to mediate on the justice of God: God is a
just God as well as merciful. Speak all ye Devils in Hell, Do ye not feel
that he is a just God? Speak Sodom, Speak Gomorrah, your fire and brimstone
can testify that he is a just God: Speak Adah, Zillah, and all ye that were
drowned in the old world, your deluge can testify he is a just God, His
judgments are all in the world, 1. Chro. 16. 14. What is become of drunken
Nabal, and swearing Saul, and covetous Ahab, and proud Jesabel, and mocking
Jehu, and envious Shimei? What is become of all blind Jebusites, and parting,
cavilling Diotrepheses? Justice has taken hold on them. What is poverty? What
is nakedness? What is famine, sickness, the gout, the stone, Fever, plague?
These are the little arrows of Gods justice. What is shame, disgrace, crosses,
afflictions, unseasonable rains, dangerous weather, wars, rumors of wars? What
are all the evils under the Sun? They are the little finger of Gods justice.
Thou spiest them here and there, in every Town, and in every Parish, in every
Country: do they not all witness that he is a just God? Read Psalm 7. 11, 12,
13. God has bent his ^ow already (says David) the arrow is ready to fly out
of the string: It will not be long before it hit thee, if thou meditate not upon
amendment: God is angry with the wicked every day, as an angry man uses to
say, I will be revenged on thee. Will thou not give over thy sins? I will be
revenged on thee. Read Psalm. 11. 5, 6, 7. Meditate on this; he will neither
spare King nor subject, nor rich, nor poor, nor noble, nor base, nor Judges,
nor Justices: yet Judges and Justices may spare, but God will not spare: they
may be bribed to pardon, but God will not be fee'd to spare them that go on in
their wickedness; and do I think to escape? Nay, my soul, thou can never
escape, except thou obeyest.

The third ground is, Meditate on the wrath of God; O! what wrath is it? Can I
stand against it? It burns like an oven, and all the proud, and all that do
wickedly shall be as stubble, and the day of wrath shall burn them up. Behold
this, says the Text, Malac. 4. 1. Behold it, and meditate on it. Can I go
naked in a hot fiery Oven? Can I lift up my hands against it? My hands will be
scorched. Can I kick against it? My legs will be baked. Can I blow upon it with
my mouth? My mouth is fiered. Did I ever see lime burned? were I in the limes
room, could I endure that boiling? and yet if I live in my sins, I shall be
as the burning of lime, I say 33. 12. Let thy heart meditate terror: Who among
us shall be able to dwell (that is the meaning of it, as Montanus shows) who
among us shall dwell with devouring fire? who among us shall burn with
everlasting burning? verse 14. Gods mercy shall say, Take him wrath: I would
have converted him, but he would not. Gods goodness shall say, Take him wrath
I would have been kind unto him, but he has abused me; Gods patience shall
say, Take him wrath: I have suffered him a great while, that he might have time
of repentance, but he repented not in that time. God smote Egypt in their
first born: Why? For his mercy endures for ever. God overthrew Pharaoh and his
host: Why? For his mercy endures for ever. Psalm. 136. 15. He smote great
Kings, Sihon a King, and Og a King: for his mercy endures for ever. So will
God damn thee that art a drunkard: Why? for his mercy endures for ever. God
will confound thee that art a worlding: Why? for his mercy endures for ever.
God will be revenged on thee that art a Luke-warmling: Why? for his mercy
endures for ever. This may well make thee ^eare the hair off thy head, rather
than let thee go on in thy sins. See Ierem. 7. 29. Meditate on this.

The fourth ground: Meditate on the constancy of God. As the Lord

The Second SERMON OF The use and benefit of Divine MEDITATION.
HAGGAI 1. 5. Now therefore thus says the Lord of Hosts, Consider your ways.
NOw follows the manner, how to follow Meditation home to the heart. Here are
four things to be practiced.

First, weigh and ponder all these things in thy heart. It Is said of Mary, she
pondred, Luke 2. 19. and kept all these sayings in her heart: verse 51. The
words signify two things: First, she compared these things together, Secondly,
she cast them in the scales together. Do thou know God is merciful? ponder
it with his justice. Do thou know that Jesus Christ dyed for sinners? ponder
it with the true drift of it, how that it is not to let men go on in their
sins, but to save them from their sins. Do thou obey God in this or that
Commandment? O ponder thy life with the rest, Ponder the path of thy feeet,
and let all thy ways be established. Prove. 4. 26. A man that eats his meat
well, forty morsels well, yet one crum going awry throttles him. Thou walk
in these and these Commandments; yea, but there be other Commandments besides
these: do thou walk in them too? thou must, if thou meanest to have thy ways
to be established. The Jews had their continers, talents, minaes, sicles, which
were greater weights; so they had also their gerahs, and agarahs, smaller
measures, and smallest of all: so have thou greater and less weights; great
ones to ponder the great Commandments, and less to weigh even the least of
Gods Commandments: and see thou make true Evangelical weight, or else all will
not be well. Suppose a man were to pay a 100 pound of good and lawful money,
and in weight, upon forfeiture of all that he has; if he weigh it not, but the
Creditor does, and finds it light, he is undone. If thou ponderest not thy
ways, God will ponder them: Prove. 5. 21. the word signifies, he weighs and
ponders them in a balance, or scales; he puts the word of his Gospel in the
one, and thy goings and obedience in the other. Thou art weighed, and art found
too light, thy kingdom is departed from thee, says God to Belshazzer, Dan. 5.
27. So if thou be light, thou shall be weighed, and so found* thou shall lose
the Kingdom of heaven for ever.

Secondly, strip sin, and look upon it stark naked sin covers and disguiseth it
self with pleasure, profit, ease, and many a whorish garment, and so inticeth
the heart. Even a toad, if she were covered over with gold, those that saw only
the gold would pocket it up; if it were naked they would fling it in the
kennel. Why do men love covetousness? Why? its hooded with profit* Why
carding, dicing, hunting, hawking, tabring, piping, and more than the word
allows? Why? they are clothed with pleasure, and delight. Its the duty of
Ministers to unmask and uncase sin, and pluck off he vail that covers it from
appearing unto men. The not doing of this is the cause that men do not meditate
on the vileness of their sin, never are humbled, never escape Gods wrath, even
because they (...) discover (...) iniquities, Lam. 2. 14. Alas the profit of
thy sins shall cease the pleasure cease, the ease cease, and all these goodly
suits shall vanish away; when the soul comes to dye, or to stand before the
judgment seat of Christ: sin will remain, but thy silver, and thy gold; where
will that be then? thy laughter, and thy mer^iment, what will become of that
then? thy delight will be gone. Meditate therefore with thy self, my sin is now
gainful, and easy, and pleasant* but what will my sin become, when I come to
lie on my deathbod* what good will it do me, when I have most need of succor?
I will never acknowledge him my friend, that will turn against me, when I have
most need of him. Alas, I must dye, I must come to judgment, I, I must go
either to heaven or to hell: the profit that I get now by my sins, will it
bestead me then* the pleasure, the ease that I now find in sin, will it help me
there? Alas no it will then be my break neck, it will be a Devil unto me the
more I have been delighted with it, the more it will gall ^e: the more I have
gotten by it the more it will damn me: the sin which I most of all loved* will
most of all torment me. Eccles. 11. 9. look thus upon sin*

The third means* Dive into thy own soul and heart. There is a tough brain over
thy heart, that it feels not its sins. Now Meditation must look through* and
come to the heart at the quick, and cause the truth to dive into the deep
places of the soul. When the timber is hard, the workman cannot thrust in the
nail with the weight of his hand: no, he must hammer it in. Meditation is the
hammering of the heart. It Is a pertinent phrase, Jer. 23, 24. Is not my word
like a fire (says the Lord) and like a hammer that breaks the rocks in
pieces? There be two similitudes, first, of a hammer: the Word of God is the
hammer; meditation is the hand that takes this hammer, and knocks the nail
into the rocky heart, and makes it enter: Will thou not feel? I Will make thee
feel (says Meditation) will thou not take notice of thy wretched estate?
Meditation comes with blow after blow, and makes us take notice. Secondly, of
fire; the word is like fire; Meditation kindles it about the heart. A man
benumbed with cold is senseless; the water frozen with cold, though the least
pebble would have sunk in it before, now a great millstone is able to lie upon
it, and not sink; the water is able to bear it: so is the heart, be it is sins
never so heavy, as the hill of Basan, yet it bears it and feels no weight: but
Meditation thawes the heart, and then every sin pincheth and oppresses. Is not
my word like fire? as if he should say, think of it, and muse of it, and
meditate of it, and thou shall feel it as a fire. Meditation is the often
smiting of the heart with this hammer: so did Ephraim smite upon his thigh,
Jer. 31. 19. like a man in a miserable agony, he thumps his own breast, and in
a vexation strikes his hand on his thigh. Oh miserable wretch that I am! So did
Ephraim, Oh what an unruly Ox am I? how unwilling am I to bear the yoke of the
Lord? Oh, and oh the hardness of my heart! oh that I could tell how to beat
thee black and blue! Many men smite their hearts, but they smite them not often
enough. When Elishah bad Joash smite upon the ground, he smote thrice, and
stayed; The man of God said to him in anger, Thou should have smitten five
or six times, for then thou had smitten Syria, till thou had consumed them,
whereas now thou shall smite Syria but thrice. 2. King. 13. 19. So men smite
their hearts twice, or thrice, or so; but they will not smite their sins dead:
it may be they break the head of their sins, but they recover again, and grow
strong upon them, as at first. Thou must smite five or six times, yea fifty
times five times, till thou have quite broken the impostume of thy heart.
Meditate on the mercies of God, and with them smite it often, and often:
Meditate on the justice of God, and with it smite it again, and again: Meditate
on the wrath of God, which is as a consuming fire, and with it smite it
soundly. Meditate on the truth of the Lord, this threatening and that
threatening; this commandment and that commandment this promise and that
promise; and with all these smite it to powder.

The fourth means, Anticipate and p^^ventthine own heart: meditate what thy
heart will one day wish, if it be not humbled: and tell thy Soul as much; thou will one day wish, Oh that I had been humbled under the reproofs of the Lord!
Oh that I had been wise to have understood my own mercy! Cursed be the day that
ever I neglected the means of grace; so the Lord brings in a foolish obstinate
sinner, cursing and banning his own soul, sobbing and howling at the last. O
how have I hated instruction, and my heart despised reproof! and have not
observed the voice of my Teachers, nor inclined mine care to them that instruct
me? Prove. 5. 12, 13. I had Ministers to preach to me, but I would not come at
them: or if I did, I cared not for their doctrine, I had friends that advised
me well; but woe is me damned wretch! I heeded them not. Thus thou will cast
the fool into thine own teeth, and fling a thousand curses into thine own face,
because of thy madness. I might have learned but I would not; I might have been
humbled, but I would not: I was almost in an evil in the midst of the assembly
of the congregation, verse 14. I lived where the Saints of God were in whole
assemblies, but I mocked them, I hated them, I misliked them for being too
precise. I was not ashamed of my security, no not in thy sight. Thus thou will
cry out one day, if thou will not yield unto meditation, which must make this
as present with thee. Know thou, O my soul, the time of thy visitation is at
hand, thou will curse thy self hereafter, if thou do not now be moved by
Gods mercies, thou shall never see mercy more: Now be awaked by Gods judgments,
or else thou shall feel them for evermore; now or for ever thou shall ^oar for
them. Then thou shall curse thy gains and thy profits that bewitched thee, thou
shall curse thy pleasures and delights that besorted thee, curse thine one
heart, and thine own soul, and thine own conscience that have damned thee.
Meditation may tell thee, thus it will be with thee, unless thou obeyest now.
Hear ye me now, Oh ye Children and depart not from the words of my mouth,
verse 7. hear the word now, and obey it, let it not depart out thy meditation.
Now be humbled with grace, or then thou shall be humbled with horror: then
thou shall wish, Oh that I had been ruled! When thou art in hell, then thou
shall meditate, Oh it was good counsel that such and such a Minister gave me;
good counsel that such a friend, and such a brother gave me; but wretch that I
was, I had not grace to follow it. I had more mind of my pleasures, more mind
of my vanities than of grace. Oh if it were to do again, I would not do so for
a thousand worlds: but alas, it is now too late. Therefore let Meditation
press this upon thee beforehand.

Now follows the third thing, how to put life to Meditation. Four

1. Let Meditation haunt the heart, let meditation dog thee with the sins, or
else God will cut off thy soul. Return, O Shulamite, return, return, its the
voice of Christ to thee: Let Meditation say, Return, O my soul, return, return,
and thou may be saved; return, or else thou shall be condemned. Now what was
the effect of this haunting meditation* Or ere I was aware, my soul made me
like the Chariots of Aminadab. verse 12. That is, my soul musing and meditating
on these and these commandments, it so humbled my soul, that it made me yield;
yea, and made me run as fast as the Chariots of Aminadab, freely and willingly
to Christ.

Deal with thy heart as Iunius his father dealt with him: he seeing his Son was
Atheistical, he laid a Bible in every room, that his son could look in no room,
but behold a Bible haunted him, upbraiding him, Will thou not read me, Atheist?
Will thou not read me? And so at last he read it, and was converted from his
Atheism: So let meditation haunt thy heart, hold forth the commandments,
promises, threatenings of the Lord, that thy heart may see them; let meditation
haunt thee in thy luke-warmnesse: prayest thou thus lukewarm? This prayer will
break thy neck one day. Repentest thou? This luke warm repentance will cause
God to spue thee out of his mouth. Hear thou, speak thou, think thou?
These lukewarm duties will confound thee ere long, if thou look not to it.

Let meditations haunt thee, as they haunted Nehemiah with warnings, ten times
(says the Text) they sent to Nehemiah, they will be upon thee, Nehem. 4. 12.
Beware of the danger, the enemy will be upon thee: ten times they warned him,
never giving over till Nehemiah looked about him, verse 13. So do thou haunt
thine own heart: they will be upon thee, this curse, this wrath, that hardness
of heart, this security will be upon thee. Ten times, yea, a thousand times ten
times, never give over thine own soul, until thou have made it to submit.
Indeed there be some, let God send Meditations to haunt them, and follow them,
saying, Repent, leave this or that sin? why will thou be damned with this sin?
Oh forsake it, presently they will gagge the mouth of meditation, and of
conscience, and strike them stark dead: as Abner, when Azahel would haunt him
and follow him, and turn neither to the right hand, nor to the left, but follow
him at the heels. Turn aside (says Abner) but he would not turn aside from
following him. Turn aside from me (says Abner again) or I will kill thee, but
he would not turn aside, he would follow him close: Then he up with his Spear
and slew him, 2. Sam. 2. 19. 20, 21, 22, 23. So many deal with the Meditation
of conscience, when conscience would dog them, and weary them out of their
sins, they will not, when conscience would haunt them, they will not be haunted
therewith; when conscience would follow them up with their desperate
wilfulness, they gall, and wound, and murder conscience to be quiet. But David
haunted his heart, and would have it haunted.

The second duty: Let Meditation trace thy heart, as it should haunt thee, so
also let it trace thee in the same steps. So would the Church, Let us search
and try our ways, and turn again unto the Lord: Lam. 3. 40. The word (in the
original, says Buxtorf) signifies, track her steps, step by step: this step
was in the ditch, that in the mire, that step awry: track them all, that we may
undergo them all again, and turn unto the Lord. Never pray but let Meditation
track thy prayer: this passage was right, that passage was amiss. Never keep a
Sabbath but let Meditation track thy keeping of it; this duty was sincere, that
was rotten: Never do any thing, but let Meditation track it. This thought, this
word, this action was warrantable; that was out of the way: track thy heart, as
the Lord tracked Eliah, he trackt him in the wilderness, he trackt him under
the juniper tree, he trackt him in the cave; What do thou here Eliah? go
forth: 1. Kings 19. What do thou here Eliah, go, return. He tract him in the
Mount, Go, return, what do thou here Eliah? this is not a place for thee. So
let Meditation wait thee; what do thou here, O sinner? what do thou here,
drunkard? in thy Cupps, or in thy profaneness, what do thou here? this is
not a place for thee, unless thou mean to perish. It may be thou art now
scared out of these sins, and art run into civil honesty, let Meditation still
track thee. What do thou do here, O sinner? Civilitie is not a case fit for
thee, unless thou were better, thou shall be torn in pieces. It may be thou
art driven out of thy civility; and art gone further, to the profession of
Religion, though it be without the power of it; let meditation still wait thee.
What do thou do here, O sinner? this sorry kind of profession is not a race
fit for thee: unless thou be godlier than so, thou shall be devoured with
everlasting fire.

Meditation is like the coursing of a Hare in the snow; the Hare fearing to be
taken by the dogs, Here she stops, there she leaps, here she interleaps, there
she goes backward, and forward, upward and downward, and all to deceive the
dogs, that they may not find her; but they go, smelling, winding and turning,
and track her step by step, till they find her: so meditation is the coursing
of the soul, the heart has a thousand fetches, a thousand Meanders and
labyrinths, a thousand cross windings, and compassings, and deceits, and all
to puzle Meditation. But Meditation must track the heart, as God dealt with
Job, he counted his steps, step by step, Job 14. 16. Meditation is the souls
bloud-hound, it will never leave howling the wrath of God; till he has taken
the hearts sin for a prey, Meditation haunts it out of one sin, and it runs
into another; Meditation haunts it out of that, and it runs into a third:
Meditation is a good pursevant, it prosecutes the sinner, and attaches him.

Now because the heart is most cunning, and hardest to be trackt by its sent,
when the heart has taken up abundance of good duties, and attained unto sundry
graces, these good duties and common graces drown the sent of the hearts
wickedness. As Huntsmen observe, that the hounds cannot well hunt in the
Spring, as Theophrastus, and Pollux, and others observe: the sweet odors of the
flowers and herbs (says Oppian) hinder the hounds from smelling the hare: so
it is with Meditation; it is hard for it to track the heart in the green
Springtime of civil honesty and formality. And therefore let Meditation make
deligent search, says he.

The third duty: hale thy heart before God, and let Meditation bring it before
his throne, and there power out thy complaint against it before God, out with
all thy villainy there, and article against thy self, and bring as many
complaints against thy self before heaven, as there be drops in a bucket full
of water. So do the godly: I powered out all my complaints before him (Psalm.
102. in the preface) I powered out my complaints as a man powers out water out
of a vessel; generally men are willing to call for mercy, but they are not so
willing to bring complaints unto God against themselves: ye shall have them
whisper after the Minister, as he is begging for pardon and mercy, but they
will not do so, whiles he is complaining of their sins, the hellish and
develish abominations of their heart. These are men of corrupt minds, reprobate
concerning the faith, and shall never have mercy, till they be as forward to
complain of their sins, as to be plaintiffs for mercy.

When a man in Meditation meets with a hard matter, that he cannot sufficiently
dive into, he breaks it to another: so do thou to God; break all thy heart to
God, tell him of thy hardness of heart, of the pride of thy heart, of the
desperate profaneness of thy heart: but take these rules with thee;







Fourthly, thy complaint must be a selfe-condemning complaint: thou must
condemn thy self, and lay thy self at Hell gates, and set the naked point of
Gods vengeance at thy throat. Thus and thus have I lived, damned, castaway, as
I have deserved to be! So did Ezra in the behalf of the Jews, Ezra 9.

For 1. He fell on his face; he did not bow down on his knees; but like a man
astonished, he fell on his knees, ready to fall on the ground in amazement.

2. He spread out his hand unto the Lord, verse 5. as if he should say, here is
my heart-blood, Lord here is my breast, Lord we deserve thou should stab us
with thy wrath.

3. He blushes to look Heaven in the face, verse 6. so vexed to think on the
sins of his people, that he is even confounded to beg mercy.

4. He is (as it were) dumb and speechless before God: And now our God, what
shall we say after all this? for we have forsaken thy commandments, verse 10.
Shall I excuse the matter? alas! it is inexcusable. What shall we say after all
this? Shall we call for thy patience? We had it, and yet were little the
better. Shall we call for mercy, Why? we had it, and yet our stubborn hearts
would not come down; I know not what to say for our selves: for we have sinned
against thee.

5. He declares Gods truth, that he had warned them by his Prophets, (verse. 11,
12.) but no warning can better us.

6. He shows how God had punished them, yet they would not be humbled: for all
that God had brought upon them less evils than they deserved, and wrought
deliverance for them, which they could not have expected; What shall we say,
should we for all this break thy commandments? verse 13, 14. What can we
expect but hell and confusion?

7. He is sensible of Gods Judgments and righteousness: O Lord thou art
righteous: as if he should say, How can thou spare us for this sin? How can
it stand with thy righteousness? How is it that such hell hounds as we are,
should live above ground, when thou art so righteous a God? It is a wonder that
the earth opens not her mouth for to swallow us up quick: for, O Lord thou art
righteous.

8. He lays down his soul, and all the peoples souls at Gods feet; as if he
should say, here we be, thou may damn us if thou will; Behold we are all here
before thee in our trespasses: for we cannot stand before thee, because of
this, verse 15. Behold here are we: rebels we are: here are our heads, and our
throats before thee, if now thou should take us from our knees unto hell, and
from our prayers unto damnation, we cannot ask thee, why thou do so: Oh it is
mercy, it is mercy indeed, that we have been spared. Thus Meditation must bring
our hearts before God, and there complain against them before heaven.

Meditation should deal with the heart, as the Father did with his possessed
child, who carried him to Christ; saying, Master my child is possessed

(...) THE DANGER Of Deferring REPENTANCE DISCOVERED In a SERMON preached at
Maidstone in Kent. By that Reverend and Faithful Minister of the Word. WILLIAM
FENNER, B. D. Sometimes Fellow of `Pembroke Hall in Cambridge, and late Pastor
of Rochford in Essex.

London, Printed by E. T. for John Stafford.

A SERMON OF M. WILLIAM FENNERS at Maidstone.
PROVERBS 1. 28. Then shall they call upon me, but I will not answer: they
shall seek me early, but they shall not find me.
THere is a good English Proverb among us, that he that neglects the occasion,
the occasion will neglect him. Solomon wisely begins his Proverbs with it: for
he brings in the wisdom of his Father in these five particulars.



to chafer away our souls for sin, How long ye scorners, will ye take pleasure
in scorning? will you still persist in your wickedness, and never have done
with your sins? will you never turn back again, but damn your souls for ever? O
ye foolish, how long will ye love foolishness?







The words are underclapt against all those that procrastinate their
repentance, and returning home unto God, wherein note, first, the parties them
selves that do prolong this day of grace, they: that is, they who when God calls
on them, will not hear; when God invites them by his mercies, patience, and
forbearance, by his Ministers and servants, by his corrections and judgment,
by all fair means and foul means; yet withstand the means of grace, they are
the men, they shall call, but God will not answer.





mind, then they shall be glad to be converted, then they shall be glad to come
out of their sins, then they shall be glad to get grace, and seek
reconciliation with God: but alas! they saw not this then, but God foresaw it
well enough; then shall they call, but I will not answer, they shall seek me
early, but they shall not find me.

Lastly, here is the frustration of their hope, which has two things in it.
First in regard of themselves, in regard of the flaw in their seeking, it being
not aright. Secondly, in regard of the Justice of God, who rewards every man
according to their works, But I will not hear them. Whence observe this point
of Doctrine.

Those that will not hear when he calls them; God will not hear them, when
they call unto him. Those that will not hear the Lord when he calls upon them
by the ministry of his Word, and voice of his Spirit, the Lord will not hear
them, when in their misery they call upon him.

Thus the Lord dealt with the people in Ezekiels days; the Lord called them to
repentance and obedience: but when they stood out; and neglected the
opportunity of grace, and seasons of conversion, see how God deals with them:
though they cry in mine ears with a loud voice, yet I will not hear them (says
the Lord.) When men have gone beyond the time of Gods mercy, and out*rowed the
tide of Gods forbearance, and will not return, the Lord sets it down with
himself, that his wrath shall return upon them, he will no longer forbear they
had a time wherein the Lord did pity them, and offered grace, and mercy unto
them, but they neglecting this season, and withstanding this proffer of grace;
God resolves with himself they shall never have it again. There was a time
wherein God did pity them, but now he will not pity them any more; twenty five
years he called unto them, and sought to bring them home; but because they
stood out and refused, the Lord says, I will love Ephraim no more.

Beloved, there is a double day, a white day, and a black day; there is a day
of salvation; Isa. 49. 9. this is the day in the which the Lord said to the
prisoners, Come forth: and to those that lie in their sins, repent and believe.
Now if any man will come forth and humble his soul before the Lord, let him
come and welcome, for it is a day of salvation. But there is another day of
damnation, which is a dark day, a black and a duskie day, wherein the Lord will
visit the sins of the world, and revenge the quarrel of his Covenant. Hos.
9. 7. The day of visitation is come, yea the day of recompense; the people
shall know it; the Prophet is a fool, and the spiritual man is mad. Beloved,
we are fools, and all the spiritual men under heaven are mad, that lay not
this day to heart. For the day of the Lord is a day of visitation, and all the
world shall rue it, though now men sleep in security. If once mercy be
rejected, and God turn away his ear from a man, then grace shall be no more,
the door of life shall for ever be shut up against him: and when once this day
comes, he has lost his own place, and deprived himself of eternal happiness.

Now there are three reasons of this point, the first is the law of
retaliation, of rendering like for like, which is the justest law that can be
made with man, for to give unto every man according to his works, to make him
take such as he brings (as the Heathen calls it) to give a man quid for qu^.
Now if God call upon thee, and thou will not hear; it is righteousness with
God, yea equity with God (that is more) that when thou call on him, he
should not hear thee. For thus runs the tenor of Gods Word, Prove. 28. 9. He
that turns away his ear from hearing the Law, even his prayers shallbe
abominable. He that turns away his ear from Gods Law, God will turn away his
ear from his prayer. He that turns, it is spoken in the present tense, that
is, he that now turns away his ear, his prayer shall be abominable (in the
future tense) that is, the Lord marks what master or servant, what father or
mother, what husband or wife, what man or woman it is, that turns away the ear
of his head or the ear of his heart, from hearing his will, and obeying of his
Commandments, the Lord takes special notice of it, and sets it down in his
Calendar, and records it in his Memorial; keeping a strict account thereof: as
if God should say, Well, is it so: I now call, and will not this man or that
woman answer? Do I now stretch out my hands; and will not they take care to
obey me? Well, let them alone (says God) there is a day coming, that I shall
be a hearing of them, times of sorrow and misery will take hold of them, and
then they in their affliction will cry unto me, but I will not hear; they will
beg for mercy, but I will not regard: they will seek me early, but they shall
not find me.

It was one of the Articles of high Treason brought in against Cardinal
Woolsey, that he had the pox, and a stinking breath, and yet durst come into
the Kings presence: So it shall be an Article against thee of high treason
before the King of heaven, if thou come into his presence with the stinking
breath of thy sins, living in thy lusts and wallowing in thy filthiness, all
thy prayers are but as so many stinking breaths in the nostrils of the Lord;
and every duty that thou performest unto the Lord, shall be as so many
Articles of high treason against thee, to condemn thee, because thou live in
rebellion, and a Traitor against God.

His prayer shall be abominable: he does not say, I will turn away mine ear
from hearing his prayer, which turns away his ear from hearing my law (that is
the true exposition of the words) no, but, like for like is sometimes
injustice: for if a man should strike a Magistrate a box on the ear, it were
not justice for him to give him another: for, it is a greater sin to strike a
Magistrate than any other common person; and therefore a greater punishment the
Law requires: So God does not say, he will turn away his ear from hearing his
prayer, but will serve him in a worse kind, he will count it abominable, yea
abomination, (in the abstract) it shall be loathsome, yea lothsomnesse it self
in the worst manner. Galat. As a man sows so shall he reap, if thou sow
sparingly; thou shall sparingly: if thou sow a dull ear to Gods Word, thou
shall reapa^dull ear from God to thy prayer: for God will reward every man
according to his works.

Secondly, because of the time of Gods Attributes, both mercy and justice,
Motive 2.
(...)

VAIN THOUGHTS ARRAIGNED At the Bar of Gods JUSTICE. SET FORTH In a SERMON
preached at Linton in Kent. By that Reverend and Faithful Minister of Gods
Word, WILLIAM FENNER, B. D. Sometimes Fellow of `Pembroke Hall in Cambridge,
and late Pastor of Rochford in Essex.

London, Printed by E. T. for John Stafford.

A SERMON OF M. WILLIAM FENNERS, Preached at Linton, September 9. 1629.
PHIL. 3. 18, 19. For many walk, of whom I have told you often, and now tell
you weeping, that they are the enemies of the Cross of Christ, whose end is
destruction, whose belly is their God, whose glory is their shame, and who mind
earthly things.
THE Apostle in the closure of this Chapter, sets out unto us a twofold
kind of life: First, the life of the Godly, and that 1. by way of Exhortation,
verse 17. Brethren, be followers together of me, and mark them which walk so as
you have us for an example: 2. By way of declaration, verse 20. But our
conversation is in heaven, whence also we look for the Savior, even the Lord
Jesus Christ. Then secondly he sets forth unto us the life of the wicked, which
walked otherwise than the Disciples and Apostles of Christ walked, in these
words read unto you. The Apostle warned those wicked men again and again; but
they would not take warning, neither did they think themselves so bad as he
made them, and therefore they thought they should speed well enough; he
preached to them in the Pulpit, and wrote unto them, though he were six hundred
miles and more distant from them (and that weeping too) that they were enemies
to the Cross of Christ, whose end is destruction, whose God is their belly,
who mind earthly things.

These words may be construed two ways; either as being meant, 1. Of several
wicked men, as first of Heterodox walkers, such as walk contrary to the
Apostles: or, 2. Of wicked persecutors of the Gospel, enemies to the Cross of
Christ: 3. Of Drunkards and Hypocrites, whose God is their belly; 4. Of
Ambitious and proud persons, whose glory is their shame: and 5. Of covetous and
carnal-minded men, who mind earthly things: or as Chrysostom expounds the words
(and so it seems is the meaning of them) to be meant of one sort of men, who
mind earthly things, they are such as walk otherwise than the Apostle walked.
Who are they that mind earthly things? they are enemies of the Cross of
Christ: Who are they that mind earthly things? Whose hearts and affections run
more after the things of this life, than after the cross of Christ; Their God
is their belly. Who are they that mind earthly things, and think only how to
increase their living and enlarge their estate, and make them sure unto
themselves? their glory is their shame. Who are they that mind earthly things?
that give their hearts (the flower of man) and their affections (the flower of
their Souls) unto the world, and unto the base things of the world, still they
are they that mind earthly things, which set either their loving thoughts, or
their raking and caring thoughts, or their fretting and vexing thoughts, or the
eager, covetous and vain thoughts on earthly things, they are they that walk
otherwise than the Apostles of Christ walked; These are are those that are
enemies to the Cross of Christ, whose God is their belly, whose glory is their
shame, who mind earthly things, whose end is destruction.

Hence then will we observe this point;

That those whose minds and hearts run habitually on earth, and earthly things,
their end must needs be destruction.

Jeremiah 9. 19. Hear O earth (says God) behold I will bring evil upon this
people, even the fruit of their thoughts, because they have not hearkened unto
me, but rejected my Law. Wherein we may see three things, 1. That the curse of
God is the desert of cursed evil and vain thoughts: 2. That the plague and
curse of God is the event of evil and vain thoughts; evil thoughts do not not
only deserve Gods plagues, but also bring them: 3. Here is notice given to all
the world; Hear, O earth: as if he had said, here is a reckoning that you
little dream of, I will bring a plague upon you, not only for your idolatry,
for your whoredom and fornication, but even for your vain thoughts, Prove. 24.
9* The thoughts of the wicked are sin; The Lord does not only condemn the
actions and courses of of wicked men, but sets his curse upon their very
thoughts. Sin is of an homogeneal nature, of which every part of a thing is the
whole; every piece of a stone is stone, for it has the nature of the whole:
even so it is with sin, the least part of sin, the least thought of sin, the
least shiver of sin, is sin, and abominable before God.

The reasons why those whose hearts and thoughts run habitually on Reason. 1.
earth and earthly things, must needs end in destruction, are 1. That man's end
must needs end destruction, that never repents: Now, so long as a man's thoughts
run usually and habitually on the things of the world, that man never repents*
repentance not only cleanses the outside of man, but the inside also, even
the heart; repentance goes as far as the Law of God ^^eth: where the word of
God begins, there repentance must noeds begin; now the word of God begins and
strikes at the heart, as says the Apostle, The Word of God is sharp and
powerful, sharper than any two edged sword, peircing to the dividing asunder of
the soul and Spirit, the joints and marrow, and is a discerner of the thoughts
of the heart, Heb. 4. 12. Now then, if the word of God strike at the thoughts
of the heart, then repentance must go and teach so far to reform and amend the
things of the heart, or else he never repents. Let a man sweep his house never
so much, yet it is not clean so long as there remains one Cob-web in it: so if
thy heart be swept from drunkenness, whoring, and swearing, and yet if the old
Cob-web of vain thoughts remain in any corner of thy heart, not washed out, nor
swept down, thou have not as yet repented Oh Jerusalem (faith God to his
Prophet) wash thy heart from wickedness, that thou may be saved: how long
shall thy vain thoughts lodge within thee? Jer. 4. 14. Mark how the Lord
inforceth his exhortation: see how he backs his counsel [that thou may be
saved:] as if he had said, thou can not be saved, unles thou wash thy heart
from vain thoughts: how long shall thy vain thoughts lodge within thee? He does
not say, why do vain thoughts come into thee? for they will come into the best
and most holy heart; but how long shall they lodge within thee? If vain
thoughts do lodge in man, and take up their nest in his heart, if a man let his
thoughts dwell upon vain things, and he give away unto them, and use them as his
market, trade and recreations, he cannot be saved; it is an emphaticall kind of
speech: as if the Lord should say. O Jerusalem, thou never considerest this,
and thus he does as it were pity and compassionate them in their blindness
and ignorance, and horrrible befottednesse, that think that thought is free.
Beloved, when the Lord comes to reckon with the world, he will not only
reckonwith them for their pounds and shillings, for their hundreds and
thousands of sins; for their murders, whore domes, blasphemies, etc. but he
will call them to an account for their least sins, the pence and farthing sins,
even their very thoughts: agree with thine adversary quickly* while thou art in
the way, lest he deliver thee up to the Jayler, and thou be cast into prison:
thou shall not come out until thou have paid the utmost farthing; thou must
deliver up thy farthing as well as thy pound sins, or else thou never agreest
with thine adversary. When the Lord by his prophet calls upon his people,
exhorting them to repentance, he wills and exhorts them to change their
thoughts, Isa. 55. 7. Repentance is the change of the thoughts* according to
the English Proverb (I have changed my thoughts:) (...) to thy feet when
thou'goest into the house of God, Eccles. 5. 1. Thou ^ast never go into the
House of God without thy feet, the thoughts and ^ffections of the heart, are
the feet of the soul; and thou can never go to God without them; and
therefore if thy heart and affections run habitually on earthly things, thou
did never repent, and so thine end is damnation*(...)

The second reason is, that man's end must needs be destruction that has no
Christ in the world: now so long as thy thoughts run habitually on earthly
things, thou have no Christ. It is not enough for a man to hang on Christ, for
many a man does so, and yet is cut off from Christ, and perishes for ever:
thou must not only hang upon Christ, but thou must also get into Christ. As in
the old world, when the deluge came, and the waters increased so greatly, that
the mountains and high hills were covered with them, and the people could not
save themselves by getting unto the tops of the mountains, no question but many
seeing the Ark swim above the water, did climb up and hang upon the sides of
the Ark, thinking to save themselves, yet none of them were saved, but those
that were gotten into the Ark: so, many a man will catch hold of Christ, but
his hold will be gone, and he perish for ever, unless he get into Christ. Now
a man can never get into Christ, unless his heart be purged from vain
thoughts, For Christ when he enters into a man, cleanses his heart from vain
thoughts, 2 Cor. 10. 5 If Christ once come into the heart, he will set up his
throne there: he will hold his Scepter of Righteousness in it: when Christ
comes, see what a work he will make in the heart, he will not suffer a proud
thought to remain there to upbraid him; but he will cast down every
imagination, and all high things that exalt themselves, and he will bring every
thought into subjection unto himself. Therefore if thy thoughts run after the
lusts of thy own heart, thou had no Christ in thee: for Christ (beloved) will
never dwell in a foul house: I know there is no wheat without some darnell, no
gold without some dross, no wine without some lees; so there is no man but
has some sin; no man so clean, but has some defilements of sin upon him;
yet if a man have not this cleansing grace of Christ in him, cleansing the
heart from vain things, there is no Christ in him: for Christ will never dwell in
a foul heart. Now beloved, the very vain thoughts of a man defile him: as
Christ faith, Mat. 7. 21. 22. 23. Out of the heart proceeds evil thoughts,
and they are they that defile a man. Allthese, not only murder and adulteries,
and uncleaness, and all other abominable sins, which men's consciences startle
at, but evil thoughts defile a man: Assure thy self, that so long as the
league of these evil thoughts is not broken, thou have no Christ as yet,
within thee. Hence is that exhortation of the Apostle, Col. 3. 12. If you be
risen with Christ, then seek those things that are above.

Brethren, you must remember that there be two kinds of exhortations, in the
Scripture: the one, if a man do them, blessed and happy is he: the other, if he
do them not, yet he may find mercy; it will be a grief and a sorrow to him, but
it follows not that he shall miscarry. But there are exhortations that tie to
obedience, that must be obeyed, or else there is no salvation; as this
exhortation of the Apostle, it is not left to our choice to do, or not to do,
but if a man be risen of Christ he must do it: he must seek the things that are
above: that man, then, that has his thoughts run habitually on the world, that
man has no Christ in him, and therefore his end must needs be destruction.

Thirdly, that man's end must needs be destruction that loves not God; now so
long as thy thoughts run habitually on the things of the world, thou have no
true love of God in thee. For thus runs the Commandment of love, Thou shall
love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, with all thy soul, and with all thy
might, Matthew. 22. 37. It is as if Christ should have said, thou shall love God,
with all thy heart, and with all thy heart, and with all thy heart: for the
soul, mind; and heart, are all one; that no man might dare to keep any part of
their heart from God. Every one will say, I love God with all my heart, I go to
Church and serve God with all my heart; I hear the Word and pray with all my
heart, I receive the Saraments with all my heart: Do thou so? and yet let thy
thoughts run upon the world? do thou pray, and yet let vain thoughts lodge
with in thee? do thou hear the Word, receive the Sacraments, and yet letrest
vain thoughts distract thee? Do thou walk in thy calling, and yet let
vain thoughts steal away thy heart, and yet say thou, I love God with all my
heart, when thou take away thy heart from God? How do thou think thy
thoughts? with thy heels, or with thy heart? Surely thou say, with thy
heart: Why then if thou love God with all thy heart, thou must give thy
thoughts unto God; God that calls for thy heart, calls for all thy heart: now the
heart is nothing but all a man's heart; all the affections and desires, all
turnings and windings, all thoughts that are in the heart do but make up the
heart: and therefore when God calls for thy heart, he calls for all the powers
and faculties of the soul. And therefore, the Prophet David would bless God
with his soul and all that was within him. Psalm. 103. So thou must give thy
thoughts, and all that is within thee to God, or else thou give God nothing;
therefore that man's end must needs be destruction that loves not God.

Fourthly, that man's end must needs be destruction, that never gives over his
sin: and so long as thy thoughts run after the world; thou can never
forsake sin: thou may resolve and think on the contrary, yet so long as thy
thoughts run habitually on the things of the world, thou do not forsake sin.
Wicked and carnal men may have the eyes of their consciences opened, and their
hearts awakened, whereby they may see their sins, and the hellish evil and
danger of them: whereupon they may resolve and purpose to forsake them, and
then they will make a covenant with God that they will not do thus and thus; I
have been touchy and choleric, but I will be so no more; I have been a
profane swearer and blasphemer of the name of God, but I will be so no more; I
have been a drunkard, and an unclean person, but Lord thou shall see a
reformation in me. Nay it may be he will tell his minister of it, and his
father and his mother, his wife, his children, and all his friends too of it:
but when he comes to his cold blood again, and these cold graces which
flattered so, come to be cold in him, so that his heart comes to it self
again, then vain thoughts rest in his heart, and he returns to his old sins
again, as the dog to his vomit, and the sow being washed, to the wallowing in
the mire.

The Apostle excellently describes a man that can never depart from his sins:
They have eyes full of adultery, which cannot cease from sin: 2. Pet. 2. 14.
where the Apostle speaks not only of that adultery which is a breach of the
seventh Commandment: but of such an adultery which is a perfect breach of
every commandment, when the heart runs a whoring after every sin and
vanity: when the eye of the soul is full of adultery, the heart cannot cease
from sin; when the eye cannot see an object of gain or profit, but the mind is
presently engaged and runs after it, when it cannot see an object of delight
and pleasure, but it is straightway caught by it: when he cannot see any wrong
or injury done unto him, but presently he is inflamed with revenge, and his
heart runs after it: I say, that if thy eye be thus full of adultery that thou
can not see the occasions, and hints of sin, but presently thou art ensnared;
and thy soul is taken by it; thou art the man that can not cease to sin:
therefore until thou turn the eye of thy soul, which is the thoughts and
affections of thy heart, another way, thou will never cease to sin. For
wheresoever thou look, thou will be ensnared, so long as thy thoughts are
evil and vicious; either upon pride, or covetousness, or ambition, or envy, or
delights; thy soul will look asquint on God: and until these vain thoughts of
thine be crucified, thou will only look upon the satisfying of these vain lusts
of thine.

Prove. 3. 6. In all thy way ways acknowledge God, and he shall direct thy
paths. In all thy ways think on God, or else thou may go to many duties in
Religion, but never be direct in thy going; thou may pray a thousand times,
but never be established in thy prayer: thou may go from Lecture to Lecture,
and yet never be established in thy service: thou may go about many things,
and never be established in any thing, unless God be in all thy thoughts: a
man may go on in a course of Religion, but it is a hap hazard he is inconstant,
and unsteady in his his course, unless in his heart he think upon God, and
therefore his end must needs be destruction.

This then may serve, first, for humiliation to the godly: secondly, for matter
of condemnation to the wicked.

First for humiliation; Are vain thoughts thus damnable, that when they bear
sway in the heart, they make that man's end to be destruction? How then ought
this to fill the faces of them that have the Spirit of Christ, with shame and
confusion, and to make them in a holy manner to be confounded in themselves,
and to think of the emptiness, naughtiness, and vanities of their hearts?
Beloved, thou can not go to prayers, but abundance of vain thoughts will be
about thee, like wasps to assault thee; thou can not go to the Word, but
these vain thoughts will be a humming in thy ears; thou can not go about the
works of thy calling; but vain thoughts will haunt thee, and creep into thy
meditations, and take away the main burden of the work all the day long.
Beloved, this should make a godly man ashamed, and confounded in himself, in
the consideration hereof. The Prophet David was so confounded and ashamed
hereat, that had not God poured in mercy and comfort into his soul, he had been
distracted, and should have despaired, considering the company of vain thoughts
that lodged within him, Psalm. 94. 19. where he shows what abundance of
distracting thoughts he had; that if God had not sustained him with comfort
after comfort, he had been overwhelmed in despair by them.

Augustine says, a man's thoughts are not in his own power: the heart of man is
like tinder; and if the Devil cast a spark into it, thou can not hinder it
from taking fire; but thou may hinder it from burning further. A ship may
have leakes in her, and thou can not hinder the coming in of water into her;
but by thy pumping and industry thon may save her from drowning in the
water; even so evil thoughts, though they be rooted out, yet they will come in
again; a man's heart is like to to the fig tree that grew out of the stone wall,
which Epiphanius speaks of; the branches were lopt off, and it grew again;
the boughs were lopt off, and it grew again; they cut down the body of it, yet
it grew again; they plucked up the roots of it, yet it grew again: till at last
the stone wall and all was fain to be pulled down: Even so it is with vain
thoughts in the heart; a man may lop them off by godly sorrow; he may cut them
down, and root them up by mortification, and yet they will be sprouting up, and
rising up again; till the whole body of sin be pulled down, and destroyed in a
man. Gregory speaks of them, and says man may pluck them up, but yet not so,
but that they will rise again.

The consideration hereof should humble us, and make us low in our own eyes. Oh
then think with thy self and say; Oh that my thoughts should be so base,
eartl^y and vain! what, have I not a God, a Christ, a heaven to think upon?
have I not excellent Commandments of God, and thousands of sweet and precious
promises in Scripture to think upon? and must I be thinking on every babble? of
every straw, not worth the thinking on? Take the Apostles exhortation,
Whatsoever things be true; whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are
just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are of good report: if
there be any virtue, if there be any praise, think on these things, Phil. 4. 8.
what, are there so many virtuous things, so many holy and pure things; so many
admirable and glorious things, so many heavenly graces, and divine promises; so
many blessed passages of holy Writ to take up my mind? and shall I spend my
thoughts and time upon such vain and cursed things as will yield me no profit?
this should astonish the hearts of Gods people, and greatly humble their souls.

The second use may serve for matter of condemnation unto the wicked: let this
doctrine strike terror into the hearts of those men, that suffer their hearts
to be taken up with vain thoughts: as Peter said unto Simon Magus, so let me
say unto them, Repent of this thy wickedness, and pray unto God (verse 8) that
if it be possible, the thoughts of thy heart may be forgiven thee. The Apostle
does not only wish him to repent of his simony and bribery, but also of the
least vain thoughts of his heart: pray pray unto God, if perhaps the very
thoughts of thy heart may be forgiven thee: for, beloved, the very least vain
thoughts that thou think, without repentance are impardonable* there is an
impossibility of remission of vain and idle thoughts without true repentance.

Oh what fearful news is this to the world of men that lay not this to heart!
Beloved, may we not run into the ears and hearts of all earthly men with this
point, whose minds and thoughts are earthly? Is it so that he whose thoughts
run habitually on the world, his end is destruction? Then they that make no
conscience what their thoughts are, what their imaginations are, what they
think of as they go up and down, how can such escape the vengeance of hell?
Tell me then what thy thoughts are; are they not of thy hawks and hounds, of
thy cattle and grounds, of thy gardens and orchards, rather than of Christ?
When thou walk in the streets, whereon run thy thoughts, but on thy
pleasures, and profits, and earthly delights? yea of every vanity, and every
delight can thou think, rather than of God and his Commandments. Thou come
to Church, thou prayest, and hear the Word of God; but do not vain thoughts
come along with thee? thou go home again, but do not vain thoughts haunt and
dog thee?

It is the brand of a wicked man, not to have God in all his thoughts, Psalm. 4.
10. when goods and cattle, plough and cart, pleasures and outward contentments
are in his mind and thoughts; when ruffs and cuffs, houses and dishes, tables
and fair hangings, or any thing but God can take up their thoughts; they can
have thoughts of every thing, but of God they can think none; this is the brand
of a wicked man, that he has no blood of a Christian in him.

It is a true description of a Pagan and Infidel, that has no knowledge of
Christ, to be vain in his imaginations: Romans 1. 21. When they knew God, they
glorified him not as God; but became vain in their imaginations: vain in their
disputes, vain in their reasonings, vain in their thoughts, in their carriages
and disputations; so then though thou know God, and have things enough in
thy mind, that convince thee that this God is to be worshipped; and
understandest the worship of God and the commandments of Christ: yet if thou
glorifiest him not as God, giving thy heart and affections to him, but art vain
in thy imaginations, thou dishonourest God. Hear what God says unto such, All
the day long have I stretched out my hand unto a rebellious and gainsaying
people, which walk in a way that is not good, but after their own thoughts, a
people that provoke me continually to my face, Isa. 65. 2, 3. As if God had
said, I sent Prophet after Prophet, Minister after Minister, to instruct them
in the knowledge of my ways, I labored to convert them, and to bring them
home unto my self, and to work better thoughts in them; but still they are a
people that walk after their own thoughts, that provoke me continually unto my
face. There is never a thought of thine, but it is in the very face of God,
both thought and imagined.

But some man may say, I think of God, and of Christ, of faith, and repentance,
and of calling on God, of mending of this and that course; I think of death,
and of my last account, and every foot I have holy thoughts in my mind.

But beloved give me leave, I pray you, to speak something unto you, which, it
may be, may stick upon you while you live: I will propound these four things,
and distinctions unto you, which I will use:

First, What? do thou think of God and of heaven? then tell me whether thy
thoughts be injected thoughts into thy heart, or thoughts raised by the heart;
for there is a great deal of difference betwren thoughts injected and thoughts
raised: God casts good thoughts into a godly man's heart, which being fit soil,
it fructifies, and brings forth fruit. Again, God casts good thoughts into a
wicked man's heart, but because his heart is not sanctified, and therefore no
fit soil to harbor in, they dye and vanish: God casts in, and they cast out,
God casts in again, and they cast out again; therefore if thou have good
thoughts, examine and try whether they be thoughts raised from the heart or no;
see whether thy heart be a renewed heart, a sanctified, an holy heart, fit to
bring forth good thoughts every day. Beloved, a wicked man may have a thousand
good thoughts, and yet go to hell in the midst of them all. God cast a good
thought into the heart of the King of Assyria to go against Judah and Jerusalem
to punish his people for their sins, and to avenge himself on them for the
breach of this Covenant: but what says the text? Howbeit he thought not so
Isa. 10. No, his only aim was how to get honor, how to enrich, to enlarge his
territories, and to bring down the Nations under him, and to make his name and
fame to be spread, and declared through all the world. So God casts many good
thoughts, into many a wicked man's heart to repent, and to leave his
drunkenness, his pride, his swearing and whoring, to be holy and religious:
howbeit he thinks not so, but he thinks how to eat and drink, how to be proud
and haughty; how to be rich and great in the world; how to be vain and
licen^ious, yea his thoughts are vile and vain all the day long.

Oh that men were wise, truly to understand this! the want whereof is the cause
why many thousands go to hell and are damned for ever. I will make it plain to
you: a wicked man reasons thus with himself; I confess, and it is true, I
sin every day against God, and sometimes drink a pot with my friend, though
sometimes I let fall anoath, and am overtaken with my infirmities, yet I thank
God, he has sanctified my heart; For I think of God and of Christ, and I often
call upon his name, and let my thoughts run on good things; God and heaven
are many times in my mind, and I am sorry when I do amiss, and the Lord has
blessed me with a large portion of outward things. Besides, I see these and these
signs of grace in me, and therefore I think my case to be haphy. And thus
securely they live, and so they go on, and so they dye, and so go to hell and
perish for ever and ever. Here is the misery of it many think of God, and of
Christ, of death, and of their last account, of heaven, of hell, of faith and
repentance, of leaving sin, of crucifying their lusts, and practicing of
holiness. Now men think that their thinking of these things, is a part of their
discharge, when indeed they are Additions to, and pieces of their talents,
which increase their judgments. God casts in a though of repentance,
holiness, of the remembrance of death, and last account* Do thou find thy
heart never the better, and holier by them? Then know, it is only Gods haunting
of thy heart, and Gods calling upon thee, and Gods inviting thee unto
repentance, to leave thy sins, to come out of thy deadness and formality, to
prepare for thy death and judgment; and therefore I say, if thy heart now
think not so, if thy heart do not repent, believe, and grow more zealous, and
thou art not drawn the nearer to God; I say then, that the more of these good
thoughts that thou have had, the greater thy doom will be: if thou have had ten
thousands of them, if they have been only Gods haunting of thy heart, think
thou then now of grace, of God, of thy poor soul, which is not bettered by
them, nor made holy, then know they are pieces of thy talent, and it does make
thy torments in hell the greater.

Secondly, thou have good thoughts, but the question is, whether they be ^
fleeting or abiding thoughts: Many think of God, of grace, of heaven, of the
word of God, and when they hear a Sermon, they will think of God; but these
thoughts, though they come into their minds, yet they go away presently, they
are in and out at an instant, in a trice, they pass away and are gone.
Beloved, there are two kinds of vain thoughts, 1. vain, because the substance
and matter of them is vain, and so all worldly thoughts are vain: 2. or else
for their want of durance and lasting, and so are all thoughts of heaven, of
God and grace, and of Christ, if they vanish away, they are all vain thoughts,
though they seem otherwise. Hear what God says Genesis 6. 5, God saw that the
wickedness of man was great upon the earth, and all the imaginations of the
thoughts of his heart were only evil continually: [all the imaginations] great
is the emphasis of this word [all] all the thoughts: yea all universally, are
only evil continually.

But you will say unto me, Does not a wicked man think that there is a God?
why, that is a good thought; does not he think that this God is to be observed
and worshipped? why, this is a good thought; does he not think that sin is to
be forsaken* that is a good thought; does he not think of heaven, and of
Christ? how then are their thoughts only evil and that continually?

I answer, Because all the thoughts of a wicked man's heart are vain, that is
vanishing thoughts; not vain for the matter, which sometimes may be good and
Holy; but vain because they soon vanish away; thoughts that come and carry ^ot,
that leave no impression in their hearts behind them, these are all vain
thoughts, according to that of the Apostle, The Lord knows the thoughts of
the wise that they are vain: 1 Cor. 3. 20. Beloved in a godly man's heart, when
a good thought comes, it abides and dwells a good while in him, and when it
goes away it leaves a good impression behind it, it leaves a sweet smell and
favor in the heart after it is gone, its made more holy and sanctified by it.
When a good thought comes into a godly man's heart, it leaves the print of it
behind* when a wicked man has a good thought, he ^osseth it up and down, and
suffers it not to stay, but presently puts it away: let a thought of the world
come in, and he can give it entertainment for seven days, yea for seven years,
yea all his life he sets his heart as a wide gate open to receive them and to
entertain them: but if a thought of God, or of repentance, of holiness and
salvation come into his mind, he is tired out with it, and it soon vanishes
away; therefore so long as thy thoughts are thus vain, though for the matter
good, if thou have never so many of them, yet if they abide not, but thou
think and unthinkest them again; if they come and give thy Soul a jog, and
so away; the more I say thou have of them, though thou have many millions, the
greater will be thy doom at the last day.

Thirdly, Thou think of God, but the question is, whether thy good thoughts
be studied, or accidental thoughts. A wicked man that runs gadding in his
thoughts here and there, over the whole world, upon this and that, and I know
not what, in the midst of a lottery of thoughts, he cannot choose but stumble
upon some good: he thinks on God, he thinks on Christ, he thinks on Heaven; but
it is by the bygone, these thoughts of his are not natural; but if he think
of the world, of his pleasures, of his outward delights and contentments, these
thoughts arise naturally out of his heart, they are his own. Now it may be a
thought of God comes by the way; But a godly man not only thinks of God, but he
stadies how to think of God; it is his continual endeavor to bring his mind
to be fixed upon God; it is his whole care to have good thoughts to dwell
habitually in him. There is an excellent phrase used to set it forth, Malac. 3.
16. They that feared the Lord spoke one unto another, and the Lord hearkened and
heard it, and a book of remembrance was written before him of all them that
feared the Lord, and thought upon his Name. Where I pray you to mark, that
thinking upon Gods Name, and the fear of God are joined together: for thinking
on God, comes from the fear of God; a godly man thinks upon God and fears him;
he thinks that God is always with him in every place, and he trembles before
him: he thinks God beholds all his thoughts and affections, and trembles at
him: he thinks as he walks up and down in his way, as he he is employed in his
calling, as he is performing of any duty of Religion, that Gods eye is upon him
and beholds him: and therefore he fears to offend and displease him. A wicked
man will swear and blaspheme the Name of God, and by and by it may be he will
cry God mercy, and so he thinks of God. The man breaks out it may be into wrath
and malice, fury and passion; and then it may be a thought will come into his
mind to cry God mercy for it, and thus he thinks of God. The man is careless,
earthly, dead, and lukewarm in the performance of good duties, and because his
Conscience tells him it is not good, he will aslo God forgiveness: he will be
proud, vain and rotten in his speeches, and then it may be a thought will come
into his mind to ask God forgiveness, and so he thinks of God; he will think
of the world, of his pleasures, profits, of his lusts and sins, and then it may
be a good thought will come into his mind, and then it may be he will think a
little of God too. Beloved, this is carnal and devilish thinking of God, thy
thoughts then of God must be joined with the fear of God.

Fourthly and lastly, thou think of God, but the question is, whether thy
thoughts of him be profitable or unprofitable thoughts: a godly man thinks of
repentance, and repents upon it; he thinks of calling on God more faithfully
and fervently then he did before, and he accomplishes his thoughts: for he goes
a bout it, and his heart is the better for it. Thus it was with David when he
said, I thought on my way ways, and turned my feet unto thy testimonies, Psalm
119. 59. I thought on my ways (there was his good thoughts) and turned my feet
unto thy testimonies (there was the profit of his good thoughts:) but on the
contrary thou think of God, but God has never the more service of thee;
thou think of leaving of thy good fellowship, and merry companions, but for
all thy thought, thou retainest them still: thou think to give over all thy
deadness and luke-warmnesse, and so get more zeal and fervency: yet day after
day, and year after year, thy heart is as dead, vain and secure as before, as
ever before. Examine thy self and see, thou have good thoughts (thou say) but
where is the profit of them? thou think of leaving thy wrath, and of
bridling thy filthy passions, but art thou enabled by thy thoughts, to put up
an injury the better? it may be thou think of death; but is thy life the
more holy and sanctified by it? Thou think of Christ and his blood; but is
thy heart purged by it? Oh the wretched misery of the most men in the world,
because of the unprofitablenesse of their thoughts! they have many good
thoughts, but they want the profitable use of them, they get no good by by them.

There is an excellent description of the thoughts of wicked men (though it be
Apocrypha,) The heart of the foolish is like a Cart-Wheel, and his thoughts
like the rolling Axeltree. As the Cart-wheel goes round all the day, and yet
remains on the Axeltree; so is it with wicked men, their thoughts wheel, and
wheel them up and down a thousand thousand times, their thoughts run upon this
thing, and then upon another thing, and so they roll up and down continually,
yet their heatt is at the same pass it was still; an earthly heart it was, and
so it is still, a profane heart it was, and so it is still; a carnal proud
heart it was, and so it remains still; But let these know, that the time
hastens wherein God will judge them, even for their very thoughts.

Where are they then that say thought is free? It is true indeed, it is free
from men's knowledge, and from men's Courts, but not from Gods, they are not free
from Gods all-seeing eye and knowledge, Thou have tried and known me (says the
Prophet) thou understandest my thoughts afar off, Psalm. 139. Beloved, as you
are in the Alehouse, or gaming house, as you walk abroad in the fields, as you
are employed in your callings, or about any holy duty, God sees all thy
thoughts, what is going in, and what is coming out there is never a thought in
thy heart, but God sees it; how then can thoughts be free? God will weigh the
thoughts of men, Prove. 16. 2.

Beloved, what a fearful day will that be, when God shall take his Scales and
weigh (not men's bodies and estates, for then in may be that rich men, and fat,
and gross men will outweigh them that are better:) but he will take men's
thoughts and weigh them, he will weigh their souls: he will take men's good
thoughts, and put them in one scale, and their bad, earthly, carnal and
unprofitable thoughts, into another scale, and to try which weighs heaviest:
Now if thy earthly and sinful thoughts weigh heaviest, then down thou go
into eternal damnation.

Secondly, as thoughts are not free from Gods knowledge, so are they not free
from Gods Word; for Gods Word can meet with them; for it is lively and mighty
in operation, and is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart, Heb.
4. 12. Does the word of God discern the thoughts of men's hearts? Then much more
does the God of this word, and therefore how can thoughts be fee?



I should here give you some means in the use, that so you might rid your
selves from vain thoughts.

First, love the word of God, if ever thou will come out of them; prize Means 1.
the truth of God, and labor to get thy mind and thoughts to be set on better
things; and then the thoughts of the world, and all vain things will vanish
away. This course the Prophet David took, Psalm. 119, 113, I hate vain thoughts,
but thy Law do I love, How came it to pass that he hated vain thoughts? namely,
by loving Gods Law: if he had not loved Gods Law, and those excellent things
therein, and set his heart on them; he could never have hated vain thoughts.
The way then to break off thy league with vain thoughts, is to be in league
with good thoughts. Do thou complain of vain thoughts in prayer, in hearing
the word, in receiving of the Sacraments, and art thou stuffed and filled with
them, that thou can not think upon God and holy things? thou do hereby
bewray thine own rottenesse and corruptions. And therefore know, that if thou
love the Lord and his Word, and did set thy thoughts upon him, thou
would never have them so much employed about such base things.

Secondly, if ever thou would rid thy heart of vain thoughts, especially
when thou art in holy action, thou must go unto God by prayer; there is no
greater bridle to restrain a man from vain thoughts, than this consideration,
that he is to go to God. I speak not this to the men of this world: Carnal
men, who can rush into Gods presence hand over head, without any fear or
reverence, they can set upon any duty without any preparation: but I speak it
to the godly man, whose heart dreads and stands in awe of God: Will thou let
thy mind rove and run all the day on worldly things? how then will thou call
upon God? Do thou not know that this is the cause of thy dullness, thy
deadness, and wanderings of thy heart, when thou art about any good duty?
namely, because thou suffer thy heart to be lashing out, and roving abroad
on the world all day, no marvel if it keep his haunt at night, and therefore
thy heart being vain, God will never hear thy prayer, Job 35. 13. God will
never hear vanity. Come thou to God with a vain prayer? God will never hear
it. Come thou with a vain ear to the hearing of the Word? God will never hear
it; or with a vain heart to the Sacrament? God will not regard it. Lay this
seriously to thy heart, if ever thou wouldesst have thy heart to the duty thou
art about, busy thy mind upon good things; for if thy heart be accustomed to
vain and worldly things all the day, it is no marvel if it return to its hau
nt again at night.

Thirdly, consider that you have not so learned Christ. It is the Apostles
argument, Ephesians. 3. consider then what you have learned of Christ; has Christ
taught you so? has Christ taught you such a love, and given you such a
liberty, that you should love the world more than him, and employ and bestow
all your thoughts wholly in seeking after vain things? Has Christ taught you
such a faith as this? Has Christ taught you such a repentance as this, to have
your thoughts more upon the world than upon Christ? to repent of sin, and yet
never forsake sin? Have ye so learned Christ? Has he not taught you such a
faith as purifieth the heart? such a sanctification as cleanses the soul and
the mind? such an obedience as brings every thought into subjection unto
himself? Therefore, if now thou should still retain thy vain, dead, earthly
and carnal thoughts, it is not to learn Christ: Christ teaches thee no such
doctrine, nor gives thee any such licencious liberty; but thou learnest of the
Devil, and of thine own heart: for all evil and vain thoughts arise from these
three heads;

First from the variety and abundance of the thoughts of the world, which

Secondly, from the fountain of corruption in man's heart, the heart of man

Thirdly, from the damned malice of the Devil, and his fearful suggestions

1. Materially, men's thoughts are vain, when the matter of them is

2. Formally, when though for the matter they are never so good, yet

3. Essentially, when the man that thinks them is vain.

4. When it is a thought that might become the best Saint upon the

First, then material vain thoughs, are all thoughts of the world, of the

First, when we think of them primarily, that is, in the first place, when
Manner 1.
we think of them before we think of God. Tell me then, what are thy first
thoughts in the morning? Hereby a man may know his thoughts whether they be
good or evil. Consider, I say, what is that first presents it self unto thy
thoughts: certainly, that which the heart is most haunted withal, and most
taken up with, is most natural unto it: If the heart be carnal and earthly,
it will have carnal and earthly thoughts; if it be a godly and gracious heart,
it will labor to make God the first in his thoughts. I know the godly man
fails in many things, and many unruly thoughts in him may rebel; but it is the
very grief of his soul, and he will never rest nor be at quiet, till he has
got Balm from Gilead, strength from Christ for the subduing and crucifying of
them, even of those vain and sinful thoughts that stick closest unto their
hearts, and are most prone unto them naturally: so that it is the practice of a
godly man first in the morning to lift up his heart with his hand unto God; and
when he is up, his thoughts are wholly upon God. See this in David, who
considering that the Lord was present every where, made this use of it, When I
awake, I am present with thee, Psalm. 139. 18. His heart was lifted up to God,
he did endeavovr to shake hands with God (as it were) in his holy meditations,
worshipping and adoring God with his first thoughts; he would be sure to give
God the flower and Maidenhead of his first service and thoughts: as soon as
ever he was awake, his heart was in heaven. This shows, that the thoughts of
men that live in their sins, are damnable thoughts; Thou that art a drunkard, a
swearer, a profane person, a carnal worlding, that never have repented, I
tell thee, that the very thinking of thy meat and drink is damnable, the very
thoughts of thy recreations and of thy sleep, are damnable thoughts: to think
of the works of thy calling, yea of setting thy foot upon the ground, or of any
thing that God has commanded thee to do, are all damnable thoughts. Why?
Because thou give not God thy first thoughts. Will thou think of thy belly,
and back, before thou think of God, and how to be converted unto him? Will thou think of thy Markets and Faires, before thou think of thy
reconciliation with God? The first thing that every soul is bound to do, is to
get in with God: First seek the kingdom of God (says our Savior) and the
righteousness thereof, Matthew. 6. 35. Where our Savior does not forbid our
taking of thought for the things of this life, but that they should not be
sought after in the first place, so that our first thoughts and endeavors
should be after the Kingdom of heaven. Therefore all thoughts whatsoever, which
are conceived before a man be converted, and so thinks of God, are all damnable
thoughts.

Secondly, all worldly thoughts are sinful, when we think of them too usually
Manner 2.
(as Chrysostom speaks) because we think of the universality of them. Beloved
it is lawful to think of the world, and to think of our trade and employments,
to think of our corn, of our cattle, fields, barnes, wives, children: For if
God have commanded or commended these things unto us, then surely he gives us
leave to think on them, that so we may accomplish our business the better; but
let us take heed they be not too usual with us: for we have souls as well as
bodies, and there is a heavenly as well as an earthly business to think upon:
thou art not to live here always, therefore take heed that thy thoughts be not
too usual and common upon the things of the world, let not earth and earthly
thinhs have too much of thy thoughts. As the Prophet David seeing the thoughts
of wicked men wholly to run after the things of the world, he tells them, all
their thoughts perish; and so I tell you; if that your thoughts on the world
run together with heap and crowd, and then you bundle them in bundles (as it
were) they all prove damnable, and shall perish.

Thirdly, worldly thoughts are sinful and damnable, if thou think Manner 3.
of them too savourily: a carnall-minded man thinks savourily of the things of
the world, the thoughts of earthly things are savoury unto him: a wicked man
will think of God and of the world; but which is the savouryest thought to him?
He will think of Christ, of Heaven, and of the Word of God, and of such a Sermon
he heard, but alas, he finds no savor, taste, nor relish in them; he finds no
sweetness, joy, or delight in them; but when he thinks of the world; of his
gold and silver, of his lands and livings, Oh these are merry thoughts unto
him, these are sweet unto him, and pleasant to him, and his heart is now at
home in his own nest; He can think of these, seven days, nay seven months,
nay seven years together, and yet never be weary, but his thoughts as full and
as fresh as at the first: But bring him to a Sermon, or to a Prayer, and he is
jaded presently, his heart is empty, and his thoughts are at an end. For (says
the Apostle) they that are after the flesh, savor the things of the flesh.
Romans 8. 5. It is a true note of an earthly, carnal, fleshly heart, to be
thinking on earthly and vain things savourily. Thou may think on the world,
but it must be only with a cast of thy thoughts, as one that looks upon a thing
with a squint eye; but when thou art to think on God, or on the things of God,
then thou must gather all thy thoughts and affections, thou must lay all the
powers of thy soul together, and thou must employ them only to this work.

Fourthly, worldly thoughts become sinful, when we think of them Manner 4.
without counsel; then (faith Solomon) they come to naught; when a man
considers not aforehand what thoughts are necessary and needful, and so
restreines and keeps off all impertinent thoughts, then his thoughts will prove
distrustful, carking thoughts, caring for the morrow, contrary to the rule of
Christ, Matthew. 6. 33. Take no care for to morrow, let to morrow care for it
self. He does not forbid here Christian provident thoughts; for, godly,
honest, and sober thoughts are fitting and necessary; but he seems hereby to
cut off all distrusting carking thoughts.

Fifthly, worldly thoughts come to be sinful, when they are thought Manner 5.
needlessly: And here I will show how far a man may think of the world; namely,
so far as his necessary business requires. Suppose a man's business be upon
merchandise, it is lawful to think of it, and of his shop and wares; but if
thou would know how far; why, so far as it is for thy business; But if thou
have so many of them, that thy heart is taken up with them, and thy mind still
on them, then they are sinful thoughts. There is many a man that in following
of his business bestows more thoughts upon it than his business requires, he
has ten thousands of superfluous thoughts; but let such remember the
exhortation of the Wise man, establish thy thoughts by counsel, counsel will
tell a man when he has thought enough, and what thoughts are fit for his
employment. Not that any man can carry himself always in that golden
mediocrity or mean; but a Christians care must be daily more and more to pare
off all superfluous thoughts of earthly things.

Now we come to the second thing: 2. Thoughts are vain formally; but he prays
with his own spirit, and not with the spirit of Adoption.

The Psalmist tells us, that the whoremaster, the drunkard, and the thief
thinks of God, it is after his own fashion: Psalm. 50. 21. These things have
thou done (says God) and I held my tongue, and then thoughtest that I was even
such a one as thy self. A wicked man goes on in his sins, and thinks that they
are not so devilish and abominable, as some say they are, and he thinks that
God thinks so too; he is earthly, carnal, lukewarm, and dead-hearted, and if
he repent at the last, he thinks all will be well, and he thinks God is of the
same mind too; he goes on in his drunkenness, swearing, pride, and hypocrisy,
and he thinks if he do but remember to ask God mercy, and to cry, Lord receive
my soul, when he is going out of the world, he thinks he shall not go to hell,
but be carried to the joys of heaven, and he thinks God is of his mind, that
God thinks so too: But mark what the Lord says; I will reprove thee, and set
thy sins in order before thee. O consider this you that forget God, lest he
tear you in pieces, and there be none to deliver you.

Thirdly, men's thoughts are vain, when the heart that thinks upon them is
earthly and vain; wherefore if all the wicked men in the world should lay their
heads together to think a good thought. yet they cannot: for their hearts are
vain hearts, sinful hearts, they may think of excellent propofitions
concerning God, his worship, his word, and service; but so long as the heart
that thinks upon them is carnal and vain, they cannot speak that which is
good, as says our Savior: Maithew 12. 34. How can you speak good things? Why,
may some men say ^ may not a wicked man read a Chapter in a Bible, are the
words Object.
so hard to be understood, and pronounced? cannot a wicked man take a Sermon
and read it, and hear a Sermon and repeat it? What? are Letters and syllables
so hard to be pronounced?

I answer, (beloved) that is not the meaning of our Savior, [How can Answer.
ye that are evil speak good things:] no, no, a wicked man may read Gods word,
and propound good questions as well as a true Christian: but he cannot speak
good words, that is, he cannot speak them from a good heart; and therefore his
heart being carnal and vain, good words in his mouth are as a Jewel in a
swines snout: it is a word indeed, but not a speech, when he reads or
pronounces Gods word. Aristotle says, that speech is nothing but the
expression of that that is within the heart. Now then, if the word and truth of
God be not ingraffed in thy heart, if thy heart be not heavenly when thou
speak of heavenly things, thou do pronounce them, but not speak them. But
when thou speak of earthly things; then thou speak to the purpose;
because thy heart is set upon them, and thy mind and thy tongue go together,
there is no jarre not discord betwixt them: but if thy heart be not pure,
though thou speak good things, or holy things, yet in Christ's sense thou
speak them not: For (say I) how can a vain, evil, corrupt heart think good
thoughts? An evil tree cannot bring forth good fruit, (says our Savior) he
does not say, that an evil tree cannot be made good, for it may be grafted
into another stock; diverse ways there are to make it good: but so long as it is
a corrupt tree, it cannot bring forth good fruit; Do men gather grapes of
thorns, or figs of thistles? Do thou go to a drunkard, and think there to
find any religion in him? or to a whore-master to find grace in him? Do thou
go to a swearer or a profane person, and think thou to find any fear of
God in them? Indeed sometimes there may be some moral good found in them, but
they are as a pearl in a dunghill, out of its place.

Fourthly, all men's thoughts come to be vain when the drift and end of the
heart and soul in thinking of them is vain.

But thou will say unto me, The end of my thoughts is Gods glory. What? is it
not to Gods glory that we go to the Word and Sacrament, that we pray and give
alms?

I Answer, The end of every good work in it self is Gods glory; but is it the
end of the worker, speaker, or thinker? I make no question but the end of a
good action in it self is the glory of God; so, the end of prayer is the glory
of God, the end of all preaching and Sermons is the glory of God, the end of
giving of alms, and of all good thoughts, is the glory of God, but the end of
the man that prays and preaches, what is that? the end of the hearer and giver
of alms, what is that? the end of him that speaks well, what is that? Beloved,
most men have false and corrupt ends, which we will branch out into these three
heads;

For the first, men will be thinking and plodding from morning till night of
their wordly businesses: Now because they know they must think on God, to make
God amends, perhaps they will think on him at night, when they have dishonored
him all the day. So men will swear and swagger, drink and be drunk, and when
they have done, say, Lord have mercy upon me, and so they think to make God
amends. What (beloved) will ye swear, swagger, drink, be drunk, and lie, be
secure and worldy, and and then ask God forgiveness to make him amends? This
is to break Priscians head, that you may give him a plaster. Will you
trespass your neighbor, that you may ask him forgiveness? This is a damned
and devilish religion; yet this is the religion of many men in the world, you
shall have them keep days and weeks and years in the observation of the times
of Gods worship; they will keep the Sabbath in coming to Church, and they will
hear Sermons, pray and think of God* but all this is to make God amends for the
wrong that they have done him: they know they have offended God, and therefore
they will do something to make him ameds like those wicked men in Jeremies
time, who did steal, murder, commit adultery, swear falsely; and burn incense
unto Baal, and walk after the Gods they knew not, and then come and stand
before God in his house, which is called by his name, and said, We are
delivered though we have done all these abominations. As if God should say unto
wicked men, What, will ye swear, steal, lie, and be earthly, giving up your
selves to all manner of lewdness, in the breach and contempt of my
commandments, and then think by making a prayer unto me and by lifting up your
eyes unto me, and by giving your ears to hear my word, thereby to make me
recompense? No, no, I have showed thee, O man, what is good, Micah. 8.

Secondly, the end of men's thoughts is commonly to collogue with God. Let a man
be under the cross, in calamity, pain, and misery, then God will hear of him
often, then he will think of God, and of his sins: Nay, the beastliest wretch
in a whole Parish, upon his sick bed, then, Oh how will he call upon God, then
send for the Minister, let him pray for me, read a chapter or some good book;
then God shall have service upon service, then he shall have the first, second,
and third course. But all this is but to be raised up again; and then when he
has received a little strength, he falls off again: like the Jews, who when
God slew them, they sought him: and they returned and enquired early after God;
nevertheless they did but dissemble with him with their mouths; and flatter him
with their double hearts, Psalm. 37. 34. There is many a man that seeks to God,
yea, that seeks to him with tears, and performs many a good duty, and yet he
does but flatter with God, he does it but to curry favor with him; is afraid
of sickness, crosses, plagus, and death, and curses upon him, if he should not
do so: and therefore to prevent this he will dissemble some service to God.

Thirdly, to smother and choke their own consciences; their hearts think and
tell them, they must think of God, their consciences tell them, that they must
have some holiness, some religion, that they must keep the Sabbath in some
sort, that they must pray and go to Church: and hence it is, that the drunkard,
swearer, whoremaster, will sometimes have thoughts of God, and will be
performing some outward acts of Religion. Why? his conscience otherwise would
not let him be at rest, but is as the Devils ban-dog to drive him to it.

Thus when the Prophet commanded the people to worship the Lord; to reverence
his name, to hallow his Sabbaths; their consciences told them that they must do
so, or else all the threatenings of wrath, and vengeance donounced by the
Prophets would come upon them. Hence it is that the Lord by his; Prophet
exhorts, saying, Arise ye, and depart, for this is not your rest; your mind
has another haunt, you have this and that black lust, this is not your rest.
Does thy heart rest on God and good things? If thy heart be good and holy, so
that it takes up its rest in God, and in Christ, then it is well; but if thou
only turnest aside to good duties, and fallest, as it were, by chance upon holy
things, away, away (says God) this is nor your rest. Aristotle says, that the
being of a thing consists in the end of a thing. Therefore if the end of thy
thoughts and courses be earthly and vain, then certainly thy religion is
earthly and vain. Thou go up and down; what is it that thou lookst after? Is
it that thou may have grace, or that thou may follow thy calling, and get
thy living? is it this that thou would have, for which thou keep such a
digging and scraping, and such a laying up? Then thy end is carnal and vain,
and thy drift and end declares the truth of thy soul, that it is carnal and
vain.

THE JUDGMENT OF THE WORLD By SAINTS at the last day. DELIVERED And learnedly
discovered in a SERMON preached By that Reverend and Faithful Minister of Gods
Word, WILLIAM FENNER, B. D. Sometimes Fellow of Pembroke Hall in Cambridge, and
late Pastor of Rochford in Essex.

London, Printed by E. T. for John Stafford.

A SERMON OF M. WILLIAM FENNERS, Upon this ensuing Text.
1 Cor. 6. part of the 2d. verse. Know ye not that the Saints shall judge the
world.
THE Corinthians, though Paul had converted many poor mean men amongst them,
Chapter 1. 26, 27. God has chosen the foolish things of the world to confound
the wise, and the weak things of the world, to confound the things that are
mighty: yet the Nobles, the Lawyers, the Counselors, the chief men in the
City* the Apostle had not converted one of them, or at the least very few.
Brethren, you see your calling; who they are that be converted to the obedience
of the Gospel of Christ from the evil of their ways: not many wise men after
the flesh, not many rich, not many nobles, some few there be, here and there
one; but for the most part they are a company of poor beggarly Christians: now
(it seems) these poor Christians have controversies one with another, went to
Law among themselves, and that before unbeleevers. The Apostle condems this
their going to Law, and would have them cease their suits and quarrels, one
against another, before the unjust and unbeleevers, and that by four Arguments.

First, by the shamfulnesse of it, verse 5. I speak it to your shame; as it he

Secondly, from the scandalousnesse of it. It is a thing so scandalous and

Thirdly, from the unseemlinesse of it, in the second verse. Do you not

Fourthly, from the strangeness of it; Dare any of you? He speaks
interrogatively

1. Because they were brethren, verse 6. Brother go to Law with brother?

2. Because it was about things of this life. What? has God made you

3. It was about small matters (verse 2.) whereas you shall sit upon men

4. And lastly, Because it was about such things; as the meanest Christian

Do you not know that the Saints shall Judge the world?

I need not go far for a point, the word affords it; The Doctrine is, That the
Saints shall judge the world.

It is an old truth. yea as old as the World it self: you may read it in
Doctrine.
the fourth verse of Judes Epistle. That Enoch the seventh from Adam
prophesied, saying, Behold the Lord comes with ten thousands of his Saints.
God will not only come to judgment himself, but he will come attended with all
his Saints, even with all the godly, to execute vengeance upon all the world,
So our Savior told Saint Peter, and not only him, but all that follow him in
the regeneration: They shall sit on thrones, judging the twelve tribes of
Israel, Matthew. 9. 18. They shall judge the Nations, and have dominion over the
people, Wis. 38.

Object.
And now because doubt is the best way to attain unto knowledge, let me answer a
doubt, that may creep in by the way, How shall the Saints judge the world?

Answer.
Ans. Not by pronouncing of judgment upon the world, for that Christ only shall
do, Then shall the King say to them on his left hand, Depart ye cursed,
Matthew. 25. But the Saints shall judge the World these four ways:

1. They shall judge the world, by their consent unto Christ's judgment.

2. The Saints shall judge the world by their applause of Christ's judgment:

3. They shall Judge the world by their Majesty; they shall not only stand

4, They shall judge the world by their lives and conversation; (as Ambrose
pretty observation of Hilary (if it be the meaning of the Text) (I will not say
it is) upon the 2 Ps. Be wise ye judges: God has appointed you to be Judges,
to sit on his bench with his Son, learn then to be wise, get to be endued
with spiritual wisdom and understanding, and to shine in all integrity and
righteousness; and then turning his speech to the wicked, he says, Kiss the
son le^t he be angry. However it be, yet this is a truth, that by the lives
of his Saints, he will judge the world, their faith shall judge the worlds
infidelity: their repentance shall judge the worlds impenitency; their
accepting of, and taking the Lord Jesus, shall judge their rejection and neglect
of Christ Jesus; their zeal shall judge the worlds luke-warmnesse, and their
holiness shall judge the worlds profaneness.

1. Because of the mystical union that is betwixt Christ and his Saints; He
Reason 1.
is the head and they are his members; now that which the head does, we ascribe
it to the whole body; when the head speaks, the whole body speaks; when the
head sees, the whole body sees: so when Christ judges the world, the whole
body of Christ may truly be said to judge the world. In as much as you did it
unto one of these (says Christ) you did it unto me: so, in as much as Chhist
passes sentence, even all the members of the mystical body of Christ judge
with him.

Secondly, in regard of compassion: I speak not of the word [compassion] Reason
2.
as it signifies [pity] but of compassion, of suffering with Christ, seeing
that Christ was reproached, contemned, hated, misused, and condemned by the
world, the Saints are likewise with him; seeing they partake of the
afflictions, humiliations, and debasements of Christ here, they shall also be
made partakers with Christ in his glory. Here the wicked judge the Saints, and
call them hypocrites, and dissemblers, and laugh and scoff at them, and wonder
at them, as the Prophet brings in Christ speaking, Isaiah 8. Behold, I and the
children that thou have given me, are for signs and wonders in Israel: The
wicked count them for wonders and monsters in the world, judging them
hypocrites and liars, which have nothing in them but rottenness and
dissimulation. Now the rule of like for like shall take place here, and as they
were judged by the world, so they shall be Judges of the world.

Thirdly, for great terror to all wicked men at the day of judgment: for
Reason 3.
as it is with a thief, not only when the Judge shall command to hang him, but
all the Justices, and all the Country shall cry out, Hang him, hang him, he is
judged the more terribly; so God will not only say of all wicked and ungodly
sinners, Damn them, damn them, but he will have all the Saints in heaven, and
all the Saints on earth to cry out, Away with them, away with them, let them be
damned, Psalm. 50, 4, 5. This will make their judgment so much the more
terrible.

Fourthly, The Saints shall judge the world because God shall so convince
Reason 4.
them, that their mouth shall be stopped, they shall have never a syllable to
to excuse themselves withal, when they shall see men, flesh and blood as
themselves are, when they shall see men and women, that have lived in the same
town, enjoyed the same Ordinances of God, lived in the same family* that did
partake of the same blessings, and of the same crosses and afflictions with
themselves, subject also to the same corruptions and sins as themselves, when
they shall see these at Christ's right hand, they shall have never a word to
excuse themselves withal as when the Apostles had healed the creeple (Acts 3.)
if the people had judged them for wicked and pestilent men, the creeple would
have convinced them, and showed that they were of God; if they should have
cried, Root them up, the creeple would have condemned them, and told them, that
they did good. And when the wicked shall see the Saints at Gods right hand,
would they call them hypocrites and dissemblers* they themselves shall see,
that they are sincere; will they call them Puritans? why, they shall then see
that their purity stands them in good stead: then the ungodly shall not stand
in judgment, nor the sinners in the congregation of the righteous, Psalm. 1. 6.
Thus the point is clear.

The first Use then is for instruction, whereby we may learn, that the Saints
by their now being Saints, do now judge the world: if by the lives of Saints
then God does judge the world, then there is never a Saint in a Town, or City,
or Parish in all the Country, but he judges all the wicked that are about
him: How? By living godly, by hating the sins of the times, by keeping his or
their garments clean from the pollution of the world: For by doing this he
judges the world. See it in Noah, Heb. 11. 7. By faith Noah being warned of
God, as yet moved with fear, prepared an Ark for the saving of his house, by
which he condemned the world.

Object.
But some men will say, Could Noah be said to condemn the world by making the
Ark? all the world did not see him when he did it.

Answer.
Beloved, Noah was making the Ark an hundred and twenty years, though it was not
seen of all, yet all the world must needs hear of it, it being such a strange
thing. Now he condemned the world in that the whole world did not come unto
Noah to inquire of him in sober sadness, but rather mocked him for building the
Ark; they thought him to be a peevish melancholy man, and not well in his wits,
and so scoft at him, saying, Will he make an Ark to swim upon dry land? whereas
they should have asked him soberly the cause why he did it; and if they had
done so, Noah no question would have told them, that the wrath of heaven was
upon the World, and that the floods of God's vengeance were shortly to be
powered down upon us: and, because my heart has been naught, and I have sinned
and provoked the Lords wrath, I fear if I get not into this Arc which the Lord
has commanded me for to make, I shall perish. Now because they would not come
unto Noah to ask him this reason, therefore the world was condemned by him:
even so the Saints, by making an Ark for their poor souls, even by getting into
Christ, (as the Ark was a type of Christ without whom none can be saved) the
Saints, I say, by getting into Christ, do judge the whole world, when they
hear there be men that be no swearers, and no drunkards, and that there be men
that will pray, read, hear the word, confer of God and of Christ, and that weep
and mourn for their sins, that spend their times in mortification of their
lusts, and endeavor after holiness and sanctification; the whole world, I
say, is judged by them. How? why, they should say: Sirs, what is the matter
that you do so run after Sermons? that you keep such a stir about getting
faith and repentance, more than other men? that you pray, weep, fast, and
mourn, and are so strict in your works? If thus men would but come unto Gods
Saints, and ask them the reason of all these things, the Saints of God would
tell them, that the wrath of God would come upon them, if they did not thus,
they would never be saved; if they did not thus believe, and thus repent, and
thus pray, and walk thus holily and precisely, they should be all damned. But
the world it falls a mocking and a scoffing at them, and never seeks to prevent
the wrath of God; but it suddenly seiseth on them to their destruction.

Secondly, this teaches us, that when there is one sinner converted from the
wickedness of his ways, and is become a Saint, then all the world may know
that there is a new judge come to sit upon them. See thou a drunkard, a
swearer, a profane person converted from his sins, and now walks soberly,
holily and purely? see thou a man or a woman struck at a Sermon? Then know,
that unless thou come out of thy sins, unless thou do repent, and walk
holily, there is a new judge added to the rest, that shall judge thee. As our
Savior told the Pharisees, If I through Beelzebub cast out Devils, by whom do
your children cast them out? Therefore they shall be your judges, Matthew 12.
27. where Christ tells them, that their children who were his Disciples, (for
some of the Pharisees children did believe in Christ and follow him, and had
power from Christ to do the same works that Christ did;) Now they liked it well
enough in their own children, but they could not endure it in Christ: and
therefore he tells them, that their children whom God had converted, and to
whom he had given power to do the same works that he did, even they shall be
their Judges to condemn them: and even so may it be with thee, thou art a
father or a mother; God having converted any of thine own children, that
child shall be thy Judge and condemn thee, if thou repent not. It may be God
has converted thy brother and sister, and thou art not not converted; thy own
brother and sister shall condemn thee, ifthou do not repent and come out of thy
sins.

Thirdly we may learn, that it concerns all the world to take notice of every
the child of God faith given him to believe in the Lord Jesus: his faith shall
judge thy infidelity. Has the child of God the Spirit of prayer given him? it
shall condemn thee that prayest only with thine own spirit. Has he zeal? His
zeal shall judge thy lukewarmnesse. Does his speech and communication
administer grace to the hearers? It shall condemn thee that speak of vain
and idle things. Yea, all the actions of thegodly shall judge the wicked: and
hence the Saints are said to do Gods judgments, Zep. 2. 3. that is, they do
according to Gods judgments whereby he will judge the world: Thus they that do
mourn, do judge them that do not mourn; they that bewayl their wickedness, and
the sins of the times, judge them that do not: they that fast, weep, pray, and
humble themselves for the miseries of the Church in these dreadful days, they
judge them that make no good conscience of their duties.

Fourthly, learn hence, that all the texts of Scripture, all the whole word

Fifthly and lastly, hence it follows, that all the ministers of the word tell
them that they shall go to hell, if they repent not, tell them that they are
damned men if they go on, and come not out of their sins: Will thou judge
them (son of man?) Beloved, there is never a Minister in England, nor ever a
Sermon that is preached by them, but it judges every Parish, and every man and
woman in the congregation, that do not labor to do what is commanded them, and
leave undone what is forbidden them: I say, it judges them, or else it is a
judgment unto them.

This then serves to condemn three sorts of men in the world: First, Use 1.
All those that despise the Saints, and that see not amiablenesse in their
faces. All the Country does reverence the face of the Judge, when he rides his
circuit; Let the Judge come into the Country, and all the Knights, Justices,
and Gentlemen in the Country will go out to meet him, and bow unto him; yet
these Judges are but Judges of a few rogues, malefactors, and peasants in the
Country: Alas, they are far from the dignity of the Saints? for the Saints
shall judge Saints and Angels: All the world, Kings and Queens, Lords and
Nobles, and Captains of the Earth, the poorest Saint in Christendom shall
judge them. The Apostle, or rather, our Savior says, To him that overcomes,
and keeps my words unto the end, to him will I give power over the Nations,
Rev. 2. 26. Whatsoever he be, if he do the works of Christ, and walk in the
ordinances of Christ, he shall have power over the Nations, not only to condemn
their pomps and vanities, their lusts and corruptions, but also to convince
their consciences, and to condemn their souls for ever.

2. Shall the Saints judge the world? Then what fools are the wicked

Lastly, It condemns all those that do not see glory and majesty in the faces
Why, what had Lot done with them? Alas, he did nothing, but when they would
have done that Sodomitish villainy against the two Angels that came to him, Lot
went to them and said, I pray you my Brethren do not so wickedly. So let the
godly be in the company of wicked men, that abuse the good creatures of God;
say, I pray you my brethren, do not so wickedly, be not drunkards, be not
swearers; brethren I pray you do not so vainly, nor so profanely use the name
of God in your mouths; I pray you my brethren, do not profane Gods Sabaths; do
not lie, do not cheat, nor cozen, if you do these and these things, the wrath
of God will plague us for it; Oh then presently they cry out, Who made you our
judges? As once the Hebrews did of Moses, Acts 7. 39. Do thou call Saints
hypocrites and dissemblers, men that judge before the time? Thou fool, were
thou not as good to suffer the Saints to judge thee now, whereby thou may
see thy wretchedness and misery, and by faith and speedy repentance prevent
that doom, which otherwise they tell thee will come upon thee, as hereafter,
when if thou have not repented, thou shall never escape that doom and
vengeance, to which the Saints will judge thee? What* will thou not suffer them
to call a drunkard, a drunkard? or an adulterer, an adulterer? a blasphemer, a
blasphemer? a carnal man, a carnal man? or a worldly man, a worldly man?

It is a pretty observation out of Cyprian, that because Christ did reprove all
sorts of religions, and spared none, he reproved the Scribes, the Pharisees,
the Lawyers, the Soldiers, etc. and yet does not reprove the Priests, because
they were Judges of the people, not because he durst not, but he would not: If
thou revilest the Saints, thou revilest thy Judges. Take heed then, how thou
cast the least aspersion upon the Saints; do not say, they are rash Judges,
uncharitable censurers, dissembling hypocrites; for they shall be your Judges.
O that the people would hearken and be admonished in time, to prevent this
judgment. Our Savior says, that this is the condemnation, that light is come
into the world, and men hate it. Joh. 3. 19. But the children of God, whom God
calls the light of the world, these lights are come into the world, and men
love darkness more then the light. How can the wicked escape damnation that
have so many thousand Judges to condemn them? If the malefactor that is
indicted for murder or felony, cannot escape condemnation, that has but one
Judge to sit upon him: thou that art a wicked man, living in thy sins without
Christ, how can thou escape, that have so many millions of Saints to judge
thee, yea from Adam the first, till the last Saint that shall be upon the
earth? Surely the wicked shall never escape condemnation: for,

1. God the Father, who judges by way of authority, he will condemn thee; all
judgment comes originally from him; he that has often commanded thee to
repent, and come out of thy sins, he shall condemn thee, because thou have not
obeyed him.

2. God the Son, he will judge thee, who judges by way of dispensation, Acts.
10. First, Christ preaches to thee repentance and remission of sins, to which
if thou yield not, then know, that there is a day appointed, wherein he will
judge thee. That Savior that thou say thou desire, if thou part not with
thy lusts, he himself will be thy Judge that will condemn thee.

3. God the holy Ghost will judge thee; that Spirit that now strives and
wrestles with thee, that suggests good motions into thy heart, that puts thee
in mind of repentance, bidding thee leave and forsake thy sins, and live
holily, but if thou will not, this Spirit shall judge thee by way of conviction.

4. The word of God shall judge thee, and that by way of form, it being the
platform, according unto which Christ will judge the whole world. Now suppose
there be forty prisoners in the Jaile together, one in for murder, another in
for theft, another for treason, (that man that knows the Law, if there be
equity and Justice in the Assise) he, I say, that knows the Law, knows who shall
be hanged or quartered, or burned, or set free; even so, Beloved that man that
looks through the Scriptures, that reads this or that Chapter, this or that
sentence, may know that or this man will to hell, if he repent not. Say I this
of my self? or says not the Scripture as much? The fearful, and unbeleeving,
and all that love and make lies, shall be cast into that lake that burns with
fire and brimstone for ever, Rev. 12. 8. By this text the Lord Jesus will come
and judge the world: and therefore for all such as live and dye in their sins,
we may all know, that they shall be all damned in fire and brimstone for ever.
Hereby I know that all they that make no conscience of idle, vain and earthly
speeches, and reproachful words, they shall give an account for them by this
Text. Mat. 12. 56. Does the Scripture say, that all the wicked shall be turned
into hell, with all the Nations that forget God? I know it shall be so by the
text. Psalm. 10. For all things shall be done according to the Scriptures.
Romans 2. 16. In that day (says the Apostle) when God shall judge the secrets
of men's hearts by Jesus Christ according to my Gospel; that is, just as Gods
Ministers preach, just as you find it written in the same Scriptures, so will
he judge at that day.

Beloved, there is never a Text throughout the whole Scripture, that commands
you to leave and forsake your sins, but it shall judge you, if you do not:
there is not one Text of Scripture, that commands performance of any holy duty,
but it shall rise up in judgment against thee, if thou perform it not. Does
the Scripture say, Be not drunk with wine wherein is excess? Ephe. 5. 18. It
shall judge and condemn the drunkard that drinks excessively. Does the
Scripture say, Mortify the members which are upon the earth, fornication,
uncleanness, inordinate affection, evil concupiscence, and covetousness,
which is Idolatry? Col. 3. 5. If notwithstanding these sins live in thee,
this Text shall rise up and condemn thee to hell. Does the Text say, That the
father to the children shall make known Gods truth. Esaias 28. 9. Ephesians. 6. 4.
Parents bring up your children in the nurture and information of the Lord? It
shall rise up in judgment and condemn those parents that have not instructed
their children to fear God. Does the Text say, Thou shall teach the word of God
unto thy children, and that thou shall talk of it when thou sit in thy
house, and when thou go by the way, when thou lie down, and when thou
risest up? Deuteronomy. 6. 7. It shall judge thee, because thou make no conscience
of holy conference. All these and the like Texts of Scripture, shall rise up
and stand in rank to condemn thee, that have not swayed thy heart, and framed
thy life according to the Scriptures.

5. All the Ministers of God shall sit as Justices in common, from the first
preacher of righteousness unto the last; Moses shall judge thee, Joshuah,
David, Esaias, Jeremy, Hosea, Daniel, Paul, Peter, etc. they shall all judge you:
just as Gods Ministers judge you here, so will God; he will take all his
Sermons and clap them upon the heads of all rebellious hearers, and so damn
them for ever.

Lastly, The Saints shall judge you; yea, all the Saints from one end of the
world to the other, they shall assist the just Judge of heaven and earth, and
they shall be interpretative Judges.

Beloved, how can the wicked escape condemnation, that have so many thousands
of judges, so many thousand exhortations and reproofs, so many thousand
admonitions and invitations, so many thousand mercies and proffers of Christ?
When God the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, shall judge them, when heaven and
all the Angels in heaven, and all the Saints on earth, shall judge them, and
condemn them? How can thou escape? Is there never a drunkard in this
congregation? is there never a swearer? never a profane person? never a
mocker? never a railer in this town, that refuses to hearken to the word? the
men of Niniveh shall rise up in judgment against them and condemn them,
because they still live in their sins, notwithstanding they have had not
three days preaching, nor forty days space only for repentance, but many
years of grace calling upon them. The Queen of Sheba shall condemn many that
live in their sins, who went many hundred miles to hear the wisdom of
Solomon (for going and coming it was well-nigh two thousand miles) but you have
the word of Christ preached in your ears, and saying, The Kingdom of God is
come among you; but you will scarce step out of your doors to receive it, or
take any pains for it. This one woman shall judge them. There will be no way
for the wicked to put off their judgment: then the sons of Eli shall have
none to advocate between God and them, none to cloak or cover their
wickedness; they shall then have no excuses for themselves: for, would they
excuse themselves? the Saints shall judge them: would they send out excuses?
the Saints shall cut them off.

Would they in the first place say, Alas! I was ignorant, I knew not how to
pray, or to read, or to meditate on the Scriptures, nor to catechize my family;
I was dull and blockish to conceive such points as were taught me; and if I did
live in sin, it was ignorance that taught it me, I was never book-learned?
Says Augustine, this Ignoramus that was as ignorant and as little book-learned
as thou, he eschewed those sins that thou live in, got the anointing of Gods
Spirit to anoint his eyes, to see and know the things of God, which thou have
neglected to get; he shall condemn thee.

A second excuse is poverty. I have no means to live on; if I should run after
Sermons, I should beg my bread: I have a great charge to keep, and nothing but
my labor to maintain them: and therefore I cannot spare time, for meditation;
I have no while to study the Scripture, to pray and to mourn for my sins, and
to get grace. Well, the poor Cobbler that lives next door to Saint Anthony,
shall rise up and condemn thee, he was as poor as thou, and had as great a
charge to keep as thou: yet he mourned and wept, he got grace, and he set time
apart for prayer, reading, meditation, holy conference; he shall judge and
condemn thee.

Thirdly, they shall have no excuse by employment; I am a servant, I am
commanded to do this or that, I find so much business to follow, that I
cannot find any time for such things. Another says, I have great employment, I
have many Irons in the fire, and therefore God, I hope, will be merciful unto
me. Well then, Cornelius that had as many and as great employments as thou, and
Eleazar (Abraham's servant) who was a servant as well as thou, yet in as much as
they walked with God, and waited upon him in his ordinances, they shall judge
thee.

Fourthly, they shall have no excuse from their callings and trades, I ^
am an Inne-keeper, and if I should not suffer drinking, and swearing, and
gaming, I should not live. Another says, I am a tradesman, and if I should ask
at first just so much as I could take, I should never bring customers to my
price, and so I should not live of my trade. Well, Rahab was an Inne-keeper, as
well as thou, and yet she lived by faith, and did not suffer such wickedness
in her house. So many a tradesman, that had the same trade, and the same
employment with thee, and as great a trade as thou, and yet have avoided these
sins and evils that thou fallest into: they shall judge thee.

Fifthly, they shall have no excuse from the times they live in; Alas (says
one) I live in wretched times, all the world is given to sin. Therefore if I
should be so strict and precise in my ways, if I should run after sermons,
pray, sing Psalms etc. all the world would be against me. There are no
professors of religion but are reproached and miscalled, I should lose all my
friends, I should be hated and opposed; yea, it may be (the time being such) I
should be accused to Councils, and have my life questioned; there is nothing
but disgrace and reproach, and persecution; wherefore I was afraid, and did
dispense with my conscience. Ah wretch! that man that lived in those wicked
times, in the same town with thee; that had the same hatred and reproach that
thou wast afraid of, that has endured all the rebukes of Christ that thou wast
ashamed of, yet he went on, and continued unto the end; he shall judge thee.

The use is for the just reproof of many of the Saints of God, because they Use
3.
are not so circumspect and watchful over their ways, as they ought. Do
thou judge others (says the Apostle) and yet do the same things thy self?
Romans 2. 2. So may I say to all such, Will you give way to sin? will you
suffer your lusts and corruptions to sway you, and not endeavor to root out or
kill them rather? how will thou then judge the world? How will thou then be
able to rise up in judgment against the wicked, to judge them for such sins
wherein thou allowest and live thy self? Surely God will never account thee
for a Saint, if he cannot judge the world by thee. Oh this should rend the
heart and bowels of those that go for Christians, that go for Saints, yet live
not as Saints should live. If God cannot take thee, and judge the world by
thee; if he cannot take thy life, and judge the life of the Pagans, infidels,
all lukewarm earthly and secure sinners, he will not account thee for a Saint.
This then first condemns all unholinesse in the lives of them that be Saints.
Beloved, if we did but live like the Saints of God in holiness and purity in
the ways of God, the Lord would put such splendour and glory upon us, that would
even daunt the very face of our enemies, and make them stand amazed at Saints.
But it is the contrary with us, the glory of God is departed from us, Spain,
France, and other Nations fear us not: Why? the righteousness and purity of
Religion is departed from us. For you shall have a Saint come into the company
of a wicked man, and yet the swearer will not be afraid to swear before him,
the drunkard will not be afraid to be drunk before him, the filthy speaker will
not be afraid to utter rotten speeches before him, the liar will not be afraid
to lie before him, the worldly man will not be afraid to discover his vanities
before him by his carnal and filthy conference. Beloved, all this is, because
the Saints have lost their glory; if they did live as Saints ought to live, the
wicked would tremble to work wickedness before them. Though a wicked man be a
drunkard, and abuse the good creatures of God when no Saint is in his company,
yet if a Saint were present, he would tremble and not dare to do it. Though he
were a swearer, a filthy talker, a vain worldling amongst his companions, yet
if he come in the Saints company, and the Saints stand in Gods council, then
would the wicked tremble and quake to do such things: then would they lick in
their tongues, and not dare to speak any such blasphemous oaths, such vain and
unprofitable words, filthy lies and slanders; It is said of those that gladly
received the Apostles words, and were added to the Church, that the fear of
them came upon the world, Acts 2. 41. Why, did the Disciples go with swords and
guns, etc. to keep men in awe thereby? No, they continued in the Apostles
doctrine and fellowship, and did live according thereto, and this made all the
world afraid of them.

Secondly, this condemns the little difference that is betwixt the wicked of
the world, and some Saints, in their lives and manners: Beloved, is there so
little difference between the Judge and the prisoners, that any one need to
come and say, I pray you Sir, show me which is the Judge, and which is the
malefactor? is there not a plain difference both in apparel and carriage? the
one is in rich apparel, and the other in stinking and filthy clothes, having
his hands manacled, and his legs chained. But it is to be feared, that many of
the Saints have neglected holiness and purity in their carriage and actions
which they perform, that one can hardly tell which is a Saint, and which is a
reprobate. If a man deal with a Saint, and deal with a wicked man, he sees no
difference between them. Let a Saint do any action, either pray, hear, or
confer, let a wicked man do the like, there is such deadness, such
carnality, such worldly-mindednesse, such lukewarmnesse of affection, that one
can hardly tell which is the Saint, and which is the hypocrite. Beloved, if the
Saints did live like Saints, there would be as plain a difference between a
Saint and a wicked man, in in their lives and behavior, as is betwixt the
Judge and the Rogue that is to be judged by him. Have thou not considered my
servant Job, (says God) how there is none like him in all the earth? Job 1. 4.
8. If a man come to be a Saint indeed, there is never a wicked man in the Town
and Country, that lives and does as he does, and walks as he walks, nor prays
as he prays, nor hears the word as he hears it, nor that confers or meditates
as he does, that believes and repents as he does, that strives against his
lusts as he does: there is none like him in all the world.

Thirdly, it condemns the scandalousnesse of many Professors in their
behaviors and actions. Oh how do wicked men insult and exclaim hereupon, to
see a Professor led away and overcome by some lust! What (say they) are these
they that are led by the Spirit of God? are these your devout men? Why they can
covet and scrape as well as others; they can cosen and lie as well as others.
I, those that are your great Professors, and hot-spurrs, they are as coveteous,
as worldly, as cruel as others, though they will not be drunk, nor swear, yet
they will cosen and lie, as well as others. The consideration whereof, made
the Prophets heart to bleed in him, and to pray, O purge me from my murder and
adultery, and all other my secret sins, lest I cast mire and dirt in the
faces of thy children, causing them to bear the reproaches of my sins. Oh let
not those that seek thee, be ashamed for my sake, Psalm. 69. For thy sake that
live scandalously and offensively, for thy sake that live covetously, and
scraping after the world, that art so unjust in thy dealings and promises, mire
and dirt, scandals and reproaches are cast upon the children. For thy
looseness, yea for thy carnal liberty it is that the true professors of
Religion are reproached, suspected, and hardly censured in the world. What did
Jacob when he was to walk with the people of the Land? Genesis 35. 5. 6. he
purged his house, and (says the Text) the terror of God was upon all the City,
he made them all to tremble at him. I tell you, all the wicked in Ashford would
tremble at the Professors that live therein, if they did live and carry
themselves like Saints indeed. Oh if all those that did profess themselves to
be Christians, were Christians indeed; and that profess themselves to be
Saints, were Saints indeed, living in the power and sanctification of
holiness; then men would say of themselves, of a truth God is in these men,
Christ dwells in them, and the Spirit of God leads and governs them indeed. If
thou would judge the world, take heed how the world judges thee, lest thou
with the world be condemned eternally. It was said that Herod feared John,
because he was a just man, Mark 6. 23. So if all thy neighbors did know that
thou were a just man, a holy and conscionable man in all thy ways, and in all
thy actions, and that cannot endure swearing, lying, and deceit, but did see
that thou wast just, and one that feared God truly, they would all fear thee.

THE PUNISHMENT Of Unworthy COMMUNICANTS AT THE TABLE of the LORD: DELIVERED In
a SERMON preached, By that Reverend and Faithful Minister of the Word, WILLIAM
FENNER, B. D. Sometimes Fellow of Pembroke Hall in Cambridge, and late Pastor
of Rochford in Essex.

London, Printed by E. T. for John Stafford.

A SERMON OF M. WILLIAM FENNERS, Upon this ensuing Text.
1 Cor. 11. 30. For this cause many are weak and sick among you, and many
sleep.
THE Apostle, in this Chapter, taxes two abuses which were then amongst the
Corinthians: First, the unseemly habit of women in the congregation, from the 1
verse to the 17. Secondly, the profane usage of the holy Communion, both by
men and women, from the 17 verse to the end of the Chapter: and herein, from
the 23. verse to the end of the 25 he sets down the Institution of the Lords
Supper; and thence raises a point of Doctrine;

That whosoever would come to this holy communion, they must examine Doctrine 1.
themselves, that so they may come worthily; else it were better that they
never came.

So we may read in the 28 verse; But let a man examine himself, and so let him
eat of that Bread and drink of that Cup: As if the Apostle had said, Unless a
man examine himself, and search his own heart, and find out his sins, and dive
into the secrets of his soul, to bring out his hidden corruptions, confessing
them, and judging himself for them before the Lord, let them never presume to
come to the holy Sacrament.

And then he proves it by three Reasons.

The first is taken from the end of the Sacrament; for it is the remembrance
Reason 1.
of the death and passion of Christ: so it is in 26. verse. So often as you Eat
of this Bread and Drink of this Cup, you show forth the Lords death till he
come. It is a reason that the men of this world are not acquainted withal, and
therefore it was a good wish of a Reverend Father, that the Sacrament should
never be ministered but there should be a Sermon, to teach men the nature of it,
and to instruct them in the Mystery thereof. We approach unto the Sacrament
hand over head, living in our sins, not showing by our coming that Christ is
dead; we say, and we profess that Christ dyed for our sins, and yet not
withstanding our sins live in us, as if Christ had not died for us, or as if we
would proclaim, that his death had no effect in us. For were we dead with
Christ, then sin and the living occasions of sin, would be dead in us also. My
beloved, we should never come to this Sacrament, but we should show forth the
Lords death thereby, that is, that Christ is dead (or rather dyed) for sin, and
that sin is also dead in us.

The second reason is taken from the damned wrong we offer unto Christ, Reason
2.
if we come in our sins, for we are guilty of the body and blood of Christ, as
it is in the 27* verse; nay, thou sinnest against the Lord Jesus Christ not a
jot less, than Pilate that condemned him, than Judas that betrayed him, and
the Jews that cried out, Crucify him, crucify him: yea thou art as much
guilty, as if thy own hand in thy own person had been imbrued in his blood. Now
we know it is a horrible sin to be guilty of the blood and murder of an
ordinary man, yea of a very rogue; how much more is it a great and fearful sin
to be guilty of the body and blood of the Lord Jesus Christ, the only and
eternal Son of God? Yet come thou to this holy Communion, and bring no
less than the guilt of the Body and blood of Christ upon thy soul?

The third Reason is taken from the woeful wrong and injury that man Reason 3.
brings upon his own soul, that comes unpreparedly without examination of
himself; in the 20. verse, he eats and drinks his own damnation; that is,
he makes himself guilty of, and liable to the same vengeance that the
crucifiers of Christ had inflicted on them. Good had it been for that man
(says Christ of Judas) if that he had never been born: So may I say, Good had
it been for that man and that woman, if they had never been borne, who come
unworthily unto the Table of the Lord: for when they eat of that Bread, they
eat their own bane; and when they drink of that Cup, they drink their own
damnation.

Then comes he to make some uses of this point; and first he condemns Use 1.
those that as they come, so they go away from the Sacrament; no more holy, no
more gracious, than before; but as they come in their sins, so they go away in
their sins; they came drunkards, and they go away drunkards; they came
worldlings, and they go away worldlings; they came mockers, and they go away
mockers, they came in their wrath, anger, malice, deadness, hypocrisy, and
luke-warmnesse, and so they go away still, never the better, but living in
them as they did before* As in the ^^* verse. You come together (says the
Apostle) not for the better, but for the worse. Whereas ^f they would have come
worthily, they should have gone away the better, they should have received more
grace and holiness to walk with God, more power and strength against sin and
corruption; yea, the Lord would have ratified and confirmed his Covenant with
them; whereas living in contention, and not coming with preparation, they grow
the worse by the Sacrament. The Corinthians thought that the Apostle would have
praised them for their coming to Church, and receiving the Sacrament: Shall I
praise you? (says the Apostle) in this I praise you not.

Secondly, He makes an use of terror against all those that dare come in Use 2.
their sins unto this holy Sacrament of the Lord* for that man that comes in
his sins unto the Table of the Lord, 1. Though he may think he receives the
Communion, yet he does not: for this is not the Table of the Lord, but the
Table of devils. It is true, thou receivest the Sacrament of the body and blood
of Christ; but yet coming in thy sins, thou receivest not his body and blood,
as of a Savior to save thee from thy sins: Indeed thou receivest the body and
blood of Christ sacramentally; but it is as the Judge to condemn thee unto the
pit of destruction, for thy damned impudency in coming so unworthily unto this
holy Sacrament. For that man cannot eat the body of Christ, that is not a
member of Christ; therefore thou must be a limb of Christ, if ever thou will
receive worthily.

2. If a man come unto the Sacrament, and come in his sins, he comes to his
own destruction: for though it be a sweet banquet to refresh an humble and
weary soul, and to make it walk more cheerfully in the ways of God, all the
days of his life: yet he that comes unto it in his sins, and receives it in
his uncleanness, speedeth thereby, his own damnation, and receives it as his
v^aticum to hell. The Apostle compares Baptism to the Red Sea, 1. Cor. 10.
from which place Crysostome says, that as the Red Sea was a way for the
Israelites to pass through to Canaan? so it was as a grave to swallow up the
Egypptians to their destruction: So the Lords Supper is as a grave, an open pit
whereby many plunge themselves into eternal destruction; but as a chariot to
the godly to carry them to heaven.

Thirdly, by coming in thy sins, thou make thy self liable to Gods Use 3.
temporary plagues and judgments; as appears in my Text, For this cause many
are sick and weak among you, and many are fallen asleep, [For this cause] which
is not only a note of conclusion, but of the cause: For this cause, namely,
because they examine not themselves, but come in their sins and receive it
unworthily. One man has a disease in his body, that he lives not out half
his days; another is sick and weak near unto death; a third is fallen asleep.
Wherefore? why (says the Apostle) for this cause of receiving unworthily the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper.

Fourthly, for instruction, that because the people of God as well Use 4.
as wicked men, are guilty of unworthy coming to the Lords Table, therefore he
exhorts them, that if they would not have the Lord judge them, that they would
judge themselves, as in the 31. verse. For if we would judge our selves, we
should not be judged of the Lord. If we would sit down and search our own
hearts, and try our own spirits, and pry into our own bosoms, and out with
our old corruptions, and unclean lusts, and enter into a new covenant with God,
of holy walking before him for after-time, if we would thus judge and condemn
our selves, and mortify our sins, coming with grace unto this holy banquet,
that we might come with comfort unto this blessed Sacrament, assuring our
selves that we shall escape the judgment of the Lord. For those of the
Corinthians whom God struck with sickness, weakness, and death, it was to
instruct others that are well and in health, that they venture not to enter
upon these holy mysteryes with unholy hearts, and unclean hands.

Fifthly, he concludes with an use of exhortation in the 33, and 34. verses:
Wherefore brethren when ye come together to partake of the holy Communion,
tarry one for another: As if he should have said, Away with all your disorders,
and come not with a temporal, but with a spiritual appetite; provide not thy
teeth, but thy heart for these dainties: for this is not a feast for the body,
but for the soul; therefore away with all your disorders and unseemly coming
unto this blessed Sacrament, take heed and repent of this sin among you, and of
all other sins which you know your own conscience to be guilty of, and so come
unto this holy communion.

Now, the verse that I have read to you, is a part of that use of terror which
the Apostle makes against the unworthy receivers of the Sacrament; and it
contains Gods severe hand and punishment against those that come unworthily:
wherein note three things.

First, the cause of their punishment, which is the unworthy eating of the

Secondly, the punishment inflicted for this sin, weakness, sickness, and

Thirdly, there is the Delinquents, which are you Corinthians: Many

Chrysostom notes here, that our Apostle does not fetch here an Argument or
example of judgment from others, as he had done in the former chapter; but he
brings it from themselves, who sensibly felt the wrath of God upon them for
this very sin: As if the Apostle should have said, How is it, O Corinthians,
that you dare venture to come unto the Communion so unpreparedly, and that you
have no more regard of so weighty a business as is the receiving of the body
and blood of the Lord Jesus Christ? See you not the wrath of God upon your
dwellings, and the curse of heaven to take hold of your town? you see it this
very time, that some are weak and very sick amongst you, near unto death, and
others have been struck with death before your eyes, and the wrath of God is
not removed; but lies yet upon you: What, will you always go on, and never
cease to provoke the Lord to indignation and wrath against you for your sins,
until his jealousy has utterly consumed you, and clean cut you off? and
howsoever many of you may think that this sickness, weakness, and mortality
comes upon you by chance, as from the infection of the air, or other secundary
causes, I tell you nay, but it is for this cause only, even your unworthy
coming to the Supper of the Lord. Whence we may observe this point of
instruction:

That God does most severely punish the unworthy receivers of the Sacrament of
the Lords Supper.

He punished the Corinthians here with sickness, weakness, fevers,
pestilence, death temporal, and God knows how many with death eternal.
Theodoret observes, that the Apostle told them of a thing that was acted
amongst them, for if he had told them of such judgments as had been hid from
them, and not manifest before their eyes, as if they had not felt the sickness
in their bodies, and heard the bells tolling daily in their ears, they might
have thought that the Apostle had but lied unto them. So the people of Israel,
as we may read in 1 Cor. 10. 2, 3. verses* they were baptized in the Cloud and
in the Sea, and they did all eat the same spiritual meat, and drink the same
spiritual drink; yet, as it is in the fifth verse, with many of them God was
not well pleased. Nay God was so wroth with them, that within the space of
forty years, many thousands of them were destroyed by death here, and God
knows how many thousands of them in hell. For God speaks of hell, as well
as of death, and their sin was so great, that it made God confirm it with an
oath, that they should never enter into his rest. And Saint Cyprian says, that
the Lord has showed many miracles, and declared many fearful judgments upon
the unworthy receivers of the Sacrament.

Judas, who Ambrose thought received the Sacrament (though Hilary and others
that he did not, but only that he did eat the Passover, and was coming to the
Sacrament also) but see his doom, John 13. as soon as ever he received the sop,
the Devil entered into him; and so it is with all such as come to the Communion
in their sins without repentance, and unfeigned resolution of walking ever
after worthy the Sacrament, I say unto all and every one of them, that as soon
as ever thou receivest the Bread and Wine into thy mouth, thou receivest the
devil together with it; as soon as ever it goes down into thy body* the
Devil goes after it, and takes more full possession of thy heart and soul.

Now the reason why the Lord does so severely punish both with temporal
judgments and with spiritual curses, the unworthy receivers of the Sacrament,
is, in regard of the author of the Sacrament, who is Christ: and that not only
as he was man, (as the Papists would make us believe) but Christ as he was God
did institute the same. So says the Apostle in the 23. verse, The Lord Jesus
Christ in the same night that he was betrayed, took bread and brake it, when he
had given thanks, and said, Take ye, and eat ye, for this is my body which is
broken for you. Now if the Lord Jesus did institute it, what an accursed thing
is it for any to defile it, and so sin against Christ? it is a damnable thing
to sin against God; but to sin against God, as he is God in Christ, is damnably
damnable. The holy Ghost in the second Psalm exhorts to kiss the Son lest he
be angry, and so thou perish: as if he should say, Adore the Son, Adore the
Lo^d Jesus Christ, and so come and eat of this bread, and drink of this Cup:
for if he be angry, thou will surely perish: If thou sin against God and so go
out of the way, Christ upon thy repentance will set thee in again; but if thou
sinnest against God in Christ, who is the Way, the Life, and the Truth, thou
shall surely perish from the right way: for there is no other way to bring thee
in again, Acts 4. 12. Therefore woeful is thy case, and miserable is thy
condition, if thou sinnest against Christ, profaning his holy Ordinances which
he himself has instituted, and abusest and despisest that blessed Spirit of
his, that comes to seal unto thee the redemption that he has purchased by his
blood. Better had it been for thee that thou had never been born: for if he
be wroth, blessed only are all they that put their trust in him, and come
preparedly unto his holy Ordinance, and that by faith embrace the Lord Jesus
Christ, but woe unto all profane persons that live in their sins: if his wrath
be but a little kindled, then woe to all drunkards, swearers, and unclean
persons; but blessed is that man that is come out of his sins. For if his wrath
be so terrible when it is but a little kindled, O how much more fearful will
it be when it is deeply incensed! Therefore if thou come unto this holy
Sacrament in thy sins, without due preparation and examination, what do thou
but even set the wrath of God burning upon thy soul and body from the very
bottom of hell?

When the Lord delivered the Law upon Mount Sinai, he commanded the people to
sanctify themselves; yea if a beast did but touch the mountain, he must dye
for the same, even be stoned to death, or thrust through with a dart, Heb. 12.
Much more then now, when the Lord does deliver the Gospel, especially the
groundwork and masterpiece thereof, the Lord Jesus Christ, and that in the
most blessed manner that ever God exhibited himself unto man; how much more
does God require purity and holiness, that all such as come to receive the
Lord Jesus Christ in the blessed Sacrament should be sanctified, purging their
hearts* and cleansing their souls from all their sin and uncleanness? Should
not a beast touch the mountain where God did appear, and dare thou touch the
body of Christ, and drink his blessed blood in thy sins? The very angels of
heaven will curse thee, and the clouds of heaven will pour down showers of
vengeance upon thee: for God has more severe punishments to inflict upon
sinners under the Gospel, than he used under the Law, though then he struck
them with more visible and sensible plagues and judgments than ordinarily he
brings upon men now: as Gehazi for his covetousness was stricken with
leprosy; Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, the earth opened her mouth and swallowed
them up quick for their rebellion against the Lord: Er and Onan were stricken
dead for their wickedness; Jeroboam had his hand withered for stretching of it
forth to strike the Lords Prophet. And though the Lord bring not such sensible
punishments now as he did then, yet he knows how to punish the world a thousand
times more than he did then, at this time* As a father has other kinds of
punishments for his son, when he is grow^ up, than he had when he was in coats,
and but a child; then a twig or two would serve the turn; but if he come to
man's estate, and then rebel against his father, it may be that he will
disinherit him, and cast him out of his family: So in former time God did
scourge and whip his people when they sinned against him: but now he has drawn
out his Church to this age, even to the age of the Gospel, he has severer
strokes of plagues and curses, wherewith to confound all profane and
impenitent sinners, that dare to abuse that blessed Sacrament of the Lord Jesus
Christ.

The second Reason is, in regard of the matter of the Sacrament, which is
Christ also; who as he was the efficient cause, so in regard of Sacramental
relation, he is the matter of the Cummunion, 1 Cor. 10. 16. The Cup of blessing
which we bless, is it not the Communion of the blood of Christ? and the bread
which we break, is it not the Communion of the body of Christ? Now the better
matter any thing is of, the more heinous is the defilement of it* A master will
not be so angry for casting his earthen vessels into the mire, as he will be
for casting his rich jewels. The Bread and Wine in the Sacrament, are the
blessed Communion of the precious body and blood of Christ, and dare thou
defile them? know thou not that thou do greatly increase the wrath of the
Lord against thy soul thereby? That soul whatever it was from Dan to Beersheba,
that came in his uncleanness to partake of any of those holy things which the
children of Israel hallowed to the Lord, whether he were man, or woman, rich or
poor, that person was to be cut off from the presence of the Lord, Levit. 12.
whereto the Lord sets his Seal for the confirmation thereof (I am the Lord:)
and as sure as I am the Lord, so will I see it accomplished. So my beloved, let
me say unto you of England, from Dover to Newcastle, or from the one end of the
town unto the other, that soul who touches any one of these holy things with
an impure heart, and comes to partake of them with his uncleanness upon him,
living in his sins, and wallowing in his lusts, casting off the fear of the
Lord, and making no conscience to walk in Gods ways, that soul shall surely be
cut off that comes so unworthily unto the Table of the Lord; not only the hand
that takes it, and the mouth that eats it, but even the very soul of him
that comes, shall perish from the presence of the Lord. So Levit. 7. 20. That
soul that eats of the flesh of the Sacrifices of peace offerings, that
pertain unto the Lord, having his uncleanness upon him, even that soul shall
be cut off from his people. Now you know that all those sacrifices had relation
unto Christ; but yet under the Law they were but shadows, and typical
relations, and were not so* lievly and effectual means for the exhibiting of
Christ, as the Lords Supper is. And therefore if such as came in their
uncleanness unto them, were punished with no less punishment than a cutting
off from fellowship with the Lords people; what wrath and vengeance will the
Lord bring upon thee that come with thy uncleanness upon thee unto this holy
Communion? Augustine says, that man that receives the Sacrament unworthily,
receives a great plague to his own soul, and a great torment to his own
conscience, yea and heapeth up a store of wrath unto himself against the day of
wrath. Me thinks thou that live in thy sins, and wilt not come out of them;
when thou hear these words [This is my body] and see the bread broken
before thy face, it should even make thee tremble and quake to look upon it,
more to touch it, and most of all to taste it: for it is the Communion of the
body and blood of Christ; and how dare thou come in thy sins to defile it?

A third Reason is, in regard of the form of the Sacrament, which is Christ
too, for as he is the efficient cause that instituted it, and as he is also the
matter of the Sacrament, so in the third place Christ is the form of the
Sacrament also, wherein the confirming grace of God is sealed up unto thee: Now
as it is treason for a man to offer contempt unto the Kings broad Seal; so
certainly is it high treason against this King of Kings, to contemn this
blessed Sacrament, which is the Seal of the righteousness of faith. If thou
should clip the Kings Coin, I will say that thou art a Traitor. Oh what a
traitor art thou then, yea, accursed traitor in the account of God and Christ,
if thou clippest his holy Communion, if thou clip it of thy examination, and
due preparation, and so come hand over head, not regarding so holy an
Ordinance. Thou sinnest against the Court of heaven. That which Saint James
speaks in general of the whole worship of God [Draw near unto God] let me apply
it in particular unto this drawing near unto God in his holy Communion, James
4. 8. Cleanse your hands ye sinners, and purify your hearts ye double-minded.
Draw near unto God in the hearing, reading and meditating on Gods Word; draw
near unto God in Prayer, and in his holy Sacrament, and receive it for your
amendment of life. [Draw near unto God] I, that I will, (says the wicked man) I
will come to Church, and draw near unto the holy Communion. Will you so? (says
the Apostle:) No, first, Cleanse your hands ye sinners, and purge your hearts
ye double-minded: As if he should say, never think of drawing near unto God, or
setting foot on this holy ground, and handling those holy mysteries of Christ,
unless thou first purge thy heart, and cleanse thy soul from all thy filthy
lusts and cursed corruptions, lest otherwise, thou coming in thy sins with thy
uncleanness on thee, and so receiving unworthily, thou eatest and drinkest
thine own damnation (as our English translation has it) damnation to thy self,
and not to another. No, God forbid, that thou should by thy unworthy coming,
eat and drink condemnation to another, for thou that art a child of God, and
come unto the Table of the Lord with repentance, and a sound measure of
preparation, though others that sit in the same pew with with thee, for their
profaneness eat and drink their own damnation, yet thou shall be sure to
receive the seal and assurance of thy reconciliation and salvation, with free
acceptance of God, through the Lord Jesus Christ, for every man shall bear his
own burden.

The last Reason is, in regard of the end of the Sacrament, which is Christ
also: For as he is the efficient, material, and formal cause, so Christ is also
the final cause of the Sacrament: So it is in the 26 verse, As often as you eat
of this Bread, and drink of this Cup, you show forth the Lords death until he
come. Not that Christ may be eaten with the teeth, or corporally received in
the Sacrament, or as if he were there productively, or transubstantially, (as
the Papists say;) no, the Apostle shows, that the end of the celebration of
this Sacrament, is to show forth the death of Christ until he come.

Object.
I, but (say the Romists) unless we eat the body and drink the blood of Christ
really; and not the consecrated bread and wine, how can any man by this
unworthy communicating, eat and drink his own damnation, and make himself
guilty of the body and blood of Christ?

Answer
I answer, a man cannot bring this guilt upon himself by eating a piece of
bread, or drinking a cup of wine; but the Apostle has an answer so fitted for
this, as that all the Papists in the world shall never be able to gain say; and
therefore I pray you to mark it: for he has joined these two verses together;
as often as you eat of this bread and drink of this cup, you show forth the Lords
death till he come: Wherefore whosoever eats this bread or drinks this cup
of the Lord unworthily, shall be guilty of the body and blood of the Lord; even
for this cause, because it is the showing forth of Christ's death till he come.
Therefore if thou eatest and drinkest unworthily, coming in thy sins, and
resolvest to go on in them, that as thou were proud before thou came to the
Sacrament, so thou art still; as thou were choleric, angry, and impatient
before, so thou art still; as thou were lukewarm and dead-hearted in Gods
service before, so thou remainest still, remember I pray thee, that as often as
thou have come unto the Communion in those thy sins, thou have made thy self
guilty of the body and blood of the Lord Jesus Christ. Therefore I beseech you
to look to it, and in time to repent, and pray with the Prophet David Ps. 51.
Deliver me from blood-guiltinesse, O Lord, even from the blood of thy Son, lest
one day it be laid unto thy charge and required straightly at thy hands. For, for
this cause many are sick among you, and many weak.

Is it so then, that the Lord does so severely punish the unworthy receiver of
the Sacrament? Take notice (I pray you) then from whence comes all sickness,
weakness, and mortality, and the reason why the Lord does send so many kind
of sorrows, crosses, and miseries upon men; namely, because of the unworthy
receiving of the Lords Supper. So says Master Calvin, why do you wonder to see
such wars, and rumors of wars, that there is so many blood-sheds, so many
Towns and Cities ruinated, and so many Countries sacked and depopulated, so
many calamities come upon the Churches abroad, and so many plagues and scourges
to overrun Christendom at this day, is not the cause plain enough? men come
unto the Table of the Lord carelessly and unworthily. And, beloved, we shall
never see the Lord take away his judgments here from the earth, until we
betake our selves to a more diligent and holy receiving of the Sacrament. For
this very cause there are so many strange diseases amongst us, never formerly
known or heard of until these days, as, the French Pox, the English sweat (as
they call it) that even the Physicians themselves are blunted at them, and (as
Peter Martyr well observes) hence are all diseases, as plagues, pestilences,
(which were late amongst us) dropsies, Bloody Flux, Agues, Apoplexies,
Convulsions, burning-Feavers, and Impostumes, etc. and all for this cause. One
man has fallen into a Fever, and we wonder at the cause whence he took it;
but in truth the communion has cast him into his Fever, and the Lord will
avenge himself on him for the same. Another is sick, and he thinks that a cold
has brought it upon him; but it is the unworthy receiving of the Sacrament
that is truly the cause of it. A third man dies before his time, even in his
full strength, before in the course of nature he has ended half his days; but
the cause is unworthy coming to the Communion, which has taken hold on him,
and cut off the thread of his life.

Many there be that expound these words in a spiritual sense, Many are sick
and weak and many are fallen asleep, that is to say, many have their
consciences seared, and their hearts hardened, etc. and this is true also, that
because men come unpreparedly, they have their hearts hardened, and their
consciences seared, and their soul plagued with many spiritual plagues. But it
is as true also in temporal judgments, thou have had many afflictions, and
much sickness laid unto thee; but thank thy self for it; namely, because thou
have come unworthily unto the communion, thou have had much weakness in thy
body, which has cost thee much money, and weakened thy estate; but thy unholy
coming unto the Sacrament, is that which thou may thank for it. Thou have
been reproched and contemned, and endured much shame; but take notice of it,
that it proceeds from the foregoing cause, and that is a special reason why
the Lord has brought these and many other evils upon thee. Thou can say the
Commandments (for the most part) by rote; but thou did never know the
mystery of this one Commandment, Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy
God in vain. Behold, the Communion is one of Gods own names, and how many
thousands are there in the world that take this name of God in vain? Is there
never a drunkard here in this congregation, that has been at the Sacrament? Is
there never a whoremonger, never a covetous worldling? Where is the man,
whosoever he be among you all, that is such a one? He is in the state of
damnation. Is there never a lukewarm and carnal Christian, that contents
himself with a formal worship, and a dead performance of holy duties, that
has no zeal for God, nor courage for his truth, but is careless of all Gods
commandments? whosoever amongst you are guilty of these sins, or any other,
and has come unto this holy Communion in them, they are the persons, that how
often soever they have received, so often they have taken this name of the Lord in
vain: And if I should examine this Congregation from the one end of it unto the
other, I fear that every pew would yield some one, if not many that have taken
a Communion (which is one of Gods names) in vain. Should I but examine thee
that come unto the Communion this day, how by the last Sacrament thou
receivedst, and the last Sermon thou have heard, thy faith is strengthened, thy
repentance renewed, and thy obedience is increased, and thy care doubled for to
walk with God? whether thou art made by them more zealous for God, more forward
in his worship and service; and every day more holy and heavenly-minded; if
not, then t^o^ have taken this Name of the Lord thy God in vain, and the Lord
will not hold thee guiltless, that is, the Lord will not take away the guilt
from thy conscience, but he will let thy sin lie open, and thou shall not be
cleansed from it, nor justified by the very blood of Jesus Christ, but it shall
rest upon thee to thy utter ruin and destruction, unless thou forsake thy
sins, and so come preparedly unto this holy Table and banquet. I know there is
a convenant of grace, a sweet refreshing for every humbled soul that is hungry
and broken for his sins, and for every poor distressed conscience; let all such
come and lay their sin upon Christ's cross, and welcome: But if there be any
that come in their sins, and will not reform their lives, but be as they came
sinners, and so they mean to continue, the Lord himself will lay this man's sins
upon his own head, and they shall never be taken away from him, but Christ
shall at the day of judgment pronounce him a guilty person, to his eternal
condemnation.

King Belshazzar that abused but the holy Vessels of the Temple, and the Cups
thereof, what a small plague befell him for it? Dan. 5. 27, 28. God has numbered
thy Kingdom and finished it, thou art weighed in the balance, and art found
too light, thy kingdom is departed from thee, and is given to the Medes and
Persians. So (beloved brethren) if any of you shall abuse this Cup of the Lord,
coming to it with a filthy unclean heart, and polluted conscience, and earthly
affections, there is a handwriting against every soul that thus comes this
day unto the Table of the Lord: thou art numbered and weighed and found too
light: Thou O man and woman, whosoever thou art that prophanest and contemnest
these holy things of God, thou shall be found out, and the Lord will keep thee
out by his spiritual plagues, and thy sin shall never be done away, but be
required at thy hands, and stand in everlasting record against thee; O my
brethren, that you would but seriously consider it, and look about you, it
being so weighty a thing that so nearly concerns every one of you.

But I would not have any poor broken heart and humble Soul to mistake me, and
so thereby be discouraged: but give me leave (I pray you) to use the words of
the Prophet, though spoken in another sense, Psalm. 115. Not unto us, O Lord,
not unto us, but unto thy Name give the glory: So let me apply this doctrine
unto the comfort of all poor brokenhearted sinners, and beat off all carnal
profane wretches that live in their sins; not unto you, O drunkards, and
swaggerers, not unto you whoremasters and unclean persons, that wallow in
ungodliness, I say not unto you, but unto the poor afflicted soul and contrite
spirit that lies bleeding and gasping under the weight of his sin, and that
trembles and fears being oppressed with the sense of its own unworthiness,
panting and breathing after Christ Jesus, and suing earnestly unto the Throne
of grace for mercy and forgiveness: unto thee only belongs this comfort, and
therefore take it home to thee, and know it for thy self. Art thou troubled
with a hard heart, and an unbeleeving soul, and art even wearyed and tired out
with thy many sins and infirmities? Come thou with comfort unto this holy
Communion: for thou shall be sure to find saving good by it; to thee it shall
be a spiritual medicine to heal all thy diseases, and to cure all thy strong
and prevailing corruptions; and if thou come unto this holy Table of the Lord,
it shall make thee, as it is recorded of Saint Laurence, able to suffer
Martyrdom, and to get victory over all thy unruly affections; yea at last thou
shall tread Satan thy arch-enemy under thy feet. Thefore be not dismayed, for
the Lord Jesus invites thee to come. What if thy infirmities be many, yet the
mercies of God, which he tenders to thee in this Communion* are many more.
Samson who was the strongest Soldier and Companion in his time that was in
Israel to overcome the Philistims, he yet began his strength in weakness,
being at the first overcome by a woman: So though the Lord intend to make thee
a strong Christian, he will make thee to begin in weakness to perfect thy
power, to begin in sin and misery, that he may make thee to end in glory. I
know Gods children here may receive temporal punishments, and bring temporal
scourges upon themselves, as we may see amongst the Corinthians here, but it
shall be for their good and amendment, namely, for their correction, and not
for their ruin and destruction; that so being chastened by the Lord, they
might not be condemned with the world. Therefore if thou come carelessly and
unprofitably, God will chastise thee with the rods of men, as he did Peter, who
receiving the Sacrament with his Master over night, yet the next day thrice
denied him; but God whipped his soul, and scourged his conscience for it, and
beat him black and blew, so that he went out and wept bitterly. Nay he could
scarce with off that sin, and recover himself again whilst he lived.

Wherefore let us take heed of unprepared coming to the Sacrament; for God will
not hold such guiltless: Yea, if his own sons or daughters transgress
thereby; he will make them to feel the smart of it. But now to come to all such
as come month by month, hand over head, without any examination and
repentance, in their uncleanness and abomination, making no conscience of
their reformation, let me tell them, that it shall be one of Christ's demands of
them in the day of judgment, How often have thou been at my Table? How often have
thou been partaker of that holy Communion which I gave unto thee? Have thou
come preparedly, or received worthily, or no? Have thou eat bread at my Table
with me, and lift up thy heel against me? Did I command* and thou would not
obey? Did I send my Ministers to thee to reform, but thou would not be
reformed? Did I check and reprove thee for thy pride, blasphemies,
drunkenness, covetousness, anger, wrath, malice, fornication, hypocrisy and
profaneness in the matter of my worship? and yet would thou still live in
these sins? Where are all the Sacraments that thou have received? How have
behaved thy self? Where are the sins that thou have forsaken, and pleasing
corruptions that thou have abhorred? What grace and holiness have thou
received by the means thou have enjoyed? and how have thou manifested the same
through thy whole conversation? Oh! woe, woe unto thee, yea and a world of woes
unto thee, and unto all such as shall be silent and speechless to those or the
like demands of Christ: for they cannot say they have come out of their sins,
and have been reformed by the means of grace, and have received spiritual
nourishment and refreshing from the heavenly banquet of the Communion of the
body and blood of the Lord Jesus Christ.

A man will especially regard the last words of a dear friend, who is as a man's
Soul, when he is to speak upon his deathbed, and will be careful to remember
them; and do thou not more regard the last Will and Testament of our Lord
Jesus Christ? we count it a horrible sin to alter the last Will of a man that
is dead. Beloved, the Lord Jesus, before he left this world, instituted this
blessed Sacrament as his last Will and Testament, and has given us a charge,
that as we would not eat and drink our own damnation by bringing the guilt of
his body and blood upon our Souls, so that we should discern the Lords body,
and not come unpreparedly in our sins and abominations, without reverence and
respect of such holy and high mysteries, as if there were nothing more to be
received and looked for after, then the bare and naked element of bread and
wine, or as if we did come to communicate with unclean Devils. O my brethren,
if you had but faith, you would be able to discern Christ in the Sacrament* and
therefore when thou come unto it, thou must prepare and sanctify thy self
to communicate with him in those holy Ordinances and heavenly mysteries of his
most precious body and blood: for if so be that thou retainest thy sins, and so
come unworthily unto this holy Table of the Lord, thou art a great
Covenant-breaker with God: For thou never come unto the Communion, but thou
make and renewest thy covenant with God, wherein thou promisest thus much, or
the like in effect; Lord, I have been formerly a drunkard, but now I promise to
give it over, and never to be a drunkard more; I have been a scoffer at
Religion, and a mocker and derider of thy children, but now I faithfully
promise (Lord) that I will never do so any more. I have been wicked and
sinful, disobeying and rebelling against all thy holy commandments, and
respected not thy judgments and thy promises, and have been careless of thy
glory: But now (Lord) as I eat this bread, and drink this wine; so I covenant
unto thee, and promise to thee, that I will amend all my sinful ways, and
become a reformed Christian. And as I ever look that the body and the blood of
the Lord Jesus Christ, represented in the elements, should nourish my soul unto
eternal life, so I promise to be disobedient unto the Devil, but faithful
and obedient unto thee. I will stop my ears against the alluring enchantments
of the world, and wicked suggestions of the Devil; but I will open them wide to
hearken to thy voice, that I may obey thy commands. But now as thou have made
it, so if thou have broken this thy covenant with God, returning to thy former
courses of sin and disobedience against him, know thou, that this covenant of
thine which thou have broken, shall stand in full force against thee: for God
will assuredly require it at thy hands: and all the Sacraments which thou have
received, thou have received them but as so many seals and pledges of thy just
deserved condemnation.

Object.
But some man may object and say, Do all that come unworthily unto the
Sacrament, eat and drink their own damnation* Then many hundreds, yea thousands
are damned: Are all damned that have eat and drunk unworthily?

Answer.
Ans. No, but a man may eat and drink his own damnation three ways: First, in
regard of guilt and liablenesse unto Gods wrath: and so he that eats and
drinks his natural food, his dinner, supper, or breakfast in his sins,
eats and drinks his own damnation: yea, whosoever thou art, that come
unto this holy banquet in thy sins, in thy pride, choler, malice, wrath or
revenge, covetousuesse, hypocrisy, and deadness in Gods service, thou never
eatest a bit of bread, but thou eatest and drinkest thine own damnation; that
is, thou eatest and drinkest that which will witness against thee another day,
Deuteronomy. 28. 16, 17, 18, 19. ver. etc. If thou ^ilt not hearken to the voice of
the Lord thy God, to observe and do all his commandments, then all these
curses come upon thee and shall overtake thee: Cursed shall thou be in the
City, and cursed in the field, cursed shall be thy basket and store. Now if thy
bread be cursed, then thou art cursed also that eatest it. Secondly, in regard
of the seal and obligation in the conscience; so he that eats and drinks
the Sacrament in his sins, eats and drinks his own damnation; that is, he
eats and drinks that which seals up his damnation against the great day of
account. And thus many amongst us, and I fear the most part of this
congregation, have eat and drunk their own damnation. But this seal may be
broken off, and God grant it may.

Thirdly, in regard of sigillation in heaven, and so he that eats and drinks
unworthily, and will not be reformed, he that receives the Sacrament time after
time, yet still retains his sins, and will not be humbled for them, nor forsake
them, he sets a seal in heaven upon his own damnation, that all the whole
world can never break off, but such an one most certainly is a damned creature.

And now (my brethren) God forbid there should be any such here, but that this
seal may be broken off: And O that God would put some strength into this word,
that it may be broken off by your godly sorrow for your sin, and forsaking of
them all: for if this seal be set on your damnation, why do I yet speak unto
you, and entreat and beseech you in the name of Christ to come home and be
reconciled to him? and I desire to stand here, as Jehoiadah set Porters at the
gates of the City, and of the house of the Lord, to keep off all those that
come in their uncleanness, 2 Chronicles. 23. 19. So I stand this day as the Porter
of the Lord, to keep the Lords watch, that no profane wretch, no proud hearted
sinner, that means not to enter into a new course of life, that no such one
come unto this holy communion, I charge you as you will answer the guilt of
Christ's blood before Gods Throne, that you meddle not with it. But now if there
be any that would absent himself because he will the more freely go on in his
sins, let him know that such an one excludes himself from the benefits and
merits of Christ's death, and shall never have the benefit of a Redeemer at the
day of judgment; but shall perish in his sins for his careless neglect, and
fearful contempt of so effectual and powerful means of salvation and purging,
as is the blood of Christ, truly and really offered in the Sacrament.
Wherefore, if thou come, or come not, woe is thee, if so be thou live and
continuest in thy sins, and go on in thy unholy courses.

And now to conclude; as the Cherubin stood before Paradise with a naked sword
to keep Adam out, that he might not enter and so eat of the tree of life: so I
bring with me the sword of God, to run it up to the hilt in the heart and
bowels of every ungodly man, every rebellious and impenitent sinner this day,
that dares presume to rush upon this holy Ordinance of God, with a polluted and
an unclean heart. Therefore let me exhort thee, that as thou tendrest the
eternal good of thy soul, so thou be careful not to eat the body of Christ,
nor drink his blood in thy sins, lest thou eat thine own bane, and drink thine
own curse: Nay, so doing, thy misery will be so great, as a good man well
weighing and considering of it, said, I profess I had rather have all my veins
cut open, and my blood spilt on the ground, than deliver the body and blood of
Christ unto a profane sinner: for why should I deliver his own bane and
destruction unto him? But now (my brethren and beloved) come out of your sins,
come and welcome, if you part with your lusts, and so come, you shall be sure
to have his blood to wash your heart, and cleanse you, his righteousness to
clear you, and cloth you, his graces to strengthen you, his spirit to heal and
to sanctify your hearts and natures; and the Lord Jesus Christ to supply all
good that is wanting in you. But if yet notwithstanding all this that has been
said, you will go on in your sins, and live as you did in your swearing,
whoring, lying, and drinking, and all manner of filthiness; and as you came to
it unclean, so you depart away from it more unclean, and never make any
conscience of any reformation: I pronounce this day before God and his elect
Angels, that thou shall surely perish, and thy soul and body be damned and
tormented in the scorching flames of hell for evermore. Therefore hearken unto
instruction, and give ear unto council, now whiles that the Lord offers it unto
you, that so you may not harden your hearts any more, but may hear and obey,
that your souls may live, and so coming together to this holy and blessed
Communion for the better and not for the worse, you may return home with the
blessing of children.

THE DUTY OF COMMUNICANTS: OR, Examination required of every COMMUNICANT. In a
SERMON preached, By that Vigilant and Painful Minister of the Word, WILLIAM
FENNER, B. D. Sometimes Fellow of Pembroke Hall in Cambridge, and late Pastor
of Rochford in Essex.

London, Printed by E. T. for John Stafford.

EXAMINATION Required in every COMMUNICANT A SERMON preached by Master WILLIAM
FENNER Minister of GODS Word.
1 Cor. 11. 28. But let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of that Bread
and drink of that Cup.
IN the later part of this Chapter the Apostle treats of the Sacrament of the
Lords Supper: and first he reproves the Corinthians for their unworthy coming
to it, as we see in verse 18. There were Errors, and Schisms, contempt of the
poor, drunkenness, excess, disorder, and unprofitablenesse in the duties of
God, they waxed worse and worse by the Sacrament. All these, and sundry other
abuses were among them; so that they did not eat the Lords Supper aright as
they ought.

Secondly, he reduces them back to the first prime institution of it by Jesus
Christ, as we see in verse 23. that hereby they might both see how grievously
they had abused the Sacrament, and likewise see how they might sanctifiedly use
it.

Thirdly, he shows the danger of unworthy receivers: and this he sets out two
ways.

First by the grievousnesse of the sin; such a person makes himself guilty of
the body and blood of the Lord, as we see, verse 27.

Secondly, by the doleful consequence that follows upon it; He eats and drinks
damnation to himself, as we see verse 29.

Now in this verse (that I may not trouble you with speaking of any The sum of
the Text.
more matter than what is necessary for the present Theme) he shows how we may
prevent, escape, and avoid this danger; how we may take an order that we do not
fall into this grievous sin, that we do not plunge our selves into this grievous
misery: Let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of that Bread, and drink
of that Cup. A man must examine himself, sift his own soul, and labor to
prepare himself, before he dare to venture on this sacred business. In these
words, before we set upon the particular handling of them, we may observe, that

Observation 1. We must not rush upon the Sacrament.
We must not rush upon the Sacrament.

There must somewhat be done before we can receive it. Let a man examine
himself, and so let him eat of that Bread, and drink of that Cup. There are
none of the Ordinances of God, that a man may safely rush upon. Would thou
offer any sacrifice to God? but thou must stay first, and examine thy self,
whether there be not something yet undone. It may be thou have offended God in
something or other; It may be thou art out with thy brother; thou must first go
and be reconciled to thy brother, and then offer thy gift, Matthew. 5. So
would thou reprove thy neighbor? It may be there be somewhat out of order,
some indisposednesse in thee, thou art not yet in case to set on this duty; it
may be thou art faulty, and guilty thy self; it may be thou have a beam in
thine own eye, First (says the Text) pull the beam out of thine own eye, and
then thou may see clearly to pull the moat out of thy brothers eye, Matthew.
7. 5. So would thou reform thy outward man? But it may be thy inward man is
not reformed; there is some lust in thy heart, some pride in thy will, some
stubbornness in thy spirit, some Idol in thy bosom; First, cleanse the
inside of the platter, Matthew. 23. 26. There is never an ordinance of God that
can be done, but there must be somewhat done first, a man must do something
before. As in the choice of officers, as Ministers, as Deacons, other Officers
in the Church, first, they must be proved before they be chosen: so in all the
Ordinances of God. Would we come to the Sacrament? There is somewhat must be
done first, we must examine our selves, and root out all unsanctifiednesse, and
indisposition, that cannot stand with the right communicating in the Lords
supper. And so in every other good duty.

The reasons of this are;

First, because naturally we are not invited guests, we are not such as are
Reason 1. Naturally we are not invited guests.
invited to the Lords Supper; we are children of wrath, and as long as we are
in such an estate, we cannot come aright to the Communion. This is childrens,
bread, and it cannot be given to dogs. Christ, whenever he sets his
dainties before his people, he tells us for whom they are, Take eat, this is my
body that is broken for you. This is the supper that is made for you, as it is
in this Chapter, verse 24. First we must prove our selves invited guests.

It is true, the Lord Christ invites every man to the Lords Supper; but he
invites him methodically, he must be in such an estate: but every man is not so
fitted: a man must be a member of Christ that means to partake of Christ's
death, he must be one that is in Christ, he must be able to prove that he is
ingrafted into Christ, he must be able to show the mark of the Lord Christ on
him. As it is with the some of your great dinners, Simile.
and feasts in this City, you have tickets and all that are admitted to the
feast, must show their ticket before they are admitted; So thou must be able to
show thy ticket, that thou have an invitation from Christ, thou must have a
mark, and token from Christ that thou come, and come with his warrant.

A second reason is, though thou be invited, it may be thou art not disposed.
Reason 2. We are indisposed.
If a man will do a thing that he is naturally indisposed to, there must be
somewhat done before of necessity: So the Lords supper, it is a thing that
naturally we are indisposed unto, therefore somewhat must of necessity be done
first. Naturally we are unholy, we are unthankful, and carnal, we are in our
sins, strangers from God, and the Covenant of God, and from the seal of the
Covenant: all this indisposition must be wrought out before we can
comfortablely come hither. If Christ would have the very Chamber first trimmed,
before he instituted the Passover, and the Sacrament; much more will he have
the soul disposed for him, and the heart cleansed from all filthiness. If he
that was of the Peace Offering being indisposed, having his uncleanness upon
him, was to be cut off from his people, Levit. 7. 20. what will God do to such
people as come hither in their uncleanness and indisposition, unsanctified and
unqualified?

Thirdly suppose we were both invited and disposed, yet this it not enough:
Reason 3. Solemn preparations required to the Sacrament.
This is a solemn Ordinance of God, and an ordinary disposition will not serve
the turn. Though every child of God be ordinarily disposed to every good word
and work, to pray, and to hear the word of God, he is prepared and furnished to
every well-doing ordinarily and habitually? but a man must be disposed farther;
There is a solemn preparation required to the Communion, as in Deuteronomy. 16. 15.
there were solemn feasts in the Law* so there is this solemn feast in the
Gospel, and there are solemn preparations required thereto. When we come to the
Communion, to eat the Lords Supper, it is not eating and drinking in Christ's
presence; for so may any reprobate do, and yet Christ may say to him, Depart
from me, thou worker of iniquity. It is not to come and sit in your Pewes, and
wait till the Bread comes, and take it; and till the Cup comes, and drink it,
so many a Reprobate may do, as the Corinthians did, that did eat and drink
their own damnation. But there must be a solemn preparation to it, to be sealed
with the Spirit of Promise, to be righteous by faith in the body and blo^d of
Christ; For a man to be humble and empty of his sin, to be ^^^^s^y a^^^^ the
precious blood of Christ; to be fed and built up in the promises; It is a
weighty thing to come to the Communion: a man must be a worthy man, or else he
has nothing to do here. As Solomon said of Adonijah, if he be a worthy man,
not a hair shall fall from his head; but if wickedness be found in him, he
shall dye, 1 Kings 1. 52. So, if we be worthy men and women, not a hair of our
heads shall fall to the ground, none of the curses shall light on us, that
light on unprepared persons: but if wickedness be found in us, if we be guilty
of any sin, if we live in any lust not mortified, if there be any profaneness
in our lives, in our families, in our courses and callings, though we catch
hold of the horns of the Altar, though we partake of these holy mysteries, yet
we shall be so far from having any mercy, as that we shall hasten our own
ruin, we set a seal on our own judgment, and make our case worse than it was
before.

Let us take notice of it, and never dare to rush on any of Gods Ordinances.
Use. To take heed of rush performance of duties.
You know what became of the foolish man in the Gospel, that when they were
invited to come to the marriage supper, he thought it was nothing but to come
with them that came, to crowd in with them, and sit down among the rest; he
considered not what he went about, that he might be prepared accordingly; the
event was this, he was cast out into utter darkness, Matthew. 22. 13. It is
dangerous rushing on any of Gods ordinances. To rush upon prayer, for a man to
fall down upon his knees, and to utter any thing before the Lord hastily with
his mouth, not considering that God is in heaven, and he on the earth. A man's
word may damn his own soul, and pull vengeance on his own pate, his prayers may
prove a curse, his prayer for mercy may be turned into vengeance: So the higher
the service, the greater the danger. As the servants 2 Samuel 15. 17.
of Abigail said to her, Consider what you do, when evil was determined
against them: so consider what you do when you come to the Sacrament, you come
to a weighty thing, to that, that will either set you nearer to the Kindome of
God, or hell and condemnation. But I let this pass, and come to the words
themselves.

Let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of that Bread, and drink of that
Cup. In these words observe;

First, the matter of the duty commanded; that is to eat of that bread, and
Parts of the Text.
drink of that cup.

Secondly, the manner of doing the duty; not only to eat of that bread; but so
to eat; and not only to drink of that cup, but so to drink.

Thirdly, the rule of direction how to come in a right manner to partake of it,
that is, by examining of our selves, Let a man examine himself, and so let him
eat of that bread, and drink of that cup.

Fourthly and lastly, the benefit following that direction, and that is in this
word, But let a man examine himself. He had said before, He that eats and
drinks unworthily, is made guilty of the body and blood of the Lord: and, he
discerns not the Lords body, verse 27. But, says he, as if he should say if
a man would prevent this, if a man would take order that he be not guilty of
the body and blood of Christ, that he do not come undiscerningly to these
heavenly mysteries, but with comfort, and title to the promises, with hope and
confidence and speeding there of the benefits of Christ exhibited, then, let a
man examine himself, and so let him eat of that bread, and drink of that cup.

Now I will pass over some of these points, namely that we are to eat
Necessity of receiving the Lords Supper.
that bread, and drink that cup. There is a necessity that we should receive
the Lords supper. I need not stand on this, you know it sufficiently proved by
the Sacrament of the Law, which was the forerunner of this Sacrament, that
soul that did not partake of that, was to dye the death, he was to be cut off
from Gods people, Number. 9. 13. If the Lord was so careful of those Sacraments
that were inferior to these (and yet they were of the same substance as these)
that the man that neglected to come to them, to partake of them, was to be cut
off, to be excommunicated from the people of God, and to be rent off from the
congregation of the Saints, then how much more for these heavenly, and weighty,
and glorious Ordinances of the Gospel, which are far more glorious than them
of the Law? But I will not stand upon that.

I might here take notice too of the frequency of the duty: for so it has The
Lords Supper to be received often.
dependence on those words formerly, As often as you eat this bread, and drink
this cup, ye show the Lords death, and so, that is, as often as ye eat, do it in
this manner. This is the command of God, that we often receive the Lords Supper.
In the Primitive times St. Basil observes, that they eat it three or four times
in a week, on Wednesdays, Frydays, and on the Lords day; but that was a time of
persecution, I will not stand upon that. I think it not neeedfull; But it
should be often, we should not thurst it only upon Easter and Whitsuntide. and
Christ-tide, three or four times in the year.

Again, I might observe here from this mystery received, in that he calls it
Bread, I might observe against the Papists Transubstantiation, that the bread
received, is not transubstantiated, but is bread still; and against that of
receiving in one kind; So let him eat of that bread, and drink of that cup: he
does not say, let him eat of that bread only, but he directs the commands in
both kinds. But I let this pass, and come to the second rhing, that is the
manner how we should do this duty.

So let him eat of that bread, and drink of that cup. It is not, first let him
examine himself, and then let him eat of that Observe. The manner of performance
of duties to be regarded.
bread, and drink of that cup: But, let him examine himself, and then, SO, let
him eat: implying, that examining a man's self helps or ought to help a man to
a right manner: and when he has gotten a right manner, then to eat that bread,
and drink that cup; that he may do, not only for matter, that which the Lord
commands, but, for manner, as the Lord commands. Beloved, the Lord stands on
circumstances as well as on duties: we are all racers, we run, we must so run
that we may obtain, 2. Cor. 9. 29 So pray that we may speed, so hear that we
may be converted, so reprove that we may be edified; so behave our selves in
our places and callings, that we may glorify God. It is not enough for a man
to run, but he must so run, if he mean to obtain. Every man will be speaking
and doing good things; but so speak, and so do, Jam. 2. 12. The Lord calls upon
us to have a care of the manner of duties, as well as of the matter of duties.
It is not enough that a man come to eat of that bread, and drink of that cup,
but so to eat, and so to drink of it, he must partake of the Lords Table, and
so as the Lord enjoins.

Now the Reasons of this are;

First, because the same Lord that commands the matter, commands the manner
Reason 1. The Lord commands the manner as well as the matter.
too. The Lord will have his service well done, as well as done, he will have
the work well performed, as well as performed. It is not only the thing that
the Lord stands upon, but the right manner and kind of doing it.

When David persuaded his son Solomon to worship the God of his Fathers, he
bids him not only do the thing, but to do it in a right manner, And thou my son
Solomon, know thou the God of thy Fathers, and serve him, Is that all? No, but
with a perfect heart, and a willing mind, 2. Chron. 28. 9. He commands him to
do it, not only for the matter of it, but in the right manner of it. A man may
serve God, but if it be not with a perfect heart, and a willing mind, and with
a cheerful spirit; if he be not ready to every command, if he do not open his
ears to every rebuke, a man does not serve God at all. The manner either makes
all, or marres all.

Secondly, another Reason is, because circumstances overthrow actions, Reason
2. Circumstances overthrow actions, as in Prayer.
if they be not rightly and duly observed. As for example in Scripture, prayer
is an action commanded of God: the Lord commands us to pray, that we call upon
his name duly, every day, in all our needs and necessities, upon all occasions
continually. But now if we pray not aright, not in that manner that the Lord
has prescribed; if we pray either with a guilty defiled conscience, with cold
affection, with a dead spirit, or without departing from iniquity, or without a
pure heart: if a man pray without the right manner of prayer, he marrs all his
prayer, it is a howling, and not a prayer. They did not cry to me (says God)
when they howled on their beds, that is, when they prayed, because they did not
pray in a right manner, the Lord calls it howling, and not a prayer. We roar as
Bears, in Isaiah 59. 12. the Prophet nicknames it, speaking in the person of
the people, he calls it the roaring of Bears: The Lord had as lieve hear the
barking of a Dog, or the grunting of a Swine, as a man that does not pray
aright, with a bleeding heart, with contrition of soul and spirit, with a
spirit of grace and supplication. When a man prays, and prays not aright, his
prayer leaves that name, it is no more a prayer in Gods account.

And so preaching, it is an admirable action; but if a man do not preach 2
Preaching.
aright, if it be flattering with the entising words of man's wisdom, or
beating the air, and to show his own learning, this overthrows the action of
preaching, he preaches not Christ, but himself; not the Gospel, though the
Gospel be in his Sermon all over, yet himself he preaches, the action is
marred, the circumstances mar it.

So in the Lords Supper, if a man come not prepared, that he have 3 Receiving
the Sacrament.
not the Wedding Garment, that he be not aright qualified according to the
requisites of the Gospel, this is not to eat the Lords Supper; Says the
Apostle, When ye come together, this is not to eat the Lords Supper: you think
you eat the Lords Supper, you take the bread and the cup, and can say, Blessed
be God, and I pray God to bless me: you may come and do these actions, but the
action is altered, the action is diversified when it is not done in a right
manner.

So if a man come to reprove his brother, if he himself be faulty, do you 4
Brotherly reproof.
think this is sufficient reproof? No, it is hypocrisy. Thou hypocrite, Matthew.
7, 5. his reproof of his brother is hypocrisy.

So, for men to tell one another of their faults, and to tell them with a
Spirit of bitterness; this is not Christian dehortation, but biting one
another, Gal. 5. 15.

And so for eating and drinking, beloved, eating is lawful, and drinking 5
Eating and drinking.
is lawful, and marrying and giving in marriage, all these are lawful, yet if
a man eat not aright, and drink not aright, and marry not in the Lord, eat and
drink without title to the Lords creatures, that he have not interest in the
Covenant of God, if Christ be not in it, how shall he have comfort? Nay, that
very nature of his eating is altered, his eating, and drinking and marrying is
a sin. As our Lord Christ shows of the old world, They did eat and drink; and
were marrying and giving in marriage, till Noah entered into the Ark, and the
flood came and swept them away, Mat. 24. 37, he reckons their eating and
drinking among their sins, among the reasons and causes why the flood came upon
them, they did eat and drink, and marry and give in marriage.

You will say, was that the reason the flood came? And was that an argument
Objection.
of their security? Did not Noah eat and drink and marry? And were not his
sons married that were in the Ark, and he a grandfather?

But he did it aright; therefore his eating and drinking is not brought Answer.
as a sign of security, but of the old world, that were carnal and wretched
people, it was because they did not eat and drink aright.

There be Rules in eating and drinking, in talking and discoursing, in doing
the duties of our callings: There be Rules how you ought to buy and sell, and
to do every good word, and work. If these Rules be not observed, the Rules of
Gods blessed word, the actions themselves are altered; though the things be
commanded of God, yea they are cursed and abominable things, when the true form
and fashion of them is not regarded, though they be never so godly.

A garment though it be never so good, if the Tailor handle it not Simile.
well, it is marred in the making, if he bring it not to a right form, and make
it in a right manner, the man that is to have the garment, is disappointed. So
Timber, though it be never so excellent, though it be all Oak, or Elm, or
whatsoever tree, though it be never so fit for building, if the Artificer deal
not well in handling it, the inhabitant that comes there, may curse the day
that ever he came there: if it be not well built, it may fall on his head and
kill him, and all that belong to him. So it is in all the Ordinances of God,
and the matters of Religion, we must not only do them for matter, but for
manner too: for that either makes or marrs them.

Thirdly, another Reason is, because only the right manner of doing duties
Reason 3. The right manner of doing duties gets the blessing.
gets the blessing. A man may pray a thousand times, and never be heard, he may
hear a million of Sermons, and never be converted, a man may come to all the
Sacraments in the year, all his life long, and never be sealed against the day
of redemption. A man may do the things, and never get the blessing; all the
blessing lies in the right manner of doing. Blessed is that servant, whom, when
his master comes, he shall find so doing, Matthew. 24. 48. He says not, Whom
when his master comes, he shall find doing. Christ when he comes to
judgment, shall find many doing; it may be he will come in prayer time, it may
be he will come in the morning, when many thousands shall be at their prayers
in their families: it may be he will come at night when all are at prayers in
their houses; it may be he will come on the Sabath, when all the country is at
Church, hearing of Sermons, he shall find many thousands doing, and praying.
But blessed is that servant, whom his Lord when he comes, shall find so
praying, so hearing, so receiving the Sacrament: He shall find many believing,
but so believing gets the blessing: many professing, but it is so professing
that gets the comfort, I say, all the blessings of God are promised to the
right manner of doing. Now, what is it, when we do duties, what do we look for?
Is it not for a blessing? Why do we do the duties, if we do not do them so as
we may get the blessing? Now except we observe the right manner of doing them,
all is to no purpose.

Fourthly, another Reason is, the example of Jesus Christ, Christ has Reason
4. Christ's example
given us an example that we should do as he did: Now he did not only do that
which his Father bid him do, for matter but for manner, both in all the words
he spoke, and in all the deeds that he performed. For the words he spoke, As
the Father has said unto me, even so speak I, John 12. And in John 14. 31. As
the Father has given me commandment, even so do I. Mark, he did not only obey
his Father in the matter of his command, but in the manner of it. And as Christ
has done thus, so all that are Christ's, all the servants of God in all ages,
they have been very careful, especially of the right manner of obeying God. As
it is said of Noah, Genesis 6. 22. As the Lord commanded Noah, even so did he,
just as the Lord commanded him, he did not only make an Ark, but so he made all
the rooms: so he made it in the same form and figure, and in the same
similitude, just as the Lord set him down in the pattern, even so did he. So
the Lord sets down the pattern of every good word and work, of all our prayers,
and Sermons, and hearing; and conference, and keeping the Sabath, and speaking
holily: all our actions have their pattern set down in the word of God. Now as
we are to do the things, so we are to do them in the same manner as the Lord
commands, even so must we do.

Fifthly and lastly, except we do it in a right manner, except as we come
Reason 5. From Gods glory.
to the duty, so we come to the right manner, we can never glorify God; The
glory of God lies in the manner of doing of things. So let your light shine
before men, that they may see your good works, and glorify your father which
is in heaven, Matthew. 5. 16. Mark, the light must not shine only in our lives
and conversations; but so that the duty must be a means to the glorifying of
God. Now the means must have i'ts proportion and likeness, and nature, and
mold, and frame, from the nature of the end. Look how the end is that the duty
looks unto, so must the frame and fashion of the duty be: Now if the end of all
our actions be, that God may be glorified, that must put a form and fashion
upon every duty, that it may be so, that he may have glory. Suppose a man pray
every day in his family and call all his housbold, his servants, and wife and
children, and all under his roof about him every morning and evening: he may
dishonor God by prayer every day on this fashion, if a man pray coldly, and
carelessly, for form and fashion, without says, and life, he makes all the
ordinances of God vile, and all the works of God contemptible: his household
sleeps, one snorts it may be; another is infinitely profane it may be, and
though there be diverse that would fain be quickened, and wakened, yet his prayer
is so cold, there is no life, or heat, nor warmth in it, that God is
exceedingly dishonored, and all are thereby rather worse than better. So for a
man's preaching, though it be never so good a duty, yet he must labor to preach
so, as the Apostle speaks of his preaching and labor in the work of his
Ministry, how he may edify others, and save his own soul. So fight I, not as
one that beats the air; but so as I may get the mastery: We must so preach,
that we may attain the conversion of the people, or else we may rather do as
Hophni and Phineas, the sons of Eli, that made the table of the Lord
contemptible, and the Sacrifice of the Lord loathsome in the eyes of the
people: So may we do with the ordinances of God.

Take any duty of religion, if it be not done aright, God has no glory by it.
Suppose thou would reprove thy brother, and tell him of his fault, and check
him for his back wardness, or omission of some duty, and for the commission of
some sin; if thou do it, do it with a spirit of compassion, and bowels of Jesus
Christ, with an humble heart, with a feeling and a pure conscience; I say thou
gettest a blot to thy own self, and causest God to be ill spoken of, and the
very way of his name to be dishonored. This will be the effect of it; and so in
every other duty. And so I come to the use.

It is so, that we must not only come to the Sacrament, but come aright; Use 1.
To reprove those that barely do duties, without looking to the manner.
or do any duty, but we must do it in a right manner? This serves to condemn
that natural popery, that is in men's hearts, that is of opus operatum, of the
deed done; this is the religion of the Church of Rome, that so man do the duty
(indeed it is better if it be done in a right manner,) but if it be done, there
is somewhat a man may look for by that. If a man come to the Sacrament, the
very eating of the Host, the very partaking of the body of Christ, they make it
meritorious: so the very hearing of so many Sermons, the very saying of so many
prayers; the very performance of so many duties: the very thing it self,
nakedly confidered, it is of some validity. This is rooted into the hearts of
men, we see it up and down; people do the duty, and think all is well enough,
when they consider not how it is done. People pray, but not with zeal; they
hear, but not with reverence: People come to the Sacrament, not for the better,
but for the worse, they come not in a right manner; and yet every one hopes to
speed, and builds himself on this, that God accepts of him. But this is the
folly of men's hearts; it is an evident argument that men go foolishly to work
in the ways of God. It is the brand of a fool not to be able to observe
circumstances. Aristotle the heathen, he says, it is the part of a wise man to
think of, and understand the manner of actions; as a wise man says, he
observes circumstances. It is the part of wisdom to observe the right
circumstances of every action, as it is, Ephesians. 5. 15. Walk circumspectly, that
is, accurately, as it is in the original, not as fools, but as wise. Mark, he
persuades them to a right manner of walking; not only to walk in a good
course, in praying, and hearing, in obedience, and sobriety, in temperance,
faith and diligence in our callings; but do it accurately, in a right manner;
do it as wise men, and not as fools, who do it in a wrong manner. It is the
part of a fool, I say, to do a thing, and to leave the right manner of doing
it. Now this is nothing with God, the Lord does not esteem any action though it
be never so frequently done, except it be done with his own stamp, except it
have his own character upon it.

I remember a story in 2 King. 17. 26. The Assyrians there observed, that God
sent Lions among them, because they did not observe the right manner of the God
of Israel: they worshipped the God of Israel; but because they observed not the
right Manner of his word, he sent Lions among them, to tear and devour them in
pieces. So though we pray, and hear, and read, and profess, and have a name
that we live; and though we be taken for good people and heap up duties from
day to day, and vie performances, and though we do them as many times as the
children of God; nay, though we could do them ten thousand times oftener than
they, yet if we do them not in a right manner, if we know not the manner of the
God of heaven and earth, with humble hearts, and selfedenying spirits, with
holiness of affection, and with purity of heart: if a man do them not in a
right manner, the Lord will tear him in pieces, and he shall have no deliverance
for all that.

Another use shall be, what may be the reasons why people are so willing Use 2.
The reason why men regard the matter and not the manner of duties.
generally, to do duties for the matter, and care not to do them in a right
manner. It shall not be amiss a little to show the mystery of this thing: for
we see every man is willing to do duties, every man will be praying and coming
to Church, many reprobates, and God knows how many carnal hearts are in this
congregation, some drunkards it may be, some adulterers, some it may be that
committed whoredom the last night, some that have been swearing even now, and
deceiving in their shops, there are many carnal hearts; yea every man is
willing to do duties, to hear, and to pray; Now what may be the reason that
people are willing to do good duties, and yet are loath to come off with their
carnal hearts? There are four reasons.

The first is this, Because the matter of the duty is easy, but the manner is
Reason 1. The matter of (...).
difficult. It is an easy matter to pray, to say, Lord I have sinned against
heaven and against thee. Lord, I have sworn, I have been a drunkard, I have
disallowed the Sabbath, I have done this and that, I pray thee pardon and
forgive me, and give me thy grace; it is an easy matter to do this. It is
easy for a man to come to Church, and mark what the Minister says, and follow
him from point to point, and it may be he go over it to his famimily. This is
good, there are few that come thus far. And so it is easy to come to the
Sacrament, to take the Bread and the Cup, and to pray for a blessing, this is
easy; but when a man comes to do a duty in a right manner, here is difficulty,
when a man does it with a How; Take heed how ye hear. He does not call upon
people to hear, that is not the matter; there needs no great diligence for
that: but, if you will consider How you hear, take heed to that. Here must be a
great deal of circumspection; the soul must be mavelous painful, a man must
offer violence to his own soul; a man must fight against his own will, a man
must beat down his own spirit, he must crucify his own thoughts, must mortify
his own mind, and beat down his own soul. It is a hard thing to do in a right
manner, as the Lord commands, if we consider how to do it. This is certain,
flesh and blood cannot abide to take pains; if it can serve God with ease, and
pray with ease, that it will do; but for a man to weep before God, for a man to
indict his heart before the throne of grace, to rend his bowels before his
maker, to tear the caul of his heart upon his kees, for a man to vow to God and
pay them; for a man to rid his hand of all the wages of iniquity, for a man to
purify himself as Christ is pure, for a man to wrestle with God, and to take
grace according to the covenant of grace, with life and power; to do it in a
right manner, here is religion, and this man cannot abide.

And so for the Sacrament, for a man to come in a right manner, Oh it is
difficult to flesh and blood; for a man to go and examine all his life, to
reckon up all his conversation, to anatomize himself from his cradle to this
moment; to consider how he has sinned in his calling, in his family, in his
shop, in his company, in his speech, and in his life; to go and judge himself
of these, and condemn himself, and to accept of his own punishment, to go and
rack his own thoughts, and crucify his own soul: Oh! this is hard, men cannot
abide this: therefore they go and take the matter, they observe that, and leave
out the manner.

Secondly, another reason is this, because the matter of duties may be Reason.
2. The matter of duties may be done with a proud heart.
done with a proud heart; there is no duty but a man may do it with a proud
heart, and never be humble. A man may pray, and use good words, and make good
petitions, and have mavelous good language, and Scripture phrase, and terms,
and passages, and an admirable sweet tone, and yet have a proud heart. A man
may come and Preach a Sermon, he may preach so as that he may strangely affect
the hearts of the people, and may make all the people wonder and admire at the
gracious words that come from his mouth, and yet have a proud heart.

A man may hear, and hear often, and hear the best Preachers in the City; and
delight in hearing, and yet have a proud heart. A man may come to the
Sacrament, and sit, to ones thinking, as devoutly as any in the Church, and
pray when the people pray, and give thanks when others give thanks, and have a
kind of moral faith in the Covenant, and a moral application of the promises,
and yet have a proud heart. It is the manner of doing duties that humbles the
soul, as Saint Paul says, Acts 20. You know in what manner I have been with
you. Why, what was the manner? In all humility of mind, says he, being among
the Ephesians; preaching to them in a right manner, leaving them the example of
his own pattern, doing all this in a right manner, he did it in all humility of
heart. It is the right manner of prayer that pulls down the heart before God. It
is the right manner of hearing the word, that makes a man melt at it. It is the
right manner of coming to the Sacrament, that makes a man feel the comfort of
God, and the promises of the Gospel, and to seek and find the admirable things
contained in it. It is the right manner that makes a man walk lowly with his
God.

Thirdly, another Reason is, Because the matter may stand with an unholy Reason
3. The matter of duties may be done, and yet a man be unholy.
life; A man may do a duty for the matter of it, and yet be unholy. This is
plain; how many thousands are there that pray, and yet are vain, and covetous,
and carnal? How many thousands hear Sermons, and yet are unprofitable? Ever
hearing, and never come to the knowledge of the truth. If they were injurious
before, they are injurious still; if they were cousners before, they are so
still; if they were drunkards before, they are so still. A man may receive the
Sacrament every month, and yet may have his lusts, and roll them as a sweet
morsel under his tongue; he may delight in his secret lusts, and go on in his
deadness of heart. It is the right manner of worshipping God, that purges the
conscience, and purifieth the soul, and makes a man that there is no room for
his corruptions, as you may see, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 10. You your selves know (says
the Apostle) how holily, and unblameably we walked among you. He speaks there
of his manner of walking, and he says to them, because it was in a right
manner, it was an holy manner; such walking as excluded all unholinesse, and
profaneness. Flesh and blood cannot abide this. Men, they love to pray, and
be proud; they love to hear sermons, and to have their profit; they love to
profess religion, and still to carry their secret lusts in their bosoms.
People love this alife, to go to Gilgal and transgress, to offer sacrifice
every new moon, and every morning and to find the labor of their hands, this
is right; but for a man to part with his iniquity, that is the thing that goes
against the hair.

The last reason is, because the matter of duties brings not the cross upon
Reason 4. The matter of duties brings not the cross.
a man. A man may do all the duties of Religion, and never be persecuted for
it: a man may be as devout as the devoutest man under heaven, and yet no body
hate him for it, except he be devout in a right manner, and worship God in a
right manner. One man may reprove another that is wicked; A drunkard may suffer
a drunkards reproof, and be never the worse: A whoremaster may serve his queen
so, he may call her so, and yet not be spited, because it is not right. It is
the right doing of it that brings the cross; as in 2 Timothy 2. 10. Thou know
thy manner of life. It was that that brought afflictions and persecutions.

We may see to this very day many thousands that seem devout men in the Church;
they will pray, and will hardly miss any time of prayer, morning or evening;
and yet they are far from being persecuted: nay, many of them are main
persecutors of the Gospel of God, enemies to the cross of Christ, and
adversaries to the Saints of God. We see it plain in Acts 15. 5. we read there
of devout women that raised persecution against Paul. Mark, they were devout,
and because it was not in a right manner, they persecuted the Apostles, and set
themselves against them that were truly faithful. Though wicked men do not
love to pray aright, yet many of them are much for praying, they care not how
much praying they have, and when they are at prayer, they will pray over from
the beginning of the book to the end, they love it alife. But if they come to a
prayer that moves the heart, that rifles the conscience, that dogs a man into
his bosom that lays a man flat on his face before God, they gnash their teeth
at such a prayer. So they love Preaching too; I, it is true, if it be preaching
that is flaunting, and glosing, with the enticing words of man's wisdom: but
if a man preach to the conscience, if he preach the pure naked word of God, and
carry it home to men's souls, this makes them gnash their very teeth, and they
could eat the Minister of God for his labor. It is the right manner of duty
that is accomdanied with the cross.

Thirdly, if we ought to be careful to perform duties in a right manner, Use
3. To labor to do duties aright.
Let us be exhorted in the fear of God, to go and quicken all our duties, to
bring a soul into so many bodies; we have bodies of praying, and bodies of
hearing, and bodies of receiving the Sacrament, and of good duties, let us get
a soul into them, labor to do them in a right manner. The bare duty is like a
carcass. It is a Proverb of the Jews, Prayer without preparation it as a
carkesse without the soul, that is, a loathsomething; so is prayer without
life, and without a right manner of pouring it forth. Let us labor therefore
in the fear of God, to pray, and pray aright, to hear, and to hear aright; to
seek God, and to seek him with all our hearts, aright, and to do every thing in
the right way.

Let us consider, first, we do not partake of any ordinance at all, Motives
to perform duties in the right manner.
except we do it in a right manner. I remember a fit place for this in
Numbers 11. 14. It is said there, The stranger shall eat the Passover, and
partake of of it according to the ordinance, and the manner of 1. Motive
it. Where the text puts in the Ordinance of the Passover, and the manner of
it. For it is all one, they are Synonima's. So the Ordinance in every duty,
Gods ordinance in praying, in hearing the Word, in the Sacramement, in reproof,
in every good duty, it is all one; as the self-same thing. So that if we pray,
and do not pray in a right manner, we have not prayed, we do not partake of the
ordinance. So when we come to the Sacrament, the ordinance and the manner of it
is all one; it is one complete concrete action, we do not partake of it, except
we partake of both.

Secondly consider, it is nothing but hypocrisy, when a man prays, and 2.
Motive.
does not pray in a right manner; when a man does any duty to God, and not in
right wise, it is nothing but hypocrisy. Mark how our Savior Christ sets
forth the hypocrisy of the Pharisee, Luke 18. 11. The Pharisee stood and
prayed thus with himself, he marks this manner of prayer; he does not say,
He stood and prayed this, these words, but, Thus he prayed; he did not pray in
a right manner, there was his hypocrisy, and that was the reason he went home
not justified.

Thirdly consider; it makes the ordinance of God of no effect. Thus they 3.
Motive.
make the Conmandements of God of none effect, Matthew 15. 6. He speaks there
of their duties that they did in a wrong manner, and their expounding the
Scripture, that they did in a wrong wise; and their sacrifice, their offerings,
and tithings, their precepts, and many things that were all done after another
fashion than God had commanded; therefore says Christ, Thus they make the
Commandment of God of none effect. So we make all the duties of Gods worship
of none effect. We know there is never an ordinance of God, but it has great
effect if it be rightly performed. Prayer is of great effect, it is able to
rend heaven, it is able to pull down God to the soul, it is able to wrestle out
a blessing, to quicken the heart, to obtain of God every thing we want: but if
a man pray not aright, a man may pray and go away never a whit the more holy,
nor more quickened, nor nearer to heaven, nor comfort. So, preaching and
hearing, they are admirable Ordinances, what powerful effects have they
wrought when they have been done in a right kind? People have cried out and
been converted at them; and many a man has been pulled out of the power of
Satan to the Kingdom of Jesus Christ. They had royal glorious effects upon
many thousand souls. But what is the reason that our hearing is so
uneffectuall? Because we hear not in a right manner, this makes the Ordinance
of God of none effect, it makes prayer of no effect, the Word of no effect, the
Sacrament and Sabbaths of none effect; you see people partake of these things,
and are never the wiser.

Lastly, it cannot please God, it is only the right manner of doing duties
that pleased God, as in 1 Thessalonians, 4. 1. As ye have received of us, How
ye ought to walk, and to please God; Mark, there is the manner, That we may
know HOW to walk, and by that to please God: It is not enough for a man to
walk in good duties, that a man may do and not please God, but (says he) ye
have received the manner HOW to walk and to please God. It is the manner how
that pleases God. A man may walk to hell upon heavens ground, he may go to
hell in the ways of God, it is Simile
possible. Suppose a man should go and take (if it were possible) all the
surface of ground between this place and York, and lay it between this place
and Dover, a man might go to Dover upon York ground* So many a man lays the
Ordinances of God in hell way: he walks in the way to hell, and there he lays
his prayers, and there his hearing, and his good duties; he prays every day,
and hears every day, and does good duties every day, and yet walks to hell: he
goes to hell on heavens ground; The reason is, because he does the duty, and
does not observe the manner how he does it.

The third thing is, the rule of direction, how we may come to the right manner
of receiving the Sacrament, that is, by preparing of a man's self: and the
preparation is here set down by the specification of it, namely, in examining
himself, Let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of that Bread, and drink
of that Cup.

The general scope of the words, and the Apostles meaning in them, is this,
That,

Observation 1. Eevery man must prepare himself before he come to the Lords
Table.
Every man must prepare himself before he come to the Lords Table.

I cannot stand on this; I will only name it.

As in the Sacrament of the Passover, there was preparation for the Passover.
In John. 19. 14. it is said of the Disciples of Christ, that they made ready
the Passover. In Matthew, 26. they made the Lamb ready, and the room ready,
and themselves ready, and the Table ready, and every thing ready. So in the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper, wherein Christ is the true Pascall Lamb, when we
come to eat of him, we must make every thing ready, faith ready, and repentance
ready, and interest in the promise ready, and hunger and thirst after these
spiritual dainties ready, every thing must be ready. Or else like a man that
comes into the field to battle, that has not gotten his sword, nor his
weapons ready, that is the way for himself to be killed; so it is when we come
to the Communion, and have not all things ready, it is the way to be damned.

The Reasons of this are;

First, because the Sacrament is an ordinance of God: Now all the Ordinances
Reason. It is Gods ordinance. Simile.
of God require preparation, they are all spiritual, and naturally a man is
carnal, and therefore cannot be prepared. As it is with wood, there is never a
tree in the wood, but it is unprepared for building; Is there any tree in the
wood of the fashion of a Chimney, or of a Lintell, or a Door? It must first be
prepared, as it is in Prove. 24. 27. First prepare thy work without, and then
build thine house. So every ordinance is to build a man up in the fear of God,
in the grace of God, and in Religion: Now man is naturally unprepared for it;
First, a man must fell his wood, and then cut it, and hew it even, and carve
it, and plain it fit, and prepare it, before he build: So a man must hew down
his own heart, he must humble his own soul, and qualify all within him, and so
be sanctified, before he be fit.

As for example: in prayer, a man must be prepared to prayer before he pray; he
must prepare his heart, and then Gods ears will hearken to it. In Psalm. 10. 17.
The Lord will have the heart prepared before he hear the prayer. So it is with
the word of God, a man must be prepared before he hear it: As a man that
preaches must be prepared before he preach, as Ezra is said to prepare his
heart. Ezra. 7, 10. He prepared his heart to do the Law, and to teach it: So a
Minister cannot preach, except he be prepared beforehand, with a commission
from God, with preserving knowledge, with a coal from Gods Altar, with a spirit
of wisdom and understanding, with a Law of kindness in his lips, with
meditation, and with a Theme fitted in his mouth for the people, he must be
prepared with a burning and a shining light; or else he shall not edify the
congregation: So it is with all other Ordinances. For humbling of a man's soul,
a man cannot humble his heart, except he be prepared to it, Amos 4. 12. Prepare
to meet thy God, he speaks of humiliation. If a man would humble himself before
God, if he be not prepared, if his heart be not prepared to let go the world,
his worldly profits, and vain pleasures, and carnal acquaintance, his wonted
lusts, and former delights. If he be not prepared to let these go, when he
comes to keep a Fast, or to afflict his soul, and goes along to do the duty, to
lay himself down before Almighty God, some lust or other will stick in his
teeth, and intercept his heart, he shall never be able to do it: as Samuel said
to the people; If you will turn to the Lord, prepare your hearts to do it, 1 Samuel 7. So it must be in all the ordinances of God, and much more in the
Sacrament.

Secondly, another Reason is, because the Lord Christ has made great Reason 2.
Christ has made preparation for us in the Lords Sup*
preparations to provide the Lords Supper; therefore we must be prepared to eat
it. You know what a great deal ado there was before the Supper was made.
Christ must be incarnate, and fulfill all righteousness, he must conclude it
upon his suffering; he must tread the wine press alone, and suffer himself to
be beaten and rejected of God, and men, and suffer death, the cursed death of
the Cross, all these things were concluded upon, before this holy and blessed
Supper was provided. Come (says he) I have prepared my dinner, Matthew. 22.
Mark, Christ is fain to prepare his dinner; he makes a great Feast: there was
great preparation for it; so there must be great preparation of our souls
before we can come to this holy banquet. It is true among men, there may be
great preparation for a feast, and little or nothing for the eating of it.
Sometimes there are two or three days preparation for a feast, and is eaten
presently. The reason is, because man naturally hungers after meat and drink,
and he always provides twice or thrice in twenty four hours, for eating and
drinking: But the Lords Supper is a spiritual banquet, a man is every day, and
hour, and moment naturally unfit for it, and there is much ado to put an edge
upon men's appetites, and a keenness upon men's desires, that they may be fitted
and prepared for it.

Thirdly, another reason is, Because the Lord Christ, when he administers
Reason 3. Christ looks for good entertainment.
himself in this heavenly mystery, he offers to come into the soul, and he
looks for good entertainment; and therefore of necessity there must be
preparation for it. You see when a mortal man, an earthly Prince, or a Noble
man comes to another man's house, what a deal of preparation there is to provide
for him: there is meat made ready, and purging the house, and sweeping the
yard, and trimming up the very pales, and every thing, and making clean all the
Chambers, and ridding out whatsoever fills it, and every thing that is out of
order it set in tune. And what will my Lord think? and what will his Majesty
think? he will think he is slighted and contemned; And when he comes in, it may
be, his own children shall serve, and his own wife wait at the Table; and there
is running up and down of errands, and a great deal of ado to give such a one
entertainment. There is preparation to entertain a man, as Saint Paul said to
Philemon, I will that you prepare me lodging: how much more when the eternal
God shall come under a man's roof, and dine with him?

Lastly, Because the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, is a part of Christ's last
will and Testament. Now it is a terrible thing when we know our Lords will, and
prepare not for the doing of it. Look in Luke 12. 48. he that knew it not, did
things worthy of stripes; but in verse 47. That servant that knew the Lords
will, and prepared not himself, neither did according to his will, shall be
beaten with many stripes, that man shall be damned with much damnation; he
shall be damned deeper than any body. Do thou know the Lords Table, that this
blessed Sacrament is part of Christ's last Testament? and will thou not prepare
thy self for it, to get an humble heart, and labor for a holy life, and seek
for a thirsty soul, and vow upon new obedience, and enter into Covenant with
the Lord Jesus Christ; for a better kind of conversation for the time to come?
Will thou not go and examine thine own soul, and go and reform whatsoever is
amiss in thy family, in thy place and calling? Will thou not do these things
to prepare for this holy will of Jesus Christ? thou shall be damned deeper than
any body else, because this is a part of Gods last Will and Testament, and thou
know it, and therefore woe unto thee, if thou prepare not for it.

THE DUTY OF THE REPROVER, And the Persons Reproved. SET FORTH In a SERMON
preached, By that Reverend and Faithful Minister of Gods Word, WILLIAM FENNER,
B. D. Sometimes Fellow of Pembroke Hall in Cambridge, and late Pastor of
Rochford in Essex.

London, Printed by E. T. for John Stafford.

THE DUTY OF REPROVERS, And Persons Reproved. A SERMON preached by Master
WILLIAM FENNER Minister of GODS Word.
PROVE. 29. 1. He that being often reproved, hardens his neck, shall suddenly
be destroyed, and that without remedy.
THese words, by reason of the ambiguity in the Hebrew tongue, do bear two
expositions, and our English can suffer but one.

The first exposition is this, He that reproves another, and hardneth his own
neck, shall suddenly be destroyed, and that without remedy. The other is, as we
have it here translated, He that being often reproved, hardens his neck,
shall suddenly be destroyed, and that without remedy.

I desire to speak of both these expositions, for fear I should miss the true
sense of this Text.

For the first, it is a truth of God every where confirmed in the Sciriptures,
that he that reproves another, and yet hardens his own heart, he does but
make a rod for his own back, he pulls sudden destruction upon his own self.

Then Secondly, there is no hinderance from the context, but that this may be
the meaning of the text: you know the Proverbs have little or no coherence,
except two or three chapters. Indeed there is a coherence in them, but
generally through the Proverbs there is none; so that if the text it self will
bear one exposition as well as another indifferently, the meaning none can
tell, but only as it is h^t.

Thirdly and lastly, the Text it self favors this exposition: for so the word
in the Hebrew is, A man of reproofs, that hardens his own neck* shall suddenly
be destroyed, and that without remedy.

Now the Question is, Whether the wise man's meaning here be of the actual
reproof, the reproving of another; or of passive reproof, this is undetermined
which of these is meant.

A man can have no light from the coherence, none in the world; and from the
text it self, there is as much reason why we should expound it one way (even
almost) as the other. So that I say, for fear I should let go the true meaning
of the wise man. I desire to speak a little of the active sense. He that often
reproves another, and yet hardens his own neck, shall suddenly be destroyed,
and that without remedy. From hence I may observe, that

Observation 1. A guilty hardened reprover, shall be destroyed.
A reprover (whether a master or a Minister, or a Magistrate, or a Father, or a
private Christian, be he what he will be) that reproves another, and yet is
guilty himself (either in the same kind or else in another, or in any kind) and
hardneth his own heart in it, that man shall suddenly be destroyed without
remedy.

Take a Preacher that preaches strict doctrine to the people, that is very
zealous against their sins, he is up with hell and damnation against their
filthy courses: he preaches for quickening, but himself is not quickened; be
threatens judgment against hardness of heart, and yet he has a hard heart
himself; this man pulls destruction upon his own pate. He is like the Pharisees,
that imposed upon others grievous burdens, and heavy to be born, but would not
touch them with one of their fingers themselves, Matthew. 23. 4.

The Reason of this is; because

Reason 1. It is against his office.
First, such a reprover of sin, does it against his office: the office of a
reprover, binds him to be blameless, as the Apostle speaks, A Bishop must be
blameless, 1 Timothy 3. 2. Every Christian should be blameless; how much more
Ministers that bear the office of reprovers? they should be blameless. Nay, if
a man, though he take not the office of a reprover, yet if he bear the person
of a reprover (as every private Christian must, when God calls him to it: for
every man may be called to reprove) though he have no authority over another,
though he be a private man, he may bear the person though not the office of a
reprover. Now a man must be unculpable, and unblameable himself, or else he
sins against his person. If a man reprove another for being carnal, himself
must be spiritual, Gal. 6. 1. If any man be overtaken with a fault, ye that
are spiritual, restore him. The reprover, the exhorter, and admonisher must be
spiritual, Reason 2. He cannot reprove to aright end.
if he would draw another to be spiritual.

Secondly, such a reprover as is guilty himself in that kind, or in any other
kind, he can never reprove to a right end. Why see thou a moat in thy
brothers eye, and considerest not the beam in thine own eye? Matthew 7. verse
3. Why (says he) to what end? what is that thou look at? thou art severe to
espy faults in thy brothers eye; To what end do thou reprove him? What is
the reason? What is the thing thou would have, that thou find fault with
him? Why see thou a moat in thy brothers eye? As if he should say, thy end
can never be good, it cannot be to do thy brother good: for then thou would
do thy self good first. It is not because thou hate sin; for then thou
would detest thine own sin. It cannot be out of a good principle, or to a
good end. It is either because thou art a busy body in other men's matters, or
thou art censorious, thou love to be meddling; or because thou hate thy
brother, and would wreak thy malice on him; thou would fain shame and
disgrace him, and by beating him down, get thy self up; or thou would get a
cover to thine own conscience; it must be some such end, it cannot be a good
end. Christ puts it to a man's conscience, why he reproves his brother, when he
is faulty himself.

Thirdly, another Reason is, such a reprover can never do it in a right Reason
3. Not in a right manner.
manner, as Christ says, Matthew 7. 4, How will thou say to thy brother, let
me pull the moat out of thine eye, when behold a beam is in thine own eye? How
will thou do it, in what fashion, or sort? How will thou be able to bring this
about? A man that is a reprover, had need to have a very clear sight of his
own, that sees another man's faults, and will set another to rights, he had need
to have a good judgment, to see all the circumstances of reproof, and rebuke,
that deals with another. As long as a man has a beam in his own eye, as long
as he has lusts in his own heart, that will blind his judgment, and darken
and cover his eyes, and make him that he shall not be able to see to go about
it. How can thou possibly say to thy brother, let me pull the moat out of
thine eye when there is a beam in thine own eye?

A man that is to reprove another, a Master that will reprove his servant, or a
Father his children, or a Minister that will reprove his people, or a
Magistrate that will reprove those that are committed to his charge, or any
brother that will reprove another, he must do it with a spirit of compassion,
with bowels of pity, with a sense and feeling: there is a great deal of
wisdom and discretion to be observed in this act. Now when a man has a beam
in his own eye, how shall he be able to do it? That man that is faulty and
guilty himself, either he must reprove too harshly, and rigorously, or too
sparingly, or too insultingly, he must do it in a wrong manner, it can never
be sincerely and truly done, as long as a man has a lust in his own heart, and
he himself is guilty and faulty that is a reprover of his brother. Nay the
party reproved, is helped to retort on him, How do thou tell me of pride, and
worldliness, and covetousness? Who is proud and covetous as thou? Thus a man
shall be ready to be hit in the teeth.

Fourthly, such a reprover is an hypocrite. It is no Christian reproof for
Reason 4. It is hypocrisy.
a man to do so. Will thou go and find fault with thy servant for his
laziness of thy service, when thou art lazy in Gods service? Will thou find
fault with thy brother for his pride, and thou art full of fashions? Will thou
condemn the sins of the times, and thou live in some lust? This is nothing
but hypocrisy. Thou make as if thou did stand so much for obedience to
God, and oh! there is this and that sin against God, when thy self, art a
sinner in that or in another kind; this is hypocrisy, as Christ says here,
Thou hypocrite first cast the beam out of thine own eye, and then thou shall
see clearly to cast the moat out of thy brothers eye. Thou hypocrite: Mark, it
is an act of hypocrisy when a man goes to find fault with another, before he
has gone to redress his own soul, to purge his own conscience and have shook
hands with the wages of iniquity his own self, before a man has done this, it
is hypocrisy to deal with another. For when a man reproves another he takes a
form upon himself of one that is zealous against sin, and an enemy to all
sinful practices: Now what is this but hypocrisy, when a man has not this in
him that he pretends? when a man finds fault with another pride, as if he were
humble forsooth, with another worldliness, as if he were liberal; when a man
does so, he incurres the guilt of hypocrisy in reproving another.

Fifthly, another reason is, because such a reprover is inexcusable, his Reason
5. It m^kes inexcusable.
reproving another man's sin, makes himself inexcusable if his own, as the
Apostle speaks, Romans 2. 1. Therefore thou art inexcusable, O man, whosoever
thou art, that judge: for wherein thou judge another, thou condemnest thy
self, for thou do the same thing. Mark, thy own mouth shall condemn thee;
thou find fault with another man's pride: it seems, he is to be condemned for
it, then God condemns thee for thy pride: Thy pride is a fair mark for Gods
justice, because thou condemnest another. Do thou find fault with another
hardness of haart, and ill will and backwardness to any thing hat was good,
and yet thou art backward? Thou exposest thine own soul to the judgment of
God; thou have taught (as it were) Almighty God how to condemn thee for thy own
lusts and corruptions.

Again, sixthly, another Reason is this, because such a reprover is an absurd
Reason 6. It is absurd.
person. It is absurd to reprove another, and be faulty ones self, as it is,
Romans 2. 21. Thou that teach another, teach thou not thy self? Thou that
preachest another should not steal, do thou steal? This is a strange absurd
thing, this reproof does not sound well in thy mouth: thou stealest, and
forbiddest stealing; thou preachest against adultery, and committest it; thou
speak against such and such sins; thou find fault with them in the
children of God, and art guilty thy self, or in thy children or servants, or
neighbors, and art obnoxious to them in thine own practice: this is an absurd
thing: these rebukes and reproofs sound not well in thy mouth.

Lastly it is a sign of impudency, Psalm 50. What have thou to do to take
Reason 7. It is impudency.
my covenant into thy mouth, when thou hate to be reformed, and have cast my
covenant behind thy back? And to the wicked God says, What have thou to do to
take my statutes or covenant, into thy mouth, since thou hate instruction?
What have thou to do to reprove thy brother? If he be proud, what is that to
thee, as long as thou art proud thy self? thou go and flingest stones at
him, fling them at thine own heart first. It is a sign of impudency.

But it may be objected, Shall not a wicked Magistrate punish sin, and a
wicked minister preach against the corruptions of the times, and a wicked
Master rebuke his servants, and a wicked Father correct his Children? Because
he is wicked himself, shall he make himself more wicked, and contract more
guilt upon his soul?

I answer, that such a man is in a dilemma; for the man is bound to reprove, in
regard of his office, and yet he is bound in conscience to go and amend himself
first. I say, he is bound to reprove all those that God calls him to reprove,
in regard of his office: but in regard of conscience he is bound to go and
amend his own fault first. Therefore if he be a Magistrate, such as sit upon
life and death, Nifi prius, or any action between man and man, if he condemn a
malefactor, and there remember himself guilty, he is bound in conscience to
arise from the Bench, and go and amend his own sin. And we that are Ministers,
when we preach to the people, and remember our selves guilty, let us lay our
hands upon our mouths, at least in votis, before ever we have the face to go
and find fault with the people; it is necessary it should be so. Therefore, I
say, a man is in a dilemma, if he do not reprove sin, it is against his
office, and the person he bears, when God calls him to it; and if he be
reproved, then he sins against the command of God, that binds him to be
blameless, this is to bear the place of a reprover.

The Use of this is, first, to let us see that a man that reproves (I speak Use
1.
not of Ministers only or of Magistrates, or Fathers, but of every man that
reproves either by tongue, in word or in thought, if he find fault in his
thought with another man for his sins, and his strange doings,) Let him take
heed, he does but pull a judgment upon his own head; he makes himself
inexcusble, as in Romans 2. 3. the Apostle there speaing of this very point,
Think thou O man, that judge him that does these things, and do them,
that thou shall escape the judgment of God? A man that judges another and
does the same things, that man certainly shall not escape the judgment of God,
as his brother does not escape his judgment.

Secondly, another Use shall be for council to every man and woman Use 2. To
be unblamable ere we reprove.
(for it is every ones case) God has called every one of us to reprove one
another, Ministers to reprove the people, and Magistrates to judge between man
and man, and every neighbor is to reprove, when he is called thereto. Now let
us mark and observe this rule, let every one of us labor with all care and
conscience, to be unblameable, unoffensive, to humble our own souls, to cleanse
our own consciences, that we may be able to perform this duty. Beloved we wrong
our own souls, if we find fault with others, and suffer our selves to be faulty.

When Paul was to preach to the people, knowing that his office of preaching
required reproving, you see, lest he should wrong his own soul, how he labored
to be unblameable, says he, I beat my body down, when I preach to others,
lest I become a cast away.

Again as a man wrongs his own soul, so he dishonours God. It cannot be unknown
what an unthankful office, the office of a reprover is, the world cannot abide
reproof. The wicked hate the reprover in the gate, Isa. 29. 21. The world is
full of scorners, that hate reproof. Prove. 15. 12. Though some men be not so
wicked as to hate reproof, yet at least they think hardly of them that reprove;
they think they usurp authority over them; and crow over them, or they
undertake to be their betters; as a reprover undertakes in that thing to be a
man's better. Now when a man is reproved, he is apt to think that his neighbor
crows over him, and excerciseth authority upon him, as if he would grow on him,
and be his Judge. You see Lot, when he reproved the Sodomites, though as gently
as ever he could, My brethren do not so wickedly, presently for all that, they
thought hardly of him; What, will this fellow be a judge that came but the
other day to sojourn? Genesis 19. Presently they thought hardly of him. So we see,
the Prophet does but find fault with Amaziah for his fault, and presently the
Kings eyes are blinded, and his heart heardened, Who made you of the Kings
counsel? 2 Chronicles. 25. 15. he thought him a medler, that pried into
State Affairs, and into the Court and Kingdom. A man cannot reprove his brother
for his sin, but it is a thousand to one if his brother be not ready
presently to pry into him, and to look narrowly into his ways, to espy a hole
in his coat if he can, or to make one if he cannot: all men's eyes are upon him,
and they look strictly and straightly, and if any thing in the world be amiss,
they will be sure to mark it, and to make more of it, to make mountains of
Mole-hills. When the blind man did but find fault with the Pharisees, and
reprove them a little for persecuting of Christ, what say they? Art thou
altogether conceived and born in sin, and will thou teach us? John 9. 34.
Presently they looked on his blindness, and birth, Certainly he is a viler
sinner than other men, and shall he go find fault with them? If we mean to
reprove another, let us labor to be unblameable, to be Godly and holy, to
reform our own ways; let us be sure to purge our own families, to cleanse our
own souls, to rid our own hands of all the ways of sin and iniquity, lest
God be dishonored. The word of God will be flung in his own face back again,
and the reproof, if it be never so sweet, and never so wise, it will be retorted
in a man's own teeth, if he be not unblameable himself. And a man had need to be
humble, and lowly, and gentle, and meek, and to put on all bowels, and
gentleness of heart, if he will reprove.

All sins are not to be reproved alike, some with sharpness, some with lenity.
He is a Mountebank, that will open a vein for every wheal and pimple. The
reprover is like them in Isaiah, when they deal with Simile.
the Cummin and Fetches, a little rod will beat them out, but when they come to
the Corn, Wheat, and Rye, they beat them out with the Cart-wheel: So when we
meet with a hard-hearted spirit, we must use stronger corrosives to them, and
gentler admonitions and rebukes toward others that sin with a lesser and a
weaker hand. But this is a thing that a man must be mavelous careful of,
that reproves. Nay, let a man be unblameable for the present, if he have been
faulty before if it were seven, or ten, or twenty years before, if it be known,
it is a thousand to one, but he shall be hit in the teeth with it, when he
reproves: you committed adultery, and you did steal at such a time, if it were
never so long ago. Therefore St. Paul would not consent to take Mark with him
in the ministry, Acts 15. because he had been offensive to the Church before.
We had need to be mavelous careful and wary, if we will reprove.

I had thought to have named other Uses, but I leave this exposition, and take
it as it is passively interpreted.

He that being often reproved, hardens his neck, shall suddenly be destroyed,
and that without remedy. THough it may be expounded the other way, yet I rather
incline to The second exposition.
this.

The Reason is;

Because this is the constant current of all interpreters generally. I meet but
with one or two that expond it the other way; but all passively, He that being
often reproved, hardens his neck, etc.

Secondly, because the word in the original is, A man of reproofs that
hardens his own neck. Now, though it be indifferent whether it be active or
passive, yet look in the scripture, and you shall find it more often passive
then active. A man of reproofs, that is a man often reproved, in the passive.
As in Isaiah 53. 3. Christ is a man of sorrows, not making others sorry, but
made sorry passively. And so in Dan. 9. 23. It is said Daniel was a man of
desires, that is, not a man desiring other men, or other things, not actively
desiring, but passively, desired, beloved of God exceedingly. So it is said of
Jeremiah, Jerem. 15. 10. he was a man of strife, not a man striving with
others, but a man striven with. So in 1 King. 2. 26. A man of death, that is,
not killing others, but to be killed himself. It is taken more frequently in
the passive sense; and we may more boldly take it so. A man of reprofs, that
is, reproved again and again, that has received diverse reproofs, and yet
hardens his own neck, shall suddenly he destroyed and that without remedy.
Here I might observe by the way, this point of Doctrine, That,

The Lord does not destroy man willingly.

He says not, A man shall be destroyed without remedy; but a man The Lord does
not destroy men willingly. God destroys not but for sin.
when he has sinned against God, when he had committed sin, and not only so,
but when he is reproved for his sin, and goes on. The Lord does not destroy a
man nakedly, but upon consideration of sin. Willingly the Lord does not afflict
any, Lament. 3. Mercy and punishment they flow from God, as the honey and the
sting from the Be; the Be yeildeth honey Simile.
of her own nature, but she does not sting, but when she is provoked: So the
Lord is gracious, and good, and favorable, and kind, and blesses his people
from his own nature, but he does not punish, and plague, and destroy, but being
provoked by sin and iniquity. I will not stand to follow this point, I let it
go.

The text it self contains the great mercy of God in lending a man a reproof.
Observation 1. A great mercy to be reproved


And what a great sin it is, what a great ill it is for a man to sin against
his reproof. The greatness of the ill is set down two ways.

First, by the great sinfulness of the thing, it is called the hardening of a
man's own neck.

Secondly, by the greatness of the punishment that God inflicts upon this sin,
and that is, he will destroy him, and that without remedy.

For the first, namely, what a great mercy it is for God to let a man be
reproved for his sins. It may be proved by many places of Scripture only, I
find Scripture is to be brought as an aggravation of sin, when they sinned
against reproof, Hosea 5. 1. says he, they are profound to commit sin, though
I have been a rebuker of them all. As if he should say, Though I have been so
merciful, as to show them the danger of sin, to tell them what would become of
their wretched courses; though I have called them to repentance, and have given
them warning what would be the issue of these things; yet for all this, for all
my mercy, they have gone on in their sins, though I have reproved them. This
Though is a word of aggravation, as we see in the speech of Daniel to
Belshazzar; Thou, O King, have not humbled thy self, though thou knew this:
as if he had said, though the Lord let thee know the punishment upon thy
father, and the plagues of Nebuchadnezzar thy grandfather, though the Lord have
let thee understand what it is for thee to exalt thy self against him; yet thou
art not humbled; he aggravates his sin; So, this aggravates a man's sin, when he
goes on, notwithstanding he is reproved.

The Reasons are;

First, because when God reproves a man of sin, the reproof primarily comes
Reason 1. Reproofs come from love.
out of love; therefore when he reproved Laodicea, and told her she was
lukewarm, and said, I would thou were either hot or cold, and since she was
neither, he would spue her out of his mouth; he tells her whence the reproof
flowed; because I love, I reprove: As many as I love, I rebuke, Revel. 3. 19.
It is not out of ill will that I tell thee of thy lukewarmnesse, and threaten
to spue thee out of my mouth; I tell thee these things that thou may avoid
that ill; I say, Gods reproofs flow primarily from love to men, whereby he
would have them lay aside their wretched courses, and avoid the judgments.
Nay, it is an argument of hatred, when a man does not reprove his brother of
sin. If God let a man go on in sin, and never tell him of his drunkenness, nor
never find fault with his pride and security, never convince him, or wound, or
touch him, nor deal with him about his unsettled estate, and his rotten
conditions, It is a sign God hates the man: But when God reproves a man from
day to day, Man thou art a proud creature, thou shall to hell for thy pride,
and hypocrisy, and security, and hardness of heart: When the Lord reproves a
man from day to day, this is an argument of love; the other is an effect of
hatred, not to reprove; Thou shall not hate thy brother in thy heart, says
Moses, but shall in any wise reprove him, and not suffer sin to be upon him,
Levit: 19. 17. Thou hate thy brother when thou see him sin, and do not
warn him; and know he is guilty of sinful courses, and do not reprove
him; and when thou have time, and place, and opportunity, and fit circumstances
to reprove, and yet thou will not do it, it is a sign thou hate thy brother;
it is the greatest degree of hatred on them. If a man deny food for the body,
and let a man rather dye of hunger, than he will give him meat, or let a man
fall into a pit, rather than he will prevent the mischief, a man is guilty of
bodily murder: but thou art guilty of the soul of thy brother, if thou let him
fall into sin. Thou think thy brother is harsh, he will not bear Prove. 10.
17.
with thee, he is hasty and testy: no, thou art in an error, That man that
hates reproof, erreth, says Solomon. Indeed a man should not be too sharp, but
first tell his brother in private that he is in an error: for, reproof is a
means of grace, it flows from great love, it is the providence of God that has
cast it about, that thou should have reproof given thee; if thou have a
heart to take it. It is an argument of love.

Another reason is taken from the primary end of reproof, which is to bring
Reason. 2. They tend to good.
a man to good, to reduce him into a right way, to convert a man, to save his
soul, that is the primary end of reproof and admonition: therefore to go in
sins contrary to it, must needs be a great evil. As Solomon brings in the
wisdom of the Father, Jesus Christ, calling upon people, O ye fools, how long
will ye love folly? turn at my reproof. Mark what follows, to what end; I will
pour my spirit on you. There is the end he tells them, O ye fools, wretched
people without understanding, that go on in sin, and harden your own hearts,
that repent not, nor turn not to God, that will not submit to his wisdom, nor
embrace his word: ye fools, that wrong your own souls, Oh turn at my reproof.
Why? This is the reason that God reproves a man on this fashion, it is, that a
man may have the Spirit of God granted him. If thou have an ear to hear
reproof, and a heart to drink it in, and to wear it as a crown of gold on thy
head, and as a chain about thy neck, thou should have the Spirit of God for
thy labor: the Lord reproves thee that thou might return back, and have the
Spirit, and have mercy and forgiveness. This is all the ill will that Gods
Ministers bear thee, and all the hatred that reprovers show, when they tell
thee of thy sins whatsoever they be, that they may stop thy steps from going
down to Hell.

When the Lord sends thee Sermon upon Sermon, Preacher after Preacher, thou art
called on day by day, (as you hear in this place) This is the infinite
goodness of God toward your souls; therefore your sin is infinite great if
you do not amend, as the wise man says, He that hates reproof shall surely
dye, Prove. 15. 10. there is no remedy for that man. That man that puts off
repentance, God reproves him from day to day, on the Sabbath day, and on the
week days; he goes to this man and here he is reproved, and to another, and
there he is reproved, and yet he goes on in his deadness and formality in the
ordinances of God, that man shall surely dye, there is no remedy, he sins
against the infinite mercy of God.

Thirdly, there is no reason in the world why reproof should be taken Reason 3.
It is brutish to reprove them.
otherwise than with all willingness, and thankfulness, and cheerfulness. If
a man have but the reason of a man in him; he must needs take reproof in good
part; he must be a beast that does not judge well of him that reproves him*
There is an excellent place, Prove. 12. 1. He that puts off reproof is brutish;
he that hates reproof is the brute, that man has no reason in him. Art thou a
swearer, and art reproved for it? thy brother tells thee thou will be damned
for it; Do thou chafe at that man? thou art a beast, thou have no more
understanding than an Ox or Simile.
an Ass. As it is with a horse, when the Ostler comes to rub him, he kicks
with his heel, when he only beats of the dirt, he lifts up his hinder leg on
him, and it may be wounds him so thou have no more understanding than a beast,
that finds fault with one that reproves thee for thy sins. So that whatsoever
thy sin be, he that tells thee of it, there is no reason in the world but that
he should be a dear man to thee. Me thinks of all men under heaven, godly
Ministers that are faithful in their place and calling, should be the dearest
men to you upon the face of the earth. Why? because they reprove you, and tell
you of your sins, and what will become of your souls, what will be the issue
and Catastrophe of all you ways. You that come to Church every day, may read a
Lecture in the Word of God, what will be your doom at the last day: you are
told of your pride, and adultery, of your whoredom, and oaths, carnal
Gospellers of their secure and carnal condition, and common professors of their
formality, and other lusts that men are given to; you are told of all: I say,
the feet of Gods messengers should be beautiful, you should hug the
messengers, and put their reproofs in your bosoms, and let them have power and
efficacy on your souls; and go and put them in practice.

The Use of this is;

First, is it so, that it is the infinite mercy of God to reprove men of their
sins, to tell them of whatsoever is amiss in their hearts and lives? Use 1.
The misery to want reprovers.
let me tell you, First, see here what an infinite punishment God is bringing
upon that kingdom when he is taking away reprovers from them: when God takes
away reprovers, he takes away all mercy and loving kindness. Therefore God
when he threatened to deliver up Judah, to curse that Kingdom, to plague them
for their rebellion, and utterly to give them over, he says, he will take away
the reprover; says he to the Prophet, Thou shall be dumb and not open thy
mouth, thou shall not be a reprover to this people, Ezekiel. 2. 26. When the Lord
would curse that people; and bind them over to a reprobate sense, and deliver
them to wrath, the Prophet shall not be a reprover, he silences the Prophet. Or
as Piscator thinks, the anger of God silenced him, or confined him to his Or
Angel.
house, that he should not prophecy. So when God silences his Ministers, that
he takes them from a place, or threatens to take them away, it is a sign of
heavy vengeance toward such a people. It may be wicked people laughed at them,
and made it a matter of nothing, they were glad that Ezekiels mouth was gagged,
and it were no matter if the country were rid of a company of Puritans; though
they had no such word then, they had as bad, they think all is well: but the
time will come, that they will curse the day that ever they provoked God to
take away their Ministers, we enjoy them by the mercy of God, other places have
lost them God knows how soon we may lose ours. In Hosea 4. 4. the Lord, there,
when he would set out the desperate estate of the children of Ephram delivers
them up to such a state and condition, that none should reprove them, Let none
reprove another. If they will sin, let them: if they will go on in Idolatry,
let them; If they will harden their own hearts, let them; if they will dye in
sin, let them; if they will perish, and be damned for ever, let them. Let no
man reprove another. It is a lamentable state.

Generally, people are glad when the Land is swept of all the good Ministers,
and the good servants of God: they had rather hear a fine song in a pulpit, of
one that preaches morally, or it may be preaches his own self, or the like;
but the time will come, when they shall say as Solomon says, It is better to
hear the reproof of the wise than the song of fools, Ecclesiastes 7. 5. people
love alife to hear the song of fools. When a fool comes up and preaches, At
what time soever a sinner shall repent him of his sin: And, be not just
overmuch; and what need such a do? Here is more puther than need, and abuse
places, and wrest Scripture. As for example, the thief on the Cross was saved
at the last with a word or two; and they bring the example of the Publican,
that cried, God be merciful to me a sinner, and went justified to his house
rather than the Pharisee that made long prayers. And rush, what need men be so
zealous, and precise, and puritanicall? Whosoever calls upon the name of God,
shall be saved: people love alife such songs of fools: but the time shall come
when peoples eyes shall be opened, and their consciences awakened, and then
they will wish, O that we had heard the reproof of the wise!

The second use makes against those that despise the reproof of the wise, ye
Use 2. Against despisers of reproof.
despise not men but God; ye have despised me, Prove. 1. 30. You think you
despise a poor Minister, he is strict, and harsh with your souls, and presses
these things upon your consciences, and it may be, more than he has warrant to
do: so you think you do not despise God, but only the Minister: Nay, says
Christ, you have despised my reproof. When you despise them that Christ sends,
you despise him. This is an express and an explicit sign of a man's
everlasting destruction, when he despises reproof, as in that speech of the
Prophet to Amaziah, I know that the Lord has determined to destroy thee:
because thou have not hearkened to my reproof, 2. Chron. 25. 16. So I may say,
I know that God has determined to destroy a Nation, a City, or people, when
they will not take counsel of Gods Messengers, when they will not hearken to
instruction. They have been called upon, national sins have been ripped up,
parochial sins have been spoken of, yet when they are told, they will not be
reproved. We that are the Ministers of God, know that God will destroy as many
as turn not at reproof. I let this pass.

I should now show the grievousnesse of this ill of standing out against
reproof: it is expressed two ways;

First, in the sinfulness of it, to harden a man's heart. The grievousnesse of
standing out against reproof.


Secondly in the punishment; He shall be destroyed without remedy. And in the
destruction you may see here,

First, the unexpectedness of it, He shall be destroyed suddenly.

Secondly the totalnesse of it, He shall be destroyed. The word signifies to
shatter all in pieces.

Thirdly, the irrecoverablenesse of it, without remedy.

Fourthly, the suitableness of it, his punishment is according to his sin.
Mark, as he hardened his own heart against God, so God will harden his heart
against him; as no remedy would turn him from his sin, so no remedy shall turn
God from his wrath: As his sin was in hardening his heart like a stone, so God
shall deal with him as a stone is dealt with, he shall destroy him. The word in
the original signifies broken to pieces as a stone is broken, that is, the
Lord will deal with him just in his own kind. Hence I might observe this
doctrine, that,

The Lord proportions punishments to men's sins.

Just as a man's sin is, so is the punishment. David sinned in numbering Doct.
God proportions punishments to sins.
the people 2 Samuel 24. 15. and God punished him in that; Pharaoh sinned in
destroying and drowning the males of the Israelites; God smote his first born:
He drowned their babes, and he himself was drowned in the sea. I might bring
abundance of examples.

Now the Reasons of this are

First, because hereby a man's punishment appears to be so much the more equal
and worthy. Retaliation is a most equal punishment to the sin; Reas. 1. To
show the equity of punishment.
there is no inequality in it but this, that it is too merciful, An eye for an
eye, and a tooth for a tooth, burn for burn, wound for wound. You know an eye
is equal for an eye: so when God punishes a man just in his own kind, quid
for quo, that as there was no remedy would turn him from his sin, so there
shall be no remedy shall turn God from his wrath. Herein Gods punishment
appears the most equal, Revelations 16. 5. 6. Thou art righteous, O Lord, in
that thou judge thus, for she has shed the blood of thy Saints, therefore
thou have given them blood to drink, for they are worthy. Thou thirstedst after
blood, there it is for thee: so this is most equal, when men have dealt thus
and thus with God, when God shall deal so and so with them, they cannot find
fault. When a man drinks as he brews, and reaps as he sows, and finds as he
brings, what inequality is here? It shall come to pass, that as when I called
they would not hear, so when they call I will not answer, Zach. 7. When God
calls upon thee, and thou will not hear, afterward when thou call for
mercy, if he do not hear thee, it is just.

Secondly, another reason is, because this stops a man's mouth, it convinces a
man's conscience; when a man's conscience finds that he is served in his own
kind, that he is paid in his own coin, it stops his mouth Adonibezck, he had
cut off the thumbs and toes of 70 Kings: afterward he was served just so as he
had dealt with others; he had cut off their thumbs and toes, and made them
gather orts under his table, so afterward his thumbs and toes were cut off.
Now mark what his conscience says, Judge. 1. 7. As I have dealt, so God has
dealt with me. As if he had said, God knows wherefore the children of Judah
have done this: they know not why they cut off my thumbs, and the reason why
they cut off my toes: God knows what they looked at in punishing me thus: but
Gods just providence has dealt thus with me, in this kind I served others.
This is so palpable a punishment, so equal and just, that though the sin were
committed twenty years ago, yet a man's conscience will find out his sin twenty
years after. As Joseph's brethren sold him, and after cast him into a pit, two
and twenty years after, when Joseph was harsh with them, see what their
conscience says; Doubtless we are guilty of our brothers blood, when we saw
the anguish of his soul, and he besought us, and we would not hear. As if they
had said, What is the matter why the man is thus harsh? He never saw us before,
why should he be so harsh, and we be strangers? Nay, says conscience, you are
well served, remember you were harsh to your brother, if you dealt so with him,
marvel not if you be dealt so with. And after, when they came to their Inn,
and found their money, they wondered, What is this that God has done? Their
conscience, I warrant you, hit them in the teeth: without doubt they thought
the money that they took for selling of their brother had haunted them as a
Ghost; did not we pay the man money for his corn that we bought? Nay, says
conscience, you are rightly served, here is the money you sold your brother
for, (though it were not so) without doubt conscience upbraided them. Naturally
we are apt to find fault with Gods judgments, and quarrel, but when
conscience sees the equity of them, we have nothing to say.

Thirdly, all the standers by may see the equity of it, when the punishment is
according to the sin: Nay, Divinity makes this Argument; that there is a God to
judge the earth, because men are punished in their own kind. I will show you
one example of Abimelech, that wretch, that slew seventy of his brethren upon
one stone, Judge. 9. 7. afterward when he came to stand under the Tower of Abel,
a woman flung a piece of a millstone upon his head, and killed him: This was
strange, all the standers by might say, that Abimelech should be killed with a
stone: no question the woman thought nothing, she flung the stone because she
had nothing else to fling; it was strange that it should hit him so pat, it
might have hit another as well as him, the stone might have fallen to the
ground as well as on him; and that it should be by a woman, and a millstone too:
Milstones are not used on the top of a Tower, and a millstone broken that a
woman could lift it, and that he should be killed by a millstone and not with a
sword, nay, might all the standers by say, This God has done, he was the son
of a strange woman, and a woman has killed him; he killed his brethren upon
one stone, and now a stone has killed him; all the world might be able to say;
This God has done.

The Use of this is,

First, let no creature in the world complain of Gods dealing, if he punish us
according to our kind: he that kills with the sword shall be killed with the
sword. He that stops his ears from hearing the poor, what shall his punishment
be? He shall cry and not be heard. He that shows no mercy, how shall he be
punished? He shall receive no mercy, James 2. 13. Woe to thee that spoyledst,
and wast not spoiled* when thou ceasest spoiling, others shall spoil thee, Isa
33. 2. Judge not, (says Christ,) what if I do? Then thou shall be judged. Thus
God recompenceth the fruit of a man's doing. Here is no Momus can complain; no
Aristarchus, that can find fault with the justice and judgment of God.

Secondly, It is not amiss to consider and see how God proportions punishments
to sins.

In Kind, Quantity, Quality, Time, Place, and other Circumstances.


In Kind; He shall eat the fruit of his own ways, that is, he shall be
punished in kind. It is a similitude from a tree, every tree brings forth
according to its own kind; if it be an Apple Tree, it brings forth Apples; if a
Crab-tree, Crabs; a Pear Tree, Pears; So every sinner shall be punished in
their kind, a Minister shall be punished in his kind, wicked Masters in their
kind, Servants in theirs, Rich in theirs, poor in theirs: If a man be a
drunkard, he shall be punished in one kind; if he be an adulterer, in another:
Every man shall eat the fruit of his own ways. Every sin brings an homogeneal
punishment, according to the nature of it. I cannot stand to follow this,
though it he very clear in Scripture.

Secondly, it is in Quantity God proportions the punishment according to the
sin; he that sowes sparingly, shall reap sparingly; but he that sowes
bountifully, shall reap bountifully. Little sins, little punishments; and great
sins, great punishments. There are little sins, moat sins, gnat sins, and there
are Camel sins; so there are little and great punishments, some meet with many,
some with fewer stripes. Just according to a man's sins, so the Lord shapes out
the punishment, for great sinners, great plagues, and for every one according
to his own measure. God has a pair of balances that he means to weigh men in:
As he weighed Belshazzar, so he will weigh thee, and look how much sin thou
put in one scale, so much punishment God will put in the other; He will not
abate thee one oath, not one idle thought, not one breach of the Sabbath, not
one neglect of hearing the Word, or of other duties: the Lord will put wrath in
one balance, as thou put sin in the other; he will make the scales even to
a hair: as he dealt with Belshazzar, He will lay righteousness to the line,
and judgment, to the plummet, and weigh thee out in the scales, and thou shall
have just according to thy sins.

As the Lord deals with his own people, he will not abate so much as a cup of
cold water, but it shall be rewarded; he will reward all, from the greatest to
the least: so he will deal with the wicked, there shall no sin pass
unpunished.

Again, there is a proportion in the Quality. If Adam sin in eating, he shall
be punished in eating; if the women of Judah sin in apparel, they shall be
punished in apparel, Isa 3. 24. In Wis. 11. 16. A man shall be punished in that
that he sins in. If Absalom sin in his hair, he shall be punished in it;
Nebuchadnezzar might find his sin in his brutish condition, and the Prodigal
might find his sin in the Hog*trough: so if thou find thy self in want,
consider if thou have not wasted thy means: if thou have not been vain in
building, and prodigal in spending, or gaming or unnecessary bounty, and im
moderate liberality beyond thy means: Art thou punished in thy Trade, or
Children? etc. see if thou have not sinned in them, for where there is sin, God
will proportion the punishment to the sin.

Fourthly, God proportions the punishment to the sin in regard of the time. The
same hour that Belshazzar was drinking and quaffing in the Temple, the same
hour the hand of God was upon him; if it be not upon thee the same hour, it may
be to morrow at the same hour. It may be thou have sinned this day at such an
hour, it may be God may strike thee to morrow at the same time, or this day
seven-night, it may be the next year. Nebuchadnezzar was warned of his pride
this year and the same time twelvemoneth the Lord drove him from among men. So
in Acts 13. 42. one Sabbath day the Jews heard Paul preach and went out before
the Sermon was quite done, they were not able to stand to the blessing; the
same day seven-night the Lord made the Apostles shake off the dust of their
feet against them, and leave them to a reprobate sense.

Fifthly, the Lord proportions his punishments to the place. It is strange many
times, that the drunkard should get his death in the same Alehouse where he got
his liquor. In Judge. 7. in that story of Oreb and Zeeb, Oreb at the rock Oreb
devised against the children of Israel, and upon the same rock he was killed;
And Zeeb another persecuter of the Children of God; so the Psalmist calls them,
he at the Wine press of Zeeb took victuals from the children of Israel, and in
the same place his own life was taken away.

Just as Judges and Magistrates at this day, they hang up men where they have
done the villainy. As they do with Dogs and Cats, they carry them to the place,
to the Cellar or the Buttery where they do the mischief. But the beasts
themselves though they have no reason, are able to pick out the meaning of it.
The Lord punishes sinners in the same place. Here where thou have been deaf to
hear the word of God, when thy heart rises against the Preacher, in the same
place, it may be the Lord will deliver thee up to a reprobate sense. In the same
place, at the Lords Table, where thou come unworthily, thou shall eat and
drink thine own damnation.

THE NECESSITY OF SELF-DENIAL. In a SERMON By that laborious and faithful
Messenger of CHRIST, WILLIAM FENNER, Sometimes Fellow of Pembroke Hall in
Cambridge, and late Minister of Rochford in Essex.

London, Printed by E. T. for John Stafford.

Practical DIVINITY: OR, GOSPEL LIGHT: Shining forth In several choice
SERMONS, on diverse Texts of Scripture.

Viz. 1. The Misery of earthly thoughts, on Isa. 55. 7.

Viz. 2. A Sermon of Self-denial, on Luke 9. 23.

Viz. 3. The efficacy of importunate Prayer, in two Sermons, on Luke 11. 9.

Viz. 4. The necessity of Gospel-obedience, in two Sermons, on Colos. 1. 10.

Viz. 5. A Caveat against late Repentance, on Luke 23. 24.

Viz. 6. The Sovereign virtue of the Gospel, on Psalm. 147. 3.

Viz. 7. A Funeral Sermon, on Isa. 57. 1.

Preached by that laborious and faithful Messenger of CHRIST, WILLIAM FENNER,
Sometimes Fellow of Pembroke Hall in Cambridge, and late Minister of Rochford
in Essex.



London, Printed by E. T. for John Stafford.

THE MISERY OF Earthly Thoughts.
ISA. 55. 7. Let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his
thoughts and let him return unto the Lord, etc.
I Have heretofore begun the Doctrine of the Thoughts of men; Now I desire to
finish it. Whence we had this Point: that

Those whose minds run habitually on earthly Doctrine:
things, are yet in the state of misery.

First, Because a man is in the state of misery till he has repented: Now,
until a man have forsaken his old thoughts, that man has not repented. Oh
Jerusalem, wash thy heart, Jer. 4. 14. A man must not only ^id himself of vain
thoughts, but he must wash his heart clean, with this Emphasis, That he may be
saved: No salvation without this. How long shall vain thoughts lodge within
thee?

2. As a man is in the state of misery, till he have repented, so also till he
is in Christ. Now when a man is led by his own vain thoughts, his thoughts
being not sanctified; so long that man is not in Christ. If he were in Christ,
Christ would sanctify his thoughts. I but, may some man say, He has wronged
me, ergo, I will think thus and thus* Nay, but Christ casts down the strong
holds, and if thou will not yield, Christ will cast thee off; but if thou
belong to Christ, he will cast all down before thee.

3. That man is in the state of misery, that does not love God, that walks not
with God in his thoughts, Thou shall love the Lord thy God, etc. Mat. 22. 37.
So I do, says one, and yet I think on my vanities too: And thus carnal men
think they love God. But if thou love God with all thy heart, thou love him
with all that is in thy heart; for what is a man's heart, but the purposes of
his heart? Now if a man give not over vain purposes, he loves not God with all
his heart.

4. That man that cannot forsake sin, is in the state of misery, and can
never enter into life, (see the Text) the wicked must forsake his ways. A man
must deny his own words, and speak according to Gods own warrant: the actions
of men's lives are the ways of their thoughts; the Tongue must not only forsake
his way, but the Heart his way also; else a man is a wicked man, Prove. 13. 26.
He is wicked whose thoughts are not sanctified. But what will men say? shall we
be condemned for a thought? words are small sins, and thoughts are less: Must
a man then so strictly look to his thoughts? I will make it plain, that for a
man to be vainthoughted, is a grievous sin;

1. Because if the sin of vain thoughts be pardoned, it will ask abundance of
mercy.

Mark the Text, Abundantly pardon: No repentance, no mercy, no abundance of it;
ergo, it is not so small as the world takes it to be.

2. Thoughts are the sins of the highest part of a man; for they are the sins
of the heart; and surely the sins of the chiefest part are greater then any
other. A King counts it not much for a Rogue to steal by the ways side, but
for a Knight or a Nobleman it is a foul matter: So the Lord would not have the
lordly part to sin against him; He would not have the tongue, much less the
heart, that is, the Kingly part of a man, to transgress. And this is the
reason why Deborah calls them great thoughts of heart* Judge. 5. 15. Sins in
thought, are great sins: the Heart is the Lady, the mistress, or highest part
of a man; and He that has made us, looks that we should serve him with the
Master-part; That must be afforded him.

3. Because thoughts are breaches of every Commandment; Other sins are but
against one, but all the Commandments condemn vain thoughts. The first
Commandment says, Thou shall have no others Gods but me; But thou set^est an
Image up in thy heart, when thou think of thy pleasures, etc. So, Thou shall
keep holy the sabbath day: Now if thou think thine own thoughts that day, thou
breakest this commandment; and so of all the rest: The sin of thought is
therefore a heinous sin.

4. Because they are the strength of a man's heart and soul, the firstborn of
original corruption. A man by nature is a child of wrath, a soul and a body of
death. Now what does the heart first break out in? It first shows it self in
its thoughts; and if it be the firstborn, it must needs be the strengh: as
Jacob said to Ruben his firstborn, he was his strength; and therefore all
Lord-ship lies in the heart; A man may more easily part with all other sins
then with this, because the bent of the heart runs this way; the heart will
part with any sin, rather then with his pernicious thoughts.

5. Because they are the dearest acts of men. We count a man preferred, when he
is preferred to the thoughts of a man, Genesis 40. 14. Think on me, says Joseph
to Pharoahs Butler: I count it thanks enough, if thou prefer me to thy
thoughts. We prize that most, which we think most o^; That which a man scorns,
he scorns to bestow his thoughts on; but that which a man sets his heart on,
that is his dearling. Now that any thing should be dear to a man, save God,
this is a horrible sin; when a man makes his dogs his dearling, his whore his
dearling, etc. For look what thou most think on, that is thy dearling: Why?
Because thou dandlest it in thy heart; therefore it is a horrible sin for a man
not to set his heart upon God.

Objection.
But can a man live without thoughts? does Grace call us to leave thinking? then
a man must cease to be.

Answer.
Non tollit, sed attollit naturam; it takes them not away, but it takes them up.
He does not say, Let the wicked forsake thoughts, but his thoughts; let him set
them on other matters. When God calls men unto him, he is so far from taking
away men's thoughts, as that he will rather increase them. If thou be a new
creature, thou must have more thoughts; Thou art full of thoughts now; but then
thou will be fuller. Psalm. 119. 59. When David turned to God, his heart thought
upon his ways; the word in the original is, He thought on his ways on both
sides. The curious work of the Sanctuary was wrought on both sides; Common
works are wrought only on one side, but on the other side are full of ends and
sh^eds. So the Prophet looks on his way on both sides; he strives to walk
curiously, precisely, and accurately to turn himself to Gods testimonies. Ergo,
God calls not to forsake thoughts, but our thoughts; it is a hard duty for men
to forsake their own thoughts. I will make it appear thus:

First, Because it is a hard thing to reform ones self; one thing may reform
another; but here is the difficulty, for a thing to reform it self: it is an
easy matter for a man's heart to reform his tongue, but it is hard for the
heart to reform it self, in correcting its own thoughts: it is hard for a man
to deny himself. Ahel-hound may reform his tongue; but here is the difficulty,
for his heart to reform it self, for thoughts are the heart, Phil 3. 19. who
mind earthly things; thoughts of earthly things are called the mind; a man's
thoughts and his mind are all one, so that if it reform thoughts, it must
reform it self.

2. It is hard to reform thoughts, because they are partial acts; if they were
full acts, a man might reform them, rather then being partial acts: my reason
is, because they are in every action he does; thoughts run on all men's actions;
if thoughts were alone, men might mend them: but they busy themselves about
all actions; if a man pray, thoughts run along with him in prayer, nay men pray
with twisted thoughts, so that before he comes to an end of his prayer, he
shall have abundance of glancings on other things. See it in old Eli, 1 Samuel 1.
Hanna was praying; Old Eli says the Text, thought she had been drunken. Either
he was, or should have been praying also; yet you see he had wandering thoughts
quod mark the lips of his neighhours. So, as John was preaching, Mat. 3. there
came a thought into his hearers hearts, that they were the seed of Abraham.
What did make them think so? John spoke of no such matter; but he said, Every
tree that brings not forth good fruit, etc. They had, it seems, by thoughts in
the duty of hearing; therefore seeing thoughts do thus twist themselves about
men's actions, hence it is that they are so hard to be rooted out.

3. It is hard for men to forsake their own thoughts, because they are in men's
hearts, Their inward thoughts, Psalm. 49. 11. Every man has two kind of
thoughts, inward, and outward; explicit, and implicit; implicit thoughts are
those that never show themselves in the heart, but at some desperate attempt;
Explicit, are those which are in the heart every day: as in Psalm. 49. 11. They
think their houses shall continue for ever. Would you think that men should
have such thoughts? their outward thoughts were, they were mortal; We see
(says the Text) that men die, etc. and yet they they think inwardly that they
shall live for ever. Now according to these inward thoughts men act; and hence
it is that men neglect repentance, and other holy duties, as if God would never
call them to an account; they have not these thoughts above-board, but they are
inward, and these spoil the heart, and these are the cause why men cannot
forsake their own thoughts. Ephiphanius speaks of a fig tree which grew in a
wall, etc. Bad thoughts will be always seizing on a (...) he dies, and then
all his thoughts perish. But so long as a man is alive in old Adam, these
thoughts are rooted in the bottom of the (...), which hinder good duties; and
this is the cause why vanity of mind sprouts up.

Examine your selves then; for it is one of the best ways for a man to Use.
try his estate by, even to examine his thoughts. If a man would see whether
the sea be salt, he need not drink all the water that is in it; one drop will
serve his turn. So a man may see whether he be a child of God, or of the Devil,
even by his thoughts. I will make it appear by these Reasons:

First because men's thoughts are the free acts of their hearts. Many times you
speak not as you would, you do not as you would, but a man thinks always as he
will. Favor of great men, and desire to please them, makes men do many times
what they would not; but thoughts are free. I may say so, and so, but I will
think what I list: Ergo, if thou will judge a man, judge him by that he does
freely, and not by that which he does by compulsion. But now thy thoughts are
free, they are thine own act; nothing can force thy thoughts but thy self:
ergo, in them thy heart shows it self whether it be carnal or spiritual.

When Peter denied his Master, could a man have judged him by that, then he
might have judged him in Apostate: but that was his passion; he discovered what
his fear was, not what his heart was; For if a man might have but looked into
Peter's heart (though it was a fearful sin, and without Gods mercy might have
damned him) Yet there you might have heard him say, Oh it is my Master! Oh that
I had never come hither! It is my Master and Savior, I have none but he. It
was for fear of his life, that he denied him: For, Prove. 23. 7. As a man
thinks in his heart, so is he. A covetous Usurer may make a rich feast, and
say with his tongue, Sir, you are welcome; he must give good words, the shame
of the world and speech of people will make him do it; yet his thoughts it may
be are not toward thee. So try thy self, how go thy thoughts, at home or
abroad? Are thy thoughts on heaven or heavenly things, or are they below? Sure
I am if a man's thoughts were on heavenly things, then his heart would be there
also; for as a man thinks, so is he, Prove. 23. 7.

2. As they are the freest acts, so they are the immediate acts of the heart.
Can a man judge of the fountain by the water that runs seven miles off, as well
as by that which runs immediately from it? The water seven miles off, may have
tincture from the soil, and so it may be bad there, though good at the
fountains head; ergo, judge of the fountain by the water which comes
immediately from it. Now, thoughts come immediately from the heart, nothing is
between them and the heart, and out of the heart (says our Savior) proceed
evil thoughts, etc. Mark 7. 21. Other sins come from the heart too, but it
is at the second, third, or fourth hand; abundance of circumstances come
between them and the act; as in the act of murder, it may be, there were base
words offered, yea and blows too, etc. but thoughts come immediately from the
heart: Ergo, if thy thoughts be proud, carnal, etc. so act thou; if thy
thoughts carry thee away in the cares of this life, so is thy heart, etc.

3. Thoughts, they are the continued acts of the heart, a man is always doing
them. Can a man judge of an Usurer, and say he is liberal, because he makes
one great feast unto his neighbors? No; but he may say it is a Usurers feast,
a great feast.

By what a man does always, by that judge him; Thou art not always praying
etc. or in good company; but thou art always thinking good or evil thoughts,
thy thoughts are continued acts of thy heart. Can a man judge a horse for
stumbling once in a long journey? At such a place he went well and at such a
time, and always; yet perhaps once in a year he may stumble: Can you, or will
you judge him by that? No, rather judge him by that which he is always doing.
Thou art always thinking; now that is thy God which thou art always thinking
on: If on riches, then that is thy god; or whatsoever it be, then that is thy
god.

Examine then thy heart by thy thoughts; for out of the abundance of thy heart
thy mouth speaks: yea, for one word, there is abundance of thoughts, for one
good duty, there is abundance of thoughts; ergo, if thou will examine thy
heart, examine thy thoughts.

4. Thoughts are the Univocall acts of the heart, such as wherein the heart
shows its own nature. As for example, the Univocal act of Light is to lighten
the room, but now you cannot judge of the Light by the heat, so well as you may
by the shining. So an ill savor must be judged of by the stinking, which is
the univocal act of it: It causes abundance of other effects, but this is the
proper act whereby it shows it self. So the thoughts of men are the univocal
acts of their hearts; therefore in Scripture called the way of the heart: just
as the heart is, so are the thoughts: if the heart be proud, so are the
thoughts: just according to the nature of the heart, so are the thoughts.

5. They are the swiftest acts of the heart. If I judge of a Scholar, I will
judge him by that which he does extempore: if a fool study, he may speak to
purpose; but look what a man does by his own inclination, that a man discovers
himself to be. Thoughts are the extempore acts of the heart; if thy heart be
heavenly, it will scatter out heavenly meditations; if carnal, then thy
thoughts are carnal: thoughts are as the visions in the night, ergo we use
this proverb, his thoughts are gone a sutering. If then they be the swiftest
acts of men's hearts, then are they most ^it to express the nature of the heart.

6. Thoughts are the peculiar acts of the heart, peculiar to God only: the
world may see what thy outward life is, but thy thoughts God only sees; neither
Angel, Devil, nor Man can see them: and as they are peculiar to Gods eye, so he
most regards what men's thoughts are; and therefore the best way for a man to
judge himself, is, to judge himself that way which God does, even by his
thoughts. The The Lord knows the thoughts of man, Psalm. 94. 11. Examine your
selves in this then, concerning your thoughts, whether they be metamorphosed,
or no: a man may say, he has good thoughts of God; but let him examine himself
whether it be so or no.

7. Thoughts are the conscionable acts of the heart; they are the greatest
accusers, or excusers of the heart: they are Consciences Nose, as we may so
speak: True it is, the words of the tongue, and the actions of the hands, are
all in the light and ^ight of the conscience; but the nearer a thing is unto
the conscience, the more able it is to judge of the conscience: And therefore
St. Paul puts the accusing, or excusing, especially on the thoughts, Romans 2. 15.

We grant, a wicked man may have good thoughts, but they are thoughts
descending, not ascending; they are cast into the heart by God, not raised out
of the hear. Moses thought in his heart to visit his brethren, Acts 7. verse
23. Good thoughts grow out of the heart of the godly, they come from the bottom
of it: a wicked man may have good thoughts cast into his mind, but he will
fling them out again.

Secondly, we grant wicked men may have good thoughts; but examine whether they
close with the heart or no; all the proper thoughts of a man, are the
possessions of the heart, Job 17. 11. They take hold of the heart, and they are
at home in the heart. Here then examine thy heart, whether the thoughts of God
close with thy heart: Does repentance close with thy heart? do thou think of
death, and do the thoughts thereof make thee die daily? Or do thou think of
death, and do thou not love to be holden with that thought? Do thou think
of hell, and will thou not be holden with that thought of hell, but thy thoughts
are on thy pleasures? So then, if thy thoughts close not with thy heart, it is
nothing to the purpose.

Thirdly, there may be good thoughts in thy heart, but it is questionable whether
good thoughts, or no; if they come out of due season, it is nothing to the
purpose: If a Printer print never so well, and make never so good letter; yet
if he place one word where another should stand, he marrs all: So, good
thoughts, if they be seasonable, and in their proper place, they are the
effects of the Spirit; but if out of season they may be the thoughts of
reprobates: As if thou be at at Prayer, and then to be thinking of a Sermon, is
nothing to the purpose. They must be seasonable, and bring forth fruit in due
season, Psalm. 1. 3. When thou art at prayer, thou must have thy thoughts
suitable to thy prayer; for if thy thoughts be never so good, yet if they be
not seasonable and suitable to the action thou have in hand, they are not
actions of grace; grace cannot away with them.

Fourthly, thou have good thoughts in thy heart, but the question is whether
they be counseled thoughts, such as thou have determined to think on. Thoughts
are called the counsels of a man's heart, 1 Cor. 4. 5. it may be thou may
stumble on a good thought now and then, it may be when thou art swearing, thou
w^lt say, God forgive me: when thou have been drinking all the day, it may be a
good thought steps in and cries God mercy, but thou go not to school to
learn the art of meditation, or the science of holy thinking, or to say with
David, O God my heart is fixed.

Now, if that sin in thought be so great a sin, this should teach us what a
horrible sin it is to sin indeed; therefore thoughts are the smallest sins, in
respect of scandal, and the Psalmist makes it an argument of Gods quicksighted
power to see thoughts, thou see my thoughts afar off, you will say that man
is quick-sighted that can see a pins head a 100 miles off: even so God sees
thoughts; if a pins point can stab a man, then a sword can much more. Now if
thoughts be so heinous and capital a sin, how fearful a sin is it to commit
sin in deed? for thee to swear, to lie, to commit adultery, to keep wicked
company, to mock at Gods people, to live in coveteousnesse, etc. this is to
commit in deed; if small sins be so damnable, what then are the greatest? If
the chockatrice in the egg be such poison, what will it be when it is hatched?
thought sins are imperfect compared with words or acts following them: yet are
they perfect in their kinds.

It Is a wicked distinction to say that some sins are Contra legem or Praeter
legem; for all sins are against the Law, as St. James says, when lust is
conceived it brings forth sin, and ^in when it is finished it brings forth
death: thou that art a drunkard, thy sin is finished: thou art a true sinner in
deed, if thou live in the execution of any sin.

Again, sins in thought are simple sins: but sins in deed are compounded, if
after thoughts follow suitable act; but when it is in deed, it may be the cause
of a 1000 sins: for a man to think too much of his belly is a sin: but for a
man to be drunken, this is abundance of sins: for it is an abuse of Gods
creatures, a spending of his substance, a weakening of his parts, a scandal to
others, etc. Sin in deed is a sin with an addition: sin in deed is an impudent
sin^ see Isaiah 65. 2, 3. etc. that man is impudent with a witness that will
commit sin in deed, for he is neither ashamed of Gods nor man's presence; if
any man be a desperate sinner, this is he.

Object.
But it may be objected, how then can thoughts be said to be such sins, even
sins of the highest part of a man?

Sol.
I answer, a Thief or Rogue has burnt a man's dwelling house, yet he may
proceed further and burn his stable too; a 1000 pound and a shilling are more
then a 1000 pound; Sins in thought are included within sins in deed. The souls
part of sin is the greatest part of sin; Now thoughts are the souls part of
sin; yet sins in deed must needs be worse in regard of the progress of sin,
and also because thoughts are included in them; thoughts and deeds, are more
then thoughts alone.

I exhort and desire you therefore to consider;

First what great reason you have to set your thoughts on God. God himself
merited this duty at your hands, God has taken a number of thoughts for us.
Innumerable are thy thoughts O God to us ward. Ps. 40. 5. the Lord thinks on us
from the Cradle to the Cross; If the Lord should have intermitted his thought
of thee, thou could not subsist; when thou wast up, the Lord thought how to
feed thee; when thou wast in bed, he thought how to preserve thee; he does not
use to think of thee at one time and not at another, but he thinks on thee when
thou art sick, and when thou art in health, asleep or awake; the Devil else
would seize on thee. I am poor and needy, yet the Lord thinks on me, says the
Psalmist, Psalm. 40. 17. And Nehemiah says, O Lord think on me; shall we call
to God to think on us? then surely it is our duty to think on him, yea and he
may call to us for that duty.

Secondly, consider with your selves what thoughts they are which God calls
for; my son, says he, give me thy heart. Prove. 23. 26. He would feign have thy
heart, he lets thee labor with thy hands for thy living, and he lets thee have
thy feet to walk, and the rest of thy members for thy several uses, but the
Lord requires thy heart, and therefore give him the thoughts of thy heart; for
if thy neighbor come to thee for fire, thou can not give him fire, if thou
take away the heat thereof; so give the Lord thy heart, and the thoughts of it
will follow.

The Devil calls for thy heart also; ergo, reason as Joseph did when he was
tempted, how can I do this and sin against my God? my Master has delivered
into my hands all that he has, thee only excepted, and shall I take thee? how
can I do this? So the Lord has withheld nothing from thee, but thy heart;
my son (says he) give me thy heart, yet will thou deny it him with the
thoughts thereof?

Tell me you that are rich, would it be any disparagement unto you to be Gods
servants, to set your thoughts on God? True, it is the greater ill men of this
world think it some disparagement to think on these things. But I tell thee,
thou that art a Gentleman, if thou have grace, it makes thee more than a
Gentleman; grace takes not away men's honor and riches, but if he be a Knight,
it makes him more than a Knight; And as Paul said to Philemon, receive him now
a servant and more than a servant; he was a servant when he was carnal, but
now being a Christian he is more than a servant; if you have grace, it is an
addition to your riches; riches and more than riches; ergo, give your hearts to
God, and it will be the better for you.

Thirdly, the Lord has made thy thoughts thy Jewels, thy thoughts are
precious, the Lord keeps them under lock and key, he will not let any see
them; if all men should observe a man, and look into him, yet they cannot see
his thoughts; no; God has locked them up and made them thy Jewels; will thou
then cast them into the mire? will thou prefer Hawks and Hounds in thy
thoughts before God? can thou sit at dinner, and not once think of God, but
always on base pelf? why, thy thoughts are thy Jewels.

Again, A man that is wise, will be wary what companions he keeps* your
thoughts are your only companions; you never go out nor in, but your thoughts
go along with you: and for this cause Solomon would have us place the word of
God in our thoughts, Prove. 6. 22. See Psalm. 139. 15. 16. when I am awake, I am
present with thee.

Men will be careful what meat they eat, because such meat as they eat such
is their blood; and as their blood is, so is their body; now as the body feeds
on meat, so does the soul on thoughts; if we look not to our thoughts, they
will be subject to abundance of corruptions; a man must give an account of
every idle word he speaks, and thoughts are the intrinsecal words of the heart:
now if men must give an account of every idle word, then of every idle thought
also.

Let this then teach all and every one of us in the fear of God to consider our
thoughts, else our end will be destruction.

(...) A SERMON OF SELF-DENIAL.
LUKE 9. 23. And he said unto them all, If any man will come after me, let him
deny himself, and take up his cross daily and follow me.
THis Text contains the first action performed of every Christian, viz. to deny
himself; concerning which you may here see,

First, the grounds of it.

Secondly, the reasons of it.

Thirdly, the occasion of it.

Fourthly, the parts of it.

Fifthly and lastly, the necessity of it.

I intend to handle these words as they are in relation to the context.

First, the grounds of this truth, viz. that every man must deny himself. And
it is here expressed to be twofold, viz. the contrariety that is between Christ
and a man's self, me, and himself, these two terms are contradictory one to the
other; if any man will come after me, let him deny himself; these two cannot
stand together.

Secondly, the contrariety that is between self and self; if a man be in Christ
he has two selves; he has a self in himself; and a self out of himself the
self in himself is old Adam; the other in Christ, which is the new man; there
is the self-denying and self-denyed; if a man will find himself, he must lose
himself. Paul must not be found in Paul, having his own righteousness, but he
must find himself in Christ; for salvation belongs unto the Lord, Psalm. 3. 8.
And ergo, let him deny himself.

Secondly, you may see the reason of it; which is threefold.

First, Christ's own example, verse 22. the son of man must suffer, must be
rejected. Christ himself denies himself, he might have commanded himself, he
might have demanded credit, honor, or riches, etc. he might have done thus;
yet though he had no wicked self, but good self, yet he denied himself; and
therefore if we will go after Christ, we must do so too.

Secondly, here is Christ's merit, he has merited this duty; Christ did not
humble himself for himself, but he did it for us, and therefore we may well
deny our selves for him. This is included in this word And. And if I have done
this for you, I would have you do the like for me.

Thirdly, here is Christ's command too; Let him deny himself; Christ enjoynes
this to all that will come after him, Let him deny himself.

Now follows the occasion, and that is threefold.

First, Peter's offense; when Christ had told Peter and the rest of his Apostles
how that he must suffer; Peter was offended, saying, Master, favor thy self;
even like a servant that out of love to himself would be loath his Master should
be troubled, because then he thinks himself shall be troubled also; oh says
Christ, art thou offended at this? I tell thee, neither thou nor any other can
come after me unless you deny your selves. If any man will come after me* etc.

Secondly, as Peter was offended, so also were the rest of the Apostles. They
were very sorry, Matthew. 17. 22. they thought to have gotten credit in the
world, and riches and worldly preferment, and it grieved them to hear that they
must have a suffering kind of trade of it; ergo, Christ said not only to Peter,
but to them all, If any man etc.

Thirdly, like as his Apostles, so likewise he did foresee that all the world
will be offended at this; for man^ would feign have Christ and their selfwill
too; but Christ gives a watchword beforehand, If any manwill, etc.

Fourthly, The parts of it. The whole duty is this, Let him deny himself.
Chrysostom on the text says, not only deny himself, but in the original deny
away himself; nor only deny credit, etc. but abhor it; if it cannot be had
but with the loss of Christ, we must not only barely deny self-respects, but
abhor them, and trample them under our feet.

The parts of this duty are two;

First, let him take up his cross.

Secondly, let him deny himself and follow me.

The first is opposed to self-favouring, the second to self-doing.

First, let him take up his cross, let him not favor himself, he must be
content to part with selfe-means and maintenance, and selfe-ends too; he must
be content to part with all these; he that will come after me, must lose many
good friends, and many a good bit and sweet morsel to the flesh: he that will
come after me, must not stand upon these terms: suppose a cross of disgrace
come, take it up and wear it as thy crown, nay thou must be willing to take a
cross before it is offered, and when thou have it, thou must be willing to
bear it.

Secondly, he must follow me too, ones self will do as ones self would have
him; that is true; but you must follow me, not your self; look to me, and
frame your selves to walk in my steps, take up my cross, etc.

Lastly, here is the necessity of it. It is absolute true, a man may go to hell
if he be so minded, he may follow himself to hell; but if a man tender his
salvation, then here is an hypotheticall necessity, a necessity with an if.

First, if he mean to come after me, he must take up his cross and deny
himself.

Secondly, if a man would save his life, he must lose it: if he will lose it,
he shall save it. If a man will keep his old relation, he may; but if he will
find credit and life in heaven, he must deny all selferespects.

Thirdly; if a man will gain himself, let him deny himself. But what say
some, how shall we live then? how then shall I hold up my head? These men would
feign have the gain of the world, but what is a man profited, if he win the
world and lose his soul? etc. verse 25. If you stand upon these terms, if you
can baulke a commandment for selfe-respects, you may lose your souls, but if
you will save your souls, thus you must do. Again the text says, if a man be
ashamed of me and of my word, of him shall the Son of man be ashamed; ergo, if
ever you look that the Son of man should not be ashamed of you, deny your
selves.

Now for the Exposition.

Deny himself; there is the difficulty. A man cannot deny himself, 2. Tim. 2.
13. so affirmare and negare are contradictions; ergo, somewhat must be meant by
ones self: yet by ones self is not meant the Devil, as Macarius would have
it; for since man has sinued, says he, the Devil is got into him, and is as
near unto him as himself, he is another self within his own self, another
heart within his own heart: ergo, if he will come after Christ, he must forsake
the Devil; though this be true, yet, this is not the meaning of the text.

But first, a man's corrupt will, wit, reason and all a man's corrupt self must
be put off. Put off concerning the former conversation the old man, etc. Ephesians.
4. 22. which is a man's self. Viz. thou must lay aside the man that thou art,
thou must not be the same man, if thou will follow Christ, thou must be a new
self in Christ.

2. Here is not only meant a man's corrupt will, wit, reason, and affections,
but also all men's lusts and corruptions, all sins that cleave so close as if
they were himself, as fornication, uncleanness, evil concupiscence, etc.
mortify therefore your earthly members, Colos. 3. ^^. The Apostle accounts a
man's lusts as close to him as his members; for until a man be brought home to
Christ, he and his sins are all one, he must deny himself, viz, all his lusts.

Thirdly, By self is not only meant a man's corrupt self as sin and
iniquity: but also a man's good self in some respects; not only sin^ but also
Father, Mother, Children, Friends, etc. yea, life it self, all, if they be
hindrances to him from Christ, so far he must deny all these nay grace it
self; for a man may make a God of grace, or of prayer, etc. a man I say must
deny all these, so far as they are stumblings and offenses in his way to
hinder him from Christ.

But oh says one, my father will disinherit me, I must humor him, he cannot
endure a Puritan; If I must live as you would have me, I shall never have foot
of his land; so the servant says, I have a profane master and he will turn
me out of doors, if I be so precise; yea, but what says Christ? If you will
come after me, you must deny Father and Mother and all; better it were that thy
Father disinherit thee, then that Christ should reject thee; therefore you must
deny all and take up his cross, and make it thine own.

And so I come to the words, Let him deny himself. It is necessary to show
what self-seeking is, before you understand what self denial is.

By selfe-seeking, I mean a man that has a head-lust whereby he is self
conceited of himself.

There are five things in selfe-seeking.

For first, self is a head-lust.

Secondly, its a lust of self-conceit.

Thirdly, of self-will.

Fourthly of selfe-wit.

Fifthly, of selfe-confidence.

1. Self is a head-lust, it is the main lust that keeps'men from coming unto
Christ; all seek their own, not that which is Jesus Christ's, Philip. 2. 21.
What is the reason? Why, because they seek self, they follow their own
thoughts; and because they are ruled by their own selves, therefore they are
not ruled by Christ.

That it is a head-lust, I prove it by five arguments.

1. Because it is the leading lust to all lusts; no lust in the world but self
leads the dance; why is man proud, but because self would get credit? Why is a
man covetous, but because self would have means and maintenaince? Why is a man
revengefull, but because self will not put up wrongs? Christ bids us of all
lusts to take heed of self, Luke 21. 34. Christ knowing what a deceitful
thing self is, he bids us have a care of selfe-beguiling; Take heed to your
selves (says he) for if you do not, self will bring you into many noisome
lusts, as surfeiting, and drunkenness, and the cares of this life, etc, and so
that day will come upon us unawares*

2. Self is the cause of all other lusts of the heart; it is the plotter and
the ruler of all, it is the master of Arts; it was self that found out all
lusts. Self found out pride, security and coverousnesse, and all other noisome
lusts; self is loath to take the pains that God would have it, and therefore
self sets his wits on the tainters, and hence it is that Solomon says, God
made made man upright, but he (viz. self) has found many inventions, Eccles.
7. 21. Man was upright, and God was the cause. He became wicked, how? why, self
found out many inventions. Self is the inventer of all, and when self cannot
get means enough by that way which God has allowed, then self seeks out for
credit, wealth, pleasure, etc. then it devises ways of it self to get
reputation, so that self is the cause of lust.

3. Self is an inlust, it runs along through all the lusts of the flesh, there
is in every lust of the flesh an ounce of self. There would be no security in
man but that self would feign live at ease. So that as David said unto the
woman of Tekoah, Has not Joab a hand in all this? so may I say, has not self
a hand in all this? Aquinas says it is called self out of an inordinate love
that a man bears to himself, and to those things which seem good to a man's
self: A man has not only lust to pride, pleasure, etc. but a man looks also
to things for self, either for some profit for self, or credit for self; self
is always an inlust. See it in the wicked Steward, Luke 16. he said within
himself, etc. he was to be turned out of his stewardship. Now, what did he? he
said to himself, or within himself; what said he? why, he said to beg he was
ashamed, and dig he could not; self was too lazy to work, and to proud to beg,
and so he brought his masters two hundred pounds to fifty; and what was his
reason for it? why, says he, that they may receive me into their houses, verse
2. etc. and it is said, the Lord commended the unjust Steward, not as if he had
commended the sin, but as if he should say, I commend his wit.

4. It is a make-lust; a man would never break out into lust if it were not for
self. Doeg had a lust of confidence in his riches, Psalm. 52. 7. and this made
Esau comfort himself against Jacob; he had a murdering lust to comfort
himself, Genesis 27. 42. The Jews had a lust of formality to pray, to hear, to
bring offerings, to observe all the new Moons, and Ordinances of God, yet they
had no delight in these things; no, their mind was on their imaginations, they
loathed the word of God; why then would they not do this? why self was the
cause, and they thought thereby to stay themselves upon God, Isaiah, 48. 2. And
for this cause many amongst us come to Church; this is a damnable lust.

Haman would not have vaunted of being invited to the Queens banquet, but that
the Queen invited none but himself with the King; he would not have been so
willing to answer to Ahashuerus's question, but for himself; whom does the King
delight to honor more then my self, thought he? self makes a man covetous,
injurious, and full of wrongs, etc.

5. As it is a make-lust, so it is a requesting lust; Other lusts are with some
men out of date; many reprobates cannot abide drunkenness, nor pride, nor
usury; these sins are out of date; why, does a man love a niggard? why, because
self is not the better for him; he cannot get so much as a dinner by him; many
other sins may be out of date also with men* but self is never out of date, it
is always in request, and so long as men do well unto themselves, they shall
be praised, says the Psalmist. Psalm. 49, 18. he has none to make much of
himself but himself. Every man for himself and God for us all, says self. But
sometimes self is out of love; but how? why he will do no good but unto
himself; this men cannot abide; this they say is self out of his wits; but self
with the wisdom of the flesh is always in request, viz. when men will be kind
to others, that they may be kind to them again; this self the world loves alife.

2. Now I come to the second, which is self-conceit; self-seeking supposes
self-conceitednesse. There is a bird called S. a fair bird, in French it is
called the Devils bird, it is a black bird, and yet it is conceited with it
self that it is fair. By* S. I mean first the conceit a man has of himself.
What, shall I (says self) be disgraced by one that goes to plough and to cart,
and shall I put it up? No, I am a Gentleman, etc. Another says, I am such and
such a Scholar, and shall I be contented with such a poor living? these men
will bear no reproof, they will none of my counsel, Prove. 1. 30. and therefore
they shall eat of the fruit of their own way, etc. verse 31.

Secondly, when a man is conceited of himself, and of his own gifts, as
commonly women are of their beauty, and scholars of their learning. A handsome
man, and I warrant you he knows it; diligent at Church, and he knows it is
so, etc. and he thinks his case the better; nay, you shall have men so
conceited of their parts, as that they will be conceited of their wicked parts,
as Simon Magus was of his Sorcerie, Acts 8. 9.

Thirdly, when a man is self-conceited of his actions; he does as Sisera's
mothers Ladies did, when they had given their verdict of Sisera's staying; they
were presently conceited, oh what a witty answer they made her! see Judges 5.
29. 30. as if they should say, we have answered very wisely; so a man cannot
make a Sermon, but presently he is conceited, oh what a learned Sermon it was!
he cannot break a jest, but straight he is conceited, oh what a witty one it
was! nay of wicked actions; you shall hear many an old man tell what pretty
pranks (as he calls them) he played in his youth, and he tells it laughingly,
which is a sign that he is selfconceited, or else surely he would speak it with
shame and grief of heart.

Fourthly and lastly, self-conceit is when a man is self-conceited of the
estate he is in. Many a man though he be the child of hell, yet he is conceited
that he is the child of God; who with the wretch in the Gospel have conceits
that they love God and Christ, and therefore with him they will come to the
Sacraments; but Christ will say to such as he did to him, friends how came you
in hither? can you conceit your selves to be friends? get you gone into utter
darkness (i.e) into hell, says our Savior.

Now if you would know what self-conceit is, you must remember that it
contains four things.

First, where there is self conceit, there is no real worth at all; he that is
self-conceited is a base man* take that for a rule. A self-conceited fellow is
a base fellow, as we use to say; there is no real worth at all in a conceited
man; all the worth that he has, is either real as he thinks, or conceitable*
now what real worth can self have? You know what Scripture says, it is only in
imaginations of their hearts. Luke 1. 43. They it may be do imagine that they
are Gentlemen, or that they have faith, and yet God scatters these men in their
imaginations.

Secondly, as he has no real worth in himself, so he will not stand to the
judgment of those that can judge him. God can tell the worth of every thing,
but they will not be judged by him; Gods Ministers out of Gods word can tell
him, that he has no reason to think his case good; but he will not stand to
the judgment of Gods Ministers. If a Minister should come to a man and say
unto him, Sir, you are conceited that you are a good Christian, I pray what
signs have you for it? you pray, so do Reprobates; you hear the word and
receive the Sacraments, so do Reprobates; have thou no better signs than
these? no better arguments than these? Why, I tell thee that a Reprobate has
these, and more than these too. A self-conceited man will be judged by none but
by himself; A sluggard is wiser in his own conceit then seven men who can give
a reason, Prove. 26. 19. The sluggard is loath to take more pains; why, he thinks
he takes pains enough, and so he is conceited, and more he will not do; let
seven men come and tell him that he must take more pains; yet he will not, and
that because he is conceited that he does enough. Even so it is with the
sluggish Christian, he is wise in his own conceit; for let seven Ministers come
and tell him that he must take more pains for heaven, or else he will never
come there; yet he will not believe them, he is wiser then so, they are fools,
as he thinks, though he have no reason so to think; he indeed is not as he
should be, and Gods Ministers can bring reasons out of the Scriptures to prove
it; for wisdom is profitable to direct, Eccles. 10. 10. But every conceited man
is a blind man.

Thirdly, A self-conceited man as he will not stand to the judgment of those
that can judge him, so he has too high a conceit of himself; be he never so
little godly, he is presently conceited he is a child of God; so if a man have
never so little humility or patience, if he come to Church, pray or do but a
few good duties in religion, he thinks presently it is as a high wall unto him,
and he shall go to heaven cock-sure; and let other men be never so holy,
strict, religious, and pious in their ways, yet they are apt to think them
Reprobates. If he see never so little slips among them, he is presently ready
to say they are all naught; if any be false among them, he is ready to say they
are all hell hounds; but if himself be conceited that he have never so little
faith, oh presently he thinks that is a high wall.

Fourthly and lastly, he rests in the judgment of himself; and this is the
case of thousands in the world; they think well of their own cases, when they
dye they shall go to heaven, there is no question but Christ will save them,
and from this conceit they will never be put; let all the Ministers in the
world come one after another, and discover unto a wicked man his estate, yet he
will not come from his own censure; for though you bray a fool in a mortar
among wheat with a pestle, yet will not his foolishness depart from him, Prove.
27. 22. So, if you should bray these men with the threatenings of the law, with
the plagues contained in the Bible, making their consciences black and blew (as
we use to speak) yet they will not leave off their conceitednesse.

Now the Reasons hereof are four;

1. Because all sinners are fools; and the foolish shall not stand in Gods
sight, Psalm. 5. 5. All that work iniquity are fools; a self-conceited fool is
a proverb; and our Savior who knew the combination of all sins, joins pride
and foolishness together, Mark 7. 22. a proud conceited man and a fool are put
together by our Savior. And this is the cause why so many thousands in the
world are conceited of themselves, that their case is good, when it is nothing
so, even because they are fools; none but fools will look more after pelf, than
jewels, and prefer transitory things before heavenly; yet such are the wise
men of this world. That man is a fool that cannot eat his meat; and such is
every sinner; his soul has no food but Christ, the word, and his promises; yet
he knows not how to feed on them; he has no cover to hide his nakedness but
Christ, etc. yet he knows not how to put on Christ; therefore he is a fool.

Secondly men are born fools; of all fools none so self-conceited as the
born-fool; one that has been a wise man, knows how to hold his peace, but a
born fool is invincible; vain man would be wise, though he be b^rne like a wild
Asses colt, Job 11. 12. Of all creatures the foal of the Ass is the simplest;
needs then must the wild Asses colt be most simple. So although a man be born a
fool, yet he would be counted wise; he is conceited that all the Ministers in
the world cannot direct him; no, he is wise enough for that matter; this folly
is bred and borne in him, he has it by kind, and that is the reason that it is
hardly clawed off, but they are ready to say, they are as wise as the Ministers
themselves.

I call not into question the wits of many; I know many of you are
understanding men and women; but I speak now of the Wisdom of the Spirit, and
how you may understand to save your souls. What is it for a man to be
worldly-wise, to get riches and honor, and to behave himself like a
Gentleman, and yet a fool in seeking his salvation? this is to be penny-wise;
but here is the question, are you not pound-foolish? can you go on in your
sins, swearing, etc? then surely you are poundfoolish; all your wisdom and
money avails nothing; alas you are butpenny Gentlemen. The Sodomites, Genesis 19.
were blind, they could not find the door, they could see well enough else, they
were only blind in this; so man is stultus ad hoc, wise enough for any thing in
the world but this; take him for husbandry, and his knowledge is good; for
matter of carriage, he can behave himself as well as the wisest; he is only
stultus ad hoc, for salvation he is a fool, a born fool, and selfe-conceited.

3. Men are selfe-conceited of their own estate; those that praise themselves
we use to say have ill neighbors; so if a fool had a good neighbor to tell
him of his folly, and to laugh at him for it, he would not praise himself; so
he that praises himself, it is certain he has ill neighbors: so the reason
why men are well-conceited of themselves, is because they have ill neighbors,
they think they are honest, and so do their neighbors, but now if a drunkard
could go no where but that every one would tell him that he were a hel-hound,
he would not be drunk, but an ill neighbor he tells him he need not fear, by
the grace of he shall do well enough, he is a good Christian, and hence it is
that when fools are not answered according to their folly, that they are
conceited of themselves; when men are soothed up, others think well of them,
and they also think their own cases good; for say they, if I were no at good
Christian, such and such would not be acquainted with me.

Fourthly and lastly* because the Lord delivers many up to the spirit of
slumber, Romans 11. 8. Black poppy seed will cast a man into such a sleep as that
his eyes shall be broad open* and yet he not see; so the Lord has cast men
into a slumber like a man between sleeping and waking; of all sleep none like
to slumber, because it is full of imaginations; never is a man so full of
dreams as then when he is in a slumber. If a man were a drunkard and in the
deep of all evil, and ^uld in the deep sea of security, he could not be so
well-conceited; but now that his eyes are half open, half shut, half awake,
half asleep, half out, half in, he thinks his repentance is good, his case
good, and he hopes he shall find mercy at the hands of God, as well as the
best Puritan in the purish; they are like the dreamer (as Joseph's brethren
termed him) singular, in Hebrew the Master dreamer; they dream they shall have
mercy, and they shall not be damned, the^e men are in a slumber they have eyes
and see not etc. Isa. 28, they see the judgment of God, but perceive it not.

Consider what a woeful case these men are in, and how the Scripture calls this
self conceit.

First, it calls it nothing but a thinking; if a man think himself to be
something, he is nothing. Gal. 6. 3. to think thy self a Christian, is a vain
thought.

2. The Scripture calls it supposition: what a vain thing it is for a man to be
a supposing? they suppose they shall go to heaven, they suppose they are better
then others, better then those on whom the Tower of Siloam fell; and so many
suppose they are not in the gall of bitterness nor in the bond of iniquity.

Thirdly, it calls them shadows; they walk in a vain show, Psalm. 39. 6. viz.
their repentance shows as if it were good repentance. They can speak lowly,
there is a show that they are humble. Man walks in a vain show, like a
Tradesman who has abundance of things which he makes show of, yet are none of
his own: so he talks of grace which was never his own.

Fourthly it calls them imaginations; Acts 4.

Fifthly, it calls them appearances, Matthew. 6. 16. So men appear all at a
Sermon, but their hearts neverly down before the Word, there are nothing but
seemings, 1 Cor. 3. Thus you may think your selves or suppose your selves to be
in good case, when as it were better thou did appear to be a hel-hound then a
Christian, and not be so indeed; for then there were some hope that thou
would look out. If a man be sick, yet if he seem to be well, none will look
out for him, as they would do if he seemed to be sick indeed; and therefore
this is the most dangerous sickness; so if men did seem to be damned wretches,
that they were born and continue in sin, and when they dye, they must be
damned, if men feared thus, they would look out.

Secondly, consider so long as thou art well conceited of thy self, Christ has
no commission lo call thee; and Christ will do nothing but what he has
commission to do, he will not run into a Praemunire; Christ does protest to all
the world that he has no commission from his Father for such; I am not come to
call the righteous, etc. Matthew. 9. 3. viz those that are righteous in their own
esteem and thoughts, but are not; if a man tell them that they are fitter for
hell then for heaven, they are better-conceited of themselves then so; if a man
tell them for all their profession they may be helhounds, yet they concei^
better of their profession then so; now then consider what a case thou art in,
if thou be out of Christ's road.

Thirdly, as Christ has no commission, so he is glad he has not, and he gives
thanks to his Father that he put him not into commission, I thank thee O
Father, etc. Luke 10. 21. q. d. thou do not convert those that are
selfe-conceited, those that think they shall not be damned, such as conceit that
they need no summons, that are righteous enough; Father I am glad of it, etc.
and it is said there that Jesus rejoiced, etc. I rather rejoice that thou have
sent me to poor souls, such as are the offscouring of the world, etc. but he
that is selfe-conceited, is wiser forsooth then so; Christ tells thee that thou
must take up his cross; but thou think that thou have more wit, thou can
go a wiser way to work; thou have an easier way to heaven, thou will none of
the Cross; and I tell thee then that Christ will none of thee, but he will be
glad to see thee damned.

Fourthly and lastly, he is in the broad way to hell that is selfe-conceited;
there be many ways to hell; the covetous goes one way, the Drunkard goes
another, there are a thousand ways to hell; though there be sundry ways to
hell, yet they all meet in self-conceit there is the broad high way where all
meet; self-conceit is not only the way to hell but it is the brood way where
all ways meet. There is a way (says the wise man) that seems right, etc.
Prove. 14. 12. but the end of it is death; there is the wages, there all the
ways meet. Oh then examine your selves. I should give you signs and tokens to
make it appear unto you; but the time will not give me leave. I will only name
one or two. That man that selfe-swears, is conceited of himself, that is one
sign; As I am an honest man, As God shall help me, by my faith and troth, As I
look that the Lord should save my soul, etc. these men are highly conceited of
themselves, they think that their salvation is sure, yea so sure that they may
swear by it, but these are devilish and damnable self conceits; it is Gods
prerogative only to swear by himself, Heb. 6. 13. 14. I speak this because I
know it is a common practice among men, and a hellish brand of a cursed
self-conceited man.

THE EFFICACY Of Importunate PRAYER, In two SERMONS By that laborious and
faithful Messenger of CHRIST, WILLIAM FENNER, Sometimes Fellow of Pembroke Hall
in Cambridge, and late Minister of Rochford in Essex.

London, Printed by E. T. for John Stafford.

THE EFFICACY OF Importunate Prayer.
LUKE 11. 9. Ask, and it shall be given unto you; Seek, and you shall find;
Knock, and it shall be opened unto you.
OUr Savior CHRIST being demanded by one of his Disciples, how they should
pray; He here teaches them these two things. First, a Platform of prayer, in
the 2, 3, 4. verses; Say, Our Father, etc. Secondly, he teaches them the
Importunity of Prayer; which he sets forth by the similitude of a man who
having a guest come to him at midnight, and had nothing to set before him, he
went to his friend to entreat him to lend him three loaves, and at the first he
nakedly entreats, Lend me three loaves: The door is shut, says his friend, and
I cannot open it now. Secondly, he falls to entreat and to beseech him to do
him this favor. He had a guest come to him, and he knew not what to do: Why
it is midnight says he, is there no other time to come but now? Thirdly, he
begins to knock, he must needs have them, though it be at an unreasonable hour.
Why, I tell you I am in bed. Then he entreats him as a friend. Friend me no
friends, says he again. Yet the man would not leave knocking: at last with
much ado the man rises, saying, Will you never be answered? and he lends him
three loaves, because of his importunity. Now, says our Savior, I say unto
you, though he would not give him as a friend, yet because of his importunity
he will.

The similitude is this: Thou art that man, oh Christian soul, this guest is
thy self: Now then, come home to thy self with the Prodigal, who when he was
come to himself, goes to his father and friend. This friend is Christ, that
thou art to pray unto; these three loaves are grace, mercy, and peace: These
thou art to pray for; it may be Christ answers thee in thy conscience, It is
midnight, thou come too late, there is no mercy for thee. The soul prays
still, Oh Lord awaken and help me: it may be the Lord will answer thee by
terror in thy soul, The door of mercy is shut, thou should have come rather.
Yet Lord, open unto me, says the soul: Nay says the Lord, all my children
have mercy already; now mercy is asleep, I have converted them already; they
came in due season, thou come at midnight, there is no mercy for such a
hell-hound as thou art. Up Lord, have mercy on me, says the poor soul, and
look on me, etc. Look me no looks, says the Lord; I came to save the lost
sheep of the house of Israel: there was a time when I would have converted
thee, when I called unto thee early and late: But now I am asleep, and my mercy
is asleep, it has been awake as long as it could well hold open its eyes; and
come thou now? Oh the soul cries still, and will never give over: if mercy be
to be had at the throne of grace, he will have it. Even as a beggar being at a
gentleman's door, they bidding him be gone, there is nothing to be had: nay,
says the beggar, I will not be gone, here is something to be had, and I will
have something, or else I will die at the door: The gentleman hearing him say
so, thinks it would be a shame for him if he should die at his door; and gives
him somewhat: So when the soul is thus importunate, because of importunity it
shall be granted. Verily I say unto you, if you thus ask, it shall be given
unto you.

These words contain in them the main duty of importunate prayer. Ask; if
asking will not serve turn, seek; if seeking will not serve turn, then knock:
try all means.

Another parable our Savior put forth, Luke 18. 1, 2. that men ought always
to pray, and not to faint. There was a poor woman wronged by her adversary, and
there was no Judge to right her but a wicked one, so that she had but poor
hopes; yet she resolves to go, or else she shall be undone; therefore if she
perish, she will perish at his feet. He calls her all to naught. Oh; for Gods
sake help me, says she. I care not for God nor man, says the Judge: Nay, good
my Lord, says the woman. The Judge seeing her thus importunate, said, I shall
be troubled with her if I do her not justice. How much more (says the text)
shall not God avenge his elect that cry day and night?

Obj. But some man may demand, what is importunate prayer?

Ans. I answer, it is a relstess prayer, which will take no nay, nor
contumelious repulse, but is in a holy manner impudent until it speed; and
there are in it four things:

First, it is restless: he that is importunate, cannot rest till he speed in
his suit before God as the poor woman of Canaan, she sought the Lord God of
Heaven and earth, (she was of the cursed stock of Cham whom the Lord commanded
to destroy; yet she repented, and became of the faith of Abraham) to see if the
Lord would own her: but the Lord seemed to reject her, and suffered the devil
to possess her daughter. Now, what, might not this poor woman think she had
made a sorry change of religion, seeing that God the author of it would not own
her, but suffered the devil to possess her daughter? But see the importunity
of this woman, she would not be quiet until she had found Christ, Mark 7. 24,
25. Christ could not be hid. No? What, could he not hide himself in some
corner? No. no, thinks she, there is a Christ, and if he be to be had under the
cope of heaven, I will have him. Even so it is with the soul that is importunate
in prayer, it is restless. What if Christ do hide himself in the Word, etc.
and will not own a poor soul, yet the poor soul knows there is a Christ, and
if he be to be found in the whole world, he will have him: I will, says he, turn
over all duties, I will go to all the Ministers that are near, I will use all
the means. Now Christ cannot be hid from such a soul that is thus importunate.

Now as it is a prayer that will take no nay, so first it will take no
privative nay of silence; Secondly, no possitive nay of denial.

First, no privative nay of silence: A man that is importunate in prayer, must
and will have some answer; he is not like Baals Priests, that could get no
answer, 1 King. 18. 26. nor like wicked men that pray in their pewes, they know
not what, nor whether God hears them or no: but an importunate prayer will have
an answer, like the woman of Canaan: Have mercy on me O Lord (says she;) but
Christ answered her not a word. Has she done then? No, she cries so much the
more, Have mercy on me O Lord: yea she was so importunate, that his Disciples
were ashamed to hear her; yet she cried, Have mercy on my daughter; the devil
has my daughter, and misery will have me, unless thou will have mercy on us.
Christ answered her never a word. It was much trouble to her to have her
daughter vexed with a devil; but this troubled her much more, that Christ in
whom all her hope was, would not hear her, nor lend her one look. What might
she think, Is this the merciful Savior, that is so full of pity and
compassion? Is this he that has made proclamation to all the world, saying,
Come unto me all ye that are weary, etc? and I am tired and wearied by reason
of the devil that possesses my daughter, etc. yet he regards me not. Thus she
might have said: yet these discouragements could not put her off, but she cried
so much the more, yea so that the Apostles were ashamed that Christ should let
her stand on that fashion; yet she stood it out, and prevailed.

Secondly, it will take no positive nay of denial: For when she had an answer,
and that flat against her, it was like bellows to the fire, she was so much
the more inflamed, she doubles her forces, Have mercy on me O Lord, etc. Chist
put her off with a denial, I am not sent but to the lost sheep of the house of
Israel; I come for sheep, not for goats; you are of the Canaanites, on whom I
have set a brand of damnation, a servant of servants, a slave of hell and
darkness: These are all of your blood; but I come to save them of the house of
Israel. But the denial of an importunate soul is like the stop in a passage of
water; the more it is stopped, the more violent it is* so this poor woman is so
much the more eager with Christ; she did but cry before, now she worships him,
verse 24. 25. as if she should have said, Lord help me now, I am one of thy
lost sheep; I confess I am a Canaanite, I am of that damned blood; yet Lord
help me; I am persuaded that thou can take a course whereby to help me, Thou
can cast some mercy on a Canaanite.

Thus you see, an importunate soul will take no denial, but will renew its
forces at the Throne of grace.

Thirdly an importunate Prayer will take no contumelious repulse; suppose God
should answer never a syllable of thy prayer, yet thou will pray; suppose he do
answer, and that against thee, yet still thou will pray. Nay suppose he call
thee all to naught making thy conscience tell thee of all thy sins and
abominations, making thee think that heaven is shut up against thee, and God
has shut his ears, calling thee Dog hell-hound, and wretch, etc. yet nothing
can break thee off if thou be importunate indeed. So this woman was not beaten
off with Christ's sending the Devil into her Daughter, nor with Christ's hiding
himself when she sought him; nor with Christ's answering never a word, nor with
the Apostles frumps, nor with his denial, nor contumelious repulse, for he
called her dog, verse. 26 Hence dog* I had as lieve ^ling my mercy on a dog, as
on th^e. What creature but an importunate one, could have gone so far? But see
here the nature of importunity, it gets within Christ and takes advantage: she
confessed the cause, saying, Truth Lord, thou have hit me right, I am a dog, or a
wicked woman; let me then have the privileges that dogs have; though dogs may
not be equal with children at the cable, yet they may wait under the table: I
acknowledge that thy children are so plentifully fed, that some crummes fall
from the table, therefore let me have the privilege of a dog. Naaman the
Syrian was a dog, as well as I; Rahab the harlot was a dog, as well as I; Ruth
a dog, as well as I; yet these got c^ums: truth Lord, I am a dog, yet thy mercy
can metamorphose a dog: Of these stones thou can raise children to Abraham.
Thus it is with an importunate soul, though God call it all to naught, and cast
all ignominious terms upon it, as I had as lieve thou should offer me swines
blood, as to speak in my hearing, yet if thou be importunate, thou will bear
any contumelious repulse.

Fourthly, an importunate prayer is impudent in an holy manner: And as an
impudent beggar that is needy, counts it no manners to hold his peace from
begging, although he be bidden; Or as a poor petitioner to the King, the King
bids him hold his peace, yet he will not, but still he goes on, The officers
say, Thou filthy fellow, will thou never have done? do thou not see that the
King is angry? Yet he still cries, Help me Lord, o King. So the Canaanitish
woman, or an Importunate prayer, is an impudent prayer, yet in a holy manner.

I remember a story of a poor woman in Essex condemned to die: she falls to
crying and screeching, as if she meant to pierce the heavens; the Juge and
those on the bench bid her hold her peace: O my Lord, said she, it is for my
life I beg, I beseech you, it is for my life. So when a soul comes before God,
and begs for mercy, he must consider that it is for his life, O Lord it is for
my life. Now though the Lord will not answer, and though he call the soul all
to naught, letting it go up and down with a heavy heart; yet the soul crying
out, It Is for my life; If I must go to hell, I will go to hell from the throne
of grace, weeping and wa^ling for my sins, and catching hold on the horns of
the altar: this soul shall find mercy.

I have wondered at the story in the 5. chapter of Luke, it is a strange
passage, where this godly kind of impudency was seen. Our Savior Christ was
preaching in the house to the people, and there was a poor man that could not
tell how to come to Christ; so the poor man got some to lift him up to the top
of the house and to untile it, and so to let him down; now the rubbish could
not choose but fall either on Christ's head, or on the heads of some of his
hearers; Was not this an impudent action? could not this man have stayed until
the sermon had been ended? But importunity has no manners: And although he did
interrupt Christ, yet Christ asked him not why he did so, but says, Man be of
good comfort thy sins be forgiven thee. Let us therefore come with boldness unto
the Throne of grace, Heb. 4. 16. with freedom to talk any thing; Not as if God
had given us leave to be irreverent, but as to a loving generous man of whom we
use to say, He is so kind, you may say any thing unto him; come to him at
dinner, he will rise up and hear you, or what business soever he be about, yet
he will hear you. Even so it is with God: he is such a God: that all poor souls
may be bold before him to speak what they will, they may lay open their cases,
and show their estates. Now when souls come boldly, and give the Lord no rest
till he establish them, Esai. 62. 7. then says God, How now, cannot I be at
rest for you? etc. This holy kind of impudency is in prayer, and it will give
the Lord no rest.

Reasons why we must seek importunately, are three.

First in regard of Gods majesty, he loves to be sought unto, and it is fit he
should be sought unto. Among men, we account it a matter of too much
stateliness to be much entreated; and we use to say he loves to be entreated;
this is a fault among men; yet for all this, Quis vestrum, etc as Seneca
speaks, what man of us can be content to be but once, or slightly entreated?
when a man comes to entreat a kindness of a man there is I sing and Anding and
shall I etc. nothing but importunity can get a kindness of a man; and this is
a sin among men, because men are bound to do good; but the Lord is not bound to
us. If we sin, he is not bound to pardon us therefore; the Lord being a God of
majesty, looks to be sought unto of us for his mercy, and he looks that we
should be importunate; and hence it is that God says, I will give you a new
heart, Ezech. 36. I will vouchsafe you all these favors, yet I will look to be
inquired for of you. verse 76. I will look that they shall send to me for these
things.

Suppose a man should need a 1000 pound; What, says the gentleman, does he
think a thousand pound is nothing? I will have good security for it. So when we
come for such high mercies as these, for such infinite compassions; these are
somewhat, and God looks to be sought unto for them; and Christ the Son of God
is a great heir, and those that are faulters to him, must be importunate with
him, if they mean to be at peace with him.

If one will marry a rich heir, who has all the preferment and dignity that
the country can afford, he looks to be well sued unto. So the Lord Jesus is a
great heir, heir of the whole world; if thou go to be married unto him, thou
must sue unto him, and he looks for prayer, he loves to hear his children
cry: this is one of his titles, though he be a God, yet he is the hearer of
prayer* Psalm. 65. 2.

Again, we have wronged his Majesty. Suppose thy servant wrong thee, thou will
say thou will pardon him, but first thou will make him humble himself unto
thee, he shall and must know that he has wronged a good master: So God is
willing to pardon thee, but yet he will make thy bowels know that thou have
sinned against a good God; he will make it appear by thy prayer, he will make
thy spirit melt, he will fill thy face with shame and confusion, he will make
thee know what a patient God thou have rebelled against, or else the Lord will
never pardon thee. Do thou think to pacify God with a lazy prayer, with
coming to Church and saying, Have mercy upon me, most merciful Father? Do
thou think that the Lord will have mercy upon thee for this? No, no, he may
send thee quick to hell for all this; he will make thee cry and cry again with
groans; he will make thee cry out and pray on another gates fashion, and he
will make the sovereignty of his mercy to be seen in thy salvation: therefore
in regard of Gods majesty, he loves men should be importunate.

Secondly, in regard of Gods mercy; it is a disgrace for Mercy to be begged
frigidly; it is a disgrace to Gods bounty, for a man to beg it with lukewarm
importunity. What make thou of the mercy of God? do thou think that it is
not worth a groan, with the running over of a Paternoster? do thou make Gods
mercy of such base reckoning? this is a disgrace to Gods goodness, to be so
cold or frigid in prayer. Thou have offered many offerings, yet I scorn them,
says God, Isaiah. 43. 23. Thou have not honored me with them, thou have not
called on me, thou have been weary of calling on me, thou have too short a
breath in thy prayers, thou carest not how soon thou come to an end? Do you
come and lay lazy prayers upon my altar? Thou have not honored me.

It was a custom among the Romans, when any was condemned to die, if he looked
for mercy, he was to bring father and mother, and all his kinsmen and
acquaintance, and they should all come with tears in their faces, and with
tattered garments, and kneel down and beg before the Judge, and cry mightily;
and then they thought Justice was honored. Thus they honored justice in man,
for a man condemned to die; and so the Lord loves his mercy should be honored,
etc, and therefore he will have prayer to be importunate, that it may appear by
groans how highly we esteem of grace; our souls must pant and gasp after
grace, the breath of the Lord being the soul of our souls, our hearts will die
without it: This is to the honor of mercy, therefore the Lord will have us
Importunate.

Thirdly, as importunity must be in regard of Gods mercy, so it must be in
regard of our selves, else we cannot tell how to esteem it: Soon come, soon
gone; lightly gotten, suddenly forgotten; I have it, come let us be jovial and
spend it, when this is gone, I know where to have more; But if he had wrought
for it, and also must work for more, if he mean to have more, he would better
esteem it. The world little esteems Mercy; what is the reason? The greatest
covetous men are they that once were poor; when a poor man has gotten store of
riches, he is more coverous than he that was born to hundreds or thousands;
they are careless of it, and spend lavishly, whilst a covetous man's teeth
water at it; and the reason is, because they come lightly by it. Therefore the
Lord loves that we should come hardly by our mercy; not as if he sold mercy for
our pains, but for our good: yet we are not capable of it. See Jer. 31. 9.
where the Lord speaks thus to his people: They come with weeping, and with
supplication will I lead them. This is a fine phrase, God leads a soul up and
down with supplication, before he grants his request; just as a beggar on the
highway, a gentleman coming by, he begs of him, the gentleman goes on his way
as if he took no notice, but the beggar goes on crying, For Gods sake (sir)
bestow something on me; yet he goes on still, till at last the gentleman comes
to his house, and then he gives him his desire. Even so God leads a soul up and
down, from one good duty to another, till he have brought the soul to that
pass that he would have it to be, and then he hears it, and says, What is thy
suit? I will pardon thee.

What then is the reason, may some man say, why so few are importunate in
prayer?

I answer, first, because men count Prayer a penance: there is a natural kind
of Popery in men's breasts; the Papists, when men sin, their Priests enjoin them
penance, as pilgrimages and scourgings, so many Pater noster's, and so many
Ave-Marie's, where they reckon Prayer to be a penance. This natural Popery is
in men's breasts; they count Prayer laborious unto them, and they are weary of
it, they are not eager upon prayer, they look not on Prayer as a blessing, but
as a yoke; behold what a wearisome thing it is, Mal. 1. 13. They were weary of
the service of God; Oh, sa^ they, that the Minister would once had done! they
had rather be in an Alehouse, or about their business; all good duties are as
penance unto carnal men. If a man be to do penance, he care not how little he
does of it; a Rogue cares not for to much whipping.

Secondly, men content themselves with formality. Many men pray, as Haman spoke
the Kings words before Mordecai, for he had rather have led him to the gallows,
than to have said, Thus shall it be done unto the man whom the King will honor:
but he thought it would be the worse for him if he spoke them not, and
therefore he only spoke them for form. And so men for the most part go to
Church, to hear the Word, to Pray, to receive the Sacraments etc. even for
form, or because it is the fashion, and they think, if they do not thus and
thus, they shall not be saved.

You shall have the Drunkard say, I am sorry for my drunkenesse; but he lies;
for the next day he will be at the Al^house again: so the Whoremaster says,
Lord I am sorry that I have sinned against thee; but he lies; for the next
Queen that he meets with, having opportunity, he falls to whoreing again: So
the Covetous man will say, I am sorry I am sorry I am so full of earthly
thoughts; yet he lies; he is not sorry; for you shall have him carking and
caring all the day long, and he has a thousand proclamations in his head; He
only prays for form with the rest, they only say prayer, they pray not. I
deny not saying of prayer, if they pray; Our Savior Christ says, When you
pray, say Our father; The proud man dishonours Gods name, saying, Thy will be
done; whereas he should be humble, for that is Gods will; it is Gods will he
should be zealous, yet he prays not: He says, Forgive us our trespasses, etc.
but he prays not so; for he wrongs his neighbor, and his neighbor wrongs
him, and he does not forgive those that trespass against him. He says, Lead
us not into temptation; but he prays it not; for he runs presently into
temptations, and has no care to avoid them. And this is the reason why men are
not importunate; viz. because they do make formality of it.

Thirdly, because they are gentlemen-beggers. Of all the beggars in the world,
I would be loath to meet with a gentleman beggar, for he is proudest of them
all; if a man tell him that he has been an ill husband, and has abused
himself, presently he sets his hands to his side, saying, I am not as every
beggar, I am thus and thus descended, am as good a man by birth as your self:
a gentlemen-beggers heart will not stoop. So men ^ gentlemen beggars to God,
they were (say they) borne of Christian parents, and they have been baptized
the children of God already; What are none the children of God, but a company
of Puritans? We are descended as well as the best of you all. These are proud,
and not as yet brought to a sense of their own misery.

When John did preach to, and baptize the Scribes and Pharisees, he calls them
all to naught, O ye vipers and full of poison, who has forewarned you to flee
from the anger to come? Vipers, say they? Viper in thy teeth; we are the
children of Abraham, we are better descended then so; we are Believers, and do
you call us vipers? then indeed we might cry out, Oh we are damned! then we
had need cry for mercy. And in this sense, men are Gentlemen-beggars.

Another reason why men are not importunate, is, because they have wrong
conceits of Prayer. I will tell you the sundry conceits of men.

First, they have high conceits of their own prayers; they cannot pray in a
morning, between the pillow and the blankets, half asleep and half awake, but
they think that they have done God good service; so that he cannot afford to
damn them: At night he says, Lord have mercy upon me, and so goes to sleep,
and then he thinks God must keep him until the morning: So when he goes to
dinner, he sais, Lord bless these creatures unto us, and so falls aboard, and
he thinks that God must needs sanctify them unto him; and after supper he goes
to prayer, and so to bed, and thinks that he shall be heard for his much
babbling sake, Mat. 6. they think God will have mercy on them. But poor souls,
if they knew how unseemingly they prayed, how unfitly, and what want there is
in seeing their own estate, they would say, is this to pray for my soul, for
such infinite mercy? Lord, how do I abuse the throne of grace? how do I abuse
thy sabbaths, thy house, thy name, and all the holy ordinances which I go
about? A man that is importunate in prayer, is ashamed; but when they think
highly of their prayers, they are insolent, their prayers are damned, and they
too.

Secondly, as men have high conceits of their prayers, so they have mean
conceits of their sins, they think not their sins so bad as they are. These
men are like Abner, who said, Let the young men arise and play before us, 2 Samuel 2. 15. They account murder a sport, and dancing and musiking little worse
then David's playing on the harp; Amos 6. 5. And if they commit adultery, they
say* that is but a trick of youth; if they tell a lie, it is only at a dead lift
when they have no other shift. That man that does not think of every sin he
commits, as David did of his, even to make his heart to ache for it, that man
shall never speed well before God.

Thirdly, as men have mean thoughts of their sins, so they have base thoughts
of God. They cannot think that God should damn a man for drinking a pot with
his friend; I cannot think God will be so strict; No, no, I love God with all
my heart, say they; and they think that God is of their mind; and if they were
as God, they would not be so strict. So, Psalm. 50. They thought I was such an
one as themselves; they think God will pardon ^^em, and therefore because of
this, men are not importunate with God. God has sent me a cross (says one)
but I hope to rub it off well enough. Why? God will not keep his anger for
ever, Jer. 3. 5. Suppose a man be absent from Church, or break out into some
unsavory speech, will God be angry for this? Suppose a man be negligent in a
good duty, will God require every days work? Tush, tush, God will not, Psalm.
10. 13. A company of Puritans say he will, but I know he will not: and hence it
is, that men will not be importunate.

Lastly, because they have wrong conceits of importunity. If a man knock once
or twice, or thrice, and none answer, presently he will be gone; this is for
want of manners; thou will knock seven times, if thou be importunate with them:
They within may say, Hold thy peace, be gone, etc. but thou will not so be
answered.

Beloved, men are close-handed, they are loath to give; and they are
close-hearted too, they are loath to take the pains to ask of God; they are loath
others should be importunate with them, and therefore they are loath to be
importuate with God. Examine your selves then in this duty; for importunate
prayer is evermore the prayer of an importunate man.

THE EFFICACY Of Importunate PRAYER. The Second SERMON By that laborious and
faithful Messenger of CHRIST, WILLIAM FENNER, Sometimes Fellow of Pembroke Hall
in Cambridge, and late Ministers of Rochford in Essex.

London, Printed by E. T. for John Stafford.

THE EFFICACY OF Importunate Prayer.
LUKE 11. 9. Ask, and it shall be given unto you; Seek, and you shall find;
Knock, and it shall be opened unto you.
TO proceed then: There be six signs to know whether our Prayers be
importunate or no.

First, importunate prayer is evermore the prayer of an importunate man; and
the man is importunate, if his prayer be importunate, but how can a man
importune God for mercy, when his person importunes God for vengeance? It must
be the prayer of a godly heart; Preserve my soul, for I am holy. Psalm. 86. 1,
2. David makes a prayer, and he was holy when he made it; his prayer could tell
him that he was one that labored to work in holiness. Therefore when thou
go to God in prayer, consider whether thou can say, Lord hear me, for I am
holy and I would fain be holy: but if the saying of these words ch^ak thee,
t^en thy prayer condems thee.

Of all begging, it is a great matter who it is that begs at the door: Who is
that, says the indweller? and when he opens the door and sees it is a thief;
etc. Oh, is it you? says he; you may stand long enough, you shall never have
alms of me. So in prayer, it is all in all, who it is that prays.

The woman in the Gospel having an issue, touched our Savior; he looking
about, asked who touched him, and when he saw the woman, Oh is it you? says
he, be of good cheer, Luke 8. 48. So when a man prays to God, Who is that,
says God, that would have these mercies? And when the Lord sees it a Drunkard,
or a covetous man, etc. is it you? says the Lord; you may stay till Dooms day,
and yet never find mercy. The spirit of supplication and the spirit of prayer,
is called the spirit of grace, Zach. 12. 10. If them thou have not the spirit
of grace, thou can not pray. The text says not, Whosoever asks the Father
in my name, but, whatsoever you ask the Father in my name? there is many a man
may use the name of Christ at the throne of grace, but certain it is, none but
those that are in Christ, can pray; and with them every thing operates. A man
that will walk with God in obedience to his laws, must be a holy man: hence is
that saying of our Savior, John 15. 7. a place fit for the purpose; If you
abide in me, and my word abide in you etc. as if he should have said, You may
ask what you please, and entreat God all the days of your life; yet unless
you abide in me, you cannot speed. That man that walks not in holiness of
life, can never be an importunate orator, as was Moses the man of God; but a
wicked man's prayer (as Augustine speaks) is tanquam latratus canum, etc. no
better then the barking of dogs, or the grunting of swine: therefore you whose
consciences tell you that you live in sin, your prayers never speed at the
throne of grace for eternal mercy.

Secondly, an importunate prayer is the prayer of a pure conscience. Suppose a
man does not see that he lives in sin, yet if his conscience cry guilty, if he
have a foul conscience, his prayer never prevails with God. If I regard
wickedness in my heart, the Lord will not hear my prayer, says David, Psalm.
66. 18. that is, If I can say, or my conscience can tell me, that I regard
iniquity in my heart, the Lord will not hear me. A man must have a pure
conscience, 2 Timothy 1. 3. else let him not look God in the face; beg he may, but
he shall never speed as long as he goes on with a conscience that can tell him
he regards iniquity.

There be many pray, (for indeed their conscience will make them pray) but they
may pray till they come to hell, yet they shall never be delivered, if there be
but one sin unrepented of.

I remember a story of a poor woman being troubled in conscience, and many
Ministers using to visit her, at last came one which (after much talking and
praying) hit upon one sin which she was guilty of, and loath to part with; Then
the woman cried out, till now you have spoken to the post, but now you have hit
the mark, my conscience tells me I have been loath to part with this sin, but I
must leave it, or else I cannot be saved.

Mala conscientia been sperare non potest. The Pagans had so much divinity, as
to say, The gods must be honored with purity; therefore they wrote on the
doors of their temples, Let none having a guilty conscience enter this place.

Thirdly, Importunate prayer is evermore a prayer that is full of strong
arguments. And hence it is that Job says, I will fill my mouth with arguments,
Job 23. 4. like an importunate man, who will bring all reasons and arguments to
effect his cause; even so an importunate man at the throne of grace, will bring
all argu,ents to persuade God. If a man be to pray for any particular grace, he
will bring all the arguments he can devise to get it; as, Lord, it is a grace
of the Covenant, for the want whereof I endure many temptations; thou have made
me a Minister, I cannot work on men's consciences until I have it, he presses
all arguments he can devise. A good orator before God, must be a good logician.
It was noted of the Highpriests that were to pray before God, they were to
have Urim and Thummim, and that was two parts of Logic, viz. knowledge and
perfection: such an one should a Minister be, he must be a good Logitian at the
throne of groce.

Fourthly, importunate prayer is a stout prayer; Continue in prayer, says the
Apostle, Col. 4. 2. a weak-hearted prayer is a cold prayer, a prayer without a
spirit; yet these men that have weak spirits to pray, have strong enough to
sin; and wit enough to sin, and knowledge enough to sin; but bring them to
grace, then they have no strength. Thou can not strive to prevail with God,
unless thou stand to it. How came Jacob to prevail with God, but by wrestling?
Prayer is called fighting, it is a holy kind of violence. Thou can not obtain
a mercy at Gods hand, unless thou lay all thy force on it. Even as a Father
who has an apple in his hand, and his child would fain have it; he first opens
one finger, then another, till the aple drop out. So is it with a poor soul at
the throne of grace: the Lord opens his hands, and fills all things living with
plenteousnesse; What is the means that is used? why, the prayers of his
children; they by their prayers open Gods hand, and so make the blessings to
descend. Go for grace; why, the Lord will say unto thee, Thou art proud, thou
must be humble, and so open that finger; Thou art careless, thou must go
quicken thy self, and so open that finger: God says, thou will not make much
of this grace when thou have it, but thou will turn it into wantonness; then
thy soul must learn to mortify its members, and so open that finger; thou
can not get grace at Gods hand, unless thou do open all his fingers, and
then it will fall down. There is a several power in all Gods children, some
have more, some have less, yet all must be powerful, else none can prevail
with God.

Fifthly if thou pray importunately, thou prayest wakefully; he must be deeply
awake that prays; his soul, his heart, his understanding must be awake: that
man that prays drowsily, prays not powerfully; Watch therefore, says Christ,
and pray, Luke 21. 36. Watch to pray. q. d. for as there is a sleepy head, so
there is a sleepy heart. As a Beggar who is begging, is all awake, head, feet,
hands, etc. all is awake to beg; so must that soul be that means to speed in
prayer.

Sixthly, importunate prayer is an assurance getting prayer; a prayer that will
not be quiet till it have got assurance that God has heard it. Wicked men
pray, and presume that God hears them, but God hears them not; nay, many of
Gods dear children pray many times, and are not heard. How long will thou be
angry with thy people that prays? Ps. 80. 4. Not only with their persons, but
with their prayers also. How then, think you, is the prayer of such as live in
their sins taken? who pray, but their prayers vanish away in the air like
clouds: these may pray and pray, but they get nothing.

Behold he prays, says the voice to Saul, Acts 9. 22. What, did he not pray
before? Yes, he had made many a long prayer, else he could not have been a
Pharisee; but now he did not only pray, but he prayed unto God as David did,
who did lift up his heart to God, Psalm. 25. 1. or else his heart could not have
prayed; and then in the next verse David begins his prayer. Our hearts are just
like a bell, which so long as it lies on the ground will make no music, till
it be lifted up; Our hearts are not like the bell of Rochea, which (they say)
will ring of its own accord; but our hearts must be lifted up, else they will
make no delightful music in the ears of God. Wherefore if you pray, and
labor not to bring your hearts home to God, that so he may hear them in mercy,
he will (it may be) hear them, but it will be to your condemnation, as he hears
the prayers of wicked men: therefore if thou praiest, pray fervently.

There be six or seven marks of Prayer that is not importunate, and he that
prays so, may go to hell, for ought I know.

The first is a lazy, prayer; An importunate man works hard to bring up hi^
suit; his understanding, his counsel, and all his po^icie works: so if the
soul he importunate, then it is a working prayer. Prayer is a labor, 2 Cor. 1.
Labor with me in prayer. That man that plowes his field, and dig^ his
vineyard, that man prays for a good harvest; if a man pray to God never so
much, yet if he do not use the means, he cannot obtain the thing he prays for.
Even so it is with grace; A man may pray for all the graces of Gods spirit, and
yet never get any, unless he labor for them in the use of the means. God
cannot abide lazy beggars, that cannot abide to follow their calling, but if
they can get any thing by begging, they will never set themselves to work. So,
many there be, that if they can get pardon of sin for begging, then they will
have it; but let such know that the Lord will not give it for such lazy kind
of praying; but if thou will have pardon of sin, thou must labor for it, thou
must get it with thy fingers ends; God gives not men Repentance, Faith, etc. by
miracles, but by means: Thou must then use the means, and keep watch and ward
over thine own soul, that so thou may get the grace thou praiest for.

Secondly; a prayer that is not a full prayer, never speeds with God; but an
importunate prayer is a full prayer, it is a pouring out of the heart, yea of
the whole heart, Psalm. 62. 8. the Psalmist says, pour out your hearts before
him, trust in him at all times, pour out your hearts (the addition is made in
the Lamentations of Jeremy) like water. It may be thou powrest out thy prayer
like tar out of a tar-box, half sticking by the sides; but when thou praiest,
thou must out with all before God. When thou give thanks, do thou labor to
remember all the blessings of God? when thou do petition to God, do thou
pour out all thy heart before him? do thou cast all thy care on God?

Thirdly, Snatch-prayer is no importunate prayer; when men pray by snatches, or
peecemeals, by breaking off a limme of their prayer, because of sluggishnesse,
or because their hearts are eager about other business; it is not good to
trust fits of devotion; it is a base kind of praying, when men gallop over their
prayers, that so they may come to an end quickly. Should I accept this at your
hands, says God by his Prophet? when they brought a sheep, it wanted a lim,
they were loath to give God a whole offering, Mal. 1. 13. Many pray a piece of a
prayer in the mornig, and then they go after the world, he down's on his knees,
and gives God a rag of a prayer, a company of ragged ends; And God counts it
an indignity; shall I accept this (says he?) What, a lame prayer? No, no, the
Lord looks for a prayer that has its full grouth; it is a shame to speak in
the congregation what men do in secret before God, which many have confessed
after they have been converted, how they have gone into Gods presence, and have
shuffled over their prayers, thinking every hour seven, until they had done.

Fourthly, Silent prayers are never importunate. I mean by silent prayer, when
a man is silent in that which God looks he should most insist upon. David made
a prayer, Psalm. 32. and the Lord looked that he should stand much upon his
adultery and murder, which he had committed, to see what shame he took on him
for it; but he shuffled it over: and what says the Text? When I kept silence;
what, did the Prophet roar, and yet keep silence? these are contradictions.
Yea, the Prophet roared and kept silence; as if he should say, the Lord counted
his prayer but roaring, so long as he laid not open that sin, which the Lord
looked he should have stood on; the Lord let him roar, and roar he might long
enough, but (says he) I brake my silence, I said, I will confess my
transgressions, and then thou forgavest the wickedness of my sin. So, many go
to God, and tell God they must needs have mercy, and fain they would have
mercy, and yet they are silent in confessing the sin they should. I say, the
Lord will never hear that man; he may pray to God all his life, and yet go to
hell in the end. Have thou been a drunkard, and do thou think that the Lord
will forgive thee for crying, Lord forgive me, etc? No, no, thou must insist on
it, and say, Against thy word I have been a drunkard, my conscience told me so,
but I would not hear; I have felt the motions of thy holy spirit, stirring
against me, and I regarded not, Now if thou should turn me into hell, I were
well requited; so many Sermons have I neglected; I have wronged others in this
kind, and I have been the cause why many are now in hell, if they repented not.
I have prayed for mercy, yet with the dog to his vomit have I returned, and
therefore for all my prayers thou may cast me into hell for ever; and now I
have prayed, yet it is a hundred to one but I shall run into my old sin again;
yet as I expect forgiveness, so I desire to make a covenant to give over all
my sinful courses, and I am justly damned if I go to them again. Such a kind of
prayer the Lord loves.

Fifthly, Seldome-prayer is no importunate prayer; when the soul contents it
self with seldom coming before the throne of grace; an importunate soul is
ever frequenting the way of mercy, and the gate of Christ; he is often at the
threshold before God, in all prayer and humiliation.

The reeling'st Drunkard in the world sometimes can do so too; the basest
Adulterer in the world sometimes can be chaste: the Devil is quiet so long he is
pleased, and the wicked may sometime have a fit in prayer. But this is the
condition of an importunate heart, he is frequent at the throne of grace. The
Prophet David prayed seven times in a day; and Hannah continued in prayer night
and day.

Sixthly, Lukewarm prayer is not an importunate prayer; when a man prais, but
is not fervent, when a man labors not to wind up his soul to God in prayer.
That man that prays outwardly only, that man teaches God how to deny his
prayer. Though you make many prayers, says God, yet I will not hear you; why?
Your hands are full of blood. Qui frigide or at, docet negare. They are like
luke warm water, that never boils out the blood: So they have been guilty of
murder and abundance of other sins, and they did indeed pray against them, but
they were never but lukewarm, they have never boiled away the blood of their
sins. Thou must pray fervently, with a seething hot heart, if thou meanest to
get pardon for all thy sins, as security, and deadness of heart, etc. And as
it is in Jonah 3. let every man cry mightily unto the Lord.

Seventhly and lastly, Bie-thoughts in prayer keep prayer from being
importunate; as when a man prays, and lets his heart go a wool-gathering. I
remember a story of an unworthy O ratour, who being to make an acclamation, O
earth! O heaven! when he said O heaven, he looked down to the earth; and when
he said O earth, he looked up to heaven. So, many when they pray to God in
heaven, their thoughts are on the earth: these prayers can never be
importunate. When a man prays, the Lord looks that his heart should be fixed
on his prayer; for our hearts will leake, and the best child of God, do what he
can, shall have bie-thoughts in prayer.

And that,

First, from corrupt nature.

Secondly, from nature curbed.

Thirdly, from Satan.

Fourthly, from a man's own sluggishnesse.

For the first; The best children of God have corrupt natures, and when they
have done what they can, distractions will fasten on them. They would perform
good duties better, if they were able, saying with Paul, The good which I would
I do not, etc.

Secondly* from nature, as it is curbed; The more grace binds nature to its
good behaviovr, the more rustling it keeps. Even a Bird being at liberty keps
no stir, but being in a cage, it flutters about, because it is abridged of its
liberty: so when thou have curbed thy corrupt flesh, it will be skittish in
every good duty thou go about; and hence it is that the Apostle uses this
phrase, viz. I find another law in my members rebelling against the law of my
mind, etc. When grace curbs the law of sin, then nature rebels.

Thirdly, from Satan; as in Job, Satan stands at his right hand as a Plantiffe,
as Aegidius compares it, which puts in all Cases to hinder the Defendant; Even
so the Devil puts in all bie-thoughts that he can devise, to hinder a man's suit
for going on before the throne of grace. But thou must do as Abraham did, when
he was sacrificing; when the birds came, he drove them away; so must thou do by
thy bie-thoughts, if thou will have fruit of thy supplications before God.

Fourthly, they come from spiritual sluggishness, that creeps on the best, if
they take not heed: And this was the reason the Apostle cried, O wretched man
that I am, etc.

I speak not now to the children of God, who are troubled with biethoughts in
their prayers; For they, the more bie-thoughts they have, the more earnest they
are in prayer; they mourn with David, in their prayer. Consider O Lord (says
he) how I mourn, Psalm. 55. There was something in the Prophets prayer that did
vex him, and that made him so much the more to mourn before God.

But as for you that can have bie-thoughts in prayer, and let them abide with
you, your prayers are not importunate; the Heathen shall rise up against you
and condemn you.

I remember a story of a certain Youth, who being in the temple with
Alexander, when he was to offer incense to his god, and the Youth holding the
golden Censer with the fire in it, a coal fell on the Youths hand and burnt his
wrist; but the Youth considering what a sacred thing he was about; for all he
felt his wrist to be burnt, yet he would not stir, but continued still to the
end.

This I speak to shame those that can let any thing, though never so small, to
disturb them, yea (if it were possible) lesser things then nothing; for if
nothing come to draw their hearts away, they themselves will employ their
hearts. Baals Priests shall condemn these, who did cut themselves with knives,
and all to make them pray so much the more strongly. What a shame is it then*
that we should come on life and death to pray for our souls, and yet come with
such loose and lazy prayers! Think you that a male factor when he is crying at
the Bar for his life, will be thinking on his Pots and Whores, etc? Was it ever
heard of, that a man at deaths-door, should be thinking on his Dogs? can he
then think on them? Do you think that Jonah prayed on this fashion, when he was
in the Whales belly: or the Thief on the cross, or Daniel in the Lions den, or
the three Children in the fiery furnace, or Paul in Prison? Do ye think that
these prayed thus? What, shall I be at prayer, and my mind in the fields? No,
no; if I will pray, I must melt before God, and bewail my sins, and be heartily
affected in prayer. But as long as I pray thus, I pray not at all. And as God
said to Adam, where art thou? so may he say to thee, Man, where art thou? art
thou at prayer, and thy mind at mill? is thy mind on thy Oxen, and art thou at
prayer before me? what an indignity is this? Should a man come to sue to the
King, and not mind his suit? will not the King say, Do you mock me? know you to
whom ye speak? The Lord takes this as a heinous sin, when men come into his
presence with such loose hearts.

Now seeing these things are thus, take a word of exhortation to labor for
importunate Prayer.

Prayer is the art of all arts; it enables a man to all other duties, it is the
art of Repentance, etc. Samuel confessed, if he had not had the (...) Prayer,
he could not have had the art of preaching, 2 San. 12. 2^* See the antithesis
between these two words. God forbid; as if he should say, God forbid that I
should cease to pray for you, for then I should not teach you the right way. A
Minister can never preach to his people, that prays not for his people. It is
the art of Thanksgiving; a man cannot be thankful, if he cannot pray. Psalm.
116. 12. It was the means whereby the Prophet David would be thankful to God;
he would take the cup of salvation, and call on the name of the Lord. A man
has not a good servant, unless he can pray for his master; see the story of
Abraham's servant, Gen, 24. Prayer helps to perform all other good duties. How
do thou think to have benefit by the Word, unl^sse thou be fervent in prayer
with God to get a blessing upon it? We can do nothing but by begging.

Secondly, as Prayer is the art of all arts, so it is the Compendium of all
divinity. Therefore to call zealously on the name of the Lord, is to be a
Christian; Whosoever shall call on the name of the Lord, etc. It includes
repentance, humiliation, sorrow* for sin, joy in Gods goodness, thanksgiving
for mercies, obedience to his commandments, yea the whole duty man; therefore
we must labor to be importunate in prayer. A Reasonable soul is eminently all
souls; so Prayer is eminently all good duties* Psalm. 72. The prayer of David
the son Jesse; that is, all his repentance, in all passages; he did humble
himself before God; all David's duties are included by the name of the prayer of
David the son of Jesse. And therefore thou had need to make much of Prayer;
for thou can never repent, unless thou pray well.

Thirdly, Prayer is a man's utmost refuge; a man cannot have Christ, but only by
Prayer. It Is bad enough for a man to be a Drunkard, or to live in any other
sin; but yet after all this, if a man have the spirit of prayer, there is hope
of this man; if after all his sins committed, he can pray to God, there is
hope. But for a man to sin, and not to be importunate in prayer, is
dangerous. What says the Psalmist? They are corrupt and become abominable,
they have not called on the name of the Lord, Psalm 14. 4. Oh fearful
condition*

Fourthly, Prayer is that which Gods people have, though they have nothing
else; it is the beggars dish (as I may so call it.) A beggar has no way to
live, but by begging; therefore he had need beg hard: so we have nothing to
live on, but praying; I mean nothing that is to be done on our side; all the
promises of God are to be gotten by prayer. Suppose a man have nothing to live
on but his fingers ends, no house nor land, nothing left to maintain his wife
and children, but his fingers ends; will he not be toyling all the day? he is a
day-labourer, as we use to say. So, to pray earnestly, is a Christians fingers
ends. When a house stands but upon (...), will not a man be fearful and
careful of that pillar? why, (...) falls all the hope of salvation (...)
unprofitable servants, that Mercy will not meddle with us, unless it be
commanded. Patience is loath to bear; we have so provoked God, that Mercy is
loath to make or meddle with us; for unless it have command from God, it will
not admit of any soul. When David begged for loving kindness, he was
importunate; else mercy and loving kindness would not look on David, Psalm. 42.
8.

Sixthly, Prayer is Gods delight. The supplication of the wicked is abom^ation
to God, but the prayer of the upright is his delight, Prove. 15. 8. The Lord
must have something to please him; Kings (you know) must b^ ^leased; so the
King of heaven would be pleased by all that come unto ^im. Now nothing is more
pleasing unto him than prayer.

Seventhly, Importunate prayer is a willing prayer. There be many that p^^y to
God for mercy, and yet they are loath to have it; why? because t^y are not
importunate. When a man's lust runs on the world and worldl^ pleasures, etc, he
speeds not. When the woman of Canaan was importun^^e, Christ says unto her,
Woman, be it unto thee as thou will: she had a ^^l to grace, Matthew. 15. 28.

Eighthly, Importunate prayer is the only faithful prayer. A beggar never ^es
away from a gentleman's door, so long as he believes he shall have ^alms: so, as
long as a soul is importunate with God, it is a sign that it (...) a believing
soul. O woman, (says Christ) great is thy faith. Why? Because her importunity
was great, therefore Christ concludes her faith was ^^eat.

The means to get importunity in prayer, are these,

First, Labor to know thine own misery. See Ephesians. 6. 18, 19, 20. They ^ould
not have prayed importunately, unless they had known how it had stood with
Paul; so unless thou know thy misery, thou can not be ^mportunate. If a
Drunkard, or Whoremaster, or Sabbath-breaker, or Swearer, etc. knew that they
should be damned, they would get out of their sins.

Secondly, You must be sensible of your misery. Simon Magus knew his misery,
yet because he was not sensible of it, he says, Pray ye to the Lord for me,
Acts 8. 24. If he had been sensible, he would himself have fallen down before
the congregation, and he would have confessed how he had committed that sin, in
a more apprehensive manner.

Thirdly, Observe the prayers of Gods people, as here the disciples of Christ
did; they hearing Christ pray, say unto him, Master, teach us to pray; they
were so affected with Christ's prayer, that they said, Oh that we could pray
thus! Oh that we had such a spirit! Master, teach us to pray So I say, consider
Gods people, how they pray; they can pray as if they would so^re up to God in
supplication; they pray as if they world read the heavens. If men did but
consider this, it would quicken them.

Fourthly, Get a stock of prayer. That man must needs be rich, that has a rock
in every market. So if a man have a stock of prayer, it is a sign he is ^ke to
speed, as 1. Cor. 4. 2. If God did lend his ears to the Corinthian when they
were crying for Paul, then certainly Paul's prayers were importunate.

Fifthly, If thou will be importunate, labor to be full of good works Qui been
operatur, been erat; as Acts 10. Cornelius his alms and prayers were come up to
God: now if he had committed drunkenness, that had ome up to God with his
prayer; therefore was it happy for Cornelius that he was full of good works; so
thou can not be importunate, unless thou be full of good works; take heed
that swearing, and lying, etc. cry no louder in Gods ears then thy prayers.

Sixthly, If thou will be importunate in prayer, labor to reform thy ^oushold.
When Jacob was to call on God, he said to his household, Put away your strange
gods, Genesis 35.(...)

THE SOVEREIGN VIRTUE OF THE GOSPEL. In a SERMON By that laborious and
faithful Messenger of CHRIST, WILLIAM FENNER, Sometimes Fellow of Pembroke Hall
in Cambridge, and late Minister of Rochford in Essex.

London, Printed by E. T. for John Stafford.

THE SOVEREIGN VIRTUE OF THE GOSPEL.
PSALM. 147. 3. He heals them that are broken in heart, and binds up their
wounds.
HEre are two things contained in this Text: the Patients, and the Physician.

First, the Patients; the broken in heart.

Secondly, the Physician, Christ, it is he that heals and binds up their
wounds.

The Patients here are felt and discerned to have two wounds or maladies;
First, brokenness in heart; Secondly, woundednesse: He binds up such.

Brokennesse of heart presupposes wholenesse of heart: Wholenesse of heart is
twofold; either wholeness of heart in sin, or wholenesse of heart from sin.

First, wholenesse of heart from sin, is, when the heart it without sin; and so
the blessed Angels have whole hearts, and so Adam and Eve, and we in them
before the fall, had whole hearts.

Secondly, wholenesse of heart in sin; so the devils have whole hearts, and all
men since the fall from their conception, til their conversion, have whole
hearts; and these are they that our Savior intends, The whole need not a
physician, but they that are sick. The hearts that are whole, need not the
physician, but they that are broken and sick. Sin is in the godly, and they
are sick of it; even as when poison is in a man, it makes him sick; why?
because the poison is contrary unto him. But sin is in the wicked, and they
are not sick of it; as poison is in a toad, and the toad is not sick, because a
toad is of that nature which the poison is; and therefore he needs not a
Physician. Will a Physician go to cure a Toad? surely no, he will rather kill
it, he will not cure it. So as long as a man is not sick at the heart of his
sin, Christ will rather kill him than cure him. When a man says he is sick,
and yet can sleep, eat, drink, and work, and look as well as ever he did, feels
no pain, nor any thing to trouble him, what need has this man of a Physician?
So when a man lives in sin, yet never breaks his sleep for it, but minds his
pleasures, his profits, has never the more pain nor anguish in his soul* he is
soule-whole, and heart-whole, what need has he of a Physician? This is a man
whole in his sins.

The wholenesse of the heart is called fallow ground, Jerem. 4. 4. for it is
like an unbroken field, not tilled nor manured; there can be no harvest,
because the ground does lie fallow; so there can be no harvest of grace in that
man, whose heart is fallow and unbroken; and therefore to repent and to break
the heart, in Scripture is called the putting of ones hand to the plough, Luke
9. 62. to plough up the fallow ground of the heart.

Brokennesse of heart may be considered two ways; First, in relation to
wholenesse of heart in sin: so brokennesse of heart is not a malady, but an
inchoative cure of a desperate malady.

Secondly, in relation to wholenesse of heart from sin; and so it is a
malady or sickness, and yet peculiar to one blood alone, namely Gods elect;
for though the heart be whole, yet it is broken for its sins: as a man that
has a barbed arrow shot into his side, and the arrow is plucked out of the
flesh, yet the wound is not presently healed; so sin may be plucked out of the
heart, but the scar that was made with plucking it out, is not yet cured. The
wounds that are yet under cure, are the plaugues and troubles of conscience,
the sighs and groans of a hungring soul after grace, the stinging poison that
the blow has left behind it; these, are the wounds.

Now the heart is broken three ways.

First, By the Law: as it breaks the heart of a Thief to hear the sentence of
the Law, that he must be hanged for his robbery; so it breaks the heart of the
soul, sensible to understand the sentence of the Law: Thou shall not sin; if
thou do, thou shall be damned. If ever the heart come to be sensible of this
sentence, Thou art a damned man, it is impossible to stand out under it, but it
must break. Is not my word a hammer that breaks the rocks in pieces? Jer. 23.
29. that is, Is not my word, my Law a hammer? Can any rock heart hold out and
not be broken with the blows of it? Indeed thus far a man may be broken, and
yet be a reprobate; for they shall be all thus broken in hell, and therefore
this breaking is not enough.

Secondly, by the Gospel; for if ever the heart come to be sensible of its
blow, it will break all to shatters. Rent your hearts for the Lord is gracious,
etc. Joel 2. 12. When all the shakes of Gods mercy come, they all cry, rent.
Indeed the heart cannot stand out aginst them, if it once feel them: Beat thy
soul upon the Gospel: if any way under heaven can break it, this is the way.

Aristotle observes, that a hammer may easily break a hard stone against a soft
bed; but if it be laid on an anvil, which will not give way underneath, strike
it as hard as you will with the hammer on the top, the anvil underneath props
it from breaking, or if it do break, it will not break into shatters; for the
anvil below helps the stone to hang fast together: but if you smite it against
a soft bed, it breaks it all to shatters. So, smite thy soul upon the Gospel;
preach the law as much as as you will, preach hell and damnation as much as you
will, let that be the hammer; but then be sure lay thy soul on the Gospel,
drive it to the Gospel, smite against this soft bed, and then (if ever) it will
break. If you strike a stone against a hard anvil, though the parts thereof
would fall asunder, yet how can they fly off, when as the hard anvil will not
give way? the hard anvil on the one side, and the hard hammer on the other
side, stop up its way from falling asunder. So, strike the soul with the blows
of Gods wrath as much as you will, and let it be upon the Law; alas whither
should the Law open it self that it might break? the Law does but fear it on
the one side, and the wrath of God does terrify it on the other, yet all this
while it is not broken; the soul all this while knows not what it shall do:
but smite it on the Gospel, and this, with the Law, rents it, and breaks it
indeed. So Joel he preached hell and damnation to the people of the Jews, and
laid their hearts upon mercy, and then the hammer cry, rent; for he is
merciful, etc. he laid them on the soft bed of the Gospel, and then he smites
them.

Thirdly, the heart is broken by the skill of the Minister in the handling of
these two, the Law, and the Gospel: God furnishes him with skill to press the
Law home, and gives him understanding how to put to the Gospel, and by this
means does God break up the heart: For alas, though the Law be never so good a
hammer, and although the Gospel be never so soft a bed, yet if the Minister lay
not the soul upon it, the heart will not break; he must fetch a full stroke
with the Law, and he must set the full power of the Gospel at the back of the
soul, or else the heart will not break.

It is a pretty observation of Aristotle, Lay (says he) an axe upon a block,
and a great and mighty weight upon it, yet it will not enter into the block to
cleave it; but if you lift up the axe and fetch a full blow at the block, then
it enters presently. So if the Minister have not skill to fetch a dead blow at
the heart, alas he may be long enough ere he break it; but let him fetch a full
blow at the soul, then does he break it, if ever. I took unto me two staves,
says the Prophet, the one I called beauty, the other I called bands, and with
these I ^ed the flock, Zach. 11. 7. There is the course of a true feeder of the
flock, he feeds them with the Law and the Gospel; he takes his two staves, and
he lays about him, till the hearts of his hearers feel him: and this is the
way to feed them, and to break them off from their sins. Thus you see the
means that God uses to bre^k your hearts. He heals the broken in heart.
Hence observe

That Christ justifies and sanctifies. For that is the meaning.

First, because God has given Christ grace to practice for the sakes of the
broken in heart* and therefore if this be his grace, to heal the brokenhearted,
certainly he will heal them. The spirit of the Lord is upon me, etc. He has
sent me to heal the broken in heart etc. Luke 4. 18. If he be created master of
this art even for this purpose, to heal the broken in heart, he will verily
heal them, and none but them. He is not like Hosander and Hippocrates, whose
father appointed them both to be Physicians; he appointed his son Hippocrates
to be a physician of Horses, yet he proved a physician for men, he appointed
Hosander to be a physician for men, and he proved a physician for horses. He is
not like these no, no, he will heal those whom he was appointed to heal: now
God appointed him to heal thee that art broken in heart, and therefore without
doubt he will do it.

2. Because Christ has undertaken to do it. When a skillful Physician has
undertaken a cure, he will surely do it: indeed sometimes a good physician may
fail, as Trajans physician did, for he died under his hands; on whose tomb this
was written, Here lies Trajan the Emperor, that may thank his Physician that
he died. But if Christ undertake it, thou may be sure of it, for he tells thee
that art broken in heart, that he has undertaken it, he has felt thy pulse
already. Thus says the high and holy one whose name is holy; I dwell in the
high and holy place, and with him that is of an humble and broken spirit, etc.
Isa. 57. 15. He does not only undertake it, but he says he will go visit his
sick patient; he will come to thy bedside, yea he will come and dwell with
thee all the time of thy sickness; thou shall never want any thing* but he
will be ready to help thee* thou need not complain and say, Oh the Physician
is too far off, he will not come at me. I dwell in the high places indeed,
says God, but yet I will come and dwell with thee that art of an humble
spirit. Thou need not fear, saying, Will a man cure his enemies? I have been
an enemy to Gods glory, and will he yet cure me? yea, says Christ, if thou be
broken in heart, he will bind thee up.

Thirdly, because this is Christ's charge, and he will look to his own calling;
To this man will I look, even to him that is of a broken heart, Isa. 66. 2.
Mark, I will look to him, I will tend him and keep him. Neither need thou
fear thine own poverty, because thou have not a Fee to give him; for thou
may come to him by way of begging, he will look to thee for nothing; For, to
him will I look that is poor, etc.

Fourthly, none but the broken in heart will take Physic of Christ. Now this
is a Physicians desire, that his Patient would cast himself upon him; if he
will not, the Physician has no desire to meddle with him. Now none but the
broken in heart will take such Physic as Christ gives, and therefore he says,
To him will I look that is of a broken heart, and trembles at my words, Esai.
66. 2. When I bid him take such a purge says God, he trembles, and he takes
it. I bid him take such a bitter Potion, or such an untoothsome vomit, to fear
him from sin; he trembles at my word, and he dares not but off with it: But
when a soul does not tremble, then the Physician may say, let him blood; but he
cares not for being let blood; he cares not for corrosives, he cares not for
his advice and counsel, he trembles not at his word; Christ will never come at
such a one, Christ bids thee follow such a diet as to watch, to pray, to fast,
to mourn, etc. to keep in and to take heed to catechizing, grow not cold by
being lukewarm, etc. If thou tremble at his word, well, if not, but that thou will go on in thy sins, and be damned for ever, then thank thine own
wilfulness. But if thou be broken in heart. Christ will assuredly heal
thee. Suppose thou should come unto Christ, be his physic never sovereign,
and thou should take it: yet if thy heart be against it, the physic cannot
work. Imagination or fancy is a great thing in the good or ill success of
physic. If thou carpe at his precepts, as too strict, and except against his
word as if he had an ounce of wormwood too much in it; If thy imaginations thus
run against the physic, Christ's physic will never cure thee; why so? thou art
not broken in heart, to tremble at his word; he will help thee without fail;
but then thou must tremble at his word, and take his directions, though he
prescribe thee to eat thine own dung, and drink thine own piss; take it I say
what ever it be, and I will warrant thee health.

But thou will reply, I have but a little faith.

I answer, so had Peter; O thou of little faith wherefore did thou doubt?
says our Savior, Matthew. 14. 13. There is a little faith, and there is a great
faith; O woman great is thy faith, Matthew. 15. 28. whether it be a little faith
or a great faith, so it be true saving justifying faith, it is good physic,
and it will assuredly cure thee. It is not the quantity of faith that saves a
man, but the quality of faith. True it is, a great quantity of faith, because
it has more of the quality, more of the truth, it heals more strongly and more
steadily; But faith whether it be great or small, so it be true, that does the
deed. Shall the Patient doubt of his recovery because of the small measure of
physic that the Physician gives him, the Physician gives but a dram of such a
powder, but perhaps the Patient would have a pound, when as it may be the state
of his body will not bear it. The Physician observes his measures in prescribing
so many ounces of this, so many scruples of that; therelies his skill in giving
the true measure, so there is the true measure of faith, Rom 12. 3. one man
has so much, and another man has not so much faith. Abraham had more faith
than Lot; the reason is, because the state of Lots soul would not bear so much
as Abraham's. It is one of Hippocrates Aphorisms, Not too much at once.

A Physician finds it dangerous sometime to empty the body at once, or to fill
it all at once, or to heat it, or to cool it all at once; it is the safest way
to give by little and little; so God by little and little deals with thee; now
he gives thee some faith, and then a little more.

Object.
O but my faith is smothered; how then can I expect to be healed?

Answer.
I answer, a man is sick, and Violets will cure him; now the Physician makes a
compound confection, so that the Violets do not appear, but only in oil;
Now, will the Patient thus argue, I cannot see one leaf of a Violet, no nor yet
so much as color, therefore I will none of it, it will not heal me? So God
gives many a soul unguentum fidei, an oil of faith, now it may be the soul
cannot see one jot of faith in himself, yet he shall be cured, because there is
faith in a confection, a mixed faith though there be none in manifestation.
Thou weepest, mournest, doubtest, and complainest, and thou can not believe
as thou say; yet thou never give over crying, my God my God; well, here is
faith in a confection, but it may be it is so compounded with other ingredients
that thou can not perceive it; for you must know that there is faith so great
it breaks out into a flame, and there is faith which is so small that it does
but smoke out a little; now whether thy faith be an inflamed faith or a smoking
faith, be of good comfort, thou shall be healed. The bruised Reed shall not be
broken, Mat. 12. 28.

Object.
But I am broken all to shatters, and I have no faith at all, how then can I
hope to be cured?

Answer.
I answer, as thy heart may be broken, and yet be a right heart; so thy faith
may be broken, and yet be a true faith: For it is sometimes bound up in the
whole, sometimes it is broken, and all to pieces. A man that is broken in
heart, although he have no faith bound up together in one act, yet he has it
broken in sunder; never a part is missing, though no part closing one with
another. The one whole act of faith is this, I believe that God is my God in
Christ. Indeed it may be thou have not this faith in the whole, but if thou
be broken in heart, thou have this whole broken in pieces.

First, thou beleevest that God is a God, there is one piece.

Secondly, thou beleevest that whomsoever God is a God unto, it is only in
Christ.

Thirdly, thou beleevest that he that truly repents, may say that God is his
God in Christ.

Fourthly, thou believe that repentance is a true hatred of sin as it is sin.

Fifthly, thou beleevest, and thy conscience tells thee it is so indeed that
thou hate sin, not only as it is able to damn thee, but also as it is sin,
and dishonorable to God; now these are the parts of faith in the whole. Thou
have all the parts of the whole, though thou have not these parts in the whole.
Well then, thou have all the parts of true faith; as thou c^nst not deny if
thou be broken in heart. Totum non differt realiter a partibus simul
sumptis. All the parts and the whole do not differ really, says the
Philosopher; he that has three groats, cannot complain he wants a shilling; he
that has ruff and stock and string, can he be far to seek for a band? so
then if thou have faith in the parts on this fashion, it is certain thou have
faith in the whole, though it appear not yet to be whole.

Aristotle asks this question, whether the parts be before the whole or no;
as for example, whether a man or a finger be first. I will not stand here to
determine this question; but this is certain, that the whole is a relative
thing, spoken in relation to its parts, and it is like the relation begins in
the whole; for first, we say that a whole is that which consists of parts, and
then the parts are they that make up the whole, and therefore if thou verily
beleevest in part, thou verily beleevest indeed. Thus David was a believer in
part, my very soul says he is consumed with grief, Psalm. 31. 9. my strength
fails me because of mine iniquity, etc. verse 10. I am forgotten as a dead
man, etc. verse 12. he was a vessel of election, but yet you may see he was a
broken vessel; he could not believe in the whole, for he was afraid that God
had cast him out of his mind, like a dead and an undone man; nevertheless he
was a believer in part, he was Gods broken vessel.

Obj.
But I am sure I have no faith, I go whining and crying up and down, I look upon
my sins with horror, I look upon Christ with horror, not a minime of faith
that I have, how then can I be healed?

Answer.
Have thou a grounded resolution to seek after God come what can come of it?
Do thou desire and long to be united with Christ? Then let me tell thee,
suppose thou have no faith yet in being, yet thou have something to secure thee
from wrath; there is difference between Fides creditura and Fides credens,
between faith about to believe, and faith that does already believe. It is
belief believing, that saves a man: But belief about to believe, cures a man
from being a reprobate. Though the fruit in the womb be not yet quickened with
a reasonable soul, yet it grows in the womb, feeds in the womb, and yet it
has no other life in it than may be in a beast; yet because it is in fieri a
man, the Mother complains not, saying, Oh I am afraid I have a beast in my
womb; no, she will wait Gods leisure to quicken it; it is secure enough from
being a beast; for it has such dispositions as will not long be without the
soul of a man in the same, though as yet there be nothing in it, but what may
be in a beast; But yet the Mother is secured because she is persuaded she bears
a babe in her womb. So many poor souls are too hasty to censure themselves; for
grant thou have no faith as yet, yet if thou be broken in heart, thou art
about to have faith; only let the word have his full work on thee, unto which
thou must diligently attend, and then fides in fieri will be quickly fides in
facto esse. Thus the blind man in the Gospel was about to believe before he
believed; he had a time of a fieri of faith; he was no believer at this time;
for he had as yet no faith; neither was he an unbeleever; for he was about to
believe. Do thou believe on the Son of God? says Christ, John 9. 35. he
answered, who is he Lord that I might believe on him? verse 39. Believe? yea
that I would with all my heart, who is he, and where is he that I might
believe? I have been hated for his names sake, I have been cast out of the
Synagogue for his sake; Lord thou know I would believe on him; but who is he
and where is he ^ and he is vanished away from me, I have sought him, but I
cannot find him. Then Christ told him, I am he that now talks with thee; and
then he believed; and Saint Chrysostom observes that this blind man was about
to believe, before he did desire it in his soul; and so it may be it is now
with thee; do thou believe in Christ? Who is he? say thou, where shall I
find that Christ is in me that I may believe in him? I weep and hunger, and I
thirst after Christ; but who and where is he? I have sought him in the word;
but I find him not; I have sought him in prayer and in all other his
ordinances; but I find him not; I would believe with all my heart if I could
find him. Thus the soul may be about to believe, though it do not already
believe; have thou gotten this same about to believe? be not thou dismayed, the
plaster is come; and it will heal thee.

Conceive these words aright I beseech you; a speech is not as it is taken, I
mean only the broken in heart; for otherwise a man may be about to believe, yet
never believe; about to be healed of his sins, yet never be healed. Even like
the wretch that Zophar speaks of, who shall be about to fill his belly, and
not be able to fill it Job 20. 23.

There is a twofold about to be; First, either such a thing as is about to be,
and that is the nature of it, and it will never be otherwise; but still only
about to be. Secondly, or else such a thing as is about to be, and that is the
progress of it, and not to rest there, but at the last to be indeed.

Fear you then, all you that are vain, and as yet in your sins; you are about
to believe, and that is the nature of your faith; it is only about to believe;
like the officers of the next year, who are about to be officers and yet are
not. Beloved, never look to be healed, if you be not broken in heart; It may be
thou art broken from some of thy sins; but if thou be not broken from them all,
it is nothing; and thou can not be healed. Alas thou may be broken in some
sense, and yet never be healed. There is a double breaking, says Aristotle,
either breaking into great parts, as wood is broken into logs; or breaking into
small parts, as a stone is broken into powder; it may be thy stony heart is
broken, but it is only into lesser stones, thou art fallen from greater sins to
lesser, from bousing and company keeping, to drinking and sipping; from playing
and gaming on the Sabbath, to talking of worldly affairs on the Sabbath, from
praying not at all, to pray coldly. Alas, alas thou have a hard heart still;
when a great stone is broken into lesser stones, the lesser stone is as hard as
a great stone; thy heart must be broken to powder, if ever God heal thee.

First, because Physic will never cure a man, unless it may enter and run
into the veins; and when it is entered into the body, and diffused up and down
through all the diseased parts thereof, then it cures; now if thy heart be not
broken, the Physic cannot enter; give a purgation to a stone, it may moysten
the outside, but it cannot soak in, to soften the stone; why? because the stone
is close, but if the stone were broken into powder, then it would soak even
into the heart of the stone.

God opened the heart of Lydia, and then the word entered* Acts 16. 14.
Brethren, you have been under the hands of Christ's Physicians ever since you
were born; but where is the heart that is broken? all the Physic is lost the
word has no entrance, it has skinned the wound; seared the outside indeed;
but the hardness of the heart is not cured. How long have you been under
Physic for the curing of your earthlinesse and vanity? how long have you lion
by it for your anger and malice, etc under the means, yet never the nearer?
whose hearts are broken? I fear the physic does not soake, it comes no nearer
than the outside. The Lord is nigh unto them that are of a broken heart, Psalm.
34. 18. why? because their hearts are open and broken; and Christ and his word
comes near, yea so near that it touches them to the quick. But if ye be not
broken in heart, no Balm, no Physic can come near enough to cure you.

Secondly, thou can never be cured, unless Christ cure thee; now Christ will
never take thee in hand till thou be broken in heart. A Physician will not
meddle with a desperate cure, such a one who is not capable of Physic. Let not
any Physician says Hippocrates set upon a fruitless cure. Now it is
fruitless to give thee any Physic, it is fruitless to pour grace into thee,
or to vouchsafe pardon to thee; this Physic will never heal thee so long as
thou art not broken in heart; and therefore Christ scorns to take thee in hand.
True it is if thou were broken in heart, God would not despise thee* for the
sacrifice of God is a broken spirit; so says the Psalmist, A broken and a
contrite heart O God shall thou not despise, Psalm. 51. 17. so then if thy heart
be not yet broken, it is yet incurable. Indeed if we consider Christ's absolute
power, no heart is incurable; for he can heal it what ever it be, for all is
at his command. But God does not go according to his absolute power, but
according to his expression and meaning of, and in his word; now the method
that God sets down in his word; is thus; first the heart must be broken, and
then it must, or may be healed; so then so long as thou art not broken in
heart, thou art incurable.

Thirdly, suppose Christ should begin to heal thee, thou being not broken in
heart, wilt always be taking off the plaster before thou be cured; sometimes
God terrifies thee with the ^aw, and then thou pullest off that plaster; Even
like unto a dainty Dame, who having taken physic, and feeling it begin to
wamble in her stomach, puts a feather in her throat to cause her to vomit it
up, before it have its full working. And thus many take hopes and comforts and
promises before the set time.

In some physic, a quarter of an hours difference may cost one his life; when
a man is to be cut of the stone, and he be bound hand and foot, yet if he do
but stir or struggle before the Surgeon has quite done with him, it is a
thousand to one but he dies for it; so they in the second Psalm had a stone in
the heart; Christ would have cut them for the stone, but they would not be
bound, they would not endure their cutting, no let us break his bonds asunder,
and cast away his cords from us, Ps. 2. 3. men cannot be smitten at a Sermon,
but oh they must presently have comfort; as soon as once the physic begins to
make the head to ache, and the stomach to be sick, and the man to be exceeding
ill, it is a sign that the physic does now begin to work; but if this man
should devise how to vomit it up, or to clyster it out, he loses all the
benefit of the physic; keep this plaster on as long as thou can, if ever
thou mean to be healed. If the wound be thoroughly whole, the plaster will fall
away of it self. Should a man have never so good a plaster and should every
foot be taking it off, it would never do him any good. If God have shot an
arrow into thy heart, bind the plaster to the sore, and let it there rest till
the malignity of the sore and venom of the wound be put out. But if thou be not
broken in heart, it is in vain to minister or to say any thing unto thee,
because thou will not abide the physic within thee, nor suffer the gripes that
thou must suffer if ever thou be healed. And therefore all you that are broken
in heart, in any measure or manner, be of good cheer, the Lord will heal you;
he heals the broken in heart.

See here these particulars.

First, for the seasonablenesse of it, when it is a seasonable time to be
healed, and that is when the heart is in need, and it is in need when it is
broken; as a man is in need of meat, when he is hungry; so a man is in need of
healing, when he is broken in heart: God will give thee that which thou
need, and that in due season says Augustine* In an acceptable time have I
heard thee, I saiah 49. 8. God looks when it will be most seasonable to give
grace, and then he gives it; therefore wait, never complain of Gods delaying
hand; if he do, it is but for a better season; I have need of healing already
say thou; but if God do not yet heal thee, then thou must know it is not yet
seasonable, and the more need thou art in, the better welcome is help when it
comes.

Secondly, when it is most profitable for thee; when he is broken in heart, it
will do him good to be healed* but if God should heal thee before, it would
hurt thee; when the Corrosive has wrought out his work, then it is good to
have a Cordial; now the Cordial will help the man; but if the Physician should
give him a Cordial first, it would help the disease, and endamage the man.
Comfortable Cordials, before the time, have been the damnation of many souls.
Oh thou would feign have comfort for thy soul; what? before the Corrosive
has eaten out the sin? thou wishest thine own poison; If God let thee wait for
thy healing, understand that he does it for thy good; only let his Corrosives
work their full course, and then he will heal thee. Wait on the Lord says
David, Psalm. 27. 14. give not over waiting, how long so ever it be, and he will
heal thee assuredly when it shall be best for thee.

Thirdly, in puncto, even just in the very nick of thy brokennesse in heart
will his healing come. It is well observed that the word in the original is
put in the participle, indifferent to any time, whether past, present, or to
come, he does not set down any time, because he will do it punctually, just at
the pinch, when thou art broken in heart; Oh then if thou be not yet healed,
know then that thou art not yet come to this punctum; but when thou art come to
it, then thou shall be healed. What if thou do lie under the heavy and
frowning hand of God? do not shake it off, but kiss that rod, and humble thy
self the more: Sometims God lets a broken heart shake off his hand a little to
soon, sometimes again he will not let them. David would feign have shaken it
off; but he could not; God would not let him. Lord rebuke me not in thine
anger, says he, etc, Psalm. 38. 1, 2. How did he know that Gods arrows stuck in
him fast? It seems that he had been pulling at them; he would feign have had
them out, he would have been comforted all on the sudden, but he could not;
God would not let him. Lord rebuke me not (says he) in thine indignation, etc.
Rebuke me as much as thou will, but let it not be in thine indignation; chasten
me as much as thou will, but let it not be in thy heavy displeasure. Oh pluck
ou^ thine arrows, take off thy hand; I pluck at them, but they stick fast; I
shake and rub to get off thy hand, but it presses me so ^^re that I cannot get
it off* Beloved, it is necessary that some while Gods own people should bleed
under Gods wrath; for by this means the corruption of sin is purged out. Thus
you see in some God will not let them shake off his hand; others, if they will
needs have it off, they shall, that they may afterward see their own folly.
Thus many a poor child of God, in conflict of conscience and sense of Gods
wrathful displeasure, scrapes comfort too soon, and God lets them take it
before he gives it: he would have had them first thoroughly cured, but they were
loath to be humbling their souls so long: but see the event of it, the sore is
only skinned over, and at the last the wound it breaks forth a fresh, and then
it may be they lie seven years rogether and get no comfort, yea sometimes
twenty years, yea, I have known some that have lived so thirty years. Now they
may thank their own folly; for if they would have been ruled by Christ, and
been humbled altogether at the first, they might have escaped this scouring;
but now they repent it every vein in their hearts, and can hardly claw it off
until death. I call these the children of God, because they have layen a long
while under Gods hand, and yet still cry after God, it is a sign they are his
children; for Gods children are many times in affliction a long while; see it
in Job, etc. Neither can I believe but that all those that lie sundry years on
this fashion still crying after God; are the children of God; or at the least,
it is so to be hoped: for if they were reprobates, and had shaken off Gods
hand, plucked out his arrows, and scraped after comfort, he would either let
them fall into a perpetual fools* paradise of presumption or security, or else
let them moulder away in despair, not caring to seek after God in the means
at all. And therefore, beloved, pluck not out Gods arrows too soon: I speak
not to all, for some will not pluck them out when they should; but I speak to
all such as are over hasty for to get Cordials before the Corrosive have had
his full working* If men be never so little humbled, reformed, or wrought upon,
presently they think they be in very good case: the very Heathen could say, we
are commonly deceived with seeming virtue and grace; and hence it is that
wicked men are humbled by halves, They think they are thoroughly humbled, when
their hearts are broken by halves; they think they are broken in heart. And as
a stick that is half in the water, and half above the water, seems to be broken
or bent in the midst; so these men when they are half in their sins, and half
out, seem to themselves to be broken hearted: But if the stick were either all
in the water, or all out, it would appear as it is: it seems to be broken, when
as it is not: so, many being half in their sins, and half out, seem to be
brokenhearted, when indeed they are not.

But (beloved) before I can give you the healing here in this text, it is good
reason that I examine you whether you be broken in heart, or no. Prognostica
praecedunt Therapeuticen, says Argastus; Prognostiques, and telling the signs
and symptoms of the disease, are before the healing of the disease. When we
believe a thing to be so, we have a proverb to say, it is a signe' it is so. Do
thou say thou art broken in heart? It Is a sign 'ris so, they carriage is so
mortified; A sign it is so, thy communication is so heavenly; A sign it is so,
thy companions so holy, etc. If a man cannot cast thy water on this fashion,
thou art not broken in heart. And therefore Signa tibi dicam, etc. I will help
the signs and symptoms of a broken heart, that so thou may examine thy self.

The signs I reduce to these two heads.

First, A breaking from sin, as a rotten member is broken from the body; so
that the heart is then said to be broken indeed, when it is broken off from sin.

Secondly, a breaking in it self, so that the heart is said to be broken when
it is broken with sorrow and self-denial, so that nothing can piece it up
again, but the favor of God. These two make up a broken heart, and therefore
they shall be the heads of examination.

First then, do thy sins go thick away from thee? when the cold is once broken
we use to say, now it is going away, not in the rheum as before, but in thick
fleam. If thou be broken in heart, then thy pride, thy earthlinesse, thy
self-love, thy deadness to good duties, and all thy sins go thick from thee.
It may be thou have some poares in thy heart, and thy sins fall away from thee
in the rheum, but if they go not away from thee in thick fleame, the cold of
thy frozen heart is not yet broken. The sins of Zaccheus were injustice and
oppression, etc. but as soon as ever he was broken in heart, these sins went
away thick from him, not dropping as if he were loath they should part, but in
great flakes, Zaccheus stood (says the text) and said unto the Lord, behold
half of my goods I give to the poor, etc. Luke 19. 8. see how his sins went
away; every word voids thick fleam.

First, he stood; before he clymed and gazed after Christ, but being broken in
heart, he stood ready pressed to do whatsoever Christ would command him.

Secondly, he said unto Christ; before Christ might have said unto him what he
would; what cared he? but now that he is broken in heart, here is hardly a word
that Christ said unto him of any such matter, yet he said to Christ.

Thirdly, Behold, before his behold was carnal, he did what he did to be seen
of men, if ever he gave ought, he loved that men should behold, but now all his
care was that Christ would behold it.

Fourthly, I give. Before he thought, I will give was enough, I will give when
I die, I will build hospitals when I am dead; but now that he is broken in
heart, he gives it forthwith.

Fifthly, the half of my goods; before he counted a penny o^ a farthing to a
poor body, a great matter, a great dole, if given now and then; but now that he
is broken in heart, the half and not only of the superfluity, but also of his
very substance and goods, as it is in the original, I give to the poor, not as
men commonly do, light come, light go; it may be they feast their rich
neighbors, but he gives half his substance to the poor Saints of God.

Sixthly, And if I have taken any thing wrongfully, though it were not much; If
I have taken any thing, though not from the rich and great ones, but from any,
rich or poor, young or old, stranger or not stranger, no matter who; if I have
taken any thing from any man by false accusation, not only against Law, where
the Law binds me to restitution, but if I have taken any thing by forged
cavillation, though the Law will boulster me out, yet I restore him; he did not
say, I give him, as many will do, calling that which should properly be called
restitution for wrong, a gift, I give, say they; he says not so; but he
casts off the thought of a gift, and does what he does by way of restitution.

Seventhly, If I have taken anything; before he could swallow down the known
wrongs that he did; but now that he is broken in heart, he makes amends for the
wrongs which peradventure he did not, to be sure, If I have taken, I restore,
his restitution goes absolute; although his wrongs go upon ifs, I restore him
says he; and that not nigardly or scantly, or no more than needs must, but
fourfold. Thus he reasons; now he is broken in heart; his sins go thick away
from him.

The text but even now called him little Zaccheus, before he had seen Christ;
merito adhuc pusillus quia nondum viderat Christum; Justly might he be said to
be little Zacheus, because then he had not seen Christ; but as soon as ever he
had seen Christ whom he had wronged by these wrongs; as soon as ever he was
broken in heart, he became a great repenter, his sins ran thick away from him.
As soon as the boil is broken, out comes the matter; As soon as the vein is
broken, out comes the blood, true it is a drop of blood may come though the
vein be not broken; if the finger be but rac'd a few drops may come, but if the
vein be once broken, out comes the blood thick and threefold; If thou do but
crop off thy sins now and then, thy heart was never broken; for if thou wast
once broken in heart, thy reformation would come apace, thy repentance and thy
amendment would come thick and threefold; but if we preach and exhort, and yet
see but thin reformation in thee, as a sigh or so, thou wast never yet broken
in heart: if thy heart be yet full of thy self-love, full of thy pride, lusts,
etc. if thy affections be yet full of earthly desires, worldly delights, vain
hopes, carnal fears; if thy back be yet full of thy garish and humerous
apparel, thy heart is not yet broken; why? because the filthy matter runs not
out.

Zaccheus when he was broken in heart, his corruptions ran out apace; both his
unreadinesse to good duties, and his deadness and dullness to holy duties:
Christ need not say much unto him, for he said unto Christ, his desire of the
credit of the world ran out, for he gave the half of his goods to the poor,
his backwardness and delaying ran out, for he made present dispatch, I give,
his very secret unknown iniquities ran out, if I have taken, etc. All his sins
ran thick away from him. Why? because a broken heart can hold no sin, this is
the first sign of a broken heart from sin, if it be broken from its sinful
course.

The second is, if it be broken from its wildness: the Hauk is then broken
when it is made fit for the I^^e, and the colt is broken when made fit for the
saddle, if he be not broken, he will not be willing the rider shall come on his
back man is borne like a wild Ass colt, Job 11. 12. so thou wast borne, and so
thou have been, and art thou not as yet broken from it? if thou be broken in
heart, then thy heart is ^ame to every commandment, to every truth, and thy
affections are tame to every precept. It is Calvin's similitude, thou art not
yet (says he) fit for Gods saddle, if thou let the Devil, the world, or any
lust ride thee, thou must be broken from thy wildness, or else thou art not
broken in heart; it may be thou art a little bridled from thy lusts, alas so
thou may be, yet be wild for all that. Be not like those beasts Psalm. 32. 9.
For though they be bridled and held in, yet they are wild still, Be not like
horse and mule, says Ambrose, for though they suffer bit and bridle, yet had
they rather be at rack and manger, or at grass in the field, they delight not
to be sadled.

Do thou not despise to be curbed by the word, to be bitten by reproof,
would thou not rather be free? God casts in good motions into thy heart,
and thou casts them out, and they vanish; God puts in good purposes into thy
heart, but thou flingest them off, and do not fulfill them, like a wild horse
that flings off his rider. Thou can not be crossed a little but presently thou
art wild with choler and anger; thy flesh and blood cannot endure it, and do
thou yet say that thou art broken in heart? no, no, thou wast born a wild Ass
Colt, and so thou art still. Thou were born a wild olive, and so thou art
still. Thou wast never yet broken in heart, never yet broken from sin; if thou
were broken from thy wildness, then every exhortation would tame thee; then
thou would be glad to be reproved, and controuled by the word; Thou would
leap at every commandment, were it never so strict; But if thou count it
preciseness and too much strictness to be holy and zealous, I say thou art
yet but a wild colt. Oh my brethren we have many amongst us who are like
Ishmael, who was a wild man, Genesis 16. many wild men, who pray wildly, and think
wildly, and hear wildly; their hearts are wild gadding hearts, while the word
is preachiug, they follow their own imaginations.

Dare thou venture upon any sin against the Gospel of Christ, and dare thou
live in it till thou art a wicked Bedlam? The Psalmist brings all such in as if
they were mad Bedlams, saying; why do the heathen so furiously rage, etc.
Christ would have bound them, but they forsooth were too wild; they would not
be bound, but say they let us break his bonds, and fling off his cords: they
will not be bound to such strictness: dare thou swear and lie and covet, and
be drunk? etc. alas man thou art in a mad vain. Dare thou break the sabbath,
live in thy lusts, etc. a fury has taken thee, thou art a madman, God must
break that wild heart of thine, else thou can not be tamed, it may be thou
art bridled from sin, but do thou bridle thy self, if not, thou art wild for
all the bridling thou have: you never saw a horse bridle himself, no, no, it is
wild, peradventure thou do bridle thy self when thou art not much tempted;
but if thou be broken in heart, thou will refrain all provocations
whatsoever. I will keep my mouth, etc. Psalm. 39. 1. while the Devil was before
him, as Hierom expounds it, or while Shimei was before him to tempt him with
wicked reproaches and disgraceful speeches, as Baz^^ and Theodoret expound it,
then would David keep his tongue as with a bridle, when he was greatly tempted
to sin. Here then is all the ^ri^ll; can thou bridle thy self from sin when
thou art tempted to sin? if thou be broken in heart, thou can; but if thou
can not, thou art wild unto this day. The wild beasts are tame enough till a
prey comes before them, and so thou may be tame when temptations are down;
but art thou tame when a temptation is before thee. This is a second sign of
brokennesse of heart, if thou be broken from thy wildness.

Thirdly, if thou be broken in heart, then thou art broken from thy pride, and
thou will stoop to Gods word in all things. A broken heart is an humble heart,
I dwell with him, says God, Isaiah 37. 15. p^idei, the root of all sin; what
is the reason that any da^e sin, but because they think better of themselves in
their sins then they do deserve? for did a man but think he were accursed and a
damned wretch in sinning against God he durst never sin, or did a man feel
that every sin, maks a man filthy? yea more filthy then a toad; did a man feel
his own damned condition, he durst not live in sin? a man thinks better of
himself th^n he deserves whenever he sins against God Hear and give ear and
be not proud, for the Lord has spoken it, Jer. 13. 15. If the Lord speak, and
thou do not hear and obey, thou a^t proud. Oh but I am not proud, then think
thou, for I will hear the poorest body in the street, when they spea^ to me yea
and I will, and do give the wall to my betters will thou so? will thou give man
the wall, and take the W^ll of God? is not this pride? swear not says God; yet
thou wi^t take the wall of that commandment, and swe^^est. Let not the Sun go
down upon thy wrath says God; thou take the wall of that commandment too;
and can remember an ill turn, a month after, so, etc. This is execrable and
abominable pride. Thou seek after thy profits and pleasures more than after
the glory of God. I cannot live else, says one; I cannot be merry else, says
another; and I must tell a lie now and then, and must suffer bousing and
swearing in my house, or else I cannot live. Thou proud wretch, what must ^hy
mirth and thy credit pe^ke above the commandment of Christ? The wicked through
the pride of his countenance will not seek after God, Psalm. 10. 4. It is wicked
pride indeed, when thou seek thy self more than God. I tell thee, the word
has not broken the heart, until it has broken the neck of this pride of
thine; never tell me that thou art not proud in thy apparel; if a servant go
never so meanly in apparel, yet he is proud if he obey not all his Masters
lawful and good commandments; never tell me thou bowest to God or thou
kneelest in prayer to God; cluck and crouch, bow and bend thou never so much,
yet thou art proud, if every corruption of thine will not yield to every
commandment of God; thou art not broken in heart; for if thou were broken in
heart, thou would stoop to all Gods commandments. Do thou mock at
preaching, etc. Tush, thou will not be so precise, If ever thou be one of his,
thou will not only obey him, but also be circumspect in all thy obedience; nay
if thou be broken in heart, thou will not only stoop to every commandment of
God, but also count it thine honor and glory, though it be the meanest office
in his service. Thou art my glory says David, David that was broken from his
pride, counted it his glory to obey God, his glory to serve God, yea his glory
to be reproched for his sake. Thou art not broken in heart till thou count it
thine excellency to serve God. We use to say such a ones excellency is in his
learning or wit, etc. but he is too precise and too holy, as if it were not a
man's excellency to be pure and zealous, and to serve God: But I tell thee if
thou count it not thine honor to be forward for God and to be nicknamed for
Christ, thine excellency to lie in this, that thou art godly and heavenly, thou
art a proud fool; when John Husse was to write upon the Epistle of Saint James,
he counted it such an high office of dignity that he was confounded at his own
indignity, saying unto God, Hei mihi laudare te contremisco; he counted it such
an honor to do any thing for God, that he was ashamed at his own vileness. O
my brethren God is called the excellency of Jacob; it was not their valor nor
wisdom, but this was their excellency, that God was their God; thy riches are
proud riches if thy excellency lie in them more than in God; if thou do not
go about every commandment as thine excellency, thy obedience is proud. This is
a third sign of a heart broken from sin, if it be broken from its pride.

A Funeral SERMON Preached By that laborious and faithful Messenger of CHRIST,
WILLIAM FENNER, Sometimes Fellow of Pembroke Hall in Cambridge, and late
Minister of Rochford in Essex.

London, Printed by E. T. for John Stafford.

A Funeral SERMON.
ISAI. 57. 1. The righteous perish, and no man lays it to heart, merciful
men are taken away none considering that the righteous are taken away from the
evil to come.
IN the end of the former chapter the Prophet reproves the special sin of
Idol-shepheards who followed their own pleasures and profits, not regarding
their flock. Now he reproves the general sin of security in the people, and
namely in this, that whereas the righteous perish, yet no man lays it to
heart, and merciful men are taken away, none considering etc.

This verse is a complaint of the Prophet touching the people in general, for
that they considered not the Judgments of God upon them in taking away the
righteous from among them.

In the words themselves we are to consider,

First, the work of the Lord, viz. the righteous perishes and merciful men
are taken away.

Secondly, the peoples sin in not considering it, not regarding this work of
the Lord, which is, that the righteous may be delivered from the evil to come.

By righteous is here meant not such as are legally righteous by the works of
the law; for so no man is righteous, but by righteous is here meant such as are
Evangelically righteous, by the righteousness of faith in the Gospel.

Perishes, that is, from the earth, for otherwise the righteous perish not.

No man considering, that is, no man lamenting, mourning, or grieving for the
loss of them.

The first thing then to be considered, is from the first part; and it is
plain out of the words of the text, That all men must dye; even the most holy
and most righteous; for they are all subject to the stroke of bodily death as
well as the wicked. There is no remembrance says Solomon, of the wise more
than of the fool; and how dies the wise man? even as the fool, Eccles 2. 16.
so zachar. 1. 5. Your fathers where are they? and the Prophets ^o they live for
ever? so that we sce Prophets and fathers dye as well as other men; yea those
Worthies recorded in the Scripture, Noah, Abraham, David, etc. they are all
gone the same way, they are all dead.

The first reason is, because it is appointed unto all men once to dye, and
after that comes the judgment, Heb. 9. 27. God has thus decreed it, and
therefore it must be so.

Secondly, because all men and women are of the dust; and therefore must return
to the dust again; dust thou art, says God, and unto dust thou shall return,
Genesis 3. 19.

Thirdly, because, all have sinned, even the most righteous man; now the wages
of sin is death, Romans 6. 23. The most righteous man must dye.

Fourthly because, as death came into the world by sin, Romans 5. 12. so
sin must go out of the world by death; and therefore it is needful that the
righteous dye, that so they may be freed from sin.

But some may object and say, Has not Christ abolished death? why then do the
righteous die?

I answer he has abolished death; as he has abolished sin; now he has not
taken sin quite away from us, for we see it does still remain in us; neither
has he quite abolished death from the righteous, for we see they all dye; but
he abolished the dominion of sin, so that it does no longer reign in us; and so
he has taken away the dominion of death, so that it does not rage as a Tyrant
over us, so that it is not hurtful unto us as a punishment, but as a means to
convey us into a better life. Christ has taken away the sting both of sin and
death; though not the things themselves away from us; yet he will one day free
us from them both; so then the righteous must suffer death as well as the
wicked, though not in the same kind.

Let no man then look to be exempted from death for his righteousness, nor
from any outward miseries that may befall the sons of Adam; nay if we are the
servants of Christ, we must look for a greater share in these than other men;
greater crosses, greater afflictions, greater sickness and harder pangs of
death do often befall the righteous, as ^^ did unto this our brother, who though
he were old and stricken (...) years, yet the pangs of death were strong upon
him. Those whom (...) will make heirs of Eternal life, he suffers them to have
a greater po^^^on in these afflictions. But the wicked are fat and full, and
die with ^^eir bones full of marrow, as Job speaks; they commonly have little
sickness, and an easy death; but the godly do ordinarily undergo greater
pangs; let none therefore think that for his righteousness he shall be free.

Secondly, consider we here how few amongst us have learned this Arithmetique,
namely to number our days, and they are but short, even a span long; who is
there almost that thinks on death? who prepares himself for it? and yet all,
even the most righteous must die; for God has placed that fiery blade of death
at the entrance into the Paridise of heaven, so that none can enter before they
taste of death, and all must taste of it, yea the most righteous are not
exempted from the stroke of death. This then should teach us to labor to draw
our hearts from the love of this present life; and what can better persuade us
and wean us from the love of this world, than a due consideration of death? we
know we must all die, and therefore we should prepare our selves for it. If any
profane person amongst us knew that this night must be his last night, and
that now he had no longer to live, would not this amaze him, and make him
bethink himself, and to prepare for death? If rich covetous men which spend the
whole course of their life in providing for the things of this life, did truly
consider of death, and that their end draws nigh, would they do as they do,
when this life and all the things of this life, and all our joys and pleasures
of this world shall shortly have an end? for when death comes, they shall all
be taken from us, or rather we from them. Oh how excellent a thing is it then
for us to be drawn from the things of this life, unto a due consideration of
death, and of those heavenly Joys and happiness to come! Oh you that look for
these things, what manner of men ought you to be in holy life and conversation?

Thirdly, seeing we all must die, and this present life must come to an end,
this should teach us to prepare our selves for a better life; to provide for a
surer building, a better estate which shall never perish. Philosophers who were
but heathen men, could meditate on death, setting it always before their eyes.
But this is not enough for us that are Christians; we cannot truly prepare our
selves for it unless we first build a surer foundation in providing for a
better life, which shall never have an end; and this no heathen or wicked man
can ever do. Oh how woeful would that message be unto a wicked man, that was
brought unto good King Hezekiah, Come, set thy house in order, for thou must
die, and not live; and why should it be terrible unto him? surely because he
has no hope of a better life, he has not provided for a better habitation.
Consider then with what comfort thou could entertain this message; with wh^^
comfort can thou meet with death? for he is no Christian that cannot in some
measure willingly meet with death, for by it we pas unto a better life: for as
this our brother spoke often, he that would have comfort in death, must look
beyond death; he must not fix his eyes on the terrors of death, but he must
look beyond, to that glorious inheritance, to which we are passing through
death, and there shall he behold his Savior putting forth his hand ready to
receive him; there shall he see the blessed Saints and Angels, whose company he
shall enjoy, besides an infinite heap of Joys and happiness that is prepared
for him also. O my beloved, nothing will make us willingly to entertain the
message of death, but only the comforts of the life to come. Oh let us labor
then for these comforts, that so we may be provided against death; were it not
a foolishness for a man who being a tennant at will, and shortly to be turned
out of his house, never to take care for another until he is cast out of doors?
Beloved we are all tennants at will, and we are very shortly to be cast out of
our dwelling houses of clay, and shall we not provide for a surer habitation?
Death is at hand, and our life must shortly have an end; let us therefore
labor to be assured of a better life, when this is ended, that so with comfort
we may meet with death.

Now we come unto the second point, which is here to be considered; taken from
the complaint of the Prophet, that the people did not consider nor lay it to
heart, viz. the death of the righteous, whence I note, That the death and loss
of good men must be laid to heart, as a special cause of grief and sorrow.

We ought justly to be grieved at the death of a righteous man, when God takes
him from amongst us. How did the Prophet Jeremy, and the people lament the
death of that good King Josiah? 2 Chronicles. 35. 23. so devout men made great
lamentation for the death of Stephen, Acts 8. 2. so all Israel lamented the
death of Moses Deuteronomy. 34. 8. And Joash the King of Israel wept for the death of
the Prophet Elisha, 2 Kings 13. 14. and thus we should lament and sorrow for
the death of any righteous man, yet not in respect of themselves, as if their
case were worse now then before, for they are now more happy.

But first, in regard of Gods glory, whereof they were instruments to set it
forth; for since they were taken away, Gods glory is impaired; because there
are the fewer left which do truly serve and worship him; for as David says,
the dead praise not the Lord, etc. Psalm. 115. 17. so then they being dead, do
not praise the Lord among the faithful on earth any longer.

Secondly, in regard of the great loss that others have by their death, who
have always received much good by them in their life; for the godly do so
order and behave themselves in all their ways that they do good wheresoever
they come; therefore when they die, it must needs be a great loss unto such
who might, if they had lived, been bettered by them.

Thirdly, We ought to lament the death of the righteous in regard of the evil
to come; for while they live, they are as a wall about us to keep Gods judgments
from us; If there had been but ten righteous men in Sodom, it had not been
destroyed, Genesis 18. 32. If there be any messenger one among a thousand, says
Elihu, to show unto man his uprightness, then is God gracious unto him Job 33.
23. Run ye to and fro in the streets of Jerusalem says God, and see if you can
find a man, if there be any that executes judgment, and seeks the Lord, and I
will pardon it, Jer. 5. 1. so that if there had been but one righteous man
among the people in that city, the Lord would have spared them even for that
ones sake; and therefore the Lord speaking of the righteous, says, I will
fasten him as a nail in a sure place, he shall be as a glorious throne unto his
fathers house. Esaias. 22. 23. Oh consider then what a loss we have when the
righteous dye; we are like to perish, when the nail that was in the sure place
is removed, cut down and falls; for then the burden that was upon it, shall be
cut off, Esaias 22. 25. You therefore of this Congregation, consider, and lament
for this your loss, in that this good man is taken from among you; for who
knows whether God spared this congregation even for this good man's sake? for
it is the righteous only that God respects, and for their sakes he will spare a
whole people; therefore surely as Solomon says, the righteous is better than
his neighbor, yea though never so poor and despised in the eyes of the world,
yet are they precious in Gods account; when I make up my Jewels (says God) I
will spare them, Mal. 3. 17. so that the righteous are Gods Jewels, the
excellent of the earth are precious in Gods sight; and have we not great cause
then to lament for the loss of such?

Seeing then it becomes all Gods children to lament the death of the
righteous; O how far then are all such from the spirit of God, who are so
far from lamenting that on the contrary they rejoice at the death of the
godly man, because he stood in their way? they could not follow their works of
darkness as they would, but he hindered them, he stood in their light, they
could not run on in sin and wickedness, but he would be reproving,
admonishing, and telling them of their faults, and this makes them long for the
good man's end, and to rejoice in it when it does come; these do not consider
that when the righteous is taken from the earth, then they lie open unto the
judgments of God; But as the Sodomites thrust out just Lot out of their city,
that so Gods vengeance might fall the sooner upon them; for till he was gone,
the Lord would not destroy them, Genesis 19. 21. Even so do these men desire to
be rid of the righteous, and rejoice when they are taken away from them, not
considering that they are open to Gods vengeance, which hangs over their
heads ready to devour them.

We ought then to be most grieved for the death of the righteous, when any of
the Saints are taken away by death. Oh what a comfort is a righteous man to the
children of God? what a feeling of grace is there in such a one? what
comfortable words come there from the mouth of such men? how full of
comfortable speeches was this poor man; always ministering comfort to those
that came to visit him? what a loss is this then unto us? it is more than if
thousands of the wicked had gone together; and shall we not mourn for the loss
of such a one? If one of our family or friends dye, we can mourn for them; and
good reason; and shall we not mourn for the loss of one of Gods Saints, one
of the spiritual family, one of our fellow members?

In this then examine thy self how it is with thee; when thou hear of any of
the faithful that are taken away, art thou grieved for it? do thou lament
and mourn for it? if thou do not, surely thou art no true Christian; for the
children of God cannot choose but lay it to heart and lament, when any of the
righteous is taken from among them. As Israel lamented the death of Samuel, 1 Samuel, 25. 1.

Now concerning the sin of the people in not regarding nor laying it to heart,
this was a great sin of security in them, in that they did as it were rest on
their pillows, and cried peace unto themselves, notwithstanding Gods judgments
upon them, in taking away the righteous, and freeing them from the evil to
come, we note that,

When God will bring any great judgment upon a People or Nation, he will (...)
ordinarily take away his faithful servants from among them, that so they may
be freed from the evil to come. Thus good Josiah must perish in his young
years, that so he might not be taken with the evil to come; I will gather thee
unto thy fathers says God, and thou shall go to thy grave in peace, and thy
eyes shall not see all the evil that I will bring upon this place, 2 King, 22.
20. So when God told Abraham of the bondage and captivity whereunto he would
bring his posterity, he says, thou shall go to thy fathers in peace, Gen, 15.
13. And thus it was with the ancient Father, St. Augustine; when the cruel
Vandals besieged his crity, he prayed that the Lord would either take him away,
or cause them to leave the siege; and the Lord heard him, and took him a way,
and presently after the Vandals destroyed the city. So Luther writing upon this
text, says that the Lord after his death would bring great affliction upon
Germany, and two years after, it so fell out indeed. Thus ordinarily God takes
away his servants from the evil to come.

See here the mercy of God unto his children in that he takes them away from
among the wicked, he calls them out of this world that they may not partake of
the evil to come; shall any one then think it a curse to be taken away betimes
in his young years? nay happy is he that is taken away from these miserable and
fearful times, wherein the judgment of God, for our sins, hangs over our
heads; and is ready every day to seize upon us.

Secondly, seeing that God when he means to bring any heavy judgment upon a
people, does ordinarily take away the righteous from the evil to come, this
shows that when the righteous are taken from amongst us, we are certainly to
expect some judgment of God upon us. For these are they which stood in the
gap, and kept off the fire of Gods wrath from us, that it should not consume
us: but now being gone, we lie open to the judgments of God; and therefore
when any righteous men are taken from us, the loss of them ought to drive us
to repentance, least Gods judgments come presently upon us and consume us,
therefore we must forsake our sins and evil ways, and perform new obedience
unto God, so will he be merciful unto us, yea he will be a shield of defense
unto us, and a wall of fire about us, and he will turn away his judgments from
us.(...)

THE SIGNS OF GODS forsaking a People. Preached By that laborious and faithful
Messenger of CHRIST, WILLIAM FENNER, Sometimes Fellow of Pembroke Hall in
Cambridge, and late Minister of Rochford in Essex.

London, Printed by E. T. for John Stafford.

THE SIGNS OF GODS forsaking a People.
JER. 14. 9. And we are called by thy Name; leave us not.
TWo things (Brethren and beloved in Christ Jesus) are intended and expressed
by the holy Prophet, from the first verse to the 13. verse.

There is first a denomination of a judgment, and that is dearth or famine
from the first verse, to the seventh.

Secondly, the sword is threatened, to the thirteenth verse; he will send the
famine, then the sword, and he will not be entreated.

Then in the eighth and ninth verses, we have the importunate prayer of the
Church to turn away these judgments: And the prayer is mavelous sweet, in
confession, where they confess their sins, and seek to God for succor.

First, they desire God that he would not take his providence from them, why
stayest thou but for a night? verse the 8. as if they should have said, it is
marveilous strange, that thou behavest thy self so like a stranger; thou see
our sorrows, and do not help us; thou perceivest our troubles, and thou
regardest us not; It is strange, it is strange; that the God of Israel stands
as a man astonished; that thou that have heretofore received us, should now
stand as a man amazed, and astonished, as if thou were weary of this thy work,
and could do no more, as if thou should say, Jerusalem cannot be saved,
and Judah cannot be succored.

Secondly, they desire that God would not take away his presence from them;
leave us not to our selves, say they; let us see thy face; though we die, yet
let it be in thy presence; yea though thou help us not, yet it does us good to
look upon our Savior, and thou can help us; and thus you see the arguments
where with they press the Lord, how sweet they are, viz.

First, thou art the hope of Israel; Alas if thou forsake us we are all lost;
our hope is not in the means only; but our hope is in thee, leave us not, for
thou art the hope of Israel, it is the task that thou have taken upon thee,
leave us not therefore.

Secondly, thou have made thy self a Savior, and now is the time of trouble,
therefore now perform what thou have undertaken.

Thirdly, thou art in the midst of us, that is, thou art a great Commander
amongst us; always ready to succor us, and will thou now see us perish? thou
art more near to us, than the Ark in the midst of the Camp, 1 Samuel 4. 6. As if
they should say, he lives in the midst of us, and will he not save us?

Fourthly, we are called by thy name, and therefore we have interest in thee,
to whom should wives go, but to their husbands? to whom should children go, but
to their fathers? to whom should servants go, but to their Masters? to whom
then should we go, but to thee our God and Savior? leave us not therefore, and
we will meddle with none but thee.

Secondly, though God might leave them, yet they beg that he would not; that is
the Amen to their prayers; though thou stand and wilt not help us; yet let us
die in thy presence; and this is the great request of the Saints, they desire
not to be left of God, although God might leave them; whence learn that God
might cast off a people.

Israel did fear it, and it is that which they prayed against, God might leave
them: I do not say that God will cast off his elect ones eternally, but those
in outward covenant, see Isaiah 1. verse 2. etc. Hear O Heavens, Hearken O
Earth, I have nourished and brought up children, but they have rebelled against
me; The Ox knows his owner, and the Ass his Masters Crib, but Israel has
not known my People have not understood, etc. and verse the seventh; see the
judgment; your cities are burnt with fire, strangers devour your land in your
presence, and it is desolate like the overthrow of strangers.

There is an out ward Calling, as well as an effectual Calling; God may
reject; for many are called, but few chosen, says our Savior. My brethren
cast your thoughts afar off, and see what is become of those famous Churches of
Pergamus and Thyatira and the rest mentioned, Rev. 1. verse 11. And who would
have thought that Jerusalem should have been made an heap of stones, and a
vagabond people? and yet we see God has forsaken them, showing us thereby that
although God will never forsake his own electones; yet he may forsake such as
are in outward covenant with him.

The Lord is said to dis-church or discharge a people, Hosea 1. 9, there God
says, call his name Loammi, for ye are not my people, and therefore I will not
be your God. And as I may so say, he sues out a bill of divorcement; as it was
in the old Law, they that had any thing against their wives, they sued out a
bill of divorcement against them, and so does God, see Hosea 2. 2. Plead with
thy Mother, tell her she is not my Spouse, nor my beloved; but let her cast away
her fornications out of her sight, and her adulteries from between her beasts,
lest I make her as at the first, that is, as she was in Egypt, poor and
miserable. As if God should now say to England, plead, plead with England, all
ye that are my Ministers in the way of my truth and say unto her, let her cast
away her rebellions, least I leave her as I found her in the day of Captivity
and bondage under the blindness of popery and superstition.

Ob. But how does God cast off a people?

Sol. I answer, first when he takes away his love and respect from a people;
and as his love, so the token of his love, which in his word and Sacraments,
the means of salvation.

Secondly when he takes away his providence, I mean when he takes down his
walls; that is, his Magistracy, and Ministry.

Thirdly, when in stead of Councelling, there comes in Bribing; and in stead of
true teaching, there comes in daubing with untempered mortar; when God takes
away the hedge thereof, Isaiah 5. 5. or the stakes grow rotten, and are not
renewed, then is God going away.

Fourthly, when God takes away the benefit of both these helps, they are signs
of Gods departure.

Use. May God un*chu ch or discharge a People, and cast a Nation off? Oh then
let this teach us to cast off all security; for miseries are night at hand in
all probability; when we observe what God has done for us, all things are ripe
to destruction, and yet we fear it not, but we promise to our selves safety,
and consider not that England is ready to be harrowed, and yet we cannot
entertain a thought of Englands desolation; when there are so many prophesies
in it of its destruction, yet we cannot be persuaded of it, but in our
Judgments it must not be, it must not be as yet; as if it were unpossible that
God should leave England; as if God were a cockering Father over lewd children;
God may leave a Nation, and his elect may suffer, and why may not England?
Englands sins are very great, and the greater, because the means are great,
and our warnings are and have been great; but yet our mercies are far
greater; England has been a mirror of mercies; yet now God may leave (...)
make it the mirror of his justice. Look how God spoke to the people that did
brag of their temple, Jer. 7. 4. says God, Trust not in (...) words, saying,
the Temple of the Lord, this is the Temple of the Lord but (...) says the Lord
by the Prophet in the twelfth and fourteenth verse* (...) now to my place which
was in Shiloh, where I set my name at the beginn^^^ and behold what I did unto
it for the wickedness of my people Israel, (...) Even so England, thou have
the Temple and the Priests; and yet (...) not God that destroyed Shiloh,
destroy thee? Go to Bohemia, (...) from thence to the Palatinate, and from
thence to other parts of Ger^^^^ Do but imagine that you were there, or do but
mark what trave^^^^ say. Gods Churches are made heaps of stones, and those
Bethels w^^^^ in Gods name was called upon, are now defiled Temples, for (...)
and superstition to reign in, you cannot go three steps but you (...) see the
head of a dead man; And go a little further, and you shall (...) the heart picked
out by the fowls of the air, or some other sad specta^^^ and then surely you
will say, Tydy has been here or there; now are (...) Churches become desolate,
and may not England? Do but go (...) their Cities and Towns, and there you
may see many comp^^^^ about with chains of Captivity, and every man bemoaning
him^^^^ Do but look under a tree, and there you may see a poor father (...)
child sending out his breath and crying unto his helpless Mother; (...) but a
little further, and you shall see the helpless Wife, the sad (...) bemoaning
her husband, and this is her misery, she cannot dye (...) enough, but she shall
see greater misery; for either she shall ((...) thinks) see her little ones
dashed against the stones, or tossed upon (...) Pikes, or if they live, that
then they shall be brought up in Popery, (...) then she weep again, and thinks
that if her Husband be dead it is (...) But it may be he is upon the rack, or
put to some other torment, (...) then she dies an hundred times before she can
die; Thus if yo^ (...) set your souls in their souls stead, and imagine you
were in their (...) dition, and say, may not this be the condition of England,
and (...) knows but it may? O my beloved, be not high-minded, but (...) as we
have Gods bounty on the one side, so (for ought I know (...) may have his
severity on the other side, Pranck not then your (...) with foolish
imaginations, saying, who dare come to hurt (...) the Spaniard has his hands
full, and the French are too weak* (...) beloved be not deluded; who would have
thought that Jerusale^ (...) Lady City of all Nations, whither the tribes went
up to (...) should become a heap of stones and a vagabond people? but ye^ (...)
see it was, and is to this day; And I pray, why may it not be (...) case?
Learn therefore, hear, and fear God, for assuredly God (...) God without
Englands prosperity; Do not say here are many (...) Christians; do you think
that God is beholding to you for yo^ (...) o^* surely not: For rather then he
will preserve such as (...) name, and yet hate to be reformed; he will raise up
of these (...) Abraham, he will rather go into Turkey and say unto (...) are my
people* and I will be your God.

But will (...) God go* England* are you so (...) Christ (...) no* (...) as
they did upon Paul; every one of you lay hold, on him and say thou thou shall
not go from us, for we are called by thy name, therefore leave us not; And for
my part I will pray that he does not take his leave of us. Do you think that
Rome will forsake or part with her Gods? no, they will rather lose their lives;
and will thou let thy God go, O England? plead with thy God and let him not
depart, but part rather with thy rebellions.

We are called by thy Name, leave us not. You see the Church is very
importunate to keep God with them, they lay hold on God with Coards of
arguments; O thou hope of Israel, do not leave us; they beset God with their
prayers, and as it were they watch him at the towns end, that he should not go
away; and they say, Thou shall still abide with us, they are importunate that
he do not leave them: whence observe, Doct. That it is the importunate desire
of the Saints of God, still to keep God present with them. They cared not so
much for sword or famine, as they did for the loss of Gods presence; O Lord,
leave us not say they; this was their prayer; and blame them not; for consider
what a grief it is that God should stand by and not help them. Good Lord (say
they) leave us not, we cannot abide to think that God should leave us, much
less can we endure to feel it or taste it; thus they did, and thus the Saints
of God should do, Exodus 33. 14, 15. Moses says if thy presence go not with
us, carry us not hence; alas, Moses might have gone upon fair terms; ye shall
(says God) possess the land in peace with prosperity; But what says Moses?
though we might have Ganaan and all the delights there, yet carry us no^ hence
unless thy presence go with us; this is the stay and the strength that he
sticks too. So Psalm. 80. 18, 19. Turn us again O Lord of hosts, make thy face
to shine upon us; here is a man, a David, a heart worth gold, he makes not
many suits, but he comes home, he sues to the purpose, make thy face (says
he) to shine upon us; as if he should have said, that is prosperity enough, for
it endures for ever.

But what is the presence of God? In a word, it is the particular favor of God
which he expresses in his ordinances, it is all the good and sweetness that
flows from the purity of Gods worship, whereby God reveals himself unto us. It
is not gold, wealth, nor prosperity, that makes God to be our God; for there is
more gold in the West Indies than in all Christendom, but it is Gods
ordinances purely administered that brings Gods presence to a people. God
forsook Shiloh because his ordinances were not purely kept there; when the
people left the Arc (viz*) his pure worship, then God left the people; when
the Arc of Gods presence was among them, the word in the purity of it, then
his face was there, and there God was principally present; hence it was that
^ai^ is said to be cast out of Gods presence; because he was cast out from the
Church, he was cast out from Gods ordinances; if a people do outwardly reform,
and sincerely worship God, they may remain. If Sodom and Gomorrah had qut
legally repented, they had remained, they had not been destroyed; And hence it
is that the Saints are so, urgent for Gods Ordinances in the purity of them:
But the wicked say, once a Sabbath is enough and once a week is too much; by
this we may see that England is ripe; and is she not weary of God? nay, she is
fat fed to the slaughter. But it was not so with the Saints and people of God
in former times; it was David's grand request, that he might dwell in the house
of the Lord, Psalm. 27. 4. And Psalm the 42. and the first verse, he said, his
soul did pant for Gods ordinances. Thus you see that the Saints of God are
mavelous importunate to keep God in his ordinances.

Quest. But may not a man be saved without preaching?

Answ. I answer, the argument is clear, the Saints maintain God in his
ordinances, the want of which is under the penalty of death and damnation*
because we have more need of God in his ordinances than of all the gold in the
world; for all the gold in the world will not satisfy a hungry man; It is bread
that he must have, because he has need of it; so the Saints have most need of
God, and of Christ, for though they have but ragged coats, and their bodies
pincht with hunger, yet God is he that they stand most in need of. In Psalm
the 73. and the 25. verse, David fretted at the prosperity of the wicked; but
at the last he breaks off kindly, saying, whom have I Heaven but thee? As if he
should have said, let them have what they will, I will have nothing but th^e
And why so? why? thou art my strength and my portion for ever, mark, he says
that God is his strength, yea the strength of his heart, hereby showing that
all the helps in the word cannot help the heart of man, if God and Christ be
wanting; you were as good offer a journey to refresh a weary man, or the air
to feed a hungry man, as to offer riches, honors and ease to help a distressed
soul. These will never help a man; he may well dote upon them, but his soul
and conscience will be galled and troubled still; it must be the God of peace
that must speak peace to troubled souls. It must be the God of peace that must
speak peace to a distressed soul, to a soul that is damned in it self; it is
he that must say, I will be the strength of their hearts, and their portion for
ever; no marvel then if a poor soul cries to God, when happily the heart is
full, when the soul gnaws and cries within it self, I am damned, I am damned,
happily the palate is pleased with delicates, when the poor soul for ought it
knows must go down to hell; oh then beloved, if you will have safety, go
where God is; for every good gift comes in with him; if once a man has got God
into his company, he has all good things with him. God blessed Obed Edoms
house for the Arks sake; now the Arc was a type of Christ, and where it came,
many blessings came with it; even so when God comes unto a people, they are
married unto him in righteousness, in judgment, in loving kindness and in
mercies for ever, Hosea, 2. 9. When a man is married to a wife, all is his; so
get Christ and all is thine, and then what would thou have more?

God speaks to the rain, and it hears; God speaks to the corn, and it
hears; but if thou be in Christ, hell and death are thy servants; but they
that have outward things only, as profits, pleasures or the like, they have
their ruin, unless they have Christ with them; get Christ therefore, for if
he be wanting, all outward and inward dangers befall that man, or that Nation;
woe be unto him or them that are without God. For though they bring up their
children, yet will I bereave them, that there shall not be a man left; yea, woe
also to them, when I do depart from them; Ephraim, as Tyrus, is planted in a
pleasant place: but Ephraim shall bring forth his children to the murderer,
Hosea 9. 12. 13. True indeed, woe be unto that heart, County or Kingdom, that
God is departed from; when God who is the God of mercies and all consolation,
is departed away, who can but pity that soul, County or Kingdom who will not
submit to Gods peace, consolation, and salvation? When God parts, all miseries
follow; for that man that makes no conscience in outfacing God in the
congregation, mark what the text says, Deuteronomy. 28. 15. I will forsake them, and
many miseries shall overtake them, and when the floud-gates are once up, then
come in all evils; And then they shall say, are not these things come upon us,
because God is not with us? If therefore we would avoid woe and sorrow, slaying
and killing one another; if the wife would not see her husband killed before
her tender eyes, and the man see his wife snatched out of the world by the hands
of wicked men, then leave not God, but hold him fast, and then evil days will
depart from us; It is our holding of God that keeps miseries from us; oh then
what shall we think of them that are weary of God, and that say to the
Almighty, Depart from us? Job. 22. 17.

Ob. But are there any amongst us that are weary of God? I hope there are none
such amongst us.

I answer, Thou art a servant, and rejectest the Command of thy Master, in it
thou do reject God, and all such as have a mean conceit of the worship of
God, and the word of God, and think that prayer or preaching is continued too
long; I say, these men know not what they think or say, but certainly it is
because they would be freed from the Ordinances of God: well, God will free
thee from them one day, I will warrant thee, and then thou will be in a
miserable condition; oh that thou would pity thy poor condition; but thou
art weary of Gods ordinances, and of his mercies, his presence and patience,
know thou that thou shall be deprived of Gods goodness, and thy portion shall
be with those that hate God in this life here, and after this life (if thou
repent not) thy portion shall be with them in Tophet, where the worm dies not,
and where the fire goes not out, and then crying will not avail, God will be
God over thee in destruction, yea when he has spurned thousands and ten
thousands into hell, such as thou art, then shall thou be the everlasting
object of his never dying wrath, then notwithstanding all thy shrill cries,
though thou could be heard out of that dungeon, yet were thy help never the
near; for God is God still. I advise thee therefore what to do, whilst thou art
here in this life, make thy peace with God in Christ, and lay thy self low
before him, and bear patiently his hand in his wrath which thou have deserved.
And mark what I say, thou have deserved to be in hell an hundred times, that is
the least; and therefore be contented with thy condition; for thou have chosen
death rather than life: and God should wrong himself and thee also, if he
should not let thee have thy choosing.

Will not these things move you, my brethren? Me thinks I see your colors
rise, I am glad of it, I hope it is to a good end; you may be wise, and happily
so wise as to choose life rather than death: Now the Lord grant it, for he
delights not in your destruction.

I w^^^dde one word more, to leave the more impression in your hearts; my
desire is the health of your souls; though my meat seem sour, yet my mind is
the will of God. Thou man or woman, that can not abide so much preaching, but
stand upon thorns whilst it is preaching: Too much of one thing (you say) is
good for nothing; You do as much as say you will not have God with you; you
will have a little of God, but you will have more of your pleasures: Is this
your desire, your delights? Know then, whosoever thou art, that have an ill
will to God and his Ordinances, and wilt not have the gospel in the purity of
it; thou shall have thy desires: Thou say, depart Preaching, and so it
shall, thou shall have thy desires. When thou shall hear the trumpets sound,
and when thine ears shall tingle with the sound of war; then depart for ever,
you that are weary of God, get you down to hell for ever: Fulfill your base
lusts, (then will God say) for I have fed you on earth this twenty, thirty,
forty, fifty, nay sixty years and upwards, and my mild Word could not rule you,
nor prevail with you, and therefore now get you to hell, and there remain for
ever. Think thus with your selves; will God serve me thus? yea that he will,
for he has prepared a place for the proudest Kings, Princes, Monarchs,
Captains, etc* that are, or ever were in the world, if they will not be ruled
nor guided by God, and his word. See Isa. 30. 33. the Text does as good as say,
he delights to make bonfires about their ears: And must this be the way to
glorify God?

But some may say, Surely Kings and Monarchs are exempted, they need not fear
that such torments shall come upon them.

To this I answer, that God will say unto them, Reign there if thou will* and
then they shall know that there is a King that laughs at their destruction.
Take notice of this I beseech you, and reason thus with your own souls: I he a
good son that cannot abide the presence of his own father? is she a good wife
that cannot abide the company of her husband? and is he a good Christian that
cannot endure the company of Christ in his ordinances?

This may serve to rebuke Gods people for their neglect. You see the gospel Use.
is going, Christ is departing, he is going to seek better entertainment. (But
I marvel you give no better attendance; I pray hearken what I say, and have
to say, stand up and hear, and the Lord give you grace to believe.) I will deal
plainly with you; as sure as God is God, God is going from England. Shall I
tell you what God told me? nay I must tell you on pain of my life; Will you
give ear and believe me? I am a poor Ambassador sent from God to do his
message unto you; and although I be ow, yet my message is from above, and He
that sent me is great, and from above; and oh that He would grant that this my
message might be believed! What if I should tell you, what God told me
(yesternight) (...)

THE SACRIFICE OF THE FAITHFUL, OR, A TREATISE showing the nature, property,
and efficacy of Zealous Prayer: Together with some Motives to Prayer, and Helps
against discouragements in Prayer. By WILLIAM FENNER, Minister of the Gospel,
Fellow of Pembroke Hall in Cambridge, and late Lecturer of Rochford in Essex.

London, Printed by E. T. for John Stafford.

A DISCOURSE OF The nature of Prevalent Prayer: Together with some helps
against discouragements in Prayer.
LAMENT. 3. 57. Thou drewest near in the day that I called upon thee, thou
said fear not.
THis Book of the Lamentations does plainly show what miseries and distresses
sin is the cause of. As in this people of the Jews, who because of their
Idolatries, their contempt of Gods Ordinances, their slighting and misusing the
Prophets, etc.* Had their Cities taken, their Temple burned, their liberties
confiscated, themselves carried captive out of their own country, and deprived
of the ordinances of their God, and the signs of his presence; before they were
rebellious: but now they sought God a long time; they prayed, but God would not
hear. Insomuch that many poor souls amongst them were discouraged, and almost
ready to despair; That had not the Lord put in some inklings of hope, they had
utterly fainted. Now whilst these poor souls were praying, and crying, and
groaning, and now ready to give over for discouragement that God will not hear
them, presently the Lord flings in comfort, and beckens to their hearts not to
be discouraged, but to pray on, and fear not. Thou drewest near in the day
that I called upon thee, thou said fear not; the words contain in them three
properties of effectual prayer:

First, the unsatiablenesse of it; All the prayers of this people though

Secondly, the sensiblenesse of it, whereby it is able to know whether

Thirdly, the supplies it has against dangers and discouragements;

That an effectual prayer is an unsatiable prayer; A man that prays
effectually, Doctrine. 1.
sets down this in himself as his first conclusion never to cease, nor to give
over praying till he speed: This the first and prime thing that a godly heart
looks at, as David in his prayers: He begins in this manner, Hear my cry O
God, attend unto my prayer, Psalm. 61. 1. So, Give ear unto my prayer O God,
and hide not thy self from my supplications, Psalm. 55. 1. Hear my voice O God
in my prayer, Psalm. 64. 1. As if he should say, Lord, now I come to call upon
thee, now that I come to thee, to beg these and these graces that my soul
wants, I beseech thee to hear me: for I am resolved never to give over my
suit, never to give thee rest, but for to continue my prayers and
supplications, til thou give a gracious answer to my soul and hear me.

This is the first and prime thing that the soul looks after, it being the
very end of prayer to be heard; it is not with prayer as with Oratory; for in
Oratory; a man may use all the persuasive arguments that the wit of man (...),
and speak as cuttingly, and as perswasively as may be, and yet the heart may be
so intractable as not to be persuaded; it is not so with prayer.

The end of prayer is to prevail with God. Beloved, there is difference
between the end and office of prayer; the office of prayer is to pray, the end
of prayer is to prevail. There is many a man that does the office of prayer,
and yet never gets the end of prayer. A man has never gotten the end of his
prayers, till he has gotten that he prayed for. It is not with prayer as with
a Physician, that may give the best physic under heaven, and yet the Patient
may die under his hands; and therefore one gives counsel that a Physician never
meddle with a desperate man.

But if the soul be an effectual suitor with God, it can never fail of its
suite, because it is an unsatiable Suitor, that never leaves his prayer till it
terminates the end of it. I cried unto the Lord with my voice, and he heard me
out of his holy hill. Selah. Jerome translates it for ever. Psalm. 3. 4. never
does a child of God pray, but he prays so as that his prayer and Gods ear
may be joined together; I cried unto the Lord, and the Lord heard me: This also
shows how the Prophet cried and prayed, namely so as his crying and Gods
hearing were coupled together.

Object.
But some may object, How can a man be unsatiable in his prayers till he speed?
must a man be always a praying? God calls men to other duties of his worship,
and of his own particular calling; after morning I must have done till noon,
after noone I must have done til night: whether God hear me or no; must I be
always a praying till I speed? then I should do nothing else but pray? how
then are we to continue our prayers till God hear us and give the grace that we
pray for? to this I answer.

Ans.
A man must give over the words and times of prayer for other duties, but a man
must not give over the suit of prayer. A poor beggar comes to a housekeepers
gate, and begs, but none hears him; now he being a poor man, has something else
to do, and therefore he sits down or stands, and knits or patches, and then he
begs or knocks, and then to his work again; though he do not always continue
knocking or begging, yet he always continues his suite: O that my suite might
be granted me, or that I might have an alms here; so when the soul is begging
of any grace, though it does not always continue the words of prayer, yet it
always continues the suite of prayer. David he would dwell in the house of the
Lord for ever, Psalm. 23. 6. A wicked man it may be will turn into Gods house
and say a prayer, etc. but the Prophet would (and so all godly men must) dwell
there for ever; his soul lies always at the throne of grace, begging for
grace. A wicked man he prays as the cock croweth; the cock crows and cease,
and crows again and cease again; and thinks not of crowing till he crows
again: so a wicked man prays and cease, prays and cease again; his mind
is never busied to think whether his prayers speed, or no; he thinks it is good
Religion for him to pray, and therefore he takes that for granted that his
prayers speed, though in very deed God never hears his prayers, nor no more
respects it, than he respects the lowing of Oxen, or the gruntling of hoggs. He
is found in his prayers as the wild Ass in her months: Jer. 2. The wild Ass
in regard of her swiftness cannot be taken but in her months, she has a
sleepy month, and all that while she is so sleepy and dumpish that any man may
take her; in her months you shall find her; so a wicked man has his prayer
months, his prayer fits: it may be in the morning, or in the evening, or day
of his affliction and misery you shall have him at his prayers, at his prayer
fits then you shall find him at it, but otherwise his mind is about other
matters. But the child of God what ever he ailes, he goes with his petition
presently to the throne of grace, and there he never removes till he has it
granted him, as here we see the prayers of the Church consisting of many years,
yet are counted but one suit. The application follows.

Use 1. Try therefore and examine whether thy prayers be unsatiable Use 1.
prayers yea or no; and for help herein take these marks; first, if thy
prayers be unsatiable prayers, then it is a begging prayer; thou praiest as if
thou had never prayed before, as if thou had never begun to pray, and thou
never think that thou have done any thing till thou have done the deed. As a
hungry man eats as if he had never eat before, so the unsatiable soul prays as
if he had never prayed before, till he has obtained that he has prayed for;
but a wicked man he prays not thu. Job speaking of carnal professors, Job 27.
10. Will he call upon God at all times? see thou a wicked man go to a good
duty, go to prayer, do you think that he will hold out always? he will never
do it; for a wicked man he reasons with himself, I have called upon God thus
and thus long, I hope I need not pray any more for this thing, and so he gives
over.

But a godly man he will be always calling upon God. Beloved, there is a
beginning to an action, and a beginning of an action; thou never beginnest to
lift up a weight till thou stirrest it from the ground; indeed thou may begin
toward the action by pulling at it, by reaching at it; but thou never
beginnest the lifting up of the weight till thou stir it from its place: thou
may give a pull at prayer, and tugge at a grace, but thou have not so much as
begun that duty, till thou see God begin to hear thee, till thou see the
grace a coming; therefore the Prophet David when he prayed and had not that he
prayed for, his prayers returned into his own bosom, Psalm. 35. 13. there to
lie to be a continual suit unto God. A wicked man prays, and he leaves his
prayer behind him in his pew, or in his hall, or chamber; but a godly man
prays and his prayer is in his heart, his prayer is not out till the grace be
in.

Secondly an unsatiable prayer it is evermore a proceeding prayer; you

A godly man when he prays, though he have not gotten the thing total that he
desired, yet he is nearer God then he was before; his heart grows every day
better than other by his prayers; he obtains still something as the Prophet
Hosea speaks of knowledge, Hos. 6. 3. Then shall we know, if we follow on to
know the Lord: so I may say of prayer, and of all other good duties, then we
pray if we proceed on wards in prayer.

A man may know and know, and yet never know the Lord, till he go on in
knowledge; so a man may pray and pray, yet if he go not onwards in his
prayers, his prayers are nothing. A godly man prays as a builder builds; now a
builder he first lays a foundation, and because he cannot finish in one day,
he comes the second day, and finds the frame standing that he made the first
day, and then he adds a second days work, and then he comes a third day and
finds his two former days work standing; then he proceeds to a third days
work, and makes walls to it, and so he goes on till his building be finished.
So prayer is the building of the soul, till it reach up to heaven; therefore a
godly heart prays and reaches higher and higher in prayer, til at last his
prayers reach up to God.

It is a sign of a wicked man to pray and to let his prayers fall down again
upon him. And here I appeal to the consciences of wicked men, if it be not so
with them; they pray and pray, but their hearts are as dead and deceitful, as
proud and vain, as ignorant, blockish and rebellious, as if they had never
prayed.

Thirdly, it is more and more a fervent prayer; if a little prayer will

As a man in winding up of a bucket, if two or three windings will not fetch it
up, he will wind it up higher and higher, till it comes up; for if he should
only wind up once or twice and no more, but hold it just at the same pin, the
bucket would never come up; So if a man prays and prays, and winds not up
his heart higher, but holds it just at the same pegge it was, prays in the
same fashion he did, grace will never come up. Mark then how thou prayest,
examine thy heart; do thou pray to day as yesterday, with no more zeal, nor
feeling affection, nor sensible desire? thou prayest not unsatiably.

No, thou restrainest thy praying from growing; an excellent description of an
hypocrite, Job 1^. 4. though falsely applied to Job, Thou restrainest prayer
before God; in some translations it is, Thou keep thy prayers from growing,
thou restrainest thy prayers as a dwarffe is restrained from growing, so thou
restrainest thy prayers from being more and more earnest and effectual and
fervent, unsatiable prayer is growing in zeal and affection.

Fourthly, it is a more and more frequent prayer, so that if twice a day
stickest at any prayers, thy prayers are not unsatiable; an unsatiable soul
never rests, though it have made ten thousand prayers, till it have gotten
the grace; it is so with other things, and therefore we need not wonder at it,
when a man does not finish his work one day, he will do it another, and so on
as long as he lives, till his work be done; so must we do for heaven and for
grace.

Fifthly, it is ever more and more a backed prayer: if ordinary prayers will
not serve the turn: a godly heart will cut off time from his recreations and
pleasures, though in themselves lawful. Beloved, it may be with thy soul in
its wrastlings and strivings for grace and power against corruptions, that
ordinary prayers will not satisfy it, but it will be necessry to give over
even lawful delights, and give that time to prayer; so a man will do for the
world, if he have a business of importance, that will bring him in gain, he
will be content to part with his delights, and recreations, and pleasures, to
follow after it; so a man must do for his soul, and if that be not enough, then
lay aside the duties of thy calling, to take time from that. If a man have two
houses on fire both together, the one his mansion dwelling house, the other
some back room or stable, if he can, he will save both; but if he see that by
spending his time on quenching the fire on the stable, that his great mansion
house will burn down, he will then neglect the other and let it burn if it
will, and employ himself about his house; So when the soul is in misery under
the want of grace, that it cannot live under, but must perish eternally if it
have it not, then the soul being better than the body, rather than that the
soul miscarry, we will neglect the body sometime. And if this will not serve,
abstain from meat and drink, fast it out; thus the people of God are feign to
do many times; their lust and corruptions being even as the devil himself,
which cannot be cast out but by prayer and fasting; there is an excellent
place, Joel 2. 12. Therefore now turn unto the Lord with fasting, weeping and
mourning, rent your hearts, etc. Therefore now, now your sins are so
divelish, now your sins are so deeply rooted in your souls, now your
corruptions are come to be such plague sores within you, do you not think that
your ordinary repentance, and ordinary prayers and humiliations will serve the
turn, but now back them with fasting and mourning. Here now thou may
examine thy soul whether it have prayed effectually, unsatiably yea or no; has
it ever a begging prayer, that thou praiest as if thou had never prayed
before? is it evermore a proceeding prayer, that thou do every day draw
nearer to God than other? is it more and more a backed prayer, a fervent and
frequent prayer? have thou taken from thy recreations, from thy calling to give
to it, yea from thy belly and back, and used all means for a prevailing with
God? then are thy prayers effectual and unsatiable.

This then condemns the prayers of most men in the world, they pray and pray
for grace, and their prayers come to an end, and cease before they have it, the
angry fretful man prays for patience and meekness, and yet sits down without
it; the covetous worldling prays to be weaned from the world, and his prayers
are done before he is so; so the luke-warmling, deadhearted and vain thoughted
professor pray; for better thoughts, for more zeal, and yet comes to his so
be it, before he have it; and so every wicked man prays, and he is come to his
Amen before the grace is given; let all suchmen know that such prayers, first
they are endless, secondly they are fruitless.

First, they are endless: The Philosopher said that for which a thing is, that
is the end of the thing: now prayer is for the speeding with God: and therefore
he whose prayers speed not with God, his prayers are endless: thou have prayed
against thy pride, but a^t as proud still: thou have prayed against thy choler
and art as teachy still: thou have prayed against earthlinesse and
worldliness, and art earthly and worldly still: thou have prayed against
security and deadness of heart, and lukewarmnesse in Gods service, and art
luke warm, deadhearted and secure still: to what end are all thy prayers, when
thou enjoyest not the end of thy prayers? to what end is the work of thy
servant, if thy business be not done, and dispatched when all is done? As good
never pray, as pray to no end, a good that thou never had begun to pray, as
to cease, and to give over thy prayers before thou have obtained the grace thou
prayest for: The prayers of the wicked are an abomination unto the Lord, but
the prayer of the upright is his delight: Prove. 15. 8. that is, the prayers of
a wicked man that continues in his wickedness, when his prayers are done, hi
prayers are an abomination to the Lord: but the prayers of the upright though
he were before he prayed never so wicked, yet if it be the prayer of an upright
and godly man, when his prayers are done, that his prayers rid him of his sin,
and make him an upright man, his prayers are Gods delight.

Beloved, many pray against distrust in Gods providence, Infidelity in Gods
promises, Impatiency under Gods corrections, etc. and yet have never the more
trust and affiance in God, never the more patience under the hand of God, all
these prayers are endless.

Secondly, thy prayers are fruitless: to what purpose is a beggars begging of
an alms? if he be gone before the alms be bestowed, his begging is fruitless;
so all thy prayers are lost, if thou art gone from the Throne of grace, before
grace is given thee; for if such a prayer be endless, then is it also
fruitless: it will never do thee any good; what is a fruitless tree good for,
but to be cut down? what is a fruitless Vine good for, but to be burned? So
all thy prayers are lost, all thy beginnings of grace are lost, we know, says
the man that was borne blind, John 9. that God hears not sinners, we know it:
Why may some say, how do you know that God hears not sinners? why, we know it
by experience, by examples.

A drunkard prays to God to cure him of his drunkenness, and yet he does not
leave his ill company; all the world may see that God hears not the drunkards
prayer, because he cures him not, but lets him go on in his sin; and so for
all other sins: see thou a man go on in his sins? thou may see that God
hears not his prayers. If a man should be sick on his death bed, and send for
the Physirians; and Apothecaries in the Country, and send for his father,
Mother, and for all his friends to come to him to minister unto him: yet I know
he is not cured by them so long as I see his deadly disease remains upon him;
so if I see a man's pride, hypocrisy, security, deadness of heart, his lust,
anger, etc. lie upon him: notwithstanding all his prayers, I know God hears
not his prayers; he prays to be cleansed from his sins, and to be purged from
his lusts, and to be redeemed from his vain conversation: if now God let his
sins continue in him, and lets him go on in them, we see plainly God hears not
him. O what a pitiful and miserable case are such men in, that pray and pray,
and yet all their prayers are endless and fruitless! is not that man in a
pitiful case, and all physic, all cost and charges is lost upon him; when his
eating and drinking, his sleeping, and winding and turning from this side to
that side do him no good? do we not say of him that he is a dead man? so if a
man's prayers and supplications to God be endless and fruitless: that man must
needs be a dead and a damned man, so long as he goes on in that case.

Now we come to the second part of the text, the sensiblenesse of the 2 Genesis
godly soul, whether it speed or no, the soul that prays aright, that prays
unsatiably, it is able to say, the Lord does hear me, the Lord does grant me
the thing that I prayed to him for; Thus says Jonah, I cried unto the Lord and
he heard me; out of the belly of Hell cried I, and thou heardst my voice, Jonah
2. 2. How could Jonah say, God heard his voice, if he had not known it?
therefore he knew it. But against this some may object,

Object.
How can this be? how can the soul know that God hears it? we have no Angels,
nor voices from Heaven now to tell men, as the Angel told Cornelius, that his
prayers were accepted, and come up before God; or to say as Christ to the woman
in the Gospel, Be of good comfort thy sins are forgiven thee; I know God hears
me with his All-hearing ear, and therefore I have a good belief in God: but
how shall I know that God hears my prayers in mercy, so as to grant that I
pray for?

Answ.
There be six ways to know whether the soul shall speed in prayer, yea or no.

The first is, the having of a Spirit of further and further praying. When thy
prayers, but God by casting in a spirit of prayer and zeal, and fervency in
prayer, imboldens thy heart in its petition, it is a sign that God will hear
thee, and grant thee thy prayers.

Blessed be God says the Prophet, that has not turned away my prayer, nor his
mercy from me, Psalm. 66. 20. How could the Prophet say that the Lord did not
turn away his mercy from him? How! because he turned not away his prayer from
him. Many Expositors expound it of not turning away his prayer from his heart;
as if he should say, Lord, thou continuest my heart to pray, thou have not
taken away my prayer from my heart; therefore I know that thou continuest thy
mercy unto me.

Secondly, the preparedness of the heart to pray, is a sign that God means

Examine thy soul then; art thou more and more prepared to pray? has God
spoken with a powerful voice to thy soul to open it self wide? it is a sign
that God means to fill thy soul with his graces. But if thou can rush into
Gods presence, and leave thy preparedness behind thee; leavest thy soul and
thy thoughts, and thy affections behind thee; and come with a straightned
heart in thy deadness and luke warmness; this is a fearful sign that God
will not hear thee.

Thirdly, Gods gracious look is a sign that he will hear thee: for sometimes

This is a riddle to the world.

If you should ask the men of the world what the meaning of Gods gracious
countenance is, or what they see of it? alas, they can say nothing of it; they
know not what it means; only the godly man understands, Psalm. 34. 15. The
eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous, and his ears are open unto their cry.
These two go together, their prayers enter in Gods ears, and they know it;
why? because they see it in his countenance upon them, as a Petitioner may read
his speeding with the King by his countenance toward him; so a poor soul may
see how prayers prevail by Gods countenance and look upon him.

If thou then art a stranger to Gods countenance, if God never admitted thee
into his presence to see his face and countenance; it is a sign that God
little regards thy prayers, and has no mind to hear thee. A wicked man is like
a varlet that stands without doors and begges an alms, but is not suffered to
go into the Gentleman's presence, and therefore knows not how he speeds,
whether the Gentleman will give him an alms, or whether he be providing a
cudgel to beat him away: so a wicked man prays and puts up his petitions to
God, but he is not able to come before God: he cannot see whether God look as
if he meant to hear his prayers, yea or no; he knows not but that God may be
providing a curse and plague for him in stead of a blessing. But a child of God
comes within the list of Gods countenance; he can tell when God smiles on him,
and when he takes another look: he is able to come into Gods presence, Job 13.
16. He also (says Job) shall be my salvation: for an hypocrite shall not come
before him. A strange verse. Job says, God is his salvation: and he gives this
reason why he was able to say so, for an hypocrite shall not come before him.
One would think that this were no reason: but yet it is an undeniable reason,
as if Job had said, I come into his presence, and he looks like a Savior, a
Redeemer upon me, but an hypocrite shall not come before him: he stands like a
rogue and begs without the gate.

Indeed a wicked man comes into Gods presence, in regard of Gods Omnipresence:
but this is not enough, thy Ox, and thine Ass stands in Gods presence: yea
so, the very Devils themselves are in Gods presence. But if thou come not into
Gods presence of grace, if God do not admit thy soul into the list of his
Throne, it is a sign that God hears thee not. Men should therefore examine
their consciences, what face or presence of God they come into or see: when
they pray in their prayers, whether they come before God, yea or no.

Beloved, no wicked man under heaven can come before God: this is made the
mark of a godly man only* Psalm. 140. 13. The upright shall dwell in thy
presence, (mark here) dwelling in Gods presence is only determined to the
righteous: the upright shall dwell in thy presence. And here I appeal again
to the hearts and consciences of wicked men, what presence of God do they find
in their prayers? they see their Pews, and the walls or hangings, etc. before
them: they see the heavens and the clouds above them: they know nothing within
doors. Do they see Gods presence and countenance? no: it is the upright man
only that dwells in Gods presence: He sees how God looks on him, how his face
smiles on him: and therefore, it is not a wicked man's coming to Church, and
falling on his knees, and uttering the words of prayer that is a coming into
Gods presence: then, this would be a false saying of the Prophet. For a wicked
man may go to Church and fall upon his knees, etc. but never come before God.

This presence, is, to see the face of God.

Fourthly, the conscience of a man does answer him whether God hear him yea or
no. As it was with the high Priest, whenever the high Priest came into Gods
presence to inquire of him, though God did not appear visibly unto him, yet he
might read Gods answer in his Urim and Thummim; he might there know Gods mind:
so a man's conscience is his Urim and Thummim. When he comes before God his own
conscience gives him an inckling whether he speed or no: 1 John 3. 20, 21. If
our hearts condemn us, God is greater than our hearts, and knows all things.
Beloved, if our hearts condemn us not, then have we confidence toward God. If
a man's conscience tell a man his prayers are rotten, that his humiliation is
rotten, that his heart is ^o upright, that yet he is not purged from his sins,
that his seeking of God is fained and hypocritical; it is the very voice of
God in his soul: and if our consciences condem us, God (says the Apostle) is
greater than our consciences.

There is no condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus. Romans 8. 1. as if
he should say, those that are in Christ, God does not condeme them; they have
not* that condemnation: nay their own conscience does not condemn them: so
that, that man whom any condemnation either from God, or from his own
conscience condemns, that man is not in Christ; being not in Christ, he can
never be heard.

Indeed, a man's conscience may be misinformed by Satan under a temptation; as
you may see in the verse before my text: Thou have heard my voice: s^op not
thine ear from my cry. Here the Church being examined, their consciences told
them they were heard in their prayers: but being under a temptation, their
consciences were afraid that God heard not. So many a poor soul, examine it,
and it cannot deny but that these and these tokens of grace and fruits of Gods
Spirit are in it; yet their consciences are afraid that the Lord will not give
them these and these other graces that they want: that the Lord will not hear
them for such and such blessings.

I mean not neither a truce of conscience: for there may be a truce of
conscience in wicked men. A truce may be between mortal enemies: but no peace
but amongst friends. Wicked men's consciences are like the Lion, 1 Kings 13. who
when he had killed the Prophet* stood by the Corpse, and by the Ass, and did
not eat the body, nor tear the Ass; so a wicked man's conscience, it is as the
devils ban-dogge or roaring Lion, till it has slain the sinner, it stands
stone still, and seems neither to meddle nor make with him, but lies as seared
or dead in him I mean not this conscience. But when God has sprinkled the
conscience with the blood of Christ, and made the conscience pure: this is a
sign that God hears his prayer.

I mean not the stammering of conscience, when it is dazelled, or overwhelmed:
but when it speaks down right as it means. A go^y man's conscience sometimes may
judge otherwise then the thing*is* But, examine what thy conscience tells thee
in sober sadness, deliberately, convincingly, and then, know that the Lord
tells thee. If thy conscience Vox conscienti^ est vox Dei.
says peremptorily that thy heart and ways are rotten, and unsound; then know
that the Lord tells thee so, and that the Lord says so to thy soul.

Fifthly, the getting of that grace that a man prays for, is a sign that God
hears his prayers. But this is not a true sign always but with distinction.

When the grace given, and the good will of God the giver, cannot be severed,
then it is a true sign. But when the gift and the good will of the giver may
be severed, then it is not a true sign.

Thou may pray unto God, and God may give thee many temporal blessings, and
many common graces of his Spirit; God may give thee good parts, a good memory:
he may give thee a good measure of knowledge and understanding, even in diverse
things; he may give thee some kind of humility, chastity; civility. thou
may be of a loving and flexible disposition so he may give thee a good
estate in the world, houses, lands, wife and children, etc. God may give thee
all these, and yet hate thee, and never hear one prayer thou make; thou
may pray for a thousand blessings, and have them: and yet never be heard, so
long as the good will of the giver is severed from them; all outward blessings
and common graces may be severed from Gods good pleasure to a man.

Therefore in temporal blessings, or in common graces, if thou would know
whether God hear thee or no: know whether God has given thee a sanctified use
^f them or no. If God has given thee many common graces, or temporal
blessings, and a heart to use them to his glory; then every blessing thou have
(there is not a drop of drink, nor a bit of bre^d that thou have,) but it is a
sign of Gods everlasting love to thee. Why? because this, and the good will of
the giver can never be severed. But on the contrary, if a man have not a
sanctified use of that he has, then it is the greatest severity of God, and
the most eminent plague and curse of God upon the soul to give it; for a man's
parts may be his bane, his civility may be his curse, and means of the final
hardness and impenitencie of his heart.

Sixthly faith* if a man have faith given him to believe, it is a sign that
God hears him; be it to thee (says Christ to the man in the Gospel) according
to thy faith; so go thou to God, and be it to thee as thou beleevest. Do
thou pray for grace? according as thou beleevest, so shall thou receive.

Object.
I have no sign that God will hear me; I have so many corruptions of my heart
against me, and so many threatenings of Gods frowns against me; I have no sign
that God will hear me.

Ans.
Would thou have a sign? An evil and adulterous generation seeks a sign
this is a tempting faith, to seek for signs to believe. Thomas* said Christ,
John 20. 29. Because thou have seen me, thou have believed: blessed are they
that have not seen and yet believe. That man that believes because he feels
grief in his heart, tears in his eyes, groans in his spirit, because he prays
long and earnestly, and sweats in his prayer, or mourns in his humiliation, I
suspect his humiliation, his tears, his grief, his prayers, and all that he
has. Why? these are good signs of faith: but rotten grounds of faith: the
word and promise of God must be thy ground. But against this the soul may
object,

Object.
That every Promise runs with a Condition: and therefore if I have not the
condition, how can I believe the promise? God has promised, Blessed are they
that hunger and thirst after righteousness, for they shall be satisfied. There
is a Promise of filling, but it is with a condition of hungering. Blessed are
the meek, for they shall inherit the earth. Blessed are the pure in heart, for
they shall see God, etc. If I have not the condition annexed to the Promise,
how dare or how can I believe the Promise?

Answ.
The Condition is not the way to get the Promise; the Promise is the ground of
faith, and the way to get the condition; because the promise is

Saul made a promise to David, 1 Samuel 18. that he should be his son in law in
one of his two daughters, upon condition that he should give him an hundred
fore-skins of the Philistines. Now, David did first believe the promise; and
thereby he was allured to fight valiantly, to keep the condition, to get a
hundred fore-skins of the Philistines. So Psalm. 116. I believed, and therefore
did I speak. He believed Gods promise, and then he spoke with condition. So we
believe says the Apostle, and therefore do we speak. First, the soul
believes; and then every action of a Christian wherein it moves to the keeping
of the condition, springs from this root* nay beloved, a man cannot keep any
condition in the Bible without faith; he must believe.

Secondly, faith is the inabling cause to keep the condition. Do thou

What, do you first think to pray, to mourn, to lament and bewail your
sins, to do this and that in turning your selves, and sanctifying of your
selves? Indeed you may fumble about these things: but you can never do any of
them in deed and to the purpose: without me ye can do nothing. I had fainted
says the Propher, unless I had believed to see the goodness of the Lord in
the land of the living, Psalm. 27. 13. where we may see three things,

First, the Promise that he should see the goodness of the Lord: otherwise he
could not have believed.

Secondly, the Condition: if he do not faint.

Thirdly, The method the Prophet went by, he believed to see the goodness of
the Lord. As if he had said, if he had not first laid hold on the Promise, if I
had not believed to have seen the goodness of the Lord in the Land of the
living, I had fainted.

Beloved, it is true that the keeping of the Condition, is before the fruition
of the Promise: but not before believing the Promise: because the doing of the
Condition is effected by believing the Promise.

This is the cause that many fumble about grace, but never get it: they are
ever repenting, but never repent: ever learning, but never learn the knowledge
of the truth everlasting: ever striving, but never get power over their
corruptions, etc. because they fumble about it in their own strength, and take
it not in the right method.

Let the soul come with faith in Christ, and believe it shall speed and have
grace, and power from Christ his grace, and from Christ's power: and then it
shall speed. Christ has promised (John 14.) that whatsoever we ask the Father
in his name, he will give it us. Christ (beloved) is an excellent Surety.
Indeed, our credit is cracked in Heaven: we may think to go and fetch this and
that grace in our own names, and miss of it: as the servant may go to the
Merchant for wares in his own name, but the Merchant will not deliver them to
him in his own name, unless he come in his Masters name and bring a ticket
from him: and then when the servant shows his Masters ticket, the Merchant
will deliver him what wares he asks for in his Masters name. So when a soul
goes to the Throne of grace with a ticket from Christ; if he can say, Lord, it
is for the honor of Christ: I come for grace and holiness, and strength
against my corruptions; Lord, here is a ticket from Christ: most certainly he
shall speed.

But, men must take heed that they foyst not the name of Christ: that they
foyst not a ticket to say that Christ sent them, when it is their own
self-love, and their own lust that sends them; it is not enough to pray and at
the end to say through Christ our Lord, Amen. No: for this may be a ^eer
foysting of the Name of Christ. But, can thou pray and show that Christ sent
thee, and say as the servant, I come from my Master, and he sent me? Lord, it
is for Christ that I come; it is not to satisfy my own lust, nor to ease and
deliver me from the galls of my conscience, nor to free me from hell; but for
Christ; Lord, I beg grace an^ holiness, that I may have power to glorify
Christ. It is for the honor of my Lord Christ that I come. When the soul comes
thus in Christ's name, believing it shall speed, then his prayer shall prevail.
Whatsoever (says Christ) ye shall ask the Father in my name, he will give it
you.

We come now to the third and last part of our Text: to wit, the supplies they
had against danger and discouragements. The Lord upheld their hearts from being
dismayed in prayer; thou said, fear not.

There be two things that do much hurt in prayer.

First, groundless encouragements.

Secondly needless discouragements.

First, I say, groundless encouragements; and these the wicked are most
subject to especially, who because they pray, hear the Word, and perform many
duties of religion; therefore they encourage themselves in the goodness of
their estates, judging themselves happy, though notwithstanding they go on and
continue in the hardness of their hearts and rebellions against God.

We have abundance of sayings amongst us, that if they were examined would
prove false and unsound; As, that the vipers dye when they bring forth their
young; for (say they) the young eat out the old ones bowels; that bears shape
all their young by licking of them; that the Swanne sings sweetest at her
death; that the Adamant stone is softened by Goats blood, etc. These things are
not so, as may be shown out of ancient Writers.

So beloved, there are abundance of sayings, that go up and down amongst men
concerning Divinity, which if they were examined, will prove to be rotten
sayings; as, He that made them, will save them. It is not so, says the
Prophet, Isaiah 27. 11. He that made them, will not have mercy on them, and he
that formed them, will not pity them. It is commonly believed, if men come to
Church, hear the Word, and call upon God, that then presently they are good
Christians. Beloved, it is not so, Mat. 7. 21. Not every one that says, Lord,
Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.

Men are ready when they can but call, Lord have mercy on me; O sweet Savior
pity me, most merciful Lord Jesus, have compassion on me: if they can pray in
their families, and pray at Church, etc. to think, now, all is well with them,
and Christ cannot but save them, and give them the Kingdom of Heaven: but our
Savior puts a not upon it, and says, not every one that says, Lord, Lord: it
is no^ a Lord, a Lording of Christ with the tongue only: it is not a taking up
of an outward profession of Christ only, that is sufficient for a man that
shall inherit the Kingdom of Heaven: no says Christ: but he that does the
will of my Father which is in Heaven. But, of this by the by.

Secondly, there are needless discouragements which do much hurt

Fear not, says God to Abraham, Genesis 15. 1. So, fear not Joshua, says God, to
Joshua, Josh. 1. 9. Intimating that both Abraham and Joshua were afraid of
discouragements: they were afraid that many evils would befall them, that they
should meet with many rubs and difficulties, that would be too hard for them:
therefore the Lord calls to them, fear not, be not djsmayed nor discouraged. I
^ou said, fear not. Hence observe.

That God would not have any Christian soul to be discouraged in Doctr.
prayer. Thou said, fear not.

For our clearer prooceeding herein, first, let me show you what discouragement
is: and secondly, how it comes to be dangerous and hurtful in prayer.

What is discouragement? Quest.


It is a base dismayment of spirit below or beneath the strength that is Answ.
in a man, under the apprehension of some evil, as if it were too hard for him
to grapple with it.

There be four things in this diffinition.

First, I say, it is a base dismayment of spirit; and so I call it to
distinguish it: for there is an humble dismayment which a Christian is
commanded. A man is bound to be dismayed for his sins. I say. 32. 11. Tremble
ye careless women that are at ease, be troubled ye careless ones: these
careless ones went on in their sins, and feared not. God calls to them and
bids them to be dismayed. But the dismayment and the discouragement I speak of,
it is a base dismayment of spirit; which is either when he is dismayed that
ought not: or he is dismayed at that whereat he ought not to fear: where no
cause of fear is.

As he that riding along upon the high way, spying a man's shape, thought it was
some Spirit: and thereupon he sickened and died. So many a poor soul looking in
the perfect Law of God, and seeing his own ugliness and filthiness, he is
discouraged, and thinks himself undone; his heart waxes cold within him, and
he begins to fear that he is but a dead and damned man.

Secondly, it is down beneath the strength that is in a man: that man is

Have not I commanded thee? says God to Joshua. Be strong and of a good
courage, be not afraid, neither be thou dismayed, Josh. 1: 9. God had given
Joshua strength enough, whereby he was enabled to observe and do according to
all that Law which Moses the servant of the Lord commanded him; God had now
doubled his Spirit upon him: yet he commands him, be not afraid* neither
dismayed: as if he had said, Joshua, if thou be dismayed and discouraged,
though thou have strength and power to go through the business that I have
called thee unto, yet thou will not be able to use it, nor to put it forth, if
thou be discouraged.

Thirdly* it is at the apprehension of some evil. I say not at the sight of

Fourthly, not of every evil neither; for if the evil be but small, courage

But if it be an evil above his strength, then his spirit melts and droops
before him. See this in Saul 1 Samuel 17. 11. and his people. When they saw the
Champion of the Philistims coming against them, when they saw him so hugely and
marvelously armed, and heard him speak such big words, they thought they
were not able to stand and to encounter with him; and therefore says the Text,
when Saul and all Israel heard these words of the Philistim, they were dismayed
and greatly afraid.

Thus you see what discouragement is;

Now we come to the second question, to show how discouragements come to be
hurtful in prayer: such discouragements the Lord would not have our hearts to
be in, when we pray unto him.

For first, God cannot give ear to that man that is out of heart in his
prayers. Thou can never pray if thou be dismayed in prayer. When the soul
begins to fear and reason, O I am so unworthy that God will not look at me; I
am so sinful, so blockish, so dead, and dull to all good, that God will never
regard me. Thou can never pray, Romans 10. 14. How shall they call on him in
whom they have not believed? If thou do not believe that God will hear thee,
if thou do not believe that thou shall prevail, that God will deliver thee
out of these corruptions and that lust that thou praiest against; that God will
give thee this grace o^ that grace: if thou do not believe that God will own
thee: if thou have these doubtful discouragements, O, he will not grant me, I
shall never get this or that: how can thou call on him? thou may call so
and so: but never can thou call to any purpose, if thou do not believe in
him.

A beggar though he be never so well able to beg, yet if when he comes to the
Housekeepers door, he be persuaded that he shall not speed, that let him beg
as long as he will, he shall get nothing: this blunts his begging, and makes
him give over his suit without any great importunity: So, it is impossible that
ever a soul should hold out and pray that is discouraged in prayer.

Secondly, thou can not pray unless thou use all thy strength in prayer; If
thou be discouraged, thou can not use thy strength.

A discouraged man, his strength melts into fear; and whatsoever strength he
has, he cannot put it forth. How came Jacob to prevail and to have power with
God? Why, he used all his strength with God, and so prevailed, Hosea 12. 3.
Thou can never prevail with God by thy prayers, unless thou putrest forth
all thy strength in prayer.

If Jacob had reasoned I am but dust and ashes; how can I strive with God? I am
sinful and evil, how, can I contend with my Maker? and so have been
discouraged in his wrestling, he could not have used all his strength with God,
and so had never prevailed with God. No, Jacob he gathers all the arguments
that he could make; he gathers together all the promises he could find in Gods
Book, or that he could hear of; he displaies all the wants that he could show;
he petitions all the graces that he could name; he used all his strength, and
by his strength he had power with God.

If thy confession of thy sins be strengthlesse; if thy petitions, and
thankesgiving for grace be strengthlesse; if thou use not all thy strength in
prayer, thou can never prevail, nor have any power with God. For how can
that man prevail and have power with God that has no power with himself?

Thirdly, thou can never pray, and have a fearful apprehension of evil in
prayer; thou can not. It is good to have a deep apprehension of thy sins:
apprehend them to be as many hells as thou eanst, thou can never apprehend
them deeply enough: but if thou have a fearful apprehension of them, thou
can never pray.

When the Apostle would exhort the Philippians to continue in one Spirit, and
in one mind, fighting together through the faith of the Gospel, he exhorts
them that in nothing they fear, Phil. 1. 27, 28. For if a man be terrified with
his adversary, with the power of his adversay, and fears he shall never be able
to withstand him, but must fall before him through his subtilty, that he can
never be wary enough for him: Alas, he can never strive with hope and courage
against him. So, beloved, if we have a fearful and discouraged kind of
apprehension of evil, we can never pray so as to prevail.

Apprehend thy sins to be as hellish, and as damnable as thou can: Feel
even the fire of hell in every one of them: but take heed of a fearful
apprehension of them, so to apprehend the evil of them, as to think with thy
self that because thou art guilty of these and these sins, that thou shall
never get in with God again, God will never be reconciled to thee: these will
eat out thine heart in prayer.

Fourthly, we can never pray if we have any secret despair, that there is any
difficulty too hard for us to grapple withal, or to get through in our
prayers. Howsoever a man prays, yet if he have any spice of these fears in
him, to think now I have taken a great deal of pains, but am never the
better; I have prayed and prayed, but have got no good: I may go on and do
thus and thus, but shall never prevail or speed; all my labors, all my prayers
and endeavors will be lost, this takes away the very spirit and life of a man's
prayers.

Judas after he had betrayed the Lord Jesus, he was discouraged from ever
praying for mercy. Why? because he thought it was impossible for him to get it;
I have betrayed innocent blood, says he. Matthew. 27 3. as if he should say, I
shall never outwrastle this sin; this sin is my death: I have brought the blood
of the Son of God on me, I shall never claw off this sin: now Judas thus
despayring, we never read one letter of any prayer that he made to God to get
out of it; no, he thought it too hard for him to get mercy. Despair drives a
man from that he did hope for; because now he thinks there is an impossibility
in getting of it.

Beloved, mistake me not; there is a double desperation:

First, there is a desperation of infidelity; and that deads and draws the
soul from God.

Secondly, there is a desperation of extremity; And if ever you mean to come to
God and to get any grace from God, you must come with desperation of extremity,
this desperation puts life into a man's prayers and endeavors,

As a Soldier, when he sees nothing but to kill or be killed, that he sees
his state desperate; why, this will compel a very coward to fight; this will
make a coward fight (as if he would kill the Devil, says the Proverb) it will
make him fight like a spirit; he will be afraid of nothing. Take a Soldier
that fights desperately for his life, with a kill or be killed; he fears
nothing; neither Pike nor Sword, nor Gun; why? he fights for his life.
Therefore one notes that sometimes it is the nearest way to victory to be
desperate in attempts and in fight. Therefore when William the Conqueror came
first into England, at Hastings, he sent back his Ships again, that so the
Soldiers might have no hope of saving themselves by flying back. And so at
Battle, at one encounter, a little Army of the English slew a great Army of the
French. Why? they grew desperate.

So, could men pray desperately, could they pray with a pray or be damned:
beg with a beg or be damned; seek to God for grace that you want with a
speed or be damned; then would their prayers be more earnest and powerful to
get grace. O, did men pray thus, they would pray otherwise then they do.

Men pray, but they pray deadly, coldly, and lazily, as if they had no need of
prayer, or as if they had no need of the grace they pray for; they pray for
grace but get it not; they pray for zeal, but have it not; for repentance and
holiness, but obtain it not.

Beloved, either get zeal and holiness, or else there is no mercy: either get
grace and repentance, or else there is no mercy for thee. Pray then when thou
prayest for grace, with a speed or be damned; say unto thy soul, either we must
speed and get grace Soul, or else we must go to hell. If men would pray thus,
with a speed or be damned we should never see, nor God should never hear so
many cold and dead prayers as now we pray.

Despair makes a man a Munke says the Papist: but this despair makes a man a
good Christian I say: never does a man pray indeed till he feels himself in
extremity, hopeless and desperate in regard of himself; so that he sees no
remedy at all but get Christ, get grace or be damned for ever. Get power and
strength over these corruptions: otherwise they will destroy and damn thee;
this would make a man pray for life. Men pray coldly and faintly: why? because
though they see they have no grace, no zeal, no holiness, no repentance, no
evidence of Christ: yet they hope to be saved notwithstanding. O beloved, the
devil has blinded these men to the intent they may be damned.

But if men would pray desperate prayers with a pray or be damned; seek with a
find or be damned: men would then pray other prayers than they do. Such
prayers did David pray, Psalm. 130. 1. Out of the deep places have I called unto
thee O Lord, Lord hear my prayer: as if he should say, Lord, I am even in the
depth of misery, plunged over head and ears, so that now I sink and perish if
thou help net: Lord, hear my prayer. This desperation a Christian must have,
this quickens up his Spirits, and puts life into him: but take heed of the
desperation of Infidelity: Saint Austin says it is the murderer of the soul:
the spice of it will eat out the heart of a man, and kill the strength of all
his endeavors.

I should now come to apply this Doctrine; but I fear me there be many amongst
us, that never come so far toward Heaven as to know what these
discouragements mean. This is lamentable.

It is true, discouragements are hideous cases in prayer, and a man may perish
and go to hell that has them: but yet they are somewhat profitable signs
that a man does at the least look a little toward God, or else he could not
know what they are. But there are abundance that never have attained so far
in religion, as to understand what they mean: but go on in drinking, whoring,
carding and dicing, hating and malicing, fretting and chafing, mocking and
coveting, swearing and blaspheming, in security, in heardnesse of heart and
impenitency: they are more careful for their dogs, for their potts, and for
their tables, and for their shops, than they are of their souls: And which is
enough to astonish any that is godly, these men scarce find any discouragements
in prayer: O, they have a good courage to pray at all tims: O, say they, God
forbid that any man should be discouraged in prayer: I thank God I have a good
hope in God; God has given me a good heart of grace to call upon him, and I
make no question but that God hears me: God would never bid us to pray if he
did not mean to hear us.

Beloved, these men that are so bold in the goodness of their hearts to call
upon God, they never as yet prayed in all their lives: all the prayers of the
wicked are indeed no prayers.

Daniel confessing the sins of wicked Judah, says, Though all this evil be
come upon us, yet made we not our prayer to turn from our wicked ways, Dan. 9.
13. all the time of those seventy years, Daniel says they never made prayer
to God; yet they fasted every year, and prayed every day, twice every day at
the least, which would amount in that time to 50000 and 100 prayers: how then
could Daniel say they never made one prayer? I answer, (and pray mark it)
because they never did quite turn from their evil ways. Though thou make
never so many prayers, though thou boastest of the goodness of thy condition,
and snatchest at the Promises of God: yet if thou turnest not from thine
iniquities, thou never as yet made any prayer by the Judgment of God
himself. Paul made many thousand prayers before his conversion, he could not
have been a Pharisee else; but they were never accounted prayers to him:
therefore as soon as ever he was converted, behold says God, he prays, Acts
9.

A wicked man, a carnal Christian, though he have the righteousness of Saint
Paul before his conversion, of living blameless, unreproveable in respect of
the outward righteousness of the Law: yet he can never make an acceptable
prayer, till he be truly converted; his prayers are no better than howling of
dogs, or lowing of Oxen, yea the Lord abhorrs them. O what poor encouragements
can thou have, seeing the Lord never tallies down any of thy prayers? wicked
men are like Ulysses, who wept more for the death. of his dog, than of his
wife; so wicked men weep and mourn for the loss of their corn and their
cattle, hawks and hounds, cards and dice: but never for the loss of their
prayers. So long as thou continuest in thy profaneness and impenitency, thou
losest all thy prayers: there is not one of them that God tallies down, or
reckons for a prayer. Here we minht have a great deal of matter, if time would
suffer me. But it will not, only let me tell you, I speak only to those whose
hearts God has awakened out of their sins, but who are often discouraged: take
heed of these discouragements.

For, first, they will drive thee to melancholy. Beloved, there are a great

Secondly, if you do not take heed of them, they will bring you to most
fearful and violent suggestions and temptations of the Devil, ready to
thrust me into the gulf of wickedness and despair.

And now, the soul begins to think that it is good for it to return again
into Egypt, to fall to its old courses again: for certainly God looks for no
such matter, he requires no such strictness and preciseness: And so it falls
a whining and repining at the Word and Ministers of God that have called men to
it, and laid it upon them: and has no heart now to do thus and thus any
longer. And thus it falls into discouragements because of the way, and into a
thousand quandaries whether it may not go back again or no. And all these
murmurings and repinings are because men suffer themselves to be discouraged.

Thirdly, discouragements will cause thee to think that God hates thee. When
the soul like Baals Priests, 1. Kings 18. 26. has been crying from morning to
noon; ten, twenty, thirty years, it may be, and yet has no answer; now it
will begin to think, if God did love me, then he would grant me my petitions.
Then hereupon comes into a man's secret thoughts and fear: that God hardly
loves his soul. So was it with Israel; when they were discouraged, they said,
because the Lord hated us, therefore he brought us out of the Land of Egypt,
Deuteronomy. 1. 27. Because that they were discouraged, and because that their
Brethren that went for spies, had disheartened them; therefore they were apt to
say the Lord hated them.

Beloved, it is a miserable thing when the soul calls the love of God into
question. Consider that as thou can not have a friend if thou be
suspicious and jealous of his love to thee: So, thou can never have the love
of God settled on thy heart so long as thou art jealous of his love to thee.

Fourthly, If thou root them not out, it is to be feared that they will bring
thee to despair. Melancholy thoughts and fears, and discouragements, drive the
soul to despair. For when the soul sees it self still disappointed of its
hopes, at the last it grows hopeless: If it have waited one day and the next
day too: if it have prayed this week, this month, this year, and yet still it
sees it self held off and disappointed: it will at last grow hopeless. Take
heed therefore, I beseech you, of all needless discouragements; to fear
because that thou find not that that thou wishedst or prayedst for, to day
or to morrow, in thine own time, that therefore thou shall never get it, that
now thou should for ever despair of the grace and love of God, and think
that now God will never hear thee, that thou shall never get grace and power
over thy corruptions.

Men think that the preaching of the Word of God brings men to despair, the
preaching of such strict points and the urging such precise doctrines makes men
despair: men are loath to be at the pains to root out their discouragements:
It is rather a cold or dead preaching of the Word that is the cause of this:
for when the soul is instructed by holiness, humbled by holiness, converted
by holiness, at the last when it comes to be thoroughly awakened, when it sees
that this and this is required in a true conversion of the soul to God, that
herein true repentance must declare and demonstrate it self by these and these
fruits, or else it is but false and rotten: Why now, the soul must needs be
brought to despair, because it sees that though it have been thus and thus
humbled, though it have prayed, fasted and mourned in this and this manner: yet
it sees it has not a soundesse of grace.

There is such a grace in it, such a work and such a fruit of Gods Spirit in
it, that yet he could never find in himself: this makes the soul to
despair. Indeed Preachers may be to blame, if they speak and preach only the
terrors and condemnations of the Law without the promises of the Gospel: for
these should be so tempered that every poor broken soul may see mercy and
redemption for him upon his sound and unfeigned repentance and humiliation. But
if men do despair, they may thank themselves for it, their own sins for
it, their own discouragements for it, because they suffer these to continue in
them.

Cain his heart grew sad, his conntenance fell, he was wroth and disquiered in
his mind, and heavily discouraged; why? Genesis 4. Sin lay at the door, (what
door?) the door of his conscience, rapping and beating upon his heart.

Beloved, when the soul lets sin lie at the door: drunkenness, pride and
worldliness, security, hardness and deadness of heart lie at the door: when
a man lets his negligent and fruitless hearing of the word lie at the door,
when a man lets his vain and dead praying, his temporizing and fashionary
serving of God lie at the door of conscience, to tell him that all his hearing
of the word of God profits him nothing, that his prayers are dead and vain,
that his mourning, fasting, and all his humiliation is counterfeit and rotten,
and that he has no soundness of grace in him, but that for all this he may
fall into hell: when sin l^eth thus at the door, thus rapping at the
conscience, it is no wonder if the soul fall into desperation, as it was here.

Cain let his sin lie at the door, there it lay rapping and beating, and told
him that his carelessenesse and negligent sacrificing to God was not accepted:
and therefore no marvel if Cain be so cast down in his countenance, and that
he fall to despair.

O beloved, when sin lies bouncing and beating at the door of thy heart,
when thy sin (whatsoever it is, search thy heart and find it out) lies
knocking and rapping at the door of thy conscience day by day, and month by
month, and thou art content to let it lie, and art unwilling to use means to
remove it, and art loath to take the pains to get the blood of Christ to wash
thy soul from it, or the Spirit of Christ to cleanse thee from it; then thy
soul will despair, either in this world, or in the world to come. But let us
take heed then, that our conscience condemn us not in any thing or course
that we allow in our selves: for if that do, then much more will God, who is
greater than our consciences, and knows all things.

The Apostle has an excellent Phrase: Romans 8. 1. There is no condemnation to
them that are in Christ Jesus etc. As if he should say, there is not one
condemnation; there is none in Heaven, God does not condemn them; there is
none in earth, their own heart and conscience does not condemn them; to him
that is in Christ Jesus, that walks not after the flesh, but after the Spirit,
there is none, no not one condemnation to him; none, neither in Heaven nor in
earth: no word, no commandment, no threatening condemns him. But if thy
conscience condemn thee, and tell thee thou let sin lie at the door,
rapping at thy conscience day after day, and month after month, telling thee
that yet thou art without Christ, that yet thou never had any true faith in
the Lord Jesus, that yet thou have not truly repented, and turned from thy
sins: this will at last drive thy soul into heavy discouragements, if not into
final despair.

O beloved, religion and piety, and the power of Godliness, go down the wind
every where. What is the reason of it, but because of these discouragements
that men live and go on in? Men pray and pray, and their prayers profit them
not: men run up and down and come to the Church and hear the Word, and receive
the Sacraments, and use the means of grace, but to no end: they are
unprofitable to them: they remain in their sins still: the ordinances of God
bring them not out of their lusts and corruptions: hereby they disgrace and
discredit the ordinances of God in the eyes and account of the men of the
world, making them think as if there were no more power nor force in the
Ordinances of God than these men manifest.

There is no life in many Christians, men's spirits are discouraged; these
secret discouragements in their hearts take away their spirits in the use of
the means, that though they use the means, yet it drives them to despair of
reaping good; or profit by them.

Beloved, I could here tell you enough to make your hearts ache to hear it.

First, All your complaints, they are but wind, Job. 6. 26. Do

Do thou nestle any discouragement in thy heart? thou may complain of sin
as much as thou can: yet all thy complainings are but as wind: thou may
cry out against thy corruptions, with weeping and tears, and pray and fight
against them: and yet all thy weeping, mourning and praying is but as the
wind: thou may beg grace, thou may seek after God, thou may hear the
Word, receive the Sacraments, and yet all will be to thee as wind: all will
vanish, be unprofitable, not regarded.

Secondly, discouragements drive us from the use of the means. If ever hope of
finding me, certainly he will give over seeking of me. So when the soul has
any secret despair of finding the Lord, that soul will quickly be drawn from
seeking of the Lord in the use of the means.

What ever you do then; O be not discouraged, lest you be driven from the use
of the means: if you be driven from the use of the means, woe is to you, you
will never find God then. Be not driven from prayer, nor driven from holy
conference, nor driven for the Word, nor driven from the Sacrament, nor from
meditation, nor from the diligent and strict examination of thy self, of thy
heart and of all thy ways: for these are the ways of finding the Lord. If you
nourish any thoughts and fears of despair in you, if you be discouraged, you
will be driven from the use of the means, which is a lamentable thing;
therefore be not discouraged.

Thirdly, discouragements will make you stand poaring on your former courses,
This I should have done, and that I should have done, woe is me that I did it
not: it will make a man stand poaring on his sins, but never able to get out
of them. So it was like to be with them in the Ship with Paul, Acts 27. 20. In
the tempest at Sea, they were utterly discouraged from any hope of safety: now
indeed Paul told them what they should have done if they had been wise: Sirs,
you should have hearkened to me, and not have loosed, verse 21. as if he had
said, you should have done thus and thus: but now do not stand poaring too
much on that, you should have hearkened to me, and not have launched forth, etc
but that cannot be helped, now: therefore I exhort you to be of good cheer, etc.

So beloved, when the soul is discouraged upon these thoughts, I should have
prayed better, I should have heard the Word of God better, and with more
profit; I should have repented better, I should have performed this and that
religious and good duty better; but ah wretch that I am, I have sinned thus
and thus; it is always looking on this sin and that sin, this imperfection
and that failing, when now I say the soul is discouraged, it will be always
poaring upon sin, but it will never come out of its sin; always poaring
upon its deadness, and unprofitablenesse, but never able to come out of it. O
beloved, be of good cheer, and be not discouraged; it is true you should have
prayed better; you should have heard the word of God better heretofore, you
should have been more careful and circumspect of your ways than you were; but
now you cannot help it; these things and times are gone, and cannot be
recalled: such a one has been a drunkard, a swearer, a worldling, etc. but he
cannot help it now. True, he might have helped it, and because he did not, his
heart shall bleed for it, if he belong to God: but do not stand poaring too
much upon it, but consider now what you have to do, now you are to humble your
selves, now you are to strive with God in all manner of prayer for more grace,
and more power of obedience and assurance, and be not discouraged.

Fourthly, If the soul be discouraged, it will breed nothing but sorrow. What
is the reason that many Christians are always weeping, and mourning, and
sighing, and sobbing, from day to day, all their life time, and will not be
comforted? because of these discouragements, 1 These. 4. 13. Sorrow not (says
the Apostle) as those that have no hope, as if he had said, sorrow if you will;
but do not sorrow as they that have ^o hope.

How is that? it is a sorrow with nothing but sorrow, from which they have no
hope of enlargement or freedom.

O then my brethren, suppose you have dead hearts, suppose you want zeal, you
want assurance; suppose it be so, yet labor to attain these grace; sorrow and
spare not; weep and mourn* and power out whole buckets of tears for your
sins, if you can: but, sorrow not with nothing but sorrow: be not
discouraged: suppose that thou have a dead heart, that thou art an hypocrite,
that thou have a rotten heart; it is a heavy thing, and a fearful case indeed,
for which thou have great cause of humiliation and sorrow; but yet sorrow not
desperately as men without hope: be not wholly discouraged, but as you sorrow
for your sins, so also labor with encouragement to get cut and be rid of
your sins.

Fifthly, Discouragements breed and procure a total perplexity. They

Alas, thou have things enough to do, if thou were not discouraged. Utterly
undone! No, man, thou might see that thou art not utterly undone but that
thou art discouraged. Do thou not know what will be come of thee? yea, poor
soul, there is mercy, grace and peace for thee, if thou will not be
discouraged.

Sixthly, Discouragements whisper within a man a sentence of death, and an

If you despair in the Lord* you have the sentence of death and damnation from
God in your conscience* take heed of this my beloved* be not discouraged in
God: do not despair in the Lord: that will work a miserable effect in your
souls: it will secretly whisper a sentence of damnation in your souls.

It is strange to consider how many poor souls rub on with these whispering
sentences in their bosoms, suffering their consciences day by day, to tell
them that they are rotten, to tell them that they were never yet converted, to
tell them that they are yet in the state of damnation, and yet they will not
root out these discouragements.

O go to the Throne of grace, beg for grace and for mercy and for power
against sin, and be not discouraged. What? will thou carry thine own
sentence of death in thy breast? if thou will not rouse up thy soul, and pray
with more affection and confidence, and shake off discouragements, take heed
least thou carry the sentence of thine own death and damnation in thy bowels.
Oh therefore once more let me beseech you to take heed of these
discouragements, and now hearken unto the voice of God, which calls upon you,
Fear not. Thou drewest nigh in the day that I called upon thee; Thou saidest,
Fear not.

THE MISERY OF THE CREATURES BY The Sin of Man. In a SERMON By WILLIAM
FENNER, Minister of the Gospel, sometimes Fellow of Pembroke Hall in Cambridge,
and late Lecturer of Rochford in Essex.

London, Printed by E. T. for John Stafford.

(...) They are accusing groans.

They are judging and condemning groans.

First, they are upbraiding groans, Give ears Oh ye heavens, and I

Chrysostom says, wicked men although they have natural reason in them, are
more senceless than senseless creatures: the rocks, and the flints, the fly
and the gnats may upbraid them; the rocks rent in sunder, but this people will
not rent their hearts; swarms of flies were hissed for to come, and they
yielded obedience; and the livelesse creatures groan under the slavery of sin:
but they will not obey, they will not be brought to groan for their sins. How
do all the creatures upbraid man! Do ye thus requite the Lord O ye foolish
people and unwise?

Beloved, how do the heavens and the earth upbraide thee for unthankfulness;
were thou ever in sickness, and God did not deliver thee? were thou ever in
misery, and God did not comfort thee? were thou ever in any straight, and God
did not direct thee? in sickness who was life unto thee? in poverty who
supplied thee? in danger who delivered thee? was it no^ God that has done all
for thee? And shall the Lord command thee obedience, and will thou not grant it
him? does he command thee to part with thy lust, and crucify all thy
corruptions, and will thou not obey him? does the Lord command thee to be meek,
humble, patient, and do thou refuse? then, hear O heavens, and hearken O
earth.

Secondly, the groans of the creatures are witnessing groans. I call

As Joshuah said unto all the people, Josh. 24. 27. Behold this stone shall be
a witness unto us, for it has heard all the words of the Lord, which he spoke
unto us; it shall be a witness, etc. so may I say unto you, the walls of this
house shall cry, the timber of the Church shall answer, this Sermon that you
have heard, this doctrine that has been preached unto you, if you will not
repent, if you will not humble your selves and obey the voice of your God, all
these shall witness against you another day, that you had a time, that you had
a day to repent in, you had the word of God calling you to it, but you would
not.

Do thou commit a sin? and none by, but the stones in the streets? even
they see thee, like Joshuah's stone with seven eyes, and they shall witness
against thee. Do thou pray thy lazy prayers unto God, thoughtlesse of God,
and none by but the walls of thy Closet, or thy bed, or thy hangings? they
shall witness against thee. Do thou swear, and blaspheme the King of Heaven?
though none were present, but the fowls of the air, they shall carry thy
voice and declare the matter. Eccles. 10. 20. If the creatures groan against
thee, then they are sensible in some sort, to witness against thee.

Beloved, men's hearts are so stubborn, that we the Ministers of God may do as
the Prophet did, 1 King. 13. 2. who cried O Altar, Altar, thus says the Lord.
What? was the Prophet sent unto the Altar? had the Altar ears? No, he was sent
unto Jeroboam, his message was to him; but he knew that he would not hear, nor
believe, nor obey; therefore he turned from the King, and spoke to the
senseless Altar. So may we say for all the hearing some will afford us; O
walls, walls, thus says the Lord, cursed is the man that obeys not. O House
of the Lord, witness against this rebellious generation.

So Jeremy, he cried out, O earth, earth, earth, hear the Word of the Lord,
this says the Lord, write this man a castaway, that shall never prosper, Jer.
22. 29. he meant wicked Jeconiah the King; but because he was a deaf Adder, he
preaches to the dead earth, as being more likely to listen than he.

O fearful doom! When Jeconiah will not hear, God he roars so loud that he
makes the dead and senseless earth to hear.

Beloved, in the fear of God, take heed, if there be any dead worldly-hearted
Professor here, if there be any loose profane sinner here, any impenitent
wretch that has not repented, if after the Lord has sent his Ministers to
thee, his Word and Gospel to thee, and thou will not hear; take heed lest the
Lord direct his speech to the dead earth, and say, O earth, earth, earth, hear
the Word of the Lord; write these men, men that shall never prosper: they will
still covet and lie, they will still fret and chafe, they will still content
themselves with forms of godliness, they will still be lukewarm or key-cold;
they do still pray as they did, rub on as they did seven years ago; no more
holy, no more zealous, no more heavenly, they will not be bettered; O earth,
earth earth, hear the Word of the Lord, write them a people that shall never
prosper, a people that shall never be converted; write them men damned for
ever; let them come and hear Sermon after Sermon, but write them men that shall
never prosper; let them pray, and let their prayers never prosper; let them go
on in their dead-hearted profession, but write them men that shall never
prosper.

Beloved, God forbid that it should so be written against you, but woe be to
you if ever it be! for if once the earth has wrote this eternal decree of God
upon thy soul, it can never be altered; I will warrant thee thy damnation sure.

Thirdly, they are accusing groans; they shall accuse thee for casting

Fourthly, these groans are judging and condemning groans. He

If the King should build him a stately Palace, and one should willingly deface
it, or abuse it, or pull it down; would not the very Ravens judge him a
Traitor? The creatures are Gods Palace, and thou demolishest their beauty, by
making them the instruments, or abettors, or matter, or incentives of sin;
thou shall be adjudged of High treason against the King of Kings, for we know
that every creature groaneth with us; and travelleth in pain together until
now.

Now we come to a third use

Of Exhortation; does the creature groan to serve sin? take heed Use 3.
then you do not abuse the creatures of God* There is not any one of them but
if it be abused to sin or by sin, but it will presently make its complaint
(like a little child to his Father) with groans unto God.

Labor to be a true Convert unto God; otherwise, if thou be not

I will recover my wool and my flax, says God, Hosea 2. 9. the creature
groaned under thraldom, because it was possessed by them that were carnal;
and therefore God says he would recover it.

Secondly, labor not to sin against God. For, if thou sinnest against

Thirdly, labor never to set your hearts on any creature* for, then,

If you be covetous and earthly, the creature must needs groan under this
wrong. Covetousness is Idolatry, says Saint Paul, Colos. 3. 5. thou turnest
the creature into an Idol: every creature is the workmanship of God, but an
Idol is a thing dedicated to Devils.

Fourthly, labor to use all the creatures in humility and thankfulness.

Fifthly, use them all as so many Books, and as so many Ladders or Rises

Saint Anthony being found fault withal for want of Books, answered, My Books
are Gods creatures, and in them I may read, as in the silent Oracles of God;
this is my Book, and it has three pages, and as many Letters* Heaven, Water,
Earth: they are the pages of this book: Stars, Fishes, Fowls, and all the
Terrestrial* creatures, they are the letters of this book.

There are but three main Books in the world to be read: all other books are
but Commentaries upon them.

The Book of the Creatures.

The Book of the Scriptures.

The Book of every Man's conscience.

Read but these three, and meditate of them, and thou shall have understanding
in the ways of God, to know God in all thy ways.

Beloved, this is rightly to use the creatures, and thus using them, thou shall
prevent their groanings against thee: to behold and see God present in them all.

It was the saying of an Ancient, that, that man is blind, deaf, senseless,
brutish, that knows not God. Thou can not see a creature, but thou may see
God: thou can not feel a creature, but thou may feel God: thou can not
smell, nor taste, nor meddle with a creature, but thou may smell and taste
God in the creature: thou can not behold a creature, but thou may behold
God in the creature.

O says one, if I could see God as he appeared to the Fathers, then I should
obey him, and fear him, and trust in him, and love him.

I answer, God appears now as he did then. How did God appear to Abraham,
Isaak, etc. and to all the holy Patriarchs and Prophets? Did God appear to
them in his own essence and nature? No, it is impossible that any should see
God and live. When God appeared to them, and showed himself to them, he did it
in the creatures. And I pray you does not God appear thus amongst us now? God
having made man to behold by sense, by sight, hearing, smelling, tasting,
handling; that all the knowledge he has, he must have it by these; God makes
as it were a manifestation of himself in the Sun, Moon, and stars, he
takes the Cattle, plants, and therein he shows something of himself: thou
never see any creature but it is a manifestation of God to thee: the whole
world is an apparition of God to thee; God appears in the heavens, in the
earth, and in every creature. If therefore when thou look on any of the
creatures, thou make not an holy use of them, beholding God in them, using
them as a rise to wind up thy heart and soul to God; then thou abusest the
creatures, and make them to groan against thee. For, we know that the whole
creation groaneth and traveling in pain till this present.

THE CHRISTIAN HIS IMITATION Of CHRIST. In a SERMON By WILLIAM FENNER, Minister
of the Gospel, sometimes Fellow of Pembroke Hall in Cambridge, and late
Lecturer of Rochford in Essex.

London, Printed by E. T. for John Stafford.

THE CHRISTIAN HIS IMITATION Of CHRIST.
1 JOHN 2. VER. 6. He that says he remains in him, ought even so to walk as
he has walked.
THis our blessed Apostle in the beginning of this Chapter, does declare these
four things,

First a general proposition of an advocate for the sins of the world; If
any man sin we have an advocate, verse 1. 2.

Secondly, an actual application of this to all true believers, who may all
know that Christ is theirs and that they are Christ's, ver. 5. And hereby we
know that we know him, if we keep his commandments. We know and are acquainted
with this principle, that Jesus Christ is the propitiation for our sins, if
we keep his commandments.

Thirdly, here is the fantastical presumtion of many men that hope and think
and say that they are in Christ, when indeed they are not in Christ. ver. 4. He
that says, I know him, and keeps not his commandments, is a liar, and the
truth is not in him.

Fourthly, here is an universal direction to all men, whereby to try and
examine themselves, whether they be in Christ yea or no. He that says he
abides in him ought himself to walk as he walked.

These words branch themselves into a Thesis and an Hypothesis.

The Thesis is this, He that abides in Christ, must walk as he has walked.

The Hypothesis is this, If any man be conceited of the subject, that he
abides in Christ, he must be assured of the predicate, that he walk himself
even as Christ walked. If he say he is in Christ, he must be sure to walk as
Christ walked.

To walk as Christ walked; there is a life of a Christian: if he walk not as
Christ walked, it is a plain demonstration that he is not in Christ. He that
says he abides in him, ought himself also to walk as he walked.

He that says; as if the Apostle had said, If there be any that says he
abides in Christ, he must walk as Christ walked.

Hence observe, That a true Christian he walks as Christ walked, if he be in
Christ.

Before we make entrance hereupon, let me expound to you two things, le^t we
mere with rubs in the way.

First, the conditional, If.

Secondly, the exemplary As.

First for the conditional, If. it is not a precedent condition of life, as a
condign preparation unto, or a previall disposition for Christ: for a man
cannot first walk as Christ walked, and then be in Christ. A graft cannot live
the life of the stock, and then be inoculated into the stock. No: but it is a
subsequent condition; if ever a man be in Christ, Christ holds him to these
terms, to live as he lived, to walk as he walked.

The first act is before the latter act: life before the actions of life; so
walk as Christ walked, this notes the actions of life. Now, a man must first
be in Christ, before he can walk as Christ walked.

Indeed this condition is first quoad cognosci, to our knowledge: but it is not
first quoad esse, and in its own nature. So then, to walk as Christ walked,
being a necessary consequent of being in Christ: we cannot be said to be in
Christ, if we walk not as Christ walked: for, take away the necessary
consequent and you take away the antecedent; take away the walking as Christ
walked, and you take away the abiding in Christ. This condition is put in by
our Savior. John 15. 10. If ye shall keep my commandments, ye shall abide in
my love, as I have kept my Fathers commandments and abide in his love. This
was the walk of Christ, he kept his Fathers commandments, and abode in his
love. This must be your walk too, that look to abide in Christ's love. If ye
keep my commandments, ye shall abide in my love. But if there be any
commandment of Christ in all the Gospel that you will not conform to, it is
an evident sign, that ye abide not in Christ's love.

Secondly, for the exemplary, As, even as he walked.

Can any man walk as Christ walked? is it possible that dust and ashes, that
is corrupt with sin, can walk as he walked?

This word, as, has a twofold signification: there is a twofold as, either
such an as, as importts an equality: or secondly similitude.

As this as imports an equality, so it is impossible that any flesh can walk as
Christ walked: so purely, so unspottedly, so steadily, so effectually as he
lived. No, for our Savior Christ was filled with the Holy Ghost: and of his
fullness have we all received grace for grace. John 1. 16. Mark, he does not
say that we receive his fulness: but, some of his fullness: so that none can
walk as Christ walked with an as of equality: but there is an as of similitude.

A scholar writes as his masters copy directs him: he begins every line as his
master begins, he ends as he ends, he sets himself to frame every letter as
his master framed it, to join letters and syllables together as his master
joined them together. Though there be no equality, he cannot write one stroke
or dash with his pen so well as his master: yet he does write as his master
sets his copy: his hand sollowes his masters hand. So it is said of all that
are in Christ. Revel. 14. 4. that they follow the Lamb whither soever he goes:
they follow Christ in all duties, in all holiness, in all his commandments:
they track Christ in all his steps, though they cannot walk with such long
strides, so steadily, so purely, so constantly as Christ; yet they labor to
track him with this as of similitude.

Do all that are in Christ, walk as Christ walked? yea Beloved, this is a
clause of the covenant of grace, so that a man cannot be in Christ, unless he
walk as Christ walked. For, thus runs the tenor of the covenant of grace:
Matthew. 11. 29. Learn of me, for I am meek and lowly of heart, and ye shall
find rest unto your souls. Mark, there is no rest to the soul, no grace to
the conscience, no assurance of the pardon of sin: Christ gives no comfort to
the heart, unless the heart will learn of Christ, follow Christ his copy, be
holy as he is holy, pure as he is pure, walk as he walked.

This will the better appear, if we consider that Christ his life must be the
example for our life, according to which we must live. Now, the exemplatum must
be conformable to the exemplary, says Aquinas; the draught must be according
to the copy; so it Christ's life be the pattern of our life, then our life must
be conformable to his life, and therefore Christ declares his ways unto us, as
our samplers; Christ was humble, and serviceable to all in the days of his
flesh, with this Motto, John 13. 15. I have given you an example, that you
should do as I have done.

Thou art of thy master the devil, and his copy thou followest, if thou
account it an indignity to stoop, a disgrace to condescend to thy brother.
Christ was willing to suffer disgrace with this Motto, 1. Pet. 2. 21. Leaving
us an example that we should follow his steps.

Art thou loath to practice Religion for fear of the cross? loath to reproove
sin for fear of a flout, or of the displeasure of a great man: least thou
should procure his ill will? it is evident that thou followest not Christ,
because he has left us an example, that as he suffered, so also should we:
Christ was obedient to the death of the cross, not looking to his own things
so much as the things of others; so the Apostle warns us, Let the same mind
be in you that was in Christ Jesus, 1. John 2. 5. you that be in Christ, must
have the fame mind that Christ had. 1. John 3. 3. He that has this hope,
purges himself, even as he is pure. Howsoever the world nicknames and
reproaches purity, yet if any have this hope (indeed he may have other hopes,
he may have vain, rotten, dead hopes, and never seek after purity) but he
that has this hope, a true saving hope to be redeemed by Christ, he purifyeth
himself even as he is pure.

Thou then which art not pure, but make a mock of pureness and of
conscience of every sin: thou can have no true sound faith in the Lord Jesus.
Thou must be righteous even as he is righteous.

Thou happily say thou art righteous, thou do this and that
righteousness, this and that good action: take thou heed says the Apostle,
that thou deceive not thy self, thou must be righteous as Christ is righteous.

In a word, love is the fulfilling of the law, and Gualter carries it along
through all the law which Christ walked in: Christ loved us, and gave himself
for us with this injunction, A new commandment give I unto you, that you love
one another as I have loved you, John. 13. 34.

This was one of the main reasons of Christ's coming into the world, to redeem
us for our justification; and then to be an example of life to us for our
sanctification; says Saint Basil. Christ was set for a sign to all nations, I
say. 11. 10. A land mark to all people, to take their aim, how to think, how
to speak, how to walk, how to live.

As men at Sea, if they see a Landmark, or the Pole-starre, thereby know how
to guide the Ship; so Christ he is a sign to all Nations, a sign of zeal in
prayer, a sign of reverence in the Temple, of perseverance in holiness, of
piety in life, and of unspotted purity, and constancy in death.

Yea, to wind it up a little higher, to walk as Christ walked, is an As of
participation. We must not only walk as Christ walked with an as of
proportion; for so the beasts may walk; every creature, the Sun, the Moon,
etc. walk according to their rule wherein God has set them, as Christ did
walk in his course that God set him in: but this is not enough; he that is in
Christ, must walk as Christ walked with an As of participation; he must
pattake of the same life, with Christ, and be led by the same Spirit of Christ,
guided by the same grace of Christ.

Even as less white is like more white, though not alike in the same degree,
yet in the same nature; there is the same nature in the lesser that there is in
the bigger; So we must have the same life, obey the same commandments, be
guided by the same rule, swayed by the same motions, led by the same Spirit
that was in Christ. If any man have not the Spirit of Christ, the same is none
of his, says the Apostle, Romans 8. 9.

What says one, can there be any man that is none of Christ's? does not he say
that every beast in the field, and the cattle on a thousand hills, are his?
Psalm. 50. 10. and does he say that there are some men that are none of his?

Yea, says the Apostle, If any man be not led by the Spirit of Christ, the
same is none of his. Indeed he is Christ's as the beasts are his, by creation
and preservation, etc. but thou art none of Christ's by grace and redemption,
unless thou have the same Spirit that was in Christ to live in thee.

What is it to walk as Christ walked? it is to contemn the same gain and
pleasures and vanities of the world that he contemned; to yield to the same
precepts that he obeyed; to yield to the same repproaches, hatred and
persecutions that he endured; to take up the same duties, to preach the same
truths, to live in the same rule, and in all to be led by the same Spirit.

Thus you see the explanation of the doctrine; come we now to the Reasons which
are principally these four.

The first reason is taken from the scope and end for which the Lord did

You may read that this was Gods purpose, that he laid down in himself from
all eternity before the foundation of the world was laid; when he predestined
that his Son should come into the world, he predestined that all that should
be redeemed by him, should be conformable to the image of his Son, Romans 8. 29.
whomsoever he did foreknow, with the fore: knowledge of Love and
predestination, them he did predestinate to be made like unto Christ; that
look what Christ was by nature, they might be by grace.

If this be the end of Gods predestination, then it is impossible that any man
should be in Christ, and not have the image of Christ; Chrysostom says, that
as Christ was holy by nature: so those that are predestinate, should be holy by
grace.

God shall never be frustrated of his end and purpose. If God have purposed it,
who shall frustrate it? Man indeed may be frustrated of his end, because of his
weakness and inability to accomplish by himself what he purposes; some other
person or thing prevents him of his end. But God as he has a purpose in
himself, so he is powerful and able to bring his purpose to pass.

We may conclude that that man that prays for mercy, and wishes, Oh that I
might have redemption by Christ; Oh that I might go to heaven, and yet lives in
his sins and slavery to his lusts: he prays to have benefit by Christ, and
to go to Heaven in spite of God, against the will and purpose of God.

Our own consciences may tell us, that God cannot be frustrated of his end and
purpose: but that thus we must be made conformable to Christ, or else we shall
never have benefit or salvation by him: or else Gods purpose would be
frustrated and in vain.

That thing must be frustrated, and in vain, that attains not its end: if this
be the end that God has purposed in himself, in the giving of Christ for life
and salvation to the world, that all that are redeemed and saved by him, should
be made conformable to him: either all such as are not conformable to the Image
of Christ, shall never be saved, but shall perish for ever without Christ: or
else Gods purpose must be frustrated and in vain.

The second reason is taken from the practice of Christanity (says Leo) in
vain are we called Christians, if we be not imitators of Christ, and live as he
lived. The Disciples, are called Christians, Acts. 11. 26. The very name tells
us that we must be followers of Christ, or else, we are not in Christ: if any
man be in Christ, he must really be a Christian.

As a man if he be of a trade, he must set up that trade, all his layings out
and travel and pains must be in that trade: why? it is his profession: so, if
a man be in Christ, all his conversation must be Christian, his labors and
endeavors must be in the trade of Christianity, he must walk as Christ
walked. He must be a Christian in all his courses, in all his ways, or else he
is not in Christ.

As the Pla^onists are denominated from Plato, so are Christians from Christ.
The Franciscans from Francis, the Dominicans from Dominick; these were bound to
follow the rules of their Order, or else superstition would not suffer them to
be of that Order: much less can thou be of the Order of Christ, if thou
observe not his rules, if thou live not as he lived.

Christ has given thee a law for thy mind, for to govern thy thoughts: Thou will not busy thy thoughts with holy meditations; thy heart is not christian.
Christ has given a law to thy affections: thou will be fretful and impatient,
malicious, proud, and ambitious, and carnal; thy passions are not christian.
Christ has given a law to thy life, that thy life may be holy: therefore if
thy life be not according to the Gospel of Christ, thy life is not Christian,
neither will Christ own thee for his, but will slay thee with curses, as an
enemy of his cross, and not as a follower of his death; These mine enemies
that will not that I should reign over them, says Christ, Luke 19. 27. Bring
them hither and slay them before me.

Thou can not look for a Savior to have mercy on thee, if thou will not be
ruled as a Disciple of Christ, but thou shall be damned in the presence of
Christ. Slay them before me, says Christ; Christ Jesus which is the Savior of
the World, will damn thee, and see thee confounded before his face; he
himself will see thee in hell: thou may cry for mercy, and for the blood of
Christ; yet if thou will not live as Christ lived, but wilt rebel and sin
against Christ, Christ will see thee in hell, and though he look on thee, yet
he will destroy thee without mercy.

If ever thou be in Christ, thou must walk as Christ walked; thou must be a
Christian like to that good Martyr, who to all demands answered that he was a
Christian. When they asked him what his name was, he answered it was Christian;
his thoughts were Christian, his words and actions Christian; his country, his
hopes, his aim, all that ever he did, they could get nothing out of him, but
all was Christian, and so he gave testimony to the Lord Jesus. So I tell thee,
thou must be a Christian all over, a Christian in thy thoughts, in thy words, a
Christian in thy calling, and in all thy employments, being swayed by the
Gospel of Christ, or else thou art not in Christ.

The third reason is taken from the essential, or rather rather from the
integrall Reason 3.
union that is between Christ and all these that are in Christ; they are all
members of his most gracious body. Ye are the body of Christ, and members in
particular, 1 Cor. 12. 27. now, we know that all the members have the same
life, and are quickened by the same soul: the soul is whole in the whole
body, and whole in every member of the body: so if Christ be our head, we are
his members, and the christian life of Christ must be diffused thorough us, so
that one man cannot be a drunkard, another a worldling, another an Epicure,
another a swearer, another a whoremaster, another a liar, another a
lukewarmeling, another a mocker, another a vaine-Jester, another a man-pleaser,
and yet be a member of Christ. All the members of Christ must have one life.

As in a man's body, there be veins, arteries, and nerves, that are the
channels to convey life, and motion and sense to every member, that all the
members may have the same life dispersed through the body. So it is in the body
of Christ* every member of Christ has faith for his veins, to convey the same
life, and the same spirits, and the same gracious motions to all the body, that
it is not now the member that lives, but Christ that lives in it. Gal 2. I live
not, says the Apostle, but Christ lives in me. As in the body, it is not the
eye that sees, if we speak proporly, but the man that sees with the eye: it
is not the ear that hears, but the man that hears with the ear: so in the
body of Christ, it is no more the man that speaks, but the truth of Christ
speaking in him. We have the mind of Christ, says the Apostle. 1 Cor. 2. 16.
if we be in Christ, Christ thinks in us, Christ speaks in us, Christ walks
in us, Christ does all in us. As in the same body, the soul rules and quickens
every member. The body of Christ cannot be a monster, like those Locusts spoken
of, Revel. 9. 7. that had shapes like horses, heads as it were like crowns of
gold, and their faces like the faces of a man, and had hair like women, and
teeth like Lions; this is a monster, and not a simple body: such a one cannot
the body of Christ be; a mocker for one member, an ignorant sot for another, an
hypocrite for another, a carnal gospeller for another, a covetous worldling
for another.

As in the body of a man, every member in this man's body, must be this man's
member, and not the member of another man: As for example, Peter must have
Peter's legs, and not Simon Magus his legs: Peter must have Peter's eyes, not
Alexanders eyes: Peter must have Peter's hands, and not Judas hands: you cannot
take the eye of an Horse, the leg of a Dog, and the paw of a Bear, and put
them together, and say here is a man: no, this would be a monster: every perfect
body must have its own members.

So it is in the body of Christ: every member in Christ his Body, must have
Christ his Members: every member in a man's body acts with reason, so every
member of Christ acts with direction of Christ, it is informed by Christ, his
mind is quickened by Christ his life: so that a man cannot be a member of
Christ, but he must walk as Christ walked.

I know, the best Christian may fall seven times a day, though he be in Christ:
it does not therefore follow that every particular action savours of Christ:
but, as every member in the body lives the life of the whole body, or else it
is a dead member: so thou must live the life of Christ, or else thou can
never be saved.

You know that all the actions of a man are guided by reason: yet there are
some particular actions that he does, and not by reason: as it may be he shakes
his head, or moves his hand, and jogs his foot, and considers not what he
does: they are the actions of a reasonable man, though not reasonable actions:
so, there may be many actions that are the actions of Christians though not
Christian actions. The sins of the godly, they are the actions of a
Christian, but they are not Christian actions: there may be stoppings in the
body: though the same life and quickening runs through the whole body, yet
through the stopping of the liver and the pipes, distempers and ill humors may
be raised in the body, so it may be in the body of Christ: and so many a
Christian may fall through infirmity; but the course of a Christian, the life
of a Christian, the ordinary trade of a Christian, the walk of a Christian, is
to live with the same spirit that lived in Christ, to walk in the same way
that Christ walked in.

The last reason, is taken from the near relation that is to be between
Christ and every member of Christ. They are not only the Servants and
Disciples of Christ, but they are the children of Christ, by his begetting of
them. If all that are in Christ, are the children of Christ, they must needs
walk as Christ walked. Like begets the like. Indeed a godly man may beget a
wicked child, a graceless son; the reason is because he begets his son not
as he is a godly man, but as he is a man corrupt by nature with sin: but
Christ begets as he is God, and therefore as he is without sin in himself,
so he never begets any but by an eternal spirit, and therefore they cannot but
be like him. Be ye followers of God as dear children. Ephesians. 5. 1. The Apostle
grounds his exhortation upon a necessity in grace. Consider, if you be the
children of God, it can be no otherwise but you must be followers of Christ as
dear children. The begetter communicates himself to the begotten: if the
begetter be flesh, he begets flesh: so Adam begot a son after his own
likeness. That that is born of the flesh is flesh John 3. and is of a fleshly
nature. That that is borne of the spirit is spirit. If we are begotten again by
the Spirit of God, then are we spiritualized of God; so that a man cannot be in
Christ, unless he be the child of Christ, and walk as Christ walked. Christ
was perfect, Christ was merciful; be you so, says Christ, Matthew. 5. Be you
perfect as your Heavenly Father is perfect; as if he should say, you cannot be
the children of your Heavenly Father, unless you be perfect as he is perfect,
merciful as he is merciful, holy as he is holy, righteous as he is righteous,
walk as he walked.

Is it so that all that are in Christ, walk as Christ walked? then all wicked
men blaspheme the name of Christ, that do not live the life of the Lord Jesus.

These blaspheme the holy and sacred name of Christ. Oh says one, I hope I am
a Christian: yet the man is a drunkard, or a whoremaster, or a gamester, or a
worldling, a proud man, a covetous man, What? was Christ a drunkard? was Christ
a whoremaster? was Christ a gamester a worldling, proud, covetous? it were
blasphemy for any to say so of Christ: and it is also blasphemy for thee who
walk not after the Gospel, to say thou art a Christian. As I am a
Christian, says another: yet the man is a filthy speaker. Was Christ such a
one? a swearer, etc.? Thou blasphemest the name of Christ. I hope we are all
Christians, says a third; and yet they are men that live in security and
profaneness. What? was there security in Christ? was profaneness in Christ? Oh,
what blasphemy is it for thee to style thy self by the Name of Christ, to say
thou art in Christ? Revel. 2. 9. says Christ, I know the blasphemy of them
that say they are Jews and are not: that say they are the children of Abraham,
but do not the works of Abraham If a man did blaspheme God to style himself
a Jew, or a child of Abraham, that did not the works of Abraham: what
blasphemy then is it for thee to say thou art a Christian, and yet do not the
works of Christ? could not a man take the name of Abraham, but he did
blaspheme, unless he did the works of Abraham? how then durst thou take the
name of Christ upon thee, and not do the works of Christ, not walk as Christ
walked?

Beloved, is any man a Christian? he has holiness engraven in his forehead to
the Lord, in his heart, in his thoughts, in his words, and in all his ways: he
is one that gaspeth after holiness.

Art thou a Christian? of all sins under Heaven God cannot endure the sins
of a Christian that has the name of Christ put upon him. When Gods material
temple was defiled by buyers and sellers, Christ whippes them out, and after
told them that the days would come wherein there should not be left of it one
stone upon another. God would not endure the Temple because it was dedicated to
his name, called his house, when it was made a den of thieves. Does God care so
much for stocks and stones, that are dedicated to his Name, will he not endure
an unholy stone, and will he endure an unholy Christian? Thou that art
dedicated unto God, and unto his service, thou that art dedicated to prayer, to
hearing, thou that art dedicated to an holy conversation, thou that art called
the Temple of God, and the House of God, will thou make it a den of thieves, a
den of vain thoughts, a den of wicked words, of dead and ungodly works?
will thou defile the Temple of the Lord? then know, the Lord will not let one
stone lie upon another, but will cast thee down, and damn thee body and soul
in hell for ever.

Thou say thou art a Christian; how so? thou say thou wast christened:
thy condemnation is the heavier, if thou say thou have been baptized into
the Name of Christ, and have not put on Christ. Examine thy self: have thou put
on Christ? otherwise it is no matter for thy baptism.

Can I say that man has put on his cloths, that has not a ragge on his back,
nor a shoe on his foot, nor a hatte to his head, nor a ring on his finger?
so, when there is never a Christ in thy thoughts, never a Christ in thy speech
and conference, never a Christ in thy walk, never a Christ in thy calling, in
thy buying and selling, never a Christ shining forth in thy life and
conversation, can thou say thou have put on the Lord Christ?

Can any man say that a beggar has put on Royal robes, when he has nothing
but rags and patches upon him? so, if I see a man with ragged thoughts of the
world, with ragged speeches of the flesh, and a ragged course and conversation,
according to the course and conversation of the world, I can never say that
such an one has put on the Lord Jesus Christ.

Do thou say thou have put on Christ? why then, show me the signs of Christ
in thee. Shall I see it by thine apparel? it may be that is garish. Shall I
see it by thy speech and conference? it may be that is earthly and carnal.
Shall I see it by thy thoughts? it may be they are vain, sinful, and worldly.
Shall I see it by thy company? it may be they are wicked and graceless. Shall
I see it in thy course and conversation? it may be that is loose and profane.
How can thou then demonstrate that thou art a Christian? it may be now and
then thou will give a prayer unto Christ, turn up the white of thine eye to
Christ, it may be thou will look into the Church, and lend an ear to Christ in
his word. Is this to be in Christ? if thou be in Christ, then thou must live
the life of Christ in all thy ways.

The life of a man is a continued thing. A man is not alive at his dinner, and
dead when he has done: alive at his work, and dead when his work is done: so
it is not enough for thee to prove that thou art in Christ, that thou art alive
at prayer, or at preaching: life is a continued thing: thou must be alive after
prayer as well as before, alive after Sermon as whilst thou art at it; if thou
have the life of Christ in thee, it is a standing life: it will not make thee
alive at prayer, and dead when thou have done: it will not make thee holy and
Spiritual at a Sermon, and leave thee dead and carnal when it is done: not
holy and heavenly in discourse and conference, and worldly and profane when it
is done: not to be holy and lively etc. in a good mood: and leave thee
dead-hearted, secure and loose afterward; this is not to be in Christ; no, the
life of Christ is a standing and a continuing life: it will make thee alive
after all thy services; after every duty, as thou wast before or in the duty.

He that says he abides in him, etc.

In this word He; there are three Notes.

a note Of Indignation Discrimination. Scrutiny.


First Indignation. The Apostle does as it were point at a certain man in his
congregation, as if there had been some m^n that he knew was not in Christ.
What man soever, whether in this pewe, or in that pewe, whether on this form,
or on that form, if he abide in Christ, he ought to walk as Christ walked.

Hence observe, That a Minister is bound to preach home in particular, so that
he may summon this man and that man in the Church, as the Apostle does here;
(he that says) if there be any one amongst the whole multitude, that says he
abides in Christ, he ought also himself to walk as he walked. And this
commission God gives unto all his ministers: Mark 16. 15. Go preach the Gospel
to every creature: he does not say preach the Gospel before every creature: so
they may do, and preach in general: but to every creature, that every
creature may feel the Gospel bearing on his heart, that every creature may
see his sins, that so the Gospel may be applied to his heart.

All the names given to Ministers, show thus much. They are called Seeds men;
now a Seeds man does not take a whole croppe, or a whole bushel of corn and
throw it in a heap in his field; but he takes it and scatters it abroad that
every place may receive some.

So, they are called Builders; now, a builder does not only frame the whole
building, but he lays every particular brick, and every particular stone in
his building.

So, they are called Shepherds; a Shepherd does not only look to his flock
in general, but to every Ram, and to every Lamb in his flock.

So, Preachers must not only preach the word of God in general, but they must
preach in particular.

The ground of this will appear, if we consider three things in particular.

First, particulars are most operative; it is not fire in general, that burns,
Universalia non operantur.
but it is this or that fire, so it is not sin in general that will humble a
man: it is not repentance in general that will turn a man: it is not faith in
general that will save a man: but, this fi^ne and that sin: this repentance
and that repentance: this faith and that faith.

All actions they are of singulars. An universal man cannot reason, an
universal man cannot dispute, an universal man cannot see, nor hear. No, it
is this man, and that man that sees and hears, and disputes. Particulars are
most operative: preaching to men in particular, is powerful preaching: that
works upon men's consciences. How came the Prophet to preach powerfully to the
people? He declared to Jacob his sin, and to Israel his transgression, Micha
3. 8. I am full of power by the Spirit of the Lord, says the Prophet; here was
the way whereby the Prophet preached powerfully; so that the Spirit went and
rent men's hearts and consciences, and made them tremble; how? why he made every
soul see his sins: so, that Minister that would preach powerfully to the
consciences of his people, he must make every one of them to see their sins
against God, and his commandments, so that they may confess, I see I have
been a grievons sinner, and I am in the state of damnation: and I must repent,
or else I shall be damned.

Secondly, particulars are most distinct; when the preacher preaches

Thus the people in Malachies time, they thought they had much knowledge while
the Priest preached thus overly to them; but when the Prophet came to preach
home, and to come with particulars to them, they thought the Prophet was mad,
they knew not what he meant. You have despised the Lord, says the Prophet;
wherein? say they: Mal. 1. 6. You have profaned the worship of God, You have
polluted the table of the Lord, says the Prophet: ver. 7. wherein? said they.
You have wearied the Lord with your words, said the Prophet Chap. 2. ver. 17.
wherein? said they. You have robbed God, Chap. 3. ver. 8. wherein? said they.
See, your words have been stout against the Lord, said the Prophet; yet they
said, what have we spoken? ver. 13. they could not tell wherein, till the
Prophet told them, herein have you robbed God, herein have you despised the
Lord, herein you have profaned the worship of God, etc.

So, should the minister of God come to men, and tell them in particular, thou
art an enemy to Gods grace, thou have abused Gods patience; wherein? say
thou. Thou art one that scornest the word of God, and thou defilest all the
Ordinances of God. Wherein? say thou. Thou art one that putst far from
thee the evil day, wherein? say thou.

Now, when the minister of God can come to particulars, and show men wherein;
then they cry out against them, and think they tell them lies, and preach false
things to them: but the Ministers of God are bound to preach so as they may
discover men's particular sins, not so as people may point one at another, but
so as every conscience may feel its own sins.

Thirdly particulars are most sensible. If the Minister preach home in
particular, there is not a false heart then in the congregation, but he will
find it out; if he preach in particular, he will discover every man's
corruption, fling wild fire in every wicked man's face, and throw balm of
comfort into every godly troubled spirit.

As King James said well of a reverend Prelate of this Land, Me thinks this man
preaches of death as if death were at my back; so should Ministers preach, as
if Heaven were at men's backs, or as if hell were at men's backs. When he
preaches of men's sins and corruptions, he must preach so that their
consciences may see that the word of God looks into the very thoughts and
hearts; when he preaches of the wrath of God, and of condemnation etc. he must
preach so, that the conscience may feel even the fire of hell flaming in it;
this is the way to teach the people the good knowledge of the Lord, as it is
called, 2 Chronicles. 30. 22. every Minister may teach the knowledge of the Lord,
but not the good knowledge of the Lord.

There is great difference between teaching of the knowledge, and of the good
knowledge of the Lord. Men may know God and his word, and their sins: but if
they go on in their sins, it is not good knowledge: then indeed a Minister
teaches good knowledge when he makes his people so to know sin as to loath it,
and to come out of it; so to know repentance as to repent indeed.

Secondly, Discrimination. As if he should say, there are some that are

Hence observe this point, That every Minister is bound to preach so, as
Doctrine 2.
to make a difference between the precious and the vile.

Saint John preached so as that his hearers might say, the Spirit of Christ is
in me: or, the Spirit of Christ is not in me: that themselves might know
whether indeed they were true members of Christ, or but hypocrites. This is the
duty of Ministers: Ezekiel 44. 23. They shall teach my people the difference
between the holy and profane, and cause men to discern between the clean and
unclean.

Here is two things.

First they shall teach them the difference between the holy and profane.

Secondly, they shall not only show it before them: but if they will not see
it, they shall cause them to see it; that is, they must beat it into them, and
rub it into their consciences; it may be when men may see, they will not:
then, he must make them to see. If there be any profane person, any luke warm
or dead-hearted professor, or close hypocrite in the congregation, the Minister
must make him see his profaneness, his deadness, and hypocrisy in Gods
worship: or if there be any godly soul, or broken heart, the Minister must
make them to see that they have a broken heart.

First reason, because else, a man defiles the pulpit, and prophanes the holy
Reason 1.
things of God. Ezekiel. 22. 26. Her Priests have violated my law, and profaned
my holy things: they have put no difference between the holy and profane,
neither have they showed difference between the clean and unclean. Those
Ministers profane the holy place of God, when they make not men's consciences
know which is holy and profane; when profane persons may come and go from
Church, and have not their profaneness discovered to them; a drunkard, a
swearer etc. and has not his sins laid open to him. Is there any profane
person here, that has not an arrow shot into his heart, but he can go away
and not take any comfort from the Sermon? these men profane the holy things of
God.

When God gave Benhadad into the hands of Ahab, and Ahab spared him, and let
him go. 1 King. 20. the Prophet tells Ahab ver. 42. Thus says the Lord,
because thou have let go a man whom I appointed to utter destruction,
therefore thy life shall go for his life, etc: so, if there be any Minister
over any congregation, in which there is any drunkard, any swearer, or
whoremaster, or wordling, or lukewarmling, or any other that lives in such
sins, which God has appointed and decreed to eternal destruction in hell; if
we tell them not their sins, and make their consciences feel them, then our
life shall go for their life, our soul for their soul: for we might have
given them such a wound as might have been a means to have cured their soul.

Secondly, We are not the Ministers of Christ, if we preach not so as that
Reason 2.
men may know that they are not converted, if they are not etc. God says to to
the Prophet Jeremiah, if thou take forth the precious from the vile, thou shall
be as my mouth, Jer. 15. 19. Jeremiah could not be Gods mouth to the people,
unless he would divide between the precious and the vile. Unless Ministers
preach so as to make the consciences of their hearers feel in what state they
live in, they may be Ministers of Satan, Idollshepheards, but they are not the
Ministers of Christ. Reason 3.


Thirdly, because otherwise they can do no good: Ezekiel. 34. 17. and as for you
O my flock, thus says the Lord God, behold I will judge between cattle and
cattle, etc. As if he should say, woe unto the shepherds; will they not
preach so as to make a difference between cattle and cattle? woe unto the
Priests; will they not preach so as to feed my flock? I will require my
flock at their hands: and now says God, will not the shepherds of my people
do it? I will now do it my self, I will convert those that are to be
converted etc. I will feed and provide for my flock my self.

Austin notes, that after that Peter had smote off Malchus his ear, Peter came
to be a shepherd, and an Apostle of Christ, after Paul had persecuted the
Church, he came to be a Preacher, and an Apostle of Christ: so after Moses had
killed the Egyptian, God made him the Captain and deliverer of his people.
Austin observes from this, that God appoints none for his Ministers, but
Smiters, such as be men of blows, men that will smite men home to the heart,
men that will wound the consciences of their hearers.

This I speak that you may not be offended at the ministers of Christ, when
they apply the word of God to your several consciences: and whenever you
have the truth of Christ preached to your souls, let your hearts make use of
it; for if thou apply not the word of God to thy soul as it is preached, thou
art guilty of thine own blood. If you apply not the word, you put off the word
of God; and then, what says the Apostle? Acts 13. 46. It was necessary that
the word of God should first have been spoken to you: but, seeing you put it
far from you, and judge your selves unworthy of everlasting life etc.

You that have heard the word of God, apply it to your souls, it is a blessed
plaster: let it lie on your souls: go home and say, Lord, I have been told of
this and that sin, of my pride, hypocrisy, deadness, and distraction in thy
worship and service, etc. I see they are against thy will, and thou command
me to come out of them, and to leave them; Lord, I beseech thee enable me to
leave them all; so, Lord, I have been told this day of such and such graces,
which thou have commanded me for to have, of such and such duties that thou
would have me to take up and perform; Lord, subject my heart to the power
of grace, and to every commandment of thy word.

Take heed, if thou do put off the word of God or any tittle of the word,
and wilt not walk according to the same, thou put off eternal life from
thy self. Do therefore as Gods people did, who when Moses had preached the
Law and Will of God to them, it is said* Exodus 12. 50. Thus did all the
Children of Israel as the Lord commanded Moses and Aaron, so did they. So do
you go home and apply the word to your souls, it was spoken for your good,
make use of it, and the Lord be with you.

Thirdly, Scrutiny, it is not only an outward word, but a word of the

THE ENMITY OF THE WICKED, To the light of the GOSPEL. In a SERMON By WILLIAM
FENNER, Minister of the Gospel, sometimes Fellow of Pembroke Hall in Cambridge,
and late Lecturer of Rochford in Essex.

London, Printed by E. T. for John Stafford.

THE ENMITY OF THE WICKED, To the light of the GOSPEL.
JOHN 3. VER. 20. For every man that does evil, hates the light, neither
comes he to the light, least his deeds should be reproved.
THis is part of Christ his parley with Nicodemus concerning regeneration:
wherein our Savior does declare four main points,

The first is, Man's natural estate and condition without Christ. It is
impossible that ever he should be saved, that ever he should get grace or come
within the list of eternal life. Christ says it, and binds it with an oath:
ver. 3. Verily, Verily, I say unto thee, except a man be borne again, he cannot
see the Kingdom of God: much less inherit it.

Secondly, here is Gods gracious provision which he has taken with the world,
that though man were in a way of damnation, invincibly; yet now he is put in a
way of probability of salvation: ver. 16. though he were damnable by nature,
yet now he is salvable by Christ.

Thirdly, here is a general proclamation upon the condition of faith, that this
salvability may be attained, if a man believe. In the same verse, God so loved
the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in
him, etc. It is a condition of faith, put to all, none excepted. Whosoever he
be that believes in Christ, he shall be saved.

Fourthly, here is the reprobation of the world, he that believes not, is

That the cause of their condemnation, is from themselves, and not from Christ:
is proved by three arguments,

First, from their own consciences: he that believes not, is condemned

Secondly, it is proved by experience; experience shows that men are

If the world stood guilty of never so many sins: yet, if it did believe in
the Lord Jesus, it should be saved. So that it is not all the other sins that
a man commits, that damnes him: but his infidelity that lays all his former
sins that ever he committed upon him; here is condemnation, that though light
be come into the world, to pull men out of their darkness, and sins; yea
though Christ, though grace come to them, yet they will not come out of their
sins; men will not have Christ, men will not have grace, men love darkness
rather then light.

Thirdly, It is proved by reason, verse 20. the verse now read unto you,

It is a strong argument to prove that if men be damned, themselves are the
cause of it: for if light come into the world to instruct men, if Christ come
into the world to pluck men out of their sins, if Christ come with his blood
and spirit to cleanse and sanctify men, and men will not be sanctified: Then,
if they perish in their sins, they are justly guilty of their own condemnation.

The words comprehend in them two things.

First, the wickeds rejection of the word of grace: which is set forth both
positively, he hates the light: and then privatively or rather negatively,
neither comes to the light.

Secondly, the cause of the wickeds rejection of the word of grace: which is

First, the qualification of his person, he does evil.

Secondly, the disposition of his male partnesse, that cannot endure to be
reproved.

From the first of these, we observe this.

That a wicked man hates the word of God grace yea he does not only hate
Doctrine.
the word of Gods grace, but he hates grace it felfe: he does not only hate
the Lantern that bears the light, but he hates the light it self.

I choose not to stand to show you how the word is called a light: but that
which I take to be more necessary for this place, I will first show you what
this hatred of the word of grace and of grace it self is, and I thus define it,

It is an actual affection of the heart, whereby a man rises up against an
union with that which seems to be opposite and contrary to his lust.

So that there be four things in a wicked man's hatred of the word.

First, it is an actual hatred: for there is an habitual hatred of the word,

Secondly, it is a passion of the heart, and so I distinguish it: for I know
rejoices in and loves thy word: I have nothing else to fill it but thy word,
and the comforts I have from it: but their hearts are as fat as grease, their
hearts are fat hearts, fat with the world, far with lust, they hate the word.

As a full stomach loatheth meat and cannot digest it: so wicked men hate the
word, it will not go down with them, it will not fetch up their lusts.

If thou partest not with thy sins, thy heart hates the word: yet thou
think thou love the word: thou say thou love to hear the word, and
thou love good Ministers, and good discourses, etc. it may be that this is
nothing but the assent of thine understanding, and the approbation of thy
conscience, and so a man may love the word in his understanding and conscience,
and yet be a hater of the word of God.

The Devils have attained to so much divinity as this; they like the word in
their understandings, and assent to the truth of it in their consciences; but
though their understandings and consciences tell them that it is a good word,
yet they hate it. This is a damnable and a most unnatural hatred.

Indeed if a man's mind and conscience were against the word, it were natural
for him to hate it: it is natural for a man to hate that which is against his
mind: but when thy conscience shall tell thee, this is the word and the will of
the Eternal God; and thy conscience shall tell thee, that it is a most true
word, a righteous, a just, an holy commandment that commands thee to serve thy
God only, and so to part with all thy sins; if yet thou will not obey, but
go contrary to his word, thy hatred it is unnatural and divelish. As it was
said of Agrippa his dog, he had a devil tied to his collar: of another that
he had a devil signed on his swords pummell: so I may say to every one that
hates the word and to be ruled by it, and yet knows it in his own
understanding and conscience to be a true and good word; I may say, it is a
divelish Hatred, and he has a devil tied to his heart, a devil in his heart.

Thirdly, this hatred is that whereby the heart rises up against an union

I put this union of the word in opposition to four things.

First against general preaching; a wicked man loves general preaching, with
his heart; he may hear a thousand Sermons and like them all well enough; so
long as the word closes not in with a man's conscience, so long as it grapples
not with his heart, so long he may love and like it. But let the word come in
particulars to him, and tell him, this is thy sin, and thou must to hell for
it, if thou give it not over: this has been an old lust of thine which will
be thy bane, if thou repent not: This thy old corruption, it will be thy
breake-necke, if thou part not with it: if the word come in this union with his
soul then he hates it.

So long as John Baptist took his text, and dwelt on the reasons, and went no
further, Herod heard him gladly: but when John came to his use to apply it, and
told him in particular, this reproves thee Herod, and all the evils that ever
thou have done, and in particular for thine unlawful marriage with thy brother
Philips wife: when John came thus, then Herod claps him up in prison; before he
heard him with joy and gladness: but when he comes close to his conscience,
and tells him that his marriage would condemn him, and his other sins would
damn him, if he repented not; Herod cannot endure this preaching any longer.

Secondly, in opposition to merciful preaching. A wicked man loves merciful
Preaching; why? it takes no union with his heart, it is like a Plaster that
will never stick. A merciful Sermon can never stick on a profane heart; it
is likened to a greasy paper that will never fasten, so merciful Sermons,
they will never fasten on his heart, they cannot take away his sins from him.

Ahab he loved his four hundred meale-mouthed merciful Preachers well enough;
but when Micaiah came to him, O, I hate him, for he never Prophesies good unto
me but evil, he is always upon hell-strings, he is always preaching
judgment unto me: I cannot claw off one of his Sermons in a month scarce, I
cannot catch hold on any of his Points to comfort my heart; there is not one
sentence in all his Sermons to refresh my conscience, he never prophesies good
unto me but evil; I hate him.

When a Minister comes to the conscience of a man, and tells him this is the
truth of God, and this is thy sin and damnation, and makes his Sermons stick
as a burre on his conscience, and as an arrow shot into his bowels, his heart
rises against it, and he cannot endure it.

Thirdly, in opposition to preaching, when the Minister is dead. A wicked man
loves the word when he that preaches it is dead. Why? then there is none to
urge a union of the word with his conscience. A wicked man loves to read Saint
Paul, Saint Peter and Saint John, etc. why? these men are not alive to urge a
union of the word with their consciences; but if Saint Paul, or Saint Peter,
etc. were alive to tell them, if this be the word of God, then thou art a
damned man, if thou do not obey it, if this be a grace, then thou art a
cursed man, if thou have it not: if these men were alive now, their Sermons
would cut to the quick. So when the Ministers are dead, men love to buy their
books; and to read their Sermons.

Now Master Perkins is dead, all the world honors him, and men buy up his
books; but when he was alive, the drunkards made ballads of him, and profane
Belials would make songs of him: why? they could not endure this union of the
word. If the Minister be by, he cannot be drunk, but the Minister will preach
condemnation to him for it, if he repent not* he cannot swear, or lie, or
deceive, but the Minister will tell him that this will be a core to his
conscience another day. Men cannot endure this. Saint Paul and Saint Peter,
etc. being dead they like well enough, but if they were alive, they would hate
them: why? they cannot endure an union with the word.

This was the religion of the Scribes and Pharisees: Matthew. 23. 29, 30. they
built the ^ombes of the Prophets, and garnished the Sepulchers of the
righteous, and said if they had lived in the days of their fathers, they would
not have been partakers with them in the blood of the Prophets. You are the
children of those men that killed the Prophets, says Christ: ver. 31. Are not
you the children of those men? do not you do those sins which the Prophets
cried out against, and for which the Prophets denounced such fearful
judgments upon them? I tell you if the Prophets were now alive, they would
^^ie hell and damnation, to you: if the Prophets were now alive, and did see
those sins you commit, they would denounce woe and vengeance to you as they
did to their fathers.

Oh says one, if I had lived in the Jews time, I would never have opposed
Christ and his Apostles, I would have kissed the very ground that they trod on;
then, wretch why do thou not do that which these men preached? look in the
writings of these holy men, of Paul, of Peter, etc. Do thou do that which
Paul and Peter have wrote thou should do? do thou look in their writings,
and not obey what they have wrote? I tell thee, if Peter and Paul were alive,
they would tell thee thou should be damned, if thou repentest not: if John
and James were alive, they would tell thee, that the wrath of God will take
hold on thee, if thou yield not obedience to that word they preached to thee.

If Paul were alive he should have many a Tertullus to oppose him: if John were
alive, he should have many a Herod to imprison him: if Amos were alive, he
should have many an Amaziah to banish him and to silence him; but now they are
dead, men can like them well enough.

A righteous man in the way, is an abomination to the wicked. Prove. 29. 27. he
does not say an upright man when he is dead, is an abomination to the wicked:
for when he is dead, they may praise him, and love him, and love to have his
picture amongst them: then they will speak well of him, and commend him. I
speak that, because I would not be misconstrued.

Let a man be a godly man indeed, a Saint indeed, as long as he lives, the men
of the world will hate him: I have chosen you out of the world, faith Christ,
and therefore the world hates you, etc.

It has been an old haunt and custom of the world to hate and malign the
righteous, to reproach them, to call them Puritans, etc, though very heathens
have acknowledged that there is no religion without purity. Cicero, Horate, and
others describing a man that is religious, say that he is an entire man, a man
pure from sin.

If any man will not believe it, let him try it: let him be holy and gracious,
and show forth the power of religion in his life, let him contemn the world,
etc. and see whether wicked men will not hate him, reproach and disgrace him
what they can not as if a godly man could not be godly and religious, unless
he be hated and reproached by the world: for it may be

First, when a man that is truly religious and godly, is a great man, and all
the country are loath to lose his favor, or to purchase his ill will* then he
may be free from hate and reproach.

Secondly, when he is a man of admirable wit and knowledge, that the world
admires him for his learning, and for his understanding, and for his parts:
such a one men will rather admire then revile.

Thirdly, it may so be that God may give a godly man favor in the eyes of the
world: howsoever the world would hate, and reproach them, yet God may so strike
their consciences that they cannot do it. Otherwise, a godly man, especially
if he be such a one by whose godliness and purity a wicked man is judged and
condemned in his conscience for his ungodliness and profaneness, the wicked
will hate him.

Lastly, I put it in opposition to now and then preaching: a wicked man loves
preaching, though never so sharp and terrible, so it come but now and then: if
the Minister preach never so powerfully never so terribly, if it give him a
reproof and away, so it does not stand digging in his conscience, and ga^ling
his heart day by day; let the minister en^er a reproof into his heart again,
so it be but once or twice, he cares not. Why? he thinks he can recover himself
again from it: but let the word of God come into him, and gall his conscience
continually, that every Sabbath he is convicted for a condemned man if he live
not otherwise: every Sermon the Minister finds him out in his closest and
dearest sins; he can never go to Church, but he hears the Minister
reprooving him for some sin or other, telling him that he must to hell for
them unless he repent, and lead a new life; thus when the word follows him
every Sabbath that he has no breathing time to recover his lust; this makes
him to hate the word.

Amos 7. The Prophet preaching the word of the Lord, and denouncing the
Judgments of God to the people for their sins, Amaziah opposes him ver. 12.
and says unto Amos, O thou Seer, go fly thee away into the Land of Judah,
and there eat bread and prophecy there, but prophecy not again any more at
Bethell, for it is the Kings Chapel, and it is the Kings Court. He could like
it well enough that Amos should prophecy once or twice: but if he did
prophecy any more, he should spoil all their ^^^th, he should gall all their
consciences; go, says he, prophecy in Judah, and eat thy bread there. Amos
should prophecy where he would, so it were not there; he might eat his bread
where he would, so it were not there.

Lastly, as it is an actual affection of the heart, whereby the heart rises
up against an union: so in the last place, it is against that that is dissonant
and repugnant to his lust. For, as love is the consonancy of the affection to a
thing that has agreement therewith: so hatred must needs be dissonancy of
affection to a thing that is repugnant and contrary to it. So, a wicked man he
hates the word, because it disagrees and jarres with his lust. Indeed a wicked
man may love the word so long as it opposes not against his lust. Therefore a
wicked man may love three kinds of preaching.

First, Quaint preaching that savours more of humanity then of divinity.

The people they did love to hear Ezeki l preach, they did love to hear his
pleasant words.

The Babylonians they did love to hear David's songs: it was fine melody to
them, though they hated the sense; so the Phylistins they did love to hear
Sampson speak, they knew he was a witty man, and could speak fine riddles to
them, but they hated his religion: so the people they did love to hear Christ
preach, and would flock after him, they did, wonder at his authority, etc. yet
they hated his doctrine, for they cried, crucify him, crucify him; so if a
Minister speak only of wit, learning and memory, etc. a wicked man will
love it, it opposes not his lust.

Secondly, they may love Impertinent preaching: when though it be

Thirdly, he may love preaching in ^anto though not in toto; he may love

The vilest drunkard, and blasphemer, and swearer that is, will be content to
hear of calling upon the Lord Jesus at his death: the vilest whoremaster, and
profane person, the earthly worlding, etc. will yield to some preaching, and
to some hearing, and to some reading: why, otherwise their consciences would
not be at quiet, but would be as the devils band-dogge, bawling and houting at
him. But if the Minister call for more religion then his lust will suffer, for
more religion then will subsist with his security, deadness, lukewarmnesse,
hypocrisy, worldliness, that he cannot yield to, and ^e^aine them: then he
thinks there is too much of it, then he hates it, and cannot endure it.

Thus you see, that wicked men hate the word of God, I set it forth by three
instances; Romans 1. 30. Haters of God. They did not hate his being and essence,
his goodness and mercy, but they hated him as he was a Lawgiver. The devils
hate not God as he is God and has a being, but they hate him as he is a
Lawgiver and as he is their Judge: they cannot endure to be called by this God;
to be controuled and judged by him. Thus was it with the Colossians, before
they were converted: they were enemies to God, Col. 1. 21. Our Savior takes
away the whole doubt, and speaks it peremptorily and generally of all the
world, they hated me; the whole world so long as they live in their sins, hate
Christ, and hate his word.

First, a wicked man hates the word, because he hates the truth and the being
of the word: he is sorry that the word of God is true, he would be glad that
the Scripture might prove false: that things may not be as the word of God
says they are; he hates the being of the word. A man loves the being of that
which he loves, and he hates the being of that which he hates; and were it in
his power, he would destroy it. Now, though a wicked man cannot destroy the
Bible from being in it self, yet he will destroy the Bible from being in his
life.

For, beloved, the word of God should not only be in the Bible, but the Bible
should be in a man's life. A man's life should he a walking Bible: but a wicked
man destroys the Bible from being in his life. A civil man would be glad that
Aristotle's Ethics were the Bible. A worldly man would be glad that the Book of
Statutes were the Bible; he is sorry that that is the Bible which indeed is the
Bible.

The young man that came to Christ, though he loved eternal life, and said
that he loved the Commandments of God, yet when our Savior told him one thing
is wanting go and sell all that thou have, and give Matthew. 19.
it to the poor, says the text of him, he went away sorrowful; as if he
should say he was sorry that there was any such truth in the Scripture: he
would have been glad that there had been no such text in the word of God.

The Prophets prophecy falsely, and my people love to have it so. Jer. 5. 31.
they hated to have it so as the word would have it. But, when the false
Prophets told them it was otherwise, O, they loved that.

Beloved* the men of the world would be glad that God would make another Bible,
that drunkards and whoremasters might be saved: another Bible; that earthwormes
and worldlings and proud persons might be saved. If God would rain down a new
Bible, another Bible, I fear there are many thousands among us, that now say
they love the Bible* yet would love to hear of it, and come from all places to
seek after it, after another Bible that would show the way to heaven a little
wider; men are loath to hear of so much holiness; so much preciseness, they
love not to be beaten on that string, a sign that they hate it.

Can a man that is nothing but flesh and blood, love the text of Saint Paul
that flesh and blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God 1 Cor. 15. 50? Can an
old filthy sinner love that text of Isaiah, An old sinner though he be an
hundred years old shall be accursed, I saiah 65. 20? Can a Usurer love the 15.
Psalm? Can a luke warmling love Rev 3. 16? no, he would be glad there were no
such truth in the word, and therefore he hates it. Romans 8. 7. A wicked man is
such an enemy to the word, that all the Ministers in England cannot reconcile
him to it.

Secondly, wicked men hate the word, because they do hate the nature of the
word. If men did love the word of God, they would will what the word of God
wills, and nill what the word of God nills. It is a good proverb amongst us,
It is the property of lovers to will and nill the same things.

If men did love the word, then look what the word says, they would do: what
the word commands them, they would obey. If men did love the word, they would
comform their hearts and lives to the rules of the word. But the carnal mind
is enmity against God, for it is not subject to the law of God, neither indeed
can be. Romans 8. 7.

A wicked man hates the law of God; why? the heart of a wicked man conceives
the word of God to be against him: he cannot think a thought but the word is
against it, he cannot speak a word, but the word of God is against it, he
cannot pray his dead-hearted prayers, but the word of God is against him, etc.
And as the word of God is against him, so his heart is against the word: he is
of one mind, the word of another: he is of one mind, and the word of the
clean contrary mind against him.

Lastly, as a wicked man hates the being of the word, and the nature of the
word in it self, so he hates the being of it in his understanding; he cannot
abide the knowledge of the word: therefore they say unto God, depart from us,
we desire not the knowledge of thy ways. Job. 21. 14.

A wicked man would feign keep this and that lust: he is loath to depart with
his old corruptions, his old sins; he has lived in them so long, that he is
loath to part with his old friends; he would feign go on in his lust, and
therefore he hates the knowledge of the word that would strippe him of his
lust, says Aquinas. Now he cannot be free for his sins, and be curbed by the
knowledge of the word.

I will tell you, once it was my hap to preach a Sermon two or three hundred
miles from this place, and when Sermon was done, I heard a man say, O what a
beast was I to come to this Sermon, what a beast was I to come to it?

When the word of God comes to men, and tells them that their state is damnable
if they live in their sins, when the word of God comes to the heart, many are
sorry that they ever heard the word of God, that ever the word made such ^^hing
known to them.

The drunkard, the wanton, the Usurer, and the worldling, how glad would they
be that the Minister could prove by the word of God, that these sins were
lawful, that usury were lawful, that covetousness were lawful? etc. But when
the word goes flat against them, then they cannot endure that word: why? their
conscience begins to pen them in, it puts their hearts in the stocks, as it
were, they cannot have freedom in the pursuit of their lusts and sins: an
evident sign that men hate the word.

Austin says of a wicked man, He loves the truth shing, but he hates the truth
reproving. As much of the word as you will, to make him skillfull in knowing:
but he hates the word every dram of it, checking and rebuking, girding and
controuling him for his sins.

Beloved, what is all our preaching? does it not show that men hate the word?
need any go to the field and exhort the Husbandman to plough and sow his
ground? need we go to your houses to persuade men to feed, to eat and drink,
and to cloth themselves? need we go to the Alehouse and persuade the drunkard
to drink, the swearer to swear, the gamester to play? no; men love their
backs, and their bellies, men love their profits and their pleasures, men love
their lusts and sins. But they must be exhorted and entreated, and commanded
to obey, and to love the word of God, and all little enough.

Hence then is a reproof to all the wicked amongst us. O beloved, it Use.
is too true that abundance of us do hate the light. Did we not hate the
light, we would have shaken all our hands of our sins sheere ere now; did we
not hate the light, we would have crucified our anger, and our wrath, and our
pride ere now; we would have subdued our security, and our self-love, and our
lukewarmnesse in good duties: did we not hate the light, we had all been
children of the light ere now. Plato says, He loves that has a similitude of
that he loves: but we have not a similitude and a likeness of the light, and
therefore we do not love it.

Beloved, let me come a little nearer, and convince all that hear me of this
point.

They must needs be said to hate one another whom no entreaties nor beseeches

Oh, how often have Gods Ministers entreated you and beseeched you to give over
your sins, and yet you will not! how often have they besought you to be
zealous, and meek, and holy, and you will not? thou art techie and revengefull
in speeches, how often have thou been sought to leave it? thou art proud and
stout-hearted, how often have thou been fought for to be humble? thou art carnal
and worldly, how often have thou been besought to be spiritual and heavenly?

Thou have no assurance of Christ in thy soul: how often have thou been besought
for to get him? Ministers beseech thee every Sabbath, Ministers entreat thee
every week: They break their brains, and break their sleep, and spend their
lung, and all to invent and speak acceptable words to prevail with your
^oules: with heart-cutting entreaties they beseech you; if not withstanding all
this; you will not be entreated to part with your sins, then it is evident
you hate reformation.

If we did not hate a thing, we would do it, though we were never besought to
do it; if thou did not hate a reformation of thy sins, thou would have
been reformed without these beseeches but if beseeches and entreaties cannot
woo thee, thou hate it indeed which beseeches cannot reconcile.

The Lord Jesus sent his Ministers in his Name; we are Gods Ambassadors in
Christ his stead, we pray you to be reconciled to God.

We have besought you by the blood of Christ, we have entreated you by the
Bowel; of Gods mercies to become new men: we beseech you in the Bowels of the
Lord Jesus Christ to give over your sins. We beseech you as you love your
souls* give over your sins: we beseech you as you are men, as you know what is
what, give over your sins: we beseech you, let the drunkard give over his
drunkenness, the swearer his oaths and blasphemies, the Idolater his Idolatry
and wilworship, let the idle talker give over his fruitless communication, the
covetous person give over his covetousness, the secure Christian and luke
warm professor and deadharted server of God come out of his security and
dead-heartednesse, etc. I beseech you by the mercies of God says Saint Paul,
present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy etc. Romans 12. 1. Sacrifice your
tongues unto God we beseech you, and speak holy conference, sacrifice your
hearts we beseech you, and use holy meditations; sacrifice your ears unto God,
and suffer not idle language to be spoken in your hearing: we beseech you do
this; yea by all the mercies of Christ: we beseech as though God did beseech
you by us, we pray you in Christ his stead; and will you not yet? Certainly,
you hate the light, if all these beseeches cannot reconcile you; we have
besought you that there be no disorders in any of your families, and yet there
are: we have besought you that there be no loss of time in your meetings, that
there be no root of bitterness in your hearts, and yet there is: we have
besought you to mend your repentance, and to better your obedience, and to
repent of your rotten formality and to come out of your sandy and quagmire
bottoms, and not to consent your selves with this beggarly form of religion
only, but as ever you love your souls and would be loved, to get the power of
grace: and a thousand more things have we besought you. Is it done? no, God
knows: all the beseeches and entreaties under heaven have not yet done it. Now
therefore you must needs stand convinced in your consciences, that you hate the
light, if all these beseeches cannot bring you to it.

They must needs be said to hate one another, when neither money nor price nor
any thing can make friends. That is inveterate cankerous hatred which can never
be out-bought, which can never be hired to ^ease. I make no question but that
the D^mosels Master at the first did hate that his Maid should be possessed
with a devil: but when he saw that it brought him in great gain, he took off
his hatred: he could then be content that the devil might have stayed in his
house, so he might have gained by it: and therefore we read that he was angry
at the Apostle for dispossessing the devil out of her; Act. 16. 19. It must be
a grievous ha^red that profit cannot mollify.

Brethren, you know that God offers you pardon of your sins: he offers you
mercy, he offers you a Kingdom, if you will come out of your sins. If thou
would rather lose father, mother, wife and children, houses and lands, goods
and livings, rather then shake hands with such a one as thou art fallen out
with, I am sure thou hate him with a witness: and if thou would rather
hazard thy own mercy, hazard the love and favor of God, hazard the Kingdom of
heaven, let Christ go, and mercy go, and heaven go, rather then let thy
sins go; surely thou hate to be reformed. I will give you a kingdom,
says God, if you will be new men; I will give thee a Kingdom, if thou will
take up Christ his Cross and be pure. I will give thee a kingdom, If thou will
walk precisely and circumspectly. But you will not, though you might have a
kingdom for it. Repent says Christ, for the Kingdom of heaven is at hand,
Matthew. 3. 2. Repent, and here is a Kingdom at hand for thee. Down with thine
old lust, thou know what I mean, and here is a Kingdom at hand for thee.
Repent of your formal repentance, repent of your fashionary prayers, repent of
your overly performances of holy duties, and behold here is a Kingdom for you.
Will thou hazard the very Kingdom of grace, and of glory, rather then thou will step out of thy old wont? thou hate repentance, if a Kingdom cannot
hire thee to love it.

They must be said to hate one another, whom all the dearest love in the world
can never unite and soder together. Love is able to burst all the hatred in the
world if the devil be not in it: love is more forcible then hatred; and
therefore that hatred is most cankerous that love cannot overcome. What is so
pleasing or delightful to the flesh of a man, but love may command it? the
love of God has given thee the blood of his own Son: if thou will part with
thy corrpptions, thou may have it. That is hatred indeed, which the blood of
thy own Savior cannot dissuade thee from.

The Apostle Peter thought he had used an excellent argument to persuade men to
holiness* when he sets forth the love of God to us. 1. Pet. 1. 18. 19. For
as much as you know, that you were not redeemed with corruptible things as
silver and gold, from your vain conversation, received by tradition from your
fathers: but with the precious blood of Christ, as of a Lamb undefiled and
without spotte. What, does Christ give his blood to thee, to redeem thee from
thy vain conversation? has he given his blood for thee, that thou should
part with thy sins, with thy drunkkennesse, with thy oaths, thy pride,
security, luke warmness, earthlinese profaneness; from thy vain thoughts,
thy vain words, and thy vain lusts, and will thou not? If God had redeemed us
with silver, and gold, that were but dross: no, he has redeemed us with the
blood of his Son: if now thou will part with the blood of Christ, rather then
with thy sins, that the word of God commands thee to part with, how great is
thy hatred of the word?

Blood it is necessary to the life of every living creature. I am sure the
Blood of Christ is necessary to the life of a Christian; without it, a man can
never be washed, nor never be sanctified, nor made acceptable to God. That man
that will rather part with his blood, rather then lay down his hatred of such
an one whom he hates, he hates him for ever, he hates him to the death. Thou
that rather then thou will part with thy evil courses, from those sins that
Gods word would have thee to to give over and forsake, wilt part with the blood
of Christ, I say thou hate the word, and thou hate a reformation of thy
ways for ever, with an everlasting and damnable hatred.

That man that had rather be damned then leave his sins, that had rather go
to hell, then be a new creature, he hates the parting with his sins, he hates
to be a new creature,.

It is truth, man is a reasonable creature, and therefore cannot reason so in
express words, as to say, I had rather be damned then to give over my
drunkenness, my lying, my swearing, my lust; I had rather go to hell, then be
so pure, and so holy etc.

But every wicked man is so unreasonable in very deed; for the word of God
tells that wicked men that live and die in such sins, and such sins shall be
damned; yet, they will not give over their sins.

Does not your own conscience tell you, that as long as you pray no better, as
long as you walk no better in your profession, God abhorre^ you, and all that
you do, and will damn you? does not thy conscience cell thee, that yet thou
have no assurance of salvation, that as yet Jesu-Christ was never given to
thee, that as yet you never had the Spirit of Christ to kill sin in you? if
that thou will go on in thy sins, and not get Christ and his Spirit into thy
heart, as the word of God commands thee, and thy own conscience persuades
thee: I say, if yet thou will go on in thy sins, then thou choosest to be
damned, rather then to part with sin.

Do we not say, such a rogue will be hanged, that such a hasty furious man
will undo himself? do we not say of a rebellious child that he will be
disinherited? not that any man reasons so in words, I will do thus and thus
and undo my self, I will steal and be hanged, I will be a rebellious child
and be disinherited, I will go on in my sins, let the world say what it
will, and be damned. But when a man knows that the wages of sin is death, that
the end of drunkenness, of swearing, of lying, of pride, security, hypocrisy,
formality in religion etc. is death: When a man knows that the end of that
sin which he lives i^ is damnation, and yet will go on in those sins, he
wills to be damned. Ezekiel 18. 31. Turn you, turn you, why will you dye, O
house of Israle? why? were any so mad as to be willing to dye, to perish for
ever? yet says the Prophet, why will you dye? as if he should say, why will
you sin? that man that wills to sin, he wills to be damned; that man that will
be damned rather then part with his sin, that man loves sin for ever, and so
hates the light.

Beloved, be ashamed to carry so many plague-tokens upon your hearts, so manny
sins in your souls, so many oppositions and rebellious against the word.
That man that hates and rebels against the word, can never be saved by the
word. You that have had the preaching of the word, look that you give way to
it; take heed that you withstand not the breath of it.

I could tell you one thing, and I pray God to send it home to your hearts:
commonly when God sneds his word to a people, those that are wrought upon, for
the most part are wrought upon at the beginning: generally it is so, I will
give you a convincing place for it: Acts. 13. 48. And when the Gentiles heard,
they glorified the word of the Lord: and as many as were ordained to eternal
life, believed. Paul and Barnabas were come to Antioch, and had preached one
Sabbath day, and now had preached another: The Gentiles glorified the word of
the Lord: and as many as were ordained to eternal life, believed; as if he had
said, all that were ordained to eternal life, believed at those Sermons; as if
he should say again, all that believed not at those two Sermons, were
reprobates.

Those that did belong to God, they did believe, and hearkened to the preaching
of the word to them, on those two Sabbaths; All that were ordained to life,
they believed at these two Sermons: the rest that believed not, are branded and
marked out for despisers and wonderers, Hear O despisers, and wonder and
perish, etc.

Agree with thine Adversary, whilst thou art in the way. Matthew. 5. Beloved, you
are now in the way of salvation: your Adversary is the Lord himself, til he be
reconciled unto you; you are in the way, while you are under the preaching of
the word, you know not how soon God may take you out of the way, you know not
how soon God may take his word away: or, if that continue, yet he may withdraw
his Spirit: and then, if God once take away his Spirit, then you may seek to be
converted, but shall never find it; you may seek for grace, but shall never get
it: you may seek for Christ, but never obtain him; if men stand out against
the word and Spirit of Christ, while it is beating upon their hearts, and
offering them grace, then Christ will be a swift witness against them. Malach.
3. 5. Does Christ come to thee? now obey, now believe, now give over thy sins.
Does he bid thee now repent? etc. O give way to the Words of Christ, give way
to the spirit of Christ; otherwise, Christ will come swiftly: I will be a swift
witness.

I tell you, the Covenant of grace will not stay long: God is about to put up
his wares. When no Customers come, the Merchant puts up his wares; so God will
even close up all his graces; then Preachers may preach, but none shall be
converted: People may hear, but never be turned; which the Lord deny from ever
being amongst us; therefore, while it is called to day, hearken, and the Fear
of God be with you.

GODS IMPARTIALITY IN HIS JUDGMENTS. In a SERMON By WILLIAM FENNER, Minister
of the Gospel, sometimes Fellow of Pembroke Hall in Cambridge, and late
Lecturer of Rochford in Essex.

London, Printed by E. T. for John Stafford.

GODS IMPARTIALITY IN HIS JUDGMENTS.
ISAIAH 42. 24. Who gave Jacob to the spoil and Israel to the Robbers? Did not
I the Lord?
THe Lord in this Chapter by the Prophet Esaias does foretell heavy things
against the people; and by the way mark the Lords dealings, he ever gives
warning before he sends any plagues: he lightens before he thunders; that the
people might not say they did not hear of it, and that the wicked might be the
more inexcusable, and that the godly might make an Arc to save themselves in.

These words, and the following verse contain in them five several things;

First, the Author of this destruction or judgment.

Secondly, the Causes of it.

Thirdly, the Judgment it self.

Fourthly, Who they were on whom this judgment was inflicted.

Fifthly, The effects of it.

Now by Gods permission I will open these words in order unto you, And for the
first, the Author of it.

It is laid down by question and answer.

Question, Who gave Jacob to the spoil, and Israel to the robbers?

Answer, Did not I the Lord? was it not I the mighty God, which am able to
order every thing according to my own will?

But indeed we are ready to ascribe things to chance and fortune and lot; to
prevent this says God, Who did these and these things? did not I the Lord?

Now, by Jacob and Israel is meant the people of the Jews, which were called by
the name of Jacob. Who though they were his peculiar people, yet when they
sinned, he gave them over. God says, Who gave this people of mine to the
enemies? did not I the Lord? therefore God, he is the Author of all punishment.

Secondly, the Cause why the Lord did this: for, some might say, why did the
Lord overthrow this people, whom he did so tenderly respect for his, which were
as the apple of his eye, and the strength of his right arm? because they
sinned against the Lord, and would not walk in his ways.

He sets down the Causes.

First, in general, they have sinned.

Secondly, in particular, they would not walk in his way, nor be obedient to
his Laws.

Thirdly, here is the Judgment it self, ver. 25. therefore has he powered upon
him the fury of his anger, the strength of the Battle, and has set him on fire
round about. He calls it the anger of the Lord: not of a King, or of a great
man, but the anger of the Lord, the fury of his anger; showing the extremity of
it: he does not say that God does drop down his anger; but* he poures out the
fury of his indignation. Moreover he says, the strength of battle; the Lord
comes like an armed man to fight against them, and to destroy them, as men in
wa^res do when they slay both young and old, and make no bones of it, and are
glad when they have done it; And, as an armed man to slay them; so likewise, he
has set a fire round about them; the Lord has enclosed them in with
indignation, so that they could see no way to get out of it, or to escape it.
So then this shows the unavoydablenesse of Gods Judgments.

Fourthly, who were these that were destroyed? Jacob and Israel, a praying and
a professing and a fasting people.

Fifthly, the effect of all this, how it did work upon them. Yet, says the
Lord, they know it not, neither lay it to heart. Oh Lord, what monstrous
stupidity is this! though God did do it; in his anger too; yet this poor
Nation saw it not, nether regarded it, till the plague came and when it came,
they never laid it to heart, neither were they humbled by it, but did bear the
plague, and afterward went down into hell, and never minded it.

Even so beloved; stands the case with us, The Lord plagues us, and we see it
not: his anger burns round about us, and the fierrenesse of his wrath is gone
out to battle: and yet we perceive it not.

From the first of these observe: namely.

That God is the author of all plagues and judgments that befall a Nation.
Doctrine.
It was he that drowned the old world, and delivered the Children of Israel to
the spoylers. Shall there be any evil in the City, and the Lord has not don't
it? says Amos in his third chapter and sixth verse. From whence observe this,
That God ordains all punishments before they come. Acts 4. 28. for to do
whatsoever thy hand and counsel determined before to be done. And as God
ordains all thing before they come; so he orders them, and the time when
they shall come; and they cannot come one moment of time before the Lord would
have them. The Jews could not lay hold on our Savior, because his hour was not
yet come. John 7. 30. The wicked cannot pull down punishments upon a Nation
when they will; As its he ordains them, and the time when; so he does appoint
them how long they shall lie upon men. Revel. 1. 10. There the Lord had
appointed the Church of Smyrna ten days tribulation; and there is measured how
much God appoints us. The devil could go no further then his commission in
afflicting Job. As he does order all, so he does order all for the good of his
people, and for the confusion of his enemies; all things work for the good of
those that fear God, Romans 8. 28. and for the hardening and overthrowing of the
enemies of the Church that are incorrigible.

This may stay and comfort the hearts of Gods Children, in any Use. 1.
heavy cross that befalls them.

Is God the orderer and disposer of all? then this may comfort thy soul O thou
poor Child of God; I say comfort thy soul with this, that the Lord is the
temperer of all things, and the Physician that stands by and sees how many
drammes the Apothecary puts in. The devil indeed may afflict thee, and
wicked men may punish thee; but thou shall have no more then the Lord sees good
for thee. Therefore though thine enemies take thee and kill thee, and Rabshekah
rail on thee, and Bonner burn thee, yet the Lord is a sweet loving Father,
and orders all things, and cannot find in his heart to hurt thee. Though they
be the Instruments, yet God he is the Author, and has appointed how long, and
how much, and for what they shall afflict thee. Therefore though the Sword find
thee, and faggot come: yea though thou be banished or sawne asunder, yet the
Lord orders all things. Therefore he says to the sword, and to the the
plague, as David said to Ioab, have a care of my dear son: only subdue the
rebel, but do not hurt my son. So says God, use my servants kindly for my
sake: only bring under their proud hearts, but do not hurt them. Therefore
have an eye to Gods love, and let faith in him overruled thy heart in spite of
all that can come against thee.

This may terrify the hearts of all wicked men that are out of Gods favor.
Use. 2.


Is God the Author of all punishments? then this may make their hair to stand
upright upon their heads. That God whom thou hate, is the punisher of thee
even he whose Son thou despisest, and whose Sabbaths thou prophanest; He is
able if his wrath be kindled, to consume thee in a moment. Oh, if thou had
not an adamant heart, this would daunt it, and dissolve it into tears of
blood. God will infinitely punish thee, who is a consuming fire: but if thou will not be daunted, there is nothing but fearful looking for of fire and
brimstone for ever in hell. When God punishes his children, it is in mercy:
but to the wicked his wrath is in their punishments, and his Judgments are in
anger and great wrath: and therefore when he punishes thee, thou may say, A
just Judge brandeth me in the hand.

Is it so? Then when Calamities come, let us not so much stand upon Use 3.
men, or upon the help of them: but let us look to God as David did: it may be
the Lord sent Shimei to raily on me; 2 Samuel 16. 10. and so did Job the Lord
gives, and the Lord has taken away. Job 21. 12. The Caldeans did it: but they
were Gods Instruments. We should not do as dogs, that gnaw the stones that are
thrown at them. God takes stones as it were, and throws them upon men's
heads: and sometimes whips them by wicked men. Now, the wicked are but Gods
rod, and when he has scourged thee, he will cast the rod into the fire.
Therefore go unto the Lord, make peace with him and he will remove it. The
wicked I confess are in fault, but God is the Author of all: and he will
deliver you in his good time.

Secondly, wherefore will God deal thus with Israel? because they have sinned
with a rebellious spirit, not by infirmity, but in disobedience.

Whence you may learn this point of Instruction, That sin and disobedience
Doctrine.
against Gods Law is that which brings down punishments and judgments upon a
Nation or a people or Church. All Sin in general is the brooder and hatcher of
all judgments, and the very spawne of all punishments. Ah, this sin and
disobedience, and wilful rebellion against God, it will bring sword and
famine amongst us, and let in the enemy, and send out God from amongst us, and
stop the mouths of his Ministers, and break off the Parliament.

A more particular cause why God sends punishments amongst us, is this, because
Kings will not be subject to the Laws of God, and Queens will do what they
list: when Bishops and all people will have elbow room to do that which seems
good in their own eyes: as giving toleration for the profanation of Gods
Sabbaths, that the people may dishonor the Lord, and run headlong to hell:
this and such like, sets up wickedness, and brings the wrath of God upon us,
and his vengeance upon our Land and Kingdom; when thus sin gets the upper
hand and day of the word, for which I cannot choose but pity our poor Land,
neither could you do less if your hearts were not as hard as an adamant, and
your eyes glued together. Ah poor Nation, now thou lie a bleeding and
drawing to an end, and the bell now tolls for this Nation, and the Lord is a
going from this Land: and her punishments and judgments are coming on apace,
so that all Nations may say, Wherefore has the Lord done this unto this Land,
what means the heat of his anger? then shall men say they have forsaken the
Covenant of the Lord God of their Fathers, and served other Gods. Judges 4. 2.
When they forgot the Lord their God, then he sold them into the hand of Iabin
King of Canaan; this was the ground why the Lord drowned the old world. Genes.
6. 12. because they had corrupted all their ways; this was the cause why the
Lord burned Sodom and Gomorrah with wildfire from heaven: this was the cause
the Lord destroyed Jerusalem forty years after Christ, because they would have
none of the offers of Christ, and of grace and mercic. And thus much for proof.

Good Lord, what a poor weak Land have we! if sin and rebellion Use 1.
be the cause of all punishments, then in what a poor case is England? how
weak are we? our hearts may shake within us, and our knees may knock together
to consider of it, having so many sins of all sorts, of all degrees, and
committed with so high a hand, and in most fearful manner.

We are sick from the Crown of the head to the soale of the feet, there is no
soundness in us: we are sick in head, sick in heart, sick in stomach; we
have had peace, and that has surfeited us: and now we have gotten the
pleurisy, and nothing but letting of blood will cure us. God grant, the Lord
let us blood in our hearts also. God must purge and physic us, and fetch out
the dross which we have gathered by our disobedience. If sin and rebellion
will do it, we have given God cause enough so to plague us.

Is it so? Then we see who are the greatest traitors in the kingdom, Use 2.
and what they are that pull down punishments upon a Kingdom; they are
disobedient rebels and traitors, full of sin.

I protest, the greatest traitors our land has this day, are the prophaners of
Gods Sabbaths, and such as do give liberty to profane them, and to swear and
be drunk: these are the plague: sores of this Kingdom, and bring down heavy
jugements upon us; yea, of what place or dignity soever they be. It is not
only poor drunkards, but silver and velvet-Coat drunkards, even the Lordly men
of this kingdom, who give liberty to sin: for the greater are the men the
greater are their sins, and they are the most dangerous, even as great
Cut-purses do more harm then little ones; for as Haman was hanged before the
Jews saw good days, and the seven sons of Saul were slain before they could
have any peace in Israel: so while these rebels be not hanged, what peace can
be expected? while Jonah was in the ship, there could be no quietness: so
whilst these rebels and vile wretches live and have favor, and are respected,
and go on still unpunished, they are in the land, as Jonah was in the ship:
and so long there can be no quietness in the land.

One Achan did plague a whole land; but here are many Aehans in this land. Oh
poor land; thou art wonderfully laden by every ungodly person, both in Country
and City. O let us beg of God that the wicked may be removed out of the land,
or that God would turn their hearts.

Is it so, that sin is the brooder of all punishments? O then let it Use 3.
teach every one of us to set heart and hand and all to work, to join all our
forces of prayers and tears against these enemies, and labor for the
reformation of these: When Jonas was in the ship, the Mariners came about him
and asked him, from whence come thou? So if ever we would see good days, we
must join our prayers and all our powers against our sins and the sins of
others.

When the Philistines saw that the Arc was the cause of the punishments that
befell them, then they never rested till they had sent it away; so let us ship
and pack away our sins, if ever we would have our punishments removed from us.
Say, O mine enemy, have I found thee, thou art the enemies of King, and
Country, and Parliament, and Gospel, and thou art he that brake the last
Parliament, thou art he that lost the day at the Isle of Ree, thou art he that
sent so many poor Rochellers to the grave with famine, and thou art he that
makes division between Kings and commons. The Lord give us power and courage:
for if ever we had need, now we have; and let us bestir our selves, and pray
that God would be pleased to stir up the heart of the King and other
Magistrates against these sins. Oh that Magaistrates in their places, would
set their hearts and hands against all these sins; but light execution is
done, and most Magistrates stand for ciphers in their places, and only take up
a room, and do nothing. We cannot draw them with all the arguments we can use,
to punish these sins. We have cause to mourn: for they stand like
scrare-crowes, with a piece in their hands, but never shoot: and the birds may
pick the strawes from their heads; so that Magistrates do nothing.

But to you I speak that are chief in Towns, and chief Officers: you should
all join hand in hand, and heart in heart to pull down these ale houses,
hel-houses, and nurseries of the devil, and to supplant wicked nesse. We must
not be one for them, and another against them: for in so doing* we shall never
see good days.

And you Gentlemen, when are your hearts and hands against them? when did you
ever speak or write against them? when did you ever set foot in striving to
have them suppressed? men stand with their fingers in their mouths, and their
hands in their pockets, and dare not stand for God and good causes. The Lord be
merciful unto us: we do not join our forces, prayers and powers that we can
make for Gods glory. Oh that the Lord would be pleased to put his Spirit into
our hearts, that we may be all of one mind. So you Gentlemen, in your places,
and we Ministers in our places, and all of us, we are with all the strength and
courage and mettle that the Lord has put into us, to cry, and pray, and preach
down sin. And all you Masters and Dames, you are to reform your Families:
for these sins bring down punishments upon the Land. Therefore labor to find
out the wickednsse of your Families, and admonish them, and reprove them
plainly, and show them from Gods word the punishments that are due to them. If
you would do these things, then there might be something done: and if reproof
and admonishment will not serve the turn, then expel them and banish them, as
Abraham did Hagar and Ismael. You Christians, mourn for your sins, and join
your hearts and prayers against the sins of the place where you live.

If any house be on fire, others will come with water to quench it as if it
were their own: so here is a flame of fire kindled in this Kingdom of England,
and the wrath of God is like wildfire coming down upon us from heaven:
therefore let every one of us bring some water or other to quench this fire
that is round about us in every place, and almost upon all hearts.

Let every man sweep his own door, and the streets will be clean; so if every
one would purge his own heart, what reformation would there be in every place?
then God and Christ and gospel might be here still, and the enemies might be
kept out still: which if we do not, who knows how soon the enemy may rush in
upon us? but alas, we harbor these traitors in our bosoms.

I protest against every man that habours sin in his own house or soul, that he
is a traitor to the Kingdom, whatsoever he be; if I knew the man, I would
fasten mine eyes on him, and tell him, Oh thou vile Achan, do thou harbor
these sins, and traitors, and keep these sins, and then cry out of the
dangerousnesse of the times?

If a man did know certainly, that the dog that he keeps in his house, would
one day pull out his throat, would he keep him fat that he might the better
do it? no sure, he would rather hang him. Or if a man did know that the fire
that burns upon the hearth, would burn him, would he blow it? or if a man did
know that the knife which he has, would one day cut his throat, would he
sharpen it? no surely.

Beloved, this is the case of all us poor wretches that live in sin: they
will be the cause of all the punishments that God sends upon us all. Now
therefore, I charge you all, men and women, and every one of you, to make a
Covenant and enter into an oath and a curse, to search out every sin, and find
them out in your families, wife and children and servants; and do what you can
to quench them. These Towns and Countries are on fire, O that the Lord would
be pleased to send his word home to every one of your hearts: you I mean that
I love as well as mine own soul, my dear people. I would spend and be spent
for you, if God would give me strength and though I speak plain, it is for
your everlasting good.

What are those punishments that he threatened to pour upon them in the fury
of his wrath? He pours full battails, and the strength of battails; all this
was upon his own dear people Israel; even those people the Lord so severely
threatens.

Hence observe this Doctrine, That the Lord oftentimes brings fearful, Doctrine
3.
and unavoydable judgments and punishments even upon his own professing
people: even they that offer sacrifice, and that pray, and call him Father, and
fast and pray, even upon these people he does often times bring these
punissiments. Amos 3. 2. You only have I known among all the Nations of the
earth: therefore will I punish you for all your iniquities.

See the whole current of Gods word: did not the Lord punish the Children of
Israel in the time of their Judges? they had many sore enemies, as Eglon and
Sisera. The ten Tribes they sinned, and were carried into captivity: and these
were Gods professing people. And afterward the other two Tribes, Judah and
Benjamine, were carried away captive into Babylon, and there they were seventy
years.

Forty years after Christ's time, the Romans came against them, and burnt all
their Cities. And these were Gods own professing people.

The Churches of Asia were famous Churches, but now they are overthrown with
Turks. Now, our sins give God just cause to make him come against us, with
punishments and judgments upon this Land.

If a man lie sick, and they see death in his face, they call it the
foretelling sign: so the Ministers of God may foresee the death and
destruction of a Kingdom. I am sure we have better grounds, then the
Physicians can have. And therefore, why may not the Ministers which are Gods
Physicians, do it?

The signs of Gods punishments that are coming upon us, are these,

The first is of Gods Ministers which with one voice do foretell judgments to
come.

Then, this is a sign that God hasteneth to battle, Amos 3. 7. Surely the Lord
will do nothing but he reveals his secrets to his servants the Prophets: but
especially when they agree all in one thing; then the Kingdom is dangerously
gone. Luke 1. 70. The Lord gives one mouth, as he spoke by the mouth of* all
his holy Prophets.

I will say nothing in this, but let me appeal to your consciences, whether
all good Ministers in the Church of England, have not declared by Gods word,
that judgments are coming out against this Land and us for many years
together: And as our Savior says, Whatsoever ye shall bind on earth, shall be
bound in beaven.

Secondly, when sins of all sorts do abound frequently, and with a bold
face, and whorish forehead. For when the harvest is ripe, then comes so many
sickles to cut it down: so when the sins of a Kingdom are ripe, then it is
time to cut that Kinddome down. Genes. 6. 12. The earth was filled with
violence, all flesh had corrupted their ways: therefore, make an Arc: for the
end of all flesh is come, God will wash away their filthiness. Consider
whether it be not thus with England or no. Was ever drunkenness and
blasphemy, and scoffing at religion, and profaning Gods Sabbaths, nay liberty
given so to do, was it ever come to that height that now it is? were ever great
ones, as Bishops and Ministers, so defiled, as now they are? our Land has
often been overcome: when men were grown desperately wicked, then they were
destroyed. Now, what sins, what blasphemies, what hating of God lies raging
in our times? I think there is none in this Congregation but sees and hears,
how City and Country are venomed and benumned, and defiled with sins of all
sorts.

Thirdly, when the devil and wicked men cast bones of dissension, that is a
sign of ruin. When there was a dissension between Rehoboam and the people,
then God pulled away ten Tribs, and much blood was shed. So when King and
Commons, and all are divided, Ephraim against Manasses and Manasses against
Ephraim, but both against Judah, then it is a fearful sign that that Nation
shall be destroyed.

I say, to apply this, if ever a Kingdom were divided, then this is, if we
could all accord, then we might expect something: but now, our best blood is
gone, and our hearts are gone: the Lord in mercy raise us up from dead ashes.

O consider this, I beseech you, and lay it to heart. Will God deceive his
Ministers, and make them all blindfold? no, no. When God puts his Spirit into
his Ministers, and makes them all with one mouth to call and cry desolation,
and when all manner of sins so fearfully abound, and when there is such
divisions in the State, then let us look for desolation.

Fourthly, the fourth sign of Gods anger on a Nation is, when all the hearts
of men fail, then it is a sign that vengeance is at the door; when there is a
kind of Cowardice through the guilt of the conscience. Josh. 2. 11. It was a
certain sign of destruction when the peoples hearts failed them: thus it is
with every man almost amongst us: every man's heart is faint and sick. Judges 7.
13. When Gideon was to go against the Midianites, being a wonderful Army, one
dreamed that a cake of barley bread tumbled into the host, and overthrew them:
Then Gideon said, be of good courage: for I see that the Lord has given them
into our hands, because their hearts were fearful; so he took three hundred
men, and put a trumpet in every man's hand, with empty pitchers and lamps; and
they cried, the Sword of the Lord, and of Gideon; and in the twelfth verse see
what followed, All the host ran and cried and fled. Even so it is with us: we
faint upon every occasion, Gods spirit is gone from England.

While Sampson had the Spirit of God upon him, he was too hard for the
Philistines: but when the Spirit of God was gone from him, he had no heart, no
spirit, no courage; then every man was too hard for him, and then he was taken,
and had his eyes pulled out. So when the Spirit of God was with this Nation, we
had courage and got the day; but now alas, every slavish Nation is too hard for
us, and every bug-beare scares us. O poor England, heavy is thy case,
therefore we may expect nothing but misery one way or another.

Now I might set down a Comment or Theme with many tears for this cause, that
every one may read his own destruction from this point. I am not a Prophet,
nor the son of a Prophet: but from the word of the Lord I speak this thing
unto you, and upon these grounds I can say so; That where these signs are,
destruction and calamities follow at the heels of them. We having all these
signs in our State, certainly destruction is at our heels; therefore let me
give you some directions what to do in these dangerous times.

First, let every man knock off the love of the world, of houses, of Use.
lands, and corn, and flocks; they shortly shall leave thee, or thou them. O
therefore cast them quite out of thy heart. I would to God I could bring my
heart and yours to this pitch, that we could give wife and children and all as
lost. I confess it is hard so to do: but God will fire us out shortly from
these things, if we part not from them, in these our deepest afflictions. Ier.
45. 5. Baruch was so much glued to the world, that he began to feather his
nest: and therefore the Prophet said, seek thou great things for thy self?
seek them not; for behold I will bring evil upon all flesh. So let me say to
you as the Prophet said to Gehazi, Is it now a time to build? Therefore at
night when thou go to bed, take thy leave of thy wife and children, and of
thy houses and all, and say, this house may be mine enemies before the morning,
or may be set on fire; this is not my wife: these are not my children: As
Doctor Tailor said when he was going to his execution, when he saw his wife and
children, he embraced them and blessed them in the name of the Lord, and set
them down again and made no bones of them: and so do you, pluck away your
hearts from all these things here below, and give them all for lost.

Secondly, get divine submission to the will of God, let thy heart be contented
that God should do with thee what he will, and submit thy self to God in the
hardest blows, and say, Good Lord, if thou see no remedy to purge this land
and Church, but by desolation, and the removing of the Gospel, good Lord, do
what thou will; if thou will have my liberty, take it, if thou will have my
children spoiled by the enemy and pitched upon spears points, do it: Lord, if
there be no remedy to purge a sinful land but by taking the Gospel out of it,
even I Lord submit my self unto it: good Lord sacrifice us, or burn our
Cities; do what thou will with us, only save our souls at the last.

I have known some could have no quietness at all, till they came to this
pitch, and then they had peace in their minds. When Isaac saw that he was to be
bound, then he yielded to it: and our Lord Christ did this in the garden when
he did bear the wrath of God, then he said, if it be possible, let this cup
pass from me: and this he did three times: yet not my will but thy will be
done; if thou will have me to drink of the cup, I will suck off the dregs
and all.

Also come and lay thy head upon the block, and let God do what he will with
thee, Ezekiel. 20. 43. They shall loath themselves for all their abominations; and
this is the practice of an humble soul, and this will bear through all.

Thirdly, pray and cry mightily to God before thou dyest, even all the time
thou have to live, for mercy and for the peace of the Church of God, and for
the poor people and posterity. Esaias. 62. 16. I have set watchmen upon the
walls of Hirusa^lem, that never hold their peace day nor night. You that make
profession of the Lord, keep not silence; let not God rest till he help and
show mercy unto our poor land, wives and children.

I am persuaded if dumb Zachary were here, he would open his mouth to pray and
cry for this miserable land. But, alas, poor souls, many of you are so bound
in the chains of your sins, that you cannot find any leisure to pray; you
save your prayers and tears till you come to hell, and then they will do you
no good; Oh, thy Mother lies a dying, and will thou not mourn for her? O dead
and drie-hearted wretches, me thinks the poor Church of England is like the
ship of Jonas, and he fast asleep in it; the Gospel and all are drawing into
a sea of troubles: and thou poor wretch art asleep and can not pray. The
Church is like a sick man upon his bed: and the Parliament is like a College
full of Physicians, they cast the state of the Kingdom, and then give it over
for lost. The Lord knows how soon the bell may ring out; and yet thou can not
pray nor weep. Ah, the Lord be merciful to the hardness of our hearts. Have
thou but one rear in thine eyes? but one prayer in thy heart? then spend them
now for the poor Church of God. Make all sound within, and get sound faith in
the blood of Jesus Christ, that may support and hold you up as the Ark did Noah
in the flood.

O my dear people of this Parish, a fearful flood is come upon this land:
therefore make you an Arc of Gopher, and pitch it within and without: get in
it, hang not about it; but, get into your Lord Christ, and shut up your selves
in him, as Noah did in the Arc, and never come out. This is your safeguard, if
you be in him, you shall be supported against all troubles, and so shall the
case go well with you. For as the Prophet said to Ahab, High thee hence, for
here is a sound of much rain: and there came a shour indeed. So say I, high you
away to Christ: for it may be you shall not hear many Sermons more: there is a
sound of many punishments and storms falling down upon us. O thrice happy are
we that have Christ upon good terms and good grounds: if a flood come, it does
me good to see how safe I am: for the higher troubles arise, the higher the
Arc will arise, and the higher your faith and comfort will arise, and you
shall sit like Noah in the Cabin. Isai. 26. 20. Come my people and enter into
the chamber, and shut the doors about thee, and hide your selves as it were
for a little moment, until the indignation be overpast.

What? would Noah have been hired to come out of the Arc? no by no means:
nothing would have got him out. I may even pity you my people, that have no
Faith. What will you do and whither will you fly? all you that have not
gotten into the Arc, and have not made sure work, if the flood should come to
morrow, you must certainly be drowned. If you look to God, he is your Enemy, if
you look within, there your consciences dog you; and if thou look for
comfort to the Minister, there is none for thee in all Gods word; if thou hang
on a Minister, he must say as Samuel said to Saul, since the Lord has forsaken
thee, I can do thee no good. Oh think on this, and get all thy friends into
the Arc with thee, as Noah did. Let me beg this at your hands; get a poor
husband into the Ark with thee, with thy poor children, and shut them all up
into the Arc with thee. Would it not grieve thee when thou sit in the
Arc, to see a poor husband or a child drowning in the flood, and going to
Hell? For the Lords sake, O my dear Brethren, spare no pains to do them good.

Fifthly and lastly, get a more strong faith then ordinary; deep dangers must
have a stronger Faith; a man cannot row upon the maine ocean in a pair of
scullers; but he must have a good ship well ballasted, and a good Pilot; so do
you think to row upon the maine ocean of Gods wrath in a pair of scullers?
therefore labor to strengthen your Faith, and to get a good ship, well pitched
and ballasted, and substantia'l Faith; for the wind will try it whether it be
so or not; a Summers dublet will not serve the turn in a winters srost; so a
little strength and comfort will not serve the turn in the storms that are
coming on us; but we must get winter garments; the East wind will try a man's
clothes. Though a weak Faith may carry thee to Heaven, yet not with so much
comfort as a stronger; especially if it be but a little before the downfall of
the Pope; for then there will be the greatest combustions that ever was or ever
shall be; and by all likelihoods, the time is now at hand. Then, thy Faith had
need to be greater then ever it was. As the Angel said to the Prophet, up and
eat, for thou have a great journey to go; so say I to thee, thou fainting
soul, make a good meal of Faith, strengthen thy Faith upon the promises, for
thou have a great work to do, and happily thou may go six months, and not
see the face of a good Minister, nor talk with a good Minister, when there
shall be no more Rogers, Hookers, Beadles and Cottons to talk with; and you
shall wander about in the woods; your faith will support you then, it will do
you some good. When all the people had lost David, Eleazer one of the Worthies,
arose and smote the Philistines, 2 Samuel 11. 23. So when all Gods Ministers
shall leave thee, and then to fight it out against thine own lusts, and the
Devil, and his temptations, will be hard, and this Faith thou have need of,
when thy books and all helps shall be taken from thee. What need have thou of
strong Faith, when thou must fight against half a score Papists and an Army of
temptations, and a world of Divils from Hell? then thou have need of a stronger
Faith then ordinary. When you shall take your leave of your children and never
see them more, then thou have need of Faith to invest thee into the promises.
Hebr. 11. 21. By Faith Jacob blessed both the sons of Joseph when he was a
dying; so when thou art to leave thy wife and children, and never to see them
more, what Faith have thou need of to invest them into the Promises, and to
say, I look to see you another day in Heaven? the Lord be with you my dear
wife and children, I shall never see you any more here, but I believe that one
day we shall meet together in a world of happiness, where we shall be together
in glory for ever and ever.

AMEN.
THE GREAT DIGNITY OF THE SAINTS. In a SERMON By WILLIAM FENNER, Minister of
the Gospel, sometimes Fellow of Pembroke Hall in Cambridge, and late Lecturer
of Rochford in Essex.

London, Printed by E. T. for John Stafford.

THE GREAT DIGNITY OF THE SAINTS.
HEB. 11. 28. Of whom the world was not worthy.
COncerning the Author or Penman of this holy Epistle I will not now stand to
discuss. But this is certain who ever was the Scribe, the Spirit of God was
the Inditer, and all Scripture is given by Divine inspiration, 2 Timothy 3. 16.

For the Coherence; the Spirit of God having exhorted the Believers how to
continue in the Faith, and with patience to undergo those trials which
accompany the profession of it; and having back it with Arguments, he comes in
this Chapter to profess the same; And you shall find in this whole Chapter, he
lays down Arguments to back the exhortations, which are taken from the
Excellency of faith.

The holy Ghost discovers it two ways. First, by a general description in the
three first verses; and after by the worthy examples of the faithful in the
Church of old.

First, the general description of Faith in the first verse, Faith

Secondly, he describes the essential properties of it; It makes Believers to
be well accounted of, both of God and man, verse second.

Thirdly, he shows that Faith makes believers to understand and believe things
incredible to reason.

Secondly, he describes Faith by examples and patterns of Faith in the

To come to the words, they are brought in by the holy Ghost to answer to a
secret Objection that the holy Ghost did foresee, that the wicked persecutors
of the Church would conceive against the godly;

Ob.
Viz. Why did they wander up and down? were believers cruelly dealt withal? yes:
for alas what were they? they were and are baggage people, not worthy to live
in the world.

Answ.
Now the holy Ghost takes away this objection; as if he should have said, you
are deceived in them; for the world is not worthy of them, they were and are
too good to live in the world.

But before I come to the main, we will note something in general.

Viz. That it has been the property of wicked men, and is still, to think
whatsoever Doctrine 1.
the godly have, is too good for them.

Ye shall be hated of all men, Matthew. 24. And have not the saints of God found
it so? what a hard conceit had the Jews of Christ? He is not worthy to live. So
of Paul, Acts 22. They were accounted the off scouring of the world, 2 Cor. 4.
13. And as it was in the Apostles times, so it is now; and would you know the
reason?

First, because God has chosen them out of the world. John 15. 19. Reason. 1.
For when Gods people were as she world is, carnal and sensual, etc. then the
world gave them the right hand of fellowship. But when a change appeared in the
godly, then the world changed too.

2. Because the wicked know not the godly. (viz.) they know them

3. Because wicked men measure others by themselves; and because they

4. Because there ever was, and ever will be, contrariety between the seed of
the woman, and the Serpent. Esau will deal very hardly with Jacob; they that
are borne of the devil, will hate them that are born of God, 1 John 3. 12.

First, This should teach the godly when they are hardly dealt with in Use 1.
the world in any kind, not to be discouraged. Think it not strange; it has
always been so, neither must you look for better dealing with wicked men.

Secondly, seeing the world deals so hardly with you, see that you 2:
do not measure like for like; but pray ye unto God for them, to open their
eyes.

Now we come to the words themselves.

Of whom the world was not worthy.

The holy Ghost in this place would discover two things;

First, the little worth of the world of wicked men, viz. how that they are not
worthy to come into the presence of the Godly.

Secondly, the great worth of the godly.

Viz. They are too good for the world.

First, the world, (viz.) the wicked in the world, are very little worth; not
worth one godly man or woman in it; whence observe, that

Gods Children are worthy persons. Doctrine.


But before I handle this point, I will give the sense and meaning of the words.

1. This word World is diversely taken. Sometims it is taken for the whole
Fabric of Heaven and earth, John 1. 10. He was in the world and the world was
made by him, and the world knew him not. So Acts 17. 24. God that made the
world, etc.

2. Sometimes it is taken for all mankind, good and bad So Romans 5. 12. As by
one man sin entered into the world (viz.) sin entered into the men which are in
the world.

3. Sometimes it is taken for the elect only; so John 1. 29. Behold the Lamb
of God which takes away the sin of the world, (viz.) the elect in the world.
Again, God so loved the world, etc. John 3. 1. 16. (viz.) his elect in the
world. Again, we believe this is the Savior of the world, John 4. 42. (viz.)
of the elect in the world.

But why are the godly called the world? Object.


I answer, first because the world was made for them, and it is continued Answ.
yet for their sakes.

Secondly, they may be called the world, because they are scattered through the
world, and that not only among the Jews, but even among the Gentiles also.

Thirdly, they may be called the world, because in themselves they are a world
of people; but yet compare them with the Devils drove, they are few, even as
the shaking of the Olive tree. Isaiah 17. 6. yet in themselves they are as the
Stars in number. Genesis. 15. 5. And Balaam said, who can number the dust of
Jacob? Numb. 22. 10.

Sometimes it is taken for the reprobates in the world. so John 15. 19. If you
were of the world, the world would love its own. It is plain also in the
prayer of Christ; I pray not for the world, John 17. 9. And they may fitly be
called the world; First because they are the worlds Citizens, they mind the
things of the world, they follow nothing but the world. Secondly, because they
are the greatest part of the world.

Sometimes the world is taken for the things in the world, those things
wherewith the Devil uses to draw men from God; as the lusts of the flesh, the
lusts of the eyes, the pride of life. 1. John 2. 16.

Sometimes for the happy estate and condition the godly shall enjoy after this
life. So Luke 20 35. They which shall be accounted worthy to obtain that world
etc.

Now whereas the Apostle says, of whom the world was not worthy; I take it, he
means wicked men in the world, and those are they that are not worthy the
company of the godly. And because I intend to show the unworthiness of the
world, I will show first that the things in this world are little worth.
Secondly that the men in the world are little worth.

First I will show you, that the things in the world are little worth; as
Riches, Honors, pleasures etc. they are called deceitful riches; and Christ
calls them the Mammon of iniquity, Luke 16. 9. trash. Luke 8. 14. Snares, 1 Timothy 6. 9. They are called uncertain riches. Now these base titles must needs
argue that they are little worth; for were they worth more, God would set
better Titles on them. And Solomon who had best experience of them, yet he
terms them vanity. Eccles. 1, 2. and 11.

Secondly, they are little worth, because they are very unprofitable, they
cannot pofit a man; It is plain by the speech of Samuel, 1. Sam. 12. 21. Vain
things which cannot profit, etc.

Thirdly, they are little worth, because they cannot further a man in the main
thing at which he should aim; they may further a man in some trifles, but not
in the maine thing. There is no true good comes to a man by all the riches in
the world; neither can they free a man from the evil day; neither can they
make you better either in respect of God or your selves.

First, in respect of God, they cannot make you better esteemed with God: for
he regards not the rich more then the poor. Job. 34. 19. He does not account
of a man according to his greatness, but according to his goodness, Prove. 20.
7, 8. Better is a poor man that walks in his integrity, then a King that is
perverse in his ways.

Secondly, they cannot better him in respect of God, because they cannot assure
him of the love of God.

Thirdly, they cannot make a man more mindful of God; nay they corrupt men's
hearts, they make a man more forgetful of God. It is thus with the greatest
part of men in the world that are worldly rich; it is with them as it was with
the Prodigal, who while he had money in his purse, never did he think on his
Father.

Fourthly, the things of this world cannot make a man more thankful to God,
but rather the contrary, ut supra.

Fifthly, the things of this world cannot draw a man nearer unto God. You see
that the more men have, the more negligent they are in Gods service.

Secondly, in respect of our selves; First, all the things of this life cannot
in rich a man's soul with grace; they cannot make him humble, nor merciful,
nor constant in the profession of godliness and good duties; nay it rather
makes them the more unmeet to any goodness; where there is gain in the chest,
there is loss in the Conscience; he that gets money apace, may lose Faith and
a good Conscience; and they that most cover for abundance of the things of this
life, are most backward in Grace; and this argues that the things of this life
are little worth, even in respect of a man's self.

Secondly, they are not able to free a man from any spiritual evil; they may
promise freedom, but when they come to the trial, they will be like a broken
staff; nay they cannot free thee so much as from an ague, much less will they
help in the day of the Lords wrath, when the rich man shall be called to an
account, and the Lord will recompense every man according to his ways. So
Prove. 11. 4. Riches profit not in the day of wrath. True it is, they may be as
a wall of brass to keep off the evil of this world; yet when the hour of
death approaches, they cannot free from that; when you are affrighted with the
accusation of your own Consciences, and with the apprehension of Gods wrath,
when the Devil shall set upon you, and all your friends forsake you, shall the
things of this life then do you any pleasure? no, no. You will say to them
then, as Job to his friends, miserable comforters are you all; this argues
their little worth: For God will not examine you, how rich you have been, but
he will consider you as you have honored him, and as you have made good use of
your riches; if you have been faithful, you shall enter into your Masters joy.
He will not consider you as you are or have been in great Offices or places in
the world, but as you have been faithful in them; not as you had crouching and
bowing to you, but as you have faithfully and frequenly bowed your knees unto
the Lord in Prayer; God will not account of you, a straw the better for your
wealth, but he will pass sentence on you as you have used or abused your
talent.

Thirdly, they can give no content. He that desires Riches shall not be
satisfied therewith. Eccles. 5. 9.

Object. O but, I desire but a competent living.

Sol. It is well done. A little spring running from the head, runs shallow at
the first, but at the last, many other falling into it, it is become great; so
you may say, you desire but a competency; but the world comes on you, then
there is craving and having, till your desires are as large as hell. Habbac. 2.
5. riches make men sick of a dogs disease; what is that? why dogs are always
eating, but never satisfied; so if a man immoderately love the things of this
life, he shall not be satisfied.

Lastly, the things of this world are nothing worth because we have no
assurance of them: they are of no continuance, they either leave us, or we
them: do you not see that after a man has risen early, and late, eating the
bread of carfulness, and has gotten a little pelf, is he not thereof
deprived in a moment of time? Prove. 12. 27. The slothful man (viz.) the
worldly man, rosteth not that which he took in hunting, (viz.) after all his
travail he is swept away, and takes not the profit of them. Is not this then
a worthless world? but suppose it do stay with you, yet one day you must part
with it. Psalm. 49. 6, 7. and you must carry nothing with you, naked you came,
and naked you must return; even like a sumpter-Horse, which carries all the
day abundance of Treasure, but at night it is all taken from him, and he is put
into a stable for his labor; all the benefit he gets by the Treasure, is, he
only feels the weight of it. Even so many rich men are Sumpterhorses to
carry the things of the world, who either for ill-useing, or ill-getting them,
are put in a filthy stable, (viz.) Hell, and their pay is everlasting torment.
These things show the little worth of this world.

Now you shall see that worldly men are little worth: First it appears that
they are little worth, because of the names and titles that the Spirit of God
lays on them; it calls them Sons of Beliall. 1 Samuel 2. 12. Vile persons.
Psalm. 15. 4. Children of iniquity. Hosea 10. 9. 11. A reprobate stock. John 8.
44. Children of wrath. Ephesians. 2. Now if there were any great worth in them,
think you that the Spirit of God would not better style them?

Secondly, they are little worth in respect of their actions; their best
actions are but glittering sins, Isaiah 66. 3. If they pray, or hear etc.
God accounts of it no better then the sacrificing of Swines flesh; they stink
in Gods nostrils. Isa. 1. 13.

If then the men of the world, and the things of the world be little worth, how
does this discover the madness and folly of men in these days who so much
mind the world? no pains nor travail too great, or too dangerous to get the
world; nay they will hazard life and health, even to the backbone, to get the
world; go to bed late, rise early, not caring if they lose both body and
soul, to get the world: and when their consciences are thus set on the tenters
to get it, they set their hearts on it and keep it as their God.

Secondly, let this inform our Judgments, that seeing the world, and the men
of the world are so little worth; let us judge of them no better then they
deserve; it is a false glass, or crooked rule that men go by, who judge
themseves men of worth if they be rich, and we use to say there is a man of
good credit; let us see our folly in thus judging. I will discover it thus.

The things of the world are given to the worst men; wicked men have many times
the greatest share in them. Esau has four hundred at his heels, when Jacob
had but a few; The Scribes and Pharisees sat in Moses chair, when as the
Disciples of Christ were carried before Rulers; so for Riches, proud Dives
fared deliciously every day, when poor Lazarus was feign to snap at a crust; so
the false prophets were fed at Iesabells table, when Elias was in commons with
the Ravens. Now if the things of this life were of such great worth, think you
that God would keep his children so sparingly with them? no, no; they are but
gifts of Gods left hand. Prove. 3. 16. Length of days are in his right hand,
and in his left hand riches and Honor.

Instruction, to teach us to take off our hearts and affections from Use 3.
pursuing things of this life. You see they are little worth; do not in
affection love the world, nor yet in action too much seek the world; but when
Heaven and earth are laid in the balance, esteem earthly things as dung in
respect of Christ, and show your little esteem of earthly things, by your
seeking them in the second place, and Gods Kingdom in the first place; Let
wicked men account the things of this life as their summum bonum; but let us be
crucified to the world, let us be as dead men to the world, and the world as
dead to us; not that I would have you utterly to reject the things of this
life, but not to set your affections on them; we must use the things of this
life as Travailers do their provision; if they have too much, it will hinder
them; so let us be content whether it be much or little; it is best to lay up
treasure in Heaven, as Christ told his Disciples. Thus of the first point; the
second follows.

OF whom the world was not worthy, as if he should have said, they are too good
to live in the world; hence observe; That true Believers Doctrine.
are persons of very great worth. The world is not worthy of them.

I need not spend much time to prove this; they are called excellent persons,
Psalm. 16. 3. Again, the righteous is more excellent then his neighbor. Prove.
12. 26. again, they are called the glory of God, Isaiah 4. 5. They are called
a chosen people, a Royal Priesthood. 1 Pet. 2. 9. Now, wherein lies the worth
of a godly man? not in the outward man; for alas the outward man of a child of
God is the same with another man. Their chief worthiness lies in the inward
man which after God is created unto righteousness and true holiness.
Ephesians 4. 24. The Kings daughter is all glorious within. Psalm. 45. 13. Now
Gods people are worthy persons, and that in these respects,

First, in respect of the worthy names they have. Do they not, says the

Secondly, they are worthy, because there was a great price paid for paid for
it; so this adds to the worth of all true believers, that the price was great
that was paid for them; they were not bought with corruptible things; not with
two hundred fore skins of the Phylistines, as David bought Michal; nor with
thirty change of garment, the reward of those that unfolded Sampsons Riddle;
they were not bought with a great sum of Money, as the Roman Burgess ship
was; I say, not with corruptible things, but with the precious blood of Jesus
Christ; for in him we have redemption through his blood. Colossians 1. 14.

Thirdly, they are worthy in respect of the Consciences of the wicked; for

Fourthly, Gods people are personages of great worth, in respect of their

The first Privilege wherein their worth is manifest, is their Royal descent;

Secondly, as they are Royally descended, so they are Royally attended.

Thirdly, they are worthy in respect of their places. They that trust in

Fourthly, in respect of their fare; they have Benjamin's Mess, which

Fifthly, they are worthy in respect of their Royal apparel; as a worthy

Sixthly, in this respect also, because they are out of debt, they need not

Seventhly, in respect they may go boldly to the throne of grace, with
confidence

Eighthly, all things work together still for them to the best. Romans

Ninthly, they are Gods beloved ones, his favorites, they have an interest in
Gods peculiar providence. True it is he shows a general providence to all: but
Gods people have a right in a more peculiar manner; for God will dwell with
them John 14. 23. and he will keep the feet of his Saints. 1 Samuel 2. 9.

Tenthly, they have the free use of all Gods creatures; the Charter that

Eleventhly, they are persons of great worth in respect of their presence

Twelfthly in respect of their actions: a true believer in his prayer prays

Thirteenthly in respect of the great things which are laid up and reserved

Object.
But are they such men of worth? why, they are not esteemed at all, neither are
they at all well spoken of.

Answer
First, know this: you that are godly, be not discouraged; this takes nothing
from your worth. For who are they that say thus? none but a

Secondly, If all should speak well of you, then woe be unto you.

Thirdly, Envy is evermore the companion of virtue. Learn then,

Fourthly, Know this in conclusion, that you that are thus despised, it

This speaks terror to the wicked, who wrong the children of God, either Use
1.
with tongue or hands: either by themselves or by others: either by nicknaming
them, or by circumventing them; this I say speaks terrible things against
them. Will you offer to speak against personages of great worth? against the
children of a King? will the King endure that thou should speak against the
blood royal? no no, he will be revenged on them that do so; do thou now
wrong a godly man? thou shall one day smart for it; for God is able to punish
thee, yea and he will do it, unless thou speedily repent. When Saul Acts 8.
persecuted the Church of Christ, Christ called from heaven and said, Saul,
Saul, why persecutest thou me? I speak to those that are wicked men, and I
speak in the bowels of Christ, if you did know them, you would not do it; for
had they known the Lord of life, they would not have crucified him. 1 Cor. 2.
8. so, if such as do persecute Gods children, did but know their worth, and
that they were his children, they would not do it.

Let us esteem godly men and women as persons of great worth: The Saints of God
have always done so.

Saint Lawrence being demanded by his persecutors, wherein the worth of the
Church lay; the story says, he gathered a company of poor people together,
and pointed at them and said, there lies the worth of the Church: so, I have
read of an ancient King, who made a great feast, and invited a company of poor
people which were Christians, and he bade his Nobles also, now when the
Christians came, he had them up into the Presence Chamber; but when the Nobles
came, he set them in his hall. Being of the Nobles demanded the reason, he
answered, I do not this as I am their King here; for I respect you more then
them; but as I am a King of another world, I must needs honor these, because
God does most honor them, and then they shall be Kings and Princes with me:
so do you esteem of them according to their worth, and show it.

If they be persons of such great worth, here you may be directed how to Use 3.
get a name of worth in the world, to be honored of God. This is the way;
labor to be believers, serve God and close with the godly, be of one mind and
of one heart with them. Honor is the thing that all desire, according to that
of Saul to Samuel, Honor me before the Elders of my people: so we are all
ready to say, oh that I could be honored in the heart of those that I converse
withal: I say then thou must labor to serve and honor God in thy heart, let
that be thine honor. It is a mere folly for men to think to get honor by
swearing, by lying, by cutting and slashing, and drunkenness etc. The sweet
ointment of a good name is not compounded of stinking ingredients.

That should serve to comfort the godly: that seeing they are of so great Use 4.
worth, what though they be disgraced here, let this suffice thee, God that
knows the true worth of every thing, he accounts thee worthy: what though dogs
bark and cry out against thee for thy holiness? let them alone: and know thou
this, that the time will come when never a curre of them all but will wish, oh
that mine end might be like his, and that they might go as thy dog to heaven
with thee, when they shall see thee sit at his right hand where are pleasures
for evermore.

Lastly, you that approve your selves to be of the number of the godly, labor
to walk worthy of the Lord. Colos. 1. 10. Does God thus advance you? then
strive you to honor him with inward and outward worship. God has not done
these things for you, that you may live as you list: no, you are a chosen
generation, etc. 1 Pet. 2. 19. Ergo, you must show forth the virtue of him that
has called you. You that are parents of children, the more you do for them,
the more you look they should honor you: the more God has done for you, the
more you ought to fear him. God has drawn you out of darkness into a
mavelous light, and will you yet walk as vassals of Satan? This was that
kept Josoph from committing adultery, even the favor of advancement, and how
then can I do this great wickedness, says he? so thou art advanced to
honor, from a child of the devil to be the son of God, how then can thou
commit wickedness? Consider I say how God has advanced thee from being a
slave of Satan to be his adopted son: and shall I now become a covetous person,
shall I be a companion of Gods enemies? when you are enticed by the devil or
wicked men to any sin, say, what shall such a man as I consent? shall I fly
from my colors? what, a Kings son and fly? Consider this.

THE TIME OF GODS GRACE Is limited. In a SERMON By WILLIAM FENNER, Minister of
the Gospel, sometimes Fellow of Pembroke Hall in Cambridge, and late Lecturer
of Rochford in Essex.

London, Printed by E. T. for John Stafford.

THE TIME OF GODS GRACE Is limited.
GENESIS 6. 3. The Lord said, My Spirit shall not always strive with man, because
he is but flesh, and his days shall be a hundred and twenty years.
IN this Chapter is continued the History of the decay of the World, wherein is
described Gods purpose of destroying mankind; in which are these two parts:

First, the meritorious deserving Cause, wherein God gives an account what he
does, how inexcusable the world is, and how just God is; unto the. 14 verse.

Secondly, a direction unto Noah to make an Arc; where we may see, that God in
his judgment remembers mercy.

The meritorious deserving cause is described, first, from the quantity of
those persons in those evil days; a great many, verse the first; men began to
multiply in places populous; where there are some good, there are many bad.

Secondly by the quality of those persons; the Sons of God, when they

Thirdly, by the kind of sin; They lusted after unlawful Marriages

These words, are a Proclamation of Gods purpose, to bring it to an end; in
which are four things.

First, the Lords complaint in these words, The Lord said.

Secondly, the proclamation it self in these words, my Spirit shall not
always strive with man.

Thirdly the reason, because he is but flesh.

Fourthly, the limitation of the time, a hundred and twenty years; in which
time if they repent, I will repent; but if they will not, my Spirit shall not
always strive. As if the Lord had said, I have tried all conclusions and used
all means, partly by Mercies to allure them, partly by Judgments to terrify
them; partly by my word to recall them, and by all means possible to bring
them to my self, yet they remain incorrigible; I now am resolved to strive
with them no more.

From the words thus opened there will naturally arise these two points.

First, that the Lord of Heaven and earth does strive mightily with a company
Doct. 1.
of poor Rebels; and all to bring them unto himself, but on this I intend
not to insist.

The seond is this, viz. that there is a time when God will strive with men

To make this plaiue I will lay down these six things;

First, I will let you see that it has been so by Testimonies of Scripture.

Secondly; I will show in or after what manner God deals with a soul in giving
it over. (...) these fashions, leave off cards and dice etc. says the Spirit
of God, and whatsoever is of evil report: yea, but I will not; for what will
Sir John and my Lady say then? Turn you unto me says the Spirit of God; no I
will not, says the stubborn walker. Put him on in a good course, yet he will
not walk therein; speak the truth says the Spirit of God, for all liars shall
be turned out: yea but not yet, I have got thus much wealth by lying, and I
will not yet leave it.

Fourthly; Such as have a common, base, vile and contemptible esteem of

Now I come to the fourth thing, which is the grounds of it, (viz.)

The grounds of this point arise from these two Attributes of God, his Justice
and his Wisdom.

First, from the Justice of God, God is a just God; and is it not just

Secondly, From the Wisdom of God and his long-suffering; and this with you
it is wisdom to give over, when there is no good to be done on you: What
could I have done more for my Vinyard etc? Isa. 5. There is no wise man that
will always water a d^y stake. And do you think that God will always be
sending Paul to plant, and Apollos to water? No, our God is a wise God, and our
merciful God is a just God: you that will have your ways and wills, take
them, and get you to hell and perish everlastingly.

Now in the fi^t place we come to the Objections.

Object. 1.
Some say, If we shall be damned, then we must be damned: if we shall be saved,
then we shall be saved; why then need we pray and keep such a quoile as the
Minister speaks of?

Sol.
Secret things belong to the Lord, but revealed things to us, and to our
children. Deuteronomy. 29. 29. ergo do thou use the means, and be thou humbled
according to the word of God, and thou shall be exalted according to the word
of God: see what God has said to thee in his word: for neither I, nor thou,
nor the Angels of heaven can tell what the will of the Lord is concerning thee,
if not revealed in the word.

Object. 2.
Another says, Why do you limit God? you take too much upon you, you sons of
Levi. The Lord says, At what timy soever a sinner does repent, etc. yet will
you limit God?

Sol.
It Is true, at what time soever a sinner does repent: but thy heart may be given
over, as Romans 2. 4, 5. etc. and what if thou then live twenty years or more,
and have not a heart to repent?

Object. 3.
Another says, But I hope my time is not past: for the Lord has given me a
tender heart.

Sol.
Has he so? it is well, and will thou then harden it? thou may repent when
it is too late; and ergo I tell thee, that good and holy desires are joined
with honest endeavors: need makes the old wi^e trot, as we say; so a soft
heart will make thee use all good and honest means.

Seeing that God strives with many, and at last gives over, go thou home, and
bless God that he has not dealt so with thee; it is enough that the Lord has
brought thee home to himself; many may say with Paul, I was a persecutor, I
was injurious, etc. 1 Timothy 1. 14. but I received mercy; so thou may say, The
Lord knows what a deal ado he has had with me; this heart was as hard as
the neaher mil-stone, but the Lord in some measure has mollified it; this
heart was as proud as the devil, but blessed be Gods name, he would let me see
it at the last; go home and say, Who am I, and what is my fathers house, that
the Lord has brought me hither? Oh that God should thus stoop to man! the
Lord has stood and knocked thus many years, and he might have given over, but
blessed be his name, I have received mercy. I lived under the means, but that
prevailed not with me: the Lord sent such and such sickness, but that wrought
not on me: at the last I went to hear a Minister, and methought that Minister
spoke nothing but what he spoke to me: and then the Lord set conscience on
work, and that affrighted me. Look to it: the Lord will either break thy
neck, or thy heart: do not think to go to heaven by good meanings: no, it
will cost thee somewhat more before thou come there. Another time the Lord set
on me, and then I set on good duties: I would have Christ to justify and
sanctify me, and blessed be his name he was not wanting unto me in any means;
the Lord make me thankful etc. I tell thee thou will be in deed, and God
shall have all: let the voluptuous man have his pleasures, etc. what is that to
thee so thou have Christ?

For the just reproof of all such as are yet in the gall of bitterness and
Use 2*
in the bonds of iniquity; there will come a time when God will strive with
thee no more; the old man thinks he has time enough to repent in, and the
young man thinks he needs not so much as enter into a Parley with godliness.
Esau went away when he had eat and drunk, he esteemed not his birthright; I
have heard some go away with this resolution, when they are married then they
will live thus and thus. etc. Suffer me first to go bury my Father etc. Master
Minister, you speak well, I like your counsel; but I have a rich Uncle, and he
has no child, and I am likely to be his heir; but he cannot abide a Puritan
of all the men in the world, and if I do not humor him, I shall never have a
Foot of his Land: let me bury him first; when Father and Friends are dead, then
the children must provide for themselves; and then they will seek after God and
repent; and by this time they grow old, and though they cannot make so good a
show as others, yet their hearts are as good as the best. But stay a while; all
is not gold that glisters; alas poor souls, they were given over many years
ago; this is also the sin of young men and women for the most part, and this is
the great sin of England, the sin of many Gentlemen and Gentlewomen; God must
pardon when they call, and that must not be till they be old, and then in all
post-haste send they to and for master Priest, and he must bring God to them,
or them to God* but the God of Heaven and earth cannot endure this mockery.

For terror to all wicked and ungodly men, woe, woe, woe, that ever Use 3.
they were borne that are thus given over; and of these there are two sorts;

Some are insensible and some sensible. The insensible are they who die like
stones as did Nabal; We have many King Harry Protestants. Others are sensible,
God has opened the eye of their souls, and has let them read the red letters
of the Gospel; It is a heavy thing for old friends to part, so Acts 20. 38.
They grieved most in that he said, you shall see my face no more; so when soul
and body part, it is heavy; but when the soul and God part, it is lamentable;
when God takes his leave never to be seen more, then whether thou look upward
or downward, there is nothing but amazement, and astonishment. If thou look
upward there is the anger of God; if downward, there is the bottomless pit; if
on the right hand, thou shall see all his mercies, which could not allure thee;
if on the left hand, all his Judgments which could not terrify thee; if
before thee, the black day, if behind thee, the Devils, this will be fearful.

I remember a Story of an adulterate woman, her Conscience pricking her, she
determined to repent, but God in the mean time did visit her so sore, that she
lay crying out, oh my time my time!

Another time, a covetous woman her House being on fire, she to save her goods,
left her child in the Cradle; but a neighbor of hers hearing it cry, took it
away; she afterward remembering her child, ran about crying, Oh my child, my
child, and would not be comforted.

So when the fire and indignation of the Lord breaks out, if not now, yet at
the last day it will; then the parties against whom it breaks, will cry, Oh
my soul, my soul, what will become of thee my soul? It had been better I had
never been born; for neither Mercies, Judgments, nor the Word could allure me;
oh, woe is me.

Now the condition of such is miseracle in three respects.

First, because if God forsake thee, all forsakes thee; when thou lie a
dying,

Secondly, when God goes, restraining grace goes; this was Saul's case,

Thirdly, if God leave us, then common protection leaves us; we are left

Redeem the time, yield to the motions of Gods Spirit, and bless God for
Mercy offered unto you in the means, and if any affliction be laid on you,
entreat The Authors Exhortation.
the Lord that he will do you good by it. If thy Conscience speak, or the
Spirit work, do as Joseph did, who got him into a corner and there wept his
belly full; so entreat the Lord that he will break the Heavens and come down
on thee to thy comfort; put not off till thou art old. A gentleman will not
always wait at the gate; neither say thou as Felix to Paul, I will send for
thee at another time, but say with Samuel, Speak Lord for thy servant hears.

Means.

First, consider the fearful condition of such as are given over; Suppose

Secondly, consider the great danger of putting off; If thy will be stubborn

Thirdly, consider the time, 1. Pet. 4. 3. It is enough for the time of our

Fourthly and lastly, though God should be calling and egging you all the

A SERMON FOR Spiritual Mortification, Delivered By WILLIAM FENNER, Minister
of the Gospel, sometimes Fellow of Pembroke Hall in Cambridge, and late
Lecturer of Rochford in Essex.



London, Printed by E. T. for John Stafford.

A SERMON FOR Spiritual Mortification.
COLOS. 3. 5. Mortify therefore your Members which are upon the earth,
Fornication, Uncleanness, Inordinate affection, evil Concupiscence, and
Covetousness, which is Idolatry.
THE Apostle having in the Chapter foregoing showed that the Colossians were
buried together with Christ in his death, and that they were also risen with
him, makes two special uses thereof.

First in regard of the resurrection, if then ye be risen with Christ seek
those things that are above.

The second is in regard of their burial with Christ, in these words; Mortify
therefore your members etc.

There be many men that look for participation in Christ, yet notwithstanding
mortify not themselves; they would fain live with Christ: yet are loath to dye
to sin; but we may say to these men, as Paul to the Atheist, Thou fool, that
which thou sowest is not quickened, unless it first die: so unless the seed
of the word be sown upon thy heart, thou can not be quickened unless thou
fist die.

The things to be mortified, are described two manner of ways; either in
general, the members; or else in particular, Fornication, uncleanness, evil
affections etc. or as in the tenth verse, all the fruits of the old man.

The words contain in them these three parts, or truths. Parts.


First, He that ever means to have Christ, must have him with a therefore.

Secondly, this condition consists in mortification; we must mortify

Thirdly, those that are made partakers of the death of Christ, are enabled

He does not say, civilize your members; many there be that civilize their
earthly members; as from mortifying to purifying of them; they come out of
profaneness and enter into Civility and a formal kind of profession; but
the Apostle says, mortify, and not civilize your members; do not pare the
nails of your corruptions, but cut them quite off, and give them their deaths
wound, that so your sins may breath out their last breath in you.

Sin may be civilized five ways.

First, when it is laid asleep. Pharaohs sins were asleep, but not dead.
all their resolutions and all the strong coards of their former purposes are
but as fire and towe; they break them all in pieces: so then they are but
asleep not mortified.

Secondly, Sin may be said to be civilized when it is laid in a

Thirdly, Sin may be said to be civilized when the sap of sin is we can say
his carnal mirth is mortified. For as the schoolmen say, (...) there is
nothing corrupted till another thing be produced; there is no dissolution of
wood until it be turned into ashes: so sin is never taken away nor utterly
dissolved, until there be contrary grace brought into the heart in stead
thereof; so then unless there be contrary graces wrought in the heart, as the
contraries of all those sins foregoing, they are but only civilized, and not
mortified.

Fourthly, Sin may be said to be civilized, when it is overwtharted by

Fifthly and lastly, Sin may be said to be civilized by Gods giving of

That if we look to have any benefit by, or interest in Christ, we Doctrine.
must mortify all our sins, and all our corruptions; As if the Apostle had
said, make all your earthly members to be as a dead corpse: now we, knowin a
dead corpse, the eyes are there but they cannot see: the feet are there also,
but they want strength for to go: it has all the members, but it has not
life and power to fet them on work: so though sin be in you still, yet let
it be like a dead corpse wanting life, like a dead Tyrant that can no longer
rage: and hence it is that the Apostle says, Let not sin reign in your
mortal bodies: he does not say, let it not be, but, let it not reign. Sin
when it is mortified, is like a dead King that can call no more Parliaments:
but a man may do for him what he lists, because his strength lies in the
dust. If Christ be in you says the Apostle, the body is dead because of sin,
but the spirit is life for righteousness sake. Romans 8. 9, 10. Again if a man
have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of Christ's; now if Christ be in you,
the body is dead, if you consider the body as it has relation unto sin.
Again, if you live after the flesh, you shall dye, verse 13. as if he should
have said, if your flesh be alive in you, if your pride live in you, and if
your infidelity live in you, if your hardness of heart live in you, if your
wrath etc, live in you, and if you walk after these, you shall surely die: he
means not a temporal death* for so they must do howsoever they live; but
his meaning is they shall die eternally; but if you mortify the deeds of the
body by the spirit, you shall live; so then it is plain, there is no life of
Christ to be had so long as you retain your sins, and therefore sin must
be mortified,

First, because Christ is a Savior, and hence he is called Jesus, Matthew.
Reason 1.
1. 21. for he shall save his people from their sins; if therefore Christ do
not save thee from thy sins, and if by the power of Christ thou mortify not
thy sins, and give them a deadly blow, assure thy self he will never be a
Jesus unto thee. It is true indeed Christ dyed for sinners, but it was not to
let them go on in sin; and therefore if thou go on in sin, it is for thy
damnation, and not for thy salvation; for he will first save thee from thy
sins, or else he will never save thee from hell: so then consider if thy
sins bear sway in thee; if they do, then know thou art delivered up unto the
power of thy sins, and to everlasting darkness. For Christ is the true
Physician of the soul: and you know that the Physician does not bring a potion
to put it unto deaths mouth to kill death, and so to save the sick person
alive: no, but he puts it into the sick man's mouth to kill the ill humors
that are in his body, that so he might not fall into the hands of death: so
Christ came not to quench the flames of hell by his spiritual Physic, but to
let his Physic fall upon the heart and soul of man to save him from hell.
Therefore unless the blood of Christ do mortify thy sins, and crucify thy
lusts, there is no hope ever to get Christ to save thee from hell and
everlasting damnation. This is a true saying says the Apostle and worthy to be
received, that Jesus Christ came into the world to save sinners. 1 Timothy 1. 15.
This is a faithful saying, and wicked men like it well indeed: For says the
drunkard, I am a wicked man, yet Christ came to save me. The whoremonger says,
I am an unclean person: yet Christ came to save me. The swearer will say,
Christ came to save sinners, and therefore I hope he will save me too. No, no:
Christ came to save sinners, that is such as were sinners, but now are none:
they have and do repent. Jesus Christ came to save sinners (says the Apostle)
whereof I am chief. I was a blasphemer, and a persecuter, but now I am not.
Hence then is the faithful saying, Christ came to save sinners, not still
sinning. No, before, Paul was injurious, a persecuter, and lived in ignorance,
and unbeleefe: but now the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ was wonderfully
abundant through Faith and love toward him: so that the grace of God has
appeared to draw men out of blindness and ignorance therefore to say that
Christ came to save such as live in their sins, and will live in them, as in
sins of drunkeness, profaneness, or uncleaness, is a rotten saying: and this
only is the faithful saying, that Christ came into the world to save sinners
in whom the power of sin is broken: therefore if ever we look to have
benefit or interest by Christ, we must mortify our earthly members.

Secondly, because it is impossible for sin and grace to live and subsist
Reason 2.
in one subject: it is impossible that they should ever stand together, and be
in a man at one and the same time: it cannot be that one and the same creature
can have the life of a swine and the life of a man: for if he have the soul of
a swine, he cannot have the soul of a man: for they are two contrary distinct
lives: and where the one is, the other cannot be. It is like hot water and
cold: if it be cold, it cannot be hot; if it be hot, it cannot be cold. Even
so, the life of sin, and the life of grace are two contraries: and therefore
they that walk in their sins, walk contrary to God. Now the Lord says, if
you walk contrary to me, I will walk contrary unto you. Levit. 26. and two
contraries we know cannot go together. He that walks in sin, walks contrary
unto God: but he that goes on in the ways of grace, he walks toward God. Now,
it is impossible to walk toward Dover and toward London at one and the same
time: for every step he goes forward to the one, it carries him backward
from the other: so then if ever we will have the life of grace, we must forsake
our sins; as it was with the house of Saul and David, Saul's house grew
weaker, and David's stronger; so must it be with sin and grace, as grace grows
stronger, so sin must grow weaker: as grace goes up, so sin must go down:
And as Saul told David he would not give him Michal his daughter to wife,
unless he brought unto him an hundred fore-skinnes of the Philistines; Even so
the Lord says that he will not marry the Lord Jesus Christ unto any soul,
unless he bring the fore-skinne of every lust: he must circumcise the
foreskinne of his pride, of his covetousness, of his profaneness: this must
be the offering and condition of marriage unto Christ; even the circumcision
of the heart, and the mortification of all the corruptions.

Thirdly, because else it is impossible to enter into heaven, if we mortify
Reasan
not our sins: a man can never be capable of glory hereafter, that does not
mortify his sins here in this life. Suppose a wicked man should enter into
heaven, it is impossible that he should delight in heaven, if he were there.
You will think this a strange point: but give me leave to explain it a little;
I say that a wicked man if he were in heaven, he could find no delight there.
As for example, take a beast, for so is every man by his own knowledge, in
regard of the life of grace, as says the Prophet Jeremy, though a man take an
Ox or an Ass, and bring him unto the Kings table, and set before him all the
delicates which appertain unto Kings: let him have a dinner before him that
cost an hundred pounds, yet he had rather be in the fields among his fellows
eating grass: or set a Crown of gold upon a beasts head, he will not regard
it, but cast it off into the mire: for so long as the beast is not transformed
and made capable of the honor that is in a man; he cannot conceive of the
pleasures and delights that do belong unto man: Even so let a wicked man enjoy
all the glory of heaven, and what will he say? We may perceive a little by
bringing him to the Word and Ordinances of God: tie him to the constant use of
them, to meditate on heaven, and to walk circumspectly and precisely in his
whole course of life, and he will say, this is more then needs: this he thinks
is too precise, too austere a life for him, he cannot away with such purity and
strictness; but if he think this so strange which is nothing in comparison,
and is but a shadow or poor resemblance of the holiness and purity that shall
be; what think you would he do if he were in heaven, where there is nothing
but continual praising and glorifying of God for evermore, where there shall
not be so much as one earthly thought or word pertaining to the world or the
affairs of this life, but a continual sounding forth of the praises of God?
there is nothing but grace and speaking of heaven, all their words are
heavenly, their joies are heavenly and their whole delight is nothing but
sounding forth uncessant Hallelujahs unto God for evermore. Now if a wicked man
were there, what would he say? surely he would say, they are all Puritans, and
would never endure it. Alas, in this life there is but a little praying, a
little grace, a little holiness, in comparison of that which shall be. Here we
do but as it were peep into heaven: now then, if this be so tedious that
wicked men cannot endure it, how will they like to be in a place where there is
perfection of all graces, where there shall be nothing but praising God for
ever and ever? Sure as I am the devil was once in heaven, and he cast himself
out from thence: God did not though he did deserve it, and God would have done
it, had he not been gone, as says the Apostle; Jude verse 6. They left their
first habitation, the original says, they flung it from them, that is, as
soon as they had sinned against God, and changed their natures, away they
went, heaven was no place for them, they thrust themselves out, and could not
endure to stay there any longer: for having changed their natures, they changed
their delights, and therefore to praise and yield glory unto God, was death
unto them, they being now corrupted through sin, and of an impure nature,
heaven became a hell unto them. Is any man weary of grace and holiness? weary
of well doing? weary of praying and of hearing the word preached? Is any man
weary of good duties? of the worship and service of God* Let him know then
that he can never endure the Kingdom of Heaven; for if he be weary of a
little, what will he do when he shall come into a place where there shall be
nothing but continual praising of God?

Is it so that sin must be mortified if ever we mean to partake of Christ?
Use 1.
then this condemns all those that go on in their old courses, in deadness
and in security, in ignorance etc. taking hand over head vain hopes for true,
feeding themselves with persuasions of salvation.

But the Apostle tells us, that the foundation of God stands sure, The Lord
knows who are his, and let every one that names the name of Christ depart
from iniquity. A wicked man cannot name the name of Christ till he depart from
iniquity: much less can he look for salvation, because he cannot be saved
without Christ: nay he cannot be saved by Christ unless he depart from
iniquity.

You say you hope to be saved; it is well; but God knows who are his: God
goes by his own rule; the foundation of God stands sure. But who then are
his? only those that name the name of Christ, and depart from iniquity; those
only will he save, and none other: he will be no ba^d to thy sins or lusts,
and wicked courses; for says the Apostle, If any man be in Christ let him be a
new creature; as if the Apostle in more words had said: If any man hope he is
a Christian, let him see that he is a new creature; for there is no expectation
of being in Christ, unless he be a new creature. All old things are passed
away, and behold all things are become new; if thou be in Christ, all thy old
praying is gone, all thy old hearing is gone, all thy old receiving of the
Sacrament is passed away, and all things are become new with thee; thou must
hear anew, pray anew, receive anew, believe anew, thou must live after a new
sort; for all old things are passed away.

Instruction to teach us, that it is not enough for us to let our sins dye
Use 2.
in us, but we must kill them; the Apostle does not say, let your earthly
members die of themselves, but, mortify them; many there be that let their
sins die in them; as for example, when one is an infant, the sins of his
Infancy naturally fall from him, when he is a child of more capacity; and when
he is a youth, the sins of his childhood naturally drop away from him; so
when he is a man, his youthful sins fall from him; and when he is old and
dies, all his sins naturally drop from him: But he must not let sin die
in him, but he must kill it. Austin says, if thou kill not sin till it dies
of it self, sin has killed thee, and not thou thy sin It is with sin as
with a beast; if an Ox fall into a pit^e and die of it self, it is good for
nothing (the hide only excepted;) but if it be killed, it is good meat, and
becomes profitable unto the owner; even so if sin die of its own accord, it
will do thee no good, it is worth nothing, it may lessen thy condemnation
somewhat; but if thou kill it, then it will be profitable unto thee.

In the fourth Chapter of Jeremy, we have a similitude taken from an
Husbandman, where the Lord says, plough up the fallow ground of your hearts,
and sow not among thorns. Now, will a Husbandman say, there are abundance of
thorns and bushes in my ground, but I will let them alone till they die of
themselves, sure I am that they will one day die? no, no; the Prophet gives
other counsel, plough up says he the fallow grounds, and sow not among
thorns; if thou do not, they will grow up to that height and rankness that
they will spoil the whole harvest. Even so if thou kill not thy sins, but
suffer them to die of themselves, they will spoil all thy spiritual harvest,
and quite banish thee out of Heaven for evermore.

The Third use may manifest unto us that the work of our Redemption Use 3.
is no easy work, as many men in the world think it to be. The Apostle says,
mortify your members; now can a man stabbe his own arm through with ease?
can he cut off his Leg or any other member without feeling any geeat pain? no
more can a man kill his sins and mortify his lusts with ease; It is called
mortification to show that there is a great deal of misery and pain in it. The
Apostle says that those that are Christians, have crncified the flesh etc.
Gal. 5. 24. and therefore Repentance is set out unto us by crucifiing, which is
the hardest of all kinds of mortifying. Can a man set his flesh upon the
Tenter, pierce his hands and feet with nails, laying his whole weight upon the
Tenter, and yet feel no pain? Cicero a wise Heathen says, that crucifiing
was a torment that cruelty it self had invented to put a man to death, it
being the soarest kind of death that could be devised. And the Apostle to set
forth Repentance what it is, shows it by crucifying. It is an easy matter to
cut off the outward act of sin, as of swearing or drunkenness etc. this is
an easy matter; but to crucify a man's lusts and to mortify daily the body of
death, which be bears about him; this is a hard thing indeed. A Father says
it it is the hardest Text in all the Bible, and the hardest duty in all
Christianity that we can go about; they that can do it, can do all things;
and therefore let a man resolve with himself, that unless he attain unto
this, there is no Christ for him. How shall we, says the Apostle, that are
dead to sin, live any longer therein? Romans 6. 2. The Apostle makes it a
Paradox, and wonders that men should be so unreasonable as to think that they
are crucified with Christ, and yet live in their sins. Is it possible that
you can be dead with Christ, and yet live in your sin? No, no, it cannot be.

Object.
But some may object and say, what does the Apostle mean to exhort the
Colossians unto Mortification? were they not already mortified? did he not say
a little before that they were crucified and buried together with Christ?

Sol.
Yes it is true; but they that have mortified their earthly Members, must go on
and persevere in this Mortification, and that for three Reasons;

First because the very same sin that has been killed, will live again
unless

Secondly, suppose the sin mortified do not rise again; yet if we go
means was used to kill it; they cut off the branches and it grew again; they
cut down the body and it grew again; they cut it up by the root and still it
lived, and grew, until they pulled down the stone wall. Even so it is with
sin; lopp off the branches, it lives; cut down the body, it will not die:
digg up the roots, and it will still revive, and will never leave growing
until God pull down the stone wall of this our earthly Tabernacle, and lay it
in the dust, and therefore we must still be mortifying of it.

Thirdly, because as we mortify, so we mortify but in part; as says the

If a man that has received his deaths wound, should send for all the
Physicians in the world, and take all the Physic he could, and use all the
means under Heaven, yet they can never recover him: So when a man is converted
unto God, as soon as ever the work is wrought in him, sin has his deaths
blow; and although the Devil come as Physician with all the Cordialls, Juleps
and Balmes under Heaven, and use all the shifts and devises in the world, yet
he shall never be able to recover it again; all will not do, why? because it
has received its deaths blow; it may be, with his industry and cost he may
make the face of sin look fresh and fair for a time, but it has it deaths
wound and it will down at the last.

The last Use may be of trial and examination whether sin be living Use 4.
or dead.

Now that we may know whether we have mortified our sins or no, let us observe
these marks following.

First, they that have mortified their sins, live in the contrary Graces.
Grace comes not to take away a man's affections, but to take them up.

Suppose a man be subject unto anger, when he is a little moved, grace comes
not to take away his anger, but to take it up from a worldly thing, and to set
it against sin which is truly evil, that so he may be angry and not sin.
Grace comes to qualify his anger; and to take it from the ways of sin, and to
set it upon Gods ways.

Again, a man is subject to be merry; Grace comes to temper him, not to take
away his mirth, but to set it upon a right object, as to delight in God, to be
merry in Christ, to rejoice in his Word and Ordinances, in his children, and in
all the ways of Grace.

Another is given to impatiency; Grace comes not to take away his impatiency,
but to set his impatience against his sins; so that when he sees his sins, he
shall not be able to endure them, but his soul will groan for them, and his
heart will rise against them.

Another is given to revenge: now Grace comes and takes him away from being
revenged on his neighbor, to be revenged on his sins; so that with the
Apostle we may call revenge a piece of Repentance, therefore this is a true
trial whether our sins be mortified, if our affections be taken away from the
ways of sin, and fast set upon the ways of Grace and godliness.

Secondly, if a man be mortified indeed and in truth, then he is dead unto
every sin; if a man be killed, he is dead in every member; so if a man be dead
to sin, no sin can ever reign in him; not one lust nor bosom sin, no
not the sin of his trade; no corruption though never so dear, though it be
the sin of his right hand, or right eye, yet it can never have dominion over
him, if he be dead to sin; therefore if a man live in any one sin or sweet
lust whatsoever, he is a dead man and has not one jot of Grace; if there be
but one known iniquity in a man, that he lives and dies in without repentance,
that one iniquity shall kill him to the put of hell, Ezekiel. 28.

The Schoolmen say, that if a Sow do but wallow in one mirie or dirty hole,
she is filthy; so if a soul wallow but in one sin, it is abominable. If a
man stab himself but with one knife so that he die, he is as truly killed, as
was Julius Caesar, who was stabbed with three and twenty knives. So if a man
should be free from an hundred diseases, and should die of one, what would it
benefit him to be free from the rest in respect of his life? surely nothing at
all. That man that has his pride, his Covetousness, his usury, hatred,
malice, deriding of Gods people, all these being dead in him; yet if self-love
and security etc. be not dead in him, these argue his case to be naught; he is
not yet qualified for Christ; for there is no mortification at all in him.

There be many sweet means to allure us unto mortification, but time will not
permit us to speak of them; but this let every man take notice of, that so
long as he lives in sin, he is altogether incapable of Christ. The Apostle
says, we know that the Law is not given unto a righteous man, but for the
lawless and disobedient, for the ungodly and for sinners, for the unholy and
profane, and whatsoever is contrary to wholesome doctrine, the Law is for such
men: But the first Doctrine of the of Christ, is, Repent of thy sins, deny
thine own ways take up Christ's cross, and follow the Lamb wheresoever he
goes. Here the Kingdom of Heaven is laid open to all the world; Let men's
miseries be what they can be, and although their sins be never so great,
Christ comes to redeem them; yea though they have a whole Hell of sin in
them, yet if they have a heart to entertain Christ, his Grace is so rich and
allsufficient, that it will save every man that enterteineth him.

There is a Proclomation openly made in the Market place, Hoe, every one that
thirsts, come unto the waters Isa. 55. 2. As if he should say, Hoe, every one
that has a mind to Christ, come and have him; every one that hungers and
thirsts after Christ, let his sins be never so great, and the number never
so many, here is hue and cry after him; Come unto the waters; He says not
come unto the water, but, waters; not a little low brook or stream, which is
not able to wash away all his sins, but there is an Ocean of waters
ndefinitely: waters in the plural number, declaring the fullness and
sufficiency to cleanse the most leprous soul, be he never so much stained with
corruption. It is said by the Prophet Obadiah, that the Lord will send unto his
People Saviors, verse 21. not in the singular number, but Saviors in the
plural number; not that there were more Christ's then one; but to manifest the
fullness of Christ, he is a rich Christ, full of salvation for all them that
come unto him; Therefore if there be any man that mourns and laments for his
sins, let him come unto Christ and welcome; for there is a Fountain laid open
for Judah and Jerusalem to wash in: but let him know upon what terms he must
come, if ever he mean to have Salvation by Christ; observe the strict
Conditions, and walk by the strait rule of Christ: he must resolve with
himself come what will come, to stand or to fall with Christ; delivering up
all his lusts and corruptions at his command, whenever he calls for them; he
must not part stakes with Christ to delude him, but he must be true and
faithful unto him, he must wholly deny himself, and lie down before Christ to
let Christ do what he will with him, and, these only are the terms he must
expect Heaven upon; and thus doing, he may have Salvation according to the
desire of his soul.

THE SINFULNESS And Danger OF HYPOCRISY. As it was delivered in a SERMON upon
an extraordinary day of Fasting and Humiliation. By WILLIAM FENNER, Minister of
the Gospel, sometimes Fellow of Pembroke Hall in Cambridge, and late Lecturer
of Rochford in Essex.



London, Printed by E. T. for John Stafford.

THE SINFULNESS And Danger OF HYPOCRISY.
ISA. 58. 4. later part. Ye shall not fast as ye do to day, to make the voice
to be heard above.
YE shall find that there are two maine things in this Chapter.

First, A commission the Prophet has to do his duty, it is from the Lord.

Secondly, the Execution of his duty.

The Commission is in the first verse. Cry aloud, spare not, lift up thy voice
like a trumpet, and show my people their transgressions, and to the house of
Jacob their sins; this is his Commission to tell them roundly of their sins,
spare not, says the Lord, and it is no other commission than all the Ministers
of God have, (especially upon such fasting days as this is) to be faithful to
the people, to make known unto them all their sins.

Now in the execution of it, there are two things, mainely considerable.

First, a discovery of their sins.

Secondly, A rule for reformation, set down 6. 7. verses.

The discovery of their sins is to the latter end of the 5. verse.

Now in the discovery we find these sins very remarkable.

First, their falsenesse, they were a company of stately Hypocrites, a company
of brave people; that could pray as well as any in the world, keep a fast from
morning till night, I say, they were people of a stately carriage, but of a
false spirit.

The second was their confidence upon their duty, as they were stately for
their parts, and policy, so they are as confident, as stately, when they did
pray and fast they could rest upon their duty, as in the third verse, Wherefore
have we fasted, and thou see it not? We have punished our selves, and thou
regardest it not. God gives them an account for that, and discovers their sins
which are the causes of it, and they are two.

First, he shows the unprofitablenesse of such kind of services, they bring no
soule-profit with them.

Secondly, such services are unacceptable to God, for says God, in the
beginning of this verse, all the fasts do but end in strife, and debate:
Consider the work we are in hand withal, and let us apply this to our selves
this day; says God by the Prophet in the Text, You shall not fast as ye do to
day, to make the voice to be heard above; as if God had said, this is not the
business that I have chosen, (as in the next verse it follows) to hang down
his head for a day; to droop in his affections, to be seemingly humbled, and
afterward to sprout up again, as peart, and ready to sin as ever; it is not
squaling and crying a little while will serve the turn, perform the duties of
a fast, if you will keep a fast aright.

In the Text are three divine truths, partly in it self, and partly in what is
before and after it; they are these three, I shall only touch upon the former,
though I name all, The first is this,

That Hypocrisy, or falsenesse in a day of fasting, and prayer, takes

That false, and slight Hypocrites, they will be content to be frequent

That fasting rightly improved, will put an edge upon our prayer.

I shall only speak a word of each of these; for the first, and I name it

I do not look that a Son of God should come to guild over a day of
fasting, to weep and houle it out, but the thing the Lord requires is to ease
the burden of the afflicted, to help the poor and oppressed ones; this day of
fasting and prayer will be the saddest that ever England had, if it do not end
in the reformation of the Nation.

An hypocrite will perform as glorious duties, it may be better then you, but
there he rests, and spares all cost, he joins not charity with his pretended
sanctity.

Secondly, False and slight Hypocrites will be frequently in fasting and

Thirdly, Fasting rightly improved will put an edge upon duty, especially

That Hypocrisy in duty, will take away the life of the duty. I say falsenesse
Doctrine 1.
and hypocrisy in the duty, will spoil that duty. Ye shall not fast as ye do
to day, to make your voice to be heard above, here you make a great noise, but
all the while ye are not heard, ye do not reach the mark, and so you lose the
game. A Cannon may make a great noise, and yet come a mile short of the mark,
for hypocricie takes away the life of the duty, your Cannon Bore is warped, so
your bullet goes beside the mark, it must be a prayer rightly and
understandingly made, that the Lord will hear: There is a phrase to this
purpose. Deuteronomy. 5. 28. and the Lord said, I have heard the voice of the words of
this people, which they have spoken unto me, they have well said all that they
have spoken.

There is a passage about this, 2 Chronicles. 3. Then the Priests and Levites arose,
and blessed the people, and their voice was heard, and their prayer came up to
his dwelling place, even to heaven, their voice was heard, because their prayer
was made in sincerity. Your prayers do not come high enough, you do not speak
home enough: if you did, you should certainly be heard, if it be in sincerity.

Now a Hypocrite may lift up his voice strongly, and yet never be heard, never
come up to Gods dwelling place, their prayers many times fall back upon their
own faces, (like spittle against the wind,) and never come to Gods presence;
mark I say, hypocricle takes away the vigor and life of the duty, says the
Lord, This is not the fast that I have chosen; not the prayer, that I would
have made, these prayers are but Arrows shot out of a weak Bow, that come not
half way to the mark.

Now we proceed to open it in the particulars; I will bring two or three
arguments to prove it that it is so.

1. You shall find that Hypocrisy in these Ordinances does spoil all upon
these two or three grounds. The first is this, Because all this falsenesse, and
hypocrisy, is directly against the nature of God: you have a strange passage
to this purpose, Mat. 6. 5. And when thou prayest be not as the Hypocrites, for
they love to stand, and pray in the Sinagoues, etc. verily I say they have
their reward; what is that? what is the reward of a false hypocritical prayer?
he has his prayer, that is all, his work for his work, a day of fasting for a
day of fasting, that is all, a poor reward. It too often falls out, that
amongst your children you have one that is a spend-all, a riotous person. Now
when the father comes to make his will, he gives to each of his obedient
children, such a portion as he is able, but when this his lewd son comes to
be named, what says he, to him? I have given thee so much and so much time
after time, thou have spent all I have, now only a shilling for thee; and that
not out of any love neither, but to stop thy mouth from troubling thy brethren
for any more: so we come to fasting and prayer, well (says God) you shall have
your reward, I will give you twelve pence, you have bin false, and vile with
that mercy that you have had, therefore look for no more. And thus when the
Hypocrite comes to see what he has got by all his duties, it will be just
nothing, this is the point that I mean, I will prove it in three perticulers,
that falseness, and hypocrisy in duty takes away the life of the duty.

First because hypocrisy here, is directly in opposition to the nature of God,
and therefore the Lord cannot possibly accept of it. I do not care for them
says the Lord; I will none of their services, they are directly against my
Name, Jehovah is Gods nature, which has a being, hypocrisy has no being,
nothing in it, therefore no being. In your prayer you tell God you sin, you
mean not to leave it, and what tell you me of such a kind of prayer? it is a
picture of a prayer, and no prayer, a picture of a man (as we say) and no man.
I beseech you to consider it, all prayers that are made in this way, they are
nothing: see a passage. Mat. 15. 8. says God, this people draw near to me
with their lips, but their heart is far from me, therefore he says, 9. verse,
But in vain they worship me: it is all to no purpose there is an emptiness in
all this, a poor ignorant creature may run to Church with the Pharisee, and
fall down upon his knees, and babble over his prayers, and all this coms to
nothing, for I say all traditionall worship is against the nature of God, hence
nothing: so all Idol worship is nothing. God is a being Jehovah, Idol worship
has no being, therefore nothing: you shall not see more cost, and bodily
labor, more ceremonies and specious show, in any religion under the sun then
in Rome, yet all this nothing, because outside service, a little fire will
quickly consume all this. Now if you come before God this day, and do not
bring your heart in a fit temper, according to the rule of Gods word, if you
mean not to be in earnest with the Minister, in sealing up your souls in the
Covenant of grace, all will prove to be nothing, you shall have breath for
breath, you will do no good, to distressed England, reformation, shall not be
one inch, furthered by this days work of your fastings and prayer.

Secondly, Hypocrisy takes away the life of the duty upon a second ground,
because from hence the Ordinance of God (this very Ordinance we are now about)
gains an heavy blow, therefore certainly it will lose the life, and comfort of
it by hypocrisy; as thus. First from hence it comes to pass, that Ordinances
used, (or rather abused) give occasion to the enemies of God to open their
mouths, and speak basely of these Ordinances, as if they had nothing in them:
the Ordinances themselves suffer much in this, they can say they are frequent
in these duties, such and such keep whole days of fasting and prayer day after
day, and yet return again to their sinful courses, as bad drunkards, and
thiefes the next day as ever, hence say the Papists, and profane persons,
these are the fasters, what amendment see you in them? and hence they conclude,
what should weeping, fasting, and prayer do? God regards them not, they have
nothing in them, noe benefit comes by them, people are not converted that use
them, they are as ignorant as they were, no change wrought upon their spirits;
Thus the Ordinance is slighted.

Secondly, Hypocrites do pervert the Ordinance, for they use it to a wrong
end. They take up fasting and prayer, to get further leave to sin, to grow
stronger in their corruptions to morrow: hypocrites are strengthened in sin by
the Ordinances.

Thirdly, because the heart of a man in the duty is the heart of the duty, your
hearts are the heart of the duty, therefore the Lord requires such a kind of
heart of his servants at the time of duty, as is agreeable to the duty, now
hypocrisy takes the heart off from the duty; therefore the duty cannot be
accepted. Now I doubt there is many a poor unprepared heart before God this
day, you do not mean to bring your sin to the duty, but the duty to your
sin, you do not mean to leave your uncle an practices, and evil courses;
if it be so, mark what I say, the duty is gone, the day is lost, for the very
heart and spirit of the duty lies here: the Minister he labors, prays and
preaches, you may weep, mourn, and lament, yet if the heart be not in the
duty, all is nothing, but as a dead carcass without a Spirit.

The Use will be a word of reproof, for I say, falsenesse, and hypocricy Use.
takes away the life of the duty, 3. Arguments you have had to prove it. Now
for reprehension, it will reprove us for all those ayrie duties, and outside
services we do perform, many come to a duty, and leave their hearts in their
Chests, amongst their Treasure, many come in discontent, and strife, they
resolve, for all this, I will when conveniently I may, give my brother a
private wound. This now lets out the very heart blood of the duty.

I do confidently believe, if all the people of the Nation could but keep this
day of fasting and prayer, sincerely from the heart, you should quickly see the
Angel stopped, the sword sheathed, and the Nation healed.

Now to reprove you of your hypocrisy, I will show you the saplessenesse of
such duties in these particulars.

First, remember this, and consider in the name of God, in what a lamentable
case that man will be, that loses all the benefit of this duty, I have known
a man, that has bought a ship, fraughted it for a great voyage, laid out all
his stock upon it, gone out to Sea, dashed it against a Rock, and lost all, and
come home a beggar: days of fasting, and prayer, are as ships that we put all
our stock, and treasure in, (mark this) if they come home empty again, if they
bring noe mercies, nor blessings with them, you are undon, you had need to get
a brief, to be gathered for in the parish, and all will* be too little to get
you up again; when you come to enter into covenant with God, will you deal
deceitfully? what shipwreck do you hereby make of your consciences? have ye
abused many heavenly opertunities, and will you do this also? all the
congregations under heaven, will not be able to raise your wants; be not
deceived says the Apostle, What a man sowes, that he shall reap; so what you
sow in these duties; that, and no other fruit you shall reap.

The second thing is this, a word of information, to inform us how to fast
aright.

First, I will inform you of the reasons of it, consider this, if your soul be
not bettered, your family not amended, the Country not reformed, superstition
not abated, the persecuted Church of Christ not releived, I will give you the
reason.

I am afraid the hearts of men are not fitted for this great work, I doubt that
many of the great men of the Nation do not sightly understand it, Ministers
are not rightly qualified for it, Congregations are not thoroughly humbled; If
you hear that things do miscarry in the Palatinate, that things grow worse
and worse, that the plague increases, then remember there was hypocricy in the
duties, and so you loose the benefit of this day; therefore if hypocrisy takes
away the life, and benfit of the duty, then look well to your selves, and look
well what you do this day, look well what you go about; that so you may enter
upon the duty as you should.

Consider of it for the Lords sake, be true to God, and your own hearts, you
know not the danger of a day of fasting ill spent; which that you may avoid, I
will give you some motives and rules,

Take this for a motive, consider your selves upon your death beds, (It is a
sad thing that I shall tell you) is it not fearful to consider, that when you
are in great distractions, full of various thoughts, those things that are
brought for Cordialls, and comforts to your deserted souls, should prove
troublesome, and heart-breakings unto you? A man upon his deathbed sends for a
Minister, he comes unto him, and finds him in sad did empers, crying, No God,
no Christ, no mercy, no comfort, what will become of me? I know not what to
do; why man, what is the matter? you that have fasted, and prayed, and been
frequent in these duties, you that have kept the sabbath, regarded Gods people,
releived the poor, there is no man in the Town can pray like you, you can make
a prayer of two houers long, what do you think there is no mercy in God, no
pity in Christ? Oh (says he) this is my bane, my fasting, and praying is the
cause of my woe, for I have but mocked God in all this. I have seen sad
experience upon a poor souls heart of this; prayer and fasting rightly
observed is a flame of all other duties, all other are but one duty, but a
flame of all duties are in this fire.

Now when a man shall see the grave open, the wife stand weeping, the child
sighing, when his eyes grow dim, his lips pale, now for him to say, I have
had a by-respect in all my duties that I have performed, I have been a
deceitful man in my trade, etc. what tell you me of fasting, and duties? I
have fasted my soul to hell, and there I shall feel the sad consequence of my
hypocrisy. Consider of this, ye that will pray and cheat, pray and be drunk,
ye that to morrow will go to a stage play. Is this your fasting, and praying?
when you are in hell, then it will come to your mind, how you have fasted away
your God, your Christ, how you have slighted these; this will make a man tear
his flesh, from his bones, his should move us to be serious in this duty we are
now about.

Take an other Motive, and it is this: Bring what ever you will to God, and
bring not this, all is nothing, and all the services you can perform without
this are nothing; if you do not bring a heart sprinkled with the blood of
Christ, a sincere honest heart, all else will be but dung; bring all parts, and
duties, you cannot so much as pray aright without sincerity: do you remember
what Simeon said to his father Jacob? pray you let Benjamin go down, no; I
will not, take money, and Cammels and what else you will, but Benjamin shall
not go; but says he, unless, Benjamin go, I will not, because else I shall
be taken for a spy: So when ever thou go to pray to God, be sure thou take
Bemjamin with thee, thou may carry all thy parts, and duties, unless
Benjamin go, it will not do: Now by Benjamin, I mean sincerity, you may
spend tears about the duty in hand, varnish over the duty, as much as you can,
all the eloquent tongues of greatest Orators will not be heard, nay if all the
Angels in heaven should bring tears, and blood, for our deliverance, all this
will be nothing; unless we have an honest sincere heart, a faithful heart, in
which there is no guile, a man that has an honest heart, when he confesses
sin, it is with a purpose to leave it, he does not confess and sin, sin and
confess, but he is in good earnest, which that you may do, take a rule or two;

First, Ye that are come to seek God this day, study whether the work of this
dayspring from living principles, or no. There be painted Flowers do not
smell, but take Flowers out of a garden, and they smell by reason of their
sweet principles: so there be painted duties which smell not sweet in the
nostrels of God, therefore consider, are your duties sincere? do they smell?
have ye not only an artificial weeping, like those women in Jeremy that could
weep when they would? But do ye weep from your hearts? you know, painted food,
it satisfies not, study to find out that your duties come from a living
principle, and not by art; labor to have it spring from the blood of the
Covenant, and thereupon, thou go to duty. I could tell you of many deceits,
one is in the affections, what is Christ come to town? miracles wrought? well,
I will go see it, and all this while he has only a little oil in the Lamp,
none in the Vessel. Oil in the Lamp, I understand to be some smaller work of
Gods spirit, some outward principle; Oil in the Vessel, I understand to be
some inward principle, that arises from the Covenant of grace.

Secondly, Take this for a note, consider in all these actions (for in this day
we are in clearing our account) whether your opposition to sin be carried on
strongly, and unchangeably; you are now come to have sin rooted out of your
hearts, your affections; you are a dealing with a malignant party, that has
already got within you: now here are the things you should look after, consider
whether the change of your spirits be continual at all times, (except passion,
and temptation, which may eclispe the rarest Christian) may be when the
Ministers heart is enlarged in prayers, and praising God for you, God comes in
and enlarges your heart like a land-floud, which does not hold long, godly
sorrow for sin, should be like a woman's sorrow, that weepeth for her child, she
cannot but weep, the more you comfort her, the more she weepeth, ask her a
reason, she will say she cannot help it, so our mourning for sin and opposition
against sin must be carried on in a constant course, our weeping for the Church
of God* must not last only for a day, this day, and end to morrow, but it must
be constant.

Lastly, when a man fixes his soul upon the duty in sincerity, he shall find
sweet comfort to his soul; a man in this case, does not mind what God gives
him, but how he accepts of his duty, that is all he requires, but know
assuredly God will fill the hungry soul, and recompense the well doers, no man
shall serve God for naught. Now I can tell you the reason, why you do not
find more comfort by your fasting and prayers, it is for want of a dram of
sincerity, you should always, when you work for God, when you fast and pray for
God, do as the Joyner does, he shaves, and brings his rule, and measures,
shaves, and measures: so should you, pray and look up to heaven, fast and bring
the duty to the word, always pray by rule, never keep a fast without a rule,
and then be assured, you shall be a workman that needs not to be ashamed.
This I have spoken only to prepare you for the work of the day, be sure what
ever you do, see that it arises from a new and living principle: let it not
be like a land-floud, that is dried up as soon as therain is over, but let it be
like a gliding stream, which keeps a constant springing course, that so you
may walk in the strength of this days fast, all the days of your life, which
grant dear Father for Christ his sake.

Amen.
REFORMATION UNDER CORRECTION, The way to prevent DESOLATION. As it was
delivered in a SERMON, By WILLIAM FENNER, Minister of the Gospel, sometimes
Fellow of Pembroke Hall in Cambridge, and late Lecturer of Rochford in Essex.



London, Printed by E. T. for John Stafford.

REFORMATION UNDER CORRECTION, The way to prevent DESOLATION.
JOB 34. 31. 32. Surely it is meet to be said unto God, I have borne
chastisements, I will not offend any more. That which I see not, teach thou me,
if I have done iniquity, I will do it no more.
THis Text is a precious pattern of seasonable counsel, by Elihu given to
afflicted Job, wherein resolution to be reformed under the rod of the Lord, is
both commanded and commended. Surely it is meet to be said, etc.

I will not spend time to divide my text into parts, nor to observe the various
readings thereof, but shall briefly observe the doctrine which naturally
arises from the Text, and which will be very suitable to our present occasion.
viz.

Under the rod of the Lord, people should resolve to reform. Or thus;
Resolution Doctrine.
to reform, should be upon the heart of all them that smart under the rod of
the Lord. Surely it is meet, etc.

There are three things that I intend to speak to in the prosecution of his
point.

1. What kind of reformation it is that we should resolve upon under the rod of
the Lord.

2. What arguments should prevail with us to resolve to reform, because we
feel the Lord strikes us.

3. What course we should take for our reforming under his rod.

That we are under the rod of the Lord is evident, there are smarting rods upon
our backs. The rod of the continuance and speading of the noisome pestilence.
The rod of unseasonable weather, this droughty pring, and unseasonable frost;
surely then it is meet to say, We will bear chastisements, we will sin no more.

I begin with the first, viz. What kind of reformation it is that God commands
and expects from us, when we are under this rod? This I shall open in six
particulars, and therein unbowell my Text.

1. In the work of reformation under the rod, we must have reference to him
that uses the rod, go to God, and set our selves to amend what is amiss, as
under the eye of God, under whose lash we smart; this lies in the text, Surely
it is meet to be said unto God, I have borne chastisement, etc.

Go to God, and set thy self as under the all seeing eye of God, endeavoring
to reform what is amiss. It is an easy thing for Ministers to be pleasing to
a people, for Children to give content to their parents, for one neighbor to
stop the mouth of another. But mark what contents God, the inside reformation,
as well as the outside, when God and I am alone as well as in company, when I
am under Gods hand, I must go to God, when I am reforming; that is one thing.

I could show it you how the Lord Christ struck down Paul, when he was
breathing out threats, and blood against poor innocent Christians, who, when he
was struck down, says, Lord what shall I do? shall I back again to the
Scribes, and Pharisees, and tell them what a blow I met withal? or shall I go
on to the Saints, and tell them what cruelty is intended against them? Lord
whither shall I go? He looks to God that smote him.

There is one thing more, (and this will follow from the former) always be
sure to be guided by the rule, (that is the word of God) in reforming of that
which is out of order, whether in your spirit, or life, That which I see not,
teach thou me, if I have done iniquity, I will do it no more.

Teach thou me, etc. Mistake me not, I do not here speak against conferring
with Christians, consulting with ministers in matters dubitable, but always heed
this, stick not in the opinion, stay not in the Judgment of any, be he never
so wise, never so pious, but labor to see a word of warrant from the
scripture, and trust only to that, say, I must do so, and so, I have it from
Gods mouth, I may take such a course, I have Gods word for it ^^^^ple would not
be so giddy, in running after new and strange opi^^^^^ ^f they would but
consider this; always go to God, and say, Lord, that which I see not, teach
thou me, and if I have done iniquity, I will do it no more.

Secondly, In reformation under the rod, you must be sure to have your work
guided by God himself, as Isa. 2. 3. He will teach us his ways, and we will
walk in his paths. so Psalm. 86. 11. Teach me thy way O Lord, and I will walk
in thy truth: knit my heart unto thee, that I may fear thy Name.

Thirdly, in the work of reformation under the rod, you must be careful to
reform in one particular, as well as another; you must go through, stich with
this business; that which I do know, and may know to be blameworthy and have
borne chastisements for, in that I will offend noe more, and if any thing
further shall be made known unto me, I will stop in my course, and if it can
be found out that therein I have sinned, I will do so no more. For know
assuredly, he has not reformed in any thing aright, that does not reform in
every thing blameworthy, as, Hosea 14. 2. says the Prophet, Thou have fallen
by thine iniquity, what follows? then says he, ver. 3. Take unto you words,
and turn to the Lord, and say unto him, Take away all iniquity, and receive us
graciously: Take away all, spare none, every eye that offends, every hand that
sins, every lust that provokes, though never so dear unto thee, foregoe all
manner of profit, and credit, in regard of thy temporal calling, if it prove
to be a sin; bear with one, and in Gods sight thou bear withal; live in
the breach of one of Gods commandments, and thou art guilty of the breach of
all.

Fourthly, in reformation under the rod, you must not only reform, in what
you your selves do, or may understand to be amiss, but you must take
direction, to know what is blameworthy, be eager and earnest, to understand
wherein you do amiss; say, Good Lord, if I do amiss in relation to others,
as a husband, as a wife, as a Father, as a child, as a Minister, as a hearer,
as a servant, as a Master, as a doer, as a sufferer, Lord show it me, Lord show
me my fault, that I may reform.

Make an earnest desire to God, and say, Good Lord, if any thing be blameable,
let it have no shelter in me, search me, if any way of sin, try me if any way
of wickedness be in me, and lead me in thy way for ever, as it is Psalm. 139.
23, 24.

Thus make your requests to God, this practice will prove the sincerity of your
hearts, thus praying you may know what is out of order, when you compare your
life, and the word (which is the rule) together. Mark what he Prophet Jeremy
says, Lament. 3. 39, 40. Wherefore is a living man sorrowful? Man suffers
for his sin, let us search and try our ways, and turn again to the Lord; Let
us look to our ways: this has been my opinion, my practice, my way, are they
answerable to scripture, consonant to the rule, the word of God? this we (...)
labor to know, when we would reform our ways.

Fifthly, a Christian under the rod should be so wrought upon with a
Resolution to reform, that he should by solemn covenant bind himself to God
for the future, even all his life long, mark the text, Surely it is meet to be
said; to whom? to our selves? no, to be said* to God, I have borne
chastisements etc. say, Lord, thou that hate every evil way hear me, what I
have to say, that have run out of the way, Thou that art privy to all my
sinful affections, help me to be reformed, I resolve (by thy help) for the
time to come to be more exact in my obedience to thy law, that know my
trouble, and affliction, make me reformed under the cross. This was David's
care Psalm. 66, 13, 14 I will go into thine house with burnt offerings, and
will pay thee my vows which my lips have promised and my mouth has spoken,
in mine affliction.

When he was in trouble, and under the rod, he promised something to God, and
now he resolves to be careful to pay it.

Sixthly and lastly, Christians under the rod, must severally, and personally,
(not only jointly in company and assemblies) reform what is amiss according
to the forementioned rules. He does not speak in the plural number, It is meet
for Cities, Countries, and Kingdoms, or Nations, but, It is meet for me, that
is, for every particular man, and woman, of what degree, estate, or condition
soever, this must be my work, my task, my care, husband apart, wife apart,
child apart, servant apart, Minister apart, people apart. For usually that is
done to best purpose, which is done single, in a way of secrecy. The soldiers
come to John, and say, What shall we do? the Publicans and sinners, What shall
we do? every one of them in particular desired to know what belonged to them
in reforming, this lies plainly in the text.

Seventhly, There is something else that I meant as a seventh help, it is that
Christians should not only look upon their reformation under the rod as a
task necessary and as a duty commanded, but they should look upon it, as an
employment comely and lovely; meet says the text, what a beautiful and
beseemingthing, is it in a Christian resolving to be reformed under the rudde?
And thus we have done with the first thing propounded, viz. what kind of
reformation it is, we should resolve upon under the rod.

The second thing propounded, is what arguments may prevail with Christians,
according to the latitude of this Text, thus to reform under the rod. There
are arguments of two kinds, that I shall suggest.

First, some in relation to God.

Secondly, some in relation to our selves.

First, in relation to God, I shall name six or seven, whereof five I shall
find in this chapter.

First, because God that calls for Reformation under Correction, is the
author of every blow, of every scourge, he it is, that breaks the bones that
teareth the skin, that bruiseth the flesh, this you may see in the 13, 14, 15.
v. Who has given him a charge over the earth? or who has placed him over the
whole world? If he set his heart upon man (speaking of God) and gather unto
himself his spirit, and his breath. All flesh shall perish together, and man
shall return unto dust: he does not say, if they will break themselves to
pieces, or if infectious air, or unseasonable times, will produce a
pestilence, to sweep them away; but, if he shall do it, that is God, he is
the author of it. Consider that place Jer. 5. 3. where the Prophet speaks thus
by way of complaint, O Lord are not thine eyes upon the truth? thou have
stricken them, but they have not sorrowed, thou have consumed them, but they
have refused to receive correction, they have made their faces harder then a
stone, and have refused to return: should not the child's care under the
smarting rod be, to give content to the angry father? know the Lord is the
author of thy chastisement, Is there any evil in the City (meaning the evil of
punishment) and the Lord has not done it, says the Prophet? Is there any
breach in the Kingdom, any plagues amongst us, any famine, or want, that the
Lord has not done? it is his hand that lays on: that is one argument.

The second reason why we should reform under the rod, is, because God
afflicts us, because we are blame worthy, because we have sinned, therefore his
Majesty is pleased to smite us, verse 26. 27. He strikes them as wicked men,
in the open sight of all men, because they have turned back from him, and would
not consider all his ways: Does God lay on them, why is it? only because he
has a delight to rend, and tear them, bruise and break? no, nothing less:
for he does not afflict willingly.

It is alienum opus, it goes against the heart, and mind of God, God is
provoked unto it by men's sins. Lam. 39. in that place (before quoted) wherefore
does the living man complain? he gives a reason, Man suffers for his sins,
and in the 40. verse, shows what use we should make of this; Let us search and
try our ways, and turn unto the Lord, say, I was proud, God has met with me,
therefore now I will be more humble, I was peevish, God has crossed me, now I
will be more tractable, I was sensual in the use of the creature, God has
given me a bitter pill, therefore I will be more moderate, that I may not
provoke his Majesty any more.

Thirdly, Consider this, (which will follow from the former,) he is exceeding
just, and gracious in every rod he uses, in every stroke, that he gives; in
every affliction that he sends, as in verse 10. 11, 12. Therefore hearken to
me ye men of understanding, far be it from God that he should do wickedness,
and from the almighty, that he should commit iniquity, for he will render unto
every man, according to his works, and cause every one to find according to his
way, and 23. for he will not lay upon man more then is right, that he should
enter into judgment with God. God will not make the staff too heavy, the rod
too big, God does noe more then justly he may, if he tear the skin, if that
will not do, he will break the veins, if that will not do, he will deal
more rigorously, and shall not this move us to reform under the rod?

Fourthly, The Lord well knows, and considers, the frame of every man's spirit,
the carriage of every soul under his correcting hand, when God lays on with
his hammer upon the anvile of our hearts, he considers what force it has
inward, in our spirits, outward in our lives: consider this in the 21. 22.
verse, His eyes are upon the ways of man, and be sees all his goings, there
is no darkness nor shadow of death, that the workers of iniquity might be hid
therein. Mark it, can a man run away from God, as a child many times from his
father, and hides himself until his anger is over? no, he knows every fault
that we reform not in, and knows every course that we take for the causing of
offense, submitting, and stooping to him will not serve the turn, we must
reform when under the rod. I could give you that passage, Amos 4. 6. to 12. I
have given you cleanness of teeth, scarsenesse of bread, I have withholden the
rain from you, I have smitten you with blasting, and mildew, pestilence have I
sent among you, your young men have I slain with the sword, I have overthrown
you, as I overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah, and ye were as firebrands plucked out of
the burning, yet in all these you have not returned to me says the Lord,
therefore thus will I do unto thee, be reformed under all these crosses, and
prepare thy self to meet thy God O Israel.

Fifthly, Know the Lord is no respector of persons, God is not like many fond
parents, that will indulge cocker, and make much of one child, and lay upon the
bones of another, many times they know not for what, but only as affection
carries them, nor like some misguided authority, where poor ragged thieves have
the halter, when silken ones are spared; no no, there is no such affection in
God, consider it, there is more in the proof then I speak of, verse 19 20. How
much less to him that accepts not the persons of princes, and regards not
the rich, more then the poor, for they be all the work of his hands, and verse
24. he shall break the mighty without seeking, and shall set up others in their
stead. God noe more regards a man worth thousands, then him that is worth not a
farthing; God no more esteems (in regard of personal respect) the governers,
then the governed.

This should move people under the rod to trust in God and labor to be
reformed, these are the five Arguments that I find in this Chapter.

There are two more remaining in the sixth place, know for certain that this
is the very end that God aims at, that by his rod people might be reformed,
as Isa. 27. 9. By this therefore shall the iniquity of Jacob be purged, and
this is all the fruit, the taking away of his sin. If a child should ask
the father, why did you beat me so exceedingly? And he and he answer, I would
have thee to reform, to take heed of sinful courses, of sinful company, it
might be a good argument to work upon the child. This is the end of God in
afflictions that he exercises his withal, to have them be reformed thereby.

Seventhly and Lastly, consider, his majesty will account himself highly
honored, by the reformation of his people under the rod; in sort we may make
God amends, (but do not mistake my expression) it does not make amends by way
of requital, not adding any thing to his worth, but by way of manifestation;
but to let that pass. Consider that concerning Paul, God laid upon him, struck
him of his horse, and presently after you shall read. 1 Gal. 23. that they
glorified God because of him; What a change is here! he that destroyed, and
persecuted, now preaches that gospel, for which he persecuted them, he that
endeavored to disperse, and scatter poor Christians, now is zealous in
encouraging them Godward, so that the godly glory greatly because of him: and
what an extraordinary honor is this to God! suppose a man has a stubborn
Colt to break, that will stand upon no ground, that seems to be very
untractable, now if this man can in a short space, bring him to the Saddle, and
make him tame and gentle; what a credit will it be unto him? So here when God
puts us one way, another way, comes to work us and wind us according to his
will, he thinks himself honored if we will become tractable, and yield to his
commands; when we that once had Christ and his government, shall come in and
say with Elihu, Surely it is meet to be said unto God, I have borne
chastisements, I will not offend any more. This is pleasing unto God, in this
he thinks himself much honored. This shall serve to have spoken to these seven
arguments in relation to God.

Now for those arguments of the second sort, in relation to our selves, of
these I will speak under a two fold head,

Some are drawing, some are driving, some are forcing, some alluring, my
meaning is, some suggest sadness to them that will not reform under the rod,
these I call driving or forcing, again some hold forth sweetness, precious
prerogatives to them that will amend, and reform when the Lord smites, and
these I call alluring, and drawing arguments. You see I am in a large field,
but I doubt, I shall have time, to go over but a little ground.

First for driving arguments.

Not to reform under the rod, it fastens a black mark of shameful
ignominy, and reproach upon the heart of a sinner: how is Jeroboam marked (in
this regard) with a black coal, what reproach is cast upon the back of that
man, though he was a King, and woare a Crown, and the main reason of this was,
because he reformed not under Gods hand, Kings 1. 13. 4. he stretched out his
hand against the Prophet, his hand dried up, so that he could not pluck it in
again, yet for all this, says the Text verse 33. Yet for all this Jeroboam
turned not from his wicked way. Here is a Monster of nature, a hopeless
wretch, God smites him with one rod after another, takes away a limb, a
hand, and yet he will not be reformed.

Here consider two things by way of argumentation.

First, not to be reformed under the rod, is a sign of unspeakable
foolishness, as it is Jeremy 5. 3, 4. Thou have stricken them but they have
not sorrowed, thou have consumed them but they have refused to receive
correction, therefore I said, surely they are poor, they are foolish, for they
know not the way of the Lord.

It is a strange thing, that men should be no more sensible of the rod, then
the Iron of the hammer. Like some sturdy villains, that will not stir at
their Masters bidding, he strikes with one hand after another, till he has
wearied himself, yet he is dogged, and will not go: so God is upon men in
estate, in name, in Children, inwardly and outwardly; Oh the rockishnesse of
men's hearts, when all these rods will not move them to be reformed, herein
they show egregious folly.

Secondly, not to be reformed under the rod is a sign of extraordinary
bruitishnesse. Pro. 27. 22. Though thou should bray a fool in a mortar
amongst wheat brayed with a pestle, yet will not his foolishness depart from
him. Mark, he is like a bruit, beat him, strike him, he amends not, like a
fool, he will not be reformed. We use to say, Children show themselves
foolish, for they might save many a blow: the father calls, he regards not,
again, come, he comes not, go, he goes not, until he comes himself, beats
him, and makes him go. Oh foolish Child, might not this have been saved? So
God calls from the world, from our pleasure, we will not hear him, he pulls
away blessing after blessing, and gives us blow after blow, yet we will not
regard him; oh foolish people and unwise, (mark it) those people that will not
reform under the rod of the Lord, they do expose themselves, (poor souls)
themselves know not, to what an increase, and augmentation of misery: Do but
observe it in Pharaoh, let my people go, says God; no not he, therefore God is
upon him with one plague after another, one judgment after another, yet not
reformed, then the first borne in every family dies, yet when he had let the
Israelites go, he pursues after them, and will not leave till he sink (as the
text says) like a stone in the mighty waters. You know what God threatens,
Levit 26. If ye will not hearken, and be obedient unto me, yet seven times
more, yet seven times more will I plague you: so Amos 4. yet have ye not
returned, I have afflicted you time after time, yet have you not returned,
therefore I will do thus unto you: How is that? I will bring some unexpected,
and miserable-making judgment: If I should say that incorrigiblenesse under
the rod, causes God in wrath to give up people, as in a condition hopeless,
I could easily prove it; know for certain, that God will say, why should I
smite any more? the more I smite, they more they sin, therefore I will take
no more pains with them: just as many a father will say of his incorrigible
child, I will spend no more stripes upon him, no more time about him, I will
pack him out of doors, let him be gone, and trouble my self no more with him,
so will God say to those that will not be reformed under the rod: this is a
sad thing to be considered: Hosea also will prove this. Further consider, this
is that that provokes the Lord (what shall I say) for to remove his ordinances
from amongst us. Isa. 13. bring no more vain oblations, incense is an
abomination unto me, I cannot suffer your newmoones, nor sabbaths, nor solemn
assemblies: All this was because ye reformed not, for says the Lord ver. 15.
Your hands are full of blood; remember what Christ said, Except ye repent, ye
shall all likewise perish. These are the driving considerations: and why should
we not all (from hence) learn to be reformed under the rod?

Now follows those that are drawn from the gain, that you and I may get by
laboring for to attain unto this frame of soul, when the Lord shall be
pleased to accept of us.

What shall I say? this is the way for to gain the comfort of the Lord, the
tender bowels of his compassion, when we are under the bitterest calamity,
that can befall us, Oh beloved, do but suppose a father had torn the flesh of
his child, or broke a vein, and the child should sobbe, and sigh, oh would I
had not done so, or so, to provoke my father, I will be better as long as I
live, how would the father, and mother, sorrow, and even weep to hear him? So
it is with God, Jer. 31. 18, 20. I have surely heard Ephraim bemoaning
himself, Thou have chastised me, and I was chastised as a bullock unaccustomed
to the yoke: you know, offer to yoke a Bullock, and she strikes one with her
horn, another with her foot, so it was with me says Ephraim, yet then the Lord
loves him, see v. 20. Is Ephraim my dear son, is he a pleasant child? for
since I spoke unto him, I do earnestly remember him, still therefore my bowels
are troubled for him, I will surely have mercy upon him, says the Lord.

Again, know that if you endeavor thus to reform under the rod of the Lord,
you may be confident, that the worst things you may or can suffer for God, and
his cause, they shall (according to the riches of his grace) turn to your joy,
and everlasting comfort.

When the Lord threatened the Captivity, Jerem. 24. he compares them to two
baskets of figs, whereof one one was good, the other naught; by the good
figs he sets out those that should be reformed by their captivity, verse 6. I
will set mine eyes upon them for good, and I will give them a heart to know me,
that I am the Lord and they shall be my people, and I will be their God.

They shall be happy, though under the power of them that hate both them, and
their profession, they shall enjoy me for good says the Lord, because they
have turned to me with all their hearts. Will you see what heaps of comfort,
heap upon heap, the Lord has provided for them, in reading that place, Job
22. 22. to the end. You know in what a case Job was, his estate was wasted, his
Children killed; his wife become a cold comforter. Now mark 22. Receive I pray
thee the Law of his mouth, and lay up his words in thine heart. 23. If thou
return to the Almighty, thou shall be built up; and thou shall put iniquity
from thy tabernacle. See further the restoration of his estate, and the supply
of his want, so far as abundance may be for thy good, thou shall have it, if
under the rod, thou return, 25. The Almighty shall be thy defense, yea, thou
shall have thy delight in the Almighty.

The reason why we have so little communion with God, is because lusts ly
unsubdued in our bosom, we take delight in our riches, and pleasure, and this
hinders us of the sweet joy we might have in Christ: He goes on, Thou shall
lift up thy face to God; what is the reason a man runs, and hides his head? it
is because he has sinned: he goes on, Thou shall make thy prayer to him, and
he shall hear thee: he will so hear that he will grant thee thy requests, and
thou shall have to pay thy vows that thou have promised, thou shall decree a
thing, and he shall establish it unto thee, thou shall always speed, and prosper
in thine undertakings, and the light shall shine in thy ways, God himself
shall direct thee, when others are cast down, then shall thou say, I am lifted
up. See what a company of comforts is here, for them that will be reformed
under the rod.

What need I name particulars? when as Jesus Christ (in whom is all the
promises of this life, and a better) is made over to them, that are careful to
reform, both in their spirit, and ways, in reference to that God that casts
them down; the redeemer shall come unto Zion, and unto them that turn from
iniquity in Jacob, says the Lord, Isaiah 59. 20. Is not here strong arguments
to move you? therefore take the Place of the text, and say, we will bear
chastisements, we will not offend any more, that which we see not, teach thou
us, and if we have done iniquity, we will do it no more.

The third thing was, what course we should take to be wrought upon to attain
unto this frame of Spirit.

First, Throuhly from scipture light, inform your selves, concerning the
sinfulness, and the ugliness of this course in regard whereof you must reform
says the Prophet, After I was instructed I repented, and smote upon my thigh,
and said, what a thing is this that I have done? that which I see not, teach
thou me, may be I do not see it, if I do see it, may be not so ugly, base,
and abominable as it is, therefore oh teach me. If men did but think, what it
is to be a natural man, for a man that has an immortal soul to lie stinking
in a puddle, to go to the trough with the Swine, and under the table with the
dog, there is noe man but would think this to be a very deformed, and
unseemly sight, how much more, to have your souls, your immortal souls
rooting in the dirt; this is the condition of a natural man. Consider, is it
not a horrible thing, to resist God, to pluck God out of the chair of state,
to pull him out of the throne of majesty, to wring the Scepter out of Gods
hand? this is horrible treason indeed! A proud man does it, he resists God, he
sets himself against God, God against him, if you did but consider this, you
would down with your proud hearts. Again consider what it is to be an
unbeliever, to give God the lie, as every unbeliever does, to let the greatest
meities of God to fall into the channel: rather then I will put out my hand to
reach them, this every unbeliever does. Now we should consider the danger of
these sins, and labor to avoid them, and we should strive to see the latitude,
and utmost extent of the bloudinesse, and baseness of our own hearts, that so
we may keep the better watch against them.

Sometimes when a Father would have his child ashamed of himself, he fetches a
glass, and shows him, what a deformed face he makes himself. Oh that you did
but see the sinfulness, and deformity of this course, whereof God would have
you to reform, you could not but be ashamed of it.

Secondly, you must be deeply humbled for what ever it is that under the rod
you do discover to be out of order, both in your heart, your mind, and
actions; the way of reformation is by weeping cross, I smote upon my thigh,
and was ashamed. Rich Manasses, who was a King, humbled himself greatly before
the Lord God of his fathers, this indeed is repentance not to be repented of;
what fear, what indignation, what zeal have the saints of God showed in their
reforming under the rod? says God, my people that are called by my name, shall
humble themselves, and turn from their evil ways, noe turning aright,
without humiliation: when a child once sees wherein he has offended, and the
haynousnesse of his offense, he falls down upon his knees, and cries out,
pardon, pardon. So must we labor to see the greatness of our sins, and the
heinousness of them, that so we may be the deeper humbled for them, and then
the soul (at the apprehension of sin growing upon the heart, in regard of the
root of original sin that feeds it, and in regard of the weakness of his own
nature to withstand the world, the flesh, and the divill,) will seek after
Christ, get Christ, hug Christ, then he will know the worth of a Savior, and
will esteem of a Savior, for he knows that God has set him apart that he may
give repentance to Israel, and forgiveness of sins, Acts 5. 31. To bless you
in turning every one of you from your iniquities, as Acts 3. 26. he knhws that
Christ has power to bind the strong man, cast out devils, if he speak but the
word, the waves and winds shall all be quiet. It was foretold, Isa. 11. 6. 7.
that in gospel time, the Wolf shall dwell with the Lamb, and the Leapard
shall lie with the Kid, and the Calfe, and the Lion, and the fat beast
together, and a little child shall-lead them, and the Cow and the Bear shall
feed, their young ones shall lie together; and the Lion shall eat straw like
the Bullock, and the sucking child shall play upon the hole of the Aspe, and
the weaned Child shall put his hand upon the Cockatrice hole. This is the
mighty work of God, therefore go unto Gov, and say, O God thou that can thus
change the natural disposition of beasts, change my beastly disposition, thou
that could call a Lazarus out of the grave where he lay rotting, Oh deliver
me from a dead heart, that have lain a long time rotting in sin, thou that
did make the lame to go, make me to run the way of thy commandments, which
thou have set before me, thou that did open the eyes of the blind, open my
eye that I may see to run the race that thou have set before me; thou that
did cure the deaf, bore my ears, that I may hear, and learn to fear thee.

Thus go to God, and pray unto God, wait upon God, and expect deliverances
from him, for there is none in Heaven or in earth that can give a deliverane
but he alone, entreat the Lord, according to your need, to work on your souls
this grace of reforming under the rod, go to God, and say, father if thou will, thou can alter me, and change me, oh, turn me, and I shall be turned,
convert thou me, and I shall be converted, say, Lord thou can take away all
transgression, all sin and iniquity, do it for thy mercy sake, say, Lord, thou
can pull out my right eye, sin, cut of my right hand, sin, there is no power,
but the power of an omnipotent God can do it, that can thus pull me out of
sin, and make me reformed, do it fot thy Goodness sake.

Lastly, Are you all willing to enter into a covenant with God? seeing we are
all under the rod, I do not speak of any particular covenant, but of a
general covenant, will you now promise the Lord that you will reform, and sin
noe more? this is that, that the Lord expects of us, now we are under the rod,
this it is that the Lord does both command, and commend unto us, this let us
all bind our selves to perform, that so we may with some boldness put up our
prayers to God, as well for others, as our selves.

FINIS.

