A Few LINES TOUCHING BAPTISM: SHOWING, I. What Baptism is; with its
signification. II. Who are fit Subjects to be Baptized. III. The Good Old Way
of Baptizing. IV. Some Objections Answered.


By Matthew Fenn.

Matthew. 3.13. Then comes Jesus from Galilee to Jordan unto John, to be
Baptized of him.

Jeremiah 6.16. Thus says the Lord, Stand ye in the Ways, and see and ask for
the Old Paths, where is the Good Way, and walk therein, and ye shall find rest
for your Souls: But they said, We will not walk therein.

LONDON: Printed for Matthew Fenn, at Coggshall in Essex. 1697.

The Epistle.
THese Lines I desire may be perused by serious Souls; and although some Men
may not read them, yet I hope they will not abuse them: The Author's Endeavors
extend not to that Greatness of Skill which some Men desire; yet though they may
not profit all Men, they may do good to some. The Captious are always apt to
despise that which the Prudent value; because that the Lord chooses base Things
to confound the Mighty: Therefore, my Christian Friends, ponder the matter, and
arise, and be Baptized.

Coggshall in Essex, 1696. Matthew Fenn.

I. What Baptism is.
BAPTISM is a Gospel-Ordinance, ordained by Christ Himself, when All Power was
given him, both in Heaven and in Earth, Mat. 28.18, 19.

And it is one of the great Witnesses Christ left to bear Record in Earth; as
in 1 John. 5.8. There are three that bear Witness in Earth, the Spirit, the
Water, and the Blood; and these Three agree in One.

And so it is one of the great Sacraments of the New Testament, which
signifies the Death, Burial, Resurrection and Ascension of our Lord Jesus;
showing clearly, that as Christ died for our Sins, was buried, rose again from
the dead, ascended up on high; even so we being dead to Sin, should be buried
with him in Baptism into death; that like as Christ was raised from the dead;
by the Glory of the Father, even so we also should walk in newness of life,
Romans 6.13, 4, 5.

What Baptism is.
BAptism is a Sacrament,
Which to us signify,
That God the Father Jesus sent,
And he for us did die;
And that he in the Grave was laid,
And also buried,
When he our dreadful Debt had paid,
For which his Blood was shed:
And that he did arise again,
Ascended up on high,
When he the Enmity had slain:
All this it signify.
And thus we plainly may perceive
What was the Lord's intent,
When he was pleased with us to leave
This Holy Sacrament.
II. Who may be Baptized.
HE that believes, and is baptized, shall be saved, Mark 16.16,

But when they believed Philip preaching the Things concerning the Kingdom of
God, and the Name of Jesus Christ, they were baptized both Men and Women, Acts
8.12.

And as they went on their way, they came unto a certain Water, and the Enuch
said, See, here is Water, what does hinder me to be baptized?

And Philip said, If thou believe with all thine heart, thou may. And he
answered and said, I believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God.

And he commanded the Chariot to stand still, and they went both down into the
Water, both Philip and the Enuch, and he baplised him. Acts 8.37, 38, 39.

Then they that gladly received his Word, were baptized, Acts 2.41.

And without Faith it is impossible to please God, Heb. 11.6.

For whatsoever is not of Faith is Sin, Romans 14.23.

Who may be Baptized.
HE that believes, and is baptized,
It Is he shall saved be;
For thus our Savior dear advised,
In Scripture you may see.
Faith is that Grace which makes Souls fit
Their Savior to obey;
Let,s labor then that Grace to get,
To help us it the way.
If thou with all thy heart believe,
Phillip the Enuch told,
Then Baptism thou may receive;
And thus it was of old.
But where that Grace cannot be found,
We clearly understand,
Such to baptize there is no ground,
They build upon the sand.
And when the stormy Winds do blow,
And Rain it does descend,
Then great will be their Overthrow,
And Woe will be their end.
Then beg of God to give thee Faith
To follow Christ herein;
For as the holy Scripture says,
What Is not of Faith, is sin.
III. The good old Way of Baptizing.
JOhn did baptize in the Wilderness, and preached the Baptism of Repentance for
the remission of Sins. And there went out to him all the Land of Judaea, and
they of Jerusalem, and were all baptized of him in the River Jordan, confessing
their Sins, Mark 1.4.5. Matthew. 3.1, 2, 5, 7.

And it came to pass in those days, that Jesus came from Nazareth of Galilee,
and was baptized of John (IN Jordan) (mark that.) And streightway coming up out
of the Water, he saw the Heavens opened, and the Spririt like a Dove descending
upon him.

And there came a Voice from Heaven saying, Thou art my beloved Son, in whom I
am well pleased, Mark 1.9, 10, 11.

After these things came Jesus and his Disciples into the Land of Judea, and
there he tarried with them, and baptized:

John also was baptizing in Enon near to Salim, because there was much Water
there: And they Came (mark that) and were baptized, John 3.23.

Acts 19.4, 5. said Paul, John verily baptized with the Baptism of Repentance,
saying unto the People, That they should believe on him that should come after
him, that is, on Christ. When they heard this, they were baptized in the Name
of the Lord Jesus.

And in Acts 8.36, 37, 38. And Philip said, If thou believe with all thine
heart, thou may: And he answered and said, I believe that Jesus Christ is
the Son of God. And he commanded the Chariot to stand still; and they went down
both into the Water, both Philip and the Eunuch, and he baptized him.

The Good Old Way of Baptizing.
BAptizing is not Sprinkling,
As fondly some surmize;
But it is quite another thing,
To Dip is to Baptize.
We find our Blessed Savior went
Down into Jordan's Flood, Mark 1.9.

As in his Holy Testament
Is clearly understood:
For coming up from thence, we read
The Heavens opened were,
And the Trinity indeed,
This Truth confirmed there:
The Son down into Jordan went
And coming up again,
The Holy Ghost made a descent,
And on him did remain;
And lo a Voice from Heaven fell,
It Is my Beloved Son,
And he indeed has pleased me well,
In that which he has done.
But Men are now too lofty grown
Their Savior dear to follow;
In vain Inventions of their own
They Would rather lie and wallow.
What, dipped as Christ was? that is too low
For most in this our Age;
Naaman-like they angry grow, 2 King. 5.11, 12.

And fall into a Rage;
As I my self have heard some say,
As now I tell to thee,
Before they would be saved that way,
They Would never saved be.
But the true, humble, gracious Soul,
Their Savior dear will eye,
And follow him without control,
There is great reason why.
Christ's way it is the clearest case,
Though Men do it gainsay;
Be thou baptized as Jesus was,
For that is the only way.
IV. Some Objections answered.
And now why tarriest thou? arise and be baptized,

Acts 22.16.
I Pray mark well, my Christian Friend,
And be thou well advised;
This Counsel Christ to Paul did send, Acts. 9.6

Arise and be baptized.
Pray what Objections can thou make,
Or wherefore do thou tarry?
God's Counsel now I pray thee take,
Lest that thy Soul miscarry.
The First Objection.
It from the Pulpit has been told,
As now I tell to thee,
Our English Climate is so cold,
Too cold it is for me.
If I this thing should undertake,
And harm should catch thereby,
The Truth may suffer for my sake,
If I fall sick and die.
Answer to the First Objection.
Pray hearken now, my Friend to me;
If God thy Life should take,
And thou should not baptized be,
What answer could thou make?
If thou God's Council do reject,
Then he will be thy Foe;
If thou thy Duty do neglect,
Then that will cause thy woe.
Come, come, my Friend, and don't distrust
The help of Christ thy Lord,
For he did never prove unjust,
Nor falsify his Word:
His Grace it will sufficient be,
His Power he will make known,
And he will surely stand by thee,
If thou his Truth do own.
O then, I pray, God's Counsel take,
And let thy Soul be pris'd;
O beg the Lord for the Lord's sake.
Arise and be baptized.
The Second Objection.
It is a mean despised way,
A way that Men do scorn,
And is so much despised this day,
It hardly can be born:
If I this thing should undertake,
And should baptized be,
My Friends I fear would me forsake,
And look aloof on me.
Answer.
Call thou that mean which Christ commands
which he has authorized?
And we in Scripture understand
He was himself baptized.
And what, are Men now grown so proud,
That Truth cannot be born?
Do they against it cry aloud,
And hold it in great scorn?
How will they answer it at last,
When Christ to Judgment call,
When he on them Contempt shall cast,
What woe will them befall?
Then follow thou God's holy way,
Although it be despised.
Would thou be blessed another day?
Arise and be baptized.
The Third Objection.
But I have in my Infancy
Baptized already been:
And what, should I now that deny,
And be baptized again?
Godfathers and Godmothers too,
For me to God did vow,
And that I hope for me will do;
I pray what say thou now.
Answer.
In Infancy thou wast too young,
(Mark well what here I say,)
Thou should confess Christ with thy Tongue,
And then his Truth obey.
Thy Godfathers and Mothers which
Of them thou seem to boast,
In Scripture we can find none such,
Therefore thy Strength is lost.
These are but things ordained by Men,
By Men they were devised.
O be not thou deceived then,
Arise and be baptized.
The Fourth Objection.
But I a true Believer am,
And truly fear the Lord,
And reverence his holy Name,
According to his Word:
The Lord his holy Spirit he
Now unto me has given;
And must I yet baptized be,
Who am baptized from Heaven?
This is enough without control,
I pray make no reply;
This is enough to save my Soul,
No Man can this deny.
Answer.
This is indeed a blessed estate.
With thee I will agree;
And it is as plain without debate,
Thou may baptized be.
Cornelius was as good a Man, Acts. 10, 1,-48.

As most that we can find,
As by the Scripture prove I can,
He few Men came behind:
Devout he was, and feared the Lord,
And prayed most fervently,
His Alms they were so spread abroad,
They reached above the Sky.
Yea, and the holy Spirit too,
God unto him had given;
And yet we find he would work to do,
Although baptized from Heaven;
Baptized he must with Water be,
It stood him so in hand,
As in the Scripture you may see,
Peter did so command.
And now from hence I do infer,
The better that Men be,
That they thereby the sitter are
Baptized for to be.
Therefore no longer stout it out,
But be thou advertised;
It is thy Duty, make no doubt,
Arise and be baptized.
The Fifth Objection.
Pray hear me yet this one thing more,
It was so in its day;
But now Baptizing's out of door,
And vanished quite away.
Answer.
Alas, poor Soul! who told thee so?
Is It not Preaching's Companion? Matt. 28.19.20.

It is of God the Scriptures show,
And cannot be nulled by Man.
This is a subtle thing indeed,
By crafty Men surmiz'd,
Therefore I pray repent with speed,
Arise and be baptized.
The Call to Submit.
COme, Friend, what linger yet like Lot?
What, loath for to obey
That Blessed Lamb that had no Spot,
Arise and come away.
The Lamb of God let us follow now,
Wherever he does go;
He was baptized, and so must thou,
He has commanded so.
Though thou wast born of Parents good,
And have by them been trained,
And many things have understood,
By Natural Parts attained;
If Abraham had thy Father been,
And thou had been Rantiz'd,
'Twill not suffice; I say again,
Arise and be Baptized.
By another Hand.
SHall the Son of God Baptized be,
By his Great Forerunner John?
The Almighty Father and Eternal Spirit
With pleasure too look on: Luke. 3.21.22, 23.

And shall not I, poor called Soul,
Most gladly submit thereto!
For it is a favor He will bid me do.
Shall the Potent Prince Emanuel
Send over the Universe
His Ambassadors, for to proclaim
His Greatness, and Baptize?
And shall not Grace prevail with me
To bow my self, give Christ the Crown,
And be Baptized as he does enjoin!
Shall the Eternal Spirit, Father and Son
Work wonderfully for ever,
Conquering stubborn rebellious, Wills,
That Salvation may be secure?
And shall not I that conquered am,
By his Goodness and his Power,
Be Baptized as his Subject evermore.
FINIS.

