CHRIST Ruling in midst of his ENEMIES; OR, Some first Fruits of the CHURCHES
DELIVERANCE, Budding forth out of the Cross and Sufferings, and some
remarkable deliverances of a twenty years Sufferer, and now a Soldier of
Jesus Christ; Together, With Secretary Windebanks Letters to Sr: Jacob Ashley
and the Mayor of Newcastle, through which the violent prosecutions of the
common adversaries to exile and banishment, are very transparent. Wherein also
the Reader shall find in several passages, public and particular, some
notable encouragements to wade through difficulties for the advancing of the
great Design of Christ, for setting up of His Kingdom, and the ruin of
Antichrist. By Lieutenant Colonel, JOHN FENWICKE.

Apoc. 7. 14. These are they that come out of great tribulation, and have
washed their robes, and made them white in the blood of the Lamb; and, Chapt.
12. 11. And they overcame by the blood of the Lamb, and by the word of his
testimony, and they loved not their lives to the death. LONDON, Printed for
Benjamin Allen in Pope's Head Alley, 1643.

The Epistle DEDICATORY TO NEWCASTLE upon Tyne.
NEWCASTLE, though not the place of my birth, or much of my breeding (for I
have herein been more beholden to other parts of the world) yet none may
challenge from me more interest in this Dedication. Newcastle, famous for thy
mocking and misusing of Christ's Messengers, and ill entertainment of his
Servants, ever since our Reformation, witness that famous Knox, great Reformer
of Scotland, his Sermons preached there: witness learned Vdall, thy faithful
Monitor, whose innocent blood cries yet from the ground, whom for writing
against the Prelates, thou prosecuted as a Traitor to bonds, imprisonment, and
sentence of death, under which he died before execution; witness Reverend
Balmford, whom in like manner thou expulsed, though thou could not touch his
life, thou pricked his sides (as well as Christ's) in his hearers, with the
reproach of Balmfordian Faction and Schism; witness Alder, Jennison, Murton,
all godly Ministers, expulsed by thee: witness others of Christ's servants, ill
entertained of thee, yet alive to witness all that is alleged against thee,
and much more; and last of all, he that sends these things unto thee, his wife
and children, who have received their birth and breathing in thee, make up that
long and black roll of bitter things writ against thee from heaven. O
Newcastle! how has God dealt with thee, by his divine waterings of his Word
many years? how has God spoke aloud to thee by his judgments and forewarnings
of ruin and desolation after thou had refused all instructions from his Word
and Messengers? have thou forgot how loud God spoke to thee in that great
plague, Anno, 1636. when there died in half a year about seven thousand, which
made thee almost desolate, thy streets grown green with grass, thy treasury
wasted, thy trading departed, as thou never yet recovered it; thy wounds
increased thy madness; thou wentest not to heaven for a perfect cure: What
think thou was the meaning of that strange fire brake out Nota, This fire
brake out in the evening of that day after their consultations were ended
wherein many ancient Records were burnt up and consumed.
(none ever knew how) in thy secret chamber of thy Towns house, or Common
hall, where the next year after that great plague, thy Rulers, like Wolves of
the evening, were lurking all that day in plotting the new project about Coals
and Salt, to devour thy poor inhabitants, and also new devices to suppress
sound preaching, and strave your souls. How is it, after many more warnings,
too large to recite, that thou art still hardened, and the cry of thy sins
like Sodom is come up to heaven: in thee is found the blood of the Prophets,
the blood of the Saints oppressed and banished, and hunted to death: in thee is
found the blood of thy inhabitants oppressed and impoverished, by unlimitted
authority, and arbytrarie government, so court-like, as an Aple is like an
Orange. In thee is found the uncleanesse of Sodom, Adulteries, and
Fornications in thy Rulers houses: thy filthiness in thy skirts, transparent
to strangers round about thee; in thee found drunkenness and excess, with
melody, to see the Church laid desolate: in thee is found the two grand sins,
that will sincke a whole state, a whole kingdom without repentance and
reformation: superstition in worship, and oppression in government, which has
brought upon this Land that bloody sword, which now threatens to devour thee
(I mean, thy wicked Magistracy and Rulers, who have wrested all thy power
into their own hands, and all that wicked crew of their confederacy) O
Newcastle! when will thou learn the dialect of heaven, speaking loud in thine
ears? O Newcastle, Newcastle! will thou not be made clean, when shall it once
be? Jer. 13. 27. If thou will not hearken to heavens counsel, hear thy
sentence, Thou art defiled with blood, and cannot be cleansed, but by the blood
of them that shed it, Numb. 35. 33. O Newcastle! what shall I say to thee? what
has enraged thee against him that writes this complaint against thee? whom
have I wronged of you? bring forth your evidences, and plead your cause; I hope
ere long, we shall have a fair and free hearing and just proceedings, not at
the bar of your Court Law of hanging, Excom. imprisonment and banishment; but
at a bar of right judgment. I have ever sought thy good in spiritualls and
temperalls, even to my own hurt and loss; I have seen sometimes thy plagues
a far off, and wept insecret for thee, (as the place of my habitation, though
my Meseck and Kedar, the place of my sorrow, and never of my joy, how often have
I assayed to have left thee in thy rebellion against God, but heavens counsels
did not favor mine) when the great plague began, Anno 1636. Consider what
might be Gods mind, to make me one day weep bitterly over thee, riding alone
about a mile from the town, with many sad thoughts, and when I looked up, and
see Newcastle before me, my heart burst out with grief, with the same words
bo^^ing within me, wherewith the Lord Jesus wept over Jerualem: O Newcastle,
Newcastle, would God thou in thy days had remembered the things belonging to
thy peace, often revolving these thoughts with me: but when I came to the next
words, with many reasonings within me, shall they be hid from thine eyes,
shall thy habitations be laid desolate. My heart was like to burst within me,
for a good space, assuring my self to hear ill news, (for I had been in the
Country) and coming to town, I heard presently of the increase of the
plague, and that the night before some six and thirty died of it; and from
thence it daily increased to four hundred a week, till it had swept away
about seven thousand at least, in seven or eight months time. O Newcastle,
before thou had recovered this blow, which I mourned to see coming upon
thee, what ailed thee to begin to plot the ruin of me and my wife and
children. I had seen many habitations laid desolate, though I returned safely
to my own, with all my family, praise to my God, often strangely preserved
from that deadly infection; was it that thou grudged me thy corrupt air to
breath in, that thou sought my life, and pursued my wife and me both as
traitors, till thou drove us out of the kingdom. God made me require thy
malice with the like pity as before, that morning I escaped thy malicious
design against me, as I passed the gates in the dark of the morning, and
being a little passed from the walls, the town being still in my sight, God
made me weep over thee, the second time, in the same manner as before, and
with ruminating and reasonings within me upon the same words of Christ over
Jerusalem, and how soon after was the bloody sword drawn, which has wasted
thee not a little, and well if the worst be not yet behind. What have thou got
now by all thy discourteous and harsh dealings with me, who has ever sought
thy good? I have served thee diverse years in a public office, wherein,
though I could do thee little good, (the stream run so strong against me)
yet I have sometimes kept out some evils from over-spreading thee, until thou
began to stretch out thy neck against God, in the Scottish Cause, and then,
ever since, how (...) an inundation of all evils overwhelmed thee, and God, I
fear, left thee to some fatal fall. Repent, repent, O Newcastle, lest the
Lord depart from thee, and send a revenging sword to avenge his quarrel
against thee; if so, take heed of what was threatened to a wicked City:
Afflicton shall not come the second time, which the Lord avert, and give thee a
heart to repent and turn to him, that has long smitten thee, that he may
repent him of the evil which otherwise will befall thee; For all the strength
and power of man wherein thou still do boast and glory, I have thought it my
duty, to present thee with a brief view of thy harsh usage of me and mine,
to see if at any time God may give thee an heart to repent, which should be to
me greater joy then to see thee laid desolate, when these papers I now send
thee, shall be as a flying roll through thy streets and doleful habitations,
filling your fainting hearts with errors and shrikings to think of all your
wickednesses; and amongst the rest, your bloody plots and practices against
one that has ever sought your good,

John Fenwick.

To the READER.
Courteous Reader,
I Had been silent concerning my self in this evil time, had not the
importunity of some friends, and the unthankefulnesse of this apostate age
imposed a necessity upon me of publishing somewhat to the world of my late
troubles and sufferings to many extremities these five years complete, (...)
about the great work of God begun in Scotland, finding by others as well as in
mine own opinion, that I have suffered much by my silence; The storms and
tempests of this troubled time, having tossed men's wearyed minds, out of their
right course and motion, and the many buffets and blows in these common
calamities, upon this kingdom, have so malld the heads and dulled the spirits
of men, that they have almost lost their hearing and understanding, and as slow
to remember what they have heard and known of former sufferings, the new
sufferings wearying out the old; so that a necessity is laid upon me to
publish somewhat to the world of my late troubles, for these reasons: First, my
duty to God, to declare his mercies in midst of mine enemies malice, in
thankfulness of mind and spirit, to leave it to posterity, as it is
expressed, Psalm. 102. this shall be written for the generations to come.
Secondly, if God bring out good to my Country out of these troubles, the world
may see, that I have suffered somewhat for it. Thirdly, Being called out to the
field in the public service of the State from the first going out of our
armies, and having lost some blood in this cause already in Keynton-field,
where God gave me (I may say) a new life, being sore wounded, and stripped and
left for dead upon the ground among the dead almost an hour senseless, and
being still resolved to be prodig all of my blood, (if God assist me) in this
his clear and undoubted cause, wherein the bloody sword makes no difference,
but my lot may be to fall as soon as another; my children may be somewhat
comforted from my former deliverances, to trust the same God, who has
strengthened me with resolution, rather to die honorably, then live a sordid
life in slavery, and when they shall enjoy their precious privileges, and find
them dyed in their fathers blood, they will more prise them, and be more
careful to preserve them in their integrity to the generation following, as
their ^^st inheritance, that still God may have his due honor and glory, and a
constant succession of faithful servants to the worlds end: Fourthly, having
lost my whole estate, in these late troubles, and not enjoying the benifit of
100l. of mine own at home, or in f^^raigne parts in five years time, and
spent my self further in the public service, and not able to provide for my
children (if God shall call me before things be settled) I leave to them I
hope hereby, a title and ininterest in the public good, whereby they may
bolaly and justly challenge a share, from that rule of common equity, That
those that have borne the hea^ of the day, and tasted deeply of the sour,
ought drink of the sweet and be comforted with the cool waters of repast and
rest; it not being for the honor of my Country to leave mine to sincke under
my burdens for the public good, wherein I have spent my self, without the
least public support. Good Reader* bear with my plain and simple style, my
desire being to speak in plainness to the weakest capacity, not curious to
study words and sentences, quaint terms or elegance, but that plainness and
simplicate may set forth truth in her own proper colors, without dimnesse or
obscurity, if any thing here may add the least strength or courage in thee,
to prosecute this great work of Christ's Kingdom, give God the praise; if any
thing bear the character of my weakness and infirmity, bury it in that love
that suffers all things, and thinks no evil, and remember in thy prayers,

Thy Servant for the Kingdom of Christ. John Fenwicke.

Epitaphium in hoc tenebroso mortalitatis tempore ab Authore scriptum, ac
posteris relictum.
THe Lord's my Life, he lengths my days,
My tongue, my pen, shall spread his praise:
From dangers great, by sea, by land;
From pestilence, from enemies hand:
From fruits of sin, from hellish fears,
From folly of my tender years;
He has preserved, and heard my cry
Assuredly; if death draw nigh,
Christ my Joy, shall soon destroy
Both death and sin, which me annoy,
And bring me safe into his barn,
In season as a ricke of Corn.
I. F.

TO THE HONORABLE, The Knights, Citizens and Burgesses of the Commons House of
Parliament, The humble Petition of JOHN FENVVICK.
Humbly shows,
THat your Petitioner has been bred a Merchant in diverse foreign Countries
many years, and so lived a Merchant in his native country some eightene
years in which time his employments of shipping sea and land-men* and diverse
manufactures of this Kingdom, have not been unprofitable to the Commonweal,
nor unfruitful to his Majesty, affording to his Treasury, three, four and
five hundred pounds per annam fifteen or sixteen years, as the Custom House
books will show. And amongst other nations your Petitioner had commerce with
the Scottish nation some fifteen years, or more, in exchange of moneys, buying
and selling and shipping goods and merchandi^e to and from thence, and there
being no restraint of commerce. Your Petitioner went into Scotland about 26
December. 1638. and brought a ship laden with Wheat, of the Earl of Winton a
papist, as he had done a few months before, and with whom he had dealing
diverse veeres before; your Petitioner coming home to Newcastle, was pursued as
a Covenanter by diverse illaffected persons in the Magistracy* and a Warrant
sent forth by Sir Alexander Davison and Sir Job. Marloe, to the Constables who
watched your Petitioner his house three days to apprehend him for no other
cause, but correspondence with the Scots, which your Petitioner in regard of
his trading could not avoid.

And your Petitioner being informed by some of good quallitie that they had a
malicious plot for your petitioners life; and when no friends durst intercede
for him, your petitioner was forced to return back into Scotland; where both
privately he was watched, excepted out of the peace at Barwick by the Earl of
A^^nd^^^, when no man else was excluded, and publicly pursued in the
Parliament there by the Lord Traquaire, his Majesty's Commissioner (by the
instigation, as he believes) of his adversaries at Court and in Newcastle, as
may appear by the Letters of Secretary Windebanck hereunto annexed.

And further humbly shows, that a little after your petitioner was thus most
in^uriously driven from his country, family and friends, and all his affai^es
struck de^d in an ^nstant, to his utter undoing: the aforesaid Sir John Marloe
and Sir Alexander Davison, with Sir Thomas Ryd^le junior, Master Ralph Co^ke
and Ralph ^^wes, under pretense of a Commission from his Majesty, which they
refused to produce, most illegally molested your petitioner his wife, examined
her and her friends, and several times did search your petitioners house, and
took away writings at their pleasures, and sundry times imprisoned your
petitioners wife, and at last drove her from her family and succor of friends,
into Scotland for her safety, where she was forced to abide until the
pacification at Barwicke, and then returned to Newcastle. And lastly, upon the
news of the Scottish army advancing into England, Master Robert Bewick then
Mayor of Newcastle, by his officer brought your petitioner his wife out of the
country far beyond his jurisdiction to Newcastle, where she was searched and
examined by Sir John Beaumont a Commander under my Lord Conway and Sir Ioh.
Marloe, and a guard of 12 Musketeers set upon her, threatening her life; so as
she was forced to escape a private way by water, into the country:

By which injurious dealing, your petitioner has been sore damnified in his
liberty, estate and credit, which is a Merchants livelihood, to the dissipation
of his family, and loss of all friends, and privileges of a subject to
possess his right and his debts at home and abroad in foreign parts, no man
to this three years past, paying him, or will yet pay him any thing without
suit of law, which in regard of his long troubles and many losses, he is wholly
unable to prosecute, until by the justice of this assembly he be righted and
repaired of his great losses and damages of above four thousand pounds, as he
hops to make good*

Most humbly prays, this Honorable Assembly to take into consideration your
Petitioner h^s sad ^ondition, and to afford him redress of his grievous wrongs
and repair of his heavy losses and da^mages sustained by the injustice and
illegal molestations of the above named persons, his long and heavy
adversaries, And your Petitioner shall daily pray, etc.

This Petition was first presented by the Earl of Roches, and the rest of the
Sc^^^ Commissioners at the Treaty of pacification about ult. De^emb. 1640. but
found no time of remedy. And in June 1642. at the next Treaty by the Earls of
Lothian and Lindsey, and the Lord Balmirinoe, and the rest of the Commissioners
from Scotland, again recommended and referred to Col, Fir^, to be taken into
consideration in Parliament upon first opportunity, but hitherto the great
distractions of the kingdom has pre^^^ted.

SECRETARY WINDEBANCKS Letter to Sir Jacob Ashley; presented at a Committee
about Newcastle business, Mr. Miles Corbet in the chair, May 28. 1642. By Sir
Thomas Rydle Junior, and Sir ^o. Marloe, in Justification of their good Service
to the King; pleading that it was good Service then, and how they sought to
take me, but could not accomplish it.
HIs Majesty has commanded me to give you notice of an Information lately
come to him from a very good hand, that one John Fenwicke a Merchant, and one
Betleston a Tanner, both of the Town of Newcastle have lately bin in Scotland
and subscribed to the Covenant and carried with them t(...) (...)es of diverse
others which will do the like, (this being a most notorious and base
Treachery, especially in an English Subject, and of most pernicious consequence
if it should spread further. His Majesty is pleased to recommend the strict
Examination of it to your ear, and commands that if these find you not at
Newcastle, you immediately repair thither, and advise with Mr. Marlay of that
Town, what course is fittest to be taken to come to a clear and certain
knowledge, of the truth hereof: You are likewise to call to your Asistance Sir
William Bellasys a very able Gentleman, and of exceeding good affection to his
Majesty's Service; and if upon examination, you shall find Fenwick and
Bitlestone guilty of this charge; you are by His Majesty's express Command to
Commit them immediately to Prison, there to remain close, until his Majesty's
pleasure shall be further known; and you are further to examine strictly what
names they carried with them into Scotland to become Covenanters; and to
certify me with all speed, what you shall find herein, that so this dangerous
correspondence and practice may be discovered and prevented, and that place of
importance secured, upon which the Covenanters have a special eye, and in the
preservation whereof consists the safety of all these Northern parts: You see
what diligence and dexterity, the weight of this business requires; and how
great a trust is laid upon you; and I doubt not but you will consider it, and
govern your self accordingly.

I have received two dispatches from you, and immediately after the first came
to my hands, I gave you notice of it by a line or two: The Lords of the
Committee have been made acquainted with them both, and you are to receive
herewith several answers from their Lordships to all that you have desired to
be instructed in.

The enclosed is from Mr. Controller, who remembers his true love to you, to
which you may do me the favor to add mine with many thanks for your friendly
expressions to me: In some acknowledgement whereof I shall be your true
Servant, in any thing wherein I may contribute to your Service there, or to you
own particular, with the assurance whereof to you, I rest.

SIR, Your most Affectionate and true Servant. FRANC. WINDEBANCKE.
At the Court at Whuhall, 19. Ian. 1638. POSTSCRIPT.
THe greatest danger we conceive of those Northern parts is Newcastle, and
therefore it is expected that you endaevour by all means possible, according
to the powers and instructions, which you have, to strengthen that place, and
to secure it from surprise; seeing likewise upon the safety of that depends
much the security of those parts, which are furnished with Fuel from thence
(...) will give me account of this business of Fenwicke and Bitlestone, as
(...) as you may, for so his Majesty expects, and to that purpose you may
keep this Messenger with you, until the Examinations shall be taken, and then
send them expressly by him.

There goes herewith a Letter from the Lord Marquess Hamilton to Mr. Marlay
of Newcastle; And likewise a Warrant under his Majesty's hand to your self,
the Major, and Store-keeper, for the issuing out of Arms to some of the Scotch
Nobility, as you will perceive.



Secreta^rie Windebanckes Letter to Sir Alexander Davison, and aliis, presented
at the same time with the former, and by the same Persons.
AFter my hearty commendations, I have received your Letters of the 24. of
Jannarie, subscribed by yourselfe, Sir William Bellasis and Master John Marlay,
together with the examinations that came with them, and have acquainted his
Majesty with them, who takes very well your care in that service, and has
commanded me to give you thanks for it: His Majesty perceives the confederacy
in that town, with the ill affected party in Scotland, may grow dangerous, if
it be not speedily prevented; and therefore doubts not of the continuance of
your diligence in the discovery of the whole combination and strict and severe
proceeding against such as you shall find inclining to it. Concerning John
Fenwicke, it is to be doubted be is in Scotland, and therefore you must carry a
watchful eye upon his return, and if you can apprehend him, commit him
immediately to some prison out of the town, where his confederates may have no
means of resort to him; for Thomas Betelston, you have done well to commit
him, but you must likewise send him out of the town to some safe prison where
he may remain close, and out of the danger of the conversing with any of his
confederates: and the like course you are to hold with all others whom upon
examination you shall find of this faction.

You are likewise to take some speedy course for the preventing of these
clandestine meetings at undue hours, at Henry Dawsons house, under pretext of
(...), and if Master Mourton the Preacher there be ill affected to the Church
government, you must make diligent inquiry from whence he has his maintenance,
and if you find he lives by contribution of refractorie persons, you must
either prevent his preaching in private, and those supplies which he receives
from them, or else not suffer him to remain in your town.

His Majesty will expect from you an account from time to time of your
proceedings herein, according to the importance of this service wherein he
doubts not of your care, and so with rememberance of my love unto you, I rest

Your affectionate friend, Fr. Windebancke.
From the Court at White Hall, 2. of Febr. 1638.
CHRIST Ruling in the midst of his ENEMIES.
I will not now trouble the Reader, with a large Relation of the troubles of my
Life, or what I have suffered under an unlimited power of Prelacy* reaching me
into Germany above twenty years ago, when I had spent some seven years in
that then flourishing Country; and how the practices of Dr. William Lo and his
accomplices, by Letters from King James and Archbishop Abbot. I was driven
from my employments and means of preferments there. Or what I have suffered
since in my Native Country, both in matters of the Church and Commonweal, by
molestations of the Prelates, there Excommunications, sometimes in four
several places upon one day* and many other molestations of Dr. Iackson and
Mr. Alvey; his Successor in the Vicaridge of Newcastle, and what other
vexations in the Commonweal, Nota, Herein I have been many years the Subject
of the admiration of friends, and the object of the enemie^ madness and rage, in
that they could never make me stoop,
I have waded through with much cost and trouble; In opposition of illegal
taxes and oppressions, under an Arbitrary Government; about Knighting. Ship
money, projects; and other oppressions in the Government of Newcastle, the
Court Records of Durham, York, Westminster, and also of the Counsel board can
testify.

My aim at this time is only, to let forth my late and bitter sufferings,
about the Scottish business now almost full five years.

In relating the passages of my troubles about the Scots, I shall overpasse,
many things will necessarily fall out to be read in the Letters* of my
adversaries, and in my petition to the Parliament, and will only here observe
some other remarkable passages of Gods providence, in the public, as well as
in my particular.

When the first troubles began in Scotland about the new Service Book imposed,
the world knows what alterations and changes followed. As mainly, the renewing
of their old Covenant, which had lain by forgotten many years, during the
reign and rage of the Prelates: A Copy of which Covenant, a worthy Minister of
almost 20. years acquaintance in Scotland sent me with a relation of the
solemn taking of it in that Kingdom, which when I read and seriously weighed
the Covenant it self and passages about it, I writ under it. Inde Triumphabit
Chr^^^us post praelia ^i^^or.

That is in English, From thence after bloody battles Christ shall triumph
and begin his conquests throughout the World.

And so sent it to my Friends in New England; who where no less affected with
it then I: and earnestly solicited my constant in elligence about that business
of Scotland, which I also as willingly performed until I was driven out of
England. And indeed to speak plain out I had some assurance from Heaven, that
now was the dawning of the Churches deliverance near, and that from those
weak beginnings Christ would a rise to do great things in the world, and make
way to his Kingdom.

About 6 May 1628. I had occasion to ride into Scotland, and bought Note, I had
to do with others as well as Covenanters.
of the Earl of Winton a Papist, a Barks lading of Wheat; and being at
Edinburgh on the Sabath day, it fell out that the Covenant was that day
solemnly taken in as reverent a manner, and with as much Majesty and signs of
Gods presence as ever I saw in any public Assembly, where Job served some
ancient and white haired men to water their cheeks, and wipe off the tears
with one hand, while they held up the other hand in token of assent to the
Covenant as their custom was.

Now all this year in England, men's cares and mouths were exceedingly taken
up in listening after, and speaking of news and discourses of the Scots
affairs. And my correspondence with the Scots as a Merchan^, for at least 15,
or 16. years before, being generally known in Newcastle, my adversaries begun
to set watches for to trap me about the Scots, and my Friends began to
forwarne me of it; at last about the 15. of December. 1638. Mr. Robert Anderson
an Alderman of the town, and my good Friend came to me privately and told me,
Now your Enemies have got their desire they have long looked for, they have got
Witnesses sworn against you, of such things about the Scots, as will undo you;
and so wished me to look to my self, I thanked him for his love, but I
regarded not much their malice, being so well accustomed to it; nor did I so
much as speak of it to any, not to my wife, till after the plot broke out: The
same day, another Gentleman of good quality gave me the the like warning; but
I will spare his Name because he is yet living, and now a sufferer under the
Marquess of Newcastle,

And upon 25. December after being a time of much profanenes and excess in
Newcastle: I took that time to ride into Northumberland, and Barwick where I
had moneys owing me; and so into Scotland, (there being no restraint of
commerce with the Scots) and bargained with the aforesaid Earl of Winton, for
another Barks lading of wheat; but before I got home to Newcastle, a Warrant
was sent out to apprehend me, by Mr. Alexander Daveson, and Mr. John Marloe,
Note, They were not Knighted till afterward, for their good service against the
Scots. Nota, My return was about the 8. of January, by comparing the Date of
Secretary Windebancks letters, you may see how ripe the plot was for execution.
and the Constastable watched my house three days before I came, but coming
home late about ten of the clock at night, they missed of their purpose.

Observe here Gods providence over me, for I knew nothing of this dangerous
plot to apprehend me, but was stayed by the way about business, and relying on
the Moons light, stayed by the way somewhat the longer. But being come home
late, I found my wife in a very sad posture, and was not sit down, until some
friends came in and gave me notice of the danger, assuring me that the plot was
of such extent as my life was struck at; and that there was no abiding in the
Kingdom for me, some advising me to go for France, some for Holland, and some
for Scotland; none of my friends daring to be seen in it, or interpose their
interest to stop their violence, no not so much as for two days safely in my
house, to order and settle my affairs both at home and abroad, all struck dead
in one instant.

Well I saw there was now no dallying, provided for my escape in Note, Here
that Newcastle was begun to be fortified for the King against the Scots.
the morning early, where I passed the Guard and the Gate with some
difficulty, and passing along in sight of the Town of Newcastle. God made me
weep over it the second time, as is expressed in the Epistle Dedicatory, with
many sad thoughts of the place, and of my Wife and Children. I had left in a
disconsolate condition amongst my enemies. So rode into the Country where I
stayed among Friends some 8 days, using means to see if the business could
be accommodated, but all means failing, and the business carried so high, as
none of my friends durst meddle in it: I took my leave of them in a sad
condition and took my way for Scotland; I had not been above eight days in
Edenborough, until I was watched by the Lord Traquire, then Lord Treasurer of
Scotland, and had the whole power there for the King; giving out threats
against me in several places, that the Kings Dominions should not hold me
long; so as I was forced to lurck very privately that winter in Edenborough and
the Country, in a disguised manner: and so we return to what they were doing
in Newcastle.

My Adversaries having missed of their purpose of me, fell withal violence
upon my wife and friends with much inhumane usuage of one of her Sex, as is set
forth in my Petition to the Parliament. hereunto annexed; wherein Mr. Alexander
Daveson Major, Mr. John Marley Mr, Thomas Rydle Town Clerk. Mr. Ralph Ceck
Alderman, and Ralph ^^ows the Clerk of their Commission from the King for that
business, were the chief actors.

It would be too tedious to relate the molestations of my poor wife and
friends, and examinations about me, and of the imprisonment of others merely
for my cause, but my wife especially for correspondence with me, till at last
they were plotting her life too, for that very thing, and so hunted her as she
durst not come in her own house, for a week together, or see her children but
through a glass window, that they might not see her; and so at last forced her
to escape into the country, where none of my friends durst keep her two nights
together, but conveyed her into Scotland to me, where she abode until after
the pacification at Barwick, and then about the end of October, 1639. she
returned to Newcastle great with child; but I being excepted out of the
pacification by the Earl of Arundale, who treated on the Kings part, I was
forced to abide in Scotland, to expect a calmer season, but how calm it proved
I shall tell you presently, after I have told you a little more of my wifes
troubles.

The unfound peace with Scotland being broken quickly, the next Summer produced
new preparation to war on both sides, and upon the news of the Scots army
advancing into England, Master Robert Bewick the Mayor, sent his officer into
the country out of his jurisdiction and brought in my wife, where she was
searched, examined, and diverse papers taken away, and a guard of about a doozen
Musketeers set upon her; well, the Scots approach with their army, and her
abode in Newcastle was so troublesome on both sides to her and our adversaries,
as it is hard to say, whethers fears were greatest, her sex may excuse her
flight with her children, unfit to be left amongst such monsters of men and
women, as Newcastle now was full of all sorts, from all quarters to fight with
the Scots: Read more of this in a little Tract I published two years ago,
entitled, The Downfall of the Hierarchy. Well, being got away by water into
the country, she found cold entertainment, all being afraid of trouble by her,
until the Scots army came near to Newburn, and then there was flying indeed
to purpose, the swiftest flight was the greatest honor to the Newcastilian new
dubd knights, a good Boat, a pair of Oars, a good Horse, (especially that
would carry two men) was more worth then the valor or honor of new
knighthood. Surely Vicar Alvey too would have given his Vicaridge for a horse,
when he for haste leapt on horseback behind a countrie-man without a cushion,
his faith and qualifications failing him, he might well fear to fall from
grace by the Scots coming; we leave him in his flight to the grace of
Conterbury, and the new dubd knights, and others to the Courts grace for full
twelvemoneths, until the cots were gone home again. They no sooner returned
to Newcastle, but the first Sabbath Day after the Scots were gone, Vicar Alvey
appears in public again, new dressed up in his pontificalitie, with Surplice
and Service-booke, whereof the Churches had been purged by the Scots lads, and
therefore now become innovations, and very offensive to many, who could digest
such things before; but my wife being Nota, Some men carried away pieces of her
clothes, and made as much of them, as if they were holy relics. This was a
bold affront, the Parliament then ^itting.
less used to have her food so dressed, growing stomack-sicke, set some other
weak stomachs on working, who fell upon the Vicars new dressing (the Surplice
and Service-booke) which set the malignant superstitious people in such a fire,
as men and women fell upon my wife like wild beasts, tore her clothes, and
gave her at least an hundred blows, and had flaine her, if the Mayor had not
stepped out of his pue to reseue her, he and his officers both well beaten for
their pains such was the peoples madness after their Idols, as God
wonderfully preserved her life, and brought her to me to London.

I return now to some remarkable passages of divine providence toward me in
Scotland, in Edinburgh, and in my travel in the country from place to place,
to avoid the Lord Traquires prosecution: God being never wanting to fill up the
empty souls of his servants in their Nota. This hundredfold is not meant of
temporal things, as many understand it, but is meant of a hundredfold more of
Gods presence, and communication of his fullness even in this life, and in time
of our sufferings especially; yea, as much as our leaking vessels can hold,
until we come to eternity when our cup shall overflow continually.
bitter sufferings did often fulfill that promise of the hundred fold to such as
forsake father and mother, house and lands for his names sake, which promise I
sued out at my first escape out of Newcastle, and had it faithfully and
re^^^^tly performed; and therefore when I speak of the fulfilling of a promise,
let none carp or catch, or tax the to countenance fantasies and revelations,
yet do I not deny but will with all humility and modesty maintain divine
raptures in diverse cases, especially in the Saints bitter exile and sufferings;
and when God comes nearer to his Saints then is ordinary, think it not a
vain thing or a fantasy, as some too wise men do; but rouse up our selves,
and look about us for somewhat more then ordinary; yea; sometimes some great
things are near but will stay no longer in the Apologue for any thing shall
follow, which I hope shall be expressed with that reverence and fear of God
and modesty toward men, as no man (not malicious) shall have cause of offense.

One day as I was riding over a solitary heath, in Tividale, my mind much
exercised with musings and meditations on the word and works of God, to see two
neighbor nations so near conjoined in many bonds, both divine and humane,
ready to clash together, so near imbruing their hands in each others blood,
about so poor a quarrel as for Bishops and Service Book, (as was at first
pretended; yet a deeper design of Rome and all her consederates was in it)
these things strongly possessing my troubled spirit, occasioned some
ejaculations as I fate on horseback, and not with dry eyes, thinking on these
unnatural ware between my countrie-men and the Scottish nation. I often
prayed: Oh that we might join in one against our common enemies; Oh that we
were one, I had answer and assurance from God that we should be one; ye shall
be one, ye shall be one, was as strongly inculcated upon my spirit, as if it
had been spoken from heaven.

Another time, when I was traveling from the pursuit of the Lord Traquire,
toward the evening there fell a shower of small rame and after the rain,
broke out a Rainbow, clear and bright before me as I rode, and at last so low
upon the ground about me, that I rode in the cirle of it a pretty space, which
occasioned some thoughts within me of this as a sign of Gods covenant of peace
and mercy toward me now in midst of mine enemies plots and malice:

And often in the company of men of several rancks and qualities, I conversed
with upon several occasions, my spirit being exalted above all the troubles of
the world, in many high thoughts of the works of Christ he is about to do in
the world in there later days from those small beginnings in Scotland; I spoke
often to their encouragement, that it was the morning of the day of Christ's
power, Psalm. 110 though dark and cloudie, and full of troubles, wherein he
would do great things for his distressed Churches; and when some more ready
to appropriate that work of Christ to Scotland upon several occasions, I used
as frequently to interpose these answers that Christ the bright morning Star is
not risen for Scotland's cause alone but for his Churches full deliverance one
after another; adding withal, Christ is first come to visit you in Scotland:
first to deliver you of all his Churches in the world, O strive to give him
kind entertainment, this was my humble request often to them to welcome Christ
with a full reformation, that he might delight to dwell amongst them.

And at some other times, when their spirits were oppressed with difficulties
at home, and the great forces and preparations from the King, and menacings
from abroad; I used these encouragements I had received from God; that this is
the beginning of that earthquake wherein the tenth part of the great City that
is, England, Scotland, and Ireland (Rome) shall fall, though she call up her
Astrologers and Wise men to take crafty counsel, as Herod did against the
Lord Jesus and his workings, and to trouble him in this his coming to deliver
his Churches, it should not be able to hinder his work who is wonderful in
counsel, and excellent in working. And at some other times I said. This work
in Scotland makes Rome to shake in Aguish fits fearing great alterations from
Christ's working here.

And when the pacification was concluded at Tweed near Barwicke, I being then
at Dunse Law in the Scottish army a godly Minister* with whom I was familiar
having often heard me speak confidently of the large extent of that work
begun in Scotland, asked me in this manner, what think you now of this work.
I can see no further into it* it would seem to terminate here (meaning in that
pacification to which I speedly answered, no, Sir, it will not end thus, God
will bring it about some way or other, it must go over your borders; Christ has
a great people in England, and other parts of the world he has a tender
respect to and he will not arise and sit down again, until he have
delivered them as he did his people in Egypt; their cry has helped to bring
him down from the habitation of his holiness, and he will hear their cry, and
help them for he is merciful.

This we have seen now in part fullfilled in England* we see how often we
have been upon Pacifications with the King, and none will hold; Christ has some
design in this work, that every one sees not, it would seem to me that it
must not end in these three Kingdoms, if we would never so saine make a peace
for our selves; no art of man can sement it, if God lay no peace for England,
till the power of Rome be abolished. Nay until his design be accomplished
and Christ's Kingdom advanced; that is the great design he is about; till that
be in some measure accomplished our troubles will not be ended; and then he
will require our help to deliver his foreign churches, and help to spread
his Kingdom and Dominion to the ends of the earth.

Now having related some passages along to the Pacification, Scotland being
seemingly secured a Parliament and a National Assembly granted to settle and
confirm all both in Religion and Liberties I have yet somewhat to impart both
of my further troubles and of Gods mercies: for in their peace my troubles
broke out into a new flame and fire.

First, I was excluded out of that pacification, when never a man in England or
Scotland but my self was exempted; and here by the way, I cannot without
ingratitude (which my very nature abhorres) but give no^ice to the world of the
noble favors I received of the Scottish Lords, still engraven in a thankful
mind to be recorded to posterity* And in the first place falls in the memory of
my honorable and faithful (but ah now deceased) Friend and Noble Earl of
Rothes, who upon all occasions showed a tender affection toward me in all my
troubles: and to whose memory, and posterity, I shall whlles I five, owe the
poor abilities in me in thankfulness of mind and duty.

When the peace near Barwicke was toward a conclusion, being at dinner with
this noble Lord the Earl of Rothes, among diverse Lords and commanders, in his
Tent a Dunse law; he was pleased (after much other discourse about the
conclusion of the Treaty) to speak after his wonted familiar manner; come
John, what would thou have done for thee, speak and it shall be done. I
returned his Lordship thanks for all his Noble courtesies and this as the
greatest. Saying my Lord my only desire is that I may be included in your
peace, and be freed from all molestations about your cause* that I may go
home in peace, as you do. My Lord answered, it shall be done John? (making no
doubt of it) but to be short, when the Treaty was ended, this Noble Lord told
me, he was sorry for me, he could not procure my liberty, for that the Earl
of drundale, who treated with them on the Kings part, had excepted me out of
that peace, and that not only by my name, but to make sure work, (because my
eldest brother was then in Scotland also) by this designation of that Fenwicke
whose wife was with him in Scotland; and for my brother and some other English
men that were there they might return for England, bringing but a Certificate
under my Lord Rothes hand, that they had not sworn and subscribed the Scottish
Covenant. So as I was glad to be content to wait for clearer weather for my
return.

Both the Armies being now drawn out of the field, all the expectations of a
firm peace were suddenly blown away, in the Kings refusal to come into
Scotland to his Parliament (as in the Treaty it was expected, if not promised)
and sending the Earl of Traquire as his Commssioner to sit, both in the Church
Assembly, and in the Parliament. Well all the time of the Assembly which about
a month and more, I went almost daily to the Assembly, with diverse Gentlemen of
our. Nation that came into Scotland, to see the Assembly and Parliament, and I
sat in the Assembly (by the favor I had) very near the said Lord Traquire,
who often gave me great looks but never a word, he knew me well by face for I
had not long before my trouble, rid post in his company to London (as I
remember) two several times: But the Assembly being ended (where he sat only
as a Churchman it seems) and the Parliament begun: upon the second or third
day of the Parliament, he sent for me, in the Kings name, by a Messenger of the
Privy Counsel, in the open market place; which messenger carried me to the
Kings House, called Holy Rose House; accompanied with Mr. Robert Hamilton, and
Mr. Forthwicke, sent by noble friends from the Parliament House to see what
should become of me; where I was welcome, and well-baited by Traquire and his
Associates, diverse Scottish Earls and Lords, belonging to the Court: with all
revilings and reproaches of Treason and treachery, (the then Court language)
Nay, said Traquire thy Life cannot satisfy the wrongs thou have done his
Majesty, by possessing his Subjects of Scotland, with an ill opinion of his
Government; and somenting the late divisions and doing many ill Offices; yea
that sufficed not but he further charged me, that I had got many of his
Majesty's honest Subjects moneys into my hands and had bought Land in Scotland
purposing to dwell there: but swore that Scotland should not shelter me. To
which I replied, his Lordship was misinformed the contrary was well known to
diverse of the best quality in Scotland: and so Traquire fell into discourse
with the Lord Roxborow, and the Lord Dalyell, and the other Lords: then one of
the Gentlemen sent from the Parliament along with me, tells me in the ear,
that he thought I would be sent to prison, which I thank God did not daunt
me: then begun Traquire again to ask me, what made me leave my country, he
was sure I might enjoy my Religion in England, with as much liberty as in
Scotland. To which I boldly answred, (expecting nothing but extremity, I
resolved not to go to prison for nothing) that if I should lose my life for
it. I must affirm that I could never enjoy my Religion with peace under King
Charles his government. When thus the Earl of Traquire saw my resolution, and
considered how the Parliament took notice of me by sending two Gentlemen along
with me, and the people of Edenborough ready to rise to riscue me, he called
one of the Gentlemen (Master Borthwick) aside, and talked with him a pretty
space, after which, Master Borthwick returned to me, saying, I have brought
your release for this time, but my Lord Traquire swears he will have about
with you ere two days be ended, and that he would send post to Newcastle to
get more matter against me. Now I found out the drift of this his sending for
me by a messenger of the counsel, to get me out of Edenborough, down to the
Kings house without the liberties of the City, was to horse me away to
Barwicke, where there were more men attending to receive me, and carry me to
the King; for within three or four days these men came from Barwicke to
Edenborough, and to my chamber three or four times to look for me, and spoke
with my wife, who perceived by their wyles and discourse what they were, and
knew one of them to have been a servant to Sir John Marley, my chief
adversary, which men were observed to lurk in Edenborough about the Castle,
then surrendered to the King, and General Ruthven and his men possessing it,
but missing of me, (being advised to absent my self out of Edenborugh, from
under Traquires power) they grew weary of attending, and returned for England.

After a few days I returned to Edinburgh privately, where my wife Note, At
this time of the restraint of liberty, I composed these meditations, Psalm.
102. which I published lately under this Title of Zions Joy in her King coming
in his Glory
told me how I was watched for, and the men then still in town, I was glad to
keep close. When thus they found their wyles would not work their ends, the
Lord Traquire made a public Declaration in Parliament against me, declaring
that he had a design upon me by Commission from his Majesty; expecting, it
seems the Parliament should deliver me up into his hands, but that failed him
too; for a noble Lord sent me presently notice of it, and wished me to keep
out of his way, so I was glad to keep more close then before; yet after
supper, being then dark, I went out to my noble friend, the Earl of Rothes,
who told me what had passed from Traquire that day, and that my noble friends,
the Lords in Parliament, were resolved to protect me, if I should be in danger,
yet rather advised me to keep me out of Traquires way, and to absent my self
out of Edinburgh, inviting me most courteously to his house in Fife for my
shelter; and withal, if any danger should befall me before I could remove out
of Edinburgh (my wife being there, and about to return for England, by Virtue
of the late peace, and being also great with child, was in a sort necessitated
to undergo some hazard, to preserve the privileges that one foreign born
cannot enjoy by our laws) My noble Lord Rothes bid me cry out in his name for
help, and he would warrant me enough to rescue me, which was a noble courtesy
in my extremity, deserves of me and mine never to beforgotten.

Whereupon I dispatched my wife and eldest son away for England, accompanying
them a part of the way into Tividale, where I heard there was no safety for me
from Traquires sconts; so I betook me over the cold snowie mountains toward
the Irish sea, and coming to Lanerick, a days journey on the west of
Edinburgh, a Gentleman of my acquaintance before in the army, came to visit
me, assuring me, that place was scarce safe for me to lodge in, because of a
near dwelling enemy, Sir John Deyell, who being lately come from Edinburgh,
from Traquire, the Kings Commissioner had threatened to watch those parts for
me, and that he would be glad to drive a cart to tear me in pieces, and also
had in his hearing, declared that the Lord Traquire (thinking that he had
frighted me out of Scotland) did swear that no country should hold me long,
and that there were watches for me both in France and Holland. These were that
Gentleman's own words* whose advice I followed, and removed thence the next
morning, himself accompanying me that days journey, and so I rode to Dwyne
and Air upon the west sea, in which parts I spent that Winter, until the Lord
Traquire was gone to Court, after which I saw him no more, for then the ill
bottomed peace quickly fell to pieces, and new preparations on the Kings part
and on the Scottish both appeared, and then again I appeared in Edinburgh,
where I found the City in great fears of being fired from the Castle, and
many other distractions.

Thus I continued in Edinburgh most part until the time of the Scots army
coming into England, under whose wings and conduct I returned to my country,
and to Newcastle, where we entered upon the Sabbath day (after God had
scattered our enemies in the skirmish at Newburne,) whereof I have by me a
brief relation I keep amongst other monuments of Christ's victories, and may
have a time, if God continue life, to record them to posterity. Here by the
way I must not omit to tell you, how some of my adversaries in Newcastle; Sir
John Marloe, and others, that had proffered large sums of money for men to
come into Scotland to apprehend me, and others, who that morning before the
skirmish, made me their melody in their cups and pots, and drunk my
confusion, and vowed my death, (as I was credibly informed) were some laid low
in the dust, and the rest, some glad to give two or three pieces for a pair of
Oars to fly, some by water and some by land, whiles the Soldiers* returned to
Newcastle with bloody heads and some without hands, crying to the People of
Newcastle fly for your lives, naked Devils have destroyed us; fie, fie, for a
guide to Dur^am cry others that were strangers; all the Priests and
Blacke-coats fled as fast as they could, but meanly mounted, when Vicar Alvey
himself in great have got on horse back behind a Country man as before: the
next bout if the Scots come again, he may perhaps learn to foot it, (after my
friend Windebancke) into France, and learn to dance and sing, Alas poor
Vicar, whither will thou go.

The Army coming after forenoone Sermon on the Sabath day toward Newcastle
(being in great want of Victuals) pitched on the South side of the Town; his
Excellency General Lesley, accompanied with the Lords and diverse Gentlemen
rode into Newcastle about noon, where they were met upon the bridge, by the
Major and some few Aldermen who were not so nimble at flight, as Sir Marloe,
Sir Daveson; and Sir Ridles, and others that were conscious of their guilt of
their good service against the Scots, for which they got the honor of
Knighthood at Newcastle and Barwicke; though Sir Marloe some say, came hardly
by his, and had well nigh missed, if some others merits had not surmounted his;
the Boys say, that Cuckold luck has raised his fortunes from a Tap-house and
et cetera, to a Carpet Knight: O tempora, O mores!

Well, we being entered Newcastle; after dinner I had the honor to Usher his
Excellence and the Lords to the great Church, where Mr. Alexander Henderson
preached, and Mr. Andrew Cant at Alihollowes where the Organs, and Sackbuts,
and Cornets were struck breathless with the fright of their Vicals, and other
of their best friends flight on Friday at night before after Newburne fight in
token of mourning that they should never meet again; for not long after, the
breach of the Scots Covenant in the Scottish Soldiers did blow them down both
root and branch, with their Altar; and Raylings. Service Book and Fonts, and
all such fopperies, as the honest Scots Lads found without a Warrant, or
Salvo-guard from their King Jesus. who sent them out. The Army being in great
straits for Victuals, I studied how to gratify the honest Soldiers who had
conducted me home to my own Country. On the M^nday morning I found out one of
the Kings storehouses, and therein about threescore thousand pound of Cheese
and about two tun of Biscuit which served the whole Army until Corn was
grinded, and other provisions made.

But here was not an end of my troubles, for the time I stayed in Newcastle,
which was about three months and more, though under the shelter of the Scots
Army; my wife and self continually reviled and abused by the malignant people
of the Town, of whom I could not get provisions and necessaries for my family,
for my money, without the Authority and command of the Scots, or seldom go
abroad without the company of some of the Scots Gentlemen diverse of whom gave
me notice, that they overheard diverse Malignant people of the Town threaten
to wash their hands in my heart blood, and others saying whether peace or
war, I should be sure to be knocked on the head; such was the madness of the
Malignants against me in that place; neither would any there or in the Country
pay me any thing they were owing me: So about beginning of December, when I
could be no longer useful to the public good, or yet to my self in my own
affairs, I declared to his Excellence General Lesley, and such of the Lords
as were then in Newcastle, my urgent necessity to repair to London to the
Parliament, for remedy of my many grievances; and there being no passage by
land for me, but through the Kings soldiers, I came to London by Sea about the
latter end of December, and repaired to Westminster, where I had walked but a
little in the Hall, until I was carried away by some friends, assuring me that
there was no safety for me to appear so public as yet, and that my
adversaries who walked in Westminster Hall; as Sir John Marloe, and others of
Newcastle fugitives from the Scots, would be sure to lay hold of me, and that
as yet I was not clear of the Scots business, for all the treaty then in
agitation, some of my friends advising me to remove into Holland, until the
Scots Treaty were fully finished, and an act of oblivion passed, till when I
could not be secure from the danger of our Laws, so that I continued privately
in London about eight months, in some hazard, before the act of oblivion was
passed; being resolved not to go out of the Kingdom, until I had remedy of
my heavy losses and grievances, which as yet I have found no time for, though I
have sought to purchase it with my blood in the service of the state, and still
am ready to wade through difficulties and hazards to procure peace and truth.
Judgment and Justice, to my native Country.

Diverse other passages in my troubles, I do willingly reserve to a calmer
Season, because as yet the times will not bear them.

By these already mentioned it may appear, that I have suffered something for
God and my Country, and have borne a large share in the heat of the day, even
to many extremities to my self and family, without any public support in a
sincking condition to the hazard of life* loss of my estate (of which I have
not had the benefit of one hundred pound these five years, complete in
December* next) friends in this cause all forsaking me, my name and credit
racked with reproaches, whereof my God whom I serve and suffer for (I am
confident) will in his good itme clear me, and make mine innocence break out
as the light, and my Judgment as the noone day.

I appeal to this ungrateful and appostate age whether it be reason, that one
who has borne the heat of the day for the common good of both Kingdoms,
should be left to sincke under the burdens of their good. it being not for the
honor of my Country to leave me and mine under insupportable burdens of
worldy necessities and distresses, wherein I have spent my self, and without
timely assistance, I and mine must necessarily perish.

Diverse other passages have slipped my memory, about the rage and madness of
mine enemies extending from the country to Court distaste of me, and the Kings
notice and rebukes of friends about me; so ^s none of them durst own me, or
afford me common courtesy, or (...) me* but in the language of mine
adversaries: also the first messenger the Scots Lords sent to the King at York
after Newburne fight at his return told me there was great inquiry at Court
after me; and further, in midst of all my greatest troubles and pursuit of the
Lord Traquire, as I should be willing to forget the unkind and unchristian
dealings of my friends, in spreading the reproaches of my adversaries, striking
at my very life (deepewounds from friends) so may I not here forget to record
the Noble respects of the Scottish Lords in their ample testimony of my
fidelity to my country, and carriage amongst them, which I sent into England
for the satisfaction of my friends misinformed; a Copy whereof attested under
the hands of diverse Gentlemen and Merchants in Edenborough I have annexed for
conclusion.

We undersubscribers (understanding that John Fenwick of Newcastle upon Tyne,
in the Kingdom of England, Merchant, since his coming into this Kingdom of
Scotland, has undergone many vise and slander us calumnies and reproaches: as
that he has been a chief Incendiarte in these late broils; inci^ing the
Nobility of this Kingdom to invade England, and to use all as enemies that
were not of our mind in Religion; and that he sought a Captains place, and
did bear arms against the King at Dunse, and servea in a troop of Horse when
be could not get a Captains place, and doing many ill offices against his
Country.) According to our Christian duty, have been moved, to testify to
all whom it may concern, that the said John Fenwicke, during his abide in this
Kingdom of Scotland now about eight months, bath behaved himself as becomes
a good Christian, a loyal Subject to his Sovereign, and a loving Countreyman
of his native Nation, for ought that ever we have heard from him, seen or
observed in him in all his carriage amongst us. And we do verily believe, all
the foresaid calumnies to be very false, malicious and scandalous, and
injuriously insinuated against him by ill affected persons: and do conceive of
him as one that has deserved better of his Contrymen.

In witness whereof, we have subscribed these presents with our Hands* At
EDENB. the 30. October. 1639. Subscribed by Earls.
Argyle, Rothes, Lothian, Lyndsey.
And, The Lord Balmirinoe. Witnesses that this is a true Copy:
John Meyne, Robert Keith, Thomas Levingston, Alexand. Dickson, John Lowrie.


The Original of this Copy I sent into England for satisfaction of friends
misinformed, November. 1639.

FINIS.

