CISTA MILITARIS, OR, A Military Chest, Furnished Either for Sea, or Land, With
Convenient MEDICINES, and necessary INSTRUMENTS.

Amongst which is also a Description of Dr LOWER'S LANCET, for the more safe
bleeding.

Written in Latin, By GULIELMUS FABRITIUS HILDANUS.

Englished for public Benefit.

LONDON, Printed by W. Godbid, and are to be sold by Moses Pit, at the Angel
in St. Paul's Churchyard. M. DC. LXX. IV.

A Description of a LANCET, FOR The more secure Letting of BLOOD, By Dr LOWER.
FOrasmuch as it has been thought convenient by several good Surgeons, to
contrive a safe way of Blood-letting, for the benefit of young Beginners in
that Profession; and whereas Dr. LOVVER of late, in his Treatise of the Heart,
has discovered a plain and secure way of Bleeding, and given a figure of the
Lancet, which he commends for that purpose, I have been advised, for the
public Good, to translate what he has written, and likewise give the figure
of the Lancet, and description of the Use of it, as it is printed in the 166
page of the last and truest Edition of his Book, Printed at Amsterdam 1671, in
the Author's own words.

HOw great Ebullition sometimes happens in the Blood, in what vessels, and with
what swift motion it is cast about every where through the Body, and if an
Artery be opened how quickly, and with what force it breaks out, it has been
hitherto treated of in the foregoing Discourse; by which it appears, how
necessary sometimes Blood-letting is, to diminish its Quantity, or to stop its
Career, and how dangerous the Administration of it is, if it be performed by a
rude and unskilful hand.

For it often happening, either by want of skill, or common practice of
Bleeding, (which makes the Mind fearful, and consequently the Hand trembling
and uncertain) that an Artery is opened, or a Nerve or Tendon cut or pricked,
Inflammations, Gangrenes or Convulsions, which put the member in danger of
being cut off, or rendered useless, I thought it might not be beyond the scope
of my Treatise, if, by way of Appendix, I should show by what means and
Instrument any Vein might be safely and securely opened, (if it swell upon a
Ligature) though it have an Artery, Nerve or Tendon immediately under it.

Forasmuch therefore as never any harm happens in Blood-letting, unless a Vein
be pricked through, or slipping aside, the Lancet be put too deep into the
part, the Fabric of this Lancet is such, and ought to be so put into the Vein,
as both may be easily prevented.

For the Laneet is so contrived, that it is not cutting on each side, unless it
be near the point, but is purposely blunt, and made round on the lower side,
which is to be applied next to the skin, that it may more easily slide over it,
as it appears by the following Table, in which

a the Lancet.

b the place where the upper edge of the Lancet ends in a plain.

c where the under edge of the Lancet ends, the rest of the under part being
polished round, and thick, (but not made thicker than the upper plain part)
that it may not grate or tear the skin (upon which it must be applied) by its
compression.

Which figure of the Lancet differs nothing from a common ordinary Lancet, but
that the under edge of it is blunted almost to the point.

The way of using it is only this, that the Member being tied, and the Vein
swelling, the Lancet must be applied as near to it as possible, but so that the
Lancet may be depressed as much as may be; then the Point of it being directed
upwards, it must be gently, and by an oblique transverse Incision be put into
the Vein: which if so directed, neither can the Vein avoid the point of the
Lancet, or the parts underneath be any way offended. Which way of
Blood-letting, as it is most easy, so it will never prove unhappy to any one,
though but meanly skilful.

And though I do not write this to Physicians and Surgeons, who are expert,
and frequently exercised in bleeding; yet having seen many peoples health and
life endangered, either by ill Blood-letting, or because a good Surgeon
could not timely be called in by Physicians, who most commonly forbear the
Practice of it, therefore I have devised this figure of a Lancet, that they may
more securely and confidently use it.

CISTA MILITARIS, OR A Military Chest, Furnished either for Sea or Land, With
convenient Medicines and Instruments.
WHilst I was in the Low Countries in the year 1612, in the City of Morsk, I
was entertained with great kindness by that Noble and Valiant Gentleman,
Alexander de Schmetchel, Governor of the Place and Works, who amongst the
other things worthy seeing, showed me the Military Chest of the most
Illustrious Hero, Maurice, Prince of Orange, etc. wherein not only Medicines
and Instruments, but also Linen, Rowlers, and other Necessaries were prepared,
and disposed all in order in a Room, but not as then put into the Chests, which
were fitly contrived for that purpose, because that the Garrison-Soldiers might
be supplied with what they needed for their healths; and also that the
Medicines that were wanting or decayed, might be forthwith renewed: an evident
sign, and great demonstration of the Piety, Prudence, and Care of this Prince
toward his Soldiers. This Chest, as often as necessity required, marched with
the Camp, and in the greatest and most dangerous occasions the Soldiers were
for the present succored, and assisted from it. Then afterward they were
carried to the next Cities, where they were taken care of by Physicians and
Surgeons, appointed and paid by the States: and if by chance any Soldier
lost a Limb, or was lame, he was relieved, and had an Annual Pension from the
States. This pious and Christian Constitution made the Soldiers despise all
dangers, and encouraged them to be both valiant and daring.

Therefore that Generals may understand what things are most necessary to
furnish a Chest with, I thought good to set down both the principal
Medicaments, and Instruments, that a Surgeon, following the Camp or Sea,
ought to be provided with; and if there should be occasion for any others, he
may furnish himself at the next Shop he comes at.

The Chest ought to be so divided into Partitions and Classes, that all
confusion and intermixing of Medicines may be avoided, and the Virtue and
Propriety of each preserved. To this purpose I have divided it into twenty
classes.

The first contains purging Simples, which must be put up in Leather-bags,
except Manna and Cassia extracted, which may more conveniently be kept in
Galli-pots. Those Bags again are to be put into other larger, and writ upon in
great Characters, Purging Simples.

In the second classis are contained Purging Electuaries, which are to be kept
in Gally-pots, writ upon, Purging Compounds: and so of the rest.

Syrups, and distilled Waters, are to be put into double Glasses, close cork'd,
and tied down with Bladders. They must be so placed, that they may not move,
and so break each other, and their cells lined with Baiz.

Pills are to be wrapped up in white leather, rubbed first with oil of sweet
Almonds.

Cordial Powders and Electuaries, being put into leather bags, are to be so
placed in a separate classis, that they may not mix with the Purgers.

Roots, Herbs, Flowers, and Seeds are likewise to be kept in bags of Leather or
Linen, and to be so distributed, that in the first Classis the Roots, second
Herbs, etc.

Oils, and common Balsams, in Glassbottles, with screwed Pewter-heads; but the
precious Chemical Oils, as of Cinnamon, Cloves, Maces, Nutmegs, etc. ought to
be preserved in double Glasses well stopped with Cork, and waxt. The Balsams
likewise of these are to be kept in Glasses, or Silver.

Unguents, and Fats are best kept in Gally-pots, or of Pewter, well tied down
with Paper and Leather. And Turpentine so likewise.

Plasters, Gums, Wax, the Sewet of Bears, Cows, Goats, and the like, which are
of a solid consistence, are to be put in Bladders wrapped afterward in Paper.

Metals, and subterraneous Medicaments, as Vitriol, Alum, Letharge, Bole, etc.
as also Meals, must be put into Leather-bags: but prepared Tutia, Seif album,
Ostiocolla, and the like, which are to be used in Colliriums, or given
inwardly, are to be wrapped up in Paper, and put into Leather-bags, and placed
amongst the Cordials. Let all the Bags be tied close, and written upon in great
letters, to prevent confusion.

Arsnick, Orpiment, crude Mercury, sublimate, praecipitate, caustic, Minium
Troches, Spirit of Vitriol, Aqua fortis, and the like corrosive Medicines, are
not to be placed in the Chest, lest the Glass, or what other things they are
contained in, break, and so spoil and prejudice the other Medicines, and
withal endanger the lives of the sick; therefore to prevent this, it is more
convenient to keep them in some Box or Chest apart by themselves.

The Instruments are to be preserved in this manner. Those that are for
cutting, and edged, as Rasors, Scissors, Incision-Knives, etc. are to be kept
in Cases, the rest are wrapped in Paper, or rather in Flannel.

These being thus prepared, and in readiness, you must take a Catalogue of all,
that you may presently, and without trouble, find them when you have occasion
for them.

As your Chest is divided into classes, after the same manner it is necessary
to write your Catalogue; and as often as any Simple and Compound Medicine is
wanting, mark it on the Margin of the Catalogue, that you may supply its defect.

All which, kind Reader, I thought good to advise: the Classes following now in
order.

CLASSIS. I.
Contains the Purging Simples.
Agarick. Aloes. Rhubarb. Cassia. Crocus Metallorum. Colocinthis. Diagridium.
Senna. Hermodacts. Manna. Mechoacans. Myrobalans. Juice of Damask Roses.
Trochisci Albandal. Turbith.
CLASSIS II.
Purging Compounds.
Benedicta Laxativa. Confectio Hamech. Diacarthamum. Diacatholicon.
Diaphoenicon. Diaturbith cum rhabarbaro. Electuarium de succo Rosarum.
Electuarium Lenitivum. Pulvis Sennae praep: Brasssavoli. Syrup of Roses
solutive. Pill: Aggregativae: Aureae. Cochiae. de Agarico. Lucis majoris. Ruffi.
Extract: Rudii. Species for Suppositories.
CLASSIS III.
Electuaries, and Powders strengthening the Heart, and noble parts.
Aromaticum Rosatum. Bolus orientalis. Camphire. Confect: Alchermes. de
Hyacintho. Prepared Coral. Burnt Hartshorn prepared. Cremor Tartari. Diaireos.
Diamargaritum frigidum. Diarrhodon Abbatis. Diatragaganthum frigidum. Diatrion
Santalinum. Flower of Brimstone. Bezoar Stone. Prepared Pearls. Mithridate.
Meconium. Opium. Laudanum Opiatum. Ostrocolla, prepared to be given inwardly.
Philonium Romanum. Pulvis ad Epithemata cordis. Shavings of Hartshorn. Sal
prunella. Tartarum vitriolatum. Sealed Earth. Theriac: Londinens: Andromachi.
Diatessaron.

CLASSIS IV.
Aromaticks, or Spices.
Calamus Aromaticus. Cloves. Cinnamon. Saffron. Gallingal. Mace. Nutmegs.
Pepper. Sugar. Ginger.
CLASS. V.
Distilled Waters, and the like.
Of Sorrel. Aniseed. Burrage. Bugloss. Marigold. Cinnamon distilled without
Wine. Bawlm. Plantain. Roses. Aqua Vitae. Absynthii. Minthae. Theriacalis.
Juices of Barberies. Citrons. Pomegranats.
Vinegar of Roses. Common Vinegar.
CLASS. VI.
Syrups
of

Sorrel. Unripe Currants. Barberies. Bugloss. Citrons. Quinces. Pomegranats.
Limons. Liquorice. Poppies. Roses not laxative. Dried Roses. Violets. Mel
Rosarum. Oxymel simplex scilliticum. Diamoron.
CLASS. VII.
Roots
of

Marshmallows. Angelica. Birthwort long, and round. Bistort. Briony. Avens.
Onyons. Succory. Comfrey. Sow-bread. Elecampane. Eringo. Fennel. Gentian.
Swallow-wort. Orris. White Lilies. Liquorice. Parsley. Burnet. Plantain.
Polypody. Squills. Tormentil.
CLASS. VIII.
Herbs.
Wormwood, common, and Roman. Agrimony. Ladies Mantle. Jack by the hedge.
Marshmallows, Leaves, Flowers, and Tops. Betony. Carduus benedictus. Centaury.
Knotgrass. Cuscuta. Dittany of Crete. Horsetail. Eyebright. Fumitory. St.
John's Wort. Marjerome. Balm. Mint. Mercury. Nep. Origanum. Plantain.
Self-heal. Winter-green. Ribwort. Rosemary. Rue. Sage. Sanicle. Scabious.
Scordium. Golden Rod.
CLASS. IX.
Flowers
of

Dill. Betony. Borrage. Bugloss. Marigold. Camomile. Pomegranats. Melilot.
Primrose. Roses. Rosemary. Sage. Elder. Mullein. Violets.
CLASS. X.
Seeds
of

Dill. Anise. Caraways. Coriander prepared. Cummin. Quinces. Foenugrick. French
Barley. Linseed. Parsley. Plantane. Raddish. Mustard.
CLASS. XI.
Fruits.
Almonds. Bay Berries. Acorn-cups. Figs. Preserved Cherries. Quinces. Galls.
Acorns. Limons. Lupins. Oranges. Pomegranats. Mirtle-berries. Cypress-Nuts.
Rose-cups. Prunes. Tamarinds. Raisons.
CLASS. XII.
Oil
of

Almonds, sweet, and bitter. Dill. Aniseeds. Balsam of Tolu. Vigo's Balsam. Oil
ofCarawayseeds. Cloves. Wax. Camomile. Cinnamon. Quinces. Fennelseed. St.
John's Wort. Juniper Berries. White Lillies. Earthworms. Mastick. Mint.
Myrtles. Nutmegs. Olives. Roses. Scorpions. Turpentine. Violets. Yolks of Eggs.
Petroleum. Foxes. Elder. Linseed.
CLASS. XIII.
Unguents.
Aegyptiacum. Album Rhasis. Apostolorum. Aureum. De Minio Camphoratum.
Defensivum Chalmetaei. Dialtheae. Diapompholigos. Nicotianae. Populeon.
Rosatum. Ad Ambusta Hildani. Basilicon. Linimentum Arcei. Martiatum.
CLASS. XIV.
Fats
of

Geese. Beef. Capons. Deer. Goats. Men. Hens. Hogs. Bears.
CLASS. XV.
Plasters.
Apostolicum. Basilicum. De Betonica. Diapalma. Diachilon simplex and
compositum. De Melliloto. De Mussilaginibus. Oxycroceum. De Ranis. Paracelsus.
CLASS. XVI.
Gums, etc.
Ammoniacum. Benjamin. Wax, white, and yellow. Colophony. Elemni. Euphorbium.
Mastick. Myrrh. Olibanum. Pitch. Stirax Calamita. Turpentine. Tragaganth.
CLASS. XVII.
Minerals, and their like.
Alome, crude and burnt. Antimony crude. Arsnick. Lime washed. Ceruse. Crocus
Martis. Gypsum. Lapis Calaminaris. Causticus. Medicamentosus Crollii. Sabulosus.
Lythargirium aureum, and argenteum. Mercurius crudus. Sublimatus.
Praecipitatus.
Nil praeparatum. Niter crude, prepared. Burnt Lead. Realgar. Seif album.
Brimstone. Tutia prepared. Vitriol crude, and burnt.
CLASS. XVIII.
Meals
of

Bay Berries. Beans. Barley. Lentiles. Darnel. Lupines. Wheat. Mill-dust.
Pulvis ad sistendum sanguinem.
CLASSIS XIX.
Instruments.
Besides the above recited Medicines, it is also most requisite, that a
Surgeon should be furnished with necessary Instruments, without which he
cannot perform his duty as he ought. They may be divided into two sorts, some
to be fitted for a Box, which he ought continually to carry about him in his
Pocket; these ought to be made small and little, that they may neither load
him, nor afright the Patient: the others are to be kept in the Chest, whilst
occasion calls for their assistance. I never visited my Patients without a Box
of Instruments in my Pocket, in the which were contained the following:

A Razor.

A pair of Scissors.

Two Incision Knives.

Four Lancets to bleed withal.

A crooked Knife to open Apostems.

A Phlegm, to divide the Gums in the Toothache.

An Extractor, to take out foreign things out of Wounds.

A pair of Forceps for the same use.

Needles, to stitch up great Wounds, which are to be of different Sizes, some
great, others small, etc.

A stitching Quill, which is used in stitching Wounds: it ought to be of that
length, as to contain the Needles within its hollowness. Wounds of the fleshy
parts only are to be sticht, nervous parts in no wise. In wounds of the face I
never use Needle, but that which is called the dry stitch.

Spatula's, great and little.

Probes.

Speculum oris; one end of which, in affects of the Jaws, and Throat, is to
depress the tongue, the other to scrape it.

Uvula-spoon.

A Burrus quill, to sprinkle Powders upon Wounds or Ulcers.

A Hook, single at one end, and two at the other.

A Hone, to set the Incision-knives, Lancets, etc.

I had all these Instruments, and many more, made me by a skilful Artist in
Silver, which I used only within the Town, Patients being less afraid of them
than of Iron: but at Sea and at Camps it is not so safe for a Surgeon to
have them of Silver, therefore they may be very conveniently made of Iron or
Steel, except the Probes, which ought to be made of Lead, Copper, or Latin.

These Instruments a Surgeon ought always to have about him, as also a
Salvatory with six divisions, which ought to be furnished 1. with unguentum
Basilicon, 2. with ung. Aureum, 3. Apostolorum, 4. Nutritum, 5. Album Rhasis,
the 6. with Rubrum Exsiccativum, or de Minio: it ought to be made of Horn, or
some solid wood, as Ebony, Guaiacum, or Box, for Unguents are better preserved
in wood, than in Silver, Copper, etc. It is also requisite that he has about
him in a Pewter Bottle some oil of Roses, to anoint any wounded part, it eases
pain, etc. as also another pot with a digestive.

Thus much for the Instruments, which a Surgeon ought to wear about him; now
follow the others, and first of those that are used about the Head.

1. Trepans, by which the Skull is perforated in great Contusions, to give
passage to extravasated and concreted blood collected in the head.

2. Levatories, to raise the depressed skull.

3. Scalpra's, to scrape the carious skull.

4. A great Speculum oris, by which the Tongue, in great inflammations of the
Jaws and Throat, is depressed.

5. Another speculum oris, to force open the Mouth, which, as I have seen
sometimes in spasmus's, to be so close shut, that a drop of Broth could not be
poured in.

6. Several Instruments to draw Teeth.

7. And because sometimes in eating, a fish-bone or the like is fixed in the
Throat, and so would suffocate the person, therefore it is necessary for a
Surgeon to have in his Chest such an Instrument, as I have described in the
36 Observation of the first Century: but if he has it not at hand, let him
forth with make fast a piece of Sponge to the end of a Catheter, and thrust it
down the Throat.

8. Instruments to draw forth Bullets from Gunshot-wounds, of which there are
diverse set down by Authors. I esteem that the most convenient, whose
Description you may see in the 88. Obs. of the first Century.

9. A great Saw, for amputating great Members.

10. A little Saw for the dismembring Fingers, and Toes; it not becoming a
Rational Surgeon to separate them with Chissels, as I have more largely
shown in my Treatise of a Gangrene, etc. chap. 17.

11. Because in amputating, the greater part of Surgeons use a Knife, it is
convenient to have one well set, and strongly sixth in a Handle.

12. A crooked Knife: its Description see in the above named book of a Gangrene.

13. I, in the taking off of Members, instead of a Knife, use a Cautery, made
in fashion of a Knife, well edged, and red hot: its description is in the above
named Treatise. He ought likewise to have ready other Cauteries, some larger,
others lesser; some sharp, others round, which may be used to stop the flux of
Blood after Amputation, or other great and dangerous Hemorages.

14. And because Soldiers, from their debaucheries and impure copulation, are
oftentimes troubled with the running of the Reins, Caruncles, and suppression
of Urine, it is necessary a Surgeon should be provided with Catheters and
Syrenges.

15. For the reducing of Broken Bones, and Dislocations there are several
Instruments, both by Hippocrates, Oribasius, and other Authors, set down; but I
have always found in my practice the Instrument of Ambrose Parey, which is with
a Pulley, the most convenient; especially if you join to it the Girdle and
Remora, as in the 86. Observation of the fifth Century: it is not only the
most convenient, but most useful Instrument for all Fractures and Dislocations,
except of the Fingers, Ribs, and Mandibles (which are set by the hand alone; it
is also little, and therefore not troublesome to carry about one.

16. A Surgeon ought also to be provided with Splints of several bignesses,
some little, others big, according to the qualities of the members broken,
which ought to be made of thin pieces of Wood, or of Scabbards.

He must be provided likewise with Mortars, Sives, Skillets to boil Cataplasms
in, and also to mix up Ointments; and with Glyster-pipes, whose use in
Angina's, wounds of the Head, Fevers, etc. are very useful.

The Description and Cuts of the Instruments are given by Ambrose Parey, Joh:
Andreas a Cruce; but because this should be a complete Treatise of Surgery,
there is added to it several Copper Plates of the most useful Instruments for
almost all operations, but especially of all those that relate any way to the
operations mentioned in this Book.

CLASSIS XX.
Linen Rowlers, and the like.
THE Chest cannot be perfectly furnished, if Linen, and the benefit received
from it, in the application of Medicines, be wanting; for what profit
Medicaments, though the most excellent, without Linnnen? especially in great
and dangerous fluxes of Blood, fractures and dislocations of the Bones, and in
other accidents, where there is danger in delay; therefore you must have always
in readiness Rowlers, both large, narrow, and middle-sized, Linen clothes
doubled, which we call Compressors, or Boulsterpledgets of Tow.

Lint, which we use to apply Medicaments upon, and to keep the lips of the
Wounds asunder, that they unite not again.

Tents also of Lint, of prepared Spunges, Gentian roots, and the like, which
are to be of several sizes, some big, some little, etc. they ought to be
prepared at leisure hours, that they may be ready when occasion requires.

He must have also Spunges, and Oxebladders, which are necessary to tie down
Pots and Glasses, and also used in Amputation.

If a Sea or Land-Chirurgeon be furnished with the above recited things, and
have about him both faithful and expert Servants, he will be able to give
assistance to a whole Fleet or Army, and preserve infinites from death.

Candid Reader, I have been somewhat prolix in the setting down the
Medicaments, and other things, by reason I designed to describe a most perfect
and every way complete furnished Chest; but if thou art to furnish one at thy
one particular charge, thou may select out of them the most useful and
necessary Medicaments; but be sure likewise that it be so provided both with
Medicaments and Instruments, that out of it, when occasion requires, thou may
be able to assist and relieve the Sick; for what thou art employed about here,
is neither Beast, nor Precious Stones, but Man, for whom the Son of God shed
his precious blood upon the Cross: therefore if any thing be neglected, it must
be answered before the Almighty, to whom an account of all our Actions must be
rendered.

FINIS.
Barbet Chyr: Part: 1: Chap: 4:

R: White: sculp:

Number: 1:

Barbet Chyr: Part: 1: Chapt: 16:

R. W. sculp:

N* 2:

Barbet Part. 1: Chapt: 26:

R W: sculp:

N 3




