A Relation of some notable Cures accounted incurable, as follows.
Ens primum (...) Germania.
WHereas the Virtue of the Ens primum Acidularum Germaniae, that is (as it
were) the Quintessence of the (Swalbacher) Sower-springs in Germany, has by
its good effects to men's health been made known in and about London, and in
several Counties of England, and many people desirous to be helped, being still
ignorant of it: The multitude of such as vaunts themselves (under the Name of
Doctors and Physicians) with store of placards affixed about the streets,
having by such a manner, (that prostitutes its Masters to a vulgar discredit,
and over-scrupulous contempt, in prejudice upon the innocent Art of Physic)
made for a long time a stop to any farther intimation concerning the said Ens
primum: Yet upon the earnest desire of several persons, the Cures hereafter
mentioned, being in truth effectively performed; it has been resolved, hereby
once more to give public notice of it, and its particular virtues, according
to late experience, since that general account given of it about 2. years past.
By the blessing of God it is an universal preserver of men's bodies and every
sublunar creature whatsoever, against all kind of putrefaction, corruption and
infection; more particularly, the Ens primum has been found beneficial to many
that wanted appetite and digestion. Also it has been found good in the stopping
of the stomach, in Consumptions, in Agues, in Vomiting, Surfeit, Ulcers,
Scurvy, Fevers, Worms, Cough, Spleen, Flux of blood, shortness of breath and
stitches, great colds, Colic, fits of the Mother, Obstructions,
Convulsion-fits: in the Smallpox it has been very effectual, and exceeding
successful; it is also a good preservative against the Gout, and has been
administered in many other diseases, restoring some persons to perfect health
that were given over by Physicians. Women subject to barrenness and
miscarriage, and also those whose children after birth usually dyed, having
taken of the Ens primum all the time of their being with child, brought forth
sound Children, not subject to the Rickets or Scab because as it purifies the
whole body from all corruption, so consequently the Womb.

Oleum de Lapide Butleri.
THat this Oil is an Universal Medicine as well as the Stone it self, is
publicly known by the Writings of Van Helmont: And therefore having for many
years tried diverse things concerning it, I have of late found something near
it, whereof the Oil into which this stone is dipped, has given these proofs,
viz. By anointing the limbs it has cured the running Gout: And by anointing
the feet it gave present ease to a painful Gout: It has cured the King's Evil,
Lameness of long continuance, Apoplexy, Spleen, Melancholy, strange pains in
the body: Also a great imposthume, that after many applications in five years
was not cured, was rendered curable. Another in a Consumption, having a hard
lump on the side of her belly, and all over her body, as it were an entire
scab, was perfectly cured in a short time with the said Oil. A hand as it were
venomed, and swelling up to the shoulder with blew spots, being anointed, the
pain immediately ceased, and the swelling assuaged. A great swelling on the
head and face, neck and shoulders with much pain, and the Kings evil, was eased
and advanced to a cure by this Oil. Feet swelled and very sore, and lameness
on the huckle-bone, have been cured. A man overtaken with a painful distemper
over all his body, for the space of five days, not knowing what it was, was
cured immediately. Another being brought very low, first he was afflicted with
knobs in a strange manner, and his flesh was much consumed of a sudden, and his
appetite quite lost, presently after he had touched this stone twice on the tip
of his tongue, the knobs fell in a wonderful manner; and using it in the same
manner 20 days, his flesh came again, and he grew pretty strong. Likewise many
being troubled in mind, and many troubled with headache have been soon
refreshed with some few drops upon the tongue. A very dangerous and desperate
Fistula entering into the body, was brought to a cure with the same, etc.

Epilepsia, Hydrops, Pustulae and Podagra.
PAracelsus (in sine Libri II. de Praeparationibus) is declaring something
concerning the Cure of the Falling Sickness, Dropsy, Morbus Gallicus ( vide
Paracelsum in Chirurgicis, Libr. 2. De Pustulis ibi: De Pustulis seu Morbo
Gallico) and the Gout, exalting the excellency of the true Spirit of Vitriol in
the diseases made mention of; but he there speaks of the making of that Spirit
according to the Philosophical manner. However I may say in truth, that a woman
aged 45. years, having had the Falling Sickness sixteen years in a most cruel
raging manner, had been wholly cured by this Medicine within six Weeks. Another
woman 36. years of age* being afflicted with the Falling Sickness for 30 years,
has been cured by the same within eight weeks. A Boy of twelve years being
taken with this disease half a year after he was born, insomuch, that when the
fit was upon him, he must be holden by two or three men; and when he felt the
fit was coming, in a strange manner he would seek to avoid it, sometimes by
offering to run into the water, sometimes into the fire, sometimes against the
wall, so that it was an exceeding great misery to behold such a poor creature;
he was at last cured within 6. weeks by this Medicine, and is still in good
health. Another Maid of 22. years of age, had often such fits three hours long,
was restored within four weeks. Also a woman being constantly afflicted with
the Falling sickness whenever she was with child, was perfectly cured by the
use of this Medicine, and not troubled any more therewith.

Thus it is manifest by such proofs, that Paracelsus is true in his promise or
assertion concerning the excellency of that wonderful Spirit of Vitriol: And
therefore we may safely conclude, that the said Paracelsus speaks truth also,
concerning the cure of the Gout, Dropsy and French Pox, with the self same
Spirit of Vitriol; which whether it be so or not, might be experienced without
any harm, because this Spirit of Vitriol is not hurtful at all to the nature of
Man, as being freed from all corrosiveness, that is ordinary to such like
Mineral Spirits, its virtue and nobility being as it were derived from an
Astral influence, by its artificial and secret preparation, which Paracelsus
loco citato, describes under the figure of the ninth Alembique.

As concerning Pustulas, or the French Pox, which Paracelsus makes mention of,
my Book in print, entitled, A Paradox of the Shameful Disease, may give larger
satisfaction to him that desires more information of it, together with its
cure, under a parable in the second part of the same, wherein I have more
particularly disclosed Paracelsus ground, whereof the said Medicine of that
disease does arise according to his intention.

Calculus Vesicae, or stone of the Bladder.
Has been from age to age a very hard trial to Physicians, of which the cure
by inward means, finally grown desparate, has caused the cutting of the
bladder-stone. Mercatus and Capivaccius do confess they were ignorant of any
remedy for it. Erastus is persuaded, that by no means the bladder-stone is
curable inwardly. Nevertheless the most authorized Philosophers do afford its
cure by their experience. Basile Valentine has performed the said cure with
his Lapis Ignis, so called; Paracelse with his Ludus, of which Van Helmont
declares something more plainly concerning its preparation, viz by the
Alcahest. And so always such as being fitly qualified, have sought in a right
manner, have found somewhat. A boy of six years pitifully tormented with the
stone of the bladder night and day, I verily certify, that he was cured
entirely with a Medicine, whether according to Basilius by the Lapis ignis, or
according to Paracelsus by the Ludus, I think needless to express more
particularly, Curiosity being not satisfactory in this respect. Another boy of
a bigger age was cured of the same, viz. Stone of the Bladder, after some years
affliction therewith by this Medicine alone. So that I am convinced,
Philosophers are true in their writings concerning this cure.

RUPTURE.
I Say more, An old man of 6^ years having a Rupture on both sides, to the
bigness of a man's fifth, was restored by the selfsame Medicine within ten weeks.
Another about the same age burst at the one side alone, was restored to his
health by the same within eight weeks, and this beyond all expectation.

These things I thought fit to publish for the common good, that I might not by
my silence be the cause, that any who may and would be helped, should perish,
knowing not, that there was a remedy provided for his distemper under the
blessing of God.

Given forth at London, in Thames Street, over against Baynards Castle, at the
bottom of Adlin-Hill, 8. of 7 ber 1663.

Sub Protectione REGIS. By Albertus Otto Faber,
Medicus Regius Exercit. Suec.

