WILFUL IMPENITENCY, THE GROSSEST Selfe-Murder.

All they who are guilty of it, Apprehended, Tried and Condemned in these
SERMONS.

Preached at Rochford in Essex not long before his death, by that able,
faithful and laborious, Minister of Jesus Christ; Mr. William Fenner B.D. and
made public by one of his unworthy fellow laborers.

PROVE. 1.24, 25, 26 Because J have called, and ye have refused, I have
stretched out my hand, and no man regarded: But ye have set at naught all my
counsel and would none of my reproof, J also will laugh at your calamity and
mock when your fear comes.

JOHN 5.40.43. And ye will not come to me that ye might have Life, J am come in
my Fathers name, and ye receive me not, if another shall come in his own name
him ye will receive.

Velle meum Domine misericordiae tale est de redeundo ad te, quale est velle
tuum de mea ad te reversione.

Gul. Paris. de Rhetor. Div. ^.14. Quid agit liberum arbitrium? Breviter
respondeo salvatur.

Bern. de Lib. Arb. and Gr. Non velle in causa est, non posse praetenditur Sen.

LONDON. Printed by E.G. for John Rothwell, at the Sign of the Sun and
Fountain in Pauls-Church yard. 1648.

TO The Right Honorable ROBERT RICH Baron of Leez in Essex, and Earl of
Warwick, abundance of spiritual blesings in Jesus Christ.
PAul being upon a prophetical wing ( for the Lord had powered upon him, This
know also (says he) there is the infallible certainly of it.
not only an Apostolical but a Prophetical spirit) does foretell in the 2 Timothy 3.1. That in the last days perilous times shall come, Those who are full
of carnal self-love and unthankfulness will, much increase the danger of this
last Age of the World. (The Lord root up all such weeds out of our hearts.)

God has I hope given Your Honor such a measure of love to the public, and
so active a spirit to do good to others, as will help to lessen the danger of
these evil times. And I would be so thankful for favors received, that I
might not be ranked among this dishonorable Catalogue which here Paul sums up
of such as make bad times worse.

It is your Honors happiness and advantage (as it was once said of the Duke
of Guise in France, that he (...) put obligations upon all) that you can
engage very many, and amongst the rest, I must ever acknowledge my self one,
who in one of the greatest turnings of my life, by the good hand of God upon
me in your free consent and noble bounty have had so much comfort in the
nearest and dearest relation, Prove. 30.10 11, 12, etc.
that I never envied any other, but find matter of everlasting praises to God
for his goodness to my self therein. And being under so great obligations,
when I can produce nothing of my own worthy your acceptance; I take leave to
act the part of a Midwife to this happy Birth which may call your Honor
Father, as will appear by the following Letter, that it was ultimately
intended for your spirit^ all advantage; And it were (...) a kind of
sacrilege to keep^ that holy issue from you that is so much your own. It
joys the souls of me and many more of your praying servants that they have
so much occasion to praise their God on your behalf, for so many able and
faithful Ministers of the Gospel of the first, second and third magnitude,
that your prudent, fatherly care has fixed, where you, as Patron, have been
trusted.

2 Kings 13 14.
Oh the many Chariots and horsemen of Israel, that your noble Father and you
have brought triumphantly into Essex (herein you did happily Patrizare) the
Lord continue the like care to build and repair his house in these who survive
you from Generation to Generation, that so your house may still be honorably
supported.

Ecclesiastical story speaks of one Henricus Auceps, Vid. Simpson. Eccl.
Histor. l. 3. cent. 10.
when he did fight against the Hungarians, made this vow to God, That if the
Lord would give him victory against his enemies, he would purge his Country
from Simony, which at this time mightily abounded therein. We want men of such
an heroical zealous disposition in England.

Oh that all Patrons were more mindful of their high trust; then they would
not so often betray the souls of people by putting off a friend etc. with a
living to some unworthy Chaplain. Doubtless there is many a damned creature
roaring in Hell, cursing covetous Patrons as well as unfaithful Pastors; 1
Pet. 4.5.
For whose Blood (in part at least) they must be accountable to the Father of
spirits and Judge of the quick and the dead. A most heavy reckoning, Note.
when the sins of so many Congregations, to which Patrons are accessory by
sending ignorant and scandalous Ministers amongst them are made theirs; whereas
the least of their own sins unrepented of will suck them eternally.

God who is faithful will not forget your labor and cost of love to the
truly Reverend man of God Master Hooker (who is now singing Hallelujahs in
Heavenly Mansions) when he was persecuted by the There are many of great
reading, who will undertake to make it appear that as Heathinish feasts
Bacchanalia et Saturnalia and were turned into Christmas and such other Feasts
hoping thereby to to win heathens to Christ; so were Archi flamines and
Flamines ch^nged it to Archpraelates, and praelates o^ of a good intention.
Archi flamen of Canterbury. He will pay abundantly for the protecting and
nursing his Children, Heb. 6.10.

I know not how better to express my deep sense of your most real favor
(the comfort whereof I daily enjoy) then by taking the humble boldness, to
beseech your Honor to add one thing more, which indeed is, the ^num
necessarium, whereby you will gain that better part which shall not be taken
from you; Luk, 10.42
Namely; Rev. 1.20. and 2.1.
that you would study and pray that you may walk in the light, and heat of
that glorious Gospel constellation (for Ministers are Stars and the So
acknowledged by by the Translators in the contents* of the second Cha. of the
Revelation. They it seems did not think these Angels to be Praelates.
Angels of the Churches) which you have endeavored to fix in your Orb. Your
Honor has been often at Sea, and there beholding the wonders of God in the
deep, have been taught to wrestle with him for mercy. It is an old saying,
he that would learn to pray let him go to Sea. Besiege Heaven with your
unwearied importunities, Qui nescit or are discat navigare. Jonab. 1.5.
that the Arc of the Gospel, which you have provided for thousands, may be
your own everlasting Sanctuary. And that you feasting upon their danties, may
be fat and flourishing in your last days* standing steadfast in these shaking
times, and immovable, keeping Faith, Phil. 29.14
and a good conscience, (which too many having put away concerning Faith, 1 Timothy 1.19.
have made Shipwreck) more and more abounding in the Work of the Lord, 1 Cor.
15. Last.
forasmuch as you know your labor is not in vain in the Lord,

This through the grace of Christ shall be the earnest Prayer, of him who is My
LORD, Your Honors most obliged servant. THOMAS HILL.

To the Right Worshipful my much Honored friend Sir NATHANIEL RICH.
I Have been often thinking what to send to you; at last this Theme, which I
had lately treated of in the Pulpit, came into my mind; its of infinite use
and necessity, and a truth little examined, considered or laid to heart, yet
marvelous necessary for humiliation to all the children of God, and of great
weight for the making the world guiltless before God. I had thought to have
sent it to my Lord of Warwick for his subcisive hours; and if you judge it
profitable after your perusal of it, to commit it unto him from me, you shall
do well. J am sorry to hear of such a worthies sickness or weakness. 2 Kings 13
14.
Now Elisha the man of God was fallen sick, The very words are able to strike
through. The Lord lend you health and strength, and peace and comfort and joy;
it is not only a matter of courtesy to pray for such as you are, but of debt,
and our very necessities and duties call for it, and mine more especially. The
Lord be merciful to me, and to many in raising you up, and make you plenus
dierum, and serus in coelum redire; that is all the hurt that I wish you, And so
I commend you to the word of his power that is able to keep you, and rest

Yours in the Lord Jesus, WILLIAM FENNER.

To the Christian Reader, who desires to hold fast the form of sound words in
faith, and love, which is in Christ Jesus, and to advance Free Grace, above
Free Will.
MOst admirably wise and fatherly has been the Lords care of his Churches in
all ages; and when there were false Prophets under the old Testament, the Lord
had his Jeremiahs to confute them, Jer. 1.18.
whom he made a defenced City, an Iron pillar, and brazen walls against all
opposition. When the devil stirred up Hymmeneus, Philetus and others, to
undermine the truths of the Gospel in the times of the new Testament; the Lord
raised and accomplished his Paul's to confound them also. 1 Timothy 1.20.
You shall find when the Churches of Christ are in a wilderness condition,
and the Sepent casts out of his mouth waters as a flood after the woman, that
is multitudes of unsound and Heretical opinions, the earth helped the woman,
Rev. 12.15 16. See Learned M. Mead in his excellent Book on the place.
and opened her mouth, and swallowed the flood which the Dragon cast out of his
mouth: that is, Jesus Christ had those here that did encounter and overthrow
all false Doctrine, with which the devil by his Agents endeavored to poison
and destroy the Churches. Besides the four general councels, namely, that of
Nice, when Arrius a Presbyter of Alexandria denying that the Son of God was
consubstantiall with the Father, 1 About A.D. 330. under Constantine the great,
vian.
and that there was a time when he was not,) was confuted, and truth obtained a
victory there God stirring up many learned men to oppose him.

2 About A.D. 383 under Theodofius.
And in the second, that of Constantinople, when there was a Macedonius who
called the Holy Ghost a creature, many were able by the power of truth to
confound him.

About A.D. 490, under Theodo. the second, not (...), but (...).

About A.D 456, under Ma^tianus. Calcedon.


And the third when a Nestorius who denied that the Virgin Mary could be called
the Mother of God, providence ordered it so that then a council of learned
Bishops and Elders at Ephesus, should blast that opinion. And when an Eutiches,
(who in a different way from Nestorius, who denied the personal Union of the
two Natures in Christ) would have the humane Nature so swallowed up by the
immensity of the Divine nature in Christ, that there was only the Divine
Nature in him, another council at Calcedon overthrew him.

God had variety of champions to contest with the most subtle, Cent. 3.
and prevailing adversaries; from hand to hand particularly when there was
Manes and Manichaei who rejected the old Testament, and affirmed that man fell
not by voluntary defection, but of necessity, because man's body was made of the
prince of darkness (wherewith Austin was levened before his conversion) The
Lord had Chrysostom and others to hinder the spreading and prevayling of it.

When there was an Arrius, Cent. 4.
who denied the Divinity of Christ, there should be an Athanasius raised to
overthrow him.

When a Macedonius to oppose the holy Ghost, then a Basil to break him. Cent 5.
Dem^sterus ex W^lfild^ refert eodem die quo ille in Anglia natus, tenebra^
error^^ toti mund^ effudit, sumum Ecclesiae lumen Augustinum in Africa
emicuisse. Ab. A.D. 41^


When a Pelagius to advance Freewill, into the Throne of Free Grace, then God
would raise up an Austine, (that great light of the Church in his time) to
depose that, and to restore this to its crown and dignity.

This Pelagius was borne in Britan the same day that Austin in Afric; he was
the first presumptuous advancer of the pride of Free Will. About A.D. 418.
He did not think the grace of God to be necessary for the helping of Free
Will, for good things in every act. This was condemned in the council of
Carthage, wherein indeed to save himself he did aequivocate in the word, Note
grace, acknowledging a natural, an exciting, and after conversion an
Assisting grace. This Doctrine was likewise condemned in the Synod of
Palestina, Damnata antequam ^ata a^minii opinio.
1200 Years ago, and therein Arminianisme killed before it was borne by the
strength of that place, 2 Timothy 1.9.

This Pelagius had his Scholars, Julianus, and Caelestinus. Jesus Christ would
not then leave Austin without some Disciples to conflict with those (as
Chrysostom had his Oecumenius, and Theophylact his Pedissequi, his followers)
so was there a Prosper, and Hilary Arelatensis, to encounter the old
M^ssilians, and Semi-pelagians in France. Vide learned Arch. By. Usher, most
excellent discourse of freewill, ^n this answer to the Jesuits challenge.


And when there was a Faustus Regiensis (a most subtle adversary) A Bishop who
did closely defend Pelagianisme in two Books of Free Will. The Church should
have a Fulgentius, and Petrus Diaconus, and others to oppose him. Yea sentence
was then given against Pelagius, About A.D. 529 un-
and Semi-pelagians, in the council of O^ange. In the general, that their
opinions touching free will and free grace, were not agreeable to the Catholic
faith.

Further, about the year 850, one Johannes Scotus (not he which wrote upon the
Sentences, with so much opposition against Thomas Aquinas but an other) wrote a
Book against Praedestination, which the Church of Leyden confuted with a godly
and learned book.

When Godescalcus a man of the Low Countries, is reckoned in the number of this
age, about the year of our Lord 849. Because he spoke of Predestination
perilously, to wit, That those who were predestined to Life by the decree of
Gods predestination, were forced to do well: and those who were predestined
to condemnation, were forced by the decree of God to do evil, was resisted by
Hincmarus and other learned men.

This infectious error Pelagianisme spread into England, where it was apt to
take the deeper rooting, because Pelagius himself, by Birth, was a Britain:
But the Lord raised learned Bradwardine, Arch bishop of Canterbury and some
others ^o appear in the cause of God and of Free Grace and to fortify the
Churches against all Pelagians, whom Augustine calls Inimicos gratiae dei, and
Fulgentius, vasa irae dei.

Afterward the subtilty of the Serpent insinuated himself into the Garden of
the Church by the wit and learning of Faustus Socinus (another Infaustus
Faustus in Poland,) They who have opportunity to consult Socinus books de
Ministerio; and the Catechismus Cracoviensis (a most subtle, and dangerous
book) shall find there the seeds of Arminianisme, their Helena, there to be
conceived (however Molina and other Popish Authors contend as once the seven
Cities did whose Homer was) their Media Scientia. They will grant a Divina
Praescientia, but deny decretum Divinum to pass upon all things, leaving the
will to it self to produce its own acts, which indeed is no less, then a
degree of Atheism, setting up the second cause into the throne of the first.
Herein and in diverse other things the Arminians do tread in their steps, as
will appear to those who examine Peltzius his book, the Harmony of the Socinian
and Arminians Doctrine. Peltzius his harmony of Socin. and Armin. Note
I wish that book were in English, it would make many blush now adays to see
how incogitantly (I hope) that is the worst in many) they have run themselves
into the Tents of Socinians and Arminians, and know not now how honorably to
retreat.

About the year 1570, when Petrus Baro a French man, had infected Cambridge
with that disease from France, Vide Mr. Prius antiarm^anism.
(you see spiritual as well as bodily evils have come from France) and one
Mr. Barret who acted concurrently with him: but then God giving the Heads of
Colleges with the Vice Chancellor a prudent zeal to oppose it, they sent up
Doctor ^indall and Doctor Whitaker, to complain to Archbishop Whitgift, which
begot that Useful book of Articuli Lambethani* Soon after this journey Doctor
Whitakers blessed soul returned to her eternal rest, having not long before
in an admirable conci^ ad clerum, (rightly called his Cy^naea Cantio)
discovered and confuted the chief points of Arminianisme therein.


The Leaven came then into the Netherlands, and (as learned King James says)
Arminius was the first that infected Leyden with the Pelagian Heresy
Pelagianisme often called Haeresis Vide D. Featles preface to his Pelag. Red.
He was a strong, and clear parted man; and as it is said of Origin, Ubi been,
nemo melius: ubi male nemo pejus, so there are some excellent discourses in his
Works, and others as desperately opposite to the Covenant of Grace, shattering
all the linkes of the goulden chain of our salvation, which is the great evil
of Arminianisme. From a young studient, Junius praesaged of him, Fide Ames.
ca^. Consc.
that he would be a very useful, or most pernicious instrument in the Church
of Christ. By this Junius (when the Lord had converted him from Atheism, by
reading the beginning of the first Chapter of the Gospel of John, Junius and
Perkins. Who both in an year.
wherein he saw such majesty, that he thought that the Lord did therein,
detonare ab alto) the Lord gave a sovereign antidote to his Church in those
parts, against the infection (...) Arminianisme. As about the same time (...)
that glorieus light, Note.
Mr. Perkins (...) England, whom the Lord made a Malleus both of Papists and
Arminia^^, and by more clear and condescending discoveries of Christ, made the
deep mysteries of speculative, and the heavenly secrets of practical
Divinity, to meet in the pulpit; and all this in a little time; (for he lived
but about 44 Years, being borne (ni faller) in the first* and dyed in the last
of Queen Elizabeth's (...) Oh how much did he in a little time?

But still the Devil will be casting weeds into Christ's garden, picking up
those that have been rooted out, and throwing them over the wall again.

Now he made use of Barnevill in Holland, to bring Religion to serve State
purposes, and so carried on the Arminian design there. These differences about
the power of Free Will, and such things as hang upon that (for there is the
primum movens) now came to be reduced to five Articles, which begat the
Conference at Hage, betwixt both parties; which is reported both by Brandius,
and Bertius.

About this time came up the name of Remonstrants, As the name Protestan^s
given first to the princes free Cities of Germany that sought Reformation in
the Diet at Spiro, A.D. 1529. and from them passed to us and other countries
where it was effected.
as the name Protestant had formerly. Whereupon Doctor Ames (once Fellow of
Christ's College in Cambridge, but in Doctor Charyes time then Master of that
place, it grew too hot for him, he not complying with the present Ceremonies,
and having Preached a Sermon at the University Church against playing at Cards
which (...) not then be borne) was by he disposing hand of Divine Providence
^arried into ^^^se parts, where (as the ^ustine of that time and place) he did
graple with all the Patrons of Free Will. And as an Appendix to that conference
at Hage, (as it is set forth by Brandius) writ that most excellent Book of his
Coronis. But still Arminius his disciples acted to their utmost, Bertius,
Grevinconius, and others so distracted those Churches, that there was a
necessity of calling a Synod which God gave them as a happy remedy, Anno.
Domini. 1618.

Syn^d of Do^, A.D. 3618
Oh the unwearied activity of adversaries to the cause of Christ (which should
make others blush to move so heavily in asserting the Doctrine of Free Grace)
before we could understand what the Anti-remonstrants in the Synod at Dort
fully intended, we had from the Remonstrants Acta Synodalia, a Book indeed
that required an Ames to answer it (which he has done most learnedly, where
you have Magnum in Parvo, a great soul in a little body, a great deal of
form in a little matter (as in his Bellarminus enervatus) that being done by
the Fraternity with the concurrent endeavors and quintessence of the best wits
amongst the Remonstrants.

About the year 1627, Mr. Montague a man of great learning, and being backed
by the then potent Duke of Buckingham, opened his Arminian (and I had almost
said Popish) pack, when the Lord used Bishop Carleton, Doctor Featly, Doctor
Preston, and others, as happy instruments to discover his adulterate wares.

Lately there sprung up a new brood of such as did assert Arminianisme, as
Dutch Tompson fellow of Clare-Hall, Mr. William Chapel fellow of Christ's
College, (as the many Pupills that were Arminianized under his tuition
(whether by him or no, he best knows) but men are more confirmed in their
suspicion hereof, since they heard of his anserable actings in the University
in Ireland) but still as in Oxford, when there was any danger of spreading
Arminianisme, whether in Acts, Books, or Sermons, they had there Robert Abbot,
Twisse, Prydeaux, and other works to suppress them; So in Cambridge God gave
us lately Davenant and Ward, who did victoriously enter the lists with the
most confident adversaries of Free Grace. And that bitter weeds could never
take deep rooting in any of these three Kingdoms, and thrive very fruitfully;
There was in Ireland a most learned Archbishop Usher to crush it there. And a
mighty man in these Controversies, Who were assra primae magnitudin^.
Doctor Twisse (another Austine) to suppress it in England. As learned and
industrious Mr. Rutherford and others have done their parts successefully in
Scotland. But alas Arminius now appears amongst us not so much in the Schools
and Pulpits, as in popular meetings.

For as Zanchius complained with much regret of the Sulteran Ubiquitaries, that
he found them ubique, everywhere to vex and molest him, so may we grieve, 2 Timothy 2.34.
(O that we could with brokennesse of heart bewail it) that our
Universallists, are almost universally spread amongst us; It is gotten into our
Netherlands, much into the Fennish and Moorish parts of this Kingdom, yea
amongst many people that love Jesus Christ, and therefore entertain it, as
conceiving it most for his Honor (the more are they to be pitied, and to be
instructed with a spirit of meekness; show them by Scripture evidence this is
not Gods way of advancing Christ, and you recover them) it is now in popular
hands, we need such worthies as the Author of this following Treatise
(blessed be the Father of mercy, the Fountain of every good and perfect gift,
for his and many others fruitful labors) who may condescend to parley with
poor Christians at their Tables, in their Shops, to follow them at the plow
(as Reverend Mr. Greenham was wont to do) endeavoring to rectify and reduce
them.

He knew how to deal wisely with subtle adversaries, (...) non (...)
that he might have the more advantage against them, grants them as much as he
could with consistency to his own principles, that so he might the more easily
confound theirs; Only you will be so candid as to consider that herein he
speaks ad populum. And therefore as the ancient Fathers, often uses the
liberty of speaking like a Preacher rather then as a Doctor of the Chair.

I reckon this a very strong argument to confute the power of Free Will to any
spiritual action in a gracious manner, Jer. 17.9.
the woeful experience of mine own wretched heart, being naturally so
desperately wicked, opposite to any spiritual good; Note
But this will not convince others (only by the way I would know how it comes
to pass, if Arminius Doctrine be true that we have Free Will, to choose that
which is truly good, why Arminians are not all very good men? Will not this be
an aggravation against them at the dreadful day of judgment?

Eccles. 12.11.
Therefore the Lord is most admirably gracious in giving us such Masters of the
Assemblies to fasten such Scripture truths as may hold us fast and close under
the Covenant of Grace.

He was a blessing to the College where he was fellow of Pembrooke Hall in
Cambridge (which has bin a fruitful nurcery to this Church, and an ornament
to the University) and after a burning and shining light in Staffordshire; Ioh.
5.35.
He delighted much in preaching in an Evangelicall way, from place to place, as
pitying many poor pining seduced souls under blind and superstitious
Ministers. The Lord fill their hearts, with compassion to them, who have power
in their hands to supply them, that so millions do not perish for want of
vision.

Afterward the noble Earl of Warwick fixed him at Rochford in Essex, where
he did speak and do great things to the honor of Free Grace; He lived
there more by acting vigorously to his great Lord and Master Jesus Christ, It
is not enough loqui magna unless we do magna ^^ve^e a Eras.
in a few Years then most of us his Brethren do in many.

O that we who are left behind in these conflicting times could more
punctually and closely follow his example; It is not studying the groundless
fopperies of Popery, nor the immersing our minds wholly into some dry disputes
concerning some externalls and forms about Religion, (as too many do now a
days being engaged in a party) that will spiritualize us or our hearts so much
as Studying and Preaching over the Covenant of Grace; The mysterious and
Heavenly secrets of the Gospel rightly opened and wisely applied, will by Gods
blessing breed a Gospel spirit in thee, leave a gracious tincture upon the
spirits of Teachers and Hearers; whereas possibly for want of this, there may
be a legal tartness and severity in the Spirits and Tongues of able and good
men.

The gracious and powerful Lord who, only teaches to profit, annoint all his
Saints with that holy unction that they may be able to discern of things that
differ, clearly to distinguish betwixt truth and error. And that he may to
this and other happy purposes, bless abundantly this savourly acute and solid
Treatise, shall be the earnest Prayer of him,

Who is thine in and for the Lord Jesus. THOMAS HILL.

A Table of the Contents.
THe reason why the wicked do not repent nor come out of their sins, 1 Doct.
is not because they cannot (though they cannot) but because they will not,
Page 8.
7 Demonstrations to prove it. 1 Dem^^^

The wicked think they have power to repent, but will not do according to their
thoughts, ibid They will not try whether they can repent or no, 2
p. 9 They refuse the help which God offers them, 3
p. 10 They will not use the power which God has given them, 4
p. 11 They grow worse by the means afforded them, 5
p. 13 Their Cannot is voluntary, 6
p. 14 They are content with their cannot, 7
p. 15
The first ground of the Doctrine. 1 Ground

Every man can do more good then he does, and shun more evil then he does, p.
17
This appears by these following considerations.
If a man can do no more then he does; 1 Consid.
nothing can hindes him, but his will, ibid. If a man can do no more then he
does, 2
and yet will not, he must needs voluntarily hinder himself from doing that
which he cannot, 3
p. 18 Jf a man will not do that he can, neither will be that which he cannot,
if he could, p. 19 If a man (...) ^ot do that he can, can or can-not, 4
all is one to him, all sticks at his will, p. 20 If a man will not do that
which he can, 5
this will make a man's conscience when it comes to speak in sober sadness, 4
thank himself for his perishing, p. 21 Arguments to prove the first Ground,
p. 22 Because God does complain against the wicked for the voluntary doing no
more good then they do, 1 Argu.
ibid. Because otherwise there were no room for praise, 2
nor dispraise, p. 23 Because there would be no room for the Sword of the
Magistrate, 3
p. 24 Because though a carnal man cannot put off the old man, 4
yet it is not his nature to commit this sin at this time and in this manner,
ibid. A wicked man can do more good, 5
etc. Because a godly regenerate man may avoid more sin then he does, p. 25
The ground further proved by Particulars.
The will has dominion over all the outward acts of the members, 1 Part.
p. 26 Every man has natural affections in hine by which he may do more then
he does, 2. Part.
and shun more evil then he does, p. 27 God has given to every man natural
counsel, 3
and natural Reason and Prudence, p. 30 That is first in order which is
natural, 4
and afterward that which is spiritual, and if a man stick there, he sticks
at a will-not, p. 31
The second Ground.
Every wicked man is slothful and negligent, 2 Ground.
p. 34
Five demonstrations to prove it.
Every wicked man does imagine more cannots, then then there be, p. 35. 1 Demon:
He makes every little difficulty a cannot, when as nothing but an
impossibility is a cannot. p, 36. 2.
A slothful man turns his very abilities into cannots 37. 3.
p He does voluntarily nail himself unto cannots, 4.
p. 38 He puts forth by halves that power which he has, 5.
p. 39 There is more in a wicked man then by reason of sluggishnesse he puts
forth, Conclusi.
p. 40
Six Arguments to prove this.
It a sign it is in him, p. 40 Because when God does convert a sinner, 1 Argu.
he does not put in new powers and faculties into the soul, ibid. Because he
can show as great power otherwise, 2
p. 41 Because he can show it too when he list, 3
p. 42 Because the rod is able to whip it out of him, 4
p. 43 Because he can do an hundred times more when he is pleased, 5
p. 44 Because he will show it in Hell, viz. 6
That it was in him to do more then he did, p. 45 A wicked man will not set
himself to use all the means that he may, 3 Ground
p. 49 A wicked man may use the means that God appointed as means, Demonst.
p. 52 Because it is the very nature of means to come between ones can and his
cannot, 1 Argu.
ibid. Because God does not exhort men like a company of stocks and stones, 2
but as men that are edifyable by his words, p. 53 Because Gods anger is very
reasonable, 3
p. 54 Because Gods offer of his kingdom to the wicked is serious, 4
p. 55 Because Gods reproves are very equal, 5
p. 56 His condemnation must be wilful, Conclusi*
that will not use all the means, p 57
Proved by three Arguments.
God will not help that man by a miracle to go that has legs to go, 1
and will not, ibid. God will not bate a farthing of the price he sets thee at,
2
p. 59 God will never be brought out of his walk to show thee any mercy or
give thee any grace. 3
p. 60 Gods Kingdom cannot be obtained without a diligent use of the means,
Conclusi.
p. 36
Reasons of it.
Because heaven is an end, 1 Reas.
and an end can never be gotten without means, ibid. God has annexed it to the
means, 2
ibid. Every soul must give an account before God how he has used the means,
3
p. 63 God will not set up another door into heaven for any man in the world, 4
ibid.
Further proofs, and encouragements to use the the means.
Some of the means that God has appointed, 1
you may do them without labor, p. 64 Some of the means that God has
appointed are easier then them, 2
ibid. Some of the means are easier yet, 3
ibid. Some of the means of grace, 4
its harder to omit them then to use them, p. 65 Some of the means of grace, 5
be they hard, yet they are but hard, they are not impossible for you to use,
p. 65
Objections.
The first Objection drawn from the Scriptures which say they cannot, 1 Object.
p. 66 The Scripture speaks of five cannots, 1. Answ.
Of a natural cannot, 2. Of a deliberate cannot, 3. Of a judicial cannot. 4.
Of a compounded cannot, 5. of a humbling cannot. Thou would (as thou
pretendest) but thou canstnot. 2 Object. Answ. 1.
Perhaps its the will of thy conscience, and not the will of thy heart. 2. May
be its a copulative will, Repentance and some lust, godliness and some lust. 3.
May be thou have a woulding will, this is no will but only a velleity, 4. May
be thou have a general Metaphysicall will; but to come to particulars, there
thou will not. 5. Thou have no true will, because if thou did will, thou
could. p. 71 Thou desire to do it, but art not able. Who can tell best what
is in thee God or thine own heart? 3 Object. Answ.
But the reason of this mistake is, 1. Thou have putative or thinking desires,
thou think thou desire. 2. Thou have ignorant desires, 3. Thou have
wandering desires, and therefore thou art mistaken. p. 77 Thou resolvest and
have good purposes, 4 Object.
but oh thou can not perform them. p. 79 These purposes thou speak of are
only willings for the future* 1. Answ.
because its only to shuffle of the willing for the present, 2. This will for
hereafter is no will, because its goes without Gods. 2. It is no will, because
thou shall miss th^se suppositions that thou willest upon. First, thou
supposest thou shall have fewer temptations hereafter, 2. Thou supposest thou
shall be fitter hereafter. 3. Thy will for hereafter is no will but a mockery.
Thou labourest to serve God and to be saved. 5 Object. Answ.
Is it this labor for grace and He^v^a, when thou laborest so id^ely?
wherefore thy impenitency is wilful, thy damnation wilful, and thy ruin
wilful, p. 81 Hence also it follows, 1. That your destruction is from self,
2. Your destruction is just, 3. Your destruction is inexcusable. 4. Your
destruction is unavoydable, 5. Your destruction is pitiless, 6. Your
destruction is grievous. p 81
Application.
Thou can never be humbled unles thou believe this truth* a man is never
humbled as long as he excuses himself* Use 1. Of instruction.
Now p. 84 First, 1 Excuse.
thou excusest thy self for all Transgressions besides original, ibid. Now
thou excusest thy self from original sin too, 2 Excuse.
Lord I would be without sin, but J cannot, p. 85 Nay thou excus^st thy self
for every sin: 3 Excuse.
thou take all thy sins to be nothing but infirmities, p. 86 Nay thou
commendest thy self more then God, 4 Excus.
p. 87 Nay thou can not so much as pray to God for a ^ill: 5 Excuse.
thou art so proud that thou conceivest thou have that already, p. 88 Nay thou
layst all the blame upon God, 6 Excuse.
p. 89 First, 1 Demon.
because you cast the blame upon nature, its my nature and J cannot. ibid.
S^condly, 2 Demon
thou d^st cast the blame upon temptation, Its my hard hap to fall upon
temptations, p. 90 Thirdly, 3 Demon.
thou layest the blame upon the Times, the times are very bad, p. 91 Fourthly,
4 Demon.
thou layest the blame upon this Commandment. If it were any Commandment, but
this, J would do it, ibid. Fifthly, 4 Demon.
thou layest the blame upon ill fortune, and bad luck, p. 92 Nay, sixthly thou
find fault with all Gods proceedings, 6 Demon
p 94 This discovers the deceitfulnes of thy heart, 2 Use
p. 95 First, thou would very feign, if God would enable thee: but thy heart
does but here lie unto God, ibid. Secondly, hereby thou dodgest with God, and
temptest the Lord, p. 96 Thirdly, hereby thou shufflest of the word, when thou
have heard it, ibid. This point calls for great humiliation; Use 3.
for 1. Here lies especially the pride of the heart, not in men's cannots, but
their will-nots, ibid. 2. Here lies especially the hardening of the heart, p. 98
3 Here lies especially the stubbornnes of the heart, ib. 4. Here lies the
great^st dispisings of the Commandments of God, p. 99 To quicken the
thankfulness of the godly, Use 4. Use. 5.
ibid. A seasonable Jtem to all Rebellious spirits, p. 100 1. Is it not enough
that thou have willingly fallen in Adam, 1 Consid.
but thou must willingly stand out again? 101 2. Consider the very Saints of
God that have not half so many will-nots as you, 2 Consid.
that stick more truly at a cannot, ibid. 3. Consider the more shameful ones
sin is, 3 Consid
the more reason to be humbled, p. 102 Nay foruthly, 4 Consid.
consider there is no greater shame then to make away ones self, ibid 5. Consider
if you would but vex your one souls with this serious consideration, 5 Consid.
it would make you kick your lusts under foot, p. 103
The danger of base Pleas and Pretenses.
1. This same pleading is the cause why you are lazy and idle in the use of the
means, viz. because you suffer your hearts to plead, oh we cannot do it p. 104
2. This same pleading brings up an evil report upon piety and godliness p.
105 3. This same pleading is a murmuring against God q. d. why does God give me
such commandments that I cannot observe, ibid. 4. This is the sawsiest excuse
of all excuses, p. 107 Nay fifthly, here lies the reason why Divines say that
the conversion of a sinner is an harder work then the creation of heaven and
earth, first because* p. 108 Here is the same difficulty that was in creation,
1 Reason
for God makes a Convert of nothing, ibid. As there was nothing praeexistent in
the creation t^ help, 2
so there was nothing to resist, but here is something to resist, the will it
resists, ibid.
The danger of sticking at a will-not is further cleared.
1. If you will not, Gods Ministers have discharged their duties, and have left
your blood on your own hands, p. 100 2. If you will not, the Gospel has
delivered its errand, ye are guilty of your own everlasting perdition, p. 111
Nay thirdly, if you will not* The blood of Jesus Christ has done that it came
for, p. 112 4. If you will not you murder your own souls, ibid. A seasonable
Item to the redeemed of the Lord, Use.
that they take heed of will-nots* for p. 114 1. We never sin against Gospel,
but only upon wil-nots, p. 115. 2. We never despise God, but only upon
wilnots, ibid. 3. Conscience can never condemn us, but only upon will-nots, p.
116 4. God can never be angry with us, but only upon wil-nots. ibid.
The end of the Table.
Wilful Impenitency the grossest Selfe-Murder.
EZECH. 18.31, 32. For why will ye dye, O ye house of Israel.


THe wicked in this Chapter dispute against God; the Fathers have eaten sower
Grapes, The division of the Text.
and the childrens teeth are set on edge, Our Fathers have sinned, and we are
punished; a common cavil in every natural man's heart, when its urged. Adam
fell and his poor posterity smart for it, if God will needs damn us he may, we
have no power for to help it, for who has resisted his Will? Gods calm answer
to their froward cavils in seven particulars.
this is man's Syllogism. God who might send man to hell for an answer, answers
calmly.

1. By abjuration, as J live says the Lord, ye shall not have occasion to use
this proverb any more as Israel. v. 3.

2. By an assertion, the soul that sins it shall dye, v. 4. no soul shall
dye but only the same that does sin.

3. By explication of himself, if a man do that which is right, he shall live,
verse. 5, 6. if he have bin never so wicked, yet if he returned he shall not
dye, v. 21.

4. By appealing to their consciences, have I any pleasure at all that the
wicked should dye says the Lord? and not that he should return and live?
verse. 23. have I any pleasure, I appeal to all your consciences, have I any
pleasure at all that the wicked should dye?

5. By retorting, hear now O house of Jsrael is not my way equal? or are not
your ways rathere unquall? v. 25.

6. By a conclusion; therefore I will judge you O house of Jsrael, every one
according to his ways, verse. 30.

7. By a final decision of the whole controversy; repent and turn your
selves, etc. so iniquity shall not be your ruin, cast away from you all, etc
for why will ye die, etc.

Where we have these four things.

1. God disclaimes all cause of their damnation from his secret will, I have no
pleasure in the death of him that dies. Four things very observable
2. He removes all cause of their destruction from his revealed will; repent
and turn your selves, etc. so iniquity shall not be your ruin; cast away, etc.
3. He disavowes all cause of their destruction from his permissive will, as
though that were gilty, accessory to it; they can have no color why they are
not wrought upon; make you a new heart and a new spirit, Make the fault lie not
at his door, no it lies at your door, make you a new heart. 4. He casts all the
cause of their destruction upon their own rebellious wills. Why will ye dye O
house of Jsrael?
1. What is the cause ye live in your sins, and die and perish in your
sins? is it because I am not merciful? you know I am gracious and full of
mercy and ready to forgive, why then why will ye die O house of Israel?

2. Is it because I am swift to revenge? you know I am slow to anger, and give
you a warning before I consume you; Isreal's perdition not from God but from it
self.
why then will ye die O house of Jsrael?

3. Is it because I will destroy you for Ahaz or Manasses, or Zedekiahs, or
Adams sin? quasi canis peccatum sus dependeret? you know that if the son
walk not in the fathers sin, I use to receive him, you can bear me witness
I call you to a new covenant, why then will ye die O house of Jsrael?

4. Is it because ye have no Savior? you know that the Lamb of God Christ
Jesus was slain for you from the beginning of the World, Rev. 13.8. Joh. 3.16.
that you may be saved upon faith.

5. Is it because ye have no power? ye know I offer you grace and power and ye
will not have it; why then will ye die, etc.

6. Some Authors allege five whies more, why will ye, etc. Is it for this
cause or that cause or that? or what cause is it? no cause on Gods side, no, ye
may thank your own wills if you perish; this, this only accuses you, Id unum
vos eccusat, resipiscere non vultu.
you will not be ruled: you are careless of God, Christ, grace, and you will
be so, ye are vain and carnal and obstinate, and ye will be so; woe unto
thee O Jerusalem will thou not be made clean? when shall it once be? Jer.
13.27. he does not say woe unto thee Jerusalem, can thou not be made clean?
but will thou not be made clean?

Presuppositions not to be mistaken.
1 Presupposition not to be m^staken.
1. Its true that a wicked man cannot repent nor be converted of himself; but
this cannot only does not hinder him, if a wicked man's cannot only did hinder
him, he might excuse himself before the tribunal of Christ, Lord thou know
I did my best. I would have bin ruled by thy word, but I could not; Lice^
aliquis cum possit gratia^ a^ pisci qui reprobatur a deo; tamen quod in hoc vel
illud peccatum labatur ex ejus libero arbitrio co^tingit, unde et merito sibi
in culpa^ imputatur. Aq. par 1. qu. 23. Atr. 3. resp ad. Arg. tertium.
I would have bin bumbled and reformed better then I was, but J could not; If a
wicked man's cannot did hinder him he might excuse himself thus. But alas he is
not able to say thus without peremptory lying. Lord, I could not choose but do
wickedly, I acted most wretchedly, but I could not otherwise choose (though it
was not in thy power not to be born in original sin) yet who necessitated
thee to commit such gross actual sins.) In Prove. 1.29. they hated knowledge,
they did not choose the fear of the Lord. They did not use any liberty of will
to choose that which was good. What was it because they could not? no, for
albeit they could not, yet that was not the cause. No they would none of my
counsel, they despised all my reproof, v. 30. Mark, the reason, why they did
not choose, was not because they could not choose, but because they would not.

Its true God does not give them power to believe, and to be renewed; but can
they say though I wouldse riously, 2 Presup.
God would not? were they able to say thus? though I desired it heartily, God
would not give me grace, then they had some color to cast it upon God, I
would, but God would not. But they cannot cast it upon him. How often would I
have gathered thee together even as the Hen gathers her chickens but thou
would not? I would said God, but you would not; Man. 23.37
nay how often would I but you would not? Mat. 23.37. Though God be not so
willing as to give them all power to believe, and be saved, yet he is aforehand
with them.

Its true, if the wicked should will as far as they are able to will, 3 Presup.
yet their will were not able full out; but this does not excuse them, because
God always resolved to be aforehand with them. Indeed as in Mat. 25.29. God
gives his servants this rule by which he ever goes toward them; Mat. 25.29
unto every one that has shall be given, and he shall have abundance; speaking
of things in eodem genere. But to apply it to a man in the state of nature, is
to say grace is given according to works, which is the very dreggs of
Pelagianisme. Yet how ever all, this is a most encouraging intimation. Facienti
quod in se est, deus faciet quod in se Pelagia. Er.
Let any man use the power that God gives him and he shall have more: As he
that takes pains for learning: As he that uses means to increase his estate,
may find in ordinary providence the hand of the diligent makes rich. Prove. 10.4
and 10.22.
He that uses a penny well makes it twopence; he that uses two pennies very
well, makes it a groat.

So that though there be not such an Infallibilis nexus, that God has bound
himself in the use of our natural abilities to add supernatural graces, yet
undoubtedly he will never be wanting to promote any good work, till men
neglect or contemn. And this leaves men wholly without excuse, and shows it
is not their cannot, but their will not, which betrays them to their
spiritual losses; namely their wilful rejecting of Gods gracious offers.

4 Presup.
Its true God gives the wicked but one Talent, when he gives his children
four, two at the least, but they cannot say he is austere, reaping where he
sowed not, gathering where he strewed not. No, There Is the same proportion
between one Talent, and gathering one more, as there is between two, and the
gathering of two others, etc.

You know that they are ready to complain, as Christ shows it in the Parable.
Lord, I know that thou wast a bard man, reaping where thou have not sown, and
gathering where thou have not strowed; But ye remember also the Lords answer.
Thou wicked and sloathfull servant, etc. Mat. 25.26. Mark, he casts the blame
upon his wilfulness, that he would not take pains for to trade. So the wicked
complain, alas God has not sown any power of conversion in my heart, and will
he look for to reap it? This is austerenesse and hardness of dealing. Oh
thou wicked and sloathfull servant, etc. Why did thou not trade with the
Talent that J gave thee? One Talent should beget one, as well as two beget two,
etc. But I gave thee wit, and thou buriedst it in the earth, and have bin
earthly with it. I gave thee knowledge, and thou have hid it in the earth, and
not traded for reformation according to it, etc. Alas thou can not plead a
cannot, but only a will not.

Its true, 5 Presup.
that if one wicked man's will be more willing then another, it is not from
himself, but from God. For what have thou that thou have not received? 1 Cor.
4.7. 1 Cor. 4.7
Its God that makes one wicked man to differ from another in goodness, and to
be better then another. One wicked man is a drunkard, and another is better,
etc. One wicked man is more wilful, another is less. Its God that makes this
difference; yet notwithstanding its his own fault, that he is not so good as
his neighbor, especicially when he sits under better helps then his
neighbor. The men of Nineveh shall rise up against this generation, and shall
condemn it, Mat. 14.41
because they repented at the preaching of Jonah, and behold a greater then
Jonah is here. See, this generation was worse then Nineveh. Nineveh repented a
great way, even in sackeloth and ashes, but this generation does not I grant it
was God that did make them do more then this generation does do. For all would
be alike wilful if it were not for him. But yet this generation cannot plead
in judgment, Lord thou wast not so gracious unto us, as to Nineveh, No. Jesus
Christ expressly tells them. Nineveh shall rise up in judgment against them
q. d. Nineveh was not so wilful as you. Nineveh would, but you would not. Our
Savior Christ ascribes it to their wilfulness, that they were not so willing
as Nineveh. Nineveh would, but you would not. Thus you see the suppositions,
which I beseech you remember as we go, least perhaps you mistake us.

Doct.
The reason why the wicked do not repent nor come out of their sins, is not
because they cannot, (though they cannot) but because they will not.

Peter says to Ananias why has Satan filled thy heart to ly to the holy
Ghost, to keep back part of the price of the Land? Acts 5.3.
was it not once in thy power? Before thou did promise, 'twas in thy power
whether thou would promise or no; did any force thee to promise? and when
thou had promised, did any squeeze the lie out of thy tongue that thou
should tell a lie to the Holy Ghost? did any drag thy fingers to the money
and force thee to handle it? no, thou would lie, and thou would finger it.

7 Demonstrations to prove this.
1 Demon 1 The wicked think they have power to repent.
1. The wicked think they have power, and yet they will not do according to
their thoughts. What Is the reason, they presume to repent another time, but
because they think they have power? what is the reason, they hope to repent on
their death beds, but because they think they have power? or at least that
they are able to beg power of Christ Jesus. Now by their own thoughts God will
convince them, Pro. 6.10. All the free will mongers the reason why they do not
repent, is because they will not; out of their own mouth will God condemn them.
that they do not give over their sins, because they will not; like the
sluggard yet a little more sleep, yet a little more slumber, yet a little more
folding of the hands to sleep; the sluggard, he thinks he can rise time
enough, and do all his business e're night, though he lie a little longer, and
therefore does he presume to lie a while longer; So thou art loath to come out
of thy sins yet* time enough yet think thou, thou have secret thoughts thou
art able to shift for Heaven afterward, tush an unhappy youth may make a good
old man, and a young Saint an old Devil. Hence it is that the whoremaster he
can plead, did not David commit adultery too? as though he could yet up again
as well as he; the drunkard, was not Noah drunk? as though he were able to
repent as well as he. Luke 23.40.
The Theife on the Cross did not he repent at last gasp? as though he could
shift as well at last; so they think they can leave of their sins for a
need, and therefore the reason why they do not, is only because they will not.
He that thinks he has a hundred pound of his own in his purse, and yet will
not give a poor body a half penny: what is the reason he will not open his
purse to give? because he cannot? No, he thinks he has it and can; but he
will not; so the reason why thou art not reformed, is, thou will no^.

2. Demonstration, because thou do not so much as try whether thou can or
no. 2 Demon. 2 They will not try.
Therefore thou do not stick at a cannot, but a will not; when a master bids
his servant carry a sack of Corn to the Mill, I cannot says he; but cant you
try says his Master, cannot you go about it? no he will not try; why then he
is wilful; if his master should see him swetting and striving to carry it, it
were something, then he would say he stuck at a cannot; but when he will not be
at the pains to try, he sticks at a will not. So thou stickst at a will not,
thou do not every da^ in arenam discendere sweat at good duties, thou do
not study and labor every day how to shun all temptations, and prevent all thy
sins, thou do not go about the cleansing of thy Family, the purging of thy
House, thou will not go about it, and therefore the reason is, because that
thou will not. Nay its all one whether thou have power yea or no. Tentantes ad
Troiam pervenere Graeci. Theo.
To what end should God give thee power? for thou will not use it. Nay how do
thou know but when thou go about it, thou may meet with, though some
power? but thou will not try; cut down thy drunken sign, and try, never let
drinking and swilling be in thy house and try, set up constant holy
conferences and try; frequent Prayer in thy Closet and try, etc. But I have
tried again and again, and yet it will not do; every day try though, si
crebro jacias, alias aliud jeceris, though thou have thrown the Dye a hundred
times, yet next time may be thou shall throw a good cast; But thou will not
try. I would have healed Babell, but she would not be healed. The field of the
slothful is all grown over with Thorns, and Nettles had covered all the face
thereof, and the stone wall thereof was broken down, Prove. 24.31. what is the
reason he has not a good crop? because the ground would not bear it? no, how
does he know? he will not try, he will not plow it and harrow it, and weed it
and manure it, and sow it, he will not try, therefore it is because he will not.

3 Demon. They refuse the help which God offers.
3. Demonstration, God offers thee many good motions of power, I will help thee
and I will enable thee, and thou will not be helped, God casts in these good
motions and thou casts them out. Stand ye in the ways, and so, ask for the
old paths and walk therein, and ye shall find rest to your souls, but they
said we will not walk therein. O do but ask for the good way and labor to
walk in it, Jer. 6.16.
I Will help you and assist you, but we will not say they. I set watchmen over
you, saying, hearken to the sound of the Trumpet, but they said we will not
hearken, verse. 17. This is plain English as we say, you will not, ye have
preaching every Sabbath and every week, but ye will not; God sends you good
motions every day and hour, but ye will not; when a beggar will not be helped,
why does he starve? what because he cannot choose? no, he starves because he
will starve. O say thou, I do hear the word and I cannot hear it better. I
do pray daily and I cannot pray better, etc. thus thou retortest upon God, as
the unprofitable servant, Lo, there, Mat. 25.25
thou have that is thine; Lo, here is the best faith thy spirit helps me to,
here is the best obedience, that thy power enabled me to, etc. Lo, there thou
have that is thine, thou helpest me with no more. I was not able to do better,
quo ore potes hoc dicere? says Gualter, with what face can thou say thus? is
this all that God has offered to enable thee? ah thou wilful creature; The
Lord has offered to help thee to a thousand times more, but thou would not
be helped.

4. Demonstration, 4 Demo. And will not use the power which he has given.
God has not only offered thee power to do more, and thou will not take it, but
also given thee more power and thou will not use it, and therefore the reason
why thou do not, is because thou will not; God has given thee one talent of
power at the least, why do thou not put it out to the merchandizers and
occupy with it? (...) says Chry. The power that God has vouchsaft thee is thy
talent. Why did thou not employ it to the utmost? every Sermon gives thee new
power, Prove. 17.16.
a new price? so every good counsel gives thee a new power; what art thou
better? every blessing thou have had, gives thee a new power, wherein are thou
purer? does God give thee but eyes, thou have more power to glorify him, then
he that has not, etc. Every mercy helps thee with new power, but wherein do
thou use it? God has given thee good memory, how have thou stuffed it? means
and maintenance: how have thou honored God? why, etc. thine own conscience
accuses thee, thou have wasted his goods, wasted them upon belly and back,
which have devoured more thoughts then ever his worship could have; thou have
wasted them upon thy credit in the World, and thy pleasure, and thy lusts, and
thy fleshly desires. How is it that I hear this of thee? Luke 16.2
Thou shall hear one day of this dismal watchword, give account of thy
stewardship, for thou may be no longer steward. What do thou talking of thy
want of power? I could not do thus, and I could not do that; where are my goods
that I lent thee? give account for thy memory. Lord, I remember this and that
Tale, this and that Bawble; thou evil and unprofitable servant thou, and why
could thou not remember my Commandments as well? give account for thy wit.
Lord I have contrived businesses, bargaynes with it, I have jested, quirped,
been merry with it; thou evil and unprofitable servant thou, why would thou
not be witty for God and for the good of thy soul? etc. God has given a great
deal of more power then ever thou bring to act, and therefore thou art
wilful.

5. Demonstration, 5 Demon. They grow worse by the means
the more power thou have to repent, the more thy will is against it. The more
means that God does vouchsafe, the more Preaching, the more knowledge, the
more reproves, the more inlightnings, the more power thou have to repent, Bern.
the more thy will is against it. Bernard says such a one is a perverse man,
that God is feign to say to, quid faciam tibi? what shall I do unto thee? O
Ephraim what shall I do unto thee? for thy righteousness goes away like the
dew. Hos. 6. Hos. 6.4.
4. The more means thou enjoyest, the more thy righteousness goes away; one
would think the more the Sunshine of the Gospel arises, the more your
righteousness should increase, it goes the more away; like the dew, the more
the Sun rises, the more it vanishes away; like many of you the more preaching
you have the farther ye are off, a man might be acquainted with you heretofore,
but now that you have been soundly rebuked for your sins, the further you fly
of; nay some of you that were somewhat forward hertofore, are mockers now; some
of you that were somewhat towardly heretofore, are more coveteous and Waspish,
and Passionate, and Worldly, like the weeds the more they are plucked up the
more they do grow, or like the Earth the more it is washed the dirtier it
proves, so the more means ye have to be enabled to good, the wilfuller ye are.

6 Demon.
6. Demonstration, because thy cannot is a voluntary cannot; Their cannot is
voluntary. A Moral impotency
thou have wilfully brought the most part of thy cannot upon thee. I cannot
give to the poor say thou; yea but thou had it once, and thou have
wilfully spent it, thou had Lands and Means and commings in, but thou have
spent it at the Alehouse; thou have consumed it on the game-house. Thus thy
cannot is a voluntary cannot; causa ^ausae est causa causati; thy will was the
cause of thy cannot, and therefore thy will is the cause of thy not giving to
the poor. I cannot read says one, and no marvile if I be ignorant; but thy
Parents would have set thee to School, and thou would be a trewant,
therefore thou art willingly ignorant; I cannot remember a Sermon says
another, no wonder though I repeat it not in my Family, but forget it as I do;
but thou have willingly ram'd it with matters of the World, or have weakened it
with drinking, and therefore thou art wilfully forgetful, etc. The
unprofitable servant was cursed that had laid up his pound safe in a Napkin, he
did not lesson it, Luke 19.20. Chrysostom.
nor imbezele it, but only laid it up, and yet he was cursed because he did
not (...) says Chrysostom. he was cursed because he d^d not double his pound;
ah the woeful estate that thou art in! if he were accursed that did lay up his
pound, what shall become of thee that do lessen it? he did not double his
abilities, and therefore he was cursed; thou do not only not double thy
abilities, but thou do lessen them. God has enabled thee to do many a thing,
and now thou art not able, thou have willingly lessened thine ability; now then
thou can not excuse thy self that thou can not, because thou have brought
this cannot on thy self; Thou can not weep at a Sermon but thou could
once; thou can not resist such a lust but thou could once, and thou have
willingly brought this cannot on thy soul, and therefore this is all the cause
because that thou will not.

7. Demonstration, may be thou can not, 7 Demon.
yea, but thou art contented with thy cannot, thou can not be holy and thou
art contented not to be, They are contented with their cannot.
thou can not crucify thy lust, and thou art contented with this cannot, nay
thou would not be able. Sir, I tell you how you may put up this injury if you
will; but Sir you shall not make me put it up; I will not be directed by you,
as it was with desperate Judah, Je^ 5.31.
my people love to have it so, Thou art carnal, and thou love to be so; were
a man in the stocks and not able to get out, yet if he be contented to be
there though he cannot get out, that is not the reason of his staying but he
will not; thou can not walk humbly and holily, and thou love to have it
so, what would you have me so pure forsooth? So then the reason is because that
thou will not; if thy will were not it, thou would never be content with thy
cannot; the Congregation is bad, and thou Iovest to have it so, the more
custom thou shall have for thy Alehouse; like a bad Clerk of the Assizes, I
heard one speak it my self, he was glad there was so many Rogues, he had the
more money; so some of you are glad there be so many frequenters of the
Ale-bench, ye have the more custom, ye love to have it so, ye cannot reform
the sins of one another, and ye love to have it so.

The Presuppositions premised, and the Demonstrations prefixed, it follows now
that I lay down the grounds of this necessary truth. (Scil.)

The reason why a wicked man does not turn unto God, is not because he cannot
(though he cannot) but because he will not.

He cannot say this at the day of judgment, Lord, thou know I left everey
sin that I could, and I took all the best courses that I could to become a
new creature, but I could not. A wicked man shall not be able to say thus
without lying. The man in the Gospel that had not on the Wedding garment, could
he say, Lord, I was not able to go to the shop of the Gospel to seek one? No.
He was speechless, Mat. 22.12. God finds out the hypocrite, though but one,
and when once discovered he is confounded and silenced with the guilt of his
own wilfulness.

The first Ground.
THe first ground is this, which is observed by our learned Divines at the
Synod at Dort, Art. 3. and 4. in refut. 3.4. error. pofit.
namely,

Every man can do more good then he does, and shun more evil then he does,
though I confess not in a gracious manner. If I can prove this to be true, it
will necessarily follow that the reason why a wicked man does not return, is
not because he cannot, but only because he will not.

Arguments to prove it.
1. Consider, 1. Consi. Every man can do more good then he does.
if a man can do more then he does* nothing can hinder him from doing more then
he does but his will; when the fire can burn more, it does burn more,
because it has no will to come between the power of burning and the act of
burning to suspend it. The fire is a natural agent, and therefore burns as
much as it can: but a man is a voluntary agent, and therefore when he can do a
thing and does not, it is because his will comes between to suspend it; So that
the reason is this, he will not. Pilate he had power to crucify Christ, and
power not to do it; John 19.10. he had power not to do it, why then does he
crucify him? not because he had no power to do otherwise, he confesses
himself he had power to do otherwise, but he crucified Christ, because he
would do so. When a man has power to do a thing, or not to do a thing; Its
the will that either suspends or determines.

Consi. 2.
2. Consideration, that if a man can do more then he does, and yet will not, he
must needs voluntarily hinder himself from doing that which he cannot; the
reason is, because a man must first do that which he can, before he can come to
that part which he cannot. Suppose a lame man were to go to London from hence,
and not able to go one mile of the journey, but there stands one at the
Church-stile, that offers if he will but crawle thither, to carry him; he is
able to crawle so far as the Church-stile, but he will not; does not he
voluntarily hinder himself from going to London? that which he can do, must be
done first, before that which he cannot. So ye that live in your sins, you
must first do that which you can, before you can look that God should help
you to do that which you cannot; if thou do all that thou can, for ought
that thou know, Christ though he has not absolutely engaged himself,
stands at the Church style, there ready to help thee. There be men in the
World whom he is resolved to help; thou do not know but thou art the man.
Christ has not told thee any thing to the contrary, but only he bids thee do
what thou can; can thou not cut off thy long hair? are no Sizers able to
cut it? have not you a Tongue in your heads ye that keep disorders in your
Alehouses? cannot you say get you hence ye drunken companions, here is no
entertainment for you? you must do that which you can, before you can expect
Christ's help to do that which you cannot; and if you will not do that which you
can, you do voluntarily hinder your own selves from doing that which you
cannot; Joshua could not stand before Ai nor hinder a close Achan from taking
the golden wedge; but when it was taken and known, he was able to make him an
example. Joshuah he fasted and cried unto God all day until night, that the
Lord would mercifully save him and all Israel; Now hear what answer the Lord
gives him, get thee up says he, why lie thou here? Josh. 7.10. Israel has
sinned, go and execute Justice, go and do that first, and then I will answer
thee about Ai; for if Joshuah would not have done what he could, the Lord would
never have helped him to do that which he could not. So thou prayst for mercy
and grace, oh that God would convert thee and pardon thee; get thee up says
God; do thou stand praying for mercy as long as such things and such things
are not reformed? thou have drunkenness in thy house, go and reform that; thou
art in league with a sort of base lusts, go and reform them; if thou will not
do that which thou can, how can thou be sure God will help thee to do that
which thou can not? no thou stickst at a will not, as long as thou refusest
to do that.

3. Consider if a man will not do that which he can, 3. Consid.
neither will he do that which he cannot if he could; the servant that will
not go five or six miles in a day which he can for his Master, neither would he
go a hundred miles for his Master if he could; you that can reform outwardly,
at least if you would, and yet will not, neither would you reform more if you
could; ye have money in your purses, cannot you spend it better then upon
swilling and drinking and gaming? ye can well enough, but ye will not. So ye
would do, had you that true riches, Luke 16.11. ye have natural abilities; if
ye will not be faithful in them, so it would be if so be you had better; ye
that have moral and civil endowments, if ye will not be faithful in them,
neither would you if God should lend you more, etc. ye are able to avoid
swearing and lying, but ye will not, neither would ye avoid all other sins
if ye could; if a man will not do that which he can, neither will he do
that which he cannot if he could.

4. Consi.
4. Consider, if a man will not do that which he can, can or cannot ^all's one
to him, all sticks at his will. I cannot repent and I cannot give over my
sins say thou, and I pray thee who told thee that thou can not? I am
naked says Adam, and who told thee that thou were naked? says God, Genesis
3.11. So may I say who told thee thou can not? does not thy own conscience
tell thee it is because thou will not? I cannot dig says the lazy Steward, and
to beg I am ashamed, Luke 16 3. I cannot dig; if he had a cudgel about his
back, it would make him to dig; to beg I am ashamed, says he; he was not
ashamed to cozen his Master of his goods, but he was ashamed to beg. I have
married a Wife and I cannot come, Luke 14.20. No. what did his wife tie his
legs? there is a Lion in the way, I cannot go out says the sluggard; alas
thy own sluggish wilful wills are this cannot. Prove. 22.13.
Can or cannot alls one to them, they never come to try whether they can, yea
or no; the sluggard never looked out to see the Lion in the way, but he dreamt
there was one there, and he was willing to believe it, he would not go out to
see; the idle steward did not try whether he could dig, yea or no; if he had
taken the Spade in his hand and gone about the work, 'twere another matter; but
I cannot dig says he, he never would put it to trial, but takes another
course without trying of that; so that alls one can or cannot, if a man will
not do that which he can, can or cannot, alls one to him.

5. Consider, 5 Consi.
if a man will not do that which he can, this will make a man's conscience when
it comes to speak in sober sadness, thank himself for his perishing; men's
consciences do but jest with them now, while they can say tush it is because I
cannot believe, and because I cannot repent; but at the hour of conviction or
the day of judgment at farthest, then conscience will speak in sober
sadness; when I was hungry ye gave me no meat says Christ, when I was a
thirst ye gave me no drink, I was a stranger and ye took me not in, sick
and in prison and ye visited me not, Mat. 25.43. mark Christ puts no cannots
on their consciences at the day of judgment; could they say, alas, we had
never a bit of bread for to do it, never a drop of drink for to do it? no, you
shall see how their consciences were mute; they could not say that they could
not; could not ye comfort Christ's dear members as well as mock them? could
thou not take them into thy house as well as carnal acquaintance? its worthy
observation to consi^er, that generally Gods threatenings do not turn against
Cannots, nor his judgments against Cannots, ^ut against men's particular
sins, that they might have avoided; for though men's sinful consciences do
necessarily incline men to sin, yet not unto this sin, nor that sin, non
determinat necessario ad hoc vel illud malum, hic and nunc, say our Britain
Divines at the Synod. Sinful concupiscence does not necessarily determine men
upon these and these sins, with the particular circumstances which they live
in, as this rapine, this lie, etc. thus ye see this will make a sure ground of
our Doctrine if so be we can prove it.

Every man can do more good then he does, and avoid more evil then he does.
This is a most certain and infallible truth, and needs no confirmation, but I
will prove it notwithstanding.

1. Argu.
First, because God does complain against the wicked for the voluntary doing no
more good then they do; what so much preaching and no more good? so many
means and no more fruit? etc. so God cemplaines against Israel, nevertheless
they departed not from the sins of Jeroboam, etc. and there remained the
groves also in Samaria, 2 Kings 13.6. the grove also; what not so much as the
grove cut down? and ye must have the sins of Jeroboam; that were enough
stubbornness one would think; but ye must suffer the grove also? reform
nothing, no, not the grove under your face? see how God girdeth their wilful
security that they would do no more good then they did; not so much as cut down
that grove? so many warnings and threatenings, etc. and yet the grove also? yet
thy filthy Tongue thy covetousness also, etc. not only keep thy other lusts,
but thy profanesse also?

Secondly, 2. Argu. Tametfi impossible er^t Judaeis convertiper externam
praedicationem Evangelii, absque praedeterminante gratia: quia tamen
^bduratiores erant Iudaei proptia malitia qua^ Tyrii and Sydonii, idcirco a
scrutatore cordium corripiu^tur. Doct. Pride. lect. de med. scient p 65.
because otherwise there were no room for praise nor dispraise, if a man could
do no more good then he does, nor shun no more evil then he does, then no man
could be praised nor dispraised; you know that wicked men and women may do many
commendable things, at least more commendable ones then others? does not our
Savior discommend Bethsaida and Corazin, in comparison of Tire and Sidon; woe
unto thee Corazin, woe unto thee Bethsaida, for if the mighty works which have
been done in thee, had been done in Tire and Sydon, they would have repented
in sackcloath and ashes, Mat. 11.21. might not they have showed so much
repentance at the least? could not they have put on sackcloath on their loins,
and powered ashes on their heads if they would? they might have done so much at
the least, and honored the works and preaching of our Savior with an outward
honor at the least. You that have such abundant teaching as ye have, ye might
honor the Gospel with some outward honor at the least; that would be more
commendable, which most of you will not.

3. Argu.
Thirdly, because otherwise there would be no room for the Sword of the
Magistrate; if a man could omit no more sin then he does, then what means
our Pillaries and Gallows, etc and other punishments upon Malefactors? will
any man be so vain as to say Achan could not choose but take the Babylonish
Garment? certainly he might have let it alone if he would; Why have thou
troubled us says J^shuah, Josh. 7.25. Alas he was not able to answer, oh Sir I
could not do otherwise? No, no; he might have omitted it, and therefore the
Law of man is favorable to such as offend against their wills; it does not hang
such as kill against their wills.

4. Argu.
Fourthly, because though a carnal man cannot put of the old man, nor shake off
the dominion of sin in general, nor deny himself, but his very nature is
sinful and fleshly, he does naturally sin, yet it is not his nature to
commit this sin at this time, and in this manner; the wickedest man under
Heaven goes about his sin with previall deliberation, and a most free
disposition of the means; the drunkard goes freely into the Alehouse, and
calls freely for a jugge or two or three, as his lust is; his Host, he freely
suffers these disorders in his house, and freely goes to the Tap and does draw
it, etc. Ephraim did willingly walk after the Commandment, Hos. 5.11. The
wicked King of Israel commanded them that will worship at Bethell, and they did
freely and willingly obey it. Pilate willingly contented the people, and
therefore he scourged our Savior, Mark. 15.15. for though all this was done
by the determinate counsel of God, yet Gods counsel put no simple necessity
upon his will, he did freely and willlingly do it; the wicked they turn the
Grace of God into wantonness, Jude 4. mark, the Grace of God; Grace whereby
they might do more good then they do, and avoid more evil then they do. Its
true, a wicked man is the servant of sin, and cannot but sin, he is
naturally a servant of sin; of sin I say, but he is voluntarily and freely
a servant of this sin; for the Lord gives him reason, and counsel, and good
motions, and many common graces, whereby he may be freed from this or that act,
but he will not, he will break out into these and these filthy passionate
words, now and then; say reason what it will, and common grace what it will, he
will do it, he will do this, and he will do that. I confess that when a wicked
man is desperate and given up of God, then it is otherwise, then his will is so
greedy, that he cannot take it off; but he is the more inexcusable because
his will is then double.

Fifthly, A wicked man can do more good, etc. 5. Argu.
for a godly regenerate soul may avoid more sin, then he does. Though God
have freed him from the slavery of sin, and he is become the servant of
righteousness, Romans 6.18. nevertheless they may do more good then they do,
and avoid sin a great deal more then they do; what man will say that David
could not otherwise choose but commit that adultery which he did, and that
murder which he did? I appeal to your consciences ye souls that are godly.
When ye pray forgive us our Trespasses, do not ye acknowledge with all that ye
have been wanting to the grace of God? Do not ye confess it with shame that
you have given way to sundry temptations that by the grace of God ye might
have overcome? And that ye have omitted many a good opportunity, that by the
grace of God ye might have made use of? Imsuperabilite^ movet, quamvis fit
aliqua resistentia.
I deny not but God does irresistibly convert his Elect at the first, and
infallibly carry them on to the end, for the maine, but in particular actions
he does not so; but though their wills be now free by grace, yet they may
freely sin, even then when they obey: and freely obey, even then when they
transgress; and so they are forced to confess they might avoid more evil
then they do, and do more good then they do.

Again A wicked man may do more good then he does, and avoid more evil then
he does; I prove it by induction upon his conscience,

By these Particulars.
First, for the outward acts of sin in the members; thus all profane persons,
drunkards, etc. ye are all convinced undeniably in your consciences, these are
sins in the very outward members; voluntas it is domina membrorum; can ye
say ye cannot pass by an Alehouse when ye turn in? ye cannot come unto
Sermons? your own legs they shall judge you; can you say you cannot give
over your oathing and lying? etc. your own Teeth and Lips shall judge you,
etc. If you do not root out these sins, its without doubt because ye will
not. The Lord has made all the outward man at the command of the will, and
therefore if the outward man be out of order, it is because ye will; (...),
says Chrysostom. Let no man say I have but one Talent, and I have no power to be
good; a Talent has power to go for a Talent, and 12 d. for a shilling and if
it do not, it is because ye will not. Have thou not power over thine own
outward members vouchsafed thee of God? the Lord in mercy lets thy will have a
despoticall power over thy members, as the Moralists call it, and why can
thou not bridle, them? as Christ said to the Officer that smote him, if I have
spoken well, why smitest thou me? Joh. 18.23. could thou not have held in
thy fingers? thou art inexcusable then for all thy profane sins. Am^r sui
ipsius est objectum mo^ioum; at Amor Dei ipsius est tantum objectum
terminativil. Ames. Cas. conse. de charit^ erga deum.


Secondly, Thou have natural affections in thee, and by them thou may do
more good then thou do, and shun more evil then thou do. Thus all civil
Professors are left inexcusable, Can thou not get more strictness of
walking, though not for love unto God, yet for love unto thy self? be more
frequent in good duties for hope of Heaven, and for fear of Hell? that's better
then nothing, better do them so then not at all. What cannot a man do for
self-love and for fear? there is never a duty of Religion, but a man may
every day do for love unto himself and for fear. God has left these
affections in thy soul on purpose. I know this is not enough; but what of
that? Why do thou not go so far as thou may? what aileth thee that thou
can not tame down thy pride for fear of Gods judgments, and bridle thy
base passions for fear of Hell? It is not unknown that God has vowed to
destroy all the workers of iniquity. It Is not unknown that he has prepared
Hell for such as thou art, as long as thou live as thou do; Thou know
this is true, and thou know God will be as good as his Word; and thou art not
able to abide it. Why do thou not curb thy proud stubborn lusts for fear
of this Hell? That's better then nothing; if thou can not do it for love, yet
why can thou not do it for fear? have thou not as much reason as a brute
creature? that is greedy of meat, yet a whip-stick is able to scare him from
it; an horse is desirous to stand s^ill, yet a spur and a rod is able to make
it go faster; and is not Hell more fearful then all rods? Why do thou not
take heed for fear, least God should send thee to Hell? a sinner and a
hypocrite are inexcusable herein; for Hell may fear them; the sinners in Sion
are afraid, fearfulness has surprised the hypocrites; who among us shall
dwell with everlasting burnings? Quis poterit? as Mon^anus has it.
Esaias 33.14. who of us is able to dwell with everlasting flames? and hypocrites
may go so far; fear Hell, and abstain from a million of sins, for fear
of these everlasting burnings; can thou say thou can not resist sin for
fear of Gods judgments? No; thou can resist sin for fear of less evils
then so; the fear of men's seeing thee can keep thee from committing adultery
in the marketplace, and cannot the fear of God restrain thee from it in
private? thou dare not transgress the Kings Laws for fear of the Gallowse;
and cannot the fear of Hell restrain thee from transgressing of Gods? Gods
displeasure is greater then the Kings? and thou know it; God is truer in his
Law then any mortal man, and thou know it: and fear thou not me? fear
ye not me? says the Lord, will ye not tremble at my presence? Jer. 5.22.
can thou say thou art not able to fear him so much as servilely? that is not
so; for when thou art sick and ready to dye, then thou will fear him, then oh
thou would feign become a new creature, and all out of fear of the great
God; and can thou not now? No, no; now here be pleasures to be had, and thou will have them; here is the World, and thou will carke; here is business, and
thou will be doing, and thou will not find leisure for God. No, thou will not,
can thou not do this that God bids thee at least out of fear? this is
nothing but a lie of Satan, thou would do them all for fear of a man.
Suppose there were Laws made that every man who does not pray in his Family
Morning and Evening should assuredly be hanged, whosoever swears an Oath should
be hanged, as soon as he has sworn it; Whosoever breaks out into any
bitter railing speech should suffer death. Suppose I say to all the duties of
Religion it were death to omit them, and the King had made such a certain sure
Law* I dare say there would be many millions of Professors more in England then
there are; rather then ye would be gibbeted, many swearers would never swear
more; many liers never lie more; many profane househoulders never omit Prayers
in their Families more; and could thou do this for fear of a man? why can
thou not then do it for fear of the great God?

Thirdly, The Lord has given thee natural counsel, and natural reason and
prudence, Oh say thou I am tempted before I am aware, and the passion is up
before I am aware, I cannot help it for my life; No, I believe thee when the
Devil is once up, there is no alaying that foul Fiend for the present; Thou
can not immediately allay it. But why can thou not prevent it with counsel
and deliberation? the very Heathens have done this; and thou have advantage of
all heathen. God has given thee not only reason in thy head, and a natural
conscience in thy breast, but also direction in his Word to prevent it, and if
thou do not, thou will not; are the lusts of thine appetite violent? why then
do thou not forecast for to reine them? Why do thou not abstain from going
to Feasts awhile? Why do thou not stint thy Trencher with so much? If thy
lusts be on fire why do thou feed them with fuel? Are the lusts of anger
and wrath predominant in thee? thou rapst out an Oath before thou art aware,
why then do thou not as Chrysostom would have thee, Set forfeitures for
every Oath? Why do thou not entreat Gods people severely to reprove thee, and
exact a fine of thee for every misgoverning word? Why do thou not bawke such
acquaintance as may occasion thy Tongue to cast out? Oaths why do thou not
club down thy lusts with argument upon argument? shall I be touchy to be
damned, and proud to be damned? etc. even arguments of self-love are able to
knock them down. I do not know how; No? that is because thou will not know,
they knew not neither will they understand, Psalm. 82.5. so thou know not,
neither will thou understand; that is the reason thou still walk in
darkness; why do not thou oppose thy lusts at first rising? non obtinebis ut
desinat si incipere permiseris, says Seneca; thou can never get victory
except thou be here first in the field. The Lord has given thee counsels on
this fashion; why do thou not use them? only because thou will not; have
thou impediments? Clarancus had them too, but he overcame them says Seneca.
Why do not thou? if thou will not, thou do willingly perish; thou might do
more then thou do, but thou will not; and thou mighst shun more then thou
do, but thou will not.

Fourthly, because thou will say all these things are but natural and moral
and civil, I may perish for all these; but alas I am not able to do any thing
spiritually; I cannot believe, I cannot repent; though this be very true, yet
thy plea is no excuse; for though they be natural, yet they are first. First
that is in order which is natural, and afterward that which is spiritual, and
if thou stickest there thou stickest at a will not. The Lord has taken a
sufficient course to humble thee, and thou will not be humbled; thou say
thou can not obey spititually; I grant it, its most true: nor repent
spiritually; why then will thou not be humbled that that can not, as God said
to Pharaoh, how long will thou refuse to humble thy self before me? Exodus
10.3. There is an external humiliation, as Ahabs humiliation; 1 Kings 21.29.
thou may come to before that humiliation thou can not express, why art
thou not humbled with that which thou may?

First, then why do thou not see thy case to be damnable? Do thou not know
that judgment is past upon all to damnation? Romans 5.18. all men are damned out
of Christ. Whosoever is not a new creature, is not in Christ, but is a damned
man to this day; thou know the Lord himself does say thus; what hinders
thee now from deducting a particular therefrom? If upon all men, then upon me;
if all be damned to this day that are not new creatures in Christ, then I am a
damned man to this hour; this logic God does vouchsafe thee; why do thou
not reason on this fashion? I am a damned man and a damned woman to this day;
if thou would be brought to this pass there might be some hope of thee, but
thou will not, thou will scrape up some hopes or other, thou will not believe
this. Believe thus, says God; but I will not say thou, no, thou will have
thy lust still, and thou will not believe this, if thou would believe verily
thou art a damned man, because thou art not a new creature in Christ, may be
thou would never have done til thou art one, thou would forsake all and
follow Christ in all things, but thou will not.

Secondly, but I cannot say thou; why then will thou not despair in thy
self? a man must despair as he is, otherwise he can never get into Christ;
as long as a man lives and does after the flesh, he can have no true hope of
mercy or pardon, or any thing; no he is a dead man, all the Angels of Heaven
cannot help him; if there were a thousand Christ's he should perish without
them; and why will thou not despair in thy self? Despair? God forbid. I Will
never despair while I live, God is more merciful then so, and I hope I need
not despair. Christ dyed for sinners and I were a fool if I should despair.
Thus thou pleadest with God for thy vain hopes; but why will thou? says God,
why will thou plead with me, thou have transgressed against me, Jer. 2.29. Thou
pleadest for hopes* and lie in thy sins, why will thou? mark, the will is
set on it, and thou will plead; thou might despair of thy self, but thou will
not, and therefore thou will wilfully perish.

Thirdly, but I cannot pull down my own heart, nor master mine one will say
thou; no? Why then can thou not go and resign it to God? Lord, here is a
proud heart, I cannot humble it; Oh; here is a stony heart, I cannot break it;
Lord do thou; here is a rebellious heart* I cannon subdue it. Lord do thou; but
thou will not resign up this heart, thou will not set about it as well as thou
can; they will not frame their doings, to turn unto God, Hos. 5.4. they will
not; so thou will not frame thy self to do it as well as thou can. And
therefore thou do willingly go on, and thou art wholly inexcusable before God;
and when he sends thee to Hell, thou shall know thine own will brought thee
thither. Thou mighst reform thine outward man, but thou will not; thou mighst
bridle thy lusts and thy passions, but thou will not, thou mighst take a
thousand good opportunities, but thou will not. And therefore thou have no
excuse before God, thou do willingly perish. Its true thou can not, may be,
Repugnanti, non volenti necessitas est Sen.
but necessity is not it, but thou will not; indeed if thou did every day
labor to fight against thy lusts, and resist to the utmost and could not,
then it were necessity, but thou do not, nay thou will not. He that
resists and then cannot, he may plead, Lord what a woeful necessity of
sinning am I in! but thou give way to thy lusts and therefore thou art
inexcusable, and thou do^t willingly perish.

The second Ground.
THe second now follows. Every wicked man is slothful and negligent. Thou
evil servant and slothful, says Christ, Mat, 25.26. Thou have been lazy
with the Talent I gave thee. I gave thee preaching and teaching, and thou have
been lazy to hear it. I have given thee knowledge of that which is good, and
thou have been lazy to improve it. I have pulled thee to Prayer by the motion
of my Spirit, and thou have been lazy at the duty. Thou evil and slothful
servant, I have given thee many a sweet opportunity to be rid of that base
lust that thou are most addicted unto, and thou have been lazy to take it.
This is another ground of this Doctrine. Now if this be so, thou must lay the
blame on thine own will, and not on Gods denying thee power; Because sloth is a
fault of the will. I cannot call him a sluggard, that sticks at a cannot but
only him that sticks at a Will not. He that labors and strives as much as he
can, none will call him a sluggard, but him that can labor more and will not.
Sloth is a voluntary fault of the will; How long will thou sleep O sluggard?
Prove. 6.9. How long will thou? its not a fault of impotency, but of will.

Five Demonstrations to prove this.
First, if thou be slothful to good duties, 1 Demon.
then thou do only imagine a company of cannots. I cannot do as I would say
thou; No; why then art thou slothful, to make more imaginary cannots? A
slothful man imagines more cannots then there be. I cannot go this journey
says he, I shall be weary, I shall be robbed, I shall fall off my horse; I
cannot travel it; the way of a slothful man* is a hedge of Thorns. But the
way of the righteous is made plain says Solomon; the slothful man he
imagines there is a Thorn hedge in his way. I shall be pricked, Prove. 15.19.
I cannot get over it; what? is there a Thorn hedge in the way? No; for the
righeous that goes it, he finds it plain, he sees none; no; there is no such
Thorne-hedge in the way, but he does imagine one; and therefore his will not is
his let, not his cannot, for he does but imagine a cannot. So do thou say, I
cannot do thus and thus; why then art thou slothful to imagine more cannots,
and Thorn hedges then there are? I cannot live then. Oh I cannot go so often
to Prayer, and if I should do as you say, I should be houted at up and down;
you tell me I am a Hellhound for my pride and my passions; Oh if I should
believe this, I should never have merry day more. Alas all these are but
imaginary cannots, imaginary Thorn hedges. I cannot be so strict, neither can
I put it up. I say thou do but imagine a company of cannots, and therefore
thou will not.

2 Demon.
2. Demonstration, Jf thou be slothful to good duties, then thou make every
little difficulty a cannot; nothing but an impossibility is a cannot. But if
thou be slothful, thou make every little difficulty a cannot. I cannot
turn mine own heart, nor break mine own heart; but why then art thou
slothful to make every little diffiuclty a cannot? a slothful man makes every
little difficulty a cannot. The slothful man will not plow by reason of cold,
and therefore shall he beg in harvest and have nothing. Prove. 20.4.
He will not plough by reason of cold, he sticks at a very little difficulty,
his fingers are so tender forsooth, they must not ache, his Toes are so
Lady-like they must not smart, because its a little diffcult, therefore he
will not do it; He will not plow by reason of cold. Well beg then and ye will;
cannot you endure a little cold? yea, he could endure it, but it would be
difficult. And therefore says the Text, he will not Plough by reason of cold.
He does not stick at an impossibility, for then indeed he could not. But the
slothful man will not plough by reason of cold; he sticks only at a
difficulty, and therefore he will not; nay if he should labor soundly indeed,
his very labor would keep him from being a cold; the truth is its the labor
of ploughing that he is against. And therefore every little cold shall serve
for an excuse; So why art thou slothful to count every petty difficulty a
cannot? Its an uncomfortable thing to be always poring on my sins, I cannot
abide it, troublesome to be Tongue-tyed. What not speak a word but only with
warrant from Scripture? I cannot abide it; what never help my self at a dead
lift by telling a lie? never right my self by a little revenge? never comply
nor sort with such and such old acquaintance, because they drop out an Oath now
and then before they are aware? O I cannot abide it. What thus precise? I am
not able to abide it. No? cannot, cannot thy stubborn will stoop to a little
difficulty? get thee to Hell, and see if thou can abide that, and there
thank thine own will for thy perishing.

3. Demonstration, 3 Demon.
if thou be slothful, then thou turnest thy very abilities into cannots,
not only all difficulties, but also thine abilities into cannots. Like a drone
that is lazy, he loses his abilities that he has. By much slothfulness the
building decays. Alas I am very dead-hearted say thou; Eccles. 10.18.
nay, but O man the time was when God quickened thee at a Sermon, why did thou
let it decay? the time was when thou were a little well affected, why did
thou let it decay? time was when thou were soberer, and less given to wrath
and passions; and why did thou let these good conditions decay? the Lord gave
thee them heretofore, and thou have played the sluggard with them, and
therefore now they are decayed. Thy quickening is decayed, thy sorrows for
sin decayed, thy meltings decayed, through much slothfulness the building
does decay. He that is slothful in his work is brother to a great waster,
Prove. 1.86
So thou art a brother to a great waster because thou art slothful.

4 Demon.
4. Demonstration, If thou be slothful then thou do voluntarily nail thy
self unto cannots. There is many a sin that now thou art a slave to, that
thou mighst have trodden under thy foot, but now thou can not; thou might
have gone further and further on in reformation, if thou had held on when
thou were going; like a Coach, its easier to make it run on when once its
going, then stir it, when once it stands still; and now thou can not, now
thou art nailed to it, like the door to his hinges. Now thou can pray and
pray and grow nere the better, hear and read and near the holier, as the door
turns upon its hinges, so does the slothful man on his Bed. Prove. 26.14.
The door goes to and fro, to it goes and fro it goes, it goes may be all the
year long; and still it hangs just upon the same hinges, and after seven
years travel, it hangs there where it did; its nailed to its hinges. So it is
with a sluggish heart, he goes to a Prayer and from a Prayer, to a Sermon and
from a Sermon, to a good duty and from a good duty; and still he hangs just on
the same hinges. He has gotten no ground, is just where he was; so thou art
just at the same pass, after a thousand prayers and a thousand Sermons, and
millions of good duties, still thou hangest on thy old duties, near the more
pure to this hour.

5. Demonstration, Sloth is a lazy putting forth by halves of that power one
has. 5 Demon.
This also is the very nature of Sloth. When a man has more power then he
shows, but he is lazy to put it all forth. The Scripture uses a comparison of
a man, that hides his hand in his bosom, and though he have meat standing
before him, yet he will not so much as bring it to his mouth. A slothful man
hides his hand in his bosom, and will not bring it to his mouth. What? Prove
19.24
why does he starve? because he has not any meat? No; The meat stands
before him; because he has not any hands? no, he has a hand in his bosom;
because his hand has the dead Palsy, and he not able to stir it? No, he
will not put it forth. He will not bring it to his mouth, says the Text; So
when thou art praying thou will not put thy self forth, when thou art
reforming thou do not put thy self forth; when thou art about any good
service thou do not put thy self forth; here is a Sabbath before thee, and a
Sacrament before thee, but thou will not reach it to thy mouth; thou will not
put thy self forth. The Lord tells thee this sin will break thy neck, and
thou will not so much as reach it to thy mouth, nor apply it to thy heart; may
be it would humble thee and feed thee, but thou will not reach it to thy mouth;
what a deal of power have thou? but thou putst it forth by the halves, when
thou art examining thy conscience, thou putst thy self forth by the halves,
thou might put thy self forth many degrees more, but thou will not.

Oh beloved, this same point will strike the World dumb before God, even this,
why did ye not put your selves forth to the uttmost? Thou have somewhat more
in thee then by reason of thy laziness thou do put forth.

Six Arguments to prove it.
There is more then by reason of Sluggishnesse thou put forth.
1. Argu.
First, its a sign it is in thee, because when God does convert a sinner, he
does not put in new powers and faculties into the soul; he does not put in a
new faculty of thinking and understanding, and willing and affecting, and
remembering; No; the soul has these faculties already, understanding, already
and thinking already, and remembering and desiring already, and willing already;
but God does not put in new faculties, When God comes to work grace, he finds
in thee indeed passiva capacitas, and potentia obedientialis, but their own
natural faculties are raised to supernatural acts upon supernatural object
God.
but turns them that are there unto himself like a watch out of frame, the
wheels are there still, the spring still, and every parcel there still; but
all out of frame, and the artist sets them in frame; so the soul has them in
it; True it requires the omnipotent power of God to turn all these faculties to
him. Notwithstanding thou do voluntarily turn them unto other things, and
not unto God. They are every one in thee, as thou art a man. But God may not
have them, nay and thou might put them forth to more then thou do. Other
things can have them superfluously, but God may not have them. (I intend not a
power of doing the least good in a gracious manner, nor to engage God to give
thee grace only.)

Secondly, its a sign it is in thee. 2. Argu.
(I mean still so far forth as to demonstrate thee slothful.) I say its a
sign it is in thee, because thou can show as great power otherwise. When a
servant can run a race for his sport, why will he not on his Masters errand
when he bids him? Its a sign it is in him, and he will not put it forth.
Can thou not spare an hour every day for private Prayer unto God, sometime
for to meditate and belabour thy heart? Thou can spare twice as much for thy
belly and thy back, and thy profits. Can thou not shed tears for thy sins?
Thou can shed tears for madness, and wrath, and vexation. Can thou not
tell how to glorify God? Oh my parts are very shallow, gifts very small, etc.
But thou art wise to do evil, They are wise to do evil, but do good they have
no knowledge. Its a sign it is in thee, Jer. 4.2^.
but thou wi^^ not. Thou can not speak for God, thou can not be angry
against sin, nor lay to heart the miseries of Gods Church? No? but thou can
find thy Tongue fast enough for to rail, and clamor; and thou can even
burst with anger when thou art crossed. Its a sign its in thee, a sign there is
wit enough in thee, and ability enough in thee to take pains. Thou have it for
other things, but thou will not put it forth for the Lord. Oh how does this
provoke the most highest! That strangers should devour all thy strength. Hos.
7.9.
Like Ephraim, strangers devoured all his strength. God might have none of it,
but strangers and strange lusts could have it; the World can have thy pains
and thy cares, the things of the World they can have thy thoughts and thy
strength, and not J says Christ. As a Master complains of his refractory
servant, you can do it for your self, and do it for others; but you will not
do it for me, a sign it is in thee, but thou will not put it forth.

3. Argu.
Thirdly, a sign it is in thee, for thou can show it to when thou listest;
like a sluggard that will work at idle times, so thou can serve God when
thou have nothing else to do. Like Pharaohs conceit of the Jsraelites, That
they would serve God because they had nothing else to do. Exodus 5.17
Ye are idle, idle ye are, therefore ye say, let us go and do sacrifice unto
God. Because they had nothing else to do; So when thou have nothing else to do
with thy Tongue then thou can give it to God; nothing else to do with thy
thoughts, then thou can think of God; when thou have no use of a lie then
thou can tell truth, etc. a sign it is in thee, it is not the telling of the
truth; it is not the speaking very gently and modestly that is not in thee to
do; but thou will not put it forth; nay thou can be soundly provoked while
some are in company, and yet still as quiet as may be, a sign it is in thee.

Fourthly, a sign it is in thee, 4 Argu.
but thou art so sluggish thou will not put it forth; because the rod is able
to whip it out of thee. Like a Boy that is idle and can say nothing, yet his
Master is able to whip it out of him, then he can say it very roundly. So thou
can not think of these things, yet let God lash thee and whip thee with
sickness, or with the pangs of death, Then O I have been a Drunkard, and I
have been naught, I have been wicked, and Oh if God would recover me, I
would not for a world sin so as I have done; Then thou can weep, and then
thou can cry, and then O for the Minister. A sign it is in thee, for a rod
puts in no new, but only lashes up that which lay there; as the Twigges of the
rod have no virtue in them to put learning into the Boy, but its a sign it was
in him. Ah thou wretch thou, thy blood lies on thine own head; why then do
thou not now put thy self forth? Thou can, but Oh it killes thee to think
now of taking pains, after such things. It kills thee now to go to thy beads
and lie at weeping cross, and be so holy forsooth. Oh it kills thee now to
take pains here abouts, like the sluggard, the desire of the sluggard kills
him, for his hands refuse to labor. He desires to have a crop, Prove. 21.25.
but it kills him to go to the Plough; he desires to have his markets, but it
kills him to go thither. So thou desire, to go to Heaven, but it kills thee
to take pains; Mortification, Selfe-Denyall, Repentance, Humiliation,
Examination of Conscience, Reformation of life; Oh these kill thee to think of
them. A sign much is in thee, but it killes thee to put it forth.

5. Argu.
Fifthly, A sign it is in thee because thou can do a hundred times more then
when thou art pleased; like a wilful lazy servant, you could do it better if
you were pleased says his Master. So as long as thou art pleased thou can be
more religious, a sign it is in thee. Rhehoboams his first years were
religious; Peter Martyr observes, (...) was well pleased that same while he
saw it was for the establishing of his kingdom. And the Levits came to him,
from Jeroboam, so long he was pleased, and then he was religious, but
afterward not; and why not afterward too? Its a sign it was in him, but he
was not well pleased; So Joash did right in the sight of the Lord all the days
of Jehoiada. Why? then he was well pleased with Religion, for it helped him to
root out Athaliahs faction; 2 Kings 12 2.
Jehoiada had been the Saveiour of his life, the help of him to the Kingdom,
the Lord protector of his Nonage, the establisher of his Scepter. All this
while Religion did please him, but afterward he would not do right in the
sight of the Lord. Why? because other things now pleased him better; but its a
sign it was in him. They on the rock, they could hear, and profess as long
as the Gospel did please them, they heard it with joy, that pleased them well.
Luke 4.13.
Ye know joy is a very pleasing thing, and then they could be forward to
profess it. A sign it was in them, but in time of affliction and persecution,
nay now the Gospel did not please them, and therefore they fall off. So thou
can love a child of God as long as he pleases thee, nay thou can commend
him for his holiness; O its a credit to thee to be acquainted with such a one.
But when some thing does not please thee, then thou can hate him in thy
heart; all these are signs it is in thee, but thou will not put it forth.

Sixthly, a sign it is in thee, 6. Argu.
because thou will show it in Hell; there Dives shall show it was in him to
have regarded a godly poor Lazarus, to have respected the salvation of his
five brethren: there he shall show it was in him to fear Hell more then he
did. Then the wicked shall say; Luke 16.28.
What has pride profited us? And what have riches and means advantaged us?
Then they shall see it was in them not to count them for hypocrites, and Fools
and Madmen that were more religious then themselves. We fools counted their
life madness, and we had them in derision; and lo they are received amongst
the Saints, Wisd. 5.3, 4, 5. And therefore it is in thee, why then will thou
not put thy self forth? I say this will strike you all dumb before God at the
last day; why would you not put you selves forth? And how do you stand lazing
and idling out the days of your own peace!

No excuse will serve impenitent sinners turn at the last day.
Ye cannot have any one excuse.
First, Ye cannot say no body hired you; Indeed the carefullest servant in the
World must of necessity be idle when none will employ him; why stand you here
idle all the day long? No man has hired us Lord, Math. 20.6. mark they have
an excuse that they were never hired into the Vineyard. That was more necessary
idleness; but you have been hired; nay you were hired very earley in the
morning, and therefore why stand you here idle all the day long?

Secondly, now thou art in Gods Vineyard, thou can not say I cannot profess.
I cannot profit by hearing, nor profit by praying, etc. Thou can not say so;
for why do thou not labor? in all labor there is profit. Never did a man
labor but some profit or other he did get; Prove. 14.23.
but thou would not labor, but thou stoodest lazing and idling. Feign
would thou be saved; feign escape Hell and damnation, and oh that this were
to labor for it. Like the sluggad that desires a harvest, and yet is idle; O
utinam hoc esset laborare; He lies loytering and playing, and oh that this
were to labor! Oh that this were to plough and to sow! If his Bed were the
Plough, and his Pillow the Teeme, he would then drive it well? So do thou,
utinam hoc esset resipiscere, thou go on minding the things of this life,
carking and caring etc. Vtinam hoc esset resipiscere. O that this were to
repent, and this were to go to Heaven thou art negligent of Prayer and Faith
and holiness, Christ Jesus save me; Thus cries the drunkard, Christ save me,
and thus the worldling, Christ Jesus forgive me. Thus like a sluggard thou
wishest; O that this were believing and serving of God. Like the sluggard I
say, O that this were to labor; thou mighst profit if thou would labor; in
all labor is profit; but thou will not labor, and therefore inexcusable. O
what a speechless creature shall thou be before God at the last day! This is
the second ground of the Doctrine; The reason why a wicked man does not turn
unto God, is not because he cannot, but because he will not. I say the ground
of it is this. Every wicked man is slothful and negligent.

Stir up your selves ye whose heart the Lord has awakened; Though the
wicked be slothful, will ye be slothful also? O what infinite reason has
the Lord to correct us, every one of us all? How woefully slothful are our
hearts! I cannot master my unruly heart says one, and I cannot cast out this
same hard hearted Devil; Thus we say like the Disciples of Christ we could
not cast him out. O faithless Generation, how long shall I be with you says
Christ. Mar. 9.19.
Cannot cast him out? Why? he could go out by Praying and Fasting; So these
same distempers of heart, these frozen-hearted Devils would go out soon
enough by Fasting and praying; but Oh we are so lazy thereat, and so cold and
so dead and so drowsy, we do not take pains. There is teaching in abundance,
and why cannot we learn? There is misery enough on the Church, and why cannot
we mourn? There is woe enough a coming, and why cannot we provide for it
aforehand? God will whip out these lazy weeds out of us, if we belong to him;
O it provokes him! as Vinegar to the Teeth, and smoke to the Eyes, so is the
sluggard to him that sends him. Prove. 10.26.
Ah thou lazy drone; this it is to send a leaden-heeld drone of ones errand; it
makes the Master look as sowerly on him, as if he had drunken a Porringer of
Vinegar. So beloved, this our sloth to good things it does deeply provoke God;
there is many a mercy we lose, because of our sloth; many a grace we never
attain, nay many a cross and many a trouble do we get by reason of our
sloth. Oh let us stir up our selves, and blow up the sparks that are under
the embers, or else it will be evil and bitter, that God will make us to
suffer. And you that live in your sins, let me tell you; ye can never look
for mercy except ye shake of your sloth; ye may desire to be converted, and
pardoned and saved, and so forth; but the soul of the sluggard desires and
has not. But the diligent shall be made fat. It Is the diligent, the diligent
only that shall be fatted with grace; but ye may desire all days of your
life, but ye shall never have grace, except ye take pains. Nay your own
raynes shall torment you in Hell; Oh how did I idle out my time, and let slip
occasions; and I could die, and I would to hell, and I would not do otherwise,
and woe is me that ever I was borne, etc.

The Third Ground.
A wicked man will not set himself to use all the means that he may.

HE is not only slothful in the use of the same, nor only will he not do as
much good as he may, but also he will not so much as use the means
constantly in any fashion. I cannot says he repent, nor be such a new
creature as you talk of; Why then will thou not use the means? This makes
thee inexcusable. All the whole World both godly and ungodly have a cannot;
indeed the ungodly their cannot is larger and begins sooner, but the godly
their cannot is much lessened, and begins further off. The Lord inables them
to go further then all the wicked of the World; but beyond that there begins
their cannot. I say all the whole World have their cannot; I call that the
means of grace, which is between their Can and their cannot. As Prayers and
hearing the Word, and studying, and meditating, etc. The Lord seeing all men in
their cannots, has appointed such means as they can, whereby they are to
seek unto God, to do that which they cannot. Now a child of God whose cannot
is in some measure healed by grace, he can pray in faith, and hear in faith,
Liberum arbitrium liberatum.
etc. And therefore Prayer in faith, hearing Gods Word in faith, etc. are his
means to get more; he cannot obey more, nor believe more, but he uses these
means that he may. But a wicked man his cannot is larger, he cannot pray in
faith, and do these in faith, and therefore the faithful doing of these duties
are not his means. I cannot do so says he; No, but thou may set upon them
all, and do them in as good manner as thou can; that is thy means. Though
thou can not pray in faith, yet thou can set up constant Prayers in thy
Family though, Col. 4.6.
such as they are; Thou can not confer with grace, but thou can confer
about grace every day; thou can not repeat the Word to thy Household in faith,
but thou can repeat it, in as good a manner as thou art able, that is thy
means. Now if thou will not use the means thou stickest at a will not; and
when thou, do perish thou must thank thine own will, thou stickst at a will
not. The first question Christ asks thee is this, what can thou do? As when
the sons of Zebedee begged to sit one on the right hand, and the other on the
left, this they could not, except God did vouchsafe them a new gift. But what
can ye do? says Christ, are ye able to drink of the Cup that I am to drink
off, and be Baptized with the Baptism that I am Baptized with? We are able
say they, Mat. 20.22, 23. Ye shall indeed drink, etc. Mark, he puts them to
do that which they can, and then bids them leave that which they cannot unto
God. I say the the first question Christ asks thee is, what can thou do? I
cannot be a Saint, Lord help me to mercy, etc. Yea but what can thou do?
Can thou not use these and these means, I appoint thee? If thou will not do
them, neither will I help thee. This is the nature of means to be a means to
that which one cannot; A child of God can pray in faith, but he cannot master
such a lust, and therefore he prays in faith that he may. He can hear the
word preached in faith, but he cannot get his heart to it as he would, and
therefore he hears in faith that he may. Doing these in faith are the
means; now this is not the means of the wicked, for they cannot do any thing
in faith, but their means is to set about them at least that they may. I
cannot pray in faith say thou, yea: but thou can set up constant Prayers in
thy Family though, such as they are; thou can not cast off thy sins in
faith, thou may cast them of though; a godly man may do these things in
faith, and therefore that is his means. But that which is his can is thy
cannot, and that which is his means thou must use means unto. Note
Thou must pray that thou may pray in faith, repeat the Word that thou may
repeat it in faith; reform thy life that thou may reform it in faith: and
seek the Lord that thou may seek him in faith. Now if thou will not set upon
the means, thou stickst at a will not; I confess here is the difference, This
confounds the Helena, of the Arminians.
the godly have a promise upon their using of the means, they using them in
faith; but thou have no promise, yet who knows what God may do? As the King of
Nineveh said, lets cry mightily to God; lets cast away these and these sins,
who knows if God will turn and repent? Jon. 3.9. he had no promise, he
could not tell whether God would forgive. He would set upon the means, he
would cry mightily; and it hit well; for God spared the City, if thou will not
set upon the means, thou do wilfully perish; and here I cleared two things*
1. That God appoints every man the means that he may use, he may use those
means that God commands him as means, 2. That if he will not, he does
wilfully perish.

Arguments to prove a wicked man may use the means that God appoints as
means.
I cannot hear the preaching of the Word say thou, I am deaf, I cannot
hear Sermons, then that is not thy means; reading which thou can, and
meditating which thou can is thy means. Every man may use the means that
God does appoint him as means.

1. Argu.
First, because its the very nature of means to come between ones can and his
cannot and therefore they are called media, Media.
because they come in in the midst between a man's can and his cannot. By what
means may I go up to London? flying in the Air is not my means. No, that is
a Birds means and not mine, for I cannot do it; but my means is going if I
have legs: or riding, if they be not able; or carrying, if I cannot ride.
Every man's mediums come in between that which he can and that which he
cannot, and he is to use them, that, that which he cannot he may be enabled to
do.

Secondly, because God does not exhort men like a company of stocks and
stones, 2. Argu.
but as men that are edifyable by his words. If there were no means they could
possibly use, they were like stocks and stones. If they had no ears as means
to let it in, no understanding as means to conceive it; no power of willing at
least to set about it, then we should preach to a company of stocks. There
must be some means propounded, that men are enabled to use (though by any
power of their own they cannot do it graciously) or else as good preach to a
company of stocks. Now God protests he draws men as men may be drawn; I
draw them with the cords of a man. Hos. 11 4. That is with such cords as a man
may be drawn with; not like a company of stocks and of stones; if ye have but
the carnal reason of a man, these cords they would draw you. God draws you
like men, with the cords of a man; indeed in the quickening of the heart, and in
point of repentance, a man is no more active then a stone. But when he draws
you to the means, he draws you like men, and therefore ye may come if ye
will, and if ye be but men, these cords are cords to draw men.

3. Argu.
Thirdly, because Gods anger is very reasonable; when a Master is angry with a
servant, that may do a thing and yet will not, we call his anger a very
reasonable anger. I know Gods anger is very reasonable, for things which thou
can not; because once he gave thee power; but when he commends the
means, now his anger is very reasonable. We our own selves count this anger
very reasonable in the like case; what will he not do it? No not use the
means for to do it? Would not this anger any body? Say we so for these things
sake comes the wrath of God upon the children of disobedience, Ephesians. 5.6. That
is for adultery, for fornication, for vain words, and vain hopes to be saved,
for these things comes the wrath of God upon the children of disobedience. He
does not say for not being renewed, for not being converted, but for these
things comes the wrath of God forth. He Is angry for that, but his wrath comes
generally forth upon men for these things, because they will not use the
means; They will not give over those sins which are the hindrances to
conversion. This is very reasonable; if a man were not able to do it, there
would be some show at least of unreasonablenesse in Gods anger; but there is
not any show of unreasonablenesse in his anger, when men will not buckle to the
means which they may. When God commanded the Egyptians to submit and be
humbled, they would not; he commanded them at least to use the means, to let
his people go, and they would not. You shall see how the Text says his anger
now was very reasonable; there is a sweet phrase, Psalm. 78.50. He made a way
to his anger; in the Hebrew it is he weighed a path to his anger. He weigted
it in a balance; mark how reasonably and proportionably God is angry. He
puts his anger and men's sins in a balance, and weighs out the right measure
of anger. When a servant forces a Master to be angry whether he will or no,
he cannot complain his Masters anger is unreasonable; he may go of his
errands and he will not, he may do this business and he will not; if he cannot
do the business it self, yet he may use the means, and he will not. Now his
Masters anger is very reasonable, because he forces him to be angry; as the
churning of Milk brings forth butter, so the forcing of wrath brings forth
strife. Prove. 30.33. He does even charm his Masters passions, and he forces
the same, as a charmer forcing the Milk to become Butter, so he forces ones
kindness to become anger; and therefore the anger is very reasonable. So God
is very reasonable in his anger; will thou not use the means to be quickened?
Suppose thou can not quicken thy self, but will thou not see about the
means? This churneth the Lords anger, and his anger is very reasonable.

Fourthly, 4 Argu.
Gods offer of his Kingdom to the wicked is serious; if they were senseless
and quite dead, and could do nothing, his offer were not serious; should a man
offer a hundred pound to a dead carcass, here is a hundred pound for you, if
you will take it, i will give it you. This offer were not serious, because the dead
carcass is not able to stir, but is senseless. True, in matter of
conversion it self, a man is as dead as a carcass. Nevertheless he is not
absolutely a dead carcass to all use of the means; he has the life of
nature, and reason, and of sense, and therefore when God offers his kingdom in
the means, this offer is serious. Turn you at my reproof, behold I will
poor out my spirit unto you, Prove. 1.23. He speaks there even of reprobates
and all, and he seriously offers them his spirit, and therefore they might
have gone about the means, but they would not; vocatio dei est seria, as our
Divines do all say, and therefore the means he appoints may be used.

5. Argu.
Fifthly, because Gods reproves are very equal; should a man reprove a criple
for not running, this reproof were not equal, because he is not able to do
it. I grant when God reproves the wicked for being sinful, such reproves are
all equal: Note.
though they be not able to be without sin; but then equality is grounded
upon something before, namely upon their voluntary apostasy and inability in
Adam. But when God reproves them for not setting about the means, his reprofes
then are very equal, and the equality is grounded upon their wilfulness
present; will ye not fear me? says God; I do this and this; mark his
reproof is very equal. God reproves Israel for not observing his Statutes,
saying the Statutes of Omri are kept. Mic. 6.16. You can observe his statutes,
why cannot you set about mine? he sets up a Temple, you can go constantly to
it, why cannot you go constantly to mine? The reproof was very equal. If thou will not set upon the means, thou art most equally condemned. I cannot preach
so often as some do, nor be so much resident as some are. No? Why will thou not
give over one of thy two livings then? Thou art able to do that; if thou wilt not
set upon the means, thy condemnation is equal. Thus I have confirmed this
first point, namely that the wicked may use those means that the Lord commands
them as means.

In the second place I showed that this being thus, thy condemnation must be
wilful if thou will not use all the means.

Arguments to prove it.
First, 1. Argu.
The Lord will not help that man by a miracle to go that has legs to go and
will not; Thou say thou would feign go to Heaven; tell me what legs has
God given thee? What means has he lent thee? If thou will not use them, the
Lord will never help thee without. Had the Israelites had any means to have
gotten over Jordan, as Ships or Barks, Boats, or Bridges, or Fords, and they
would not, he would never have helped them over without. You know the Lord
parted the waters, Josh. 3.13. but if they had refused the means, he would
not have kept them on this manner without: if they had food sufficient in the
Wilderness to eat, and they would not, he would not have rained food down
upon them; had they had Shoomakers and Drapers, and cloth sufficient to come
by, and they would not, he would never have miraculously have helped the
garments from wearing. Its a tempting of God, when thou have the means and
wilt not be diligent in them, to desire God to help thee without; thou would
have thy children Gods children, thy family Christ's family; then use the
means. Set up the constant invocation of Gods Name, Morning and Evening among
them; set up Reading, set up Catechizing, and every good thing: or thou can
never expect it. Would thou be holy, and heavenly? then use the means; Talk
of Heaven in thy meetings, reason about grace, inquire of good souls And how
may I come by an humble heart? Note:
How may I get faith, and be lead by the spirit? If thou will not be constant
in the use of the means, all thy prayers to God are nothing but temptings.
Thou art troubled with by thoughts, thou say thou would feign be delivered
therefrom; then use the means, be not so long without God every hour, pray
every day oftener, strive in the duty the harder; if thou will not use the
means, God will never help thee without. Thou art full of thy doubtings, thou
say thou heartily desire to be freed; then use the means, or thou lie:
give over thy broad walking* thy broad acquaintance; those that have no more
holiness in them then the stock are thy bosomest friends; if thou will not use
the means, God will never assure thee without, nor convert thee without; if
Dives his five brethren will not hear Moses and the Prophets, they shall have
no miracle from the dead, Luke 16.18. if God lend thee the means, he will not
save thee without.

Secondly, 2. Argu.
God will not bate a farthing of the price he sets thee at; when a Tradesman
has once set his lowest price, he will not go lower. Now the use of the
means, are Gods lowest price, the Lord will not bate a farthing of that;
wherefore is a price put into the hand of a fool, Pro. 17.16. the means of
grace are this price, and the price is in thy hands, when the Lord vouchsafes
thee the means, heel not bate thee a farthing of this price. He sets this
price on his mercies and graces, thou must use all the means; not as though
grace might be valued; no it exceeds all prices, or as though grace were not
free. Yea, its free and without price: its fit though that this price should be
set upon the alms, that the proud beggar should choose to receive it; if thou will not give the price that God has put into thy hand, thou art worthy to
miss it; I will give so much, and labor so much, and pray so much, and
reform so much. No, no; that will not do, Christ will have the other odd penny
too; thy filthy speaking must off, and thy base passions and old curses must
off, heel have thee stoop to all his holy means; would thou have it
cheaper? Mine own children and Saints never had it cheaper. Not Abraham,
Isaac, nor Jacob, nor Paul; they were feign to use all holy means, to abandon
every lust, to set up every duty, invocation in their families meditation in
their hearts, examination in their consciences, holy communication in mouths,
none of my Saints had it cheaper. And thou make a mock of them for praying so
much, and professing so much, so much hearing, and so much gadding after
Sermons, etc. Well, well, i will not bate thee one duty, nor one lust, nor one
carnal desire, i will have thee set about all or thou shall never have mercy.
Yea, but I cannot find in my heart to put up this, nor to be abridged of this,
and shall Christ and thou part for one single farthing? Perish then, and go and
thank thine will for it in Hell. God is resolved upon this price, and this is
the lowest.

3. Argu.
Thirdly, God will never be brought out of his walk, thou can never look
that God should come out of his walk to show thee any mercy, or give thee any
grace. Now the way wherein God walks is the means of grace and of salvation;
There thou must look for God, or thou can have no hope for to find him.
Suppose a poor Petitioner should come with his petition to the King; he can
never look to have the King come down hither to Rochford to to grant it him;
No, he must go up to the King. The King is at Court at White Hall, and there
he may have him; if he will not go thither, he is wilful, and if his petition
be not granted he may thank his own will. So thou can not look to fetch
God out of his own walk, the means of grace and salvation, endeavor to obey
him, Note.
prayings cryings, seekings, etc. These and the other means of salvation are
his walk, these are the ways wherein they must wait to find God, if they
would have him; in the way of thy judgments have we waited for thee. Isa.
26.8. There the godly wait for the Lord, in the way where his walk is; he
will not be spoken with, but only there in his walk. If thou will not seek
him there, thou may thank thine own will, if thou missest him; ye that are
negligent to hold out in Gods ways, ye can never look to find mercy while
ye live. Pray for mercy, and cry for mercy, and groan for mercy, ye must
look to perish without it, if ye will not seek it in his ways; you will seek
him in some, but you will not seek him in all; assure your selves then you
shall miss of him, do you think the King will come to you, to grant your
petitions? you must go up to him, and take him where he is to be spoken with.
God will not be spoken with but only in his ways; the Jews received
Sacraments enough, every meals meat is as a new Sacrament in the Wilderness,
afterward they prayed prayers enough, but I will not hear you says God;
near tell me of your seeking for mercy, wash you, make you clean, put away
from you the evil of your doings, learn to do well; come now and lets reason
together; if your sins be a red as Scarlet, I Will whiten them. Now heel be
spoken with, Isa. 1.18.
if you wilt come hither; What not erect his fear up in his family? not give
over thy base carnal consorts? keep such disorders under thy roof? and in
thy life swear still? and give place to the Devil still? cursed passions
still? mock at my children still? Do thou walk in these ways and hope to
find good? No; as good cut off a dogs neck as give him sacrifice of prayers,
as long as you walk in your own ways. Esaias 66.3. you must seek him in the
ways that he walks in, and not choose your own ways, heel never come out
of his way for any of you all; what shall I do Lord? says Saul; he would feign
have spoken with God there. No, no; go to Ananias, etc. if thou will not seek
him in his way, thou art well served if thou missest him.

I beseech you consider this point, you can never look to be saved, except
you will set your selves to do what you may, and use all those means that you
may; for though the use of the means does not save you, yet they are the way;
though not causa regnandi, yet via regni; and if you will not constantly use
them, you can never have his Kingdom.

Reasons of it.
First, because Heaven is an end, and an end can never be gotten without
means; the end is eternal life. Romans 6.22. eternal life is an end, and
therefore except the means be all used, you can never attain it.

Secondly, God has annexed it to the means; all Heaven and Earth can never
separate them; either use all the means that God has appointed, or else he
has decreed it, ye shall never be saved. When he has once appointed these
and these shall be your means, these shall you use for it, ye shall never be
saved without them. When God has appointed their abiding in the ship a means
of their escape, you shall see what Paul says, except these abide in the ship,
ye cannot be saved. Act. 27. So it is for Heaven, except ye abide in the means,
ye cannot be saved.

Thirdly, Every soul must give an account before God* how he has used the
meaners, Whether he has used them all yea or no. And according as the account
is he can give, so shall his judgment be. God has sworn this, as I live
says the Lord; God has pawned his own life upon this, that thus it shall be.
As J live says the Lord, every knee shall bow to me, and every tongue shall
confess to God, every one of us all shall give an account unto God, Rom
14.11.12. every one of us, God will exempt none, we must all be brought to an
account for these things; will not thy heart bow to it? As I live says the
Lord; I Will make every knee bow to it; I Will make you bow or I Will break you for
ever; as good do it as not, for ye shall give an account whether ye have done
it or no.

Fourthly, beloved, God will not set up another door into Heaven for any man in
the World; either come in at this or you shall never come in. Heel never make
another Bible; either be ruled by this or by none; Heel never chalk out
another way, either go this way or choose and perish in thy wilfulness. The
drunkards way shall never be his way; the worldings way shall never be his, nor
the lazy Gospellers his, nor the careless professors his, he will never change
ways, nor are my ways your ways, Esaias* 55.8. you must amend your ways. Jer.
7.3. and come into his way, or ye shall never escape the evil to come; can
there be any reasonabler way then this?

Proofs.
First, Some of the means that God has appointed you may do them without
labor, you may do them with ease; do but say I will, and it is done. What
labor is it to say, company-keepers shall not sit drinking in my house? There
is nere an Alehouse in your Town, but if they will, may root out disorders
from their houses, their own wills do destroy them; Its no labor in the World
to do this, and will ye not do it? perish then and thank your own wills.

Secondly, Some of the means that God has appointed, are easier then them;
only that you would give way to another to do them; may be the wife would have
prayers in the family if the husband would give way. The Minister would teach
you if you would give way; The Lord Jesus might work many things in you, if
you would give way; this a less then to will. You that have good Wives, who
would reform sundry things if you would give way, etc. I beseech you apply it
particularly to yourselves, your ruin is wilful if ye yield not, and will not
give way.

Thirdly, Some of the means are yet easier, for some of the means of grace
are better for you, even in your worldly and carnal respects. You Will say,
that is the easiest of all for a man to favor himself, and his flesh. As for
example the reforming of your gaming, dicing, carding in your Innes, your
drunkenness and bezeling over the pot, your pride and your geigawes, and the
like; would not this favor your purses, and be more agreeable to your very
carnal respects? And therefore you that do not reform these, you pluck
wilful perdition on your heads.

Fourthly, some of the means of grace, its harder to omit them then to use
them. Many of you meet with more hardships in the omission then you could light
upon in the practice of them; I need not instance, the particulars are very
familiar.

Fifthly, Some of the means of grace, be they hard, yet they are but hard;
they are not impossible for you to use; They will ask no more then a litlle
labor and diligence, and therefore omitted only by reason of will-nots.

I hope by this time you see clearly the truth of this ground. If ye will not
set your selves to use the means of grace and salvation, when ye die, you
must needs lay the blame on your wills; And why will ye so? Why will ye die O
house of Israel?

But notwithstanding the evidence of this truth; The wisdom of the flesh which
is enmity against God, fills carnal minds with many objections against it;
from all which I shall endeavor to vindicate it, by answering them all in
order.

1. Object.
THe first Objection is drawn those from Scriptures which say that they cannot.

2. Object.
From their own willingness, they would, but they cannot.

3. Object.
Is from their own desires, they desire to do it, but they are not able.

4. Object.
Is from their resolutions, they purpose, but whether they will or no, they are
feine to break their good purposes.

5. Object.
Is from their good endeavors (as they say) they labor against their sins,
and yet they are transported into them, to swear before they are aware, to be
overtaken in company, etc. We will answer them in order.

1. Object. answered. There are five cannots in Scripture. 1 Cannot.
As to the first Objection from the Scriptures which say they cannot, I answer.

Indeed the Scripture speaks of five Cannots.
First, Of a natural cannot; every man is borne by nature under a cannot
believe, and a cannot see God. But there is difference between thy cannot
repent, and thy do not repent; there is difference twixt these two. The
cause of thy cannot is one thing, and the cause of thy do not is another.
The cause of thy cannot is the carnalnesse of nature, but the cause of thy
do not is the wilfulness of thy will. The natural man receives not the
things of the Spirit of God, for they are foolishness to him; neither indeed
can he for they are spiritually discerned, 1 Cor. 2.14. where the Apostle
makes a different cause of a natural man's cannot, and his does not; when he
speaks of his cannot, he tells us the cause of that is, because grace is
spiritual and he is carnal. Neirher indeed can he, because they are
spiritually discerned; but when he speaks of his does not, you see he alleges
a different cause of his does not. The natural man does not receive the things
of the spirit of God, they are foolishness unto him; He counts them all
foolish; He is so wilful in his own carnal reason, that he counts it folly to
deny it; thou can not do thus and thus do thou say? Why then wilt you count
it folly to do so? when a man crosses thee of thy will, thou countst it folly
to put it up; I were a fool if I should be so precise as some be; I were a
fool if I should not suffer a little disorder in my house, as long as I gain
by it. This is mere wilfulness; this, and not a cannot, is a cause of thy
do not, Thou can not indeed because thou art carnal, but thy cannot is
dead and not operative; thy will is the cause of thy does not. Caecu^ est e^
palpebras claudit.
Like the wilful blind blind man, He was blind and would not open his
eyelids. He could not see, but his cannot lay dead, for he would not open his
eyelids; his cannot is not operative till he will open his eyelids. If he
could see, yet he could not till he would open his eyelids, so thou will not
open thine eyelids.

Secondly, 2 Connot.
the Scripture speaks of a deliberate cannot, when a man cannot do a thing,
only because he cannot find in his heart to do it. Thou can not repent of
this and that sin and forsake it, the truth is; thy cannot is this, thou
can not find in thy heart to forgo it. Such a couse is so profitable and
pleasing to thy flesh, thou can not find in thy heart to abandon it, thou
can not find in thy heart to be friends with such a one; to part with thy
vanities, or to abridge thy self of thine angry speeches when thou art stird,
etc. Thou can not find in thy heart to do it. As the Jews, you cannot
believe, says Christ, because ye seek honor one from another. Joh. 5.44.
they would feine be well thought of, of all their acquaintance, and therefore
they could not find in their heart to believe in Christ. Oh that would make
thee to be out of favor with the Pharisees, and to be counted basely of in the
World. Therefore they could not find in their heart to believe; now this is no
excuse; thou can not turn unto God, thou can not find in thy heart to part
with thy lusts, this is thy cannot.

3 Cannot.
Thirdly, the Scripture speaks of a judicial cannot, as a rogue cannot go,
because for his loytering the Magistrate has locked him in the stocks; This
does not excuse thee one jot, shall the villain be wilful in his loytering,
and then complain of the Magistrate that he is not able to go about his work?
I cannot go about my work says he; and who bad him be so idle as not to go
about it, when he might? Thou have gone on may be wilfully in thy sins, and
now the Lord has inflicted a judicial cannot unto thee. Thou can not come
out of thy sins, nay the Lord has cast this cannot upon thee in judgment; he
has set thee in the stocks for thy wilful security. As the wicked Jews they
could not believe says the Text, because Isaiah says, he has blinded their
eyes, and hardened their hearts, Joh. 12.39, 40. could they excuse themselves
for their cannot? No the Lord had set them in the stocks for their wilfulness
and security? They could not believe, for they had wilfully provoked the Lord
to cast this cannot upon them in judgment.

Fourthly, 4 Cannot.
the Scripture speaks of a compounded cannot. A cannot in sensu composito as
we call it; a cannot in a compounded sense. As a drunkard cannot tender his
family, his poor Wife and children, No; as long as he lies blowsing on the
Alebench, he cannot, in a compounded sense he cannot. Jmpossibile est sedentem
ambulare.
Aristotle sets it out by sitting; he that is sitting cannot walk, that is as
long as he is sitting he cannot walk. As Christ says of a carnal man he
cannot be my Disciple; he cannot in a compounded sense, he that comes to me
and hates not father and mother and wife and children, yea and his own life*
cannot be my Disciple. Luke 14.26. he cannot indeed as long as he stands upon
these terms, My father will not love me, and my mother will not like me; if I
should be one of your Disciples, my friends would not own me: I must do as I
do or I cannot keep my wife and children. Indeed as long as thou standst on
these terms thou can not be a Disciple of Christ; thou can not in a
compounded sense; but if thou would divide it thou might; no man can serve
two masters, Mat. 6.24. mark compound them together and he cannot. But if he
would give over one, he might serve the other; thou can not thou say. No;
I yield thee in a compounded sense thou can not, thou can not as long as
thou art thus careless as thou art, as long as thou favourest thy self in
such and such lusts, thou can not; The compounding of thy security and
lazines with Religion, that is the reason why thou can not, this is it that
makes our prayers hard, and our repentings hard, our believings and all our
performances hard; because we would feign be compounding. We have much ado to
pray, Note
our hearts can hardly be brought to wrestle, much ado to be humbled, our wills
will hardly stoop; if it were not for these compoundings, these duties were
easy. And what excuse have thou hence? none at all, for its a cannot only in
the compounded sense that thou make it.

5 Cannot.
Fifthly, the Scripture speaks of a humbling cannot, a cannot not to bolster
thee up in thy excuses, but only to humble thee, that thou may be driven out
of thy self unto God. A servant cannot live except it be his Masters pleasure
to take pity on him; Is this any pretense to him to anger his Master? or to be
negligent of his Masters commands? nay rather it forces him to be so much the
more careful to obey him, and to be humble before him. So the Scripture says
that thou can not without God, except God show mercy on thee, to convert thee
and save thee, thou can not be accepted of him. All this is to humble thee,
not to help thee with excuses. Tush I cannot do as his Ministers do bid me, I
cannot mortify these sins, I cannot be so strict, this is too much preciseness
you speak of. O murmur not, this cannot is only to bumble thee; murmr not
among your selves. No man can come to me except the father draw him, Ioh.
6.43.44. This is no reason why thou should murmur or cavil, or be stubborn
as thou art, thou can not come at Christ exeept the father take pity on thee
to draw thee. Thou have so much the more reason to be humbled, and not to go on
wittingly and wilfully as thou do. Can thou not be holy, and saved,
except he be pleased to pity thee? in what a woeful case then art thou to
provoke him as thou do? So much shall suffice for the first Objection, drawn
out of the Scripture.

The second thing thou objectest, is thy willingness; thou would as thou
pretendest, but thou can not.

I answer thee for this.

First, may be its the will of thy conscience, 2. Object. answered
and not the will of thy heart; thy heart is carnal and unacquainted with God,
and so its contented to be, only thy conscience would have thee grow better and
more heavenly; but thy heart will not yield; and therefore all thy willings are
nothings but deludings; they are only the willings of conscience and not of thy
heart. Thou art chasing and fretting every foot, thy conscience tells thee thou
should not, thou art praying carnally every day; when thou have done,
conscience says thou should pray holyer then so; conscience would, but thou will not, conscience would have thee get assurance for Heaven, but thou will
not be at the pains. Alas, this makes thee inexcusable, for now thou
condemnest thy self, and yet wilt sin; thou art inexcusable O man whosoever
thou art that judge, for wherein thou judge another, thou condemnest thy
self. Romans 2.11. mark, when a man condemns himself he is then inexcusable.
(I do not now quote it for the particular the Apostle does instance in there
for judging another,) for the truth is the same, whatsoever sin we do
instance in, the truth is this that Paul grounds his speech on. Note.
He that condemns himself in a sin, and yet will go on in it; that man is
inexcusable. What now have thou gotten by thy plea? thou would, thou say;
this makes thy sin to be worse in that thy conscience would, and yet for all
that thou will not.

Secondly, may be its a copulative will; thou have a will to repent and be
godly, but it is with a copulative will. Repentance and some lust, godliness
and some lust; thou would feign please the Lord and thine own lust too, be
religious and proud too, believe in Christ and covet too, and be vain too,
etc. Thou have a will, but it is a copulative will, to serve God and do this
too; Pish, cannot I serve God and do this too? No, no; this same copulative
will is a flat contradiction. Couple light and darkness? Christ and Beliall, 2
Cor. 6.15. Its a contradiction to imagine to couple them, for they cannot
possibly be coupled. And therefore this same copulative will is nothing but a
mockery, and the truth still is this thou will not?

Thirdly, May be thou have a woulding will, this is no will, but only a
velleity; so thou have a woulding will. I would do as well as any other but I
cannot; to speak properly this is no will, for its only that will wherewith
fools will things impossible; I would I were at London, with a wish says he;
I would I could fly as well as an Eagle. These things are impossible, and
therefore its no will, but mere folly; thus may be thou willest grace, I would
with all my heart I could do as God says, God knows my heart, my will is
good, I would be better then I am; And yet thy conscience can call for
something or other to be mended, and thou will not. This is an impossibility,
Lazy velleities no will.
and therefore no will; like the fool that would sit in his chair, and I
would I were at London, he would feign be at London and sit still. So thou
sit at the same pass, I would I were in Christ; thou would feign be in
Christ, and yet thou art loath to stir out of that base temper thou art in. This
is an impossibility, a folly and no will; woulding and no willing. I grant the
Saints of God have their wouldings, and their would does go further then their
will; their will is absolutely set to be holy, and they would be holy. Their will
is deeply to be humbled, and they would be deeper; their would is grounded upon
a will, they will in some measure and they would go further. I will, oh that I
could will more. But thou that lie in thy sinful estate, thy would is pure
folly. A would grounded upon a will not is foppish; the Saints would is
grounded upon a will; Note.
but thine, the root at bottom is this thou will not.

Fourthly, may be thou have a general metaphysicall will, but to come to
particulars, there thou will not. I hate the Saints of God? God forbid? I Will
never hate them while I live; and yet come to this Saint and that Saint; him
thou will hate; him? He is the veriest hypocrite in the Country, and keeps
more ado then needs. When carnal men can discover no other blemishin the
Saints, the^ they charg them with hypocrisy.
Thus thy will is good to a company of metaphysicall Saints in the cloulds; but
those that are Gods Saints in particular, thou mockest. I be stubborn against
the Commandments of God? I will not be stubborn against them; yea but this
and that Commandment thou will not observe. Thou will not think best of them
of whom thou should, nor take up that carriage in meetings that thou
should; thou have a good will to the Commandments in affection, but thy will
stands against the particulars of them. Generals are but Notions, when they
are abstracted from the particulars. And therefore thy will is but a Notion;
the will when it wills indeed, wills particulars, this particular duty,
this particular Ordinance. Indeed good in the general is the object of the
will, but when the will comes to will in the exercise of it it pitcheth on
particulars.

Fifthly, thou have no true will, I speak still to the carnal, I say thou
have no true will, because if thou truly did will, thou could; if thou
did truly will to believe, and will to be a new creature, thou could; for
the will it has potentiam execuvtiuam, so far as it will, etc. It has an
executing power to go so far as it wills; if thou did truly and really will
to speak holy, thy will would make thy tongue to put it in execution. If thou
had a will, thy will would command execution, my tongue shall speak the
praise of the Lord says David, Psalm, 119.171.172. my soul it shall praise
thee verse. 175. I grant the woulding of the will goes further then all
execution can go, to will is present with me, but how to perform that which is
good, I find not, Romans 7.18. I quote this place the rather because many wrest
it to their own destruction. Oh says a wicked man, I have a a good will, I
would as Paul says, but J cannot perform, thus men misinterpret this place;
for look how far Paul would, he could perform, for the will has potentiam
executricem and an imperative force over the man. What he did will, he did
perform, he performed it in his heart and tongue and hand, etc. but he would
draw his will forwarder then it was, but he could not, his very will was partly
unwilling, he could not indeed perform so much as he would, that is, he could
not draw on his will so strongly as he would. His will was not perfectly
sanctified, no Saint in this World has any perfect completenesse of will; and
therefore his performance is not perfect because his will is not perfect. I say
if thy will be converted to God, thou thy self art converted to God, obedience
ever goes as far as the will. And therefore if thou art willing, its certain
thou art obedient; if ye be willing and obedient says the Text, Isay 1.19.
whosoever is willing to obey, that man does obey in some measure, because the
will has power of execution, and the whole man at command. This is the reason
why Divines say, that the sincerity of the will is the condition of the
Gospel; wherefore if thou be not obedient, neither art thou willing to
obey, all the powers of thy soul and all the members of thy body, thy will
has an actus imperativus to command them. Now if thy will will not command
them to yield, thou art not so much as willing at all; if a Justice of peace
should tell me he would give me a Warrant, and yet when all comes to all, he
will not command his clark for to write it, nor his own hand for to pen it, I
see plainly he will not. Do thou say I would obey Christ, and J would deny
self, why then do thou not command thy Clerk for to writ it? If thy will
will not command tongue, Tongue thou shall never talk so unprofitably as thou
have done, and Ear thou shall never hearken after vanity as thou have done;
and thoughts, Thoughts ye shall never run at rovers as ye have done. Jf your
will were but willing, it would command your whole soul, soul thou shall not
do as thou have done; as David's will commanded his soul O my soul bless the
Lord, and forget thou not all his benefits, Psalm 103.2. nay he commanded all
that was in him, all that is in me, bless his holy name, verse. 1. So if thou
were willing, thy will would command all thy soul; soul, thou shall not be so
seldom at the throne of grace at thou art, etc. thus much of the second
objection drawn from the will.

Objection the third.
But thou desire to do it, and therefore thou do not stick at a will not.

I answer thee, who can tell best what is in thee, 3. Obect. answered
God or thine own heart? verily the Lord that did make it, is likeliest to
know best. Now the Lord says peremptorily thou desire not grace; yea and thy
heart says it too, and the Lord hears it, though thou hear it not; they
say unto God depart from us, we desire not the knowledge of thy ways, Job.
21.14. Nevertheless because thou stand so stoutly upon it, that thou do
desire grace, I Will tell thee the reason of thy mistake.

First, thou have putative or thinking desires, thou think thou desire, and
therefore thou art mistaken; like Seneca's young scholar, that said he desired
to be good. I do not say says he, he lies, but putat se cupere, He thinks he
desires; so thou say thou desire. I will not say thou lie, but thou
think thou do so; now alas thy thoughts are the vainest things in the
World. Vanity of thoughts. 2 Kings 5.31.
How long shall vain thoughts lodge within thee. Jer. 4.14. thy thoughts are
very vain, there is no trusting to them. Naaman thought, I thought says he,
but how wide his thought was the story declares. Est. 6.6.
Haman thought, he thought in his heart says the Text, but his thoughts came
to nothing but a Gallowse and a Ha^er. Ishbibenos thought, but you know what
his thoughts did come unto; it fell foul on his own head, nothing is more
vain then the thoughts of carnal men's hearts; so thou think thou desire,
alas thy thought is but vanity.

Secondly, thou have ignorant desires* thou do desire to be one of Gods
Saints, thou desire it ignorantly; for when thou come to see who the Saints
be, namely, such and such whom thou conceivest to be strange people and
Puritans, then thou have no desire to be one. Thou desire to go after Christ,
thou do ignorantly desire it, for when thou see thou must take up this
cross, then thou have no desire thereunto; as the Prophet speaks of Christ in
the person of the wicked: when we shall see him, there is no beauty that we
should desire him, Esaias 53.2. thou desire with ignorant desires before thou
see who he is; but when thou see who he is, thou do not desire him. Thou
desire his grace, thou desire to believe and repent, and to put up
injuries, these are ignorant desires before thou see what they be; but when
thou see what they be, what the injury is that thou should put up, then
thou do not desire to put it up; what the sin is that thou should leave,
then thou do not desire for to leave it; when thou see them, then thou do
not desire them. When we shall see him, there is no beauty that we should
desire him.

Thirdly, thou have wandering desires. Oh says one, you have a happy turn,
you have good Preaching, and good means to be godly, and be edifyed. I desire
to be so; but alas our Minister does not Preach, and we have a dumb dog; and
I am in a very wicked place, If I were as you are, I should count my self
happy. God knows, I desire heartily the edification of my soul; thus thy
desires wander after other men's cases; and thou will not stir out for thine
own. How do thou desire to be edified, when thou will not stir out two or
three miles to be edifyed? Thy desires are like wandering vagrants, that will
be everywhere wandering, but only there where they should be. So thy desires go
roving up and down, and you are happy, and he is happy, and thou art unwilling
in the mean time to labor, where and how God has appointed thee: These are
none but gadding, wandering desires; better is the sight of the eyes then the
wandering of the desire. Eccl. 6.9. thy desires wander abroad to a roming
company of wishes, but thou will not observe that which God gives thee to see;
thus much of the third objection, drawn from desire.

The fourth Objection.
Thou resolvest and have good purposes, but oh thou can not perform them.

I answer thee, 4. Object. answered.
do but consider what thy purpose is, and thou shall see how thou art cozened;
these purposes thou speak of are only voluntates de futuro. I will hereafter
look to it better then J have done heretofore. Hereafter J will, I purpose,
that is hereafter I will; alas: this will for hereafter is no will.

First, because its only to shuffell of the willing for the present. Now the
heart is unwilling to obey, and therefore it puts of the Commandment to
hereafter, not for any such desire that it has to do it hereafter, but only
because it is unwilling to do it for the present. Like a man that is unwilling
to lend, I Will lend you hereafter says he; say not unto thy Nighbour go and
come again, and to morrow I will give thee, when thou have it by thee, Pro.
3.28. his purpose to lend him to morrow, was only because he would shuffell of
the lending to day. And therefore this purpose of willing hereafter, is no will
at all, but only to shuffell of the willing for the present. Thou have the
opportunity by thee, why do thou not take it? thou have the temptation by
thee, why do thou not resist it? do thou say thou have a will for
hereafter, that is but a gull, that thou may not will for the present.

Secondly, this will for hereafter is no will, because it goes without Gods; no
will can go without God. Gods will is now, he would have thee now and thou will
not; thou will hereafter, but then may be he will not. He that will not when he
may, when he will he shall have nay; afterward thou would feign be
converted, and pardoned, etc. Lord open to me, nay but O man, when J would thou
would not; now thou would, but I will not, thy will is for hereafter goes,
without Gods, and therefore it is no will.

Thirdly, thy will for hereafter is no will, because thou shall miss those
suppositions that thou willedst upon.

First, Thou supposest thou shall have fewer temptations hereafter. O when
these troubles are over, and these temptations are over, I will; nay but O man
when these are all over, new ones will come. And if the temptations for the
present be a hinderance, some temptation or other as bad thou shall meet with,
that shall hinder thee hereafter much more, and therefore this supposition is
false.

Secondly, thou supposest thou shall be fitter hereafter; but, qui non est
body cras minius aptus erit. if thou be not fit now, much less will thou
be afterward; thoult be unfitter and unfitter; like meat the longer it is
kept, the unfitter it is to be eaten, and therefore this supposition is false too.

Fourthly, thy will for hereafter is no will, but a mockery. Antigonus (...),
Antigonus J will give, this is not good in men's Laws, much less in Gods.
Dabo, I will give; this is no gift, says the Law. So resipiscam, I will
repent, this is no repentance, says God; thus you see this objection is
nothing, never tell me of thy purposes, thy purposes art willings for
hereafter, and they are no wills at all.

The fifth Objection.
Thou endeavourest and labourest to serve God and to be saved

I answer thee, Alas; 5. Obect. answered
Is this to labor for grace and for Heaven, when thou labourest so idly? as
God said of that fasting; so may I say of thy labor, Is this the fast that J
have chosen? to afflict a man's self for a day? So, is this the labor that I
have chosen? To labor so as thou labourest? but I need not to insist on this
plea, thy conscience is able to answer it. Thou labor? thy conscience knows
well enough thou art lazy, thou do not labor for holiness; so then thine
impenitency is wilful, and thy damnation wilful and thy ruin wilful.

To conclude then, understand all that you will not hear and obey.

First, that your destruction is from self, you cannot cast it upon God; he
offers you the means to escape it, and you will not, Hos. 13.9.

Secondly, your destruction is most just, you cannot allege severity or
cruelty; no; your selves are the cruel ones. You judge your own selves unto
Hell. The Lord presses the Gospel of grace upon you, and you put it off. Acts
13.46.

Thirdly, your destruction is inexcusable, you have nothing to excuse you; God
has taken way all clokes of excuses, he has offered you saving knowledge and
you would not; a Christ and you would not; good motions, counsels, threatenings,
and you would not. Your mouths are quite stopped when you perish, Mat. 22.12.

Fourthly, your destruction is unavoydable; if you would have relented and
yielded, there might have been hope, but you would not. You have hardened your
necks, and what is that but a will not? Therefore you shall be destroyed without
remedy, Prove. 29.1.

Fifthly, your destruction is pitiless; what eye can pity you? Will, will
have will, though Will will have woe, as we say; not God, nor Angels, nor
Saints, no eye can pity you. If the theife will steal and will to the
Gallowse, let him go; he is no object of pity; as we say of a wilful man, no
tale can tune him to take heed, so no means can tune you to take heed; and
therefore when you rue it, you cannot be pitied.

Sixthly, your destruction is grievous; of all plagues, none will fret more,
then those which one has wilfully pulled on himself. You Will one day gnash your
own teeth, curse your own wills, banne your own hearts; woe is me, I am under
the rod, and my self gathered it; in Hell, and my self kindled it. I might
have prevented it, but J would not.

Now follows Application
Learn instruction then, least ye perish wilfully; 1 Use.
reform as much as you may, down with all your disorders, stumbling blocks
of iniquities, and all the Idols of your hearts, and cast them into the brook
Kidron. Set up good courses as much as you may, use all the means to salvation
as humbly as you may; let not any family be without the due worship of God in
it. Fathers, suffer not sin on your children, nor Masters on your servants;
lie not, swear not, covet not, omit not the exercises of hope, least ye
justly, inexcusably, unavoydably, pittilesly perish, and so reproach your own
wills for ever in Tophet; as David then said unto Solomon, after he had set
him businesses to do, arise therefore and be doing, and the Lord be with thee
says he, 1 Chronicles. 22.16. So I may say to you, arise and be doing; up, set
about it, use no excuses, humble your selves before God, see your misery and
bewail it, and the Lord be with you.

BUt may be you will say, this Doctrine is Pelagianisme, or Arminianisme, at
least. Nay then, let me tell you it is Arminianisme to hold the contrary. You
make your wills to be your own, Note.
and free for to will, that say your will is to repent, but you cannot. And if
God should give you a posse, ye profess your selves to be of the Pelagian
heresye, if God should give you a power, you would add the will. To pass over
this and so to go on.

1 Use For instruction
Except the belief of this truth do sink into thy heart, thou can never
soundly be humbled; Thou can never be humbled unles thou believe this truth.
if thou should say Lord I would feign have repented all this while, but I
could not, thou never soundly were humbled* a man is never humbled as long as
he excuses himself; thou say I would be holier, I would pray better, and I
would reform more, but I cannot; this is to fall to excuses, and not to be
humbled; For,

1. Excuse.
First, thou excusest thy self for all transgressions besides original. A man
must be humbled for his actual sins as well as his original, and count
himself inexcusable for one as well as the other. But thou pitchest all thy
humiliation upon thy Apostasy in Adam, if now thou pleadest a cannot. Lord, I
confess I was conceived in sin, but now I cannot do with all; I cannot do
otherwise though I would never so feign. I cannot but drink now and then and
be drunk, I cannot but rap out an Oath now and then in my haste, etc. I
confess I brought this cannot upon me in the loins of Adam; but upon the
supposall of that do thou bid me give over my sins? J cannot; this is not
to be humbled, but to fall to excuses. Its true, actual corruption which
naturally flows from original requires that one and self same humiliation
that original does. But otherwise thou must be humbled with a new humiliation
for thine actual transgressions, or else thou art not humbled but pleadst
excuses. David humbles himself for both, with one humiliation for the one,
Psalm. 51.5. whith another for the other, verse. 3. But as long as thou pleadst
on this fashion, thou excusest thy self for thy actual sins, and never art
humbled.

Nay secondly, 2. Excuse.
thou excusest thy self for thy original sin too. Lord, I would be without
sin, but J cannot, if I could I would; belike then if it had been thy case
as it was Adams thou would not have eaten of the forbidden fruit. And
therefore it was his fault and not thine, thou would not have sinned if thou
could have otherwise chused. And therefore thou excusest thy self for that
too; for thou say thou would not have sinned if thou had been as he, he
sinned when he might have otherwise chused; but thou would not have done so.
Thus thou excusest thy self for thine original sin too; And therefore thou
can not be humbled as long as thou pleadst thus; the truth is thou did
willingly sin as well as Adam^ God made man upright, but they have sought out
many inventions. Eccl. 7.29. he speaks of Adams being upight; God made Adam
upright; he does not say but man has found out many inventions, Note.
as though it were his fault alone that was created upright. No, God made man
upright but they, mark, he casts the blame upon every man as well as Adam.
But they have sought out many inventions. Thus we must be humbled for our
original corruption; but thou can not be humbled as long as thou pleadst on
this manner; no thou excusest thy self, and therefore thou were never yet
humbled.

3 Excuse.
Nay thirdly, thou excusest thy self for every sin, thou make all thy
sins to be nothing but infirmi^es, as though Paul's case were thine; the good
which J would do, that do J not, and the evil which J would not do, that do I.
I would be godlier then I am, but I cannot; and therefore thou make all thy
sins to be infirmities. Sin of Infirmity.
What is a sin of infirmity but a sin the will protests against? thou
say that thy will protests against every of thy sins, thou would leave
them, but thou can not. See then how far thou art from sound humiliation; thy
presumptuous sins are all nothing with thee, thy stubbornness nothing, and
thy wilfulness nothing, no all thy sins are infirmities. Nay thou make thy
sins to be purely and only infirmities, invincible infirmities; invincible
infirmities are the most excusable of all. Now when thou say thou stickest
at a Cannot, thou make thy sins not only infirmities, but also invincible
infirmities; such as thou can not possibly avoid, thou would feign avide
them but thou can not; and therefore if thou go this way to work thou
can never be humbled.

Nay fourthly, 4. Excuse.
Thou commendest thy self more then God; nay if ever God should enable thee
and give thee power to be a new creature, thou make thy self more beholding
to thy self then to God. The will is more then the power; the will to believe
and repent and convert, is more then the power; Actus secundus est nobilior
actu primo. To be able to believe and to be able to repent and become a new
Creature, these are but first acts. If God would help thee to these, thou
say thou would add the other. Thou would believe and thou would convert,
and thou would be a new creature; if God would give thee the power, thou
would add the act. And therefore thou commendest thy self more then God;
for in moral powers which have a further reference unto act, the act is more
noble then the power. The truth is, the will is better then the power of doing;
and both is of God, and so the Apostle does show it. Its Gods that works in
you, speaking of the Saints; Its God that works in you both the will and the
deed, Phil. 1.13. mark, the will and the deed. First the will and then power
to bring it into deed; the will is the primary blessing of God. And this is the
reason why a child of Gods estate is now better under Christ, then it was
before in innocence, Note.
for then he had only power if he would; and now both the will and the
deed. I say this is the truth, the will is more then the power; and therefore
thou were never humbled in thy life, that pleadst, O I would if I could* thou
make thy self more beholding to self then to God, if God should ever convert
thee; and therefore thou art not yet capable of conversion; why? thou art not
yet humbled, but standst at proud terms with the Lord.

5. Excuse.
Nay fifthly, thou can not so much as pray to God for a will, thou art so
proud, that thou art conceited thou have that already. I have as good a will to
be good as any body else, but I cannot possibly do as I would; So that all thy
prayers to God are a mockery. Apud Cassandrum, Domine duc me quo non volo.
The godly humble soul prays as the ancient Church used to pray; Lord give
me a will to be good which my will is set against. But thou can not pray
so, thou art a richer beggar then so; for thou had a good will already thou
think. A man cannot pray for a thing the lack whereof he is not sensible
thereof; if any man lack wisdom, let him ask it of God, James 1.5. He
cannot pray for a thing if he do not think that he lacks it; Nor thou for a
will, for thou do not think that thou lackst it. Nay if God should convert
thee thou can not give him thanks for converting thee; for thy will needed
none; may be thou will pray for possibilities till thou have them, and give him
thanks for possibilities when thou have them, but thou can not pray for a
will, for thou think thou have it; nor give him thanks for thy will, for
that is thine own. So that thou art Devilishly proud; never humbled since thou
were borne. Nay thou art so proud that all thy Prayers are but mockeries, and
thy giving of thanks is a mockery. How can thou look that God should convert
thee, when as thy proud heart tells God before hand, thou would not thank
him if he should.

Nay sixthly, 6. Excuse.
thou castest all the blame upon God; for its even just as if thou should
say, I cannot help it if God be not pleased to enable me, how can I help it?
my will is as good as another, such and such are so forward and so Heavenly,
God gives them the power; but my will God knows is as good as theirs, I would
feign do as well as the best, Carnal men excuse themselves, and cast the blame
up-God.
bus I Cannot; O if God would enable me, I would. O beloved take deed of
these conceits, for ye cast all the blame upon God; whereas the blame is in
your selves, ye would not be enabled. I say ye cast all the blame upon God.

First, because ye cast the blame upon nature, 1. Demon.
its my nature, and I cannot; I would, but its my nature and I cannot. Thou
layest the blame upon thy nature, and therefore thou castest the blame upon God
for not helping thee to a better nature; it is God that justly determines men's
natures. Ones nature is more choleric, another more fearful, another more
lazy, another more lustful. Do thou lay the blame upon nature, my nature is
more subject to choler, and wrath? Alas, thou layest blame upon God. For its
he that disposes of men's natures; and therefore, thou take part with those
wretches that said, why have thou made me thus? Romans 9.20. thou layest the
blame upon God, I would not do thus, but only it is my nature, and I cannot
help it. No. And will thou lay the blame upon God? No* no; this is thy nature
and thou art contented with this nature.

2 Demon.
Secondly, Thou do cast the blame upon temptations, it is my hard hap to fall
upon temptations. I was tempted or I would not have done it; this is to cast
the blame upon God too, for it is his providence to order temptations. Such and
such temptations for one man, such and such for another, such now and such
then. Its the providence of God that disposes which and which temptations
every man shall have. One shall have temptations to Pride, another temptations
to Wrath, another to Revenge, another to Coveteousnesse. Its true; God tempts
no man, but he orders the temptations of men. Let no man say he is tempted of
God, James 1.13
for God tempts no man. No, every man is tempted to sin by his own lusts.
Thus thou would say if thou were humbled; but thou layest the blame upon God;
it was long of temptations that I did it. This is as if thou should say 'twas
long of God, that I did it, because 'twas Gods providence that suffered these
temptations to be laid for thee.

Thirdly, because thou layest the blame upon the times, the times are very bad.
3 Demon.
I would not go in this fashion, but only that the times require it. I would
be more given to fasting and repeating the Word, etc. I would willingly be more
forward then I am but the times are very bad; This is to lay the blame upon God
too, for God sets every man's time. If I had been in Christ's time, or Paul's
time, or Queen Elizabeth's time, I would have done thus and thus. Thou layest
the blame upon God, for God sets every man's time; When God from eternity
made his common place-Booke of all the whole World, he appointed such and such
to live first, such next* and such last; Such and such to live here, and such
there; Such at Rochford, and such at London; so says the Apostle, he has
made of one blood all Nations of men, to dwell on all the face of the Earth;
and has determined the times before appointed, and the bounds of their
habitations, Acts 17.26. mark, he has appointed the times* and the places.
The times when they shall live, and the places where. God sets men's times;
and therefore thou which layest the blame upon the times, layest the blame upon
God.

Fourthly, 4 Demon.
because thou layest the blame upon this Commandment, if it were any
Commandment but this, J would do it; But this I cannot do; if it were any
other injury but this, any disgrace but this, I could willingly put it up, but
I cannot put up this; if it were any duty but this; I would do any thing but
this, but to root out all disorders out of my house alas I cannot do this, I
cannot live, as good keep no Inn at all, as not suffer men to call for what
they would, I cannot do this; this is to cast the blame upon God too, that he
should make such a Commandment as this, he should have done well to have made
another Law, and penned another Gospel, and then I would have kept it: thou
layest the blame upon God for it is God that made all these commandments, these
are the commandments of the Lord, Deuteronomy. 6.1. The Lord made all the
commandments, and this too, and therefore if thou layest the blame upon this,
thou layest the blame upon God.

5 Demon.
Fifthly, because thou layest the blame upon ill fortune and bad luck, it was my
ill fortune to marry a shrew, and I cannot but fret and lie out of doors.
Alas, marriages are made in heaven, and God had decreed them; thus thou layest
the blame upon God, it was my ill fortune to miscarry, to light upon such a
companion, to be so overtaken as I was, I would willingly have had it to have
been otherwise, but I had not the luck of it, and it fell out very unluckily;
thus thou committest two evils, Note.
thou playest the Atheist in speaking of fortune, like them in the Prophet that
prepared a table for fortune as the word signifies, Esaias. 65.11. I say thou
committest two evils, one in calling it fortune, the other, thou layest the
blame upon God, for that which thou profoundly call fortune and luck, That
which men call fortune, is Gods providence.
it is (...) says Aristotle, the very Heathen is able to tell it is God, and
the Scripture puts it for Gods providence; and therefore when thou layest the
blame upon ill fortune, thou layest the blame upon God, so that hence ye may
see, that thou can never be humbled as long as thou pleadest on this wise
before God. I would very willingly, but I cannot: I say thou can never be
humbled, because this is to lay the blame upon God. Indeed a child of God, that
of unwilling is made willing, he may plead a cannot before Christ without
laying the blame upon God. Lord, I cannot humble my proud heart, nor crucify
this bewitching lust of mine, Lord I am not able to do it, I beseech thee to
help me. I say a child of God that is sincerely willing to do it, may plead a
cannot before Christ; nay Christ his promise can nowhere be applied, but where
the soul can truly plead a cannot. He gives power to the faint, to him that
has no might I will increase strength, Isay. 40.29. when the soul lies
tugging and pulling at his heart and cannot pull it up, striving and
endeavoring and using all holy means and cannot, its even faint with pulling
and tugging at that which it cannot. As ye know it will make any man faint to be
tugging at a millstone, which he cannot pull up. When the soul lies thus at a
cannot, I will give power says Christ, though it have no strength, I will
enable it: a child of God that is willing may plead a cannot, without laying
the blame upon God, but then he humbles his soul for all his former will nots,
nay for his too too many will nots for the present. But thou can never be
humbled while thou live, if thou pleadst thus a cannot, because thou layest
the blame upon God.

6 Demon.
Nay sixthly, thou can not be humbled because thou do not only lay the
blame upon God for thy sins, but thou find fault with all gods
proceedings; it is as if thou should say, why does he bid me repent, when he
knows I cannot? why does he yet complain? Romans 9.19. he knows that I cannot,
why does he woo me to do that which I cannot? or promise me blessings if I
do, when he knows that I cannot? why does he help me to more and more
knowledge? he does but hurt me with knowledge, and make my sins to be worse,
which I cannot forsake. My sins are now against knowledge, and Ministers tell
me that is worse; this is all that I get by your preaching; nay thou find
fault with all Gods corrections: why does he punish me for not doing of that
which I cannot? thus thou art far from being humbled; the truth is, thou
might get a great deal by knowledge, by exhortations, and reproves and
corrections, but thou will not: is it not easier to leave a sin when thou
know it, then when thou art ignorant of it? to be moved when thou art
exhorted, then when thou art not admonished at all? to forsake a sinful course
when once God has imbittered it to thy flesh by corrections, then when it was
sweet? is it not easier to give over drunkenness, when thy excess is bitter
to thy stomach, then when it it was pleasant? so it is with every other sin,
thou mighst get a great deal of God by every one of Gods dealings, but thou will not. Why should you be stricken any more? ye will revolt more and more,
Esaias. 1.5. Ye will says God, this is Gods language he finds fault with thy
will, but thou findst fault with his will; why does he smite me more and more,
I cannot but revolt? I cannot do as he would have me; may be thy lusts are
more mannerly then to say thus; but this secret grumbling is in thee, if thou
say that thou stickest at a cannot, and therefore thou can not be humbled.
2 Use. Which discovers the hearts deceitfulness.


In the second place, if it be thus, the reason why thou do not amend, is not
because thou can not, but because thou will not.

See here then the deceit of thy heart.
If God would give me grace, I would willingly do any thing; this is nothing
but the deceitfulness of thy heart, which is deceitful above all things. Ier.
17.9.
For thy heart does but here lie unto God; I would very feign, if God would
enable me; thou lie; God knows it is not so: like the wilful Jews, they
would be Gods people, they would stay themselves upon God; God tells them in
effect they lied, I knew thou were obstinate, and thy neck is an iron sinew,
and thy brow brass, Isay. 48.4. would thou believe in me? no, no, I know
thou art obstinate and wilt not; so God knows thou art obstinate. I cannot see
this is a sin to say faith and troth, I cannot see it is a sin not to pray
daily in my family, not to repeat the sermon every Sabbath: If I could see it
were a sin I would mend it; no, no, thou lie to God, thou art obstinate and
thou would not have it a sin, and thou will not believe it, and if thou
did know it to be one, thou would not reform it.

Secondly, hereby thou dodgest with God, and thou temptest the Lord. If God
would give me grace I would do it; this is nothing but dallying and trifling
with the Lord; for why do thou not set about it and try every day what thou
can do? If God would but quicken me and persuade me, and compel me, and
enable me, I would do it. Alas thou dodgest with God as the people in the
Gospel, if he will come down from the cross we will believe in him, Mat.
27.42. they had no will to believe in him, this was nothing but dodging: Christ
had done enough for them to make them believe, if they had any such will, and
this was nothing but a pretense of their deceitful heart.

Thirdly, hereby thou shufflest of the word, when thou have heard it, God give
me grace to do so as he has taught me this day, alas I cannot my self, God
give me grace, and so shufflest it off, and think no more of it: like (those
you call) godfathers in some places, as soon as ever they are charged at the
Font to look to the child, and see him brought up in religion, they presently
go and put off the charge on the Father, I pray you take the charge upon you:
so thou layest the charge at Gods door, when God gives thee any duty in
charge, thou layest it at his door, as though it stuck there, and there thou
let it lie, not s^^ing about it to do it; God give me grace, repentance is
his gift, and if he do not give it, I cannot repent, I would but I cannot, if
he do not give it: the speech is very good and becomes a godly soul that makes
conscience of the means to say it, but this is thy shuffling to lay it at Gods
door, as though it stuck there; God tells thee plainly it does not stick at
him, he would have all to come unto repentance, 2. Pet. 3.9. but thou will not
come, and this is the deceit of thy heart to shuffle it from thee.

In the third place, is it so, 3 Use.
that the reason why thou do not amend, is not because thou can not, but
only because thou will not?

Oh then my Brethren learn to be humbled.
This point calls for great humiliation.

First, 3 Use. Engage to humiliation.
here lies especially the pride of the heart, not in men's cannots, but their
will nots; when a soul does whatsoever it can, reformes as much as it can,
uses as many means as it can, and as often as it can, this is not a proud
heart: but a proud heart is that especially which stickest at ^^ will not. If
ye will not hear, my soul shall weep in secret places for your pride, Jer.
13.17. mark, for your pride, if you will not, he does not say if you cannot,
my soul shall weep for your pride, if ye stick at a cannot, but if ye stick
at a will not; do not think this point does lift up men's wills, no, this point
does as much beat at the humbling of the will, as any point under heaven; for
here lies all the pride of the will, and therefore here ye must be humbled.

Secondly, here lies especially the hardening of the heart: when a man sticks
at a cannot, he does not more and more harden his heart, but only sticks at
the same hardness he had. Beloved, thou do then harden thy heart when thou will not obey, and therefore here is most need of thy humbling, to be humbled
for thy will nots; its said of Pharaoh he hardened his heart, Exodus 9.34. what
follows? He would not let the children of Israel go: thy will nots these are
they that harden thy heart; do thou complain of the hardness of thy heart?
O go and humble thy soul for thy will nots, these are the hardners of thy
heart, nay let me tell thee, thou have no hardness of heart, no more then an
infant or a babe, but only that which thy will nots have made thee, and
therefore thou have great reason to be humbled for thy will nots.

Thirdly, here lies especially the stubbornness of the heart; when a child
that is commanded by his Parent to obey sticks at a cannot, he obeyes as far
as he can, but only he sticks at a cannot, he is not stubborn; stubbornness
is when one sticks at a will not; if a man have a stubborn son which will
not obey the voice of his Father, Deuteronomy. 21.18. so here lies especially the
stubbornenesse of thy heart, and therefore here is most humiliation required.

Fourthly, here lies the greatest despisings of the Commandments of God;
authority is never so much despised as when men will not submit to it: a
father's despised when a son will not hear him; and a master's despised when
his servant will not do as he bids him; nay a commandment cannot be despised
but by will nots, it may be omitted, and not obeyed by cannots, but it cannot be
despised but by will nots; if ye shall despise my statutes, so that ye will
not do all my commandments, etc. Levit. 26.15. O what infinite reason have thou
to be humbled, that despisest the Lord? He cannot endure that men should
despise him; he can put up any other wrong rather then this, that men should
despise him: but to be slighted and despised he will not, cannot endure it.
For three transgressions of Judah, and for four I will not turn away the
punishment thereof, because they have despised the law of the Lord, Amos. 2 4.
he will not turn away the punishment of this sin, when men do despise him;
what infinite need then have thou to be humbled under thy will not, thou
despisest the commandment.

Here Is a word to you that are godly; 4 Use. To quicken the thankfulness of the
godly.
O what mercy has the Lord showed to you, and how ought you to be thankful!
never was there such mercy as this, to show mercy to the wilful: O woeful
soul, be his misery never so great, he is not the fit object of mercy; for
though misery be mercies object, Note
yet joined with wilfullnes it is not to be pitied: you have been as wilful as
any, all cut out of the same rock; the Lord has not only helped you to mercy
and grace, but also to a will to take it. When Lot was unwilling to go out of
Sodom, the Lord took him by the arm, and carried him perforce; now now see
how the Text expresses it: the Angels took hold of his hand, the Lord being
merciful unto him* and they brought him forth, Genesis 19 16. As if he should
say, would you feign stay? you shall not; would you stand lingering to be
consumed with fire and brimstone? you shall not: the Lord was merciful to him
whether he would or no. So you had no mercy on your selves, but the Lord had;
ye were wilful against mercy, and the Lord fastened mercy on you, whether you
would or no; he commanded his loving kindness, Psalm. 42.8. go mercy and
seize on them, go loving kindness, and make them take ye; not as though God
converted you against your wills: for when he converted you, your
unwillingnesse was taken away; but he made you of unwilling, willing. Oh the
infinite mercy of God, and the infinite cause you have to be thankful.

5 Use. A seasonable Item to all rebellious spirits
In the fifth place, to you that stand out in your wilfulness still; is it so
that ye stick at a will not? then be exhorted to be much in abasing your
selves before the Lord: your stoutnesse is intolerable, that you dare set up
the briars and thorns against God in battle; down with them and be wise: you
harden your own hearts, and disable your selves more and more for repenting of
it; ye despise the Lords name, by the stubbornenesse of your froward will, you
can never be saved except your wills stoop: before Christ will meddle with a
soul, he will first ask, art thou willing? as he asked the blind man, what will thou that I do unto thee? Lord says he that I may receive my sight, Luke
18.41. So the first question he puts to thee is, what will thou? Lord that I
may be humble, converted, purged: if thou be wilful, though he never take
thee in hand, Psalm. 81 11.
but leave thee to thy self, he will be justified in thine eternal confusion.

First, Consider.
Is it not enough that thou have willingly fallen in Adam, but thou must
willingly stand out again? God now calls thee to means of grace, thou have
stood out once all ready, and will thou be wilful to stand out again? as
Israel, though in a mistake, said to their brethren, is the iniquity of Peor
too little for us, from the which we are not cleansed to this day? but that ye
must turn away this day too? Josh. 22.17. So may I say, is your willing
apostasy in Adam too little for you, from the which ye are not cleansed to
this day? but ye must willingly stand out against Christ too?

Secondly, consider the very Saints of God that have not half so many will nots
as you, that stick more truly at a cannot; I would do the good but I cannot.
I say the very Saints of God they labor to humble themselves every day: O
wretched man that I am says Paul, Romans 7.24. does Paul cry out, Oh wretched
man that I am? he was a Saint of God, and heir of heaven, and sure of bliss;
does he cry out of himself, that he was wretched? oh what infinite need then
have thou to be humbled! Thou art yet a child of hell, an heir of damnation,
wilful in thy sins to this hour, Oh wretched man that ^ am!

Thirdly, consider the more shamfull ones sin is, the more reason to be
humbled; thy sin is most shameful; for thou corruptest thy self, they have
corrupted themselves, Deuteronomy. 32.5. so thou corruptest thy self, thy will
corrupts it self.

Nay fourthly, consider there is no greater shame then to make away ones self;
thou destroyest thy self; Oh Israel thou have destroyed thy self. More credit
to be stabbed by the high way, Hos. 13.9.
nay more credit to be hanged on a Patibulum as a Malafactor, then to murder
ones self. Put him into a hole, drive a stake through his body, set a Monument
of shame on him. (I do not know whether it be so among you, but) it is so in
some places, when a man murders himself. Wilful disobedience is soule-murder.
So thou do murder thy self, nay more thy best self; thou make away thy
soul. Be vexed then with thy wicked will, what a mad man am I? I will have
this lust, and I will have that passion, like the people, we will have a King
over us; 1 Samuel 12.12.
no says Samuel, the Lord your God, is your King; nay but we will have a
King. So thou art wilful, and thou will do thus; Oh do not do it, the Lord
has forbidden thee? Nay but I will do it. Thus thou art wilful, and thou will
to Hell; vex thine own heart with this. When a wilful Malefactor, comes
afterward to know that if he had not been wilful the judge would have saved
him, Oh how will it vex him! he could even rend his own hair and tear his
own flesh, what a mad ^an was I! I forsook mine own Clerg^ so thou
forsakest thine own Clergy, ^^^e own mercy; they that observe lying vanities
forsake their own mercy, Jonah 2.8. vex thine own heart with it, say I have
forsaken mine own mercy.

Fifthly, consider if you would but vex your own souls with this serious
consideration, it would make you kick your lust under foot, and cry out upon
them, out upon you, get ye hence, as they cried out upon their Idols, Esaias
30.22. get ye hence, yet ye hence; here is no entertainment for you from
henceforth. I forsake mine own mercy as long as I keep you.

Having showed you that except your belief of this point be rooted in your
hearts, ye can never be humbled;
FIrst, because hereby you excuse your selves from all your transgressions
besides original.

Nay secondly, ye excuse your selves for your original sin too.

Nay thirdly, you make all your sins to be nothing but infirmities,
invincible infirmities.

Nay fourthly, you commend your selves more then God.

Nay fifthly, you block up the way to the throne of grace.

Nay sixthly, you cast all the blame upon God.

First, because you lay the blame upon nature.

Secondly, because you cast the blame on temptations.

Thirdly, because you lay the blame on the times.

Fourthly, because you lay the blame upon the Commandment.

Nay seventhly, you find fault with all the dealings of God.

Oh take heed then of these base pleas and pretenses; for

That I may interpose four or five particulars unnamed.

First, this same pleading is the cause why you are lazy and idle in the use of
the means; namely because ye suffer your hearts to plead, Oh we cannot do
thus. We cannot beat down this evil; why did the unjust Steward refuse honest
labor to work for his living. J cannot dig says he, Luke 16.3. therefore
he refused to labor; so this is the cause why ye pray no more, and reform
no more, etc. Ye set your hearts thus to plead, I cannot do it; This is the
reason why ye are backward to labor; how know ye what may be done if ye
would buckle to labor? but alas, J cannot do it say you; and therefore ye are
dead and dull and sluggish to every good Ordinance. Shake off these lazy
hearted pleas, otherwise yee'l never buckle to labor.

Secondly, this same pleading brings up an ill report upon piety and
godliness; generally men think religion is so ircksome, and holiness is
impossible. We cannot be Saints, and we are not able to be so holy; these
pleas bring an evil report on Religion. Like the spies that brought an evil
report upon Canaan. Number. 13.23. What says the Text in the verse going before?
we be not able to get it, say they, verse 31. this made the rest of the people
think hardly of their going into Canaan; they generally thought it was to very
little end. Oh they were not able to win it; so ye bring an evil report
upon the Heavenly Canaan, the flesh is too strong, the devil too strong,
temptations too strong, and its impossible to grapple with them all, we are
not able to get mastery. I say this brings up an evil report on Religion, ye
discourage one another. I cannot get quickening, and I cannot deny my self. Ye
bring up an evil report upon these duties, and ye are guilty of the evil
report that goes up and down.

Thirdly, this same pleading is a murmuring against God. q. d. why d^es God
give me such Commandments, that I cannot observe? Why does he charge me to
root out a lust that I cannot root out? this is to murmur against God. Like
those murmuring Disciples in the Gospel, when they were told they must feed
upon Christ, and as the body feeds upon meat, so your souls must feed upon
Christ; this is a hard saying, who can hear it say they? Christ construed this
speech to be murmuring, Joh. 6.60.61. We cannot do this, and this is so hard
we are not able to do it. The Text says it was murmuring, when Jesus knew in
himself that his Disciples murmured at it; that pleading of a cannot was a
murmuring. So when thou grumblest on this manner I cannot walk thus, I cannot
believe thus, etc. this is to murmur against God, nay this will bring thee to
Apostasy at last, if thou suffer thy heart to plead thus. May be now thou art a
forward professor, yet be thou never so forward, and favourest any lust, and
I cannot give it over, I cannot root it out, etc. I say this will break thy
neck at the last, if thou do not look to it. So it was with those forenamed
Disciples, they were very forward Professors, for they were the Disciples of
Christ says the Text; yet those Disciples, they went away back and walked no
more with Christ, verse. 66. their pleading of their cannots, drove them to
Apostasy; they went away back. So thou will go away back, and fall into
Apostasy if thou suffer thy heart to stand pleading of cannots in this manner.

Fourthly, this is the sawsiest excuse of all excuses, many sinners excuse
their own selves, but there is more mannerlinesse in all their excuses; I pray
thee have me excused says one. I have bought five yoke of Oxen, and I pray
thee have me excused; says the other, I have bought a purchase, I pray thee
have me excused. These though wretched excusers and turned out from all mercy,
yet they were somewhat more mannerly; but I cannot come, say thou; I have
married a Wife, and J cannot come, Luke 14.20. this is a most saucy excuse,
thou tellest Christ in plain terms, I cannot come, q.d. ye may even save
your labor to invite, for this is the short and long, as we say, I cannot
come. This I put in only by the by.

I showed you some of the deceits of the heart in pleading these cannots.

First, How it lies unto God.

Secondly, how it dallies with God.

Thirdly, how hereby it puts off the word.

And then I showed you the strong reason we have to be humbled under these
will-nots.

First, because here chiefly lies the pride of the heart, not in men's Cannots,
but in their will-nots, Jer. 13.17.

Secondly, here lies chiefly the hardening of the heart, Ex. 9.34.35.

Thirdly, here lies chiefly the stubbornenesse of the heart, Deuteronomy. 21.18.

Fourthly, here lies chiefly the greatest despising of the Commandments of
God, Levit 26.15.

Fifthly, now to go on, here lies the reason why Divines say that the
conversion of a sinner is a harder work then the Creation of Heaven and Earth;
for thus they do reason. When God created Heaven and Earth, he had nothing to
resist him; as he had nothing to help him, (he made all of nothing) so he had
nothing to resist him. There was but one difficulty in the creation of Heaven
and Earth; but in the conversion of a sinner there be two difficulties.

First, here is the same difficulty that was in creation, for God makes a
Convert of nothing; he had nothing to help him, not one thought, not one
desire, not one good inclination, and therefore the Scripture calls it a new
creation; Note.
whosoever is in Christ is a new creature, 2 Cor 5.17. that is, is created
anew. And therefore, there was nothing praeixistent, no not one thought, all
the thoughts of men are only evil, and that continually. So there is the same
difficulty, that was in the Creation of Heaven and Earth; and then

Secondly, there is another difficulty more then there was in the Creation; for
as there was nothing praexistent to help, so there was nothing to resist. But
here is something to resist, the will it resists; now the Cannot does not
resist. No, the bestowing of the new powers is no more then another Creation.
But the changing of the will is more then another Creation; for the will it
resists, yea and it sets all the soul a resisting. Carnal reason resists,
carnal desires they resist, all the soul it resists; and the greatest
resistance of all is the resistance of the will; for the will is the utmost
strength of the soul. And therefore here lies the infinite difficulty of the
conversion of a sinner, namely in the turning of the will; it requires more
power, then was required to the creation of Heaven and Earth. God puts himself
forth more when he converteth a sinner, then when he created a World; and
therefore the Scripture calls the day of conversion of men's wills, the day of
his power. Thy people shall be willing in the day of thy power, Psalm. 110 3. In
the day of thy power; mark; its called a day of Gods power, when he
converteth a people to be willing. Why? because the will did resist him; Note.
nay God had his own self to resist him, anger steps in his way to resist
him. Convert him not Lord, his wilfulness has angered thee; Justice stepped in
to resist him, save him not Lord, his sins have dishonored thee. Nay, he had
his mercy to resist him; mercy steps in, Lord he has abused me, save him
not. Indeed had a sinner yielded as soon as he sinned, mercy would not resist
him; but mercy had be dealing with him, and he abused all mercy. And
therefore he had mercy to resist, nay and wisdom one would think to resist
too, what a wilful fool? pity him not Lord. There is no reason he should be
pitied, if he will perish let him perish. I say in the conversion of a sinner,
as there was nothing to assist him, so there was all to resist. The will does
resist him, nay God had himself as I may so speak to resist him; yea, and
mercy to resist him; it was not so in the Creation of Heaven and Earth. The
creature had never provoked God not to create it; but the sinner has provoked
God never to convert him, so that now God must have power over himself if he
mean to convert him. Oh then what infinite reason have thou to be humbled;
thou resistest God, as Stephen told the Jews, you have always resisted the
Holy Ghost, Acts 7.51. so thou have resisted Gods spirit, yea, thy will does
resist him, and that is the strongest thing to resist in the World. His word
comes to convert thee, and thou do resist his motions, his mercies, his
corrections, his ordinances and all holy means to convert thee, thou do
resist them; nay his spirit contendeth within thee, and thou d^st resist him.

I gave you five things to consider, what it is to stick at your will nots. I
beseech you consider yet further,

First, If you will not, Gods Ministers have discharged their duties, and have
left your blood on your own heads; they can go no further if you will not:
the Groom can but carry the Steed unto watering as we say, if he will not
drink he cannot help it; so they cannot help it, your blood lies upon your
own heads, they have discharged their duties. When Abraham's servant objected,
and how if the woman will not? Abraham he answers, if the woman will not be
willing, then thou shall be clear from my oath. Genesis 24.8. So Lord, how if
they will not? may we say, nay if they will not, let them choose, thou art
clear; the Lord has sworn us to preach, and teach, and exhort, and reprove,
and invite you to grace; but if we do so, and you will not, we cannot help it,
your blood is on your own heads; we have discharged our oath and our duty, we
would be glad that you would; but if now you will not, we have discharged our
duties. Nay,

Secondly, if you will not, the Gospel has delivered its errand, ye are
guilty of your own everlasting perdition; the Gospel has delivered its
message, and this is the message, Whosoever will, let him take of the water of
life freely, Revelat. 22.17. This message has been delivered to you often; its
the last exhortation in the whole Bible: Note.
like one in the evening of the market, he is even about to take down his
standing; I have told you my lowest price, if you will have it, take it; if
not, choose, I must be gone. So this is the end of Gods book; as if he should
say, I am even a closing up my book, speak quickly, if ye will, come, and
welcome; but if not, I am gone. If yet you will not, you will not submit; nay
but you will have your lusts, and your stomachs will not come down, you will
not stir a jot beyond your painted civility and formality; you will not be
more conscionable then you have been, nor frequent holy duties more then you
have done: nor get more holiness then you have done, then if Will will have
will, Will must win woe; the Gospel has delivered its message.

Nay,

Thirdly, if you will not; the blood of Jesus Christ has done that it came
for: it came to tender you mercy upon very easy terms; to offer you grace and
pardon, and salvation and Heaven, and all upon very free cost. If you had
rather that sin should be your master, then that Christ should be your
master; if you will not hearken and obey, I say the blood of Christ has done
that which it came for; and your souls shall know ye shall be worse offered:
you have knowledge of the truth, Christ has offered you very fair, and you
cannot but know it, and yet you will not submit to it; assure your selves you
shall be worse offered: for next to your will nots, comes Christ leaving you
desolate. As Christ told Jerusalem, I would, but you would not; what follows?
Behold your house is left unto you desolate, Mat. 23.37.38. So Christ would,
and you would not; he he has given you gracious offers, but you will not:
therefore you may look to be worse offered, your souls to be desolate. Nay,

Fourthly, If you will not, ye murder your own souls; when a man has murdered
himself, the Coroner comes and he does sit on him, and he enquires and he
examines, and who has murdered this man? and when he finds that it was
himself that did murder him, so he concludes, and that man is branded for
murdering of himself; so you murder your own souls. The Jews their souls
were all murdered; well, when the Coroner sat on them, he concluded they had
murdered themselves: O Israel thou have destroyed thy self, Hos. 13.9. So if
the Coroner set on thee, its most certain he shall find thou have murdered
thine own self; O what a company of you is there, your souls are quite
murdered; one in one sin, another in another; who has murdered these men? not
God, he was ready to help them: not the Minister, he did use all means to
save them; he has not been wanting to teach them and exhort them. No, your own
selves have murdered your selves; you would be carnal, and you would be proud,
and you would not lie down to the word: when the Coroner sits on you, he must
necessarily conclude, you have murdered your selves; your own wills have
condemned you.

You remember what exhortations we gave you. As ever you regard mercy to humble
your souls, we told you the first question Christ asks, is, if ye be
willing, as he asked the blind man, what will thou? Luke. 18.41. if thou be
not willing, he will never take thee in hand: the subjects of the kingdom of
grace must be willing. Christ will never come into a soul, where his will may
be affronted by another; Caelum non patitu^ duos sole^.
Heaven cannot bear two suns, nor one hearts two wills: if thy will be not
crucified, and made agreeable to Christ's, Christ cannot dwell in thy heart;
there would be two contrary wills in one heart; and this cannot be: if Christ
come; he will have these and these lusts turned away, which thou would feign
keep; he will have this done and that done, and thou will not: two contrary
wills can never stand together. No, if thy will be contrary to Christ, Christ's
Will, will be contrary to thine; if thy will be to do that which will offend
him, his Will will be to do that which will vex thee; If ye will walk
contrary to me, I will also walk contrary to you, Levit. 26.23.24. No, no,
your wills they must bow, or Christ will not take you in hand; the will is the
general presupposition of all the whole gospel: Note.
the sum of the whole Gospel is this, to deny a man's self and take up
Christ's cross and so follow him; now see the will is presupposed as ready; if
any man will come after me, let him deny himself, etc. Luke. 9.23. never a
commandment of the gospel, never a promise, never an one passage but
presupposes the will; Christ will not open his mouth except thy will be brought
down.

An awakening hint, for ^here deemed of the Lord.
A few words to you that are the redeemed of Lord, and so I Will make a conclusion
of all. I pray God smite home this point into your hearts; for though your wills
be tamed and subdued in regard of the wicked, you do not stand out as they
do, nevertheless observe you this point: there is many a Canaanite that
remains still in our bosoms, that we may thank our own wills for not rooting
out. We do not put our selves forth so much as we might, nor labor in the
Lord so seriously as we might, nor walk so close as we might; oh beloved these
these same will nots do us all the mischief that ever is done us. For

First, Note.
We never sin against gospel but only upon will nots; indeed we sin
against the law in every of our cannots, but we never sin against the Gospel,
but only in our will nots. The gospel requires nothing of a believer, but that
which it gives him, and therefore we never sin against the gospel, but only
in our will nots: this is the voice of the gospel (...) if any man will, John.
7.17. Oh then let us stir up our selves, shall we sin against gospel? and
sin against mercy?

Secondly, We can never displease God but only upon will nots. I speak only
upon Gods people; we can never stain our acceptance with God, but only in our
will nots; though we cannot but sin in our prayers, but sin in our duties,
but sin in every thing that we do* yet this does not stain our acceptance
with God, nor blemish it one whit, when God has our wills: for if there be a
willing mind, it is accepted according to that which a man has, and not
according to that which a man has not, 2 Cor. 8.12. But when God would have us
mend this, and we will not; and reform that and we will not; we let security
and sloth break in to our wills, here and here only do we desplease our good
God, this is a maine thing to consider; is there but one thing wherein we may
displease God, and shall we not take heed of that!

Thirdly, Conscience can never condemn us but only upon will nots; when a
child of God sins, and he cannot otherwise choose, his conscience can never
condemn him. A child of Gods cannots, be they never so many, nay if they were
millions more then they are, they never hinder sincerity; sincerity is rooted
only in the will, it is our will not that is the breach of sincerity, and
therefore here only the conscience condemns; does our conscience reproach us
in our ways? let us thank our will nots for this; have we little peace? it is
because of the rebellion of our will nots. Ah, ah, this is an infinite evil,
for it hinders our comforts, it hinders our boldness of access to the throne
of Gods grace, it hinders our patience, and every good duty, this does us
infinite hurt; it stabbes to the heart, and wounds our very soul, when our
conscience affords little peace, O it hinders very grievously; all this is
long of our will nots, because we will not be so careful and so circumspect as
we might.

Fourthly, God can never be angry with us but only upon will nots; its true as
long as a man is not in Christ, all the score stands, and God is angry for all;
but God is angry for nothing but will nots in his children, as Nehemiah says of
Gods people in Judah, they would not hear, therefore God gave them up into the
hand of the people of the land, Nehem. 9.30. God is not angry with his people
for cannots, but only for their will nots; it is for our wilnots that God does
not so go out with our Ministers, nor so quicken his word to your hearts. Note.
It is for our will nots that he threatens our land, and begins to abridge us
of our spiritual food, and shows ominous signs of his departing away from
us, and are we not even sick unto death for these Will nots? We complain of
our deadness, and what trow we is the cause, but our will nots? we complain
of our corruptions and of the leanenesse of our souls, and whom may we thank,
but our will nots? we might grow more then we do, what lets us, but our will
nots? What makes some of us go down the wind? as we say; but because we will
not stand on our guards. These, these, brethren, these will nots of ours, are
the reason why God is provoked against us. O let us put forth our selves, and
shake of these will nots, least anger break out, and there be no remedy; for
ones crooked servant to be stubborn, it is but his kind: but for ones child
to be stubborn, this angers the father indeed.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 9. line 4. for yet read get, p. 44. l. 15. blot out then, p. 55. l. 18.
for charm, r. c^urne, l. 19. for charmer, r. churner, p. 61. l. 34. r. will,
p. 63. l. 8. r. has, p. 66. l. 1. for those from, r. from those, p. 68. l. 4.
for couse r. course, p. 81. l. 16. for minius r. minus, p. 81. l. 22. for
fourthly r. thirdly, p. 82. l. 24. for way r. away, p. 86. l. 8. for ^pight r.
upright, p. 87. l. 9. for avide r. avoid, p. 88. l. 27. for the lack r. of
the lack, l. 28. blot out thereof, p. 89. l. 23. for deed r. ^eede, p. 103.
l. 22. for yet r. get.


