To the Christian Reader.
HAving been informed upon very good grounds, that the former Sermons of Mr
William Fenner, have found good acceptance, both in regard of the worthiness
of the Author, and also in regard of the usefulness of the Sermons; I could
not but give my approbation to these ensuing Sermons of the same Author, and
desire that they may find the like acceptance with all Godly wise Christians,
and that they may become profitable to the Church of God.

Imprimatur, EDM* CALAMY.

THE SACRIFICE OF THE FAITHFUL. OR, A TREATISE showing the nature, property,
and efficacy of Zealous Prayer; together with some Motives to Prayer, and Helps
against discouragements in Prayer.

To which is added seven profitable Sermons. 1. The misery of the Creature by
the sin of man, on Romans 8. 22. 2. The Christians imitation of Christ, on 1
Ioh. 2. 6 3. The enmity of the wicked to the light of the Gospel, on John 3. 20
4. Gods impartiality, on Esaias 42. 24. 5. The great Dignity of the Saints, on
Heb. 11. 28. 6. The time of Gods grace is limited, on Genesis 6. 3. 7. A Sermon
for spiritual Mortification, on Col. 3. 5.


By William Fenner, Minister of the Gospel* Fellow of Pembrok Hall in
Cambridge, and Lecturer of Rochford in Essex.

LONDON, Printed for John Stafford, and are to be sold at his House over
against Brides Church in Fleet Street, 1648.

The CONTENTS of the first Treatise on Lament. 3. 5. 7.
THE opening of the words in which are three properties of effectual Prayer.
page 1. 1. The unsatiablenesse of it till it be heard. 2. The sensiblenesse of
it whether it be heard or no. 3. The supply it has against danger, and
discouragement. p. 2. 1. Doct: An effectual prayer is an unsatiable prayer. p.
3. Quest. Must a man always pray? Ans. A man must give over the act of prayer
for other duties, but he must never give over the suit of Prayer. p. 5. Rules
to know whether our Prayers be unsatiable or no. 1. It is an earnest begging
Prayer. p. 6. 2. It is constant Prayer. p. 8. A godly man's Prayer is not out of
his heart, till the grace he prayed for be in. p. 9. 3. It is a Prayer that is
ever a beginning. ib. 4. It is a proceeding Prayer, it winds up the heart
higher, and higher. ibid. 5. It is a Prayer that purifieth the heart. p. 10. It
is more and more fervent. p. 11. And more and more frequent. p. 12. It will
take time from lawful recreations, and from the lawful duties of our calling.
p. 13. And it will add humiliation and fasting to Prayer. p. 14. Use. To
condemn those who pray for grace, and yet sit down before grace is obtained.
p. 15. Such Prayers are. 1. Endless. p. 16. 2. Fruitless. p. 17. 2. Doct: A
godly soul is sensible of Gods hearing or not hearing his Prayer. p. 19.
Quest: How can the soul know whether it speed in Prayer or no? Answ. 1. When
God gives a soul further and further ability to pray, it is a sign that God
hears it. p. 20. But if the soul have no heart to continue its suit, it is a
sign that God never means to hear that man's Prayer. p. 21. 2. The
preparedness of the heart to Prayer, is a sign that God means to hear. p.
21. 3. Gods gracious look is a sign that he will hear; for sometimes God
answers his people by a cast of his countenance. p. 22. 4. The conscience of a
man will answer him, whether God hears his Prayer or no. p. 26. But a man's
conscience may be misinformed. p. 27. A wicked man may have a truce, though no
true peace in his conscience. p. 28. 5. The getting of the grace that a man
prays for, is a sign that God hears his Prayer. p. 29. But God may give many
temporal blessings, and common graces, yet not in love, but in wrath. ibid. 6.
If a man have Faith given him to believe, it is a sign that God hears him. p.
30. Good works are good signs of Faith, but they are but rotten grounds of
Faith. p. 31. Object: Every Promise runs with a condition. ibid. Ans. 1. The
Promise is the ground of Faith, and the way to get the Condition. p. 32. 2.
Faith is the enabling cause to keep the Condition. p. 33. Two things do much
hurt in Prayer. 1. Groundless encouragement. 2. Needless discouragement. p.
36. 3. Doct. God would not have any Christian soul to be discouraged in
Prayer. p. 39. A definition of discouragement. ibid. 4. Reasons. 1. Because
discouragement hinders the soul in prayer. p. 42. 2. Discouragement takes away
the strength of the soul in Prayer. p. 43. 3. If we have fearful
apprehensions of our sins, so as to think they will never be forgiven, we can
never pray aright. p. 45. 4. If we have any secret despair, we can never pray
to purpose. p. 46. There is a double desperation. 1. Of infirmity, which draws
the soul from God. 2. Of extremity, which puts life into a man's Prayers and
endeavors p. 47. A man never prays well till he feels himself undone. p.
49. We should take heed of discouragements; for 1. Discouragements breed
melancholinesse in the soul. p. 53. 2. They breed hard thoughts of God. p. 54.
3. They will cause a man to think that God hates him. p. 56. 4. They will
bring a man to despair. p. 57. Ministers should not preach the pure Law
without the Gospel. p. 58. Secret discouragements in the heart 1. They take
away the Spirit in the use of the means. p. 62. 2. They drive us from the use
of means. p. 63. 3 They make a man continually to pore on his sins, so as he
shall never be able to get out of them. p. 64. 4. They breed nothing but
sorrow. p. 66. 5. They leave the soul in a maze, that it knows not whether to
turn it self. p. 67. 6. They whisper into a man a sentence of Death, and an
impossibility of escaping. p. 68. The conclusion of the whole. p. 69.
The Contents of that Sermon ROMANS 8. 22.
EVery creature has a threefold goodness in it 1. A goodness of end. p. 70.
2. A goodness of nature. p. 71. 3. A goodness of use. ibid. There be four
evils under which every Creature groaneth. p. 73. 1. The continual labor that
the creature is put unto. ibid. 2. The creature sometimes partakes of the
plagues of the ungodly. ib. 3. The Creature has an instinctive fellow-feeleing
of man's wretchedness. p. 74. 4. Because they are rent and torn from their
proper Masters. ibid. Doct. Every Creature groaneth under the slavery of sin.
p. 75. Not only under the slavery of sinful men, but so far as they minister
to the flesh of the Saints, they groan under them. ibid. Object. Did ever any
man hear any unreasonable creature groan under sin? Answ. It is spoken
Hyperbolically, to declare the great misery the creatures are into serve
sinful man. p. 76. 2. Analogically in regard of a natural instinct of blind
reason, that is in all the creatures. ibid. 3. It is spoken by way of
supposition, if they had reason they would groan. p. 77. 4. Intelligently,
because a man cannot wreng the creature, but he wrongs God in the creature. p.
78. 5. Specifically, because the Godly come before God in the behalf of all
the creatures, and mourn for the abuse of the creatures. p. 79. Four Reasons
why the creatures groan. 1. Because they are distracted in their service. p.
80. 2. Because of the unprofitablenesse of their service. p. 82. 3. Because of
the uncessantnesse of their service. p. 83. 4. Because of that misery and woe
the creatures lie under. p. 84. Every creature has, 1. A specificall end. p.
85. 2. An ultimate end. ibid. A wicked man has no true right unto the
creature. p. 86. But he has 1. A civil right. ibid. 2. A providentiall right.
ibid. 3. A vindicative right. p. 87. 4. A Creatures right, as he is a creature.
ib. But he has no filial right, no son-like right in Christ. p. 89. Use. To
show that wicked men have little cause to be merry at any time, because there
is nothing near them, but groaneth under them. p. 90. All creatures groan to
God for vengeance to be powered upon the wicked. p. 92. And these groans are 1.
Upbraiding groans. p. 95. 2. Witnessing groans. p. 96. 3. Accusing groans.
p. 100. 4. Judging and condemning groans. ibid. Use. For exhortation. 1. To
take heed how we do abuse the Creatures of God. p. 101. 2. Take heed of
sinning against God by the Creatures. ibid. 3 Take heed of setting thy heart
upon the Creature. p. 102. 4. Use all the Creatures in humility and
thankfulness. p. 102. 5. Use the Creatures as so many Ladders to help thee to
climb up toward Heaven. p. 103.
The Contents of that Sermon 1 JOHN. 2. 6.
THE opening of the words in four particulars. p. 108. Doct. A true Christian
walks as Christ walked. p. 109. A man must first be in Christ, before he can
walk as Christ walked. p. 110. Object. Can any man walk as Christ walked? p.
111. Answ. None can walk as Christ walked in regard of equality; but in regard
of similitude they may. p. 111. The life of Christ should be the Example of our
life. p. 112. Christ came into the World to redeem us for our justification,
and to be an example of life unto us for our sanctification. p. 114. This
Question answered. viz. What it is to walk as Christ walked. p. 116. Four
Reasons of the point. 1. Because as Christ came into the World to justify the
ungodly, so he came to conform them to his image. p. 117. 2. Because in vain
we are called Christians, if we be not imitators of Christ, and live as he
lived. p. 119. 3. Because all that are in Christ, are Members of his body,
therefore they must have the same life, and be quickened by the same Spirit. p.
121. 4. Because of that near relation that is betwixt Christ and every one of
his Members. p. 123. 1. Use. To show that all men that live not the life of
Christ, do blaspheme the name of Christ. p. 127. Of all sins under Heaven,
God cannot endure the sins of them that take the name of Christ upon them. p.
198. Doct: Every Minister is bound to preach home to men in particulars. p.
132. 3. Reas. 1. Particulars are most operative. p. 133. 2. Particulars are
most distinct, and most powerful. p. 135. 3. Particulars are most sensible. p.
137. Doct: Every Minister is bound to preach so, as to make a difference
betwixt the precious and the vile. p. 138. Reas. 1. Because, otherwise a
Minister prophanes the holy things of God. p. 139. 2. Otherwise he cannot be
the Minister of Christ. p. 141. 3. Otherwise he is like to do no good by his
Ministry. ibid.
The Contents of that Sermon on JOHN 3. 20.
THE Context opened in four particulars. 1. What man's natural estate, and
condition is without Christ. p. 145. 2. Gods gracious provision for man's
salvation. p. 146. 3. The condition required, viz. Faith. ibid. 4. The
reprobation of the World if they do not believe. ibid. But Christ is neither
the efficient, nor deficient cause thereof. ibid. But the cause of their
damnation is from themselves proved 1 By their own conscience. p. 147. 2 By
experience. p. 148. 3. By Reason. p. 149. In the words are two parts. 1. The
wickeds rejection of the word of grace. ibid. 2. The cause of that rejection.
ib. viz. 1. First, from the qualification of their persons. 2. From the
disposition of their nature. ib. Doct: A wicked man hates the word of Gods
grace, yea grace it self. p. 150. This hatred is 1. An actual hatred. ibid.
2. It is a passion of the heart. p. 151. 3. It causes the heart to rise up
against an union with the word. p. 153. This union of the word is set in
opposition 1. To general preaching. p. 154. 2. To merciful preaching. p. 155.
3. To now and then preaching. p. 156. to p. 160. If the World do not hate a
righteous man, it is either 1. Because he is a great man. p. 160. 2. Because he
is a man of admirable wit, end knowledge. ibid. 3. Or because God gives him
favor in the eyes of the World. ib. 4. This hatred causes the heart to rise
against that which is repugnant to its lusts. p. 162. A wicked man may love 3
kinds of preaching. 1. Eloquent preaching, that savours more of humanity then
of Divinity. ib. 2. Impertinent preaching. p. 163. 3. Now and then some
preaching, to satisfy the cravings of his Conscience. p. 164. Reas: 1. A
wicked man hates the word* because he hates all truth, even the very being of
the word. p. 165. 2. Because he hates the very nature of the word. p. 167. 3.
Because he cannot endure the knowledge of the word. p. 169. All natural men
hate the word. 1. Because no entreaties, no beseeches can possibly reconcile
them. p. 171. 2. Because neither money, nor price can make them friends. p. 175.
3. Because all the love in the World cannot unite them together. p. 176. 4.
Because neither the love of God, nor the blood of Christ will soder them
together. p. 177. Every natural man had rather be damned then leave his
sins, rather go to Hell then be a new creature. p. 178.
The contents of that Sermon on ESAIAS. 42. 24.
THE words contain five things. 1. The Author of the destruction. p. 185. 2.
The causes of it. ibid. 3. The judgment it self: p. 186. 4. The people on
whom it was inflicted. ibid. 5. The effects of it. p. 187. 1. Doct. God is the
Author of all judgment that befalls a Nation. ibid. 1. Use For comfort to Gods
children, seeing God is the Orderer of all events. p. 119. 2. Use For terror
to the wicked that God whom they hate shall be their judge. p. 190. 3. Use. To
learn in all calamities to look up unto God. p. 191. 2. Doct. Sin and
disobedience against the Law of God, is that which brings down punishments,
and judgments, upon a Nation, Church, or People. ibid. Use. 1. To discover the
weakness of our Land, in what a poor condition it is by reason of sin. p.
193. 2. To show who be the greatest Traitors to a Kingdom. p. 194. 3. To teach
all of us to set hand and heart, Prayers and tears a work against sin. p.
195. Especially it concerns those that are in places of Authority. p. 197. 3.
Doct. The Lord often times brings fearful, and unavoydable judgments, and
punishments, upon his own professing people. p. 200. Four signs of Judgment
a coming. 1. When the Ministers of God with one voice, foretell judgments to
come. p. 202. 2. When sins of all sorts do abound. ib. 3. When the Devil
and wicked men cast in bones of dissension. p. 203. 4. When all men's hearts
begin to fail. p. 204 Three Directions, what is to be done in such times. 1.
Let us shake off the love of all things here below. p. 206. 2. Let us lay our
heads upon the block, and be willing that God should do what he will with us.
p. 208. 3. Let us pray and cry mightily to God, before we dye, even all the
time we have to live, for mercy, peace, and truth. ibid. The Church of England
like the ship of Jonah. p. 209. The Authors Admonition to the People. ib. and
p. 210. etc. More then ordinary Faith requisite for these times of danger. p.
211. 212. etc.
A DISCOURSE OF the nature of prevalent Prayer, together with some helps
against discouragements in Prayer.
LAMENT. 3. VER. 57. Thou drewest near in the day that I called upon thee,
thou said fear not.
THis Book of the Lamentations does plainly show what miseries and distresses
sin is the cause of. Now this people of the Jews, because of their
Idolatries, their contempt of Gods Ordinances, their slighting and misusing the
Prophets, etc. Their Cities were taken, the Temple burned, their liberties
confiscated, themselves banished out of their country, and deprived of the
ordinances of their God, and the signs of his presence, before they were
rebellious: but now they sought God a long time; they prayed, but God would not
hear, In so much that many poor souls amongst them were discouraged, and
almost ready to despair; That had not the Lord put in some incklings of hope,
they had utterly fainted. Now whilst these poor souls were praying and
crying, and groaning, and now ready to give over for discouragement that God
will not hear them, presently the Lord flings in comfort, and beckens to their
hearts not to be discouraged, but to pray on and fear not. Thou drewest near
in the day that I called upon thee, thou said fear not; the words contain
in them three properties of effectual prayer.







thousands of supplications and prayers as one suite; never had they done their
prayers till God did hear them.

Secondly the sensiblenesse of it, whereby

Thirdly, the supplies it has against

That an effectual prayer is an unsatiable prayer, A man that prays
effectually, sets down this in himself as his first conclusion never to cease,
nor to give over praying till he speed: This is the first and prime thing that
a godly heart looks at, as David in his prayers: He begins in this manner,
Hear my cry O God, attend unto my prayer. Psalm. 61. 1. So, Give ear unto my
prayer O God, and hide not thy self from my supplications, Psalm. 55. 1. Hear
my voice O God in my prayer, Psalm. 64. 1. As if he should say, Lord, now I come
to call upon thee: now that I come to thee, to beg these and these graces
that my soul wants, I beseech thee to hear me: for I am resolved never to
give over my suit, never to give thee rest, but for to continue my prayers and
supplications, till thou give a gracious answer to my soul and hear me.

This is the first and prime thing that the soul looks after, it being the
very end of prayer to be heard; it is not with prayer as with Oratory; the end
of oratory is not to persuade, but to speak perswasively; for a man may use
all the persuasions that may be, and use all the persuasive arguments that the
wit of man can invent, and speak as cuttingly, as perswasively as may be, and
yet the heart may be so intractable as not to be persuaded; it is not so with
prayer.

The end of prayer is to prevail with God. Beloved, there is difference
between the end and office of prayer; the office of prayer is to pray, the end
of prayer is to prevail. There is many a man that does the office of prayer,
and yet never gets the end of prayer. A man has never gotten the end of his
prayers, till he has gotten that he prayed for. It is not with prayer as with
a Physician, that may give the best physic under heaven, and yet the Patient
may die under his hands; and therefore one gives counsel that a Physician
never meddle with a desperate man.

But if the soul be an effectual suitor with God, it can never fail of its
suite, because it is an unsatiable Suitor, that never leaves his prayer till it
terminates the end of it. I cried unto the Lord with my voice, and he heard me
out of his holy hill. Selah. Jerome translates it for ever. Psalm. 3. 4. never
does a child of God pray, but he prays so as that his prayer and Gods ear
may be joined together; I cried unto the Lord, and the Lord heard me: This also
shows how the Prophet cried and prayed, namely so as his crying and Gods
hearing were coupled together. But some may object, Object.
How can a man be unsatiable in his prayers til he speed? must a man be always
a praying? God calls men to other duties of his worship, and of his own
particular calling; after morning I must have done till noone, after noone I
must have done till night: whether God hear me or no, must I be always a
praying till I speed? then I should do nothing else but pray; how then are we
to continue our prayers till God hear us, and give the grace that we pray for?
to this I answer.

A man must give over the words and Answ.
times of prayer for other duties, but a man must not give over the suite of
prayer. A poor beggar comes to a housekeepers gate and begs, but none hears
him; now he being a poor man, has something else to do, and therefore he
sits down or stands and knits or patches, and then he begs or knocks, and then
to his work again; though he do not always continue knocking or begging, yet
he always continues his suite: O that my suite might be granted me, or that I
might have an alms here; so when the soul is begging of any grace, though it
does not always continue the words of prayer, yet it always continues the
suite of prayer. David he would dwell in the house of the Lord for ever. Psalm.
23. 6. A wicked man it may be will turn into Gods house and say a prayer, etc.
but the Prophet would (and so all godly men must) dwell there for ever; his
soul lies always at the throne of grace begging for grace. A wicked man he
prays as the cock croweth; the cock crows and cease, and crows again and
cease again; and thinks not of crowing til he crows again: so a wicked man
prays and cease, prays and cease again; his mind is never busied to
think whether his prayers speed or no; he thinks it is good Religion for him
to pray, and therefore he takes that for granted that his prayers speed,
though in very deed God never hears his prayers, nor no more respects it, then
he respects the lowing of Oxen, or the gruntling of hoggs: he is found in his
prayers as the wild Ass in her months: Jer. 2. The wild Ass in regard of
her swiftness cannot be taken but in her months, she has a sleepy month, and
all that while she is so sleepy and dumpish that any man may take her; in her
months you shall find her; so a wicked man has his prayer months, his prayer
fits: it may be in the morning, or in the evening, or day of his affliction and
misery you shall have him at his prayers, at his prayer fits then you shall
find him at it, but otherwise his mind is about other matters. But the child
of God what ever he ailes, he goes with his petition presently to the throne of
grace, and there he never removes till he has it granted him, as here we see
the prayers of the Church consisting of many years, yet are counted but one
suite; try therefore and examine whether thy prayers be unsatiable prayers yea
or no; and for help herein take these marks; first if thy prayers be
unsatiable man eats as if he had never eat before, so the unsatiable soul
prays as if he had never prayed before, till he has obtained that he has
prayed for; but a wicked man he prays not thus. Job speaking of carnal
professors, Job 27. 10. Will he call upon God at all times? see thou a wicked
man go to a good duty, go to prayer, do you think that he will hold out always?
he will never do it; for a wicked man he reasons with himself, I have called
upon God thus and thus long, I hope I need not pray any more for this thing,
and so he gives over.

But a godly man he will be always calling upon God. Beloved, there is a
beginning to an action, and a beginning of an action; thou never beginnest to
lift up a weight till thou stirrest it from ground; indeed thou may begin
toward the action by pulling at it, by reaching at it; but thou never
beginnest the lifting up of the weight til thou stir it from its place: thou
may give a pull at prayer, and tugge at a grace, but thou have not so much as
begun that duty, till thou see God begin to hear thee, till thou see the
grace a coming; therefore the Prophet David when he prayed and had not that he
prayed for, his prayers returned into his own bosom, Psalm. 35. 13. there to
lie to be a continual suiTe unto God. A wicked man prays, and he leaves his
prayer behind him in his pew, or in his hal, or chamber; but a godly man prays
and his prayer is in his heart, his prayer is not out til the grace be in.

Secondly an unsatiable prayer, it is evermore that he is unwilling to give,
but to make them more earnest with God: to draw them the nearer to himself; a
wicked man prays and his prayers tumble down upon him again; and his heart
is as dead as ever it was before, as sensual as ever, as carnal and earthly
as ever, as hard, as impenitent and secure as ever.

A godly man when he prays, though he have not gotten the thing total that he
desired, yet he is nearer God then he was before; his heart grows every day
better then other by his prayers; he obtaines still something, as the Prophet
Hoseah speaks of knowledge Hos. 6. 3. Then shall we know, if we follow on to
know the Lord* so I may say of prayer, and of al other good duties, then we
pray if we proceed on wards in prayer.

A man may know and know, and yet never know the Lord, till he go on in
knowledge; so a man may pray and pray, yet if he go not on-wards in his
prayers, his prayers are nothing. A godly man prays as a builder builds; now a
builder he first lays a foundation, and because he cannot finish in one day,
he comes the second day, and finds the frame standing that he made the first
day, and then he adds a second days work, and then he comes a third day and
finds his two former days work standing; then he proceeds to a third days
work, and makes walls to it, and so he goes on till his building be finished.
So prayer it is the building of the soul till it reach up to heaven; therefore
a godly heart prays and reaches higher and higher in prayer, till at last his
prayers reach up to God.

It is a sign of a wicked man to pray and to let his prayers fall down again
upon him. And here I appeal to the consciences of wicked men, if it be not so
with them; they pray and pray, but their hearts are as dead and deceitful, as
proud and vain, as ignorant, blockish and rebellious, as if they had never
prayed.

Thirdly, it is more and more a fervent

As a man in winding up of a bucket, if two or three windings will not fetch it
up, he will wind it up higher and higher, till it comes up; for if he should
only wind up once or twice and no more, but hold it just at the same pin, the
bucket would never come up; So if a man prays and prays, and winds not up
his heart higher, but holds it just at the same pegge it was, prays in the
same fashion he did, grace will never come up. Mark then how thou prayest,
examine thy heart; do thou pray to day as yesterday, with no more zeal, nor
feeling affection, nor sencible desire? thou praiest not unsatiably.

No, thou restrainest thy praying from growing, an excellent description of an
hypocrite, Job 14. 4. though falsely applied to Job. Thou restrainest prayer
before God; in some translations it is Thou keep thy prayers from growing,
thou restrainest thy prayers as a dwarffe is restrained from growing, so thou
restrainest thy prayers from being more and more earnest and effectual and
fervent, unsatiable prayer is growing in zeal and affection.

he will pray three times a day. Psalm. 55. 17. and if that will not prevail,
he will pray seven times a day. Psalm. 119. 164. and when that is not enough, he
will be even ever a praying, hardly broken off day or night. Psalm. 88. 1. he
cares not how often he prays; it may be that thou have been a suitor for
strength and grace against corruptions, and have put up many prayers to the
same purpose. If now thou stickest at any prayers, thy prayers are not
unsatiable; an unsatiable soul never rests, though it have made ten thousand
prayers, till it have gotten the grace; it is so with other things, and
therefore we need not wonder at it; when a man does his work one day, he will
do it another, and so on as long as he lives till his work be done; so must we
do for heaven and for grace.

Fifthly it is ever more and more a backed house, the other some back room or
stable, if he can, he will save both; but if he see that by spending his time
on quenching the fire on the stable, that his great mansion house will burn
down, he will then neglect the other and let it burn if it will, and employ
himself about his house; So when the soul is in misery under the want of
grace, that it cannot live under, but must perish eternally if it have it not,
then the soul being better then the body, rather then that the soul miscarry,
we will neglect the body sometime. And if this will not serve, abstain from
meat and drink, fast it out; thus the people of God are feign to do many
times; their lust and corruptions being even as the devil himself, which
cannot be cast out but by prayer and fasting; there is an excellent place:
Joel: 2. 12. Therefore now turn unto the Lord with fasting, weeping and
mourning, rent your hearts, etc. Therefore now, now your sins are so
divelish, now your sins are so deeply rooted in your souls, now your
corruptions are come to be such plague soars within you, do you not think
that your ordinary repentance, and ordinary prayers and humiliations will serve
the turn, but now back them with fasting and mourning. Here now thou may
examine thy soul whether it have prayed effectually, unsatiably yea or no;
has it ever a begging prayer, that thou praiest as if thou had never prayed
before? is it evermore a proceeding prayer, that thou do every day draw
nearer to God then other? is it more and more a backed prayer, a fervent and
frequent prayer? have thou taken from thy recreations, from thy calling to give
to it, yea from thy belly and back, and used all means for a prevailing with
God? then are thy prayers effectual and unsatiable.

This then condemns the prayers of most Use.
men in the world, they pray and pray for grace, and their prayers come to an
end, and cease before they have it; the angry fretchard prays for patience
and meekness and yet sets down without it; the covetous worldling prays to
be weaned from the world, and his prayers are done before he is so; so the
lukewarmeling deadhearted and vaine-thoughted professor prays for better
thoughts, for more zeal, and yet comes to his be it so before he have it* and
so every wicked man prays, and he is come to his Amen before the grace is
given; let all such men know that such prayers first they are endless,
secondly they are fruitless.

First they are endless: The Philosopher said that that for which a thing is,
that is the end of the thing: now prayer is for the speeding with God: and
therefore he whose prayers speed not with God, his prayers are endless: thou
have prayed against thy pride, but art as proud still: thou have prayed
against thy choler and art as teachy still: thou have prayed against earthlines
and worldlines, and art earthly and worldly still: thou have prayed against
security and deadnes of heart, and lukewarmenesse in Gods service, and art
lukewarm, dead hearted and secure still: to what end are all thy prayers, when
thou enjoyest not the end of thy prayers? to what end is plowing of thy ground
if it be not fallow? when thy plowing is done, to what end is the work of thy
servant, if thy business be not done, and dispatched when all is done? As good
never pray as pray to no end, as good that thou never had begun to pray, as
to cease, and to give over thy prayers before thou have obtained the grace thou
prayest for: The prayers of the wicked are an abomination unto the Lord, but
the prayer of the upright is his delight: Prove. 15. 8. that is, the prayers of
a wicked man that continues in his wickedness, when his prayers are done,
prayers are an abomination to the Lord: but the prayers of the upright though
he were before he prayed never so wicked, yet if it be the prayer of an upright
and godly man, when his prayers are done, that his prayers rid him of his sin,
and make him an upright man, his prayers are Gods delight.

Beloved, many pray against distrust in Gods providence, Infidelity in Gods
promises, Impatiency under Gods corrections, etc. and yet have never the more
trust and affiance in God, never the more patience under the hand of God, all
these prayers are endless.

Secondly, thy prayers are fruitless: to John 9. that God hears not sinners,
we know it: Why may some say, how do you know that God hears not sinners? why,
we know it by e^perience, by examples.

A drunkard prays to God to cure him of his drunkenness, and yet he does not
leave his ill company; all the world may see that God hears not the drunkards
prayer because he cures him not, but lets him go on in his sin; and so for all
other sins: see thou a man go, on in his sins? thou may see that God
hears not his prayers. if a man should be sick on his death bed, and send
for the Physicians and Apothecaries in the Country, and send for his Father,
Mother, and for all his friends to come to him to minister to him: yet I know
he is not cured by them so long as I see his deadly disease remains upon him;
so if I see a man's pride, hypocrisy, security, deadness of heart, his lust,
anger, etc. lie upon him: notwithstanding all his prayers, I know God hears
not his prayers; he prays to be cleansed from his sins, and to be purged
from his lust, and to be redeemed from his vain conversation: if now God let
his sins continue in him, and lets him go on in them, we see plainly God
hears not him. O what a pitiful and miserable case are such men in, that
pray and pray, and yet all their prayers are endless and fruitless! is not
that man in a pitiful case, that all physic, all cost and charges is lost
upon him; when his cating and drinking, his sleeping, and winding and turning
from this side to that side do him no good; do we not say of him that he is a
dead man? so if a man's prayers and supplications to God be endless and
fruitless: that man must needs be a dead and a damned man so long as he goes
on in that case.

Now we come to the second part of the Text, the sensiblenesse of the godly
soul. whether it speed or no, the soul that prays aright, that prays
unsatiably: it is able to say the Lord does hear me, the Lord does grant me
the thing that I prayed to him for; Thus says Jonah, I cried unto the Lord and
he heard me; out of the belly of Hell cried I, and thou heardst my voice, Jonah
2. 2. How could Jonah say God heard his voice, if he had not known it?
therefore he knew it. But against this some may object,

How can this be? how can the soul Object*
know that God hears it? we have no Angels, nor voices from Heaven now to tell
men, as the Angel told Cornelius that his prayers were accepted, and come up
before God; or to say as Christ to the woman in the Gospel, Be of good
comfort, thy sins are forgiven thee; I know God hears me with his All-hearing
ear, and therefore I have a good belief in God: but how shall I know that God
hears my prayers in mercy, so as to grant that I pray for?

There be six ways to know whether the soul shall speed in prayer, yea or
no. Answ.


the having of a Spirit of further and further praying. When God gives the
soul a further and further ability to pray, when God opens a way for the soul
to the Throne of grace, and gives him a free access to the gate of mercy, and
a spirit to hold out in prayer: It is a sign that God means to hear it. When
a Petitioner has access to the King, and presents his Petition, If the King
imbolden him in his speech, and let him speak all that he would speak, it is a
sign that the King means to grant that man his petition, because otherwise
the King would never have endured to have heard him so long, but would have
commanded him to be gone. So it is with the soul at the Throne of grace; if it
come with a petition and prayer to God; if God dispatch the soul out of his
presence, so that the soul has no heart to pray, nor to continue its suite;
but prays deadly and dully, and is glad when he has said his prayers, and
has done: it is a fearful sign that God never means to hear that man's
prayers: but if thou praiest and praiest, and have not done in thy prayers, but
God by casting in a spirit of prayer and zeal, and fervency in prayer,
imboldens thy heart in its petitions, it is a sign that God will hear thee,
and grant thee thy prayers.

Blessed be God says the Prophet, that has not turned away my prayer, nor his
mercy from me; How could the Prophet say that the Lord did not turn away his
mercy from him? How! because he turned not away his prayer from him. Many
Expositors expound it of not turning away his prayer from his heart; as if he
should say, Lord, thou continuest my heart to pray, thou have not taken away my
prayer from my heart; therefore I know that thou continuest thy mercy unto me.

Secondly, the preparedness of the heart to pray, is a sign that God means to
hear. When the Merchant stretches his bag wider and wider, it is a sign
that he means to put something in it: so when God opens the heart of a poor
soul, it is a sign that he means to fill it; when God prepares the soul with
more hunger and thirst after grace, with more longings and breathings: it is a
sign that God has already prepared his ear to hear that prayer; it is a
sign that heart shall speed with God in prayer: Psalm. 10. 17. Lord thou have
heard the desire of the humble, thou will prepare their heart, thou will cause
thine ear to hear. First, God prepares the heart to pray, and then he bows
his ear to hear.

Examine thy soul then; art thou more and more prepared to pray? has God
spoken with a powerful voice to thy soul to open it self wide? it is a sign
that God means to fill thy soul with his graces. But if thou can rush into
Gods presence, and leave thy preparedness behind thee; leavest thy soul and
thy thoughts, and thy affections behind thee; and come with a straightned
heart in thy deadness and lukewarmenesse; this is a fearful sign that God
will not hear thee.

Gods gracious look, is a sign that he will hear thee: for sometimes
(beloved) God answers his people by a cast of his countenance, with a gracious
smile of his face. Psalm. 22. 24. he has not despised nor abhorred the
affliction of the afflicted, neither has he hid his face from him, but when he
cried unto him he heard. Hereby was the Prophet able to know that God did hear
his prayer, because he did not hide his face from him; when his poor soul saw
God smile on him, and set a favorable eye upon him, this made him say that God
heard his cry.

This is a riddle to the world.

If you should ask the men of the world what the meaning of Gods gracious
countenance is, or what they see of it? alas, they can say nothing of it; they
know not what it means; only the godly man understands, Psalm. 34. 15. The
eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous, and his ears are open unto their cry,
These two go together, their prayers enter into Gods ears, and they know it;
why? because they see it in his countenance upon them, as a Petitioner may read
his speeding with the King by his countenance toward him; so a poor soul may
see how prayers prevail by Gods countenance and look upon him.

If thou then art a stranger to Gods countenance, if God never admitted thee
into his presence to see his face and countenance; it is a sign that God
little regards thy prayers, and has no mind to hear thee. A wicked man is
like a varlet that stands without doors and begges an alms, but is not
suffered to go into the Gentleman's presence, and therefore knows not how he
speeds, whether the Gentleman will give him an alms, or whether he be
providing a cudgel to beat him away: so a wicked man prays and puts up his
petitions to God, but he is not able to come before God: he cannot see whether
God look as if he meant to hear his prayers, yea or no; he knows not but that
God may be providing a curse and plague for him in stead of a blessing. But a
child of God comes within the list of Gods countenance; he can tell when God
smiles on him: and when he takes another look: he is able to come into Gods
presence, Job 13. 16. He also (says Job) shall be my salvation: for an
hypocrite shall not come before him. A strange verse. Job says, God is his
salvation: and he gives this reason why he was able to say so: for an hypocrite
shall not come before him. One would think that this were no reason: but yer it
is an undeniable reason, as if Job had said, I come into his presence, and he
looks like a Savior, a Redeemer upon me; but an hypocrite shall not come
before him: he stands like a rogue and begs without the gate.

Indeed a wicked man comes into Gods presence, in regard of Gods Omnipresence:
but this is not enough: thy Ox, and thine Ass stands in Gods presence: yea
so, the very Devils themselves are in Gods presence. But if thou come not into
Gods presence of grace, if God do not admit thy soul into the list of his
Throne: it is a sign that God hears thee not. Men should therefore examine
their consciences, what face or presence of God they come into or see: when
they pray in their prayers, whether they come before God, yea or no.

Beloved, no wicked man under heaven can come before God: this is made the
mark of a godly man only, Psalm. 140. 13. The upright shall dwell in thy
presence, (mark here) dwelling in Gods presence is only determined to the
righteous: the upright shall dwell in thy presence: And here I appeal again
to the hearts and consciences of wicked men, what presence of God do they
find in their prayers? they see their Pews, and the walls or hangings, etc.
before them: they see the heavens and the clouds above them: they are like
rogues that know nothing within doors. Do they see Gods presence and
countenance? no: it is the upright man only that dwells in Gods presence: He
sees how God looks on him, how his face smiles on him: and therefore, it is
not a wicked man's coming to Church, and falling on his knees, and uttering the
words of prayer that is a coming into Gods presence: then, this would be a
false saying of the Prophet. For a wicked man may go to Church and fall upon
his knees, etc. but never come before God.

This presence, is, to see the face of God.

the conscience of a man does answer him whether God hear him yea or no. As
it was with the high Priest, whenever the high Priest came into Gods presence
to inquire of him, though God did not appear visibly unto him, yet he might
read Gods answer in his Vrim and Thummim; he might there know Gods mind: so a
man's conscience is his Urim and Thummim. When he comes before God, his own
conscience gives him an inckling whether he speed or no: 1 Ioh. 3. 20, 21. If
our hearts condemn us, God is greater then our hearts and knows al things.
Belived, if our hearts condemn us not, then have we confidence toward God. If
a man's conscience tell a man that his prayers are rotten, that his humiliation
is rotten, that his heart is not upright, that yet he is not purged from his
sins, that his seeking of God is fained and hypocritical; it is the very
voice of God in his soul: and if our consciences condemn us, God (says the
Apostle) is greater then our consciences.

There no is condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus. Romans 8. 1. as if
he should say, those that are in Christ, God does not condemn them; they have
not that condemnation: nay their own conscience does not condemn them: so
that, that man whom any condemnation either from God, or from his own
conscience, condemns, that man is not in Christ; being not in Christ, he can
never be heard.

Indeed, a man's conscience may be misinformed by Satan under a temptation; as
you may see in the verse before my text: Thou have heard my voice: stop not
thine ear from my cry. Here the Church being examined, their consciences told
them they were heard in their prayers: but being under a temptation, their
consciences were afraid that God heard not. So many a poor soul: examine it,
and it cannot deny but that these and these tokens of grace and fruits of Gods
Spirit are in it; yet their consciences are afraid that the Lord will not give
them these and these other graces that they want: that the Lord will not hear
them for such and such blessings.

I mean not neither a truce of conscience: for there may be a truce of
conscience in wicked men. A truce may be between mortal enemies: but no peace
but amongst friends. Wicked man's consciences are like the Lion, 1. Kings 13.
who when he had killed the Prophet, stood by the Corpse, and by the Ass, and
did not eat the body, nor tear the Ass; so a wicked man's conscience, it is
as the devils band-dogge or roaring Lion: till it has slain the sinner, it
stands stone-still, and seems neither to meddle or make with him, but lies as
seared or dead in him. I mean not this conscience. But when God has sprinkled
the conscience with the blood of Christ, and made the conscience pure: this is
a sign that God hears his prayer.

I mean not the stammering of conscience, when it is dazelled, or overwhelmed:
but when it speaks down right as it means. A godly man's conscience sometimes
may judge otherwise then the thing is. But, examine what thy conscience tells
thee in sober sadness, deliberatey, convincingly,: and then, know that the
Lord tells thee. If thy conscience says peremptorily that thy heart and ways
are rotten, and unsound; then know that the Lord tells thee so, and that the
Lord says so to thy soul.

Fifthly the getting of that grace that a man is a sign that God hears his
prayers. But this is not a true sign always but with distinction.

When the grace given, and the good will of God the giver, cannot be severed:
then it is a true sign. But when the gift and the good will of the giver may
be severed, then it is not a true sign.

Thou may pray unto God, and God may give thee many temporal blessings, and
many common graces of his Spirit; God may give thee good parts, a good memory:
he may give thee a good measure of knowledge and understanding, even in diverse
things; he may give thee some kind of humility, chastity, civility: thou
may be of a loving and flexible disposition: so he may give thee a good
estate in the world, houses, lands, wife and children etc. God may give thee
all these, and yet hate thee, and never hear one prayer thou make; thou
may pray for a thousand blessings, and have them: and yet never be heard, so
long as the good will of the giver is severed from them; all outward blessings
and common graces may be severed from Gods good pleasure to a man.

Therefore in temporal blessings, or in common graces, if thou would know
whether God hear thee or no: know whether God has given thee a sanctified use
of them or no. If God has given thee many common graces, or temporal
blessings, and a heart to use them to his Glory; then every blessing thou have
(there is not a drop of drink, nor a bit of bread that thou have, but) it is
a sign of Gods everlasting love to thee. Why? because this, and the good will
of the giver can never be severed. But on the contrary, if a man have not a
sanctified use of that he has, then it is the greatest severity of God, and
the most eminent plague and curse of God upon the soul to give it; for a man's
parts may be his bane, his civility may be his curse, and means of the final
hardness and impenitencie of his heart.

faith; if a man have faith given him to believe, it is a sign that God hears
him; be it to thee (says Christ to the man in the Gospel) according to thy
faith; so go thou to God, and be it to thee as thou beleevest. Do thou pray
for grace? according as thou beleevest, so shall thou receive.

I have no sign that God will hear me; Object.
I have so many corruptions of my heart against me, and so many threatenings of
Gods frowns against me; I have no sign that God will hear me.

Would thou have a sign? Answ.
An evil and an adulterous generation seeks a sign: this is a tempting
faith, to seek for signs to believe. Thomas, said Christ, Joh. 20. 29.
because thou have seen me, thou have belived: blessed are they that have not
seen and yet believe. That man that believes because he feels grief in his
heart, tears in his eyes, groans in his spirit, because he prays long and
earnestly, and sweats in his prayer, or mourns in his humiliation, I suspect
his humiliation, his tears, his grief, his prayers, and all that he has.
Why? these are good signs of faith: but rotten grounds of faith? the Word and
promise of God must be thy ground. But against this the soul may object*

That every Promise runs with a Condition: Object.
and therefore if I have not the condition, how can I believe the promise God
has promised? Blessed are they that hunger and thirst after righteousness,
for they shall be satisfied: There is a Promise of filling, but it is with a
condition of hungering. Blessed are the meek, for they shall inherit the earth.
Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God, etc. if I have not the
Condition annexed to the Promise, how dare or how can I believe the Promise?

The Condition is not the way to get the Promise; the Promise is the ground of
faith, Answ.
and the way to get the condition; because the promise is the Motive cause that
moves the soul to get the condition. Now, the Mover must be before the Moved;
then if belief of the Promise move thy soul to get the condition of the
promise, then belief of the promise must be before that the soul can keep
the condition of the promise.

Saul made a promise to David, 1 Samuel 18. that he should be his son in law in
one of his two daughters, upon condition that he should give him an hundred
fore-skins of the Philistims. Now, David did first believe the promise; and
thereby he was allured to fight valiantly, to keep the condition, to get a
hundred fore-skins of the Philistims. So Psalm. 116. I believed and therefore
did I speak. He believed Gods promise, and then he spoke with condition. So,
we believe says the Apostle, and therefore do we speak. First, the soul
believes; and then every action of a Christian wherein it moves to the keeping
of the condition, springs from this root; nay beloved, a man cannot keep any
condition in the Bible without faith; he must believe.

Secondly, faith is the inabling cause to keep the condition. Do thou think
to get weeping, mourning, and humiliation for thy sins, and then thereby to
get the promise to thy self? then thou go in thy own strength; and then,
in Gods account, thou do just nothing, John 15. 5. Without me ye can do
nothing, says Christ; therefore first lay hold on me, believe in me, abide in
me.

What! do you first think to pray, to mourn, to lament and bewail your
sins, to do this and that in turning your selves, and sanctifying of your
selves? Indeed you may fumble about these things: but you can never do any of
them in deed and to the purpose: without me ye can do nothing. I had fainted
says the Prophet, unless I had believed to see the goodness of the Lord in
the land of the living, Psalm. 27. 13. where we may see three things.

First, the Promise that he should see the

Secondly, the Condition: if he do not

the method the Prophet went by.

I had not believed to have seen the goodness of the Lord in the Land of the
living, I had fainted.

Beloved, it is true that the keeping of the Condition, is before the fruition
of the Promise: but not before believing the Promise: because the doing of the
Condition is effected by believing the Promise.

This is the cause that many fumble about grace, but never get it: they are
ever repenting, but never repent: ever learning, but never learn the knowledge
of the truth everlasting: ever striving, but never get power over their
corruptions, etc. because they fumble about it in their own strength, and take
it not in the right method.

Let the soul come with faith in Christ, and believe it shall speed and have
grace, and power from Christ his grace, and from Christ's power: and then it
shall speed; Christ has promised ( John 16.) that whatsoever we ask the
Father in his name, he will give it us. Christ (beloved) is an excellent
Surety. Indeed, our credit is cracked in Heaven: we may think to go and fetch
this and that grace in our own names, and miss of it: as the servant may go
to the Merchant for wares in his own name, but the Merchant will not deliver
them to him in his own name, unless he come in his Masters name and bring a
ticket from him: and then when the servant shows his Masters ticket, the
Merchant will deliver him what wares he asks for in his Masters name. So when
a soul goes to the Throne of grace with a ticket from Christ; if he can say
Lord, it is for the honor of Christ: I come for grace and holiness, and
strength against my corruptions: Lord, here is a ticket from Christ: most
certainly, he shall speed.

But, men must take heed that they foyst not the name of Christ: that they
foyst not a ticket to say that Christ sent them, when it is their own
self-love, and their own lust that sends them; it is not enough to pray and
at the end to say through Christ our Lord, Amen. No: for this may be a mere
foysting of the Name of Christ. But, can thou pray and show that Christ sent
thee, and say as the servant, I come from my Master, and he sent me? Lord, it
is for Christ that I come: it is not to satisfy my own lust, nor to ease and
deliver me from the galls of my conscience, nor to free me from hell; but for
Christ; Lord, I beg grace and holiness, that I may have power to glorify
Christ. It is for the honor of my Lord Christ that I come. When the soul comes
thus in Christ's name, believing it shall speed, then his prayer shall prevail.
Wbatsoever (says Christ) ye shall ask the Father in my Name, he will give it
you.

We come now to the third and last part of our Text: to wit, the supplies they
had against danger and discouragements. The Lord upheld their hearts from being
dismayed in prayer; thou said fear not.

There be two things that do much hurt in prayer.

groundless encouragements.

needless discouragements.

greundlesse encouragements; and these the wicked are most subject to
especially, who because they pray, hear the Word, and perform many duties of
religion; therefore they encourage themselves in the goodness of their
estates, judgeing themselves happy, though notwithstanding they go on and
continue in the hardness of their hearts and rebellions against God.

We have abundance of sayings amongst us, that if they were examined would
prove false and unsound; As, that the vipers die when they bring forth their
young; for (say they) the young eat out the old ones bowels; that bears shape
all their young by licking of them; that the Swanne sings sweetest at her
death; that the Adamant stone is softened by Goats blood, etc. These things are
not so, as may be shown out of ancient Writers.

So, beloved, there are abundance of sayings, that go up and down amongst men
concerning Divinity, which if they were examined, will prove to be rotten
sayings; as, he that made them, will save them. It is not so, says the
Prophet, Esai. 27. 11. He that made them, will not have mercy on them, and he
that formed them, will not pity them. It is commonly believed, if men come to
Church, hear the Word, and call upon God, that then presently they are good
Christians. Beloved, it is not so, Matthew. 7. 21. Not every one that says Lord,
Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.

Men are ready when they can but call Lord have mercy on me; O sweet Savior,
pity me, most merciful Lord Jesus, have compassion on me: if they can pray in
their families, and pray at Church, etc. to think, now, all is well with them,
and Christ cannot but save them, and give them the Kingdom of Heaven: but our
Savior puts a not upon it, and says, not every one that says Lord, Lord: it
is not a Lord, a Lording of Christ with the tongne only: it is not a taking up
of an outward profession of Christ only, that is sufficient for a man that
shall inherit the Kingdom of Heaven: no says Christ: but he that does the
will of my Father which is in Heaven. But, of this by the by.

needless discouragements which do much hurt in prayer. Needless
discouragements do much hurt to many a poor soul, that has forcible
wouldings, and wracked desires after grace and holiness, and yet is held by
discouragements: yea, many a Christian heart lies a long time under it
wrestling and striving under its wants, and yet, kept out from grace, and from
growing in grace, because of discouragements: yea the best and strongest of
Gods Saints, have been kept off, and have hung much on discouragements.

Fear not, says God to Abraham, Genes. 15. 1. So, fear not Joshua, says God
to Joshua, Josh. 1. 9. Intimating that both Abraham and Joshua were afraid of
discouragements: they were afraid that many evils would befall them, that they
should meet with many rubs and difficulties that would be too hard for them:
therefore the Lord calls to them, fear not, be not dismayed nor discouraged.
Thou said fear not. Hence observe,

That God would not have any Christian Doct.
soul to be discouraged in prayer. Thou said, fear not.

For our clearer proceeding herein, first, let me show you what discouragement
is: and secondly, how it comes to be dangerous and hurtful in prayer.

What is discouragement? Quest. Answ.


It is a base dismayment of spirit below or beneath the strength that is in a
man, under the apprehension of some evil, as if it were too hard for him to
grapple with it.

There be four things in this diffinition.

First, I say it is a base dismayment of spirit; Isay. 32. 11. Tremble ye
careless women that are at ease, be troubled ye careless ones: these
careless ones went on in their sins, and feared not. God calls to them and
bids them to be dismayed. But the dismayment and the discouragement I speak
of, it is a base dismayment of spirit; which is either when he is dismayed that
ought not: or he is dismayed at that whereat he ought not to fear: where no
cause of fear is.

As Vitello his man thought his Master had got skill in Optickes: he riding
along upon the high way, spying a man's shape, thought it was some Spirit: and
thereupon he sickened and died. So many a poor soul looking in the perfect Law
of God, and seeing his own ugliness and filthynesse, he is discouraged, and
thinks himself undone; his heart waxes cold within him, and he begins to
fear that he is but a dead and damned man.

it is down beneath the strength that is in a man: that man is properly said
to be discouraged: not that he has no strength at all in him, nor no courage
at all (for such a one is an infeebled man, not a man discouraged) but a
discouraged man is a man put besides the courage that is in him; when a man
has strength enough to grapple with the evil before him, but through
dismayment of spirit he cannot put it forth.

Have not I commanded thee? says God to Joshua; Be strong and of a good
courage, be not afraid, neither be thou dismayed, Josh. 9. God had given Joshua
strength enough, whereby he was enabled to observe and do according to all that
Law which Moses the servant of the Lord commanded him; God had now doubled his
Spirit upon him: yet he commands him, be not afraid, neither dismayed: as if he
had said, Joshua, if thou be dismayed and discouraged, though thou have
strength and power to go through the business that I have called thee unto,
yet thou will not be able to use it, nor to put it forth if thou be
discouraged.

Thirdly, it is at the apprehension of some evil. I say not at the sight of
some evil: for a man may be dismayed at the apparition of good, as Mary when
she saw nothing but a good Angel, Luke 1. 29. she saw nothing but a glorious
Angel: nevertheless she was afraid, and discouraged. Why? because she had a
secret apprehension of some evil, either of some evil proceeded in the
salutation, or some unworthiness in her elfe to receive such a gracious
salutation: it cannot be the apprehension of any good that discourageth a man,
but the apprehension of some evil.

Fourthly, not of every evil neither; for if the evil be but small, courage
will stand it out; but it is of such an evil as he fears he is not able to
grapple withal. If the evil before him, be inferior to him, he scorns it as
the barking of a toothlesse Dog. If it be but an evil equal to his strength,
then he makes a tush at it, because he knows or thinks himself able to
encounter with it.

But if it be an evil above his strength, then his spirit melts and droops
before him. See this in Saul, 1 Samuel 17. 11. and his people. When they saw the
Champion of the Philistims coming against them, when they saw him so hugely
and mervelously armed, and heard him speak such biggs words, they thought they
were not able to stand and to encounter with him; and therefore says the Text,
when Saul and all Israel heard these words of the Philistim, they were dismayed
and greatly afraid.

Thus you see what discouragement is; such discouragements the Lord would not
have our hearts to be in when we pray unto him.

God cannot give ear to that man that is out of heart in his prayers. Thou
can never pray if thou be dismayed in prayer. When the soul begins to
fear and reason, O, I am so unworthy that God will not look at me; I am so
sinful, so blockish, so dead, and dull to all good, that God will never regard
me; thou can never pray, Romans 10. 14. How shall they call on him in whom they
have not believed? If thou do not believe that God will hear thee, if thou
do not believe that thou shall prevail, that God will deliver thee out of
these corruptions and that lust that thou praiest against; that God will give
thee this grace or that grace: if thou do not believe that God will own
thee: if thou have these doubtful discouragements, O, he will not grant me, I
shall never get this or that: how can thou call on him? thou may call so
and so: but never can thou call to any purpose, if thou do not believe in
him.

A beggar though he be never so well able to beg, yet if when he comes to the
Housekeepers door, he be persuaded that he shall not speed, that let him beg
as long as he will, he shall get nothing: this blunts his begging, and makes
him give over his suite without any great importunity: So, it is impossible
that ever a soul should hold out and pray that is discouraged in prayer.

Secondly, thou can not pray unless thou use all thy strength in prayer; If
thou be discouraged, thou can not use thy strength.

A discouraged man, his strength melts into fear; and whatsoever strength he
has, he cannot put it forth. How came Jacob to prevail and to have power with
God? Why, he used all his strength with God, and so prevailed, Hosea 12. 3.
Thou can never prevail with God by thy prayers, unless thou put forth
all thy strength in prayer.

If Jacob had reasoned I am but dust and ashes; how can I strive with God? I am
sinful and evil, how can I contend with my Maker? and so have been
discouraged in his wrestling, he could not have used all his strength with God,
and so had never prevailed with God. No, Jacob he gathers all the arguments
that he could make; he gathers together all the promises he could find in Gods
Book, or that he could hear off; he displaies all the wants that he could
show; he petitions all the graces that he could name; he used all his strength,
and by his strength he had power with God.

If thy confession of thy sins be strengthlesse; if thy petitions, and
thankesgiving for grace, be strengthlesse; if thou use not all thy strength in
prayer, thou can never prevail, nor have any power with God. For how can
that man prevail and have power with God that has no power with himself?

Thirdly, thou can never pray, and have a fearful apprehension of evil in
prayer; thou can not. It is good to have a deep apprehension of thy sins:
apprehend them to be as many hells as thou can, thou can never apprehend
them deeply enough: but if thou have a fearful apprehension of them, thou
can never pray.

When the Apostle would exhort the Philipians to continue in one Spirit, and in
one mind, fighting together through the faith of the Gospel, he exhorts them
that, in nothing they fear, Phil. 1. 27, 28. For if a man be terrified with
his adversary, with the power of his adversary, and fears he shall never be
able to withstand him but must fall before him through his subtilty, that he
can never be wary enough for him: Alas, he can never strive with hope and
courage against him. So, beloved, if we have a fearful and discouraged kind
of apprehension of evil, we can never pray so as to prevail.

Apprehend thy sins to be as hellish, and as damnable as thou can: Feel
even the fire of hell in every one of them: but take heed of a fearful
apprehension of them, so to apprehend the evil of them, as to think with thy
self that because thou art guilty of these and these sins, that thou shall
never get in with God again, God will never be reconciled to thee: these will
eat out thine heart in prayer.

Fourthly, we can never pray if we have any secret despair that there is any
difficulty too hard for us to grapple withal, or to get through in our
prayers. Howsoever a man prays, yet if he have any spice of these fears in
him, to think now I have taken a great deal of pains, but am never the
better; I have prayed and prayed, but have got no good: I may go on and do
thus and thus, but shall never prevail or speed; all my labors, all my
prayers and endeavors will be lost; this takes away the very spirit and life
of a man's prayers.

Judas after he had betrayed the Lord Jesus, he was discouraged from ever
praying for mercy. Why? because he thought it was impossible for him to get it;
I have betrayed innocent blood, says he. Matthew. 27. as if he should say, I
shall never out-wrastle this sin; this sin is my death: I have brought the
blood of the Son of God on me, I shall never claw off this sin: now Judas
thus despayring, we never read one letter of any prayer that he made to God to
get out of it; no, he thought it too hard for him to get mercy. Despair drives
a man from that he did hope for; because now he thinks there is an
impossibility in getting of it.

Beloved, mistake me not; there is a double desperation.

First, there is a desperation of infidelity;

Secondly, there is a desperation of extremity; must come with desperation of
extremity. desperation puts life into a man's prayers and endeavors.

As, a Soldier when he sees nothing but to kill or be killed, that he sees
his state desperate; why, this will compel a very coward to fight; this will
make a coward fight ( as if he would kill the Devil, says the Proverb) it
will make him fight like a spirit; he will be afraid of nothing. Take a
Soldier that fights desperately for his life, with a kill or be killed; he
fears nothing; neither Pike, nor Sword, nor Gun? why. he fights sor his life.
Therefore one notes that sometimes it is the nearest way to victory to be
desperate in attempts and in fight. Therefore when William the Conqueror came
first into England, at Hasting, he sent back his Ships again, that so the
Soldiers might have no hope of saving themselves by flying back. And so at
Battle, at one encounter, a little Army of the English slew a great Army of the
French. Why? they grew desperate.

So, could men pray desperately, could they pray with a pray or be damned: beg
with a beg or be damned; seek to God for grace that you want with a speed or
be damned; then would their prayers be more earnest and powerful to get grace.
O, did men pray thus, they would pray otherwise then they do.

Men pray, but they pray deadly, coldly, and lazily, as if they had no need of
prayer, or as if they had no need of the grace they pray for; they pray for
grace, but get it not; they pray for zeal, but have it not; for repentance and
holiness, but obtain it not.

Beloved, either get zeal and holiness, or else there is no mercy: either get
grace and repentance, or else there is no mercy for thee. Pray then when thou
prayest for grace, with a speed or be damned: say unto thy soul, either we
must speed and get grace Soul, or else we must go to hell. If men would pray
thus, with a speed or be damned, we should never see, nor God should never
hear so many cold and dead prayers as now we pray.

Despair makes a man a Munke says the Papist: but this despair makes a man a
good Christian I say: never does a man pray indeed till he feels himself in
extremity, hopeles and desperate in regard of himself; so that he sees no
remedy at all but get Christ: get grace or be damned for ever. Get power and
strength over these corruptions: otherwise they will destroy and damn thee;
this would make a man pray for life. Men pray coldly and faintly: why? because
though they see they have no grace, no zeal, no holiness, no repentance, no
evidence of Christ: yet they hope to be saved notwithstanding. O beloved, the
devil has blinded these men to the intent they may be damned.

But, if men would pray desperate prayers with a pray or be damned, seek with
a find or be damned: men would then pray other prayers then they do. Such
prayers did David pray Psalm. 130. 1. Out of the deep places have I called unto
thee O Lord, Lord hear my prayer: as if he should say, Lord, I am even in the
depth of misery, plunged over head and ears, so that now I sink and perish
if thou help not: Lord, hear my prayer. This desperation a Christian must
have, this quickens up his Spirits, and puts life into him: but, take heed of
the desperation of Infidelity: Saint Austen says it is the murderer of the
soul: the spice of it will eat out the heart of a man, and kill the strength
of all his endeavors.

I should now come to apply this doctrine; but I fear me there be many amongst
us, that never come so far toward heaven, as to know what these
discouragements mean. This is lamentable.

It is true, discouragements are hideous cases in prayer, and a man may perish
and go to hell that has them: but yet, they are somewhat profitable signs
that a man does at the least look a little toward God, or else he could not
know what they are. But there are abundance that never have attained so far
in religion, as to understand what they mean: but go on in drinking, whoring,
carding and dicing, hating and malicing, fretting and chafing, mocking and
coveting; swearing and blaspheming, in security, in hardness of heart and
impenitencie: they are more careful for their dogs, for their potts, and for
their tables, and for their shops, then they are of their souls: And which is
enough to astonish any that is godly, these men scarce find any
discouragements in prayer: O, they have a good courage to pray at all times: O,
say they, God forbid that any man should be discouraged in prayer* I thank God
I have a good hope in God; God has given me a good heart of grace to call upon
him, and I make no question but that God hears me: God would never bid us to
pray if he did not mean to hear us.

Beloved, these men that are so bold in the goodness of their hearts to call
upon God, they never as yet prayed in all their lives: all the prayers of the
wicked are indeed no prayers.

Daniel confessing the sins of wicked Judah, says, though all this evil be
come upon us, yet made we not our prayer to turn from our wicked ways. Dan.
9. 13. all the time of those seventy years, Daniel says they never made
prayer to God; yet they fasted every year, and prayed every day, twice every
day at the least, which would amount in that time to 50000 and 100 prayers: how
then could Daniel say they never made one prayer? I answer, (and pray mark it)
because they never did quite turn from their evil ways. Though thou make
never so many prayers, though thou boastest of the goodness of thy condition,
and snatchest at the Promises of God: yet if thou turnest not from thine
iniquities, thou never as yet made any prayer by the Judgment of God
himself. Paul made many thousand prayers before his conversion, he could not
have been a Pharise else; but they were never accounted prayers to him:
therefore as soon as ever he was converted, behold says God he prays Acts 9.

A wicked man, a carnal Christian, though he have the righteousness of Saint
Paul before his conversion, of living blamlesse, unreproveable in respect of
the outward righteousness of the Law: yet he can never make an acceptable
prayer till he be truly converted; his prayers are no better then howling of
dogs, or lowing of Oxen, yea the Lord abhorrs them. O what poor encouragements
can thou have, seeing the Lord never tallies down any of thy prayers? wicked
men are like Ulysses, who wept more for the death of his dog, then of his
wife; so wicked men weep and mourn for the loss of their corn and their
cattle, hawks and hounds, cards and dice: but never for the loss of their
prayers. So long as thou continuest in thy profaneness and impenitency, thou
losest all thy prayers: there is not one of them that God tallies down, or
reckons for a prayer. Here we might have a great deal of matter, if time would
suffer me. But it will not, only let me tell you, I speak only to those
whose hearts God has awakened out of their sins, but who are often
discouraged: take heed of these discouragements.

For, first, they will drive thee to melancholy. silly dove without a heart,
Prove. 7. 11. A dove is a melancholy creature, that has no heart to any thing;
so Ephraim has no heart to call upon God, no heart to return unto God: and
this is the cause that men and women go whineing and mourning under the burden
of sin, and are not able to come out, because of discouragements: all the
policy of hell is less then this policy of the devil, in driving men to
despair or discouragements: this does more hurt then all the rest of hell besides

I have prayed, but the Lord will not hear me: I have called, and the Lord
will not answer, but has turned away his ears from me. Now, thou speak
against God. Number. 21. 4, 5. The soul of the people was much discouraged, and
the people spoke against God, and against Moses, saying, Wherefore have you
brought us out of Egypt, to die in the wilderness? for here is neither bread,
nor water, and our soul loatheth this light bread. So, beloved, if we suffer
our souls to be discouraged, we shall soon come to murmr against God:
wherefore has he brought me up to this strictnes, and precisensse? when I was
a drunkard, a worldling, when I followed the lust of my flesh and liberry, then
I enjoed onnions, garlic, and the fleshpots of Egypt: pleaures and delights
for my soul: then I had a good hope in God, and a good persuasion that my soul
should go to heaven: and then Preachers told me that if I would give over such
and such sins, and look after Heaven a little more, and do such and such
things, O then I should come to a Land flowing with milk and honey, then I
should not miss of glory and salvation; But alas, I see nothing but Giants and
Anakims; I am in a wilderness; now, now I see a man have a great deal of
repentance, and yet be a castaway; A man may have a great deal of faith and
yet be but a reprobate; A man may give over a great many sins, and yet perish
in hell; now I see a man may live civilly and well, and have and do a great
many good things, and yet be damned when he has done all: A man may even go
to Heaven Gates, and yet the gates be shut against him, and he turned into
hell. Alas! my poor soul is in a wilderness; now I know not which way to
go; I am ready to lose my self, I see nothing here now but huge Giants, the
sons of Anack, strong corruptions, inclining and forcing me to evil: most
fearful and violent suggestions and temptations of the Devil, ready to
thrust me into the gulf of wickedness and despair.

And now, the soul begins to think that it is good for it to return again
into Egypt, to fall to its old courses again: for certainly God looks for no
such matter, he requires no such strictness and preciseness: And so it falls
a whining and repining at the Word and Ministers of God that have called men to
it, and laid it upon them: and has no heart now to do thus and thus any
longer. And thus it falls into discouragements because of the way, and into a
thousand quandaries whether it may not go back again or no. And all these
murmurings and repinings, are because men suffer themselves to be discouraged.

discouragements will cause thee to think that God hates thee. When the soul
like Baals Priests, has been crying from morning to noone; ten, twenty, thirty
years, it may be, and yet has no answer: now, it will begin to think if God
did love me, then he would grant me my petitions. Then hereupon comes into a
man's secret thoughts and fears that God hardly loves his soul. So was it with
Israel; when they were discouraged, they said, because the Lord hated us,
therefore he brought us out of the Land of Egypt, Deuteronomy. 1. 27. Because that
they were discouraged, and because that their Brethren that went for spies, had
disheartened them; therefore they were apt to say the Lord hated them.

Beloved, it is a miserable thing when the soul calls the love of God into
question. Consider that as thou can not have a friend if thou be
suspicious and jealous of his love to thee: So, thou can never have the love
of God settled on thy heart so long as thou art jealous of his love to thee.

Fourthly, If thou root them not out, it is Melancholy thoughts and fears, and
discouragements, drive the soul to despair. For when the soul sees it self
still disappointed of its hopes, at the last it grows hopeless: If it have
waited one day and the next day too: if it have prayed this week, this month,
this year, and yet still it sees it self held off and disappointed: it will
at last grow hopeless. Take heed therefore, I beseech you, of all needless
discouragements; to fear be ause that thou find not that that thou wishedst
or prayedst for, to day or to morrow, in thine own time, that therefore thou
shall never get it, that now thou should for ever despair of the grace and
love of God, and think that now God will never hear thee, that thou shall
never get grace and power over thy corruptions.

Men think that the preaching of the Word of God brings men to despair, the
preaching of such strict points, and the urging such precise doctrines makes
men despair: men are loath to be at the pains to root out their
discouragements: It is rather a cold or dead preaching of the Word that is the
cause of this: for when the soul is instructed by holiness, humbled by
holiness, converted by holiness, at the last when it comes to be thoroughly
awakened, when it sees that this and this is required in a true conversion of
the soul to God, that herein true repentance must declare and demonstrate it
self by these and these fruits, or else it is but false and rotten: Why now,
the soul must needs be brought to despair, because it sees that though it
have been thus and thus humbled, though it have prayed, fasted and mourned in
this and this manner: yet it sees it has not a soundness of grace.

There is such a grace in it, such a work and such a fruit of Gods Spirit in
it, that yet he could never find in himself: this makes the soul to
despair. Indeed Preachers may be too blame if they speak and preach only the
terrors and condemnations of the Law without the promises of the Gospel: for
these should be so tempered that every poor broken soul may see mercy and
redemption for him upon his sound and unfeined repentance and humiliation. But
if men do despair, they may thank themselves for it, their own sins for
it, their own discouragements for it, because they suffer these to continue in
them.

Cain his heart grew sad, his countenance fell, he was wroth and disquieted in
his mind, and heavily discouraged; why? Genesis 4. Sin lay at the door, (what
door?) the door of his conscience rapping and beating upon his heart.

Beloved, when the soul lets sin lie at the door: drunkenesse, pride and
worldliness, security, hardness and deadnes of heart lie at the door: when a
man lets his negligent and fruitless hearing of the word lie at the door, when
a man lets his vain and dead praying, his temporizing and fashionary serving
of God lie at the door of conscience, to tell him that all his hearing of the
word of God profits him nothing, that his prayers are dead and vain, that his
mourning, fasting, and all his humiliation is counterfeit and rotten, and that
he has no soundness of grace in him, but that for all this he may fall into
hell: when sin lies thus at the door, thus rapping at the conscience, it is
no wonder if the soul fall into desperation.

Cain let his sin lie at the door, there it lay rapping and beating, and told
him that his carelesenesse and negligent sacrificing to God was not accepted:
and therefore no marvel if Cain be so cast down in his countenance, and that
he fall to despair.

O beloved, when sin lies bouncing and beating at the door of thy heart,
when thy sin (whatsoever it is, search thy heart and find it out) lies
knocking and rapping at the door of thy conscience day by day, and month by
month, and thou art content to let it lie, and art unwilling to use means to
remove it, and art loath to take the pains to get the blood of Christ to wash
thy soul from it, or the Spirit of Christ to cleanse thee from it; then thy
soul will despair, either in this world, or in the world to come. But let us
take heed then, that our conscience condemn us not in any thing or course
that we allow in our selves: for if that do, then much more will God who is
greater then our consciences, and knows all things.

The Apostle has an excellent Phrase: Romans 8. 1. There is no condemnation to
them that are in Christ Jesus etc. As if he should say, there is not one
condemnation; there is none in Heaven, God does not condemn them; there is
none in earth, their own heart and conscience does not condemn them; he that
is in Christ Jesus, that walks not after the flesh, but after the Spirit, there
is none, no not one condemnation to him; none, neither in Heaven nor in earth:
no word, no commandment, no threatening condemns him. But if thy conscience
condemn thee, and tell thee thou let sin lie at the door, rapping at thy
conscience day after day, and month after month, telling thee that yet thou art
without Christ, that yet thou never had any true faith in the Lord Jesus,
that yet thou have not truly repented, and turned from thy sins: this will
at last drive thy soul into heavy discouragements, if not into final
despair.

O beloved, religion and piety, and the power of godliness, go down the
wind every where. What is the reason of it, but because of these
discouragements that men live and go in? Men pray and pray, and their prayers
profit them not: men run up and down and come to the Church and hear the
Word, and receive the Sacraments, and use the means of grace, but to no end:
they are unprofitable to them: they remain in their sins still: the
ordinances of God bring them not out of their lusts and corruptions: hereby
they disgrace and discredit the ordinances of God in the eyes and account of
the men of the world, making them think as if there were no more power nor
force in the Ordinances of God then these men manifest.

There is no life in many Christians, men's spirits are discouraged; these
secret discouragements in their hearts take away their spirits in the use of
the means, that though they use the means, yet it drives them to despair of
reaping good or profit by them.



First, all your complaints they are but wind, Job 6. 26. do you imagine to
reprove words, and the speeches of one that is desperate which are as wind?
Jobs friends taking Job to be a man of despair, they accounted all his words
but as wind.

Do thou nestle any discouragement in thy heart? thou may complain of
sin as much as thou can: yet all thy complainings are but as wind: thou
may cry out against thy corruptions, with weeping and tears, and pray and
fight against them: and yet all thy weeping, mourning and praying is but as the
wind: thou may beg grace, thou may seek after God, thou may hear the
Word, receive the Sacraments, and yet all will be to thee as wind: all will
vanish, be unprofitable, not regarded.

Secondly, discouragements drive us from the use of the means. If ever we
mean to come out of our sins, if ever we mean to get grace and faith, and
assurance, and zeal: we must constantly use the means, 1 Samuel 27. 1. David
says, there is nothing better for me then that I should speedily escape into
the Land of the Philistims, and Saul shall despair of me to seek me any more.
David thought in himself, if I can make him out of hope of finding me,
certainly he will give over seeking of me. So when the soul has any secret
despair of finding the Lord, that soul will quickly be drawn from seeking of
the Lord in the use of the means.

What ever you do then, O be not discouraged, lest you be driven from the use
of the means: if you be driven from the use of the means, woe is to you, you
will never find God then. Be not driven from prayer, nor driven from holy
conference, nor driven from the Word, nor driven from the Sacrament, nor from
meditation, nor from the diligent and strict examination of thy self, of thy
heart and of all thy ways: for these are the ways of finding the Lord. If you
nourish any thoughts and fears of despair in you, if you be discouraged, you
will be driven from the use of the means, which is a lamentable thing;
therefore be not discouraged.

thus I should have done, and that I should have done, woe is me that I did it
not* it will make a man stand poaring on his sins, but never able to get out
of them. So it was like to be with them in the Ship with Paul, Acts 27. 20. In
the tempest at Sea, they were utterly discouraged from any hope of safety: now
indeed Paul told them what they should have done if they had been wise: Sirs,
you should have hearkened to me, and not have loosed, ver. 21. as if he had
said, you should have done thus and thus: but now do not stand poaring too
much on that, you should have hearkened to me, and not have launched forth, etc.
but that cannot be helped, now: therefore I exhort you to be of good cheer,
etc.

So beloved, when the soul is discouraged upon these thoughts, I should have
prayed better, I should have heard the Word of God better, and with more
profit; I should have repented better, I should have performed this and that
religious and good duty better; but ah wretch that I am, I have sinned thus
and thus; it is always looking on this sin and that sin, this imperfection
and that failing: when now I say the soul is discouraged, it will be always
poaring upon sin, but it will never come out of its sin; always poaring
upon its deadness, and unprofitablenesse, but never able to come out of it. O
beloved, be of good cheer, and be not discouraged; it is true you should have
prayed better; you should have heard the Word of God better heretofore, you
should have been more careful and circumspect of your ways then you were; but
now you cannot help it; these things and times are gone and cannot be
recalled: such a one has been a drunkard, a swearer, a worldling, etc. but he
cannot help it now. True, he might have helped it, and because he did not, his
heart shall bleed for it, if he belong to God: but do not stand poaring too
much upon it, but consider now what you have to do, now you are to humble your
self, now you are to strive with God in all manner of prayer for more grace,
and more power of obedience and assurance, and be not discouraged.

if the soul be discouraged, it will breed nothing but sorrow. What is the
reason that many Christians are always weeping, and mourning, and sighing, and
sobbing, from day to day, all their life time, and will not be comforted?
because of these discouragements, 1 These. 4. 13. Sorrow not says the Apostle)
as those that have no hope, as if he had said, sorrow if you will* but do not
sorrow as they that have no hope.

How is that? it is a sorrow with nothing but sorrow, from which they have no
hope of enlargement or freedom.

O then my brethren, suppose you have dead hearts, suppose you want zeal, you
want assurance; suppose it be so, yet labor to attain these graces; sorrow
and spare not; weep and mourn, and power out whole buckets of tears for your
sins, if you can: but, sorrow not with nothing but sorrow: be not
discouraged: suppose that thou have a dead heart, that thou art an hypocrite,
that thou have a rotten heart; it is a heavy thing, and a fearful case
indeed, for which thou have great cause of humiliation and sorrow; but yet
sorrow not desperately as men without hope: be not wholly discouraged, but as
you sorrow for your sins, so also labor with encouragement to get out and be
rid of your sins.

Fifthly, discouragements breed and procure a total perplexity. They leave the
soul in a maze, that it knows not whether to turn it self. When men come to
be discouraged, Oh what shall I do says one, I am utterly undone says
another: I know not what will become of me, says a third: Oh I am utterly
lost, I shall perish one day, one day God will discover me, and be avenged on
me for this and that sin: I were as good go to hell at the first as at the
last, for that will be the end of me: I have gone to prayer, but that does not
help me: I have gone to Sacraments, but I find no help: still my soul lies
under the power of sin, still my sins are as strong in me as ever: Thus the
soul is discouraged and cries out, Oh, what shall I do? I know not what to
do. What shall I do say thou?

Alas, thou have things enough to do, if thou were not discouraged. Utterly
undone! No, man, thou might see that thou art not utterly undone, but that
thou art discouraged. Do thou not know what will become of thee? yea, poor
soul, there is mercy, grace and peace for thee, if thou will not be
discouraged.

discouragements whisper within a man a sentence of death, and an impossibility
of escaping. As far as the discouragement of life goes, so far goes the
sentence of death. We despaired of life, and had the sentence of death in our
selves, says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 1. 8. 9. he despaired of life in himself, and
therefore had the sentence of death in himself; this was good, but he did not
despair of life in God; for then he should have had likewise the sentence of
death from God in his conscience.

If you despair in the Lord, you have the sentence of death and damnation from
God in your conscience; take heed of this my beloved; be not discouraged in
God: do not despair in the Lord: that will work a miserable effect in your
souls: it will secretly whisper a sentence of damnation in your souls.

It is strange to consider how many poor souls rub on with these whispering
sentences in their bosoms, suffering their consciences day by day to tell them
that they are rotten, to tell them that they were never yet converted, to tell
them that they are yet in the state of damnation, and yet they will not root
out these discouragements.

O go to the Throne of grace, beg for grace and for mercy, and for power
against sin, and be not discouraged. What? will thou carry thy own sentence
of death in thy breast? if thou will not rouse up thy soul, and pray with more
affection and confidence, and shake off discouragements, take heed lest thou
carry the sentence of thy own death and damnation in thy bowels. O therefore
once more let me beseech you to take heed of these discouragements, and now
hearken to the voice of God which calls upon you, fear not. Thou drewest
nigh in the day that I called upon thee, thou said fear not.

FINIS.

