Practical DIVINITY: OR, GOSPEL LIGHT Shining forth In several choice
SERMONS, On diverse Texts of Scripture. Viz. 1. The Misery of earthly thoughts,
on Isa. 55. 7. 2. A Sermon of self-denial, on Luke 9. 23. 3. The Efficacy of
importunate prayer in two Sermons, on Luke 11. 9. 4. The necessity of Gospel
obedience, in two Sermons on Collos. 1. 10. 5. A Caveat against late
repentance, on Luke 23. 24. 6. The Sovereign virtue of the Gospel, on Psalm.
147. 3 7. A Funeral Sermon, on Isa. 57. 1.


Preached by that laborious and faithful Messenger of Christ, WILLIAM FENNER,
sometimes Fellow of Pembroke Hall in Cambridge, and late Minister of Rochford
in Essex.

LONDON, Printed by T. R. and E. M. for John Stafford and are to be sold at his
house in Brides Churchyard. 1647.

To the Reader.
Christian Reader,
THE Author of the Sermons now in thy hand, was known unto many, (and to my
self in part) for a man of an absolute composition and temper to make a
Minister of the Gospel, in respect of two sovereign ingredients; light and
heat, eminency of knowledge in the things of God, together with strength and
fervencie of zeal for the managing of this knowledge to the best advantage for
the glory of God. So that that crown of honor which our Savior himself set
upon the head of John the Baptist, would very well, without any anointing of
flattery, have fitted his: He was a burning and a shining light John 5. 35
. And though his sense and mine do not walk together thorough every particular
touched in the Sermons following; yet do I judge the perusal of them, a
worthy recompense for any man's time and labor that shall be bestowed thereon.

The God of peace give us in his time union of judgments in the Truth: and in
the mean time union of affections in that which is good. If we really and
cordially love peace and not our own minds and wills, thorough a mistake instead
of it, most certain it is, that we will not suffer it to be taken from us by
the hand of any difference in judgment whatsoever. I do but keep thy heart
and spirit from better company in the Sermons following by my Epistle. But that
which hinders thee in this behalf shall be immediately taken out of the way,
after the speaking of this one word: Read, understand, and consider: and thy
soul shall prosper, and the grace of God in Christ shall be thy portion.

Coleman-street London. Feb. 5. 1646. Thine in the service of Truth and Peace
JOHN GOODWIN.

The Contents of the several Sermons contained in this Book.
Text Esaias 55. 7.
page 1 p. 1 2. Because a man is in a state of misery until he is in Christ,
and a man is not in Christ till his thoughts be sanctified. p. 2 3. Because a
man is in the state of misery that does not love God, and a man can never love
God until he forsake his vain thoughts. p. 2 4. Because that man is in a state
of misery that does not forsake sin, and a man can never forsake sin till he
leave his vain thoughts. p. 3 1. Because vain thoughts are great sins. p. 4 2.
They are sins of the highest part of man. p. 4 3. They are the breach of every
Commandment. p. 4 4. Because they are the strength of a man's soul, the first
born of original corruption. p. 5 5. Because they are the dearest acts of man.
p. 5 1. Because it is hard for to reform the inward part p. 7 2. Because
thoughts are partial acts, and run on in every action. p. 7 3. Because
thoughts are inward, in the heart. p. 8 p. 9 A man may know whether be a Child
of God, or of the Devil, by his thoughts. p. 10 1. Because men's thoughts are
the free acts of their hearts. p. 10 2. They are the immediate acts of the
heart p. 11 3. They are continued acts of the heart. p. 12 4. They are the
univocall acts of the heart p 13 5. They are the swiftest acts of the heart. p.
14 6. They are the peculiar acts of the heart. p. 14 7. They are the greatest
accusers, or excusers of the heart. p. 15 p. 17 For exhortation to consider p.
20 2. What thoughts they are that God calls for. p. 20
Text. Luke 9. 23
p. 25 to 31 The first action to be performed of every Christian is to deny
himself. p. 25 p. 27 2. Christ denied himself for us, therefore we must deny
our selves for him, p. 27 3. This Christ enjoins to all that will come after
him, p. 27 What is meant by a man's self, 1. A man's corrupt will, wit and
reason, p. 31 2. All his lusts and corruptions, p. 31 3. Not only a man's
corrupt self, but a man's good self in some respects, p. 32 Self-denying is
opposite to self-seeking, p. 33 There are five things in self-seeking: 1. It is
an head-lust, p. 33. And that appears, 1. Because it is a leading-lust to all
lust, p. 33 2. Because self is the cause of all other lusts of the heart, p. 34
3. Because self is an in-lust, it runs along through all the lusts of the
flesh, p. 35 4. Self is a make-lust, a man would never break out into lust,
were it not for self, p. 36 5. Self is a lust that is in request, p. 37 2.
Self-seeking is a self-conceited lust, p. 38 that is, 1. When a man has a
conceit of himself, Ibid. 2. Of his own gifts, Ibid. 3. Of his own actions. p.
39 4. Of the state that he is in. p. 39. when as a selfconceited man, 1. Has
no real worth in himself. p. 40 2. He will not stand to the judgment of those
that can judge him. p. 40 3. He has too high a conceit of himself. p. 42 4. He
rests in the judgment of himself. p. 43 And the reasons of this are, 1.
Because sinners are fools. p. 43 2. Men are born fools. p. 44 3. Men are well
conceited of their own estate. p. 46 4. The Lord gives up many to a spirit of
slumber. p. 47 The Woeful case of a self-conceited man, 1. Because the
Scripture calls self-conceit, 1. Only a thinking. p. 48 2. A superstition. p. 48
3. A shadow. p. 48 4. An Imagination. p. 48 5. An appearance. p. 48 2. So long
as a man is well conceited of himself, Christ has no commission to call him.
p. 49 3. Christ rejoices that he has no commission to call such. p. 50 4. The
self-conceited man is in the broad way to hell. p. 51
Text. Luke 11. 9.
The opening of the Context. p. 56, 57 The words of the Text opened. p. 58, 59
p. 59 p. 60 2. Not a positive denial, not a contrary answer. p. 62 3. It will
take no contumelious repulse. p. 63 4. It is in a holy manner a kind of
impudent prayer. p. 64 3. Reasons why we must seek importunatly. 1. In regard
of Gods Majesty, God respects it. p. 67 2. In regard of Gods mercy, it is a
disgrace to Gods mercy to beg it coldly. p. 70 3. In regard of our selves, else
we should never esteem mercy. p. 71 4. Reasons why men are not importunate in
Prayer. 1. Because men account prayer a penance. p. 72 2. Most men content
themselves with formality. p. 73 3. Men are Gentlemen beggars. p. 75 4. Men
have wrong conceits of prayer. p. 76 1. They have high conceits of their own
prayers. p. 76 2. They have mean conceits of their sins. p. 77 3. They have
base thoughts of God. p. 78 4. They have wrong conceits of importunity. p. 78
6. Signs whereby we may know whether our prayers be importunate. p. 83 1.
Importunate prays is evermore the prayer of an importunate man. p. 83 2. It is
the prayer of a pure conscience. p. 86 3. It is a prayer that is full of strong
arguments. p. 87 4. It is a striving prayer p. 88 5. It is a wakefull prayer p.
89 6. It is an assurance getting prayer p. 90 7. Marks of Prayer that is not
importunate. 1. It is a lazy prayer p. 91 2. It is not powered out from the
heart p. 92 3. It is a praying only by fits p. 93 4 It is a silent prayer, he
is silent in that he should most insist upon. p, 94 5 A seldom prayer. p, 95 6
A lukewarm prayer. p, 96 7 By-thoughts in prayer keep prayer from being
importunate, p, 97 By-thoughts in Prayer arise, 1 From corrupt nature. p, 98 2
From nature as it is cumbred. p, 98 3 From Satan. p, 98 4 From spiritual
sluggishmesse p, 99 8. Motives to importunate Prayer. 1 Because prayer enables
a man for duties, p, 101 2 Prayer is the compendium of all divinity. p, 102 3
Prayer is a man's utmost reference p, 103 4 Prayer is that which Gods people
have, though they have nothing else. p, 103 5 Prayer has the command of mercy.
p, 104 6 Prayer is Gods delight. p, 104 7 Importunate prayer is a willing
prayer. p, 105 8 Importunate prayer is the only faithful prayer. 6 Helps to
importunity in Prayer. 1 Labor to know thine own misery. p, 106 2 Be sensible
of thy misery p, 106 3 Observe how Gods people pray. p, 106 4 Get a stock of
prayer. p, 107 5 Labor to be full of good works p, 107 6 Labor to reform thy
household. p, 107
Text Collos. 1. 10.
p, 114 p, 115 2 Because it is the Gospel of Christ whereby we are called, p,
116 3 Because by the Gospel we are called to repentance, p, 117 4 Because if we
walk not worthy of Christ, God will not hold us to be his servants. p 117 5 If
we walk not worthy of Christ, then it will be for the glory of God to cashire
us. p, 119 6 If we walk not worthy of Christ, we put an indignity upon him. p,
121 Motives to walk worthy of God. 1 If we do walk worthy of God, then we
shall answer all the labor and cost that God has been at. p, 128 2 Then we
shall walk with God in white. p 130 3 Then we do not disappoint Gods account.
p 131 4 Then we shall be importunate beggars, and so worthy of mercy, p, 132 5
Then we shall add humiliation to every duty we do perform, p, 132 2 If we do
not walk worthy of God, then 1 We walk worthy of destruction, p, 133 2 Then we
are guilty of the death of Christ, p, 134 3 Then we shall be condemned. p, 134
The second part of the Text opened p. 134 p, 140 p, 140 2 There is a way,
wherein if we walk, we shall please God. p, 141 3 The Lord has showed us this
way, p, 141 p, 142 It is a fit duty to please God, p, 143 p. 143 2. His
pleasure is a good pleasure. p. 143 3. Christ who is our betters did those
things that pleased God. p. 144 4. If we do not please God our consciences will
condemn us. p. 144 5. It is a duty most suitable to humane society. p. 146 p.
146 p. 146 2. It is the most acceptable of all duties. p. 146 3. It is
unconfinable to place or time. p. 147 4. It is in all things without limitation
p. 148 5. It is an everlasting duty. p. 149 6. It is the whole duty of the new
man. p. 149 p. 150 p. 150 2. We are in a woeful case if we do not please God.
p. 151 3. If we do not please God, we are continually in danger of the wrath
of God. p. 152 p. 153 2. Those that please men. p. 154 3. Those that please
themselves. p. 154
Text Luke 23. 24.
Extraordinary cases never make a common rule. p. 159 That a wicked life will
have a cursed end, this is the ordinary rule. p. 160. Yet in some extraordinary
cases it may be otherwise, 1. When God is pleased to show his prerogative
royal. p. 160 2 When a sinner has not had means of salvation in his life, but
only at his death. p. 160 3. When a sinner shall be made exemplary. p. 161 4.
When the Lord may be as much honored by a man's death, as he has been
dishonored by his life. p. 161 This repentance of the theif was extraordinary,
1. Because it was one of the wonders of Christ's passion. p. 162 2. We read not
of any other that was converted at the last as the thief was. p. 164 3. Because
of the suddenness of it. p. 165 4. In regard of the Evangelical perfection of
it. p. Containg, 167. 1. His penitential confession. p. 167 2. His penitential
profession. p. 167 3. His penitential satisfaction. p. 168 4. His penitential
self-denial. p. 168 5. His penitential faith. p. 169 6. His penitential
resolution. p. 169 7. His penitential prayer. p. 169 5. This repentance was
extraordinary in regard of the incomparablenesse of it. p. 171 This example is
once recorded that none might dispare, and but once that none might presume. p.
177. None, because this example should defer their repentance. 1. because this
theif had not the means of life and grace before. p. 180 2. Because we never
read that this theif put off his repentance till the last. p. 181 3 Because at
that time God was in a way of working miracles, p, 185
Text Psalm. 147. 3.
The words of the text opened, p, 193 What is meant by wholnesse of heart, p,
194 What is meant by brokennesse of heart, p, 196 p, 200 2 Christ has
undertaken to do it p, 201 3 Christ has this in charge to bind up the
brokenhearted, p, 202 4 None but the broken hearted will accept of Christ, p,
202 Several objections are answered from p, 204 to 208 3 Reasons why Christ
will heal the brokenhearted, 1 This is the most seasonable time to be healed,
when the heart if broken, p, 218 2 It is the most profitablest time, p, 219 3
It is the very nick of time, the heart can never be healed until it be broken,
p, 219 3 Signs of a broken heart. 1 A breaking from sin, p, 224 2 A breaking
in it self with sorrow, p, 224 The history of Zacheus conversion is opened in
7. particulars, p, 225, to 229 3 When the heart is broken, then it will stoop
to Gods word in all things, p, 233
Text Esaias 57. 1.
p, 241 1 Because God has so appointed it p, 241 p, 241 3 Because all have
sinned, p, 242 4 Because as death came into the world by sin, so sin might go
out of the world by death, p, 242 2 Objections against this are answered, p,
242 p, 243 2 Hence we should learn to draw our hearts from this present world,
p, 244 3 To teach us to prepare our selves for a better life, p, 245 The death
and loss of good men must be laid to heart as an especial cause of grief and
sorrow,. p, 247 p, 248 2 Because of the great loss that others have by their
death, p, 248 3 Because of the evil to come; for while they live, they are as
a wall to keep off the wrath of God, p, 248 p, 250 p, 251 When God will bring
any great judgment upon a people or Nation, ordinariy he takes away his
faithful servants from amongst them, p, 252 p. 253 2. To inform us than when
the righteous are taken away, we are certainly to expect some great judgment
from God to fall upon us. p. 254
Text. Jer. 14. 9.
The opening of the context in many partculars. p. 263 p. 266 4. Signs of Gods
casting off a people. 1. When he takes away his love and respect from a people.
p. 268 2. When he takes away his providence from them. p. 268 3. When he breaks
down the walls of Magistracy and Ministry. p. 268 4. When he takes away the
benefit of both these helps. p. 269 p. 269 to 273 p. 274 The presence of God is
the particular favor of God which he expresses in his ordinances, p. 275 1.
This question is answered, whether a man may be saved without preaching. p. 276
p 280. To rebuke Gods people for their neglect, in not striving to keep God who
seems to be departing, p 284 to 288 How may we keep the Lord amongst us. p 289
p. 289 3. We must make him welcome. p. 291 4. We must be importunate with God
to tarry, and account it a great favor if he will stay. p 292
THE MISERY OF Earthly Thoughts.
ISA. 55. 7. Let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his
thoughts, and let him return unto the Lord, etc.
I Have heretofore begun the Doctrine of the Thoughts of men; Now I desire to
finish it. Whence we had this Point: that



First, Because a man is in the state of misery till he has repented: Now,
until a man have forsaken his old thoughts, that man has not repented. Oh
Jerusalem, wash thy heart, Jer. 4. 14. A man must not only rid himself of vain
thoughts, but he must wash his heart clean, with this Emphasis, That he may be
saved: No salvation without this. How long shall vain thoughts lodge within
thee?

2. As a man is in the state of misery, till he have repented, so also till he
is in Christ. Now when a man is led by his own vain thoughts, his thoughts
being not sanctified; so long that man is not in Christ; if he were in Christ,
Christ would sanctify his thoughts. I, but may some man say, He has wronged
me, ergo, I will think thus and thus. Nay, but Christ casts down the strong
holds, and if thou will not yield, Christ will cast thee off; but if thou
belong to Christ, he will cast all down before thee.

3. That man is in the state of misery, that does not love God, that walks not
with God in his thoughts. Thou shall love the Lord thy God* etc. Mat. 22. 37.
So I do, says one, and yet I think on my vanities too: And thus carnal men
think they love God. But if thou love God with all thy heart, thou love him
with all that is in thy heart; for what is a man's heart, but the purposes of
his heart? Now if a man give not over vain purposes, he loves not God with all
his heart.

4. That man that cannot forsake sin, is in the state of misery, and can
never enter into life; (see the Text) the wicked must forsake his ways. A man
must deny his own words, and speak according to Gods own warrant: the actions
of men's lives are the ways of their thoughts; the Tongue must not only forsake
his way, but the Heart his way also; else a man is a wicked man, Prove. 13. 26.
He is wicked whose thoughts are not sanctified. But what will men say? shall we
be condemned for a thought? words are small sins, and thoughts are less: Must
a man then so strictly look to his thoughts? I will make it plain, that for a
man to be vain-thoughted, is a grievous sin.

1. Because if the sin of vain thoughts be pardoned, it will ask abundance of
mercy.

Mark the Text, Abundantly pardon: No repentance, no mercy, without abundance;
ergo, it is not so small as the world takes it to be.

2. Thoughts are the sins of the highest part of a man; for they are the sins
of the heart; and surely the sins of the chiefest part are greater then any
other. A King counts it not much for a Rogue to steal by the ways side, but
for a Knight or a Nobleman it is a foul matter: So the Lord would not have the
lordly part to sin against him; He would not have the longue, much less the
heart, that is the Kingly part of a man, to transgress. And this is the reason
why Deborah calls them great thoughts of heart, Judge. 5. 15. Sins in thought,
are great sins: the Heart is the lady, the mistress, or highest part of a man;
and He that has made us, looks that we should serve him with the the
Master-part; That must be afforded him.

3. Because thoughts are breaches or every Commandment; Other sins are but
against one, but all the Commandments condemn vain thoughts. The first
Commandment says, Thou shall have no other Gods but me; But thou set an
Image up in thy heart, when thou think of thy pleasures, etc. So, Thou shall
keep holy the Sabbath day: Now if thou think thine own thoughts that day, thou
breakest this commandment; and so of all the rest: The sin of thought is
therefore a heinous sin.

4. Because they are the strength of a man's heart and soul, the firstborn of
original corruption. A man by nature is a child of wrath, a soul and a body of
death. Now what does the heart first break out in? It first shows it self in
its thoughts; and if it be the firstborn, it must needs be the strength: as
Jacob said to Ruben his firstborn, he was his strength; and therefore all
Lordship lies in the heart; A man may more easily part with all other sins then
with this, because the bent of the heart runs this way; the heart will part
with any sin, rather then with his pernicious thoughts.

5. Because they are the dearest acts of men. We count a man preferred, when he
is preferred to the thoughts of a man, Gen 40. 14. Think on me, says Joseph to
Pharaohs Butler: I count it thanks enough, if thou preferred me to thy
thoughts. We prize that most, which we think most on; That which a man scorns,
he scorns to bestow his thoughts on; but that which a man sets his heart on,
that is his dearling. Now that any thing should be dear to a man, save God,
this is a horrible sin; when a man makes his Dogs his dearling, his Whore his
dearling, etc. For look what thou most think on, that is thy dearling: Why?
Because thou dandlest it in thy heart; therefore it is a horrible sin for a man
not to set his heart upon God.

thoughts? does Grace call us to leave thinking? then a man must cease to be.

Non tollit, sed attollit naturam; it takes them not away, but it takes them
up. He does not say, Let the wicked forsake thoughts, but his thoughts; let him
set them on other matters. When God calls men unto him, he is so far from taking
away men's thoughts, as that he will rather increase them. If thou be a new
creature, thou must have more thoughts; Thou art full of thoughts, now; but
then thou will be fuller. Psalm. 119. 59. When David turned to God, his heart
thought upon his ways; the word in the original is, He thought on his ways on
both sides. The curious work of the Sanctuary was wrought on both sides; Common
works are wrought only on one side, but on the other side are full of ends and
shreds. So the Prophet looks on his way on both sides; he strives to walk
curiously, precisely, and accurately to turn himself to Gods testimonies. Ergo,
God calls not to forsake thoughts but our thoughts; it is a hard duty for men to
forsake their own thoughts. I will make it appear thus:

First, Because it is a hard thing to reform ones self; one thing may reform
another; but here is the difficulty, for a thing to reform it self: it is an
easy matter for a man's heart to reform his tongue, but it is hard for the
heart to reform it self, in correcting its own thoughts: it is hard for a man
to deny himself. A hell-hound may reform his tongue; but here is the
difficulty, for his heart to reform it self, for thoughts are are the heart,
Phil. 3. 19. who mind earthly things; thoughts of earthly things are called the
mind; a man's thoughts and his mind are all one, so that if it reform thoughts
it must reform it self.

2. It is hard to reform thoughts, because they are partial acts; if they were
full acts, a man might reform them, rather then being partial acts: my reason
is, because they are in every action he does; thoughts run on all men's actions;
if thoughts were alone, men might mend them: but they busy themselves about
all actions; if a man pray, thoughts run along with him in prayer, nay men pray
with twisted thoughts, so that before he comes to an end of his prayer, he
shall have abundance of glanceings on other things. See it in old Eli, 1 Samuel
1. Hanna was praying; Old Eli, says the Text, thought she had been drunken.
Either he was, or should have been praying also; yet you see he had wandering
thoughts to mark the lips of his neighbors. So, as John was preaching, Mat. 3.
there came a thought into his hearers hearts, that they were the seed of
Abraham. What did make them think so? John spoke of no such matter; but he
said, Every tree that brings not forth good fruit, etc. They had, it seems,
by-thoughts in the duty of hearing: therefore seeing thoughts do thus twist
them selves about men's actions, hence it is that they are so hard to be rooted
out.

3. It is hard for men to forsake their own thought, because they are in men's
hearts, Their inward thoughts, Psalm. 49. 11. Every man has two kind of
thoughts, inward, and outward; explicit, and implicit; implicit thoughts are
those that never show themselves in the heart, but at some desperate attempt;
Explicit, are those which are in the heart every day: as in Psalm. 49, 11. They
think their Houses shall continue for ever. Would you think that men should
have such thoughts (...) their ourtward thoughts were, they were mortal; We see
(says the Text) that men die, etc. and yet they think inwardly that they shall
live for ever. Now according to these inward thoughts men act; and hence it is
that men neglect repentance, and other holy duties, as if God would never call
them to an account; they have not these thoughts above-board, but they are
inward, and these spoil the heart, and these are the causes why men cannot
forsake their own thoughts. Epiphanius speaks of a fig tree which grew in a
wall, etc. Bad thoughts will be always seizing on a man till he dies, and then
all his thoughts perish. But so long as a man is alive in old Adam, these
thoughts are rooted in the bottom of the soul, which hinder good duties; and
this is the cause why vanity of mind sprouts up.

Examine your selves then; for it is one of the best ways for a man to try his
estate by, even to examine his thoughts. If a man would see whether the sea be
salt, he need not drink all the water that is in it; one drop will serve his
turn. So a man may see whether he be a child of God, or of the Devil, even by
his thoughts. I will make it appear by these Reasons:

First, because men's thoughts are the free acts of their hearts. Many times you
speak not as you would, you do not as you would, but a man thinks always as he
will. Favor of Great men, and desire to please them, makes men do many times
what they would not; but thoughts are free. I may say so, and so, but I will
think what Ilist: Ergo, if thou will judge a man, judge him by that he does
freely, and not by that which he does by compulsion. But now thy thoughts are
free, they are thine own act; nothing can force thy thoughts but thy self:
ergo, in them thy heart shows it self whether it be carnal or spiritual.

When Peter denied his Master, could a man have judged him by that, then he
might have judged him an Apostata: but that was his passion; he discovered what
his fear was, not what his heart was; For if a man might have but looked into
Peter's heart, (though it was a fearful sin, and without Gods mercy might have
damned him) Yet there you might have heard him say, Oh it is my Master! Oh that
I had never come hither! It is my Master and Savior, I have none but he. It
was for fear of his life, that he denied him: For, Prove. 23. 7. As a man
thinks in his heart, so is he. A covetous Usurer may make a rich feast, and
say with his tongue, Sir, you are welcome; he must give good words, the shame
of the world and speech of people will make him do it; yet his thoughts it may
be are not toward thee. Sorry thy self, how go thy thoughts? at home or abroad?
Are thy thoughts on heaven or heavenly things, or are they below? Sure I am, if
a man's thoughts were on heavenly things, then his heart would be there also;
for as a man thinks, so is he, Prove. 23. 7.

2. As they are the freest acts, so they are the immediate acts of the heart.
Can a man judge of the fountain by the water that runs seven miles off, as well
as by that which runs immediately from it? The water seven miles off, may have
tincture from the soil, and so it may be bad there, though good at the
fountains head; ergo, judge of the fountain by the water which comes
immediately from it. Now, thoughts come immediately from the heart, nothing is
between them and the heart, and out of the heart (says our Savior) proceed
evil thoughts, etc. Mark 7. 21. Other sins come from the heart too, but it is
at the second, third, or fourth hand; abundance of circumstances come between
them and the act; as in the act of murder, it may be there were base words
offered, yea and blows too, etc. but thoughts come immediately from the heart:
Ergo, if thy thoughts be proud, carnal, etc. so art thou; if thy thoughts carry
thee away in the cares of this life, so is thy heart, etc.

3. Thoughts, they are the continued acts of the heart, a man is always doing
them. Can a man judge of an Usurer, and say he is liberal, because he makes one
great feast unto his neighbors? No; but he may say it is a Vsurerve feast, a
great feast.

By what a man does always, by that judge him: Thou art not always praying,
etc. or in good company; but thou art always thinking good or evil thoughts:
thy thoughts are continued acts of thy heart. Can a man judge a horse for
stumbling once in a long journey? At such a place he went well, and at such a
time, and always; yet perhaps once in a year he may stumble: Can you, or will
you judge him by that? No, rather judge him by that which he is always doing.
Thou art always thinking; now that is thy God which thou art always thinking
on: If on riches, then that is thy god; or whatsoever it be, then that is thy
god.

Examine then thy heart by thy thoughts; for out of the abundance of thy heart
thy mouth speaks: yea, for one word, there is abundance of thoughts; for one
good duty, there is abundance of thoughts; ergo if thou will examine thy heart,
examine thy thoughts.

4. Thoughts are the Univocal acts of the heart, such as wherein the heart
shows its own nature. As for example: the Univocal act of Light is, to lighten
the room: but now you cannot judge of the Light by the heat, so well as you may
by the shining. So an ill savor must be judged of by the stinking, which is
the univocal act of it: It causes abundance of other effects, but this is the
proper act whereby it shows it self. So the thoughts of men are the univocal
acts of their hearts, therefore in Scripture called the way of the heart: just
as the heart is, so are the thoughts: if the heart be proud, so are the
thoughts: just according to the nature of the heart, so are the thoughts.

5. They are the swiftest acts of the heart. If I judge of a Scholar, I will
judge him by that which he does ex tempore: if a fool study, he may speak to
purpose; but look what a man does by his own inclination, that a man discovers
himself to be; Thoughts are the extempore acts of the heart; if thy heart be
heavenly, it will scatter out heavenly meditations; if carnal, then thy
thoughts are carnal: thoughts are as the visions in the night, ergo we use this
proverb, his thoughts are gone a sutering. If then they be the swiftest acts of
men's hearts, then are they most fit to express the nature of the heart.

6. Thoughts are the peculiar acts of the heart, peculiar to God only: the
world may see what thy outward life is, but thy thoughts God only sees; neither
Angel, Devil, nor Man can see them: and as they are peculiar to Gods eye, so he
most regards what men's thoughts are; and therefore the best way for a man to
judge himself, is, to judge himself that way which God does, even by his
thoughts. The Lord knows the thoughts of man, Psalm. 94. 11. Examine your
selves in this then, concerning your thoughts, whether they be metamorphosed or
no: A man may say, he has good thonghts of God; but let him examine himself
whether it be so or no.

7. Thoughts are the conscional acts of the heart; they are the greatest
accusers, or excusers of the heart: they are Consciences Nose, as we may so
speak: True it is, the words of the tongue, and the actions of the hands, are
all in the light and sight of the conscience; but the nearer a thing is unto
the conscience, the more able it is to judge of the conscience: And therefore
Saint Paul puts the accusing, or excusing, especially on the thoughts, Romans 2.
15.

We grant, a wicked man may have good thoughts, but they are thoughts
descending, not ascending; they are cast into the heart by God, not raised out
of the heart. Moses thought in his heart to visit his brethren, Acts 7. ver.
23. Good thoughts grow out of the heart of the godly, they come from the
bottom of it: a wicked man may have good thoughts cast into his mind, but he
will fling them out again.

Secondly, we grant wicked men may have good thoughts; but examine whether they
be close with the heart or no; all the proper thoughts of a man are the
possessions of the heart, Job 17. 11. They take hold of the heart, and they are
at home in the heart. Here then examine thy heart, whether the thoughts of God
close with thy heart: Does repentance close with thy heart? do thou think of
death, and do the thoughts thereof make thee die daily? Or do thou think of
death, and do thou not love to be holden with that thought? Do thou think
of hell, and will thou not be holden with that thought of hell, but thy
thoughts are on thy pleasures? So then, if thy thoughts close not with thy
heart, it is nothing to the purpose.

Thirdly, there may be good thoughts in thy heart, but it is questionable whether
good thoughts, or no; if they come out of due season, it is nothing to the
purpose: If a Printer print never so well, and make never so good letters; yet
if he place one word where another should stand, he marrs all: So, good
thoughts, if they be seasonable, and in their proper place, they are the
effects of the Spirit; but if out of season, they may be the thoughts of
Reprobates: As if thou be at Prayer, and then to be thinking of a Sermon, is
nothing to the purpose. They must be seasonable, and bring forth fruit in due
season, Psalm. 1. 3. When thou art at prayer, thou must have thy thoughts
suitable to prayer; for it thy thoughts be never so good, yet if they be not
seasonable and suitable to the action thou have in hand, they are not actions
of grace; grace cannot away with them.

Fourthly, thou have good thoughts in thy heart, but the question is whether
they be counseled thoughts, such as thou have determined to think on. Thoughts
are called the counsels of a man's heart, 1 Cor. 4. 5. it may be thou may
stumble on a good thought now and then, it may be when thou art swearing, thou will say God forgive me; when thou have been drinking all the day, it may be a
good thought steps in and cries God mercy, but thou go not to school to
learn the art of meditation, or the science of holy thinking, or to say with
David, O God my heart is fixed.

Now, if that sin in thought be so great a sin, this should teach us what a
horrible sin it is to sin in deed, therefore thoghts are the smallest sins, and
the Psalmist makes it an argument of Gods quick-sighted power to see thoughts,
thou see my thoughts afar off; you will say that man is quick sighted that
can see a pins head a 100 miles off: even so God sees thoughts; if a pins point
can stab a man, then a sword can much more. Now if thoughts be so heinous and
capital a sin, how fearful a sin is it to commit sin in deed? for thee to
swear, to lie, to commit adultery, to keep wicked company, to mock at Gods
people, to live in coveteousnesse, etc. this is to commit in deed; if small
sins be so damnable, what then are the greatest? If the cockatrice in the egg
be such poison, what will it be when it is hatched? sins in thought are
imperfect, but outward actions are perfect.

It Is a wicked distinction to say that some sing are Contra legem or Praeter
legem; for, all sins are against the Law, as Saint James says, when lust is
conceived it brings forth sin, and sin when it is finished it brings forth
death; thou that art a drunkard, thy sin is finished; thou art a true sinner in
deed, if thou live in the execution of any outward sin.

Again, sins in thought are simple sins; but sins in deed are compounded; sin
in thought is part of sin, but when it is indeed, it may be the cause of a 1000
sins: for a man to think too much of his belly is a sin; but for a man to be
drunken, this is abundance of sins; for it is an abuse of Gods creatures, a
spending of his substance, a weakening of his parts, a scandal to others, etc.
Sin in deed is a sin with an addition; sin in deed is an impudent sin; see Esaias
65. 2, 3. etc. that man is impudent with a witness that will commit sin in deed,
for he is neither ashamed of Gods nor man's presence; if any man be a desperate
siner, this is he.

how then can thoughts, be said to be such sins, even sins of the highest part
of a man?

Sins in thought are included within sins in deed. The souls part of sin is the
greatest part of sin; Now thonghts are the souls part of sin; yet sins in deed
must needs be worse in regard of the progress of sin, and also because
thoughts are included in them; thoughts and deeds, are more then thoughts alone.

consider.

what great reason you have to set your thought on God. God himself merited
this duty at your hands, God has taken a number of thoughts for us.
Innumerable are thy thoughts O God to us ward. Ps. 40. 5. the Lord thinks on us
from the Cradle to the Cross; If the Lord should have intermitted his thoughts
of thee, thou could not subsist; when thou wast up, the Lord thought how to
feed thee; when thou wast in bed, he thought how to preserve thee; he does not
use to think of thee at one time and not at another, but he thinks on thee
when thou art sick, and when thou art in health, asleep or awake; the Devil
else would seize on thee. I am poor and needy, yet the Lord thinks on me,
says the Psalmist, Psalm. 40. 17. And Nehemiah says, O Lord think on me; shall
we call to God to think on us? then surely it is our duty to think on him,
yea and he may call to us for that duty.

Secondly, consider with your selves what thoughts they are which God calls
for; my son, says he, give me thy heart. Prove. 23. 26 He would feign have thy
heart, he lets thee labor with thy hands for thy living, and he lets thee have
thy feet to walk and the rest of thy members for thy several uses, but the
Lord requires thy heart, and therefore give him the thoughts of thy heart; for
if thy neighbor come to thee for fire, thou can not give him fire, if thou
take away the heat thereof; so give the Lord thy heart, and the thoughts of it
will follow.

The Devil calls for thy heart also; ergo reason as Joseph did when he was
tempted, how can I do this and sin against my God? my Master has delivered
into my hands all that he has, thee only excepted, and shall I take thee? how
can I do this? So the Lord has withheld nothing from thee, but thy heart;
my son (says he) give me thy heart, yet will thou deny it him with the
thoughts thereof.

Tell me you that are rich, would it be any disparagement unto you to be Gods
servants, to set your thoughts on God? True it is the greater men of this world
think it some disparagement to think on these things. But I tell thee thou
that art a Gentleman, if thou have grace, it makes thee more then a Gentleman;
grace takes not away men's honor and riches; but if he be a Knight, it makes him
more then a Knight; And as Paul said to Philemon, receive him now a servant and
more then a servant; he was a servant when he was carnal, but now being a
Christian he is more then a servant; if you have grace, it is an addition to
your riches, riches and more then riches; ergo give your hearts to God, and it
will be the better for you.

Thirdly, the Lord has made thy thoughts thy Jewels, thy thoughts are
precious, the Lord keeps them under lock and key, he will not let any see
them; if all men should observe a man and look into him, yet they cannot see
his thoughts; no; God has locked them up and made them thy Jewel; will thou
then cast them into the mire? will thou preferred Hawks and Hounds in thy
thoughts before God? can thou sit at dinner and not once think of God, but
always on base pelf? why thy thoughts are thy Jewels.

Again, A man that is wise, will be wary what companions he keep: your
thoughts are your only companions; you never go out nor in, but your thoughts
go along with you: and for this cause Solomon would have us place the word of
God in our thoughts, Pro. 6. 22. See Psalm. 139. 15 16. when I am awake I am
present with thee.

Men will be careful what meat they eat, because such meat as they eat such
is their blood; and as their blood is, so is their body; now as the body feeds
on meat, so does the soul on thoughts; if we look not to our thoughts, they
will be subject to abundance of corruptions; a man must give an account of
every idle word he speaks, and thoughts are the intrinsecall words of the
heart: now if men must give an account of every idle word, then of every idle
thought also.

Let this then teach all and every one of us in the fear of God to consider
our thoughts, else our end will be destruction.

A SERMON OF SELF-DENIAL.
LUKE 9. 23. And he said unto them all, If any man will come after me, let him
deny himself, and take up his cross daily, and follow me.
THis Text contains the first action performed of every Christian, viz. to deny
himself; concerning which you may here see,

First the grounds of it.

Secondly the reasons of it.

Thirdly, the occasion of it.

Fourthly, the parts of it.

Fasthly and lastly, the necessity of it.

I intend to handle these words as they are in relation to the context.

First, the grounds of this truth, viz that every man must deny himself And it
is here expressed to be twofold, viz. the contrariety that is between Christ
and a man's self; me, and himself, these two terms are contradictorie one to
the other; if any man will come after me, let him deny himself; these two
cannot stand together.

Secondly. The contrariety that is between self and self; if a man be in Christ
he has two selves; he has a self in himself, and a self out of himself; the
self in himself is old Adam; the other in Christ, which is the new man; there
is self denying and selfe-denyed; if a man will find himself, he must lose
himself. Paul must not be found in Paul having his own righteousness, but he
must find himself in Christ; for salvation belongs unto the Lord Psalm. 3. 8.
And ergo let him deny himself.

Secondly, you may see the reason of it, which is threefold.

First, Christ's own example verse 22. the son of man must suffer, must be
rejected, Christ himself denies himself; he might have commanded himself, he
might have demanded credit, honor, or riches, etc. he might have done thus; yet
though he had no wicked self, but good self, yet he denied himself; and
therefore if we will go after Christ, we must do to.

Secondly, here is Christ's merit, he has merited this duty; Christ did not
humble himself for himself, but he did it for us, and therefore we may well
deny our selves for him. This is included in this word And. And if I have done
this for you, I would have you do the like for me.

Thirdly, here is Christ's command too; let him deny himself; Christ enjoynes
this to all that will come after him, let him deny himself.

Now fellows the occasion, and that is threefold.

First, Peter's offense; when Christ had told Peter and the rest of his Apostles
how that he must suffer; Peter was offended saying, Master, favourthy self;
even like a servant that out of love to himself would be loath his Master
should be troubled, because then he thinks himself shall be troubled also; oh
says Christ, art thou offended at this? I tell thee, neither thou nor any
other can come after me unless you deny your selves. If any man will come
after me, etc.

as Peter was offended, so also were the rest of the Apostles. They were very
sorry, Mat. 17. 22. they thought to have gotten credit in the world, and
riches and worldly preferment, and now it grieved them to hear that they must
have a suffering kind of trade of it; ergo Christ said not only to Peter, but
to them all, if any man, etc.

like as his Apostles, so likewise he did foresee that all the world will be
offended at this; for many would feign have Christ and their self-will too;
but Christ gives a watchword beforehand, if any man will, etc.

the parts of it. The whole duty is this, Let him deny himself. Chrysostom
on the text says, not only deny himself, but in the original deny away
himself; not only deny credit, etc. but abhor it; if it cannot be had but
with the loss of Christ, we must not only barely deny self respects, but
abhor them and trample them under our feet.

The parts of this duty are two.

First, let him take up his cross.

Secondly, let him deny himself and follow me.

The first is opposed to selfe-favouring, the second to selfe-doing.

First, let him take up his cross, let him not favor himself; he must be
content to part with selfe-means and maintenance, and self ends too; he must
be content to part with all these; he that will come after me, must lose many
good friends, and many a good bit and sweet morsel to the flesh; he that will
come after me, must not stand upon these terms; suppose a cross of disgrace,
come, take it up and wear it as thy crown, nay thou must be willing to take a
cross before it is offered, and when thou have it, thou must be willing to
bear it.

Secondly, he must follow me too; ones self will do as ones self would have
him; that is true; but you must follow me, not your self; look to me, and
frame your selves to walk in my steps, take up my cross, etc.

Lastly, here is the necessity of it. It is absolute true a man may go to hell
if he be so minded, he may follow himself to hell; but if a man tender his
salvation, then here is an hypotheticall necessity, a necessity with an if.

First, if he mean to come after me, he must take up his cross and deny
himself.

Secondly, if a man would save his life, he must lose it: if he will lose it,
he shall save it. If a man will keep his old relation, he may; but if he will
find credit and life in heaven, he must deny all selfe-respects.

Thirdly, if a man will gain himself, let him deny himself. But what say
some, how shall we live then? how then shall I hold up my head? These men would
feign have the gain of the world, but what is a man profited, if he win the
world and lose his soul? etc. verse 25. if you stand upon these terms, if you
can baulke a commandment for self respects, you may lose your souls; but if
you will save your souls, thus you must do. Again the text says, if a man be
ashamed of me and of my word, of him shall the son of man be ashamed; ergo if
ever you look that the son of man should not be ashamed of you, deny
yourselves.

Now for the Exposition.

Deny himself; there is the difficulty. A man cannot deny himself, 2 Timothy 2.
13. for affirmare and negare are contradictions; ergo somewhat must be meant by
ones self: yet by ones self is not meant the Devil, as Micarius would have it;
for since man has sinned, says he, the Devil is got into him, and is as near
unto him as himself, he is another self within his own self, another heart
within his own heart: ergo, if he will come after Christ, he must forsake the
Devil; though this be true, yet this is not the meaning of the text.

But first, a man's corrupt will, wit, reason, and all a man's corrupt self must
be put off. Put off concerning the former conversation the old man, etc. Ephesians.
4. 22. which is a man's self. Viz. thou must lay aside the man that thou art,
thou must not be the same man if thou will follow Christ, thou must be a new
self in Christ.

2. Here is not only meant a man's corrupt will, wit, reason, and affections,
but also all men's lusts and corruptions, all sins that cleave so close as if
they were himself, as fornication, uncleanness, evil concupiscence, etc.
mortify therefore your earthly members, Colos. 3. 5. the Apostle accounts a
man's lusts to as close to him as his members; for until a man be brought home
to Christ, he and his sins are all one, he must deny himself, viz. all his
lusts.

self is not only meant a man's corrupt self as sin and iniquity: but also
a man's good self in some respects; not only sins, but also Father, Mother,
Children, Friends, etc. yea, life it self, all, if they be hindrances to him
from Christ, so far he must deny all these, nay grace it self; for a man may
make a God of grace, or of prayer, etc. a man I say must deny all these so
far as they are stumblings and offenses in his way to hinder him from Christ.

But oh says one, my father will disinherit me, I must humor him, he cannot
endure a Puritan; If I must live as you would have me, I shall never have foot
of his land; so the servant says, I have a profane master and he will turn
me out of doors if I be so precise; yea, but what says Christ? if you will
come after me, you must deny Father and Mother and all; better it were that thy
Father disinherit thee then that Christ should reject thee; therefore you must
deny all and take up his cross and make it thine own.

And so I come to the words Let him deny himself; because justification is
after regeneration, it is necessary to show what selfe-seeking is, before you
understand what selfe-denyall is.

By selfe-seeking, I mean a man that has a head lust whereby he is
selfe-conceited of himself.

There are five things in selfe-seeking.

For first, self is a head lust.

Secondly, it is a lust of self-conceit.

Thirdly, of self-will.

Fourthly, of self-wit.

Fifthly, of self-confidence.

1. Self is a head lust, it is the main lust that keeps men from coming unto
Christ; all seek their own, not that which is Jesus Christ's, Philip, 2. 21.
What is the reason? why because they seek self, they follow their own
thoughts; and because they are ruled by their own selves, therefore they art
not ruled by Christ.

That it is a head lust, I prove it by five argument.

1. Because it is the leading lust to all lusts; no lust in the world but self
leads the dance; why is man proud, but because self would get credit? why is a
man covetous, but because self would have means and maintenance? why is a man
revengefull, but because self will not put up wrongs? Christ bids us of all
lusts to take heed of self, Luke 21. 34. Christ knowing what a deceitful
thing self is, he bids us have a care of self-beguiling; Take heed to your
selves (says he) for if you do not, self will bring you into many noisome
lusts, as surfeting and drunknesse, and the cares of this life, etc. and so
that day will come upon us unawares.

2. Self is the cause of all other lusts of the heart; it is the plotter and
the ruler of all, it is the master of Arts; it was self that found out all
lusts. Self found out pride, security and covetousness, and all other noisome
lusts; self is loath to take the pains that God would have it, and therefore
self sets his wits on the tainters, and hence it is that Solomon says God made
man upright, but he (viz. self) has found many inventions, Eccle. 7. 21. Man
was upright, and God was the cause; He became wicked, how? why self found out
many inventions. self is the inventer of all, and when self cannot get means
enough by that way which God has allowed, then self seeks out for credit,
wealth, pleasure, etc. then it devises ways of it self to get reputation, so
that self is the cause of lust.

3. Self is an inlust, it runs along through all the lusts of the flesh,
there is in every lust of the flesh an ounce of self. There would be no
security in man but that self would feign live at ease. So that as David said
unto the woman of Tekoah, has not Joab a hand in all this? so may I say, has
not self a hand in all this? Aquinas says it is called self out of an
inordinate love that a man bears to himself and to those things which seem good
to man's self: A man has not only lust to pride, pleasure, etc. but a man
looks also to things for self, either for some profit for self, or credit for
self; self is always an inlust. See it in the wicked Steward, Luke 16. he
said within himself, etc. he was to be turned out of his stewardship. Now,
what did he? He said to himself, or within himself; what said he? why, he
said to beg he was ashamed, and dig he could not; self was too lazy to
work, and too proud to beg, and so he brought his masters two hundred pounds to
fifty; and what was his reason for it? why, says he, that they may receive me
into their houses, verse 2. etc. and it is said, the Lord commended the unjust
Steward, not as if he had commended the sin, but as if he should say, I
commend his wit.

4. It is a make lust; a man would never break out into lust if it were not for
self. Doeg had a lust of confidence in his riches, Psalm. 52. 7. and this made
Esau comfort himself against Jacob; he had a murdering lust to comfort
himself, Genesis 27. 42. The Jews had a lust of formality to pray, to hear, to
bring offerings, to observe all the new Moons, and Ordinances of God, ye they
had no delight in these things; no, their mind was on their imaginations, they
loathed the word of God; why then would they do this? why self was the cause,
and they thought thereby to stay themselves upon God, Esaias 48. 2. And for this
cause many amongst us come to Church; this is a damnable lust.

Haman would not have vaunted of being invited to the Queens banquet, but that
the Queen invited none but himself with the King; he would not have been so
willing to answer to A hashueroths question, but for himself; whom does the
King delight to honor more then my self thought he; self makes a man
covetous, injurious, and full of wrongs, etc.

5. As it is a make lust, so it is a requesting lust; Other lusts are with some
men out of date; many reprobates cannot abide drunkenness, nor pride, nor
usury; these sins are out of date; why, does not a man love a niggard? why,
because self is not the better for him; he cannot get so much as a dinner by
him; many other sins may be out of date also with men: but self is never out
of date, it is always in request, and so long as men do well unto themselves
they shall be praised, says the Psalmist. Psalm. 49. 18. he has none to make
much of himself but himself. Every man for himself and God for us all, says
self. But sometime self is out of love; but how? why he will do no good but
unto himself; this men cannot abide; this they say is self out of his wits;
but self with the wisdom of the flesh is always in request, viz. when men
will be kind to others that they may be kind to them again; this self the
world loves alife.

2. Now I come to the second, which is self-conceit; self-seeking supposes
self conceitednesse. There is a bird called S. a fair bird, in French it is
called the Devils bird, it is a blackbird, and yet it is conceited with it
self that it is fair. By S. I mean first the conceit a man has of himself.
What shall I (says self) be disgraced by one that goes to plough and to cart,
and shall I put it up? No, I am a Gentleman, etc. Another says I am such and
such a Scholar, and shall I be contented with such a poor living? these men
will bear no reproof, they will none of my counsel, Prove. 1. 30. and
therefore they shall eat o the fruit of their own way, etc. verse 31.

Secondly, when a man is conceited of himself and of his own gifts, as
commonly women are of their beauty, and scholars of their learning. A hansome
man, and I warrant you he knows it; diligent at Church, and he knows it is
so, etc. and he thinks his case the better; nay, you shall have men so
conceited of their parts, as that they will be conceited of their wicked parts,
as Simon Magus was of his Sorcerie, Acts 8. 9.

Thirdly, when a man is self-conceited of his actions; he does as Sisera's
mothers Ladies did when they had given their verdict of Siseras staying; they
were presently conceited, oh what a witty answer they made her; see Judges 5.
29. 30. as if they should say, we have answered very wisely; so a man cannot
make a sermon, but presently he is conceited oh what a learned Sermon it was;
he cannot break a jest, but straight he is conceited, oh what a witty one it
was; nay of wicked actions; you shall hear many an old man tell what pretty
pranks (as he calls them) he played in his youth, and he tells it laughingly,
which is a sign that he is self-conceited, or else surely he would speak it
wit shame and grief of heart.

Fourthly and lastly, self-conceit is when a man is self-conceited of the
estate he is in. Many a man though he be the child of hell, yet he is conceited
that he is the child of God; who with the wretch in the Gospel have conceits
that they love God and Christ, and therefore with him they will come to the
Sacraments; but Christ will say to such as he did to him, friends how came you
in hither? can you conceit your selves to be friends? get you gone into utter
darkness ( ie) into hell, says our Savior.

Now if you would know what self-conceit is, you must remember that it
contains four things.

First, where there is self-conceit, there is no real worth at all; he that
is self-conceited is a base man; take that for a rule. A self-conceited fellow
is a base fellow, as we use to say; there is no real worth at all in a
conceited man; all the worth that he has, is either real as he thinks, or
conceitable; now what real worth can self have? You know what the Scripture
says, it is only in imaginations, and God scatters the proud in the imaginations
of their hearts. Luke 1. 43. They it may be do imagine that they are
Gentlemen, or that they have faith, and yet God scatters these men in their
imaginations.

Secondly, as he has no real worth in himself, so he will not stand to the
judgment of those that can judge him. God can tell the worth of every thing,
but they will not be judged by him; Gods Ministers out of Gods word can tell
him that he has no reason to think his case good; but he will not stand to the
judgment of Gods Ministers. If a Minister should come to a man and say unto
him, Sir, you are conceited that you are a good Christian, I pray what signs
have you for it; you pray, so do Reprobates; you hear the word and receive
the Sacraments, so do Reprobates; have thou no better signs then these? no
better arguments then these? Why, I tell thee that a Reprobate has these and
more then these too. A selfe-conceited man will be judged by none but by
himself; A sluggard is wiser in his own conceit then seven men who can give a
reason, Prove. 26. 16. The sluggard is loath to take more pains; why, he thinks
he takes pains enough, and so he is conceited, and more he will not do; let
seven men come and tell him that he must take more pains, yet he will not, and
that because he is conceited that he does enough. Even so it is with the
sluggish Christian, he is wise in his own conceit; for let seven Ministers come
and tell him that he must take more pains for heaven, or else he will never
come there; yet he will not believe them, he is wiser then so, they are fools
as he thinks, though he have no reason so to think; he indeed is not as he
should be, and Gods Ministers can bring reasons out of the Scriptures to prove
it; for Wisdom is profitable to direct, Eccles. 10. 10. But every conceited man
is a blind man.

Thirdly, A self-concieted man as he will not stand to the judgment of those
that can judge him, so he has too high a conceit of himself; be he never so
little godly, he is presently conceited he is a child of God; so if a man have
never so little humility or patience, I he come to Church, pray or do but a
few good duties in religion, he thinks presently it is as a high wall unto
him, and he shall go to heaven cock sure; and let other men be never so holy,
strict, religious, and pious in their ways, yet they are apt to think them
Reprobates. If he see never so little slipps among them, he is presently ready
to say they are all naught; if any be flase among them, he is ready to say
they are all-hounds; but if himself be conceited that he have never so little
faith, oh presently he thinks that is a high wall.

Fourthly and lastly, he rests in the judgment of him self; and this is the
case of thousands in the world; they think well of their own cases, when they
die they shall go to heaven, there is no question but Christ will save them,
and from this conceit they will never be put; let all the Ministers in the
world come one after another, and discover unto a wicked man his estate, yet
he will not come from his own censure; for though you bray a fool in a mortar
among wheat with a pestle, yet will not his foolishness depart from him, Prove.
27. 22. So if you should bray these men with the threatenings of the law, with
the plagues contained in the Bible, making theit consciences black and blew (as
we use to speak) yet they will not leave off their conceitednesse.

Now the reasons hereof are four.

1. Because all sinners are fools; and the foolish shall not stand in Gods
sight, Psalm. 5. 5. All that work iniquity are fools; a self-conceited fool is
a proverb; and our Savior who knew the combination of all sins, joins
pride and foolishness together, Mark 7. 22. a proud conceited man and a fool
are put together by our Savior. And this is the cause why so many thousands in
the world are conceited of themselves that their case is good when it is nothing
so, even because they are fools; none but fools will look more after pelf, then
jewels, and prefer transitory things before heavenly; yet such are the wise
men of this world. That man is a fool that cannot eat his meat; and such is
every sinner; his soul has no food but Christ, the word and his promises; yet
he knows not how to feed on them; he has no cover to hide his nakedness but
Christ, etc. yet he knows not how to put on Christ; therefore he is a fool.

Secondly, men are borne fools; of all fools none so self-conceited as the
born fool; one that has been a wise man, knows how to hold his peace, but a
born fool is invincible; vain man would be wise, though he be borne like a
wild Asses colt, Job 11. 12. Of all creatures the foal of the Ass is the
simplest; needs then must the wild Asses colt be most simple. So although a man
be borne a fool, yet he would be counted wise; he is conceited that all the
Ministers in the world cannot direct him; no, he is wise enough for that matter;
this folly is bred and borne in him, he has it by kind, and that is the reason
that it is hardly clawed off, but they are ready to say they are as wise as the
Ministers themselves.

I call not into question the wits of many; I know many of you are
understanding men and women; but I speak now of the Wisdom of the Spirit, and
how you may understand to save your souls. What is it for a man to be worldly
wise, to get riches and honor, and to behave himself like a Gentleman, and
yet a fool in seeking his salvation? this is to be penny wise; but here is the
question, are you not pound foolish? can you go on in your sins, swearing,
etc? then surely you are pound foolish; all your wisdom and money availes
nothing; alas you are but penny Gentlemen. The Sodomites, Genesis 19. were blind,
they could not find the door; they could see well enough else, they were only
blind in this; so man is stultus ad hoc, wise enough for any thing in the world
but this; take him for husbandry, and his knowledge is good; for matter of
carriage he can behave himself as well as the wisest; he is only stultus ad
hoc, for salvation he is a fool, a born fool, and self-conceited.

3. Men are self-conceited for their own estate; those that praise themselves
we use to say have ill neighbors; so if a fool had a good neighbor to tell
him of his folly, and to laugh at him for it, he would not praise himself; so
he that praises hmselfe, it is certain he has ill neighbors: so the reason
why men are well conceited of themselves, is because they have ill neighbors;
they think they are honest, and so do their neighbors; but now if a drunkard
could go nowhere but that every one would tell him that he were a hellhound, he
would not be drunk; but an ill neighbor he tells him he need not fear, by the
grace of God he shall do well enough, he is a good Christian; and hence it is
that when fools are not answered according to theit folly, that they are
conceited of themselves; when men are soothed up, others think well of them,
and they also think their own cases good; for say they, if I were not a good
Christian, such and such would not be acquainted with me.

Fourthly and lastly, becuase the Lord delivers many up to the spirit of
slumber, Romans 11. 8. Black poppy seed will cast a man into such a sleep as that
his eyes shall be broad open, and yet he not see; so the Lord has cast men
into a slumber like a man between sleeping and waking; of all sleep none like
to slumber, because it is full of imaginations; never is a man so full of
dreams as then when he is in a slumber. If a man were a drunkard and in the
deep of all evil, and luld in the deep sea of security, he could not be so
well conceited; but now that his eyes are half open, half shut, half awake,
half asleep, half out, half in, he thinks his repentance is good, his case
good, and he hopes he shall find mercy at the hands of God, as well as the
best Puritan in the parish; they are like the dreamer (as Joseph's brethren
termed him) singular, in Hebrew the Master Dreamer; they dream they shall have
mercy, and they shall not be damned, these men are in a slumber, they have
eyes and see not, etc. Esaias. 28. they see the judgment of God, but perceive it
not.

Consider what a woeful case these men are in, and how the Scripture calls this
self-conceit.

First, it calls it nothing but a thinking; if a man think himself to be
something, he is nothing. Gal. 6. 3. to think thy self a Christian, is a vain
thought.

2. The Scripture calls it superstition; what a vain thing it is for a man to
be a supposing? they suppose they shall go to heaven, they suppose they are
better then others, better then those on whom the Tower of Siloam fell; and so
many suppose they are not in the gall of bitterness not in the band of
iniquity.

Thirdly, it calls them shadows; they walk in a vain show Psalm. 39. 6. viz.
their repentance shows as if it were good repentance. They can speak lowly,
there is a show that they are humble. Man walks in vain show, like a Tradesman
who has abundance of things which he makes show of, yet are none of his own;
so he talks of grace which was never his own.

Fourthly, it calls them imaginations, Acts 4.

Fifthly, it calls them appearances, Matthew. 6. 16. So men appear all at a
Sermon, but their hearts never lie down before the Word, there are nothing but
seemings, 1 Cor. 3. Thus you may think your selves or suppose your selves to be
in good case, when as it were better thou did appear to be a hell-hound then
a Christian, and not be so indeed; for then there were some hope that thou
would look out. If a man be sick, yet if he seem to be well, none will look
out for him as they would do if he seemed to be sick indeed; and therefore
this is the most dangerous sickness; so if men did seem to be damned wretches,
that they were borne and continue in sin, and when they dye they must be
damned, if men feared thus, they would look out.

Secondly, consider so long as thou art well conceited of thy self, Christ has
no commission to call thee; and Christ will do nothing but what he has
commission to do, he will not run into a Praemunire; Christ does protest to
all the world that he has no commission from his Father for such; I am not
came to call the righteous, etc. Matthew. 9. 3. viz. those that are righteous in
their own esteem and thoughts, but are not; if a man tell them that they are
fitter for hell then for heaven, they are better-conceited of themselves then
so; if a man tell them for all their profession they may be hell hounds, yet
they conceit better of their profession then so; now then consider what a case
thou art in, if thou be out of Christ's road.

Thirdly, as Christ has no commission, so he is glad he has not, and he gives
thanks to his Father that he put him not into commission, I thank thee O
Father, etc. Luke 10. 21. q. d. thou do not convert those that are
self-conceited, those that think they shall not be damned, such as conceit that
they need no summons, that are righteous enough; Father, I am glad of it, etc.
and it is said there that Jesus rejoiced, etc. I rather rejoice that thou have
sent me to poor souls, such as are the offscouring of the world, etc. but he
that is selfe-conceited, is wiser forsooth then so; Christ tells thee that thou
must take up his cross; but thou think that thou have more wit, thou can
go a wiser way to work; thou have an easier way to heaven, thou will none of
the Cross; and I tell thee then that Christ will none of thee, but he wIll be
glad to see thee damned.

Fourthly and lastly, he is in the broad way to hell that is selfe-conceited;
there be many ways to hell; the covetous goes one way, the Drunkard goes
another, there are a thousand ways to hell; though there by sundry ways to
hell, yet they all meet in self-conceit, there is the broad high way where all
meet; self-conceit is not only the way to hell, but it is the broad way where
all ways meet. There is a way (says the wise man) that seems right, etc.
Prove. 14. 12 but the end of it is death; there is the wages, there all the
ways meet. Oh then examine your selves. I should give you signs and tokens to
make it appear unto you; but the time will not give me leave. I will only name
one or two. That man that selfe-sweares, is conceited of himself, that is one
sign; As I am an honest man, As God shall help me, by my faith and troth, As I
look that the Lord should save my soul, etc. these men are highly conceited
of themselves, they think that their salvation is sure, yea so sure that that
they may swear by it, but these are devilish and damnable selfe-conceits; it
is Gods prerogative only tr swear by himself, Heb. 6. l3, 14. I speak this
because I know it is a common practice among men, and a hellish brand of a
cursed self-conceited man.

THE EFFICACY Of Importunate PRAYER In two SERMONS.

BY That laborious and faithful Messenger of CHRIST, WILLIAM FENNER, Sometimes
Fellow of Pembroke Hall in Cambridge, and late Minister of Rochford in Essex.

Printed at London by T. R. and E. M. for John Stafford, and are to be sold at
his house in Brides Churchyard. 1647.

THE EFFICACY OF Importunate Prayer.
LUKE 11. 9. Ask, and it shall be given unto you; Seek, and you shall find;
Knock, and it shall be opened unto you.
OUr Savior CHRIST being demanded by one of his Disciples, how they should
pray; He here teaches them these two things. First, a Platform of prayer, in
the 2. 3. 4. verses; Say, Our father, etc. Secondly, he teaches them the
importunity of Prayer, which he sets forth by the similitude of a man who
having a guest come to him at midnight, and had nothing to set before him, he
went to his friend to entreat him to lend him three loaves, and at the first he
nakedly intre^ts, Lend me three loaves: The door is shut, says his friend, and
I cannot open it now. Secondly, he falls to entreat and to beseech him to do
him this favor, He had a guest come to him, and he knew not what to do: Why,
it is midnight, says he, is there no other time to come but now? Thirdly, he
begins to knock, he must needs have them, though it beat an unreasonable hour.
Why, I tell you I am in bed. Then he entreats him as a friend. Friend me no
friends, says he again. Yet the man would not leave knocking: at last with
much ado the man rises, saying, Will you never be answered? and he lends him
three loaves, because of his importunity. Now, says our Savior, I say unto
you, though he would not give him as a friend, yet because of his importunity
he will.

The similitude is this: Thou art that man, oh Christian soul, this guest is
thy self: Now then come home to thy self with the Prodigal, who when he was
come to himself, goes to his father and friend. This friend is Christ, that
thou art to pray unto; these three loaves are grace, mercy, and peace: These
thou art to pray for; it may be Christ answers thee in thy conscience, It is
midnight, thou come too late, there is no mercy for thee. The soul prays
still, Oh Lord awaken and help me: it may be the Lord will answer thee by
terror in thy soul, The door of mercy is shut, thou should have come rather.
Yet Lord, open unto me, says the soul: Nay, says the Lord, all my children
have mercy already; now mercy is asleep, I have converted them already; they
came in due season, thou come at midnight, there is no mercy for such a
hell-hound as thou art. Up Lord, have mercy on me, says the poor soul, and
look on me, etc. Look me no looks, says the Lord; I came to save the lost
sheep of the house of Israel: there was a time when I would have converted
thee, when I called unto thee early and late: But now I am asleep, and my mercy
is asleep, it has been awake as long as it could well hold open its eyes; and
come thou now? Oh the soul cries still, and will never give over: if mercy
be to be had at the throne of grace, he will have it. Even as a beggar being at
a gentleman's door, they bidding him be gone, there is nothing to be had: nay,
says the beggar, I will not be gone, here is something to be had, and I will
have something, or else I will die at the door: The gentleman hearing him say
so, thinks it would be a shame for if him if he should die at his door, and
gives him somewhat: So when the soul is thus importunate, because of
importunity it shall be granted. Verily I say unto you, if you thus ask, it
shall be given unto you.

These words contain in them the main duty of importunate prayer. Ask; if
asking will not serve turn, seek; if seeking will not serve turn, then knock:
try all means.

Another parable our Savior put forth, Luke 18. 1, 2. that men ought always
to pray, and not to faint. There was a poor woman wronged by her adversary, and
there was no Judge to right her but a wicked one, so that she had but poor
hopes; yet she resolves to go, or else she shall be undone; therefore if she
perish, she will perish at his feet. He calls her all to naught. Oh, for Gods
sake help me, says she. I care not for God nor man, says the Judge: Nay, good
my Lord, says the woman. The Judge seeing her thus importunate, said, I shall
be troubled with her if I do her not justice. How much more (says the text)
shall not God avenge his elect that cry day and night?

obj. But some man may demand, what is importunate prayer?

Ans. I answer, it is a restless prayer, which will take no nay, nor
contumelious repulse, but is in a holy manner impudent until it speed; and
there are in it four things:

First, it is restless: he that is importunate, cannot rest till he speed in
his suit before God: as the poor woman of Canaan, she sought the Lord God of
heaven and earth, (she was of the cursed stock of Cham whom the Lord commanded
to destroy; yet she repented, and became of the faith of Abraham) to see if the
Lord would own her: but the Lord seemed to reject her, and suffered the devil
to possess her daughter. Now, what, might not this poor woman think she had
made a sorry change of religion, seeing that God the author of of it would not
own her, but suffered the devil to possess her daughter. But see the
importunity of this woman, she would not be quiet until she had found Christ,
Mark 7. 24, 25. Christ could not be hid. No? What, could he not hide himself in
some corner? No, no, thinks she, there is a Christ, and if he be to be had
under the cope of heaven, I will have him. Even so it is with the soul that is
importunate in prayer, it is restless. What if Christ do hide himself in the
Word, etc. and will not own a poor soul; yet the poor soul knows there is a
Christ, and if he be to be found in the whole world, he will have him: I will,
says he, turn over all duties, I will go to all the Ministers that are near, I
will use all the means. Now Christ cannot be hid from such a soul that is thus
importunate.

Now as it is a Prayer that will take no nay, so first it will take no
privative nay of silence; Secondly, no positive nay of denial.

First, no positive nay of silence: A man that is importunate in prayer, must
and will have some answer; he is not like Baals Priests, that could get no
answer, 1 King. 18. 26. nor like wicked men that pray in their pewes, they know
not what, nor whether God hears them or no: but an importunate prayer will have
an answer, like the woman of Canaan: Have mercy on me O Lord (said she); but
Christ answered not a word. Has she done then? No, she cries so much the more;
Have mercy on me o Lord: yea she was so importunate, that his Disciples were
ashamed to hear her; yet she cried, Have mercy on my daughter; the devil has
my daughter, and misery will have me, unless thou with have mercy on us.
Christ answered her never a word. It was much trouble to her to have her
daughter vexed with a devil* but this troubled her much more, that Christ in
whom all her hopes was, would not hear her, nor lend her one look. What? might
she think, Is this the merciful Savior, that is so full of pity and
compassion? Is this he that has made proclamation to all the world, saying,
Come unto me all ye that are weary, etc? and I am tired and wearied by reason
of the devil that possesses my daughter etc. yet he regards me not. Thus she
might have said: yet these discouragements could not put her off, but she cried
so much the more, yea so that the Apostles were ashamed that Christ should let
her stand on that fashion; yet she stood it out, and prevailed.

Secondly, it will taken no (...) of denial: For when she had an (...), and
that flat against her, it was like bellows to the fire, she was to much the
more inflamed, she doubles her forces, Have mercy on me o Lord, etc. Christ put
her off with a denial, I am not sent but to the lost sheep of the house of
Israel; I come for sheep, not for goats; you are of the Canaanites, on whom I
have set a brand of damnation, a servant of servants, a slave of hell and
darkness: These are all of your blood; but I come to save them of the house of
Israel. But the denial of an importunate soul is like the stop in a passage of
water; the more it is stopped, the more violent it is: so this poor woman is so
much the more eager with Christ; she did but cry before, now she worships him,
verse. 24. 25. as if she should have said, Lord help me now, I am one of thy
lost sheep; I confess I am a Canaanite, I am of that damned blood; yet Lord
help me; I am persuaded that thou can take a course whereby to help me, Thou
can cast some mercy on a Canaanite.

Thus you see, an importunate soul will took no denial, but will renew its
forces at the Throne of grace.

Thirdly, an importunate prayer will take no contumelious repulse; suppose God
should answer never a syllable of thy prayer, yet thou will pray; suppose he
do answer, and that against thee, yet still thou will pray, Nay suppose he
call thee all to naught making thy conscience tell thee of all thy sins and
abominations, making thee think that heaven is shut up against thee, and God
has shut his ears, calling thee Dog, hell-hound, and wretch, etc. yet nothing
can break thee off if thou be importunate indeed. So this woman was not beaten
off with Christ sending the Devil into her Daughter, nor with Christ hiding
himself when she sought him; nor with Christ's answering never a word, nor with
the Apostles frumps, nor with his denial, nor contumelious repulse, for he
called her dog, verse. 26. Hence dog, I had as lieve fling my mercy on a dog, as
on thee. What creature but an importunate one, could have gone so far? But see
here the nature of importunity, it gets within Christ and takes advantage: she
confessed the cause, saying, Truth Lord, thou have hit me right, I am a dog, or a
wicked woman; let me then have the privileges that dogs have; though dogs may
not be equal with children at the table, yet they may wait under the table: I
acknowledge that thy children are so plentifully fed, that some crummes fall
from the table, therefore let me have the privilege of a dog. Naaman the
Syrian was a dog, as well as I; Rahab the harlot was a dog, as well as I; Ruth
a dog, as well as I; yet these got crummes: truth Lord, I am a dog, yet thy
mercy can metamorphise a dog: Of these stones thou can raise children to
Abraham. Thus it is with an importunate soul; though God call it all to naught,
and cast all ignominious terms upon it, as, I had as lief thou should offer
me swines blood, as to speak in my hearing; yet if thou be importunate, thou will bear any contumelious repulse.

Fourthly, an importunate prayer is in an holy manner: And as an impudent
beggar that is needy, counts it no manners to hold his peace from begging,
although he be bidden; Or as a poor petitioner to the King, the King bids him
hold his peace, yet he will not, but still he goes on: The officers say, Thou
filthy fellow, will thou never have done? do thou not see that the King is
angry? Yet he still cries, Help me Lord, o King. So the Canaanitish woman, or
an Importunate prayer, is an impudent prayer, yet in a holy manner.

I remember a story of a poor woman in Essex condemned to die: she falls to
crying and screeching, as if she meant to pierce the heavens; the Judge and
those on the bench bid her hold her peace: O my Lord, said she, it is for my
life I beg, I beseech you, it is for my life. So when a soul comes before God,
and begs for mercy, he must consider that it is for his life, O Lord it is for
my life. Now though the Lord will not answer, and though he call the soul all
to naught, letting it go up and down with a heavy heart; yet the soul crying
out, It Is for my life; if I must go to hell, I will go to hell from the throne
of grace, weeping and wailing for my sins, and catching hold on the horns of
the altar: this soul shall find mercy.

I have wondered at the story in the 5. chapter of Luke, it is a strange
passage, where this godly kind of impudency was seen. Our Savior Christ was
preaching in the house to the people, and there was a poor man that could not
tell how to come to Christ; so the poor man got some to lift him up to the top
of the house, and to untile it, and so to let him down; now the rubbish could
not choose but fall either on Christ's head, or on the heads of some of his
hearers; Was not this impudent action? could not this man have stayed until
the sermon had been ended? But importunity has no manners: And although he did
interrupt Christ, yet Christ asked him not why he did so, but says, Man, be of
good comfort, thy sins be forgiven thee. Let us therefore come with boldness
unto the Throne of grace, Heb. 4. 16. with freedom to talk any thing; Not as if
God had given us leave to be irreverent, but as to a loving generous man, of
whom we use to say, He is so kind, you may say any thing unto him; come to him
at dinner, he will rise up and hear you, or what business soever he be about,
yet he will hear you. Even so it is with God: he is such a God that all poor
souls may be bold before him to speak what they will, they may lay open their
cases, and show their estates. Now when souls come boldly, and give the Lord
no rest till he establish them, Esai. 62. 7. then says God, How now, cannot I
be at rest for you? etc. This holy kind of impudency is in prayer, and it will
give the Lord no rest.

Reasons why we must seek importunately, are three.

First, in regard of Gods majesty, he loves to be sought unto, and it is fit he
should be sought unto. Among men, we account it a matter of too much
stateliness to be much entreated; and we use to say he loves to be entreated;
this is a fault among men; yet for all this, Quis vestrum, etc. as Seneca
speaks, what man of us can be content to be but once, or slightly entreated?
when a man comes to entreat a kindness of a man there is Ifing and Anding and
shall I, etc. nothing but importunity can get a kindness of a man; and this
is a sin among men, because men are bound to do good; but the Lord is not
bound to us. If we sin, he is not bound to pardon us therefore; the Lord
being a God of majesty, looks to be sought unto of us for his mercy, and he
looks that we should be importunate; and hence it is that God says I will
give you a new heart, Ezechiel 36. I will vouchsafe you all these favors, yet
I will look to be inquired for of you. verse 76. I will look that they shall
send to me for these things.

Suppose a man should need a 1000 pound; What, says the gentleman, does he
think a Thousand pound is nothing? I will have good security for it. So when we
come for such high mercies as these, for such infinite compassions; these are
somewhat, and God looks to be sought unto for them; and Christ the son of God
is a great heir, and those that are faulters to him, must be importunate with
him, if they mean to be at peace with him.

If one will marry a rich heir, who has all the preferment and dignity that
the country can afford, he looks to be well sued unto. So the Lord Jesus is a
great heir, heir of the whole world; if thou go to be married unto him,
thou must sue unto him, and he looks for prayer, he loves to hear his children
cry: this is one of his titles, though he be a God, yet he is the hearer of
prayer, Psalm. 65. 2.

Again, we have wronged his Majesty. Suppose thy servant wrong thee, thou will
say thou will pardon him, but first thou will make him humble himself unto
thee, he shall and must know that be has wronged a good master: So God is
willing to pardon thee, but yet he will make thy bowels know that thou have
sinned against a good God; he will make it appear by thy prayer, he will make
thy spirit melt, he will fill thy face with shame and confusion, he will make
thee know what a patient God thou have rebelled against, or else the Lord will
never pardon thee. Do thou think to pacify God with a lazy prayer, with
coming to Church and saying, Have mercy upon me, most merciful Father? Do
thou think that the Lord will have mercy upon thee for this? No, no, he may
send thee quick to hell for all this; he will make thee cry and cry again with
groans; he will make thee cry out and pray on another gates fashion, and he
will make the sovereignty of his mercy to be seen in thy salvation: therefore
in regard of Gods majesty, he loves men should be importunate.

Secondly, in regard of Gods mercy; it is a disgrace for Mercy to be begged
frigidly; it is a disgrace to Gods bounty, for a man to beg it with lukewarm
importunity. What make thou of the mercy of God? do thou think that it is
not worth a groan, with the running over of a Paternoster? do thou make
Gods mercy of such base reckoning? this is a disgrace to Gods goodness, to be
so cold or frigid in prayer. Thou have offered many offerings, yet I scorn
them, says God, Esa. 43. 23. Thou have not honored me with them, thou have
not called on me, thou have been weary of calling on me, thou have too short a
breath in thy prayers, thou carest not how soon thou come to an end? Do you
come and lay lazy prayers upon my altar? Thou have not honored me.

It was a custom among the Romans, when any was condemned to die, if he looked
for mercy, he was to bring father and mother, and all his kinsmen and
acquaintance, and they should all come with tears in their faces, and with
tattered garments, and kneel down and beg before the Judge, and cry mightily;
and then they thought Justice was honored. Thus they honored justice in man,
for a man condemned to die; and so the Lord loves his mercy should be honored,
etc. and therefore he will have prayer to be importunate, that it may appear by
groans how highly we esteem of grace; our souls must pant and gasp after
grace, the breath of the Lord being the soul of our souls, our hearts will die
without it: This is to the honor of mercy, therefore the Lord will have us
importunate.

Thirdly, as importunity must be in regard of Gods mercy, so it must be in
regard of our selves, else we cannot tell how to esteem it: Soon come, soon
gone; lightly gotten, suddenly forgotten; I have it, come let us be jovial and
spend it, when this is gone, I know where to have more. But if he had wrought
for it, and also must work for more, if he meant to have more, he would better
esteem it. The world little esteems Mercy; what is the reason? The greatest
covetous men are they that once were poor; when a poor man has gotten store of
riches, he is more covetous then he that was borne to hundreds or thousands;
they are careless of it, and spend lavishly, whilst a covetous man's teeth
water at it; and the reason is, because they come lightly by it. Therefore the
Lord loves that we should come hardly by our mercy; not as if he sold mercy for
our pains, but for our good: yet we are not capable of it. See Jer. 31. 9.
where the Lord speaks thus to his people: They shall come with weeping, and
with supplication will I lead them. This is a fine phrase, God leads a soul up
and down with supplication, before he grants his request; just as a beggar on
the highway, a gentleman coming by, he begs of him, the gentleman goes on his
way as if he took no notice, but the beggar goes on crying, For Gods sake (sir)
bestow something on me; yet he goes on still, till at last the gentleman comes
to his house, and then he gives him his desire. Even so God leads a soul up and
down from one good duty to another, till he have brought the soul to that pass
that he would have it to be, and then he hears it, and says, What is thy suit?
I will pardon thee.

What then is the reason, may some man say, why so few are importunate in
prayer?

I answer, first, because men count Prayer a penance: there is a natural kind
of Popery in men's breasts; the Papists, when men sin, their Priests enjoin them
penance, as pilgrimages and scourgings, so many Pater-noster's, and so many
Ave-Marie's, where they reckon Prayer to be a penance. This natural Popery is
in men's breasts; they count Prayer laborious unto them, and they are weary of
it, they are not eager upon prayer, they look not on Prayer as a blessing, but
as a yoke; behold what a wearisome thing it is, Mal. 1. 13. They were weary of
the service of God; Oh, say they, that the Minister would once have done! they
had rather be in an Alehouse, or about their business; all good duties are as
penance unto carnal men. If a man be to do penance, he cares not how little he
does of it; a Rogue cares not for too much whipping.

Secondly, Men content themselves with formality. Many men pray, as Haman spoke
the Kings words before Mordecai, for he had rather have led him to the gallows,
than to have said, Thus shall it be done unto the man whom the King will
honor: but he thought it would be the worse for him if he spoke them not, and
therefore he only spoke them for form. And so men for the most part go to
church, to hear the Word, to Pray, to receive the Sacraments etc. even for
form, or because it is the fashion, and they think if they do not thus and
thus, they shall not be saved.

You shall have the Drunkard say, I am sorry for my drunkenness; but he lies;
for the next day he will be at the Alehouse again: so the Whoremaster says,
Lord I am sorry that I have sinned against thee; but he lies; for the next
Queen that he meets with, having opportunity, he falls to whoreing again: So
the Covetous man will say, I am sorry I am so full of earthly thoughts; yet he
lies; he is not sorry; for you shall have him carking and caring all the day
long, and he has a thousand proclamations in his head; He only prays for form
with the rest, they only say prayer, they pray not. I deny not saying of
prayer, if they pray; Our Savior Christ says, When you pray, say Our father.
The proud man dishonours Gods name, saying, Thy will be done; whereas he should
be humble, for that is Gods will; it is Gods will he should be zealous, yet he
prays not: He says, Forgive us our trespasses, etc. but he prays not so; for
he wrongs his neighbor, and his neighbor wrongs him, and he does not forgive
those that trespass against him. He says, Lead us not into temptation; but he
prays it not; for he runs presently into temptations, and has no care to
avoid them. And this is the reason why men are not importunate, viz. because
they do make formality of it.

Thirdly, because they are Gentlemen-beggers. Of all the beggars in the world,
I would be loath to meet with a gentleman-begger, for he is the proudest of them
all; if a man tell him that he has been an ill husband, and has abused
himself, presently he sets his hands to his side, saying, I am not as every
beggar, I am thus and thus descended, I am as good a man by birth as your self:
a gentleman-beggers heart will not stoop. So men are gentlemen-beggers to God,
they were (say they) borne of Christian parents, and they have been baptized
the children of God already; What, are none the children of God, but a company
of Puritans? We are descended as well as the best of you all. These are proud
and not as yet brought to a sense of their own misery.

When John did preach to, and baptize the Scribes and Pharisees, he calls them
all to naught, O ye vipers and full of poison, who has forewarned you to flee
from the anger to come? Viper, say they? Viper in thy teeth; we are the
children of Abraham, we are better descended then so; we are Believers, and do
you call us Vipers? then indeed we might cry out, Oh we are damned! then we
had need to cry for mercy. And in this sense, men are Gentlemen-beggers.

Another reason why men are not importunate, is, because they have wrong
conceits of Prayer. I will tell you the sundry conceits of men,

First, they have high conceits of their own prayers; they cannot pray in a
morning, between the pillow and the blankets, half asleep and half awake, but
they think that they have done God good service; so that he cannot afford to
damn them: At night he says, Lord have mercy on me, and so goes to sleep,
and then he thinks God must keep him until the morning: So when he goes to
dinner, he says, Lord bless these creatures unto us, and so falls aboard, and
he thinks that God must needs sanctify them unto him; and after supper he goes
to prayer, and so to bed, and thinks that he shall be heard for his much
babbling sake, Mat. 6. they think God will have mercy on them. But poor souls,
if they knew how unseemingly they prayed, how unfitly, and what want there is
in seeing their own estate, they would say, is this to pray for my soul, for
such infinite mercy? Lord, how do I abuse the throne of grace? how do I abuse
thy sabbaths, thy house, thy name, and all the holy ordinances which I go
about? A man that is importunate in prayer, is ashamed; but when they think
highly of their prayers, they are insolent, their prayers are damned, and they
too.

Secondly, as men have high conceits of their prayers, so they have mean
conceits of their sins, they think not their sins so bad as they are. These
men are like Abner, who said, Let the young men arise and play before us, 2 Samuel 2. 14. They account murder a sport, and dancing and musicking little worse
then David's playing on the harp; Amos 6. 5. And if they commit adultery, they
say that is but a trick of youth; if they tell a lie, it is only at a dead lift
when they have no other shift. That man that does not think of every sin he
commits, as David did of his, even to make his heart to ache for it, that man
shall never speed well before God.

Thirdly, as men have mean thoughts of their sins, so they have base thoughts
of God. They cannot think that God should damn a man for drinking a pot with
his friend; I cannot think God will be so strict; No, no, I love God with all
my heart, say they; and they think that God is of their mind; and if they were
as God, they would not be so strict. So, Psalm. 50. They thought I was such a
one as themselves; they think God will pardon them, and therefore because of
this, men are not importunate with God. God has sent me a cross (says one)
but I hope to rub it off well enough. Why? God will not keep his anger for
ever, Jer. 3. 5. Suppose a man be absent from Church, or break out into some
unsavory speech, will God be angry for this? Suppose a man be negligent in a
good duty, will God require every days work? Tush, tush, God will not, Psalm.
10. 13. A company of Puritans say he will, but I know he will not: and hence it
is, that men will not be importunate.

Lastly, because they have wrong conceits of importunity. If a man knock once
or twice, or thrice, and none answer, presently he will be gone; this is for
want of manners; thou will knock seven times, if thou be importunate with them:
They within may say, Hold thy peace, be gone, etc. but thou will not so be
answered.

Beloved, men are close-handed, they are loath to give; and they are
close-hearted too, they are loath to take the pains to ask of God; they are loath
others should be be importunate with them, and therefore they are loath to be
importunate with God. Examine your selves then in this duty; for importunate
prayer is ever more the prayer of an importunate man.

THE EFFICACY Of Importunate PRAYER The second Sermon.

BY That laborious and faithful Messenger of CHRIST, WILLIAM FENNER, Sometimes
Fellow of Pembroke Hall in Cambridge, and late Minister of Rochford in Essex.

THE EFFICACY OF Importunate Prayer.
LUKE 11. 9. Ask, and it shall be given unto you; Seek, and you shall find;
Knock, and it shall be opened unto you.
TO proceed then: There be six signs to know whether our Prayers be
importunate, or no.

First, importunate prayer is evermore the prayer of an importunate man; and
the man is importunate, if his prayer be importunate: But how can a man
importune God for mercy, when his person importunes God for vengeance? It must
be the prayer of a godly heart; Preserve my soul, for I am holy. Psalm. 86. 1,
2. David makes a prayer, and he was holy when he made it; his prayer could tell
him that he was one that labored to work in holiness. Therefore when thou go
to God in prayer, consider, whether thou can say, Lord hear me, for I am
holy, and I would fain be holy: but if the saying of these words choke thee,
then thy prayer condemns thee.

Of all begging, it is a great matter who it is that begs at the door: Who is
that, says the indweller? and when he opens the door and sees it is a thief,
etc. Oh, is it you, says he; you may stand long enough, you shall never have
alms of me. So in prayer, it is all in all who it is that prays.

The woman in the Gospel having an issue, touched our Savior; he looking
about, asked who touched him; and when he saw the woman, Oh is it you, says
he, be of good cheer, Luke 8. 48. So when a man prays to God, Who is that,
says God, that would have these mercies? And when the Lord sees it a Drunkard,
or a covetous man, etc. is it you? says the Lord; you may stay till Doomsday,
and yet never find mercy. The spirit of supplication and the spirit of prayer,
is called the spirit of grace, Zach. 12. 10. If then thou have not the spirit
of grace, thou can not pray. The text says not, Whosoever asks the Father
in my name, but, whatsoever you ask the Father in my name? there is many a man
may use the name of Christ at the throne of grace, but certain it is none but
those that are in Christ can pray, and with them every thing operates. A man
that will walk with God in obedience to his laws, must be a holy man: hence is
that saying of our Savior, John 15. 7. a place fit for the purpose; If you
abide in me, and my word abide in you, etc. as if he should have said, You may
ask what you please, and entreat God all the days of your life; yet unless
you abide in me, you cannot speed. That man that walks not in holiness of
life, can never be an importunate orator as was Moses the man of God; but a
wicked man's prayer (as Augustine speaks) is tanquam latratus canum, etc. no
betrer then the barking of dogs, or the grunting of swine: therefore you whose
consciences tell you that you live in sin, your prayers never speed at the
throne of grace for eternal mercy.

Secondly, an importunate prayer is the prayer of a pure conscience. Suppose a
man does not see that he lives in sin, yet if his conscience cry guilty, if he
have a foul conscience, his prayer never prevails with God. If I regard
wickedness in my heart, the Lord will not hear my prayer, says David, Psalm.
66. 18. that is, if I can say, or my conscience can tell me that I regard
iniquity in my heart, the Lord will not hear me. A man must have a pure
conscience, 2 Timothy 1. 3. else let him not look God in the face beg he may, but
he shall never speed as long as he goes on with a conscience that can tell him
he regards iniquity.

There be many pray, (for indeed their conscience will make them pray) but they
may pray till they come to hell, yet they shall never be delivered, if there be
but one sin unrepented of.

I remember a story of a poor woman being troubled in conscience, and many
Ministers using to visit her, at last came one which (after much talk and
praying) hit upon one sin which she was guilty of, and loath to part with; Then
the woman cried out, Till now you have spoken to the post, but now you have hit
the mark, my conscience tells me I have been loath to part with this sin, but I
must leave it, or else I cannot be saved.

Mala conscientia been sperare non potest. The Pagans had so much divinity, as
to say The gods must be honored with purity; therefore they wrote on the
doors of their temples, Let none having a guilty conscience enter this place,

Thirdly, Importunate prayer is evermore a prayer that is full of strong
arguments. And hence it is that Job says, I will fill my mouth with arguments,
Job 23. 4. like an importunate man, who will bring all reasons and arguments to
effect his cause; even so an importunate man at the throne of grace, will bring
all arguments to persuade God. If a man be to pray for any particular grace, he
will bring all the arguments he can devise to get it; as, Lord, it is a grace
of the Covenant, for the want whereof I endure many temptations; thou have made
me a Minister, I cannot work on men's consciences until I have it; he presses
all arguments he can devise. A good orator before God, must be a good logician.
It was noted of the Highpriests that were to pray before God, they were to
have Vrim and Thummim, and that was two parts of Logic, viz. knowledge and
perfection: such a one should a Minister be, he must be a good Logitian at the
throne of grace.

Fourthly, importunate prayer is a stout prayer; Continue in prayer, says the
Apostle, Col. 4. 2. a weak-hearted prayer is a cold prayer, a prayer without a
spirit; yet these men that have weak spirits to pray, have strong enough to
sin, and wit enough to sin, and knowledge enough to sin; but bring them to
grace, then they have no strength. Thou can not strive to prevail with God,
unless thou stand to it. How came Jacob to prevail with God, but by wrestling*
Prayer is called fighting, it is a holy kind of violence. Thou can not obtain
a mercy at Gods hand, unless thou lay all thy force on it. Even as a Father
who has an apple in his hand, and his child would fain have it; he first opens
one finger, then another, till the apple drop out. So is it with a poor soul at
the throne of grace: the Lord opens his hands, and fills all things living with
plenteousnesse; What is the means that is used? why, the prayers of his
children; they by their prayers open Gods hand, and so make the blessings to
descend. Go for grace; why, the Lord will say unto thee, Thou art proud, thou
must be humble, and so open that finger; Thou art careless, thou must go
quicken thy self, and so open that finger: God says, thou will not make much
of this grace when thou have it, but thou will turn it into a wantonness; then
thy soul must learn to mortify its members, and so open that finger; thou
can not get grace at Gods hand, unless thou do open all his fingers, and
then it will fall down. There is a several power in all Gods children, some
have more, some have less, yet all must be powerful, else none can prevail
with God.

Fifthly, if thou pray importunately, thou praiest wakefully; he must be deeply
awake that prays; his soul, his heart, his understanding must be awake: that
man that prays drowsilie, prays not powerfullie; Watch therefore, says
Christ, and pray, Luke 21. 36. Watch to pray. q. d. for as there is a sleepie
head, so there is a sleepie heart. As a Beggar who is begging, is all awake,
head, feet, hands, etc. all is awake to beg; so must that soul be that means to
speed in prayer.

Sixthly, importunate prayer is an assureance-getting prayer; a prayer that
will not be quiet till it have got assurance that God has heard it. Wicked men
pray, and presume that God hears them, but God hears them not; nay, many of
Gods dear children pray many times, and are not heard. How long will thou be
angry with thy people that prays? Ps. 80. 4. Not only with their persons, but
with their prayers also. How then, think you, is the prayer of such as live in
their sins taken? who pray, but their prayers vanish away in the air like
clouds: these may pray and pray, but they get nothing.

Behold he prays, says the voice to Saul Act. 9. 22. What, did he not pray
before? Yes, he had made many a long prayer, else he could not have been a
Pharisee; but now he did not only pray, but he prayed unto God as David did,
who did lift up his heart to God, Psalm. 25. 1. or else his heart could not have
prayed; and then in the next verse David begins his prayer. Our hearts are just
like a bell, which so long as it lies on the ground will make no music, till
it be lifted up; Our hearts are not like the bell of Rochea, which ( they say)
will ring of its own accord; but our hearts must be lifted up, else they will
make no delightful music in the ears of God. Wherefore if you pray, and
labor not to bring your hearts home to God, that so he may hear them in
mercy, he will ( it may be) hear them, but it will be to your condemnation,
as he hears the prayers of wicked men: therefore if thou praiest, pray
ferventlie.

There be six or seven marks of Prayer that is not importunate, and he that
prays so, may go to hell, for ought I know.

The first is a lazy prayer; An importunate man works hard to bring up his
suit; his understanding, his counsel, and all his policy works: so if the soul
be importunate, then it is a working prayer. Prayer is a labor, 2 Cor. 1.
Labor with me in prayer. That man that plowes his field, and digs his
vineyard, that man prays for a good harvest; if a man pray to God never so
much, yet if he do not use the means, he cannot obtain the thing he prays
for. Even so it is with grace; A man may pray for all the graces of Gods
spirit, and yet never get any, unless he labor for them in the use of the
means. God cannot abide lazy beggars, that cannot abide to follow their
calling, but if they can get any thing by begging, they will never set
themselves to work. So, many there be, that if they can get pardon of sin for
begging, then they will have it; but let such know that the Lord will not give
it for such lazy kind of praying; but if thou will have pardon of sin, thou
must labor for it, thou must get it with thy fingers ends; God gives not men
Repentance, Faith etc. by miracles, but by means: Thou must then use the means,
and keep watch and ward over thine own soul, that so thou may get the grace
thou praiest for.

Secondly, a prayer that is not a full prayer never speeds with God; but an
importunate prayer is a full prayer, it is a pouring out of the heart, yea of
the whole heart, Psalm. 62. 8. the Psalmist says, pour out your hearts before
him, trust in him at all times, pour out your hearts (the addition is made in
the Lamentations of Jeremie) like water. It may be thou pourest out thy prayer
like tar out of a tar-box, half sticking by the sides; but when thou praiest,
thou must out with all before God. When thou give thanks, do thou labor to
remember all the blessings of God? when thou do petition to God, do thou
pour out all thy heart before him? do thou cast all thy care on God?

Thirdly, Snatch-prayer is no importunate prayer; when men pray by snatches, or
peecemeals, by breaking off a limme of their prayer, because of sluggishnesse,
or because their hearts are eager about other business; it is not good to
trust fits of devotion; it is a base kind of praying, when men gallop over their
prayers, that so they may come to an end quickly. Should I accept this at your
hands, says God by his Prophet? when they brought a sheep, it wanted a lim,
they were loath to give God a whole offering, Mal. 1. 13. Many pray a piece of a
prayer in the morning, and then they go after the world; he down's on his
knees, and gives God a rag of a prayer, a company of ragged ends; And God
counts it an indignity; shall I accept this (says he)? What, a lame prayer?
No, no, the Lord looks for a prayer that has its full growth; it is a shame to
speak in the congregation what men do in secret before God, which many have
confessed after they have been converted, how they have gone into Gods
presence, and have shuffled over their prayers, thinking every hour seven,
until they had done.

Fourthly, Silent prayers are never importunate. I mean by silent prayer, when
a man is silent in that which God looks he should most insist upon. David made
a prayer, Psalm. 32. and the Lord looked that he should stand much upon his
adultery and murder which he had committed, to see what shame he took on him
for it; but he shuffled it over: and what says the text? When I kept silence;
what, did the Prophet roar, and yet keep silence? these are contradictions.
Yea, the Prophet roared, and kept silence; as if he should say, the Lord
counted his prayer but roaring, so long as he laid not open that sin which
the Lord looked he should have stood on; the Lord let him roar, and roar he
might long enough, but (says he) I brake my silence, I said I will confess my
transgressions, and then thou forgavest the wickedness of my sin. So many go to
God, and tell God they must needs have mercy, and fain they would have mercy,
and yet they are silent in confessing the sin they should. I say, the Lord
will never hear that man; he may pray to God all his life, and yet go to hell in
the end. Have thou been a drunkard, and do thou think that the Lord will
forgive thee for crying, Lord forgive me etc? No, no, thou must insist on it,
and say, Against thy word I have been a drunkard; my conscience told me so, but
I would not hear; I have felt the motions of thy holy spirit stirring against
me, and I regarded not; Now if thou should turn me into hell, I were well
requited; so many Sermons have I neglected; I have wronged others in this kind,
and I have been the cause why many are now in hell, if they repented not. I
have prayed for mercy, yet with the dog to his vomit have I returned, and
therefore for all my prayers thou may cast me into hell for ever; and now I
have praid, yet it is a hundred to one but I shall run into my old sin again;
yet as I expect forgiveness, so I desire to make a covenant to give over all
my sinful courses, and I am justly damned if I go to them again. Such a kind of
prayer the Lord loves.

Fifthly, Seldom prayer is no importunate prayer; when the soul contents it
self with seldom coming before the throne of grace; an importunate soul is
ever frequenting the way of mercy, and the gate of Christ; he is often at the
threshold before God, in all prayer and humiliation.

The reeling'st Drunkard in the world sometimes can do so too; the basest
Adulterer in the world sometimes can be chaste: the Devil is quiet so long as
he is pleased, and the wicked may sometime have a fit in prayer. But this is
the condition of an importunate heart, he is frequent at the throne of grace.
The Propher David prayed seven times in a day; and Hannah continued in prayer
night and day.

Sixthly, Lukewarm prayer is not an importunate prayer; when a man prays, but
is not fervent, when a man labors not to wind up his soul to God in prayer.
That man that prays outwardly only, that man teaches God how to deny his
prayer. Though you make many prayers, says God, yet I will not hear you; why?
Your hands are full of blood. Qui frigide orat, docet negare. They are like
lukewarm water, that never boils out the blood: So they have been guilty of
murder and abundance of other sins, and they did indeed pray against them,
but they were never but lukewarm, they never boiled away the blood of their
sins. Thou must pray fervently, with a seething-hot heart, if thou meanest to
get pardon for all thy sins, as security, and deadness of heart, etc. And
as it is Jonah 3. let every man cry mightily unto the Lord.

Seventhly and lastly, Bie-thoughts in prayer, keep prayer from being
importunate; as when a man prays, and let his heart go a wooll-gathering. I
remember a story of an unworthy Orator, who being to make an acclamation, O
earth! O heaven! when he said O heaven, he looked down to the earth; and when
he said O earth, he looked up to heaven. So, many when they pray to God in
heaven, their thoughts are on the earth: these prayers can never be
importunate. When a man prays, the Lord looks that his heart should be fixed
on his prayer; for our hearts will leake, and the best child of God, do what he
can, shall have biethoughts in prayer:

And that,

First, from corrupt nature.

Secondly, from nature curbed.

Thirdly, from Satan.

Fourthly, from a man's own sluggishnesse.

For the first; The best children of God have corrupt natures, and when they
have done what they can, distractions will fasten on them. They would perform
good duties better, if they were able, saying with Paul, The good which I
would, I do not, etc.

Secondly, from Nature as it is curbed; The more grace binds nature to its good
behavior, the more rustling it keeps. Even as a Bird being at liberty keeps
no stir, but being in a cage, it flutters about, because it is abridged of its
liberty: so when thou have curbed thy corrupt flesh, it will be skittish in
every good duty thou go about; and hence it is that the Apostle uses this
phrase, viz. I find another law in my members rebelling against the law of my
mind, etc. When grace curbs the law of sin, then nature rebels.

Thirdly, from Satan; as in Job, Satan stands at his right hand as a
Plaintiff, as Aegidius compares it, which puts in all Cases to hinder the
Defendant; Even so the Devil puts in all bie-thoughts that he can devise, to
hinder a man's suit for going on before the throne of grace. But thou must do as
Araham did, when he was sacrificing; when the birds came, he drove them away;
so must thou do by they biethoughts, if thou will have fruit of thy
supplications before God.

Fourthly, they come from spiritual sluggishnesse that creeps on the best, if
they take not heed: And this was the reason the Apostle cried, O wretched man
that I am, etc.

I speak not now to the children of God, who are troubled with bie-thoughts in
their prayers; For they, the more bie-thoughts they have, the more earnest they
are in prayer; they mourn, with David, in their prayer. Consider o Lord (says
he) how I mourn, Psalm. 55. There was something in the Peophets prayer that did
vex him, and that made him so much the more to mourn before God.

But as for you that can have bie-thoughts in prayer, and let them abide with
you, your prayers are not importunate; the Heathen shall rise up against you
and condemn you.

I remember a story of a certain Youth, who being in the temple with Alexander
when he was to offer incense to his god, and the Youth holding the golden
Censer with the fire in it, a coal fell on the Youths hand and burnt his wrist;
but the Youth considering what a sacred thing he was about, for all he felt his
wrist to be burnt, yet he would not stir, but continued still to the end.

This I speak to shame those that can let any thing, though never so small, to
disturb them, yea (if it were possible) lesser things then nothing; for if
nothing come to draw their hearts away, they themselves will employ their
hearts. Ba^ls Priests shall condemn these, who did cut themselves with knives,
and all to make them pray so much the more strongly. What a shame is it then,
that we should come on life and death to pray for our souls, and yet come with
such loose and lazy prayers! Think you that a malefactor when he is crying at
the Bar for his life, will be thinking on his Pots and Whores, etc? Was it ever
heard of, that a man at deaths-doore, should be thinking on his Dogs? can he
then think on them? Do you think that Jonah prayed on this fashion, when he was
in the Whales belly? or the Thief on the cross, or Daniel in the Lions den, or
the three Children in the fiery furnace, or Paul in prison? Do ye think that
these prayed thus? What, shall I be at prayer, and my mind in the fields? No,
no; if I will pray, I must melt before God, and bewail my sins, and be
heartily affected in prayer. But as long as I pray thus, I pray not at all.
And as God said to Adam, where art thou? so may he say to thee, Man, where art
thou? art thou at prayer, and thy mind at mill? is thy mind on thy Oxen, and
art thou at prayer before me? what an indignity is this? Should a man come to
sue to the King, and not mind his suit? will not the King say, Do you mock me?
know you to whom you speak? The Lord takes this as a heinous sin, when men come
into his presence with such loose hearts.

Now seeing these things are thus, take a word of exhortation to labor for
importunate Prayer.

Prayer is the art of all arts; it enables a man to all other duties, it is the
art of Repentance, etc. Samuel confessed, if he had not had the art of Prayer,
he could not have had the art of Preaching, 2 Samuel 12. 23. See the antithesis
between these two words. God forbid; as if he should say, God forbid that I
should cease to pray for you, for then I should not teach you the right way. A
Minister can never preach to his people, that prays not for his people. It is
the art of Thanksgiving; a man cannot be thankful, if he cannot pray. Psalm.
116. 12. It was the means whereby the Prophet David would be thankful to God;
he would take up the cup of salvation, and call on the name of the Lord. A man
has not a good servant, unless he can pray for his master; see the story of
Abraham's servant, Genesis 24. Prayer helps to perform all other good duties. How
do thou think to have benefit by the Word, unless thou be fervent in prayer
with God to get a blessing upon it. We can do nothing but by begging.

Secondly, as Prayer is the art of all arts, so it is the Compendium of all
divinity. Therefore to call zealouslie on the name of the Lord, is to be a
Christian; Whosoever shall call on the name of the Lord, etc. It includes
repentance, humiliation, sorrow for sin, joy in Gods goodness, thanksgiving for
mercies, obedience to his commandments, yea the whole duty of man; therefore
we must labor to be importunate in prayer. A Reasonable soul is eminently all
souls; so Prayer is eminently all good duties. Psalm. 72. The prayer of David
the son of Jesse; that is, all his repentance, in all passages; he did humble
himself before God; all David's duties are included by the name of the prayer of
David the son of Jesse. And therefore thou had need to make much of Prayer;
for thou can never repent, unless thou pray well.

Thirdly, Prayer is a man's utmost reference; a man cannot have Christ, but only
by Prayer. It Is bad enough for a man to be a Drunkard, or to live in any other
sin; but yet after all this, if a man have the spirit of prayer, there is hope
of this man; if after all his sins committed, he can pray to God, there is
hope. But for a man to sin, and not to be importunate in prayer, is
dangerous. What says the Psalmist? They are corrupt and become abominable,
they have not called on the name of the Lord, Psalm 14. 4. Oh fearful
condition!

Fourthly, Prayer is that which Gods people have, though they have nothing
else; it is the beggars dish (as I may so call it.) A beggar has no way to
live, but by beging; thererefore he had need beg hard: so we have nothing to
live on but praying; I mean nothing that is to be done on our side; all the
promises of God are to be gotten by prayer. Suppose a man have nothing to live
on but his fingers ends, no house nor land, nothing left to maintain his wife
and children, but his fingers ends; will he not be toyling all the day? he is a
day-labourer, as we use to say. So, to pray earnestly, is a Christians fingers
ends. When a house stands but upon one pillar, will not a man be fearful and
careful of that pillar? why, Prayer is a man's pillar; is this be gone, down
falls all the hope of salvation.

Fifthly, Prayer is that which has the command of Mercy; we are such
unprofitable servants, that Mercy will not meddle with us, unless it be
commanded. Patience is loath to bear; we have so provoked God that Mercy is
loath to make or meddle with us; for unless it have command from God, it will
not admit of any soul. When David begged for loving kindness, he was
importunate; else mercy and loving kindness would not look on David, Psalm 42.
8.

Sixthly, Prayer is Gods delight. The supplication of the wicked is abomination
to God, but the prayer of the upright is his delight, Prove. 15. 8. The Lord
must have something to please; Kings (you know) must be pleased; so the King of
heaven would be pleased by all that come unto him. Now nothing is more pleasing
unto him then prayer.

Seventhly, Importunate prayer is a willing prayer. There be many that pray to
God for mercy, and yet they are loath to have it; why? because they are not
importunate. When a man's lust runs on the world and worldly pleasures, etc. he
speeds not. When the woman of Canaan was importunate, Christ says unto her,
Woman, be it unto thee as thou will: she had a will to grace, Mat. 15. 28.

Eighthly, Importunate prayer is the only faithfully prayer. A beggar never goes
away from a gentleman's door, so long as he believes he shall have an alms: so,
as long as a soul is importunate with God, it is a sign that it is a believing
soul. O woman, (says Christ) great is thy faith. Why? Because her importunity
was great, therefore Christ concludes her faith was great.

The means to get importunity in prayer, are these:

First, Labor to know thine own misery. See Ephesians. 6. 18, 19, 20. They could
not have prayed importunately, unless they had known how it had stood with
Paul; so unless thou know thy misery, thou can not be importunate. If a
Drunkard, or Whoremaster, or Sabbath-breaker, or Swearer, etc. knew that they
should be damned, they would get out of their sins.

Secondly, You must be sensible of your misery. Simon Magus knew his misery,
yet because he was not sensible of it, he says, Pray ye to the Lord for me,
Act. 8. 24. If he had been sensible, he would himself have fallen down before
the congregation, and he would have confessed how he had committed that sin,
in a more apprehensive manner.

Thirdly, Observe the prayers of Gods people, as here the disciples of Christ
did; they hearing Christ pray, say unto him, Master, teach us to pray; they
were so affected with Christ's prayer, that they said, Oh that we could pray
thus! Oh that we had such a spirit! Master, teach us to pray. So I say,
consider Gods people, how they pray; they can pray as if they would soar up to
God in supplication; they pray as if they would rend the heavens. If men did
but consider this, it would quicken them.

Fourthly, Get a stock of prayer. That man must needs be rich, that has a
stock in every market. So if a man have a stock of prayer, it is a sign he is
like to speed, as I Cor. 4. 2. If God did lend his ears to the Corinthians when
they were crying for Paul, then certainly Paul's prayers were importunate.

Fifthly, If thou will be importunate, labor to be full of good works. Qui
been operatur, been orat; as Act. 10. Cornelius his alms and prayers were come
up to God: now if he had committed drunkenness, that had come up to God with
his prayer; therefore was it happy for Cornelius that he was full of good
works; so thou can not be importunate, unless thou be full of good works;
take heed that swearing, and lying, etc. cry not louder in Gods ears then thy
prayers.

Sixthly, If thou will be importunate in prayer, labor to reform thy household.
When Jacob was to call on God, he said to his household, Put away your strange
gods, Genesis 35.

THE NECESSITY OF GOSPEL OBEDIENCE. In two Sermons.

BY That laborious and faithful Messenger of CHRIST, WILLIAM FENNER, Sometimes
Fellow of Pembroke Hall in Cambridge, and late Minister of Rochford in Essex.

THE NECESSITY OF Gospel-Obedience.
COLOSS. I. 10. That you might walk worthy of the Lord unto all pleasing, being
fruitful unto every good work.
THere is a double sense in these words:

First, wherein we may not, not cannot walk worthy of GOD.

And secondly, there is a sense, wherein we may, and must walk worthy of Him.

The first sense, wherein we cannot walk worthy of God, is twofold.

First We cannot walk worthy of God, with an absolute worth of exact
proportion; for in this sense the Angels of heaven cannot walk worthy of God:
they bless God and praise him uncessantly; but God is above all blessing and
praise, Nehem. 9. 5. Their holiness etc. had a beginning; but God is infinite.
Oh then, how much less can we walk worthy of God!

Secondly, We cannot walk worthy of God, with a sinlesse worth of a mortified
condignitie, so worthily as we might have done if we had not had sin; for we
are compassed with the flesh and sin, which leads us on to all impieties. And
in this respect John says, I am not worthy, etc. Luke 3. 16. It was no idle
complement in that good man, That he was not worthy to untie Christ's
shoo-tyers, or to carry his books after him, as we use to speak; but it is
certain, in regard of sin which makes us unfit to do any duty to God; God is
worthy of better service then the best of us can perform, and to have better
attendance then we can give him.

Nevertheless, there is a sense wherein we may and must walk worthy of God.
And this is also twofold:

First, quoad dignitatem non repugnantiae, As a niggard or a sparing servant is
an unworthy servant to a bountiful master, or a drunkard to a servant of God:
there is a repugnancie between a master and such a servant. He that will not
take up his cross and follow me, is unworthy of me, Mat. 10. 37. And in this
sense we must walk worthy of God, that is, not contrary to God.

Secondly, This worthy includes dignitatem condecentiae; Walk worthy of God, i.
e. suitable unto him. A correspondencie there must be between Christ and those
that are his, between the children of God, and God; we must walk answerable to
him; God is holy, gracious, merciful, etc. now we must walk worthy, (viz,)
suitable to those attributes; and not to deal basely wish God, who has dealt
bountifully with us, and has delivered us from hell, and helps us to heaven.
Let us not then put unworthy tricks on God, but let us walk as men renewed. So
much for the sense.

This speech is directed to the professors of the gospel of Christ in Colosse;
for first, Epaphras had given out that there were godly souls in that city.

Secondly, as it was reported; so this report came to Paul; he heard that there
were a company of men, that went for Gods saints: We have heard, says he etc.
verse. 4. I Paul heard so; and hence it is that Paul directs his speech. As if
he should say, (for so it is in the ninth verse) I hear that there are
professors among you; Now I pray God that you walk worthy of God; You profess
Christ and his word, I pray God you may walk worthy of the master you serve.
Hence observe,

That those that profess Christ, must walk worthy of christ; worthy of Christ
whom you say you serve, or they serve.

This is further commanded, and that expressly in I These. 2. 12. That you would
walk worthy of God. Think not that this is a duty left to your choice no, no,
says the Apostle, you know how we have exhorted and charged you; as if he
should say, I have given many exhortations to this purpose, I have begged that
you would do so, ver. II. I have encouraged and comforted them that have done
so; I commanded the unwilling, and you know it, and I tell you that this is a
duty of great consequence.

First because he has called you to be cristians; now it is a shame for you to
be unworthy of your calling whereunto you are called. It is fit, if a man be
called unto a calling, that he be worthy of it. When a wicked and an unjust man
is preferred to be a Judge, God knows he is a very unworthy man for that
calling: A licentious Divine for a pulpit, is unworthy of that vocation. It is
a shame a man should be unworthy the calling whereunto he is called. We are
called to be Christians; is it not a shame a man should be unworthy the
vocation the Lord has called him unto? I beseech you, says the Apostle,
Ephesians. 4. 1. You are called to be Christians by Christ: I beseech you consider
this, and be worthy of this calling. Art thou a Christian, and art thou not
loving and kind? Are you Christians, and yet are you careless and secure, and
will you not walk as Christ walked? What, shall a man be a Christian, and carry
himself dishonestly, otherwise then the Gospel commands? What a shame is this?

A second ground or reason is; The Gospel of God whereby we are called, this is
a blessed cailing. The Lord Jesus tells thee what gospel is, Luke 4. 18. itis
riches to the poor, sight to the blind, deliverance to captives, a gospel of
peace and liberty etc. It has many excellent names in Scripture. Now this is
the gospel whereby you are called from being damned wretches, to be the sons of
God. That man is unworthy of freedom, that is content to be a slave; he is
unworthy of these blessed things which the gospel brings, that will walk in
sin still. What, will you be captives to hell still? will you go on in your
old fashion still? will you live after the imaginations of your own hearts
still, notwithstanding you are called by the gospel? Have you the gospel of a
Kingdom, and will you not obey it, when it calls you to be Kings? what an
unworthy thing is this, that a man should not behave himself worthy of the
gospel whereby he is called? Phil. 1. 27. This is a main one, that your
conversations be worthy of the gospel of God. For men to be covetous proud,
drunkards etc. still, when we have the gospel to draw us out of these sins;
surely it is a shame, and we are unworthy of this gospel.

Thirdly, because we are called to Repentance. For as we are called by the
gospel, so by the gospel we are called to repentance; therefore we must walk
worthy. Is it repentance enough, to hear a Sermon, or do any good duty? No,
no, these are not fruits worthy the name of repentance, Luke 3. 8. I mean not
worthy to be repented of, but, not worthy the name of repentance. For a man to
put finger in the eye, and cry, Lord; is this worthy the name of repentance?
No, no, it is othergates mourning then this. True it is, many repent, but they
repent not enough; they must bring forth fruits worthy repentance.

Fourthly, because if we walk not worthy of God, the wisdom of God will not
hold us for his servants. A master, if he be wise, will not keep a servant that
will not do his business; if the master have cattle to be looked unto, and
other business abroad to be done, if his servant do lie and sleep all day, or
lie at the alehouse and neglect his masters business, sure I am, if he be but
worldly-wise, he will not keep such a servant. In 1 Samuel 30, 31. an Amalekite
did turn away his servant because he was sick; this was hard dealing;
Nevertheless, that man that will not walk worthy, that will not look to the
charge that God has given him, he is unworthy to be Gods servant. The Lord
has abundance of business to be done; Commandments to be performed,
Sacraments to be received, and abundance of employment; and shall he hire
servants and do his work himself? will any keep a dog, and bark himself? That
man is not worthy of God, that will not do his business: therefore the wisdom of
God will turn us out of doors, because we leave his work, and fall to wrangling
within our selves. What division is there amongst us? what heart-burning
between neighbors and neighbors? what growing cold in religion, etc? And God
has haste of business to be dispatched; why are not his Commandments regarded,
his Promises desired, his Judgments feared? Certainly, the Lord expects that
we should go about these things, and we are unworthy, if we do them not.

Fifthly, if we will not walk worthy of God, then it is for his glory to
cashiere us out of his sanctuary. It is not for a masters credit to keep a
servant that will discredit him; as to keep a whoremaster, or a sharking
companion; what will honest men think? Is not he naught himself, that keeps
such shag-rags about him? All the dishonor lies on the master. So it is not
for the honor of God, to suffer such to be within the company of professors of
his Name, that dishonor his Name, and cause the gospel of God to be blasphemed
by them that are without. So soon as Elishai his servant had abused him, he
sent him packing, He went forth from his presence, etc. 2 King. 5. 27. He
should stay no longer with him; why? because he had dishonored him; and what
might Naaman think? Will he now have something? and even now he would have
nothing; he has soon repented him of his kindness. Though Naaman did not argue
thus, yet thus he might, and, for ought we know, such thoughts he had; but
howsoever, Geh^zi greatly dishonored his master, and therefore his master sent
him out of his presence. Even so, if we walk not worthy of God, he will turn us
put of doors.

God keep me from being a Puritan; I had rather be a Papist: and thus the name
of Christ comes to be blasphemed for your sakes. These say, Come, come, I
warrant you for all this, yet he will lie for a need, though he say Yes verily.
And thus Religion and the gospel of Christ is called into question by the men
of this world, even for your sakes that walk not worthy of God; nay, by reason
of this, God cannot hire servants to do his work. Beloved, God has sent us out
to hire servants; now many would come in willingly, but because they see and
think that those that profess the name of Christ be dissemblers, Puritans, and
hypocrites; and therefore they say as sometimes the Indians did of the
Spaniards, If these men be the servants of Christ, I will never be his servant;
So, if these men be the servants of God, Lord bless me from them. What a
damned thing is this?

Sixthly, If we walk not worthy of God, we put great indignity upon him. A
worthy man cannot abide to meddle with unworthy things; and shall a Christian
serve God after an unworthy fashion? Be not deceived, God is not mocked, Gal.
6. 7. Do thou come into his house, hear his Word, and will thou not obey it?
Come thou to a Sacrament, and have thou drinking, carding and dicing, at
home? Thou go under the name of a good Christian, yet thou live in thy
sins, having a secret lust, either to swear, or lie, or to commit adultery.
Take heed, I say, God will not be mocked. For men to go in the name of Gods
children, and yet not to serve and obey him, this is to make a mockery of God;
but God will not be mocked.

Oh, says one, my Father will never like it, if I be so strict and precise;
and as for my Mother, she cannot abide a Puritan. Another says, I cannot keep
my children unless I put my money to use, etc. But what says Christ? He that
loves father or mother, etc. more then me, is not worthy of me, Mat. 10. 37.
Do thou argue on this fashion, and yet hopest to be a Christian? Do thou
plead self-respect, and do thou hope to go for a Christian? what a mockery
is this? nature abhorrs it.

I remember a story of a Boy, who being at Lions, and saw two men, one tall,
and he had a short cloak, the other short, and he had a long cloak; and thought
it very unseemly; so he took the long cloak and put it on the tall man's back,
and the cloak on the short man's back, and then it liked him. So, is it seemly
that any of us should wear the long robes of Christianity, and yet be short
in Obedience? that we should go for the people of God, and not behave our
selves sutably?

In this place there is no room for Papists to establish merit for themselves;
the Apostle intends no such matter in this place; for we are not our own men,
and therefore cannot merit. We are taught to pray, Give us this day our daily
bread; we have not one bit of bread but we must beg it; and when we have done
all we can, (as who does?) yet we are but unprofitable servants. But suppose we
could merit all righteousness; yet all our ability is from God. Again, suppose
we be righteous, what is that to him? if we be holy, what is that to him? If we
be damned, he is never the worse, if we be saved, he is not the better; if we
keep all his commandments, yet it is his mercy to save us. He shows mercy to
thousands; to whom? not to them that sin, but to them that love me and keep my
commandments, Exodus 20. 6. To one that keeps Gods commandments, it is his
love to save him, it is his love that he has mercy on him. The Church of Rome
do talk much of their well-doing; but in the mean while what becomes of their
sins? they should go and suffer for their sins, and then come and talk of
merit; Do they talk of merit before they have satisfied for their sins? the
Law will be satisfied first; and when they have endured hellfire world without
end, then let them talk of merit. The Lord does not mean that we must walk
worthy so as to merit any thing: for suppose that al1 the sufferings of this
life, and all the torments of the world that all the Saints of God have
suffered, were put on one man, and he to endure them all; yet they are not
worthy the glory that shall be revealed Romans 8. 18 Here then is no room for
Papists merits. Yet we must walk worthy of God with sutablenesse; and if we do
not so, the Lord will not own us. You know the story of the guests in the
Gospel, and how they were invited to the supper; one pretended one thing,
another another thing; one had married a wife, he could not come, yet sure I am
he might have brought her with him: another had bought oxen, etc. But what
follows in the text, Mat. 22. Those that were bidden were not worthy,
therefore they shall not taste of my supper. So some say for their sins, it
is their nature, or one occasion or other puts them off, they could not come.
None that are unworthy of God, shall taste of the mercy of God, neither in the
pardon of their sins, nor salvation; no, you get not so much as a taste of
Christ, if you walk not worthy of the gospel of Christ.

The truth of this will appear in the Use, if we consider what this worthy
walking is.

We must be as it were even the very nature of God; we should, as Peter speaks,
show forth the virtue of him that has called us, that we may show what a
glorious God, what a blessed Redeemer, and righteous Judge we have, and admire
his goodness that has called us out of darkness into this glorious light;
and we must be holy as he is holy, 1 Pet. 1. 15. How does this suit with the
nature of God, when we walk not worthy of God? God is just, 2 Cor. 1. 3. how
unworthy then are we that are cruel, unmerciful, and unjust? God is a God of
peace, 1 Cor. 14. 22. how unworthy then are we of him, that live in
heart-burning one with another? We are the image of God, if we please him, 1
Cor. 11. 7. What a shame, dishonor, and wrong then is it to God, that we
should have his image, and yet be nothing like him? Should a glorious King see
a deformed picture of himself, surely he would make that man smoke that
pictured him so: And shall we go for the image of God, the God of all glory,
and shall we be vile and unclean, negligent and careless, and yet go for Gods
picture? what do we make of God? will not God be angry, and will not his wrath
burn like fire? What, am I a drunkard, a whoremaster, etc. is this my picture?
Sure I am God cannot endure this.

Secondly, consider the relation we have with God; we are the children of God,
we are the begotten of the Father: does God beget monsters? does God beget such
children? We profess our selves servants to God; the ground of that relation
is, that we are at Gods command: did God command us to do the duties of
Religion* thus? No, no, beloved; if we be servants, we must be at his command.
We profess our selves sheep of his pasture; but do we live as if we fed on his
Commandments? Is this to live worthy the commons that Christ has put us in,
which is such rich food of salvation? How unworthy is this? If I be a father,
where is mine honor? If I be a master, where is my fear? Mal. 1. 6. Is not
this rather to dishonor God, that a child should have a worthy man to his
father, and be a lout himself? what indignity is this that we put on God? Let
us examine our selves whether we walk worthy of God, or no. I speak to the
professors of the gospel; for it is certain, that they that profess it not,
are unworthy; you that are yet in the gall of bitterness, and in the bond of
iniquity, are not worthy.

For first, Christianity is a trade. What profession soever thou art of, that
is thy trade: will a man say to a Physician, what, cannot you keep your Physic
to your self? must you needs make profession of it? Or will a man go to a
shoo-maker and say, Cannot you keep your shoes and trade to your self? So
Christianity is a Profession, and thou art unworthy of it unless thou
profess it.

Secondly, To what end is a trade? it will do a man no good unless he profess
it; Every man in his calling lives on his calling; then, if he live by it, he
must walk worthy of it. A Lawyer may die for all his calling, if he profess it
not: Do thou walk in no calling nor profession? Undoubtedly, thou will get no
living by it?

Thirdly, Christianity is an Order. If a man be a Papist, yet he cannot be a
Franciscan, unless he profess himself to be of that Order. So if we be
Christians, Christ is the father of that order. Jesus Christ the High Priest of
our profession, Heb. 3. 1. he is the Father of all Christianity, and thou
can not be a Christian, unless thou profess that Order. Let your light so
shine etc. says our Savior, or else you walk not worthy of God. I speak this
to those that profess Christ; for a man may profess a trade, and yet not walk
worthy of it.

For first, If we walk worthy of God, then our labors answer all the cost God
has been at. That ground is unworthy tillage, that will not pay the cost that
is bestowed on it; that Scholar is not worthy to be maintained, that does not
answer the cost of his Parents. So, my beloved, if you walk worthy of God,
answer the charges that God has been at with you. It has cost God his Son to
redeem you, and what are you the better? The work of his Spirit comes to
enlighten us; the labor of his Ministers to teach us: Now what are we the
better for all this? It has cost God abundance of Mercy to allure us,
abundance of Judgment to terrify us, many Corrections, and above all he is
patient to bear with us; and this is a mercy of mercies. A man will show all
he has, before he show his patience; a man may show himself kind, and if he be
much wronged, he will say, What, will you try my patience? I tell thee, God
has suffered his patience to be tired by us a long time, and he has been at a
great deal of cost with us; but have we answered it? if we have not, we are
unworthy of God. God has been at a great deal of cost to make you love one
another, and shall there be heart-burning still? Good ground brings forth good
herbs meet for use, not only herbs, but meet herbs: so if you be good children
to God, you will bring forth fruit meet for God; otherwise, if God have been at
all this cost, and you secure, and strangers still one from another, and never
the better, you are near unto cursing, your labor is not to profit in the
Word, and so you answer not God the cost that he has been at with you. I fear
me, God will remove his candlestick, or if he continue it, you shall have
hardness of heart with it: For since those rents have been, how has the
number of believers decreased? when was one converted? when was a whoremaster
or a drunkard renewed, unless it be to take a higher degree in sin? No, no,
the Gospel has done childbearing; and surely this is the cause; We walk not
worthy of it.

Secondly, If we walk worthy of God, then we walk with God in white. I have a
few names, etc. Rev. 5. 4. for they are worthy, etc. In white, (i. e.) in true
love and holiness, with white robes of purity, clothed with the
righteousness of Christ: but if you be of the black qualities of the world,
you walk not worthy, you edify not your selves, nor others; this kind of
walking is for the men of the world, it is for them to stand at a stay in
religion; it is for them to hear and not to practice; these are black qualities;
but if you walk aright, you walk with me in white, says God; those that walk
aloof, walk unworthy, like base Rogues who are not admitted into the Kings
presence.

Thirdly, if we walk worthy of God, we do not disappoint Gods account. God
accounts us sincere and undefiled, as a Virgin unspotted pure in heart; Such as
are renewed, the Lord calls all that are his children by this name. Now if you
walk so, as the world may tax you for pride, covetousness, hatred, or any
other vice; this is not to walk worthy of God, but to disparage Gods account;
God counts you righteous, and the world censures you, and says you are not,
and that because of your ill carriage, and so Gods judgment seems not to be
right. they that shall be counted worthy, etc. Luke 20. 35. they that enjoy
Gods glory, are counted worthy; God counts them worthy, Christ counts them
worthy, conscience and the world counts them worthy: but do you think that the
wicked shall say at the last day that they were worthy? No, no, this were a
disparagement to God.

Fourthly, If we walk worthy of God, then we are importunate beggars; that
beggar that will not beg hard, is unworthy of an alms; so we are unworthy of
mercy, if we beg not hard for it: Watch therefore and pray always, that you may
be counted worthy, etc. Luke 21. 36.

Fifthly, If we walk worthy of God, then we add humiliation to every duty we
do to God. It is true, all our prayers are not accepted, unless they be
worthy; our receiving the Sacrament is cursed in Gods sight, unless it be done
worthily; but yet not as if there were any inherent righteousness in man; no,
no. Luk 6. 6. I am not worthy, that is, I think not my self worthy. Here is the
worthiness of all our wages, if we pray in faith, and add humiliation to our
prayers; we must obey God, and add humiliation thereunto, we must add unto
every good duty humiliation; so that if we be worthy, we are the more humbled.
This is a duty, as of great moment; it is such a duty, as if we walk not
worthy of God in humiliation, we are not capable of the gospel, nor pardon of
sin, if we be not content to be ruled by Christ. If the house be worthy, let
your peace abide upon it, Mat. 10. 11. The peace of Gods Ministers is peace to
the conscience; and the conscience is at peace, if sin be pardoned: So that
if this place, this congregation, be not worthy that they should have pardon of
sin preached, they are not capable of it. The world must be pulled down,
self-will and self-lust must be lamed and mortified, to do as the Lord will
have it; that man is not capable of the gospel, that will not be ruled by it.

In the second place, let us consider, If we walk not worthy of God, we walk
worthy of somewhat else; if not of God, then of hell, vengeance, and
condemnation: Let us assure our selves, of whatsoever we walk worthy, that we
shall have. I speak not of worth of proportion. Let a man be ignorant, if he be
thought worthy of hell, then to hell he shall go; none shall go to hell, but
those that are unworthy of heaven; and none shall go to heaven, but those that
have the tokens of heaven about them. Fill her with blood (says God) Rev. 15.
6. as she was worthy of blood, so God would give her blood her belly-full; so
when men walk on in their sinful courses, as they are worthy, so shall they
have

Secondly, You are guilty of Christ, if you walk not worthy of Christ. It is a
damnable thing for a man to be thought or found guilty of perjurie; but to be
thought or found guilty of Christ, this is the greatest of all. Beloved, you
are guilty of Christ, if you walk not worthy of Christ: see it in one branch of
a Christians walk. If a man receive the Sacrament unworthily, he is guilty of
Christ, 1 Cor. 11. 27. If a man walk unworthily in any one duty, he is guilty
of Christ, and the death of Christ shall be laid upon him: Oh, what then will
become of them who walk unworthily in all the duties of Christianity? Judas
betrayed Christ, and thou art guilty; Pilate condemned him, and thou art
guilty; so etc. His blood lies on thy soul, and thou shall answer for it, if
thou get not into Christ. Thus you see, if we walk not worthy in one duty, we
are guilty if all.

Thirdly, If you walk not worthy of Christ, you shall be condemned; the
sentence of condemnation is on you for ever. He that eats and drinks
unworthily, eats and drinks his own damnation; and this is but one branch.
So he that prays, or professes the name of Christ unworthily, what ever duty
it be, if a man labor not to do it suitable to God, it is his damnation. That
prisoner is unworthy of a pardon, that will not stand to the conditions of his
pardon, and be ruled by the Judge. Even so, you that will not walk holily
according to the conditions of the gospel, you are not worthy of pardon, and
you shall never enjoy it; for the Lord knows beforehand who are worthy walkers
before him. Has God children here, and would they be so accounted? Let them
walk worthy of God, let their light shine, etc. let them labor to quit the
cost that God has been at; walk with Christ in all thy ways, for this is
to walk worthy of God in all pleasing. Let this suffice for Exhortation.

THE NECESSITY OF GOSPEL OBEDIENCE. The second Sermon.

BY That laborious and faithful Messenger of CHRIST, WILLIAM FENNER, Sometimes
Fellow of Pembroke Hall in Cambridge, and late Minister of Rochford in Essex.

THE NECESSITY OF Gospel-Obedience.
COLOSS. 1. 10. That you might walk worthy of the Lord unto all pleasing, being
fruitful unto every good work.
THe Apostle having delivered unto us the sundry duties of walking worthy of
God, concerning which we have spoken; he comes now to amplify it, and that he
does these two ways. First generally, unto all pleasing; Secondly
particularly, in the sundry duties wherein we are to please God; namely, to
walk worthy, and then to be fruitful in every good work, and increasing in the
knowledge of God unto all pleasing (as it is in the Original.)

Some would have all pleasing to be meant of pleasing all men; but this were a
sin; for if a man will be a man-pleaser, he cannot please God. What then does
the Apostle exhort us unto? to sin? God forbid. Would he have us strive to
please all men? this were but flattery: No, no, there is no such matter in the
Original; it is not the adjective, in all pleasing, that is, pleasing to all:
but in the substantive, unto all-pleasing, that is, unto all manner of
pleasing: Labor to walk so according to the gospel, being directed in all your
ways according to the light thereof, that so you may please God in all things.
It has reference to the walking worthy of the Lord, that is, in all manner of
pleasing to the Lord. And this is not impossible;

First, because God is not a rigorous God, but kind, loving and amiable, full
of compassion and kindness, a God easy to please. There be some men that a
man cannot please, they are so captious, and so full of exceptions, and so
humorous, that a man can never please them; but God is a kind God, full of
compassion, abundant in goodness and truth, and therefore it is possible for a
man to please God. True it is, if God should require obedience in rigor,
holiness in rigor, etc. if he should do thus, then it were impossible to
please him, then he must have othergates servants then we; but the Lord deals
in easy terms, he demands obedience according to the gospel: When a man's ways
please the Lord, says the wise man, Prove. 16. 7. where we may note, that it is
possible for a man so to walk, as that his ways may please God.

Secondly, as God is not a rigorous God, so there is a way to walk wherein we
may please him, and that is the way of sincere walking. It was Gods advice to
Abraham Genesis 17. I. We must be faithful in our calling: see it in David; I
will magnify God with thanksgiving, and this also shall please the Lord, etc.
Psalm. 69. 31. To be thankful and to obey his commandment is the way to please
God.

Thirdly, the Lord has showed us this way; he might have been at choice
whether he would have told us what would be pleasing in his sight or no; he
might have left that for us to have studied out, or else he might have sent us
to hell for our ignorance in it; he might have chosen whether he would have
come and taught us our horne-book or no. Like as a Master once in a comedy,
when his servant could not please him, says the servent, pray Master tell me
what I shall do to please you; nay says the Master, Sirrah, look you to that;
so God might have made us look to that our selves, and that most justly too;
but here appears the love of God; as there is a way so he has showed us this
way, saying this is my beloved son, hear him. Mat. 12. 3. As if he shouid
say, go to my son, he will tell you what you shall do to please me, for in
him I am well pleased; he does not say with him, though that had been true, yet
but half the meaning; but in him; get to him, be governed by him, be ingrafted
into him, this is the course you are to take to please me; this is my beloved.

Lastly, as God has showed us this way, so there be some that have walked in
this way before us. The children of God, in all ages have labored to please
God, and that as a child labors to please his Father Heb. 11. 5.

Thus you see it is possible to please God.

Secondly, as it is possible, so likewise it is a fit duty, it is very fit we
should all labor to please God.

For first, God is a great king; now great ones you know look to be pleasedi a
man cannot speak to a great man without he say and if it shall please you.
Esther. 1. 19. If it please the King, etc. such as have greatness, look for
this style; and it is fit it should be so, that greatness should have the
companions of it, which is to be pleased. Now who is so great as God? and
therefore it is fit his servants should please him.

Secondly, as God is a great God, so his pleasure is a good pleasure, ergo it
is fit he should be pleased; hence it is called the good pleasure of his
will, Ephesians. 1. 5. Look what ever Gods pleasure is, it is always good, ergo it
is fit he should be pleased, because it is always agreeable ^o reason; it is
not always fit we should please men, for they are wicked many ^imes in their
desires. See it in Ahashuerus; his pleasure was one while utterly to extirpate
the Jews; It was Darius pleasure to seal an idolatrous Decree; it was Pharohs
pleasure to set hard tasks on Gods people, and Herod's pleasure was to put James
to death, and it pleased the Jews too; thus you see all their pleasures were
wicked; nay, all men, their pleasures are not always good, and therefore not
fit at all times to please them; but God is always good, and therefore it
stands with equity that he should always be pleased.

Fourthly, if we will not, our betters will, and therefore it is fit we should;
Christ was and is our better, and he did those things which pleased God, John
8. 29. The Angels of heaven think it fit, they bless the Lord, and they also
are our betters, see Psalm. 103. 21. If these think it fit to please God, it if
much more fit that we should serve and please him. We argue thus, Will you not
do as I bid you? your betters will: so then you see they are our betters that
will please God.

Fifthly, it is most suitable with our conscience that we should do so; for if
we should not please God, our consciences would find fault with it. If our
consciences condemn us not, etc. John 3. 21. then we do those things that are
pleasing in his sight; the pleasing of God is set down as a pleasing thing to
our consciences; and can we desire a more fit duty then that which our own
selves will charge us with rebellion if we be not conformable unto it? such is
the pleasing of God; it is naturally in the conscience of all men that God is
to be pleased; how often read we in heathen books, if it please God? and it is
a common phrase in most men's mouths, and therefore a fit duty.

Sixthly, it is a duty most suitable with humane society; if all men would
labor to please God there would be no hatred, no tale-bearing, no falling out:
Oh what a blessed life might we lead if we would labor to please God? this is
the true ground of all good fellowship: But what was the reason the Jews were
contrary to all men? It was this, because they did not please God, 1 These. 2.
15. when every one pleases himself in his lusts and desires, then there must
needs be a contrariety among men; for one man's will is contrary to another;
one will have this, another that; but if all would refer their will to Gods
will, and agree in one, there would be no contrariety among men.

Thirdly, as it is a possible and a fit duty, so it is a large duty; it runs
along as Expositors observe, in all our thoughts, words and deeds. It must be
at all times and in all places, and in all regards. It is I say a large duty,
and I will show it in six things.

First, it is the end of all our duties; what duty is there for a Christian to
undertake, but he is to please God in it? why do we hear, pray, receive the
Sacrament, believe, repent, suffer injuries for Christ's sake, but that we may
please God? why must children obey their parents, but that they may therein
please God? I can go about no duty; but if I mean to do it aright, I must
propound this end, that I may please God.

Secondly, it is large in that it is the most acceptable of all duties; and
indeed it is the form and life of all performances; prayer is abomination to
God, unless we please God in that action; the pleasing of God is that which
puts life in that duty which we undertake, Philip. 4. 19. the Apostle combines
these two, acceptable and well pleasing; and they cannot well be separate; if
any Sacrifice be wel-pleasng, it must needs be acceptable unto God; therefore
it is pleasing, because it makes every duty acceptable.

Thirdly, it is large, in that it is unconfinable to place or time, we must not
only be godly at Church, but at home also; not only fair carriaged in the
company of the godly, but we must be holy in all companies, please God in all
places; we must labor to please him wheresoever we are; it is a duty not
conscribed to any place; shall a man please God at a Sermon and displease him
abroad by drunkenness and whoring, etc? shall we think to please God in such a
place where we cannot for shame break out into unsavory speeches, and at
another time, and in another place endure any ungodliness? this is not to
please God, but rather the contrary. No, no; it is not limited to time, not
place; we must please God not only in prayer time, but also when prayer is
ended; not in Sermon time only, but when the Sermon is ended also. Labor
therefore to please God at all times; not on Sundays only, but on the week
days also; many will read on the Sabbath, but never else; but this is a duty
to be performed at all times; it is not as hearing, that cannot be performed
always: no, it is a general duty, Aristotle's Universals: and Psalm. 116. 5. I
will walk before the Lord, etc. Placebo Dominum, will please the Lord in the
land of the living. This contains the sum of all Religion.

The largeness of it appears in this, that it is in all things: it is larger
then the servants duty to please their masters; yet servants must labor to
please their masters in all things, 2 Tit. 9. 9. But if servants must please
their masters in all things, then how can the duty of pleasing God be larger?
i.e.) in all that are commanded of God; otherwise they may not; for when the
thing is forbidden by God, it is nothing but the privation of the thing. Sins
are privations: an Idol is nothing; all sins are as idols, they are nothing;
it is not an action, bur the privation of the image of God that should be there,
and of agreeableness to the Word in all things that are not contrary to the
Word: the duty of pleasing man must be bounded within another, but we must
please God without limitation.

Fifthly, it is large, in that it is an everlasting duty; it shall be a duty,
when other duties cease. Prayer, belief, repentance, weeping and mourning, etc.
must cease, when Gods children come to heaven; they must pray no more, fast no
more; no, these duties must cease; but this is and must be a duty when they are
dead and gone, it is an everlasting duty, it is that which we must carry to our
graves, yea into another world with us. It is the fruit of all other duties; we
are tried by prayer and hearing, etc. as by apprentiship, that so we may learn
this art of well-pleasing God; if we have not learned this art, we are not
capable of entering into life, so that in some sense it is above the
commandments: we will keep the commandments, that we may please God; this is
the crown of all our obedience, not as if it could be more, but the pleasing of
God in these is the upshot of all our obedience to God.

Sixthly, It is large, in that it is the whole duty of the new man; only new
men in Christ can please God, unregenerate men cannot please God; let them give
alms, etc. yet if they be not new treatures, they cannot please God; let them
do actions, though never so good for manner or meaning, yet they are worthless
in the hand of an unregenerate man. They that are in the flesh cannot please
God, Romans 8. 8. He speaks not of such as are married; for Zachary and
Elizabeth were married, and they pleased God: but those that walk after the
flesh as unregenerate, unsanctified, unpurified, such as live in sin, none of
these can ever please God. Thus you see it is the whole duty of the new man.

Fourthly, as it is possible, fit, and large, so it is a necessary duty. The
Apostle sets a must, and an ought upon it, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 2. It must be done,
there is a necessary laid upon it. It must be done.

For first, we have no saving grace, unless we labor to please God; it comes
from God good pleasure, and it goes to Gods good pleasure. God is well pleased
in his image, and grace is the image of God: Now then, if a man please not God,
it is because he has no grace: Thou think Christ did die for thee, thou
think a lie, why? thou have no saving grace. Let us have grace, says the
Apostle, that we may serve God, Heb. 12. as if he should say, without grace it
is impossible to please him: therefore you see it is very necessary to please
God, it is as necessary as grace, and without it we are damned.

Secondly, if we do not please God, we may see what a woeful case we are in; it
God be not pleased to spare us, we cannot be saved. Now a man will be sure to
please that man that can hang him if he please; he will not pull his
displeasure upon him. Acts. 12. when Herod was displeased, they labored to
turn away his displeasure, and made friends; so we depend on God, and therefore
our souls, bodies, and everlasting happiness or destruction depends on God;
and if he be not pleased, what benefit can we wretches expect? Would thou
have mercy, and will thou not please God? thou shall be deceived. Because
Hester pleased the King, he showed her kindness; and God will never show us
kindness, unless we please him. There is no man so mad, to heap good turns
upon a man's head that will not please him; how can we have the good pleasure of
God, when we will not seek to please God? Before Enoch was translated, it was
said he pleased God? Heb. 11. 5. God would never have brought him to heaven, if
he had not been pleased with him. So before he translates thee from earth to
heaven, before he delivers thee from, damnation, thou must be sure to please
God.

Thirdly, if we labor not to please God, God knows what infinite dangers we
are ever in; in the morning he may brain us, or we may die and perish in our
sleep, or in any action; God knows what mischief may befall us if we please
not God. If a man prove a Traitor to the King, God knows what the King will
do unto him; the wrath of a King is as the roaring of a Lion; Oh then what is
the displeasure of the judge both of quick and dead? If God be displeased with
us, God knows what will become of us, we cannot eat a meals meat safely, we.
may be choakt for ought we know; we cannot be secure one moment; It may be this
is the moment he means to disgrace thee, to lay rottenness on thy heart; It
may be he will lay the curse of heaven upon thee before thou go home and be no
more seen; but if thou please God Eccles. 9. 7. come what can come, nothing can
come amiss to them that pleases the Lord but if thy ways please not the
Lord, thou live in a damnable condition.

Is it so that the duty of pleasing God is so possible, fit, large, and
necessary? here then three sorts of men are condemned,

First those that please not God. Do you think then that this is pleasing to
God that there should be so many Alehouses in the Town, or in any such place
as this where the Gospel has been so long taught, that there should be so many
profane Esaues which walk after the stubbornness of their own hearts? Do
you think that it is pleasing to God that you should think hardly of them that
think best of the Word? Think you, is it best pleasing to God, that you should
have inordinate courses in your families, that after so much preaching, yet
many of you should be still in your sins? Is this pleasing to God? Oh
consider what you pull upon your selves, viz. wrath, yea wrath to the utmost.
It is a grievous thing for a man to pull the wrath of a King upon him; You
shall not do this on pain of Our displeasure. Do then, if you dare. If the
wrath of a King then be so great, and so to be feared; what then is the wrath
(and that to the utmost) of the ever living God? Destruction and damnation to
the utmost; God will show no mercy to them that make no conscience to please
him.

Secondly, this condemns those that please men. If it be so necessary to please
God, what will then become of men-pleasers, as such there are, and too too many
amongst, us, that carry tales, etc? why? because they will please such and such
men: Such are many of your children and servants in Alehouses, that can fill
pot after pot, and that because it is their masters pleasure that it should be
so: But what will become of this in the end? If I should please men, etc. Gal.
1. 10. If not the servant of God or of Christ, then I must needs be the servant
of the Devil. I, even I Paul, if I should seek to please men, I were none of
the servants of Jesus Christ.

Thirdly, this also condemns those that please themselves. Many there are that
are self-pleasers, which walk after their self-wils, self-conceits,
self-desires, and self-affections. It is pleasing to them to drink, to swagger,
to dice and to card; It is pleasing to them to shuffle over the ordinances of
God; why? because they have other things to do. Oh think, I beseech you, what a
grievous evil you pull on your heads, that are self-pleasers; You draw down
upon you more then swift damnation. How can that be, will you say? Yes, a man
may pull down more then naked damnation; double damnation is more then single;
now if you please your selves, live as you list, do as you list, you pull on
your selves damnation with a mischief. God will reserve all the wicked for the
day of judgment to punish them, 2 Pet. 2. 9. but chiefly them that are
self-pleasers, unto whom he gives special marks; as first, unclean persons; 2.
such as rebel agianst God; 3. Presumptuous, such as build castles in the air
(as we use to say) on Gods mercy; 4. He reckons the self-willed, in the
Original self-pleasers (i.e.) when a man follows his own will and pleasure.
These are they that God will chiefly cast into damnation: this is to pull
damnation, and more then damnation upon thee. And thus, by Gods assistance, you
have seen the prosecution of this Point.

A CAVEAT AGAINST LATE REPENTANCE. In a SERMON

BY That laborious and faithful Messenger of CHRIST, WILLIAM FENNER, Sometimes
Fellow of Pembroke Hall in Cambridge, and late Minister of Rochford in Essex.

A CAVEAT against Late Repentance.
LUKE 23. 24. And he said unto Jesus, Lord remember me when thon come into
thy kingdom.
THis is spoken from the good Thief on the Cross, And be said unto, etc.
Extraordinary cases never make a common rule: The ordinary rule is this, As is
a man's life, so is his death. It Is a common axiom, and it is as true as
common, Qualis vita, finis ita; a good life cannot choose but have a good
death, and a wicked life a cursed end: this is the ordinary rule.

Nevertheless there are extraordinary cases wherein it may be otherwise, and
these cases are referred to four heads.

First, when it pleases God to show his prerogative royal, he may convert a
man at the last gasp, and give unto the last even as unto the first, Mat. 20.
13. his grace is his own, Christ his own, Heaven is his own, and he may do
with his own as he will; this is Gods prerogative; as a King may pardon an old
beaten Traitor, and thereby show his prerogative: but this is not ordinary.

Secondly, when a sinner has not had means of salvation in this life, but
only at his death; as when S. Paul came unto Corinth, many were there lying on
their deathbeds, S. Paul converted some of them, 1 Cor. 15. 29. Alas, they
were Pagans before, they never had the means of salvation before; yet so it
pleases the Lord sometimes to step in and convert a sinner that never had the
means before: but this case is not ordinary neither; for now we have the means
and health.

Thirdly, when it comes to pass that a sinner is made an example to all the
world, as when a thief is brought to the gallows, and the Lord converts him:
And for ought we know, this was the case Of Achan, Jos. 7. 25. he was converted
perhaps, when the stones flew about his ears.

Another extraordinary case is, when the Lord may be as much honored by a man's
death, as he has been dishonored by his life. In such a case some live, and
it pleases the Lord to give repentance unto life: And this was the case of
this Thief; he did as much honor God at his death, (as you shall see in his
repentance) as many whose lives were spent in all holiness.

The privileges of a few men make no common rule; men deal with repentance (as
a Divine speaks) as they do with their Wills, they put them off to the last
gasp; so they put off repentance to the last hour, like A chitophel, that never
set his house in order till he went and hanged himself. As it is said of the
serpent, it grows crooked all the days of his life, and when it dies then it
straightens it self: So many walk perversely while they are well, and then to
straighten all, cry God mercy when they are a dying, as the heart of oak, that
never grows soft till it is dead and rotten; so they never soften their hearts
with repentance, till they see they must die, and then they fall to their beads
and say, Was not the Thief converted at the last? and did not the Thief on the
cross find forgiveness? and why then may not I? Thus they bear themselves on
the example of the Thiefs conversion. I dare be bold to say, that this Thief
never stole more goods in his life, then his example has stolen souls from
heaven after his death. Therefore I have chosen this Text, to let you all know
that the repentance of this Thief was no ordinary thing, nay, to us an
extraordinary wonder, and therefore there is no trusting to it; For, for a man
to be careless while he is well, hoping to speed with repentance at the last,
is vain.

Now that this his repentance was extraordinary, I prove it by five arguments.

First, because it was one of the wonders of Christ's passion: now Christ's
passion was full of wonders, and they were of two sorts, Corporal and
Spiritual.

The first wonder was in the heavens, the Sun was ecclipsed, the Moon the being
at the full, which is a miracle in nature. To show that Christ the Sun of
righteousness was ecclipsed at that time; for there was darkness over the
face of the whole earth, Mark 15. 33.

The second wonder was in the temple, the vale of the temple did rent, verse.
38. to show that the ceremonies therein contained were abrogated, the substance
being then present.

The third wonder was in the rocks, the hard rocks clave, to convince the
hardness of those that did not rent their hearts.

The fourth wonder was in the earth, Mat. 27. 31. the earth did quake at the
sight thereof, to upbraid those that quaked not.

The fifth wonder was in the sepulchers, many graves were opened, to show the
virtue of Christ's passion.

And as there were wonders corporal, so there were wonders spiritual.

First, the Centurion glorified God, saying, This was the Son of God, Mat. 27.
54. Secondly, there was a wonder among the people, beholding the things that
were done; they smote their breasts, and returned. A third wonder was on this
thief, for he was converted; To day shall thou be with me in paradise. Thus you
see that Christ's passion was full of wonders, so that there is no ground for a
man to delay his repentance, hoping to repent as this Thief did, unless he
will look for wonders. Can thou expect, when thou lie a dying, that that he
will rent the rocks again, or open the graves, or create new wonders? No, no,
thou can not look for forgiveness, if thou deferrest thy repentance: This
repentance was extraordinary, and one of the wonders of Christ's passion.

Secondly, that this repentance was extraordinary, it may appear by the number;
for of all numbers of men from the creation to that hour, it was never read
that any one was converted thus at the last, as was this Thief; so that for all
that we know, for this one Thief that was penitent and so saved at the last,
the whole world of the wicked and ungodly, that delayed their repentance,
living and dying in sin, were damned for ever. For all that we know, Er and
Onan, Jeroboam and Pharaoh, as they lived in sin, so the Scriptures plainly
show that they died in their sins. What need I speak of those hundred
fourscore and five thousand, 2 King. 19. 35. all clapped to hell in one night,
for all we know? What need I speak of the old world? As they were disobedient
in the days of Noah, so they are now in chains. What need I speak of Admah,
Zeboim, Sodom and Gomorrah, burnt with fire and brimstone? so that as they
lived in sin, so they died and were damned in their sins, for all we know. Now
what poor ground is this for a man to defer his repentance, thinking to
repent at the last hour, when among so many millions of men, only this Thief
found repentance? Thus you see it was extraordinary, in regard of the number.

Thirdly, in regard of the suddenness of it. Repentance the work of grace
ordinarily takes up the whole time of life, and will require as many days as a
man lives; this is a great work and it cannot be performed on the sudden; and
yet that this work should be attained unto in that while he was on the cross,
this must needs be wonderful; nay he had not so much time; for it seems he did
hang on the cross in his sin, the thieves (says the text) reviled him, Mat.
27. 44. both cast the same thing in his dish, therefore he was not working
repentance all the time; this then must needs be wonderful, that this work
should be dispatched in one hour, and God knows it might have been in less
time effected. Is it not a wonder that a man that has no skill in music
should learn that Art in one hour? Is it not a wonder that a boy that knows
not a letter in the book should learn to write and read well and speak good
latin in one hour? Is it not a wonder that a man that is an errant ignoramus,
should attain to be a good Lawyer in one hour? These are wonders: So I tell
you repentance, grace and conversion, are hard arts, harder then music or
divinity, harder then all arts; there is no art so hard as to learn to go
to heaven, and can a man learn this in one hour? if he do, it is a wonder;
It cost David all his life time; Timothy from his youth studied the Scriptures,
and Hillary said, 90. years have I been learning to die. If a man had
Methusalahs days he could no more then con this lesson, now seeing repentance
is so long an art, and we think to repent as the thief, because Philip was
carried to Azotus at a trice, Acts 8. 30. which was as some affirm 16 miles,
does it follow that another shall do so too? the way to heaven is a long way,
and if the thief dispatched it in one hour, it was a miracle.

This repentance was extraordinary in regard of the Evangelicall perfection of
it, though dispatched on a sudden, yet it was not done to halves, but was
perfect consisting of these seven parts.

For first, there was his penetentiall confession, as you may read verse. 41.
we indeed justly receive the due reward of our death, q. d. It Is just with God
that I am brought to the gallows, and just it were with God if I were damned; I
have lived all my days in roving and hunting up and down, in breaking Gods
commandments, and now God has justly found me out; this is his open
penitential confession.

Here is his penitential profession, but this man has done nothing amiss,
all his Doctrine was true, not one jot amiss in all his life, there was
nothing amiss; but you Scribes have cried crucify him amiss; thou wretched
Judas have betrayed him amiss; he is the Son of God; here he confesses Christ
to be the Messiah, and thus he stood for him against all the world.

3. Here is his penitential satisfaction; as he had been partner with the other
thief in sin, so now he labors to make him satisfaction in turning him to
God; in the 40 verse, do thou not fear God, seeing thou art in the same
condemnation? Alas thou and I have played the villanes against God, and are
justly damned; But as we have been thieves together, so now let us repent
together, and call on God together; do thou not fear God seeing that thou
art in the same condemnation? and thus he labors to convert his fellow thief.

4. Here is his penitential self-denial; he denies himself, he loves the glory
of God more then his own soul or salvation, mark here how he labors to
convert his fellow thief and to make him give all the glory to God; he was so
wounded to the soul that his fellow thief should dishonor God, as that he
labored to turn him before he prayed for his own soul; do thou not fear
God? etc. this he said, before he said, Lord remember me; he lets his own
soul lie at the stake while he labors to glorify God; so that it is plain
he loves God more then his own soul.

5. Here you may see his penitential faith, he believes not with a general
faith, but with a saving and particular faith, with faith and assurance he
looks on Christ as his Jesus; he said unto Jesus; there is not one idle word
in this text, the holy Ghost says he said unto Jesus, he said not that he
thought to say so, but the Spirit of God witnesses that he said so indeed, he
spoke to Christ as to a Jesus.

6. Here is his penitential resolution of newnes of life and new obedience for
time to come; Lord, remember me; he acknowledges Christ to be his Lord, q.
d. I have followed the imaginations of my own will hitherto; all my stealing
and other sins have been to fulfill my own will; but now I confess thee to be
my Lord, and were I to live again, or any longer, I would for ever serve thee.

Lastly, here is his penitential prayer, Lord remember me; he acknowledges
Christ to be his Lord, nay he did not only pray thus, but says Basil, he
offered much prayer unto God, even as much as his short time could permit;
these words are but the sum of what he spoke, Lord remember me, etc. thus
you see he was no more a thief but a convert and confessor, as Augustine
observes, a wicked thief to steal earthly things, but a good thief (as we call
him to this day) to break through into the Kingdom of heaven, he steals
Paradise; thus you see what a wonderful repentance he had in regard of the
perfection of it; faith was in it, humiliation was in it, turning to God was in
it, felfe-denyall was in it, satisfaction was in it, and glorifying of God in
the face of the world was in it; nay he was the only professor of Christ, to
the Nations at that time; he had never a servant but this; never a word at this
time spoken for Christ, but that which this Thief spoke; none to back Christ
but this Thief; he was the only professor and confessor of Christ at this time,
the only man on the earth that glorified GOD. Therefore unless thou expect
such a death, to bring such glory to God as this Thief did, never bear thy
self upon his example.

Fifthly, This repentance was extraordinary, in regard of the incomparablenesse
of it; Never was there such a repentance since the world began, nor shall be
while the world stands: for when all the world, Jews and Gentiles, stood in
their obstinacy, Priests and Rulers, great and small, all cried Crucify him;
and when the Disciples doubted, this Thief believed; and when Peter denied
Christ, this Thief repented and confessed Christ; nay, when all the Apostles
showed their heels, this Thief stood to his tacklings, this Thief maintains
Christ against them all; nay when Mary Magdalen, out of whom Christ had cast
seven devils, when she was afraid to come near to the Cross, Mat. 27. 55. and
the mother of Zebedees children, who should have come near, yet they stood a
far off; only this Thief published the gospel of Jesus Christ, and makes open
acknowledgement of him to be the Savior of the world, when all his Disciples
and the world forsook him in their obstinacy, and, as the Papists observe, God
then had no visible Church upon the earth; so that this Thief on the cross put
down all the world for repentance, yea the Apostles of Christ. Now show me such
a repentance whereby thou may put down Peter and all the Apostles of Christ;
either show me such a repentance, extraordinary, incomparable, and wonderful,
to make them all ashamed: I say, either show me such a repentance, or never
trust on the Thieves example on the cross. If a man have a hundred miles to go
for his life, and but a short time allotted unto him, he had need make haste.
Now the way to heaven is a long way, and he that can begin and end that journey
when he lies a dying, is the quickest man of foot that ever yet was heard, this
Thief only excepted. If thou run to obtain, thou had need to have the art of
prayer and repentance, or else thou can not overtake them, for they are
before thee much.

This may serve to condemns those that rely upon this example. Oh, says one,
did not the Thief on the cross repent at the last hour? and God is the same
God still; and if he repented at thee last, why may not I? How many wrest this
Scripture to their own damnation? that live in sin with this Thief that went to
heaven; yet die and are damned, with the other Thief that went to hell.

I will demonstrate this and make it plain, because I desire to convince all
that hear me.

First then, tell me when this Thief was converted? was it not when Christ hung
on the cross? Mat. 27. 33. Christ hung then on the cross, and was to be
inaugurated King over all. Now, when Kings are inaugurated into their kingdoms,
they show that bounty, then, which they will not do again all the time of their
reign. We have of this a sufficient story in the Chronicles of England, of
King Henry the fourth, who when he was inaugurated King, he created 55 Knights,
he hung all the streets and lanes in London with cloth of gold, he made all the
Conduits in London to run with Sack. Claret and White wine: this he did when he
was inaugurated King, which he never did all his life time afterward. Even so
Christ was pleased to show mercy and grace unto this Thief, unto life eternal,
when he was inaugurated King over principalities and powers, over hell and
darkness. Now as K. Henry never created so many Knights again^ never hung
London streets so again, never made the Conduits run so with wine again; even
so the Lord showed such a bounty then, as, for ought we know, he never did
before, nor will do the like again.

Secondly, Kings when they are inaugurated, they pardon such offenses, forgive
such taxations, wrongs, injuries, treasons and fellonies, as they will never
pardon again as long as they live in the kingdom. So we read of Charles the 3.
King of France, that day that he was crowned, he pardoned all those that had
sinned against the Crown, in what kind soever they had offended; Why? because
he was crowned King, and so he would make that day a day of rejoicing. And thus
it was when Christ triumphed over hell, he forgave the sins of this Thief, the
like whereof we never read of, and for ought we know will never do the like
again.

3. Tell me where was this thief pardoned? Was it not in Golgotha, where Christ
was crucified, the place where Christ did triumph, where he was crowned, where
he forgave transgressions and sins? there it was where Christpardoned him. Now
as it is with a Captain when he has gotten the victory, he will set up some
monument at the place, that it may be a token thereof; so Christ having wrought
the salvation of the world, set up a monument there where he wrought it,
whereof none greater then this could be, not the rending of the rocks, nor the
earthquake, nor any of the wonders besides did so honor the death of Christ,
as the conversion of this Thief; who like a Physician having made an excellent
medicine, and desirous to try it, will do that for nothing; which he will not
do again for much: so Christ having made an admirable sovereign plaster for
the salvation of mankind, so soon as ever he had made it, he makes an
experiment thereof on this Thief; as if he should have said, Now you shall see
what my death can do. So then you see that the conversion of this Thief was no
ordinary, but an extraordinary wonder.

Fourthly, tell me how he cures by forgiveness, not by bare repentance only,
but by repentance with Martyrdom; he did not only nakedly repent of his sin,
but he died also a Martyr for Christ; he was a Martyr on the cross; for
although he was first hung on the cross for his evil deeds, yet afterward
when he repented and confessed the Lord Jesus Christ, and maintained him to be
the Messiah, and condemned Pilate, Herod, and the Jews, by publishing that he
was unjustly crucified, and that he was the son of God; I say though at the
first he was hung on the cross for his sin; yet now they let him hang for his
religion, as by their own law it was manifest; for they had a law that
whosoever confessed Christ, should be punished; so that now he confessing
Christ, they let him hang for his religion to Christ, so that he died a Martyr;
and verse 20. what a witness he gave unto Christ? The other answering, he
rebuked him, saying, Do not thou fear God? etc. As if he should say, thou
see the Scribes and Pharisees fear not God, they have conspired against the
Son of God. The Jews that should have believed on him cried crucifiy him;
Herod: has mocked him, Pilate condemned him; do thou not yet fear God? what
not thou that art in the state of condemnation, thou that art to be damned
within this hour? is it not enough for them to crucify Christ, but do not
thou fear God neither; Oh what a witness was this unto Christ; no wonder if
he found mercy when it pleased the Lord to enlarge himself so in bringing his
soul unto him.



it is once recorded that none might despair, and but once, that none might
presume. Christ saved him at the last cast, that when a man is at that pinch
he might not despair if he repent and become a new creature; and but one was
saved that none might presume.

There are many reasons why this Scripture is recorded.

First, to show the sovereignty of Christ's death, and as Christ healed all
manner of sickness in his life, so his death is able to heal all manner of
sins; it is the leaves of that tree only that can heal the Nations, Rev. 22.
2. and therefore the Scripture sets down a desperate example of a thief; for a
man must be a desperate man, if he be a thief: and Christ did this to show that
he can show mercy even to a thief; that so all the world may take notice of the
virtue of Christ's death.

Secondly, it is recorded, that no poor soul should cry out of his sins,
saying, I am damned, I am accursed, I am more sinful and graceless then any
man, more wicked then any man. I say, do not thus reason; for here is an
example set down of the thief, and you know what Christ said to the multitude,
of a Thief; Do you come unto me as to a thief, with swords and staves? as if he
should have said, You deal basely with me, as if I were as bad as a thief,
implying, that a thief is the worst of all men, nay as bad as the devil, Joh.
12. 6. And it is reckoned as one of their damnable usages against Christ, that
they hung him between two thieves, two of the vilest creatures of all: so that
a thief is an example of a desperate man; and yet you see Christ has mercy,
and gives it to a thief; Therefore if the LORD have enlarged thy heart to
repent, be not discouraged, but lay hold on CHRIST.

Thirdly, this Scripture is recorded, that we may not cast off all men that
come to the last cast; all men, though great sinners, must not desperately be
cast off: For suppose a man have been a Drunkard, yet prayer and supplication
may be made to God for him, and God may open his eyes, and there is some
possibility that he may be saved, though it be a thousand to one; yet I say
there is some possibility; for there was one thief saved at the last cast: and
therefore a Drunkard, etc. is not to be given over for quite gone. It may be
there are a wonderful company of improbabilities in it, yet we cannot tell but
that this may be the second to whom the Lord will give repentance, and
therefore the Lord converted this thief.

Lastly, this story is recorded, that by it we may be encouraged to believe,
and to be converted betimes. for if the Lord were so willing to receive the
thief that sought him but at the last hour, how willing will he be then to
receive thee that seek him betimes? But as for thee that live in thy sins,
and bear on the example of this Thief; let me tell thee, this story was
never penned for thy comfort. The Lord knew how men would abuse this story;
therefore S. Matthew, S. Mark, and S. John omit it; and if we had none to
testify it, all the world would say both the thieves were damned; nay, S.
Matthew says, the thieves, both the thieves cast the same thing in his teeth:
only S. Luke, he pens it for the comfort of the godly; he was loath (as it seems
to me) to leave it out quite, because some poor soul might stand in need of
it. Therefore let me here rap off the fingers of all those that would lay hold
on this example of the thief, to defer their repentance: this story belong
not unto such.

First, because this thief had not the means of life and grace before; for
where do you read in all the gospel, that ever this Thief had the means of
life? perhaps when Christ was preaching, he was pilfering; where do you read
that ever he heard any of the Apostles, or Seventy, or John the Baptist, or any
Sermon in all his life? No, no, he went roving up and down, we have not one
title to imply that he had the means of salvation; and therefore this is
nothing to thee, that have the preaching of the Word, which reproves thee of
thy sins and therefore if thou will go on, thou shall dye, Ezech. 3. 19.

Secondly, this story belongs not unto thee; for, where do thou read that
ever this thief did build upon this hope? do you think that this thief said I
will steal as long as I can, I know I shall be imprisoned, and I shall be
crucified with Christ, but while I lie in prison, I will repent, and then he
will have mercy on me? did this poor thief ever dream of these hopes; did he
presume of mercy, and so sin against mercies, and therefore thou that buildest
on this example, whosoever thou art, it belongs not unto thee.

Tush, tush, says the Drunkard shall I be damned? the thief was saved. Thou
cursed caitiffe, what though thou should repent and cry for mercy? art thou
sure the Lord will hear and pardon thee? when I spoke to you said Moses, you
would not hear, but rebelled, and were presumptuous, Deuteronomy. 1. 43. Do thou
presume on Gods mercy that he will convert thee at the last? I tell thee that
Gods mercy is good mercy, it is not like the mercy of a wicked Judge; that is
wickedly merciful, and suffers Rogues to be pardoned; No, no, Gods mercy is
good, psalm. 109. 21. mercy and justice are all one with God, and they have all
one name in scripture. There is a crown laid up for me says Paul which the
Lord, the just Judge shall give me ( viz) which God the merciful Judge shall
give unto me; God is just in his mercy, and therefore think thou to live in
thy sins, to swear, to lie, to be drunk, etc. and yet hope to have mercy? thou
art deceived; the Lords mercy is just mercy, and he will damn thee for
evermore, if thou repent not in sincerity. You never read in the Scripture,
that there is mercy in the ways of the devil: But, Psalm. 25. 10. all the ways
of the Lord are mercy and judgment, etc. So long as thou walk in the ways
of the Lord, there is mercy to thee in every step; mercy in Prayer, mercy in
hearing the Word, and in receiving the Sacraments; but in the ways of the
devil there is no mercy; for as long as thou walk in darkness, security,
and all sinful and vain courses, which are the ways of the devil, there is no
mercy for thee; for, the Spirit of God says, those that follow their vanities,
forsake their own mercies; you must turn from your own ways; for the way of
mercy lies in another road, in the road of holiness, humiliation, and
repentance, in the road of forsaking all your vain imaginations and thoughts;
If thou follow thy own ways, God will have no mercy on thee, Jonas 2. 8. He
will not tell a lie, to have mercy on thee: Gods mercy is true, and mercy and
truth go together, Psalm. 98. 3. Now if thou be a Drunkard, and do live and
die in that sin, God has said that he will damn thee, Gal. 5. 21. Now he
should be a liar, if he should not do it, and thou know that mercy and truth
go together in him: Therefore in time repent. Pish, pish, says the Drunkard,
etc. I hope the Lord will be more merciful; these Preachers preach nothing but
damnation, I hope the Lord will pardon me. Pardon thee; says God? how shall I
pardon thee for this? Thy children have forsaken me, and sworn by them that
are no gods, and though I fed them to the full, yet they committed adultery,
and assembled themselves by troops in the harlots houses, Jer. 5. 7. As if God
should have said, I cannot pardon thee. No: why? Thou will not come at me, thou
have forsaken me in mine ordinances, etc. Will a Physician cure a man that will
not come at him? why, they have forsaken me, says God, and they will not come
at me; as if he should say, I am willing to pardon, I send out my
commandments, but they will not bend their minds to keep them, they forsake
these ways of mercy. Have mercy on them? nay, shall I not rather visit for
these things, says the Lord? Jer. 5. 9. If those that disobeyed Moses law dyed
without mercy, Heb. 10. how then look thou for mercy, that despisest the
Lord Jesus, even the gospel of his kingdom? Nay, the cross of Christ calls
thee, he wooes thee by his death and passion, and now it thou will not obey,
thou shall die without mercy. Oh what a cursed conclusion is this: I have a
merciful and a good Father, and therefore I will lift up my head against him;
I know he will forgive me; I will break my head, I know where to have a
plaster to heal it; I will offer such a man a wrong, I know he will nnot sue
me? Thou cursed wretch! though the Lord pardon ten thousand, yet he will not
pardon thee; no, no, thou sinnest with a high hand. But keep your selves in the
love of God, looking for the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ, Jude 21. Keep your
selves there, if you be wise; for if Gods patience be abused, it will be turned
into wrath and wormwood, and it will burn like fire unto the nethermost hell:
to a man that sins against mercy, there is no redemption; this story belongs
not unto such.

Thirdly, this story is nothing to thee, because at that time God was in a way
of working miracles, but now he is not in that way; then he rent the rocks,
opened the sepulchers, and raised the dead, etc. Now unless thou take God in
this way again, never look to have thy sins pardoned, if thou go on in thy
sins with a high hand. It may be God will not be in the way of working of
miracles, when thou art a dying; No, the Lord will show salvation to no man but
unto him that orders his conversation aright, Psalm. 50. 23. thy life must be
right, and all thy ways must be upright, if thou mean to find mercy.

But the Thief was converted, without ordering his ways aright.

I answer, one Swallow cannot make Spring, nor one fair day a harvest; One
example cannot make a rule, one instance concludes nothing. This example
breaks no square; but it is only he that lives uprightly, that shall see the
salvation of God, and none else. And if thou do mean to go to heaven, thou
must go in the way that leads thither, and thou must do those things that are
between thee and heaven: there is but one way to heaven, and all that go to
heaven must walk that way; there is one faith, one newness of life, one kind
of regeneration, and God will have thee go all these over, he will have thee
run through every Commandment; all that come to heaven must travel thither:
therefore never bear thy self on this or that example, for it is a wonder of
wonders, one of the miracles of Christ's passion.

I remember the story of an ancient Confessor which proved a worthy Christian,
300 years after the Apostles time: this man was an old man, and had been a
Pagan all his days, and in his old age he hearkened after Christ, and said he
would be a Christian. Simplinus hearing him say so, would not believe him; but
when the Church saw him to be a Christian indeed, there was shouting and
dancing for gladness, and Psalms were sung in every Church, Caius Marius
Victorius is become a Christian: this was written for a wonder, that he in his
old age and in his gray hairs should become a good Christian; so this is a
great wonder, and an extraordinary example, that this Thief was converted. Do
you not think that there were a thousand thieves that at that time lived and
dyed in their sins, and so were damned? Were there not many widows in the days
of Eliah, and yet to none of them was he sent but to the widow of Sarepha? Were
there not many Lepers in the days of Elisha? yet none of them were cleansed
saving Naaman the Syrian. So there were many thousands at that time, and yet
for all that we know they were all damned, only this one is excepted. Now,
shall a man rush into a den of Lions, because Daniel did escape? or will a man
cast himself into a fiery furnace, because the three Children were cast in and
had no hurt? Shall a man venture to cast away his juels or his purse, because
one among a thousand did so, and found it again? No, no, these are wonders, and
therefore bear not thy self on this, or the like example.

The common rule is this, Live in sin, and die in sin; you that live in
sin now, shall then be damned in sin for ever, if you repent not. St. Paul
knew well that this thief was converted; and yet he says, Be not deceived,
neither Drunkards, nor Fornicators, nor Thieves, etc. shall inherit the kingdom
of God. 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10. St. Peter also knew that this thief was converted, yet
says he, If the righteous scarcely be saved? where shall the sinners and
ungodly appear? 2 Pet. 2. 9. St. James also knew this story, Jam. 5. 12. yet
if we swear, we may fall into condemnation. This is a most sweet example, if
by it we return unto God; but thou make a damned use of it, if by it thou
make thy self secure in thy sinful courses, hoping to be saved at the last,
as this thief was. Consider with your selves, wherefore are the commandments of
God? are they, think you, to be disobeyed while men live, and then when men are
dying, to cry God mercy? Again, why has God given you Ministers to preach the
Word of eternal life? Never to preach it to men till they are a dying? No, no,
deceive not thy self; thou must hear Gods Ministers preach whilst thou art
well. What, has God given you days, that you should spend your lives in sin?
No, no; says God, I gave her time to repent, but she repented not, Rev. 2. 21.
And this is the leason that God gives thee time; That thou might repent. The
Lord could have sent thee to hell as soon as thou wast borne, but that in mercy
he gives thee life and time to repent, that so thou may find forgiveness
with God, and chat thou may become a new creature, before thou go hence and
be no more seen. You that think to repent, resting on the example of this
thief, take heed lest the Lord put you off: therefore labor to obey whilst it
is called to day, and make use of the Word whilst it is sounded in your ears,
before these things be hid from your eyes.

THE SOVEREIGN VIRTUE OF THE GOSPEL. In a SERMON

BY That laborious and faithful Messenger of CHRIST, WILLIAM FENNER, Sometimes
Fellow of Pembroke Hall in Cambridge, and late Minister of Rochford in Essex.

THE Sovereign Virtue OF THE GOSPEL.
PSALM. 147. 3. He heals them that are broken in heart, and binds up their
wounds.
HEre are two things contained in this Text: the Patients, and the Physician.

First, the Patients; the broken in heart.

Secondly, the Physician, Christ, it is he that heals and binds up their
wounds.

The Patients here are felt and discerned to have two wounds or maladies;
First, brokennesse in heart; Secondly, woundednesse: He binds up such.

Brokennesse of heart presupposes wholenesse of heart: Wholenesse of heart is
twofold; either wholenesse of heart in sin, or wholenesse of heart from sin.

First, wholenesse of heart from sin, is, when the heart is without sin;
and so the blessed Angels have whole hearts, and so Adam and Eve, and we in
them before the fall, had whole hearts.

Secondly, wholenesse of heart in sin; so the Devils have whole hearts, and
all men since the fall from their conception, till their conversion, have whole
hearts; and these are they that our Savior intends, The whole need not the
physician, but they that are sick. The hearts that are whole, need not the
physician, but they that are broken and sick. Sin is in the godly, and they
are sick of it; even as when poison is in a man, it makes him sick; why?
because the poison is contrary unto him. But sin is in the wicked, and they
are not sick of it; as poison is in a toad, and the toad is not sick, because a
toad is of that nature which the poison is; and therefore he needs not a
physician. Will a Physician go to cure a Toad? surely no, he will rather kill
it, he wilt not cure it. So, as long as a man is not sick at the heart of his
sin, Christ will rather kill him than cure him. When a man says he is sick,
and yet can sleep, eat, drink, and work, and look as well as ever he did, feels
no pain, nor any thing to trouble him, what need has this man of a physician?
So when a man lives in sin, yet never breaks his sleep for it, but minds his
pleasures, his profits, has never the more pain nor anguish in his soul, he
is soule-whole, and heart-whole, what need has he of a Physician? This is a
man whole in his sins.

The wholenesse of the heart is called fallow-ground, Jer. 4. 4. for it is like
an unbroken field, not tilled nor manured; there can be no harvest, because the
ground does lie fallow; so there can be no harvest of grace in that man, whose
heart is fallow and unbroken; and therefore to repent and to break the heart,
in Scripture is called the putting of ones hand to the plough, Luke 9. 62. to
plough up the fallow ground of the heart.

Brokennesse of heart may be considered two ways; First, in relation to
wholenesse of heart in sin: so brokennesse of heart is not a malady; but an
inchoative cure of a desperate malady.

Secondly, in relation to wholenesse of heart from sin; and so it is a
malady or sickness, and yet peculiar to one blood alone, namely Gods elect;
for though the heart be whole, yet it is broken for its sins: as a man that
has a barbed arrow shot into his side, and the arrow is plucked out of the
flesh, yet the wound is not presently healed; so sin may be plucked out of the
heart, but the scar that was made with plucking it out, is not yet cured. The
wounds that are yet under cure, are the plagues and troubles of conscience, the
sighs and groans of a hungering soul after grace, the stinging poison that
the blow has left behind it; these are the wounds.

Now the heart is broken three ways. First, by the Law: as it breaks the heart
of a thief to hear the sentence of the Law, that he must be hanged for his
robbery; so it breaks the heart of the soul, sensible to understand the
sentence of the Law: Thou shall not sin; if thou do, thou shall be damned. If
ever the heart come to be sensible of this sentence, Thou art a damned man, it
is impossible to stand out under it, but it must break. Is not my word a hammer
that breaks the rocks in pieces? Jer. 23. 29. that is, Is not my word, my Law a
hammer? Can any rock-heart hold out and not be broken with the blows of it?
Indeed thus far a man may be broken, and yet be a reprobate; for they shall be
all thus broken in hell, and therefore this breaking is not enough.

Secondly, by the Gospel; for if ever the heart come to be sensible of its
blow, it will break ail to shatters. Rent your hearts, for the Lord is
gracious, etc. Joel 2. 12. When all the shakes of Gods mercy come, they all
cry, rent. Indeed the heart cannot stand out against them, if it once feel
them: Beat thy soul upon the Gospel: if any way under heaven can break it,
this is the way.

Aristotle observes, that a hammer may easily break a hard stone against a soft
bed; but if it be laid on an anvil, which will not give way underneath, strike
it as hard as you will with the hammer on the top, the anvil underneath props
it from breaking, or if it do break, it will not break into shatters; for the
anvil below helps the stone to hang fast together: but if you smite it against
a soft bed, it breaks it all to shatters. So, smite thy soul upon the Gospel;
preach the Law as much as you will, preach hell and damnation as much as you
will, let that be the hammer; but then be sure lay thy soul on the Gospel,
drive it to the Gospel, smite against this soft bed, and then (if ever) it will
break. If you strike a stone against a hard anvil, though the parts thereof
would fall asunder, yet how can they fly off, when as the hard anvil will not
give way? the hard anvil on the one side, and the hard hammer on the other
side, stop up its way from falling asunder, So, strike the soul with the
blows of Gods wrath as much as you will, and let it be upon the Law; alas
whither should the Law open it self that it might break? the Law does but fear
it on the one side, and the wrath of God does terrify it on the other, yet all
this while it is not broken; the soul all this while knows not what it shall
do: but smite it on the Gospel, and this, with the Law, rents it and breaks it
indeed. So Joel he preached hell and damnation to the people of the Jews, and
laid their hearts upon mercy, and then the hammer cries rent; for he is
merciful, etc. he laid them on the soft bed of the Gospel, and then he smites
them.

Thirdly, the heart is broken by the skill of the Minister in the handling of
these two, the Law, and the Gospel: God furnishes him with skill to press the
Law home, and gives him understanding how to put to the Gospel, and by this
means does God break up the heart: For alas, though the Law be never so good a
hammer, and although the Gospel be never so soft a bed, yet if the Minister lay
not the soul upon it the heart will not break; he must fetch a full stroke with
the Law, and he must set the full power of the Gospel at the back of the soul,
or else the heart will not break.

It is a pretty observation of Aristotle, Lay (says he) an axe upon a block,
and a great and mighty weight upon it, yet it will not enter into the block to
cleave it; but if you lift up the axe and fetch a full blow at the block, then
it enters presently. So if the Minister have not skill to fetch a dead blow at
the heart, alas he may be long enough ere he break it; but let him fetch a full
blow at the soul, then does he break it, if ever. I took unto me two staves,
says the Prophet, the one I called beauty, the other I called bands, and with
these I fed the flock, Zach. 11. 7. There is the course of a true feeder of the
flock, he feeds them with the Law and the Gospel; he takes his two staves, and
he lays about him, till the hearts of his hearers feel him: and this is the
way to feed them, and to break them off from their sins. Thus you see the means
that God uses to break your hearts. He heals the broken in heart. Hence
observe,

That Christ justifies and sanctifies. For that is the meaning.

First, because God has given Christ grace to practice for the sakes of the
broken in heart; and therefore if this be his grace, to heal the
brokenhearted, certainly he will heal them. The spirit of the lord is upon me,
etc. He has sent me to heal the broken in heart, etc. Luke 4. 18. If he be
created master of this art, even for this purpose, to heal the broken in
heart, he will verily heal them, and none but them. He is not like Hosander
and Hippocrates, whose father appointed them both to be Physicians; he
appointed his son Hippocrates to be a physician of horses, yet he proved a
physician for men; he appointed Hosander to be a physician for men, and he
proved a physician for horses. He is not like these; no, no, he will heal
those whom he was appointed to heal: now God appointed him to heal thee that
art broken in heart, and therefore without doubt he will do it.

2. Because Christ has undertaken to do it. When a skilful Physician has
undertaken a cure, he will surely do it: indeed sometimes a good physician may
fail, as Trajans physician did, for he died under his hands; on whose tomb this
was written, Here lies Trajan the Emperor, that may thank his Physician that
he died. But if Christ undertake it, thou may be sure of it, for he tells
thee that art broken in heart, that he has undertaken it, he has felt thy
pulse already Thus says the high and holy one whose name is holy; I dwell in
the high and holy place, and with him that if of an humble and broken spirit,
etc. Isa. 57. 15. He does not only undertake it, but he says he will go visit
his sick patient; he will come to thy bedside, yea he will come and dwell with
thee all the time of thy sickness; thou shall never want any thing, but he will
be ready to help thee: thou need not complain and say, Oh the Physician is
too far off, he will not come at me. I dwell in the high places indeed, says
God, but yet I will come and dwell with thee that art of an humble spirit. Thou
need not fear, saying, Will a man cure his enemies? I have been an enemy to
Gods glory, and will he yet cure me? yea, says Christ, if thou be broken in
heart, he will bind thee up.

Thirdly, because this is Christ's charge, and he will look to his own calling;
To this man will I look, even to him that is of a broken heart, Isa. 66. 2.
Mark; I will look to him, I will tend him and keep him. Neither need thou
fear thine own poverty, because thou have not a Fee to give him; for thou
may come to him by way of begging, he will look to thee for nothing; For, to
him will I look that is poor, etc.

Fourthly, none but the broken in heart will take Physic of Christ. Now this
is a Physicians desire, that his Patient would cast himself upon him; if he
will not, the Physician has no desire to meddle with him. Now none but the
broken in heart will take such Physic as Christ gives, and therefore he says,
to him will I look that is of a broken heart, and trembles at my words, Esaias
66. 2. When I bid him take such a purge says God, he trembles, and he takes
it. I bid him take such a bitter Potion, or such an untoothsome vomit, to fear
him from sin; he trembles at my word, and he dares not but off with it: But
when a soul does not tremble, then the Physician may say let him blood; but he
cares not for being let blood; he cares not for corrosives, he cares not for
his advise and counsel, he trembles not at his word; Christ will never come at
such a one; Christ bids thee follow such a diet as to watch, to pray, to fast,
to mourn, etc. to keep in and to take heed to catechizing, grow not cold by
being lukewarm, etc. If thou tremble at his word, well; If not, but that thou will go on in thy sins, and be damned for ever, then thank thine own
wilfulness. But if thou be broken in heart, Christ will assuredly heal
thee. Suppose thou shouldeft come unto Christ, be his physic never so
sovereign, and thou should take it: yet if thy heart be against it, the
physic cannot work. Imagination or fancy is a great thing in the good or ill
success of physic. If thou carpe at his precepts, as too strict, and except
against his word as if it had an ounce of wormwood too much in it; If thy
imaginations thus run against the physic, Christ's physic will never cure
thee; why so? thou art not broken in heart, to tremble at his word; he will
help thee without fail; but then thou must tremble at his word, and take his
directions, though he prescribe thee to eat thine own dung, and drink thine
own piss; take it I say what ever it be, and I will warrant thee health.

have but a little faith.

Peter; O thou of little faith wherefore did thou doubt? says our Savior,
Matthew. 14. 13. There is a little faith, and there is a great faith; O woman
great is thy faith, Matthew. 15. 28. whether it be a little faith or a great
faith, so it be true saving justifying faith, it is good physic, and it will
assuredly cure thee. It is not the quantity of faith that saves a man, but the
quality of faith. True it is, a great quantity of faith, because it has more
of the quality, more of the truth, it heales more strongly and more steadily;
But faith whether it be great or small, so it be true, that does the deed.
Shall the Patient doubt of his recovery because of the small measure of physic
that the Physician gives him? The Physician gives but a dram of such powder,
but perhaps the Patient would have a pound, when as it may be the state of his
body will not bear it. The Physician observes his measures in prescribing so
many ounces of this, so many scruples of that; there lies his skill in giving
the true measure; so there is a true measure of faith, Romans 12. 3. one man has
so much, and another man has not so much faith. Abraham had more faith then
Lot; the reason is, because the stare of Lots soul would not bear so much as
Abraham's. It is one of Hippocrates Amphorismes, Not too much at once.

A Physician finds it dangerous sometimes to empty the body at once, or to fill
it all at once, or to heat it or to cool it all at once; it is the safest way
to give by little and little; so God by little and little deals with thee; now
he gives thee some faith, and then a little more.



unguentum fidei, an oil of faith; now it may be the soul cannot see one jot
of faith in himself, yet he shall be cured because there is faith in a
confection, a mixed faith though there be none in manifestation. Thou weepest,
mournest, doubtest, and complainest, and thou can not believe as thou say;
yet thou never give over crying my God my God: well, here is faith in a
confection, but it may be it is so compounded with other ingredients that thou
can not perceive it; for you must know that there is faith so great that it
breaks out into a flame, and there is faith which is so small that it does but
smoke out a little; now whether thy faith be an inflamed faith or a smoking
faith, be of good comfort, thou shall be healed. The bruised Reed shall not be
broken, Mat. 12. 28.



one act, yet he has it broken in sunder; never a part is missing, though no
part closing one with another. The one whole act of faith is this, I believe
that God is my God in Christ. Indeed it may be thou have not this faith in the
whole, but if thou be broken in heart, thou have this whole broken in pieces.

First, thou beleevest that God is a God, there is one piece.

Secondly, thou beleevest that to whomsoever God is a God unto, it is only in
Christ.

Thirdly, thou beleevest that he that truly repents, may say say that God is
his God in Christ.

Fourthly, thou beleevest that repentance is a true hatred of sin as it is
sin.

Fifthly, thou beleevest, and thy conscience tells thee it is so indeed that
thou hate sin, not only as it is able to damn thee, but also as it is sin,
and dishonorable to God; now these are the parts of faith in the whole. Thou
have all the parts of the whole, though thou have not these parts in the whole.
Well then, thou have all the parts of true faith; as thou can not deny if
thou be broken in heart. Totum non dissert realiter a partibus simul
sumptis. All the parts and the whole do not differ really, says the
Philosopher; he that has three groats, cannot complain he wants a shilling;
he that has ruff and stock and string, can he be far to seek for a band? so
then if thou have faith in the parts on this fashion, it is certain thou have
faith in the whole, though it appear not yet to be whole.

Aristotle asks this question, whether the parts be before the whole or no;
as for example, whether a man or a finger be first. I will not stand here to
determine this question; but this is certain, that the whole is a relative
thing, spoken in relation to its parts, and it is like the relation begins in
the whole; for first, we say that a whole is that which consists of parts, and
then the parts are they that make up the whole, and therefore if thou verily
beleevest in part, thou verily beleevest indeed. Thus David was a believer in
part, my very soul says he is consumed with grief Psalm. 31. 9. my strength
fails me because of mine iniquity, etc. verse 10. I am forgotten as a dead
man, etc. verse 12. he was a vessel of election, but yet you may see he was a
broken vessel; he could not believe in the whole, for he was afraid that God
had cast him out of his mind, like a dead and an undone man; nevertheless he
was a believer in part, he was Gods broken vessel.



thou have no faith yet in being, yet thou have something to secure thee from
wrath; there is difference between Fides creditura and Fides credens, between
faith about to believe, and faith that does already believe. It is belief
believing that saves a man: But belief about to believe, cures a man from being
a reprobate. Though the fruit in the womb be not yet quickened with reasonable
soul, yet it grows in the womb, feeds in the womb, and yet it has no other
life in it then may be in a beast; yet because it is in fieri a man, the
Mother complains not saying Oh I am afraid I have a beast in my womb; no, she
will wait Gods leisnre to quicken it; it is secure enough from being a beast;
for it has such dispositions as will not long be without the soul of a man in
the same, though as yet there be nothing in it, but what may be in a beast; But
yet the Mother is secured because she is persuaded she bears a babe in her
womb. So many poor souls are too hasty to censure themselves; for grant thou
have no faith as yet, yet if thou be broken in heart, thou art about to have
faith; only let the word have his full work on thee, unto which thou must
diligently attend, and then this fides in fieri will be quickly fides in factum
esse. Thus the blind man in the Gospel was about to believe before he
believed; he had a time of a fieri of faith; he was no believer this time; for
he had as yet no faith; neither was he an unbeleever; for he was about to
believe. Do thou beleeeve on the Son of God? says Christ John 9. 35. he
answered, who is he Lord that I might believe on him? verse 39. Believe? yea
that I would with all my heart, who is he, and where is he that I might
believe? I have been hated for his names sake, I have been cast out of the
Synagogue for his sake; Lord thou know I would believe on him; but who is
he and where is he? and he is vanished away from me; I have sought him; but I
cannot find him. Then Christ told him, I am he that now talks with thee; and
then he believed; and Saint Chrystome observes that this blind man was about to
believe, before he did desire it in his soul; and so it may be it is now with
thee; do thou believe in Christ? who is he? say thou, where shall I find
that Christ is in me that I may believe in him? I weep and hunger, and I thirst
after Christ; but who and where is he? I have sought him in the word; but I
find him not; I have sought him in prayer and in all other his ordinances; but
I find him not; I would believe with all my heart if I could find him. Thus the
soul may be about to believe, though it do not already believe; have thou
gotten this same about to believe? be not thou dismayed, the plaster is come;
and it will heal thee.

Conceive these words aright I beseech you; a speech is not as it is taken, I
mean only the broken in heart; for otherwise a man may be about to believe, yet
never believe; about to be healed of his sins, yet never be healed. Even like
the wretch that Zophar speaks of, who shall be about to fill his belly, and
not be able to fill it, Job 20. 23.

There is a twofold about to be; First, either such a thing as is about to
be, and that is the nature of it, and it will never be otherwise; but still
only about to be. Secondly, or else such a thing as is about to be, and that is
the progress of it, and not to rest there, bun at the last to be indeed.

Fear you then, all you that are vain, and as yet in your sins; you are about
to believe, and that is the nature of your faith; it is only about to believe;
like the officers of the next year, who are about to be officers and yet are
not. Beloved, never look to be healed, if you be not broken in heart; It may
be thou art broken from some of thy sins; but if thou be not broken from them
all, it is nothing; and thou caust not be healed. Alas thou may be broken in
some sense, and yet never be healed. There is a double breaking, says
Aristotle, either breaking into great parts, as wood is broken into logs; or
breaking into small parts, as a stone is broken into powder; it may be thy
stony heart is broken, but it is only into lesser stones, thou art fallen from
greater sins to lesser, from bouzing and company keeping, to drinking and
sipping; from playing and gaming on the Sabbath, to talking of worldly affairs
on the Sabbath; from praying not at all, to pray coldly. Alas, alas thou have a
hard heart still; when a great stone is broken into lesser stones, the lesser
stone is as hard as the great stone; thy heart must be broken to powder, if
ever God heal thee.

First, because Physic will never cure a man, unless it may enter and run into
the veins; and when it is entered into the body, and diffused up and down
through all the diseased parts thereof, then it cures; now if thy heart be not
broken, the Physic cannot enter; give a purgation to a stone, it may moysten
the outside, but it cannot soake in, to soften the stone; why, because the
stone is close; but if the stone were broken into powder, then it would soake
even into the heart of the stone.

God opened the heart of Lydia, and then the word entered. Acts 16. 14.
Brethren, you have been under the hands of Christ's Physicians ever since you
were borne; but where is the heart that is broken? all the Physic is lost, the
word has no entrance, it has skinned the wound; and seared the outside
indeed; but the hardness of the heart is not cured. How long have you been
under Physic for the curing of your earthlinesse and vanity? how long have you
lien by it for your anger and malice, etc. under the means, yet never the
nearer? whose hearts are broken? I fear the Physic does not soake, it comes
no nearer then the outside. The Lord is nigh unto them that are of a broken
heart Psalm. 34. 18. why? because their hearts are open and broken, and Christ
and his word comes near, yea so near that it touches them to the quick; But
if ye be not broken in heart, no Balm, no Physic can come near enough to
cure you.

Secondly, thou can never be cured unless Christ cure thee; now Christ will
never take thee in hand till thou be broken in heart. A Physician will not
meddle with a desperate cure, such a one who is not capable of Physic. Let not
any Physician says Hippocrates set upon a fruitless cure. Now it is fruitles
to give thee any Physic it is fruitless to pour grace into thee, or to
vouchsafe pardon to thee; this Physic will never heal thee so long as thou art
not broken in heart; and therefore Christ scorns to take thee in hand. True it
is if thou were broken in heart, God would not despise thee; for the sacrifice
of God is a broken spirit; so says the Psalmist, A broken and a contrite heart
O God shall thou not despise, Psalm. 51. 17. so then if thy heart be not yet
broken it is yet incurable. Indeed if we consider Christ's absolute power, no
heart is uncurable; for he can heal it what ever it be, for all is at his
command. But God does not go according to his absolute power, but according to
his expression and meaning of, and in his word; now the method that God sets
down in his word, is thus; first the heart must be broken and then it must or
way be healed; so then so long as thou art not broken in heart, thou art
incurable.

Thirdly, suppose Christ should begin to heal thee, thou being not broken in
heart, wilt always be taking off the plaster before thou be cured; sometimes
God terrifies thee with the law, and then thou pullest off that plaster; Even
like unto a dainty Dame, who having taken physic, and feeling it begin to
wamble in her stomach, puts a feather in her throat to cause her to vomit it up
before it have its full working. And thus many take hopes and comforts and
promises before the set time.

In some physic, a quarter of an hours difference may cost one his life; when
a man is to be cut of the stone and he be bound hand and foot, yet if he do
but stir or struggle before the Surgeon has quite done with him, it is a
thousand to one but he dies for it; so they in the second Psalm had a stone in
the heart; Christ would have cut them for the stone, but they would not be
bound, they would not endure their cutting, no let us break his bonds asunder,
and cast away his cords from us, Psalm. 2. 3. men cannot be smitten at a Sermon,
but oh they must presently have comfort; as soon as once the physic begins
to make the head to ache, and the stomach to be sick, and the man to be
exceeding ill, it is a sign that the physic does now begin to work; but if
this man should devise how to vomit it up, or to glister it out, he loses all
the benefit of the physic; keep this plaster on as long as thou can, if
ever thou mean to be healed. If the wound be thoroughly whole, the plaster
will fall away of it self. Should a man have never so good a plaster and
should every foot be taking it off, it would never do him any good. If God have
shot an arrow into thy heart, bind the plaster to the sore, and let it there
rest till the malignity of the sore and venom of the wound be put out. But if
thou be not broken in heart, it is in vain to minister or to say any thing unto
thee, because thou will not abide the physic within thee, nor suffer the
gripes that thou must suffer if ever thou be healed. And therefore all you that
are broken in heart, in any measure or manner, be of good cheer, the Lord will
heal you; he health the broken in heart.

See here these particulars.

First, for the seasonablenesse of it, when it is a seasonable time to be
healed, and that is when the heart is in need, and it is in need when it is
broken; as a man is in need of meat, when he is hungry; so a man is in need of
meat, when he is broken in heart: God will give thee that which thou need,
and that in due season says Augustine. In an acceptable time have I heard
thee, Esaias 49. 8. God looks when it will be most seasonable to give grace, and
then he gives it; therefore wait, never complain of Gods delaying his hand; if
he do, it is but for a better season; I have need of healing already say
thou; but if God do nor yet heal thee, then thou must know it is not yet
seasonable, and the more need thou art in, the better welcome is help when it
comes.

Secondly, when it is most profitable for thee; when he is broken in heart, it
will do him good to be healed; but if God should heal thee before, it would
hurt thee; when the Corrosive has wrought out his work, then it is good to
have a Cordial; now the Cordial will help the man; but if the Physician
should give him a Cordial first, it would help the disease, and endamage the
man. Comfortable Cordials before the time have bin the damnation of many
souls. Oh thou would fain have comfort for thy soul; what? before the
Corrosive has eaten out the sin? thou wishest thine own poison; If God let
thee wait for thy healing, understand that he does it for thy good; only let
his Corrosives work their full course, and then he will heal thee. Wait on the
Lord says David Psalm. 27. 14. give not over waiting how long so ever it be,
and he will heal thee assuredly when it shall be best for thee.

Thirdly, in puncto, even just in the very nick of thy brokennesse in heart
will his healing come. It is well observed that the word in the original is
put in the participle indifferent to any time, whether past, present or to
come, he does not set down any time, because he will do it punctually, just at
the pinch, when thou art broken in heart; Oh then if thou be not yet healed,
know then that thou art not yet come to this punctum; but when thou art come to
it, then thou shall be healed. What if thou do lie under the heavy and
frowning hand of God? do not shake it off, but kiss that rod, and humble thy
self the more: Sometimes God lets a broken heart shake off his hand a little
too soon, sometimes again he will not let them. David would feign have shaken
it off; but he could not; God would not let him. Lord rebuke me not in thine
anger, says he, etc. Psalm. 38. 1, 2. How did he know that Gods arrows stuck
in him fast? It seems that he had been pulling at them; he would feign have
had them out, he would have been comforted all on the sudden, but he could
not; God would not let him. Lord rebuke me not (says he) in thine indignation,
etc. Rebuke meas much as thou will, but let it not be in thine indignation;
chasten me as much as thou will, but let it not be in thy heavy displeasure. Oh
pluck out thine arrows, take off thy hand; I pluck at them, but they stick
fast; I shake and rub to get off thy hand, but it presses me so sore that I
cannot get it off. Beloved, it is necessary that some while Gods own people
should bleed under Gods wrath; for by this means the corruption of sin is
purged out. Thus you see in some God will not let them shake off his hand;
others, if they will needs have it off, they shall, that they may afterward
see their own folly. Thus many a poor child of God, in conflict of conscience
and sense of Gods wrathful displeasure, scrapes comfort too soon, and God lets
them take it before he gives it: he would have had them first thoroughly cured,
but they were loath to be humbling their souls so long: but see the event of
it, the sore is only skinned over, and at the last the wound it breaks forth
afresh, and then it may be they lie seven years together and get no comfort,
yea sometimes twenty years, yea, I have known some that have lived so thirty
years. Now they may thank their own folly; for if they would have been ruled
by Christ, and been humbled all together at the first; they might have escaped
this scouring; but now they repent it every vein in their hearts, and can
hardly claw it off until death. I call these the children of God, because they
have lain a long while under Gods hand, and yet still cry after God, it is a
sign they are his children; for Gods children are many times in affliction a
long while; see it in Job, etc. Neither can I belive, but that all those that
lie sundry years on this fashion still crying after God, are the children of
God; or at the least, it is so to be hoped: for if they were reprobates, and
had shaken off Gods hand, plucked out his arrows, and scraped after comfort, he
would either let them fall into a perpetual fools-paradise of presumption or
security, or else let them moulder away in despair, not caring to seek after
God in the means at all. And therefore, beloved, pluck not out Gods arrows too
soon: I speak net to all, for some will not pluck them out when they should;
but I speak to all such as are over-hastie for to get Cordials before the
Corrosive have had his full working. If men be never so little humbled,
reformed, or wrought upon, presently they think they be in very good case: the
very Heathen could say, we are commonly deceived with seeming virtue and grace;
and hence it is that wicked men are humbled by halves, They think, they are
thoroughly humbled, when their hearts are broken by halves; they think they are
broken in heart. And as a stick that is half in the water, and half above the
water, seems to be broken or bent in the midst; so these men when they are
half in their sins, and half out, seem to themselves to be brokenhearted: But
if the stick were either al in the water, or al out, would appear as it is: it
seems to be broken, when as it is not: so, many being half in their sins,
and half out, seem to be brokenhearted, when indeed they are not.

But (beloved) before I can give you the healing here in, this Text, it is good
reason that I examine you whether you be broken in heart, or no. Prognostica
praecedunt Therapeuticen, says Argastus; Prognostiques, and telling the signs
and symptoms of the disease, are before the healing of the disease. When we
believe a thing to be so, we have a proverb to say ' it is a sign it is so. Do
thou say thou art broken in heart? It Is a sign it is so, thy carriage is so
mortified; A sign it is so, thy communication is so heavenly; A sign it is so, thy
companions are so holy etc. If a man cannot cast thy water on this fashion,
thou art not broken in heart. And therefore Signa tibi dicam, etc. I will help
thee with the signs and sumptomes of a broken heart, that so thou may
examine thy self.

The signs I reduce to these two heads.

First, a breaking from sin, as a rotten member is broken from the body; so
that the heart is then said to be broken indeed, when it is broken off from sin.

Secondly, a breaking in it self, so that the heart is said to be broken when
it is broken with sorrow and selfe-denyall, so that nothing can piece it up
again, but the favor of God. These two made up a broken heart, and therefore
they shall be the heads of examination.

First, then do thy sins go thick away from thee? when the cold is once
broken, we use to say, now it is going away, not in the rhume as before, but
in thick fleam. If thou be broken in heart, then thy pride, thy earthlinesse,
thy self-love, thy deadness to good duties, and all thy sins go thick from
thee. It may be thou have some poares in thy heart, and thy sins fall away from
thee in the rhume, but if they go not away from thee in thick fleame, the cold
of thy frozen heart is not yet broken. The sins of Zacheus were injustice and
oppression, etc. but as soon as ever he was broken in heart, these sins went
away thick from him, not dropping as if he were loath they should part but in
great flakes, Zacheus stood (says the text) and said unto the Lord, behold
half of my goods I given unto the poor, etc. Luke 19. 8. see how his sins went
away; every word voids thick fleam.

First, he stood; before he clymed and gazed after Christ, but being broken in
heart, he stood ready pressed to do what soever Christ would command him.
Secondly, he said unto Christ; before Christ might have said unto him what he
would; what cared he? but now that he is broken in heart, here is hardly a
word that Christ said unto him of any such matter yet he said to Christ.

Thirdly, Behold before his behold was carnal, he did what he did to be seen
of men, if ever he gave ought, he loved that men should behold, but now all his
care was that Christ would behold it.

Fourthly, I give. Before he thought, I will give was enough, I will give when
I die, I will build hospitals when I am dead; but now that he is broken in heart
he gives it forthwith.

Fifthly, the half of my goods; before he counted a penny or a farthing to a
poor body, a great matter, a great dole, if given now and then; but now that
he is broken in heart, the half and not only of the superfluity, but also of
Esaus very substance and goods, as it is in the original, I give to the poor,
not as men commonly do, light come, light go; it may be they feast their rich
neighbors, but he gives half his substance to the poor Saints of God.

Sixthly, And if I have taken any thing wrongfully, though it were not much; If
I have taken any thing, though not from the rich and great ones, but from any,
rich or poor, young or old, stranger or not stranger, no matter who; if I have
taken any thing from any man by false accusation, not only against Law where
the Law binds me to restitution, but if I have taken any thing by forged
cavillation, though the Law will boulster me out, yet I restore him; he did not
say, I give him, as many will do, calling that which should properly be called
restitution for wrong, a gift I give, say they; he says not so; but he casts
off the thought of a gift, and does what he does by way of restitution.

Seventhly, If I have taken any thing; before he could swallow down the known
wrongs that he did; but now that he is broken in heart, he makes a mends for
the wrongs which peradventure he did not, to be sure, If I have taken, I
restore, his restitution goes absolute; although his wrongs go upon ifs, I
restore him says he; and that not nigardly or scantly, or no more the needs
must, but fourfold* Thus he reasons; now he is broken in heart; his sins go
thick away from him.

The text but even now called him little Zacheus, before he had seen Christ;
merito adhuc pusillus quia nondum viderat Christum. Justly might he be said to
be little Zacheus, because then he had not seen Christ; but as soon as ever he
had seen Christ whom he had wronged by these wrongs; as soon as ever he was
broken in heart, he became a great repenter, his sins ran thick away from him.
As soon as the boil is broken out comes the matter; As soon as the vein is
broken, out comes the blood; true it is adrop of blood may come though the
vein be not broken; if the finger be but rac'd a few drops may come, but if
the vein be once broken, out comes the blood thick and threesold; If thou do
but prop off thy sins now and then, thy hear was never broken; for if thou wast
once broken in heart, thy reformation would come apace, thy repentance and thy
amendment would come thick and threefold; but if we preach and exhort, and yet
see but thin reformation in thee, as a sight or so, thou was never yet broken
in heart: if thy heart be yet full of thy self-love, full of thy pride, lusts,
etc. if thy affections be yet full of earthly desires, worldly delights, vain
hopes, carnal fears; if thy back be yet full of thy garish and humerous
apparel, thy heart is not yet broken; why? because the filthy matter runs not
out.

Zacheus when he was broken in heart, his corruptions ran out apace; both his
unreadinesse to good duties, and his deadness and dullness to holy duties:
Christ need not say much unto him; for he said unto Christ; his desire of the
credit of the world ran out, for he gave the half of his goods to the poor;
his backwardness and delaying ran out; for he made present dispatch, I give,
his very secret and unknowen iniquities ran out, if I have taken, etc. All his
sins ran thick away from him. why? because a broken heart can hold no sin; this
is the first sign of a broken heart from sin; if it be broken from its sinful
course.

The second is, if it be broken from its wildness; the Hauk is then broken
when it is made fit for the Lurk, and the colt is broken when made fit for the
saddle; if he be not broken, he will not be willing the rider shall come on his
back; man is borne like a wild Ass colt, Job. 11. 12. so thou wast borne, and
so thou have been, and art thou not as yet broken from it? if thou be broken in
heart, then thy heart is tame to every commandment, to every truth, and thy
affections are tame to every precept. It is Calvin's similitude, thou art not
yet (says he) fit for Gods saddle, if thou let the Devil, the world, (...)
lust ride thee, thou must be broken (...) thy wildness, or else thou art not
broken in heart; it may be thou art a (...) bridled from thy lusts; alas so
thou may be, yet be wild for all that. Be not like those beasts Psalm. 32.
9. For though they be bridled and held in, yet they are wild still, Be not like
horse and mule, says Ambrose, for though they suffer bit and bridle, yet had
they rather be at rack and manger, or a grass in the field, they delight not
to be sadled.

Do thou not despise to be curbed by the word, to be bitted by reproof,
would thou not rather be free; God casts in good motions into thy heart,
and thou casts them out, and they vanish; God pu^ in good purposes into thy
heart, but thou flingest them off, and do not fulfil^ them, like a wild horse
that flings off (...) rider. Thou can not be crossed a little but presently
thou art wild with choler and anger; thy flesh and blood cannot endure it, and
do thou yet say that thou art broken in heart? no, no; thou wast born a wild
Ass Colt, and so thou art still. Thou were borne a wild olive, and so thou art
still. Thou was never yet broken in heart, never yet broken from sin; if thou
were broken from thy wildness, then every exhortation would tame thee; then
thou would be glad to be reprooved, and controuled by the word; Thou would
leap at every commandment, were it never so strict, But if thou count it
preciseness and too much strictness to be holy amd zealous, I say thou art
yet but a wild colt. Oh my brethren we have many amongst us who are like
Ishmael, who was a wild man, Genesis 16. many wild men, who pray wildly, and
think wildly, and hear wildly; their hearts are wild gadding hearts; while
the word is preaching, they follow their own imagnations.

Dare thou venture upon any sin against the Gospel of Christ, and dare
thou live in it till thou art a wicked Bedlam, The Psalmist brings all such in
as if they were mad Bedlams, saying; why do the heathen so furiously rage,
etc. Christ would have bound them, but they forsooth were too wild; they would
not be bound; but say they let us break his bonds, and fling off his cords:
they will not be bound to such strictness dare thou swear and lie and
covet, and be drunk, etc? alas man man thou art in a mad vain. Dare thou
break the sabbath; live in thy lusts, etc. a fury has taken thee, thou art a
mad man; God must break that wild heart of thine, else thou can not be
tamed, it may be thou art bridled from sin; but do thou bridle thy self; if
not, thou art wild for all the bridling thou have: you never saw a horse bridle
himself; no, no; it is wild, peradventure thou do bridle they self when
thou art not much tempted; but if thou be broken in heart, thou will
refrain all provocations whatsoever. I will keep my mouth, etc. Psalm. 39. 1.
while the Devil was before him, as Hierom expounds it, or while Shimei was
before him to tempt him with wicked reproaches and disgrace full speeches, as
Basil and Theodoret expoound it, then would David keep his tongue as with a
bridle when he was greatly tempted to sin. Here then is all the trial; can
thou bridle thy self from sin when thou art tempted to sin? if thou be broken
in heart, thou can; but if thou can not, thou art wild unto this day. The
wild beasts are tame enough till a prey comes before them, and so thou may be
tame when temptations are down; but art thou tame when a temptation is before
thee. This is a second sign of brokennesse of heart if thou be broken from
thy wildness.

Thirdly, if thou be broken in heart, then thou art broken from thy pride, and
thou will stoop to Gods word in all things. A broken heart is an humble heart,
I dwell with him says God Esaias. 37. 15. pride is the root of all sin; what is
the reason that any dare sin, but because they think better of themselves in
their sins then they do deserve? for did a man but think he were accursed and
a damned wretch in sinning against God, be durst never sin, or did a man feel
that every sin makes a man filthy; yea more filthy then a toad; did a man feel
his own damned condition, he durst not live in sin? a man thinks better of
himself then he deserves whenever he sins against God. Hear and give care
and be not proud, for the Lord has spoken it, Jer. 13. 15. If the Lord speak,
and thou do not hear and obey, thou art proud, Oh but I am not proud, then
think thou, for I will hear the poorest body in the street when they speak
to me; yea and I will and do give the wall to my betters, will thou so? will thou give man the wall and take the wall of God? is not this pride? swear not
says God; yet thou will take the wall of that commandment, and swearest. Let
not the Sun go down upon thy wrath says God; thou take the wall of that
commandment too; and can remember an ill turn, a month after, so, etc. This
is execrable and abominable pride. Thou seek after thy profits and pleasures
more then after the glory of God. I cannot live else, says one; I cannot be
merry else, says another; and I must tell a lie now and then, and must suffer
bousing and swearing in my house, or else I cannot live. Thou proud wretch,
what must thy mirth and thy credit perke above the commandment of Christ? The
wicked through the pride of his countenance will not seek after God, Psalm. 10.
4. It is wicked pride indeed when thou seek thy self more then God. I tell
thee the word has not broken the heart until it has broken the neck of this
pride of thine; never tell me that thou art not proud in thy apparel; if a
servant go never so meanly in apparel, yet he is proud if he obey not all his
Masters lawful and good commandments, never tell me thou bowest to God or thou
kneelest in prayer to God; cluck and crouch, bow and bend thou never so much,
yet thou art proud, if every corruption of thine will not yield to every
commandment of God; thou art not broken in heart; for if thou were broken in
heart thou would stoop to all Gods commandments. Do thou mock at
preaching, etc. tush, thou will not be so precise, If ever thou be one of his,
thou will not only obey him, but also be circumspect in all thy obedience; nay
if thou be broken in heart, thou will not only stoop to every commandment of
God, but also count it thine honor and glory, though it be the meanest office
in his service. Thou art my glory says David, David that was broken from his
pride, counted it his glory to obey God, his glory to serve God, yea his glory
to be reproached for his sake, Thou art not broken in heart till thou count it
thine excellency to serve We use to say such a ones excellency is in his
learning or wit, etc. but he is too precise and too holy as if it were not a
man's excellency to be pure and zealous, and to serve God: But I tell thee if
thou count it not thine honor to be forward for God, and to be nicknamed for
Christ, thine excellency to lie in this that thou art godly and heavenly, thon
art a proud fool; when John Husse was to write upon the Epistle of Saint James,
he counted it such an high office of dignity that he was confounded at his own
indignity, saying unto God, Hei mihi laudare to contremisco; he counted it such
an honor to do any thing for God that he was ashamed at his own vildnesse. O
my brethren God is called the excellency of Jacob; it was not their valor nor
wisdom, but this was their excellency, that God was their God; thy riches are
proud riches if thy excellency lie in them more then in God; if thou do not
go about every commandment as thine excellency, thy obedience is proud. This
is a third sign of a heart brokeu from sin if it be broken from its pride.

A Funeral SERMON Preached by That laborious and faithful Messenger of
CHRIST, WILLIAM FENNER, Sometimes Fellow of Pembroke Hall in Cambridge, and
late Minister of Rochford in Essex.

A FUNERAL SERMON.
ISAI. 57. 1. The righteous perish, and no man lays it to heart, merciful
men are taken away, none considering that the righteous are taken away from the
evil to come.
IN the end of the former chapter the Prophet reproves the special sin of
Idol* shepherds who followed their own pleasures and profits, not regarding
their flock. Now he reproves the general sin of security in the people, and
namely in this, that whereas the righteous perish, yet no man lays it to
heart; and merciful men are taken away, none considering, etc.

This verse is a complaint of the Prophet touching the people in general, for
that they considered not the Judgments of God upon them in taking away the
righteous from among them.

In the words themselves we are to consider.

First, the work of the Lord, viz. the righteous perishes and merciful men are
taken way.

Secondly, the peoples sin in not considering it, not regarding this work of
the Lord, which is, that the righteous may be delivered from the evil to come.

By righteous is here meant not such as are legally righteous by the works of
the law; for so no man is righteous, but by righteous is here meant such as are
Evangelically righteous, by the righteonsnesse of faith in the Gospel.

Perishes, that is, from the earth; for otherwise the righteous perish not.

No man considering, that is, no man lamenting, mourning, or grieving for the
loss of them.

The first thing then to be considered, is from the first part; and it is
plain out of the words of the text, That all men must dye; even the most holy
and most righteous; for they are all subject to the stroke of bodily death as
well as the wicked; There is no remembrance says Solomon of the wise more then
of the fool; and how dies the wise man? even as the fool, Eccles. 2. 16. so
Zacha. 1. 5. Your farhers, where are they? and the Prophets, do they live for
ever? so that we see Prophets and fathers dye as well as other men; yea those
Worthies recorded in the Scripture, Noah, Abraham, David, etc. they are all
gone the same way, they are all dead.

The first reason is, because it is appointed unto all men once to dye, and
after that comes the judgment, Heb. 9. 27. God has thus decreed it, and
therefore itmust be so.

Secondly, because all men and women are of the dust; and therefore must return
to the dust again; dust thou art, says God, and unto dust thou shall return,
Genesis 3. 19.

Thirdly, because, all have sinned, even the most righteous man; now the wages
of sin is death, Romans 6. 23. the most righteous man must dye.

Fourthly because, as death came into the world by sin, Romans 5. 12. so sin must
go out of the world by death; and therefore it is needful that the righteous
die, that so they may be freed from sin.

But some may object and say has not Christ abolished death? why then do the
righteous die.

dye; but he abolished the dominion of sin, so that it does no longer reign in
us; and so he has taken away the dominion of death, so that it does not rage
as a Tyrant over us, so that it is not hurtful unto us as a punishment, but as
a means to convey us into a better life. Christ has taken away the sting both
of sin and death; though not the things themselves away from us; yet he will
one day free us from them both; so then the righteous must suffer death as well
as the wicked, though not in the same kind.

Let no man then look to be exempted from death for his righteousness, nor
from any outward miseries that may befall the sons of Adam; nay if we are the
servants of Christ, we must look for a greater share in these then other men;
greater crosses, greater afflictions, greater sickness and harder pangs of
death do often befall the righteous, as it did unto this our brother, who though
he were old and stricken in years, yet the pangs of death were strong upon him.
Those whom God will make heirs of Eternal life, he suffers them to have a
greater portion in these afflictions. But the wicked are fat and full, and die
with their bones full of marrow, as Job speaks; they commonly have little
sickness and an easy death: but the godly do ordinarily undergo greater
pangs; let none therefore think that for his righteousness he shall be free.

Secondly, consider we here how few amongst us have learned this Arithmetique,
namely to number our days, and they are but short, even a span long; who is
there almost that thinks on death? who prepares himself for it? and yet all,
even the most righteous must die; for God has placed that fiery blade of death
at the entrance into the Paradise of heaven, so that none can enter before they
taste of death, and all must taste of it, yea the most righteous are not
exempted from the stroke of death. This then should teach us to labor to draw
our hearts from the love of this present life; and what can better persuade us
and wean us from the love of this world, then a due consideration of death? we
know we must all die, and therefore we should prepare our selves for it. If any
profane person amongst us knew that this night must be his last night, and
that now he had no longer to live, would not this amaze him and make him
bethink himself and to prepare for death? If rich coveteous men which spend
the whole course of their life in providing for the things of this life, did
truly consider of death, and that their end draws nigh, would they do as
they do, when this life and all the things of this life, and all our joys and
pleasures of this world shall shortly have an end? for when death comes, they
shall all be taken from us, or rather we from them. Oh how excellent a thing is
it then for us to be drawn from the things of this life unto a due
consideration of death, and of those heavenly Joys and happiness to come! Oh
you that look for these things, what manner of men ought you to be in holy life
and conversation?

Thirdly, seeing we all must die, and this present life must come to an end,
this should teach us to prepare our selves for a better life; to provide for a
surer building, a better estate which shall never perish. Philosophers who were
but heathen men, could meditate on death, setting it always before their eyes.
But this is not enough for us that are Christians; we cannot truly prepare our
selves for it unless we first build a surer foundation in providing for a
better life, which shall never have an end; and this no Heathen or wicked man
can ever do. Oh how woeful would that message be unto a wicked man, that was
brought unto good King Hezekiah, Comes, set thy house in order, for thou must
die, and not live; and why should it be terribl unto him? surely because he
has no hope of a better life, he has not provided for a better habitation.
Consider then with what comfort thou could entertain this message; with what
comfort can thou meet with death? for he is no Christan that cannot in some
measure willingly meet with death, for by it we pass unto a better life: for
as this our brother spoke often, he that would have comfort in death, must
look beyond death; he must not fix his eyes on the terrors of death, but he
must look beyond to that glorious inheritance to which we are passing through
death, and there shall he behold his Savior putting forth his hand ready to
receive him; there shall he see the blessed Saints and Angels whose company he
shall enjoy, besides an infinite heap of Joys and happiness that is prepared
for him also. O my beloved, nothing will make us willingly to entertain the
message of death, but only the comforts of the life to come. Oh let us labor
then for these comforts that so we may be provided against death; were it not a
foolishness for a man who being a tennant at will, and shortly to be turned
out of his house, never to take care for another until he is cast out of doors?
Beloved we are all tennants at will and we are very shortly to be cast out of
our dwelling houses of clay, and shall we not provide for a surer habitation?
Death is at hand, and our life must shortly have an end; let us therefore
labor to be assured of a better life, when this is ended, that so with comfort
we may meet with death.

Now we come unto the second point which is here to be considered; taken from
the complaint of the Prophet that the people did not consider nor lay it to
heart. viz the death of the righteous, whence I note, that The death loss of
good men must be laid to heart as a special cause of grief and sorrow.

We ought justly to be grieved at the death of a righteous man, when God takes
him from amongst us. How did the Prophet Jeremy and the people lament the death
of that good King Josiah, 2 Chronicles. 35. 23. so devout men made great lamentation
for the death of Stephen, Act. 8. 2. so all Israel lamented the death of Moses
Deur. 34. 8. And Joash the King of Israel weept for the death of the Prophet
Elisha, 2 Kings 13. 14. and thus we should lament and sorrow for the death of
any righteous man, yet not in respect of themselves, as if their case were
worse now then before, for they are now more happy.

But first, in regard of Gods glory whereof they were instruments to set it
forth; for since they were taken away, Gods glory is impaired; because there
are the fewer left which do truly serve and worship him; for as David says,
the dead praise not the Lord, etc. Psalm. 115. 17. so then they being dead, do
not praise the Lord among the faithful on earth any longer.

Secondly, in regard of the great loss that others have by their death, who
have always received much good by them in their life; for the godly do so
order and behave themselves in all their ways that they do good wheresoever
they come; therefore when they die, it must needs be a great loss unto such
who might if they had lived, been bettered by them.

Thirdly, we ought to lament the death of the righteous in regard of the evil
to come; for while they live, they are as a wall about us to keep Gods
judgments from us; if there had been but ten righteous men in Sodom, it had
not been destroyed Genesis 18. 32. If there be a messenger one among a thousand,
says Elihu, to show unto man his uprightnes, then is God gracious unto him Job
33. 23. Run ye to and fro in the streets of Jerusalem says God, and see if you
can find a man, if there be any that executes judgment, and seeks the Lord,
and I will pardon it, Jer. 5. 1. so that if there had been but one righteous
man among the people in that city, the Lord would have spared them even for
that ones sake; and therefore the Lord speaking of the righteous, says, I will
fasten him as a nail in a sure place, he shall be as a glorious throne unto
his fathers house. Esaias. 22. 23. Oh consider then what a loss we have when the
righteous dye; we are like to perish, when the nail that was in the sure place
is remooved, cut down and falls; for then the burden that was upon it, shall
be cut off, Esaias, 22. 25. You therefore of this Congregation, consider, and
lament for this your loss, in that this good man is taken from among you; for
who knows whether God spared this congregation even for this good man's sake?
for it is the righteous only that God respects, and for their sakes he will
spare a whole people; therefore surely as Solomon says, the righteous is
better then his neighbor, yea though never so poor and despised in the eyes
of the world, yet are they precious in Gods account; when I make up my Jewels
(says God) I will spare them Mala. 3. 17. so that the righteous are Gods
Jewels, the excellent of the earth, are precious in Gods sight; and have we not
great cause then to lament for the loss of such?

Seeing then it becomes all Gods children to lament the death of the
righteous; O how far then are all such from the spirit of God, who are so
far from lamenting, that on the contrary they rejoice at the death of the
godly man, because he stood in their way? they could not follow their works of
darkness as they would, but he hindered them, he stood in their light, they
could not run on in sin and wickedness, but he would be reproving,
admonishing, and telling them of their faults, and this makes them long for the
good man's end, and to rejoice in it when it does come; these do not consider
that when the righteous is taken from the earth, then they lie open unto the
judgemens of God; But as the Sodomites thrust out just Lot out of their city,
that so Gods vengeance might fall the sooner upon them; for till he was gone,
the Lord would not destroy them Genesis 19. 21. Even so do these men desire to
be rid of the righteous, and rejoice when they are taken from them, not
considering that they are open to Gods vengeance which hangs over their heads
ready to devour them.

We ought then to be most grieved for the death of the righteous, when any of
the Saints are taken away by death; Oh what a comfort is a righteous man to the
children of God? what a feeling of grace is there in such a one? what
comfortable words come there from the mouth of such men? how full of
comfortable speeches was this poor man always ministering comfort to those
that came to visit him? what a loss is this then unto us? it is more then if
thousands of the wicked had gone together; and shall we not mourn for the
loss of such a one? If one of our family or friends dye, we can mourn for
them; and good reason; and shall we not mourn for the loss of one of Gods
Saints, one of the spiritual family, one of our fellow members.

In this then examine thy self how it is with thee; when thou hear of any
of the faithful that are taken away, art thou greived for it, do thou lament
and mourn for it? if thou do not, surely thou art no true Christian; for the
children of God cannot choose but lay it to heart and lament, when any of the
righteous is taken from among them. As Israel lamented the death of Samuel. 1 Samuel 25. 1.

Now concerning the sin of the people in not regarding nor laying it to heart,
this was a great sin of security in them, in that they did as it were rest on
their pillowes and cried peace unto themselves, notwithstanding Gods judgments
upon them, in taking away the righteous, and freeing them from the evil to
come, we note that,

When God will bring any great judgment upon a People or Nation, he will
ordinarily take away his faithful servants from among them, that so they may
be freed from the evil to come. Thus good Josiah must perish in his young
years, that so he might not be taken with the evil to come; I will gather
thee unto thy fathers faith God, and thou shall go to thy grave in peace, and
thy eyes shall not see all the evil that I will bring upon this place. 2 King.
22. 20. So when God told Abraham of the bondage and captivity whereunto he
would bring his posterity, he says thou shall go to thy fathers in peace Genesis
15. 13. And thus it was with the ancient Father Saint Augustine; when the
cruel Vandals besieged his city, he prayed that the Lord would either take him
away, or cause them to leave the siege; and the Lord heard him, and took him
away, and presently after the Vandals destroyed the city. So Luther writing
upon this text, says that the Lord after his death would bring great
affliction upon Germany, and two years after it so fell out indeed. Thus
ordinarily God takes away his servants from the evil to come.

See here the mercy of God unto his children in that he takes them away from
among the wicked, he calls them out of this world that they may not partake of
the evil to come; shall any one then think it a curse to be taken away
betimes, in his young years? nay happy is he that is taken away from these
miserable and fearful times wherein the judgment of God, for our sins hangs
over our heads; and is ready every day to seize upon us.

Secondly, seeing that God when he means to bring any heavy judgment upon a
people, does ordinarily take away the righteous from the evil to come, this
shows that when the righteous are taken from amongst us, we are certainly to
expect some judgment of God upon us. For these are they which stood in the gap
and kept off the fire of Gods wrath from us, that it should not consume us: but
now being gone, we lie open to the judgments of God; and therefore when any
righteous men are taken from us, the loss of them ought to drive us to
repentance, least Gods judgments come presently upon us and consume us,
therefore we must forsake our sins and evil ways, and perform new obedience
unto God, so will he be merciful unto us, yea he will be a shield of defense
unto us, and a wall of fire about us, and he will turn away his judgments
from us.

Beloved in the Lord we are here assembled to perform this last Christian duty
of burial to the Saint of God now deceased, whose soul I am as certainly
persuaded is at rest with Christ in glory, as I am sure his body is in this
coffin. When I consider those excellent graces that were in him, his great
knowledge in the word of God, his love, zeal, patience and humility; when I
consider his excellent gifts in comforting, exhorting, admonishing, with his
heavenly gift of prayer, etc. and withal consider that he was unlettered, he
could neither write nor read, I cannot but call to mind that in the Acts. 4.
13. where it is said of the Priest and Pharisees that they seeing the boldness
of the Apostles how they answered and spoke, perceiving them to be unlearned
and ignorant men, they knew that they had been with Jesus: Even so may we know
that this our brother had been with Jesus: not in the flesh, but in the spirit,
and that from him he received these things, that book-learning could never have
taught him; for he was a good man and full of the holy Ghost, as it is laid of
Barnabas; Truly verifying that of the Apostle that God has chosen the poor of
this world, that they should be rich in faith; he was a true follower of
Christ, of whom it is said he went about doing good; so this Disciple of
Christ did good wheresoever he came; how many by him have been stirred up,
comforted and admonished and quickened unto good duties, feeding them with the
lips of knowledge who fed him with bodily food? how often have I my self
through him been stirred up to good duties? how often have I been refreshed and
comforted in my heaviness by this poor man! so lively did he bear the Image,
of God in him, that me thought Christ Jesus walked in him alive upon the earth;
how much true service; sincere obedience, fervent and faithful prayer had the
Lord out of that poor cottage wherein he lived? If ever there were a true child
of Abraham, and an heir to the promise, this was he; if ever there were among
us a true Israelite in whom there was no guil, this was he; If ever there were
amongst us a true Christian that shined as a light to those amongst whom he
lived, this was he; If ever there were amongst us a poor man rich in faith,
this was he. In his life he was a pattern to all that knew him, so contented
with his estate, so diligent in the duties of his calling whilst health
suffered; In sickness until death whilst speech continued, so comfortable
that I never came to him, but I went away bettered by him. O how did he exhort
and stir up all those that came to visit him, to hold out constantly unto the
end, to grow and increase in those good beginnings which they had made? how
often and how excellently would he speak of the benefits which we have by
Christ, even the pardon of sin, more like a Divine then a common Ghristian, and
so feelingly did he express the certain pardon of his own sin, even the
sweet assurance thereof, that it did my heart good to hear him. Often did he
deplore the state of these evil times, in which we live, from which the Lord
has now taken him away; Often did he with tears bewail the state of this
congregation, and their unfruitfulnesse under the ministry of the word. How did
he even with tears pray for his enemies? he had some enemies, but they were
such as his piety, religion and care to keep a good conscience made enemies
unto him, touching whom I must say that which without trembling I cannot speak,
that as they refused his society while he lived, and sought to thrust him from
among them, so I fear that where he now is, they shall never come except they
repent. O it is a fearful thing to hate a man for his religion and piety; but
such was his love and compassion toward them, that he did often with tears
lament their estate and pray for them. At the mention of death he would still
repeat the point not long since delivered; that he that would have comfort in
death, must go beyond death; even to that glorious inheritance to the which we
are passing through death? and never in my life did I ever see any man so
comfortably and contentedly adresse himself to encounter with death as he did.
O said he, this is the time that I have long waited for; and as the pangs of
death grew nearer, so used he the more comfortable speeches, saying with Paul,
I desire to be dissolved and to be with Christ; now shall I see my sweet
Savior whom I have longed for; and when death was even upon him, he said come
Lord Jesus come quickly, and so with admirable patience endured the pangs of
death after prayer with him when his speech began to fail, I exhorted him now
to look up to his Redeemer, who was ready to receive him into his Masters joy;
and I spoke something out of the Revelations, touching the happy estate of
those that die in the Lord, adding further that all this comfort we have by
Christ, He answered with these his last words which with much difficulty he
spoke; saying, blessed be his glorious name, blessed be his glorious name, and
thus this faithful servant of Christ and heir of blessing, gave up his breath
in blessing God and died, praising that God to whose praise he had lived. And
what should I say more but as David said of Abner, died Abner as a fool dies?
died this our brother as a fool, as a worldling, as a wicked man dies, of whom
no reckoning is to be made? no, precious is his death in the eyes of the Lord,
and in the eyes of all that fear the Lord, and blessed shall his memory be, yea
all that knew him well, will call him blessed. And for my own part so often as
I shall think of his death, and often I must think thereon, my soul shall wish
and pray, Oh let medie the death of the righteous, and let my last end be like
unto his Amen.

THE SIGNS OF GODS forsaking a people.

Preached by That laborious and faithful Messenger of CHRIST, WILLIAM FENNER,
Sometimes Fellow of Pembroke Hall in Cambridge, and late Minister of Rochford
in Essex. Being the last Sermon that he preached.

THE SIGNS OF GODS forsaking a people.
JER. 14. 9. And we are called by thy Name; leave us not.
TWo things (Brethren and beloved in Christ Jesus) are intended and expressed
by the holy Prophet from the first verse to the 13. verse.

There is first a denomination of a judgment, and that is dearth or famine
from the first verse to the seventh.

Secondly, the sword is threatened to the thirteenth verse; he will send the
famine, then the sword, and he will not be entreated.

Then in the eighth and ninth verses we have the importunate prayer of the
Church to turn away these judgments: And the prayer is mavelous sweet, in
confession, where they confess their sins, and seek to God for succor.

First, they desire God that he would not take his providence from them, why,
stayest thou but for a night? verse the 8, as if they should have said, it is
marveilous strange, that thou behavest thy self so like a stranger; thou see
our sorrows, and do not help us; thou perceivest our troubles, and thou
regardest us not; It is strange, it is strange; that the God of Israel stands
as a man astonished; that thou that have heretofore received us, should now
stand as a man amazed and astonished, as if thou were weary of this thy work,
and could do no more, as if thou should say Jerusalem cannot be saved, and
Judah cannot be succored.

Secondly, they desire that God would not take away his presence from them;
leave us not to our selves say they; let us see thy face; though we die, yet
let it be in thy presence; yea though thou help us not, yet it does us good to
look upon our Savior, and thou can help us; and thus you see the arguments
wherewith they press the Lord how, sweet they are, viz.

First, thou art the hope of Israel; Alas if thou forsake us we are all lost;
our hope is not in the means only; but our hope is in thee, leav us not, for
thou art the hope of Israel, it is the task that thou have taken upon thee,
leave us not therefore.

Secondly, thou have made thy self a Savior, and now is the time of trouble,
therefore now perform what thou have undertaken.

Thirdly, thou art in the midst of us, that is, thou art a great Commander
amongst us, always ready to succor us; and will thou now see us perish? thou
art more near to us then the Ark in the midst of the Camp, 1 Samuel 4. 6. As
if they should say he lives in the midst ofus, and will he not save us?

Fourthly, we are called by thy name, and therefore we have interest in thee,
to whom should wives go, but to their husbands? to whom should children go, but
to their fathers? to whom should servants go, but to their Masters? to whom
then should we go, but to thee our God and Savior? leave us not therefore and
we will meddle with none but thee.

Secondly, though God might leave them, yet they beg that he would not; that
is, the A men to their prayers; though thou stand and wilt not help us; yet let
us die in thy presence; and this is the great request of the Saints, they
desire not to be left of God, although God might leave them; whence learn that
God might cast off a people.

Israel did fear it, and it is that which they prayed against, God might leav
them: I do not say that God will cast off his elect ones eternally, but those
in outward covenant. see Esaias 1. verse 2. etc. Hear O Heavens, Hearken O
Earth, I have nourished and brought up children, but they have rebelled against
me; The Ox knows his Owner, and the Ass his Masters Crib, but Israel has
not known, my People have not understood, etc. and verse the seventh; see the
judgment; your cities are burnt with fire; strangers devour your land in your
presence, and it is desolate like the overthrow of strangers.

There is an outward Calling, as well as an effectual Calling; God may reject;
for many are called, but few chosen says our Savior. My brethren cast your
thoughts afar off, and see what is become of those famous Churches of
Pergamus and Thyatira and the rest mentioned Rev. 1. verse 11. And who would
have thought that Jerusalem should have been made an heap of stones and a
vagabond people? and yet we see God has forsaken them, showing us thereby that
although God will never forsake his own elect ones; yet he may forsake such as
are in outward covenant with him.

The Lord is said to dis-church or discharge a people Hosea. 1. 9. there God
says call his name Loammi for ye are not my people, and therefore I will not
be your God. And as I may so say, he sues out a bill of divorcement; as it was
in the old Law, they that had any thing against their wives, they sued out a
bill of divorcement against them, and so does God, see Hosea. 2. 2. Plead with
thy Mother, tell her she is not my Spouse nor my beloved; but let her cast
away her fornications out of her sight, and her adulteries from between her
breasts, lest I make her as at the first, that is, as she was in Egypt, poor
and miserable. As if God should now say to England, plead, plead with England
all ye that are my Ministers in the way of my truth, and say unto her, let her
cast away her rebellions, least I leave her as I found her in the day of
Captivity and bondage under the blindness of popery and superstition.

Ob. But how does God cast off a people?

Sol. I answer, first when he takes away his love and respect from a people;
and as his love, so the token of his love, which is his Word and Sacraments,
the means of salvation.

Secondly, when he takes away his providence, I mean when he takes down his
walls, that is, his Magistracy and Ministry.

Thirdly, when in stead of Councelling there comes in Bribing; and in stead of
true teaching there comes in daubing with untempered mortar; when God takes
away the hedge thereof, Esaias 5. 5. or the stakes grow rotten and are not
renewed then is God going away.

Fourthly, when God takes away the benefit of both these helps, they are signs
of Gods departure.

Use May God un-church or discharge a People and cast a Nation off? Oh then let
this teach us to cast off all security; for miseries are nigh at hand in all
probability; when we observe what God has done for us, all things are ripe to
destruction, and yet we fear it not, but we promise to our selves safety, and
consider not that England is ready to be harrowed, and yet we cannot
entertain a thought of Englands desolation; when there are so many htophesies
in it of its destruction, yet we cannot be persuaded of it, but in our
Judgments it must not be, it must not be as yet; as if it were unpossible that
God should leave England, as if God were a cockering Father over lewd children;
God may leave a Nation, and his elect may suffer, and why may not England?
Englands sins are very great, and the greater, because the means are great,
and our warnings are and have been great; but yet our mercies are far
greater; England has been a mirror of mercies; yet now God may leave it, and
make it the mirror of his justice. Look how God spoke to the people that did
brag of their temple Jer. 7. 4. says God, Trust not in lying words, saying the
Temple of the Lord, this is the Temple of the Lord; but what says the Lord by
the Prophet in the twelfth and fourteenth verses, Go now to my place which was
in Shiloh, where I set my name at the beginning, and behold what I did unto it
for the wickedness of my people Israel, etc. Even so England, thou have the
Temple and the Priests; and yet may not God that destroyed Shiloh, destroy
thee? Go to Bohemia; and from thence to the Palatinate, and from thence to
other parts of Germany; Do but imagine that you were there or do but mark
what travelers say. Gods Churches are made heaps of stones, and those Bethels
wherein Gods name was called upon, are now defiled Temples; For Satan and
superstition to reign in, you cannot go three steps but you shall see the
head of a dead man; And go a little further, and you shall see the heart picked
out by the fowls of the air, or some other sad spectacle? and then surely you
will say, Tylly has been here or there; now are these Churches become
desolate, and may not England? Do but go into their Cities and Towns, and
there you may see many compassed about with chains of Captivity, and every man
bemoaning himself. Do but look under a tree, and there you may see a poor
fatherless child sending out his breath and crying unto his helpless Mother;
step but a little further, and you shall see the helpless Wife, the sad Wife
bemoaning her Husband, and this is her misery, she cannot die time enough, but
she shall see greater misery; for either she shall (as she thinks) see her
little ones dashed against the stones, or tossed upon the Pikes, or if they
live, that then they shall be brought up in Popery, and then she weeps again,
and thinks that if her Husband be dead it is well: But it may be he is upon the
rack, or put to some other torment, and then she dies an hundred times before
she can die; Thus if you can set your souls in their souls stead, and imagine
you were in their condition, and say, may not this be the condition of
England, and who knows but it may? O my beloved, be not high minded; but
fear; for as we have Gods bounty on the one side, so (for ought I know) we
may have his severity on the other side, Pranck not then your selves with
foolish imaginations saying, who dare come to hurt England? the Spaniard has
his hands full, and the French are too weak. But beloved be not deluded; who
would have thought that Jerusalem the Lady city of all Nations, whither the
tribes went up to worship, should become a heap of stones and a vagabond
people? but yet you see it was, and is to this day; And I pray, why may it not
be Englands case? Learn therefore, hear, and fear God, for assuredly God can
be God without Englands prosperity; Do not say here are many good Christians;
do you think that God is beholding to you for your religion? surely not: For
rather then he will preserve such as profess his name, and yet hate to be
reformed; he will raise up of these stones children unto Abraham, he will
rather go into Turkey and say unto them, Thou art my people, and I will be your
God.

But will thou let God go England? are you so content, and will youlet Christ
go and God go? O no, no; lay heart and hands upon him as they did upon Paul;
every one of you lay hold on him and say thou shall not go from us, for we are
called by thy name, therefore leave us not; And for my part I will pray that he
does not take his leave of us. Do you thihke that Rome will forsake or part
with her Gods? no, they will rather loose their lives; and will thou let thy
God go O England? plead with thy God and let him not depart, but part rather
with thy rebellions.

We are called by thy name, leave us not. You see the Church is very
importunate to keep God with them, they lay hold on God with Coards of
arguments; O thou hope of Israel, do not leave us; they beset God with their
prayers, and as it were they watch him at the towns end that he should not go
away, and they say, thou shall still abide with us, they are importunate that
he do not leave them, whence observe, Doct. That it is the importunate desire
of the Saints of God, still to keep God present with them. They cared not so
much for sword or famine, as they did for the loss of Gods presence; O Lord,
leave us not say they; this was their prayer; and blame them not; for consider
what a grief it is that God should stand by and not help them, Good Lord (say
they) leave us not, we cannot abide to think that God should leave us, much
less can we endure to feel it or taste it; thus they did, and thus the Saints
of God should do, Exodus 33. 14, 15. Moses says if thy presence go not with
us, carry us not hence; alas, Moses might have gone upon fair terms; ye
shall (says God) possess the land in peace with prosperity; But what says
Moses? though we might have Canaan and all the delights there, yet carry us
not hence unless thy presence go with us; this is the stay and the strength
that he sticks too. So Psalm. 80. 18, 19. Turn us again O Lord of hosts, make
thy face to shine upon us; here is a man, a David, a heart worth gold, he
makes not many suits, but he comes home, he sues to the purpose, make thy face
(says he) to shine upon us; as if he should have said that is prosperity
enough, for it endures for ever.

But what is the presence of God? In a word, it is the particular favor of God
which he expresses in his Ordinances, it is all the good and sweetness that
flows from the purity of Gods worship, whereby God reveals himself unto us.
It is not gold, wealth, nor prosperity, that makes God to be our God; for there
is more gold in the West Indies, then in all Christendom, but it is Gods
ordinances purely administered that brings Gods presence to a people. God
forsook Shiloh because his ordinances were not purely kept there; when the
people left the Arc ( viz) hs pure worship, then God left the people; when the
Arc of Godspresence was among them, the word in the purity of it, then his
face was there, and there God was principally present; hence it was that Cain
is said to be cast out of Gods presence; because he was cast out from the
Church, he was cast out from Gods ordinances; if a people do outwardly
reform, and sincerely worship God they may remain; if Sodom and Gomorrah had
but legally repented, they had remained, they had not been destroyed; And hence
it is that the Saints are so urgent for Gods Ordinances in the purity of them:
But the wicked say once a Sabbath is enough, and once a week is too much; by
this we may see that England; is ripe; and is she nor weary of God? nay, she
is fat fed to the slaughter. But it was not so with the Saints and people of
God in former times; it was David's grand request, that he might dwell in the
house of the Lord, Psalm. 27. 4. And Psalm the 42. and the first verse he
said, his soul did pant for Gods ordinances. Thus you see that the Saints of
God are mavelous importunate to keep God in his ordinances.

Quest. But may not a man be saved without preaching?

Answ. I answer, the argument is clear, the Saints maintain God in his
ordinances, the want of which is under the penalty of death and damnation,
because we have more need of God in his ordinances than of all the gold in the
world; for all the gold in the world will not satisfy a hungry man; It is bread
that he must have, because he has need of it; so the Saints have most need
of God and of Christ; for though they have but ragged coats, and their bodies
pincht with hunger, yet God is he that they stand most in need of. In Psalm
the 37. and the 25. verse David fretted at the prosperity of the wicked; but at
the last he breaks of kindly, saying, whom have I in heaven but thee? As if he
should have said, let them have what they will, I will have nothing but thee.
And why so? why? thou art my strength and my portion for ever; mark, he says
that God is his strength, yea the strength of his heart, hereby showing that
all the helps in the world cannot help the heart of man, if God and Christ be
wanting; you were as good offer a journey to refresh a weary man, or the air
to feed a hungry man, as to offer riches, honors and ease to help a distressed
soul. These will never help a man; he may well dote upon them, but his soul
and conscience will be galled and troubled still; it must be the God of peace
that must speak peace to troubled souls. It must be the God of peace that
must speak peace to a distressed soul, to a soul that is damned in it self;
it is he that must say, I will be the strength of their hearts, and their
portion for ever; no marvel then if a poor soul cries to God, when happily
the heart is full, when the soul gnaws and cries within it self, I am damned,
I am damned; happily the palate is pleased with delicates, when the poor soul
for ought it knows must go down to hell; oh then beloved, if you will have
safety, go where God is; for every good gift comes in with him; if once a man
has got God into his company, he has all good things with him. God blessed
Obed Edoms house for the Arkes sake; now the Arc was a type of Christ, and
where it came, many blessings came with it; even so when God comes unto a
people they are married unto him in righteousness, in judgment, in loving
kindness and in mercies for ever, Hosea 2. 9. When a man is married to a wife,
all is his; so get Christ and all is thine, and then what would thou have
more?

God speaks to the rain, and it hears; to the corn, and it hears; but if
thou be in Christ, hell and death are thy servants; but they that have outward
things only, as profits, pleasures or the like, they have their ruin, unless
they have Christ with them; get Christ therefore, for if he be wanting all
outward and inward dangers befall that man; or that Nation; woe be unto him or
them that are without God. For though they bring up their children, yet will I
bereave them, that there shall not be man left; yea woe also to them, when I
do depart from them; Ephraim, as Tyrus is planted in a pleasant place: but
Ephraim shall bring forth his children to the murderer, Hosea the 9. 12, 13.
verses. True indeed, woe be unto that heart, County or Kingdom, that God is
departed from; when God who is the God of mercies and all consolation, is
departed away, who can but pity that soul, County or Kingdom who will not
submit to Gods peace consolation and salvation? when God parts, all miseries
follow; for that man that makes no conscience in outfaceing God in the
Congregation, mark what the text says Dent. 28. 15. I will forsake them, and
many miseries shall overtake them, and when the flood gates are once up, then
comes in all evils; And then they shall say, are not these things come upon us
because God is not with us? If therefore we would avoid woe and sorrow, slaying
and killing one another; if the wife would not see her husband killed before
her tender eyes, and the man see his wife snatched out of the world by the hands
of wicked men, then leave not God, but hold him fast, and then evil days,
will depart from us; It is our holding of God that keeps miseries from us; oh
then what shall we think of them that are weary of God, and that say to the
Almighty depart from us? Job 22. 17.

Ob. But are there any amongst us that are weary of God? I hope there are none
such amongst us.

I answer, thou that art a servant, and rejectest the Command of thy Master, in
it thou do reject God, and all such as have a mean conceit of the worship of
God and the word of God, and think that prayer or preaching is continued too
long; I say, these men know not what they think or say, but certainly it is
because they would be freed from the Ordinance; of God: well, God will free
thee from them one day, I will warrant thee, and then thou will be in a
miserable condition; oh that thou would pity thy poor condition; but thou
that art weary of Gods ordinances and of his mercies, his presence and
patience, know thou that thou shall be deprived of Gods goodness, and thy
portion shall be with those that hate God in this life here, and after this
life (if thou repent not) thy portion shall be with them in Tophet where the
worm dies not, and where the fire goes not out, and then thy crying will not
avail, God will be God over thee in destruction, yea when he has spurned
thousauds and ten thousands into hell, such as thou art, then shall thou be
the everlasting object of his never dying wrath, then notwithstanding all thy
shrill cries, though thou could be heard out of that dungeon, yet were thy
help never the near; for God is God still. I advise thee therefore what to do,
whilst thou art here in this life, make thy peace with God in Christ, and lay
thy self low before him, and bear patiently his hand in his wrath which thou
have deserved. And mark what I say, thou have deserved to be in hell an
hundred times, that is the least; and therefore be contented with thy
condition; for thou have chosen death rather than life: and God should wrong
himself and thee also, if he should not let thee have thy choosing.

Will not these things move you, my brethren? Me thinks I see your colors
rise, I am glad of it, I hope it is to a good end; you may be wise, and happily
so wise as to choose life rather then death: Now the Lord grant it, for see
delights not in your destruction.

I will add one word more, to leave the more impression in your hearts; my
desire is the health of your souls; though my meat seem sour, yet my mind is
the will of God. Thou man or woman, that can not abide so much Preaching, but
stand upon thorns whilst it is preaching: Too much of one thing (you say) is
good for nothing; You do as much as say you will not have God with you; you
will have a little of God, but you will have more of your pleasures: is this
your desire, your delights? Know then, whosoever thou art, that have an ill
will to God and his Ordinances, and wilt not have the gospel in the purity of
it; thou shall have thy desires: Thou say, depart Preachings, and so it
shall, thou shall, have thy desires. When thou shall hear the trumpets sound,
and when thine ears shall tingle with the sound of war; then depart for ever,
you that are weary of God, get you down to hell for ever: Fulfill your base
lusts (then will God say) for I have fed you on earth this twenty, thirty,
forty, fifty, nay sixty years and upwards, and my mild Word could not rule
you nor prevail with you, and therefore now get you to hell, and there remain
for ever. Think thus with your selves; will God serve me thus? yea that he
will, for he has prepared a place, for the proudest Kings, Princes, Monarchs
Captains, etc. that are, or ever were in the world, if they will not be ruled
nor guided by God, and his word. See Isa. 30. 33. the Text does as good as say,
he delights to make bonfires about their ears: And must this be the way to
glorify God?

But some may say, surely Kings and Monarchs are exempted, they need not fear
that such torments shall come upon them.

To this I answer, that God will say unto them, reign there if thou will, and
then they shall know that there is a King that laughs at their destruction.
Take notice of this I beseech you, and reason thus with your own souls: Is he
a good son that cannot abide the presence of his own father? is she a good
wife that cannot abide the company of her husband? and is he a good Christian
that cannot endure the company of Christ in his ordinances?

This may serve to rebuke Gods people for their neglect. You see the Gospel is
going, Christ is departing, he is going to seek better entertainment. (But I
marvel you give no better attendance; I pray hearken what I say and have to
say, stand up and hear, and the Lord give you grace to believe.) I will deal
plainly with you; as sure as God is God, God is going from England. Shall I
tell you what God told me? nay I must tell you on pain of my life; Will you
give ear and believe me? I am a poor Ambassador sent from God to do his
message unto you; and although I be low, yet my message is from above, and He
that sent me is great, and from above; and oh that He would grant that this my
message might be believed! What if I should tell you, that God told me
(yesternight) that he would destory England and lay it waste? What say you to
this, my beloved? it is my message, by meditation is Gods word, that he bid me
do to you, and he expects and answer from you: I do my message as God commanded
me; what say thou unto it, England? I must return an answer to my Master
that sent me, yea this present right I must return an answer; for the Lord has
appointed a set time, saying, To morrow the Lord will do this thing in the
Land, Exodus 9. 5. Why speak you not? an answer you must give: Do you think well
of it? will you have England destoyed? will you put the aged to trouble, and
your young men to the sword? will you have your your young women widows, and
your virgins defiled? will you have your dear and tender little ones tossed
upon the pikes and dashed against the stones? or will you have them brought up
in Popery, in idolatry, under a necessity of perishing their souls for ever,
which is worst of all? Will you have these Temples wherein we seem to worship
God, will you have them and your houses burnt with fire, and will you see
England laid waste without inhabitants? are you well contented it shall be so?
I am an importunate suitor for Christ, oh send me not sad away, but speak
comfortably and cheerfully, what are you resolved of? Are you willing to enjoy
God still, and to hve him dwell with you? it is well, I am glad of it if it be
so; but you must not only say so, but you must use the means, and you must
plead importunately with your God: for although his sword be drawn, and in his
hand, lifted up and ready to strike; yet suffer him not to destroy, but rather
to sheath his sword in the blood of his enemies. I would be glad to have
England flourish still; but if desolation do come, thank your selves for it, it
is your own fault if you be destroyed, and not Gods, for he delights not in
the death of any. We may justly take up the complaint of the Prophet Esaias, who
says, No man stirs up himself to lay hold on God, Isa. 64. 7. But this is
our comfort, or rather our misery, that we have quiet prosperity, with ease
and commodity, our bellies full, our coffers full, and our backs curiously
clothed, etc. not remembering the afflictions of our neighbor Nations; but all
is well with us, and it will serve our turns: and if we do humble our selves a
little, we think it is well. And thus we play mockholiday with God and with his
gospel, in making it out pack-horse. Well, look to it, for God is going, and if
he do go, then our glory goes also; and then we may say with Phineahs wife, I
Sam. 4. 22. Glory is departed from Israel, so glory is departed from England;
for England has seen her best days, and the reward of sin is coming on
apace; for God is packing up of his gospel, because none will buy his wares:
God begins to ship away his Noah's, which prophesied and foretold that
destruction was near; and God makes account that New England shall be a refuge
for his Noah's and his Lots, a rock and a shelter for his righteous ones to run
unto; and those that were vexed to see the ungodly lives of the people in this
wicked Land, shall there be safe. Oh therefore my brethren, lay hold on God,
and let him not go out of your coasts; look about you I say, and stop him at
the towns-end, and let not thy God depart, O England, lay siege about him by
humble and hearty closing with him; and although he be going, he is not yet
gone; suffer him not to go far, suffer him not to say farewell or rather fare
ill England; therefore because I will do thus unto thee, prepare to meet the
God of Israel O England. Amos 4. 12. Now God calls upon thee, as he did
sometime upon Jerusalem Jer 6. 8. Be thou instructed therefore O England,
least my soul depart from thee, and least I make thee desolate like a Land
that none inhabiteth; and thus we see what the godly have done before us, and
now let it be our Coppie, and let us with Mary claspe close about Christ; they
have broke the Ice, let us follow them: this is our day of atonement; this
present day is ours, we have nothing to do with tomorrow; we are at odds
with God; and this is the day of our reconciliation this is the day wherein we
are to make our peace with our God; and to end all controversies, let us labor
therefore to prevail with God, and that we may not lose his presence, do as the
spouse Cant. 3. 1. she sought him, but she could not find him, yet she gave not
over but she followed him till she found him; So our God is going, and shall
we sit still? would you have the Gospel kept with lazy wishes, Oh no, no;
arise, arise from your downy beds, and fall down upon your knees, and entreat
God to leave his Gospel to you and to your posterity; shall we by our sins
disinherit our Infants and posterity of such a blessing which is or should be
the life of there lives? and so have them brought up in superstition? no, no;
Lord we cannot abide this, Oh give us neither wealth nor any other blessing but
thy Gospel; this is our Plea Lord; and when have found God then let us bring
him home to our houses, and there retain him, that so he may be our God and
the God of our posterity, in all our and their afflictions; and this will make
you to rejoice exceedingly; Oh my beloved carry God whom with you, and let him
be a Father to you and to your posterity.

Quest. But now may we keep the Lord, it would he worth our labor; for at his
right hand there are pleasures for evermore.

Ans. First, we must be sure to prepare a room for him; for he is a King, and
a King you know sends his harbinger before him to prepare a room for him;
saying come out of her my people and touch no unclean thing, and then I will be
thy God and thou shall be my people 2. Cor. 6. 17. so my beloved brethren, come
out of all sinful courses, pleasures, and practices, and you may expect Gods
coming unto your houses; And when you sit down by your fires, or lie down in
your beds, think thus with your selves, what an equal condition does God
propound, it is but only to part with a sin, a lust, a Dalilah, which I may
very well spare, as well as I may spare water out of my shoes, or a coal out
of my bosom; I say think thus with thy self and say in thy heart, will God
keep Company with me, if I will not keep Company with sin? are the terms no
harder? this is a good offer; I will at once then bid sin adue; for now I am
upon another bargain; here is an offer that I was nor aware of; I will quickly
dispatch this bargain and make my peace with my God; and thus if you would
have God to be yours, then let your souls and bodies be his by forsaking all
sins; and when you shall call, God will come and say here am I, Esaias. 58. 9.

Secondly, as you must prepare a room for God, so you must give him content
too; let God have his will cross him not. Where the King is, he will have all
things to his mind, even so it is with God, If he may have his own worship,
you please him wondrous well; you must dress his dishes according to his
tooth; but if you put poison into his meat, if you mingle the traditions of men
with Gods worship, then you discontent him. Lay aside therefore all your
superstitions, and erroneous opinions of God and his worship, and do it
according to his will in his word revealed, and then yon please him indeed;
when a Nation or a soul submits to God and to his truth in all things. To bow
at the name Jesus, is not meant at the word Jesus for so to give him the bow is
to commit syllabicall Idolatry; but the meaning is, we should worship him in
spirit and in truth, humbly subjecting our selves unto Christ.

Thirdly, as we must give him his mind, so we must give him welcome, if you
displease God and look loweringly or sowerly upon him, and grudge at God or at
his truth, no wonder then if God go away; land surely this is the sin of
England, we bear an ill will unto God and his word, and God has done well for
this Land, and what could he have done more then he has done for this Land,
as he says of his vineyard? Esaias 5. 4, 5. but it brought forth contrary
fruit; even so we do all contrary to Gods expectation; mark therefore what
God says, he will take away the hedge, and it shall be trodden down; and for
ought that may be collected, so it is like to be with us, if his mercy prevent
it not; for, are we better than the old world? the same sins that were found
in the old world, are found in us; Sodom's and Gomorahs sins were but strawes
in respect of ours; and yet God rained down fire and brimstone upon them; tell
me, are there not as great sins amongst us as were in Jerusolem, who were
carried captives, their city destroyed, and they a vagabond people until this
day? Are we better then other Brethren and neighbor Nations, that have drunk
so deeply of Gods wrath? I tell you truly, we area burden to God, he cannot
long bear us, and he will think his burden well over when he has destroyed
us. You know all men are glad when their pain is over; even so it is with God,
we are a pain and a trouble unto him and why should God go continually pained
with us, which are worthy to be destroyed? Then shall England seek peace, but
shall not find it, God shall not pity us: Oh, my beloved brethren, what a
pitiful thing it is, when a merciful God shall show himself unmercifull when
his patience shall be turned into impatience? There is a hard time ere long
befalling England, if God in mercy prevent it not; but we do not consider it,
lamentable is our time. Christ wept over Jerusalem; Oh (says he) that thou
had known in this thy day of visitation, the things that do concern thy
peace! but now thy are hid from thine eyes Beloved, what do you think we shall
do, when Gods mercies are turned into justice? Look to it England, the Lord
has wept over thee in mercy many years; What shall we do when we have leisure
to consider what once we did enjoy? for Gods patience is never truly prized,
till we want it; and then the poor soul will thus say: There was a time when we
might have been at peace with this patient God, but now he is hid from our
eyes, now the gate is shut, barred and locked up. thus when a people does abuse
Gods mercy he sends the contrary judgments, and then it will grieve and wound
our souls to think what once we did enjoy; but that soul that will bid God
welcome to his heart, may go singing to his grave.

Fourthly, You must be importunate with God to tarry, and account it a great
favor if he will stay: For God has room enough in heaven, and therefore you
need not lodge him for want of lodging, but you must be beholding to him to
tarry with you (yet in these days men do not love to be beholding;) Jacob
wrestled with God, and by that means he held him till he blessed him: you live
under the means, and know the way, and will you not do it? what greater
condemnation can there, be, and how great will your judgment be unto you, more
then unto them that have no means? and as it was said of Capernaum, so say I
to England, Thou England that was lifted up to heaven with means, shall be
brought down to hell; thou shall be abused for it; for if the mighty works which
has been done in thee, had been done in India or Turkey, they would have
repented ere this time; And therefore Capernums place is Englands place, which
is the most scaldings tormenting place of all, if it repent not; And mark what
I say, the poor native Turks and Infidels shall have a more cool summer
Parlour in hell then England shall have, for we stand upon high rates;
therefore thy torment shall be the more intolerable to bear.

Now the Lord write these things in our hearts by the finger of his holy spirit
for his Christ's sake, under whom I would we were all covered. Amen.

FINIS.

