VARIETY OF EXCELLENT SYMMETRICALL RULES of Drawing Limning etc. Invented by
Odoardo Fialet and others


THE Whole Art OF DRAWING, PAINTING, LIMNING, AND ETCHING. Collected out of the
Choicest Italian and German Authors. To which is added Exact Rules of
Proportion for Drawing the Heads of Men, Women and Children, of what Bigness
soever.

Originally invented and written by the famous Italian Painter Odoardo
Fialetti, Painter of Boloign.

Published for the Benefit of all Ingenuous Gentlemen and Artists, by Alexander
Brown Practitioner.

London, Printed for Peter Stint at the Sign of the white Horse in
Giltspurre-Street, and Simon Miller at the Star in St Paul's Churchyard, M. D
C. LX.

TO THE Great Cherisher of all Ingenuous Artists. Sr WILLIAM PASTON Baronet,
etc.
Honored Sir,
IT was a Fate as happy as accidental, threw this ensuing Treatise into my
hands, ready instructed at the charge of a Person of Honor in the English
Tongue, and by him preserved as a Jewel (bound up together with the Original
Prints and Italian Comment) for private use. There has been no Parallel in the
same Species ever public in this our native dress, which put me to a pause,
till the remembrance of your un^^served favor (despairing of any thing of my
own, worthy your acceptance) prompted me to communicate. And the rather,
because I find my Author both precedent and warrant, first unlocking this
treasure in his Mother tongue. Let therefore the genuine propensity, your
disposition bears to Arts of this nature, pardon my presumption; and your
wonted candor, not only courteously entertain this Stranger (whose noble extract
shines through all disguises) but also vindicate him against incident injuries;
from which, the inscription of no Name I know, can better protect, then your
own. Sir, I may not longer detain you here, since I dare hope you will take
some delight in the Garden, though this passage be wholly unpleasant, were it
not an Inlet, and the only conveyance of the duty and observance of

Your Honors most humble and obliged Servant, Alexander Brown.

THE CONTENTS.
Several Observations and Directions in the Art of Drawing, page 1. 7 The
Manner of Drawing a Head by the Life, 1. 45 How to Draw a naked man by the
Life, 2, 3 How to perfect the out-Lines of any Point or Figure 6 How to decline
any Print in a small compass, ibid Observations in the Art of Limning, and
Painting, and Tempering Colors, 8, 9, 10, 11 How to prepare a Tablet to work
on, 12 Rules for Shadows in the Face, 13 How to begin a Face by the Life, 14
Concerning dead-Colouring, 15 The second work of Painting observed in the
second Sitting, 15, 16 The Manner of finishing at the third Sitting, 17
Ornaments in setting forth a Picture, 18 A Receipt to make liquid Gold, 19
Rules for Landskips, ibid Secrets for preserving Colors, 20 General
Observations in Painting, ibid Instruments to draw with, 21 To make Wax-work or
Moulding, 22, 23 To counterfeit Sweet Meats, 24 To counterfeit Pearl, ibid
Grounds and Rules of Etching, 25 Instruments used in Etching, 25, 26 How to
make the Ground, 27 How to lay the Ground on the Plate, 28* 33 How to draw the
outmost Lines of any Print on the Plate, ibid Several Observations in
Hatching, 29 Necessary Observations in Etching Landskips, 30 How to make the
Wax-wall round about the Plate, to keep the Aqua fortis from running off, ib
How to use the Aqua fortis, ibid How to know when it is eaten deep enough, 31
To lay a white or red Ground on a black, 32 How to preserve the work in frosty
Weather, 34 To keep the Aqua fortis from injuring the Plate, ibid To Etch soft
or hard according to Nature or Art, ibid Observations in Etching Prospective,
35 How to Grave any Hand or Letter on Copper, ibid How to Polish the Plate, 36
Fit Instruments to be used; and their use, ibid Rules of Proportion for Drawing
of the Ear, 38 Nose, Mouth, and Beard, 40 The Head upright, or with a Triangle,
41, 42 The Foreright, and other Positions of the Face, 48 The Inclining or
Foreshortning of the Face, 46 A more perfect Foreshortning, 44 The upright or
side-Face without any Measure, 50 The Manner how to describe a Head every way
without Measure, 52 Of Childrens Heads, 54
THE ART OF DRAVVING.
Several Instructions and Observations directing to the Art of Drawing.
BEcause the greatest difficulties and principal parts of this Art consist in
some part in Drawing the lively Resemblance of a Face, therefore I thought it
very necessary to add this as a further direction to Draw any Face after the
Life.

Several Observations in Drawing a Head after the Life.
Therefore if you will draw any Face after the Life, that it may resemble the
Party you Draw it after; take notice in the first place of the Physiognomy or
circumference of the Face, whither it be round or long, fat or lean, big or
little; so that in the first place you must be sure to take the right
Physiognomy and bigness of the Face, and in case it be a fat Face you will
perceive the Cheeks to make the side of the Face swell out, add so make the
Face look as if it were square; and if it be neither too fat nor too lean, it
will be round for the most part; but if it be a lean Face the Jaw-bones will
stick out, and the Cheeks fall in, and the Face will be long and slender.
Observe when you Draw the outmost circumferences of a Face, to take the Head
and all with it, or otherwise you may be deceived in Drawing the true bigness
of a Face, then you must diligently and judiciously observe and discern all
the Gentlemaster touches, which gives the spirit and life to a Face, and
discovers the graces or disposition of the mind, wherein lies the whole grace
of the work, and the credit of the Artist, you may easily discern a smiling
countenance in the corners of the mouth when they turn up alittle; you may best
discern a staid and sober countenance in the eye, when the upper eyelid comes
somewhat over the Ball of the Eye; but a frowning countenance is easily
discerned in the Forehead by the bending of the Eyebrowes, and some few
wrinckles about the top of the Nose between the two Eyebrowes* and a laughing
Countenance is easily discerned all over the Face; but an angry Countenance is
discerned by extraordinary frownings; there are also some touches about the Eye
and Mouth which you must diligently observe, which gives the spirit and life to
a Face.

Some general Rules to be Observed in Drawing the Figure of a Naked Man after
the Life.
A standing Figure from the top of the head to the bottom of the feet is eight
times the length of the Head, and because you ought to be most exact in Drawing
the Head, because the whole body must be proportioned correspondently to the
Head; therefore I shall give you in short some several Rules and Observations
to Draw a foreright Head. First, Draw an Ovale, then devide that Ovale into
four equal parts; the first is for the Hair, the second for the Forehead and
Brows; the third for the Nose, the fourth for the Mouth and Chin, as before
written in the Book of Fielettoe. But when you Draw after the life, you are not
to follow this Rule exactly, because some Men have a long Nose, and another a
short; one a high forehead, another a low forehead; Therefore if you look upon
a hundred Men's Faces that they all differ one from another, the eyes must be
placed just the length of one eye the one from the other. Then having Drawn the
Head, you measure out eight times the length of the Head, then the Head is
reckoned one of the eight parts; then you must Draw a straight Line from the
top of the Head to the sole of the Foot, one Heads length from the Chin, you
must Draw the Breasts the third length reaches to the Navell, the fourth to the
privities, the fifth reaches just to the middle of the Thigh, and the sixth to
the lower part of the Knee, the seventh to the small of the Leg, and the
eighth to the Heel and sole of the Foot: But observe as you Draw downwards from
the Head to place the Muscles in their right places according to nature; and
because there are no certain Rules for Drawing the Muscles but only to observe
them exactly as they are in the Life. The breadth of the Shoulders contains
two measures of the Head, the breadth of the Hipps two measures of the Face,
and the Arms stretched out are eight measures of the Head, and if the Breasts
be reckoned unto them, so the Arms without the Breasts are but six measures.
And note that when an Arm hangs straight down it reaches within a span of
the Knee: a Hand must be no longer then the length of the Face, that when the
Hand is spread abroad, it must as it were cover the Face and no more; It is
very necessary for one that intends to practice to Draw Naked Figures to Draw
after good Anatomies of Plaster, and when you have practiced a while, it will
learn you to place all your Muscles according to Nature or Art. There are also
good Books of Anatomies with Prints and instructions to them, which are very
useful for one that intends to draw a good Naked Figure, which you can never
be eminent at, without you understand the Anatomy and use to Draw after the
Life very much.

Some further Observations in Drawing a Naked Figure.
Whatsoever you Draw, Draw it at first very lightly with a Cole, because if it
be out of proportion you can the easier mend it, and rub it out, and Draw it
again anew: but note, that you must finish nothing with your Cole, before you
see every thing is placed right according to Art and proportion and then finish
it the one after the other as exactly and curiously as you can possibly in the
Drawing a Naked Figure. Observe first that you draw the Head very exactly, and
next the Shoulders in their just breadth, as before mentioned, containing two
measures of the Head; Then you Draw the Trunck of the Body beginning just at
the Armpits, and you may leave the Arms to finish till afterward, and then
you proceed to Draw down to the Hipps on both sides, but be sure that you
exactly observe the breadth of the Wast; and when you have done this, then Draw
that Leg first which the Body stands firmest upon, then Draw the other which
stands looser of the two, but be sure to place that Leg which the Figure
stands upon firmly and right, upon the straight Line which comes down from
the Head, or else the Figure may seem to yield one way or the other, and as it
were fall; and lastly you must proceed to Draw the Arms and Hands.

A further Observation.
When you Draw a Naked Figure you must judiciously and exactly observe to place
the Joints and Sinews and Muscles in their natural places, according to their
proportion, and observe that one Joint be not higher or lower then the other;
otherwise the Figure will seem to be crooked and deformed and out of proportion
to the judicious eye; see that every parallel Joint must bend moderately
according to Nature, and answer the other which is opposite to it; and note
that the straight stroke must be struck according to the bending of the Body,
so that if the Body bow, the stroke must bow also, and if the body stoop
downwards a little, you must strike your stroke sloping accordingly; then make
the Shoulder, which ought to stand straight over one another, the one to be a
little higher then the other, on that side which the body turns upon the
Shoulders and the other Joints, which otherwise ought to be placed one even
against another; you must make them to yield something lower then that side the
Figure stands firmest upon, more or less, answerable to the stooping of the
Body; and be sure to be very exact and careful in the Drawing your outmost
circumferences, and to be very careful in Drawing your Muscles and Joints
which are in the body; therefore because you should place things in their right
and natural places, you strike the straight Line from the Pit of the Throat
straight down, just in the middle of the Body, where you can discern the
parting of the Ribs. From thence you must proceed with your Line quite down to
the Feet, and be sure to observe the bowing and bendings of the Body, and to
draw that part which is opposite to that which bends, to yield and bend
accordingly with it: As for example, if one side of the Body does yield or bend
inwards, then you must make the other side for to stand out answerable, and
according to the bending in of the otherside; and observe whenever you draw
the Back bending in, you must make the Belly to yield in according to it, so
that when the Belly yields in, the Back must stick out according to proportion;
and also if the Buttocks stick out, then that which is over in opposition to it
must yield in equally. This is not only to be observed in these parts of the
Body, but in all the other also; as when the Knees bend out, then the Hammes
which answer to it must yield in accordingly, and therefore this Rule is very
necessary to be observed very exactly in all the other Joints; or else
peradventure the Body will not have all the natural windings and yieldings,
which give the greatest looseness to any Figure whatsoever. Withal be sure to
use your utmost endeavor to make things of an answerable and equal proportion
and bigness according to Art, that is to say, not to make a Leg or an Arm or
any other Joint, not of an equal and suitable bigness, but to make one bigger
then the other; therefore observe to make all the Joints of an equal bigness,
both of bigness, length, and breadth, but according to proportion. But in case
any part of the Body yield or turn something away from the Eye, then you must
decline that part which turns according to proportion; and likewise if any
part of the Body do appear to the Eye to foreshorten, as when it does hinder
the sight of the full Latitude of that part of the Body: Therefore I say upon
such occasions, the Body or part of the Body must be made to decline and
foreshorten, according to that proportion that the Eye does guess of it;
therefore be sure to observe your exact distances one from another, how far
the one is distant from the other; you must observe also how much one part of
the Body sticks out beyond the other; be careful when you draw a naked Figure
to draw nothing hard, but to shadow it fine and soft as possible you can, and
not to draw the out-Circumferences sharp or stiff, but as loose as possible.

A way to take the perfect out-Lines or Circumferences of any Painting or Print
whatsoever.
Take a sheet of Venice Paper, and dip it in Oil; or take a Feather, and wet
the Paper all over with Oil of Turpentine, then take a clean linen Rag, and
after the Oil is soaked into the Paper a while, rub the Oil clean off from the
Paper as clean as you can, for if the Paper be Oily it will spoil any Print,
because that the Oil will soak through. Then having prepared the Oyl-Paper,
take it and lay it upon the Painting or Print which you intend to draw after,
and you shall perceive all the Painting very clearly through the Oyl-Paper.
Then you take a black lead Pensil, and* draw upon the Oyl-Paper all the
out-Lines and Circumferences thereof, then take a piece of Charcole, or a piece
of black Lead, and scrape it upon the backside of the Oyl-Paper, then take a
Feather and rub it all over, and shake off the rest; this being done take a
sheet of clean Paper, and lay under the Oyl-Paper; then take a Stift, and draw
all the same strokes which you drew before upon the Oyl-Paper over again, then
take the Oyl-Paper off from the other, and all the same out-Lines will be upon
the clean Paper; then if you think good, you may finish it up according to the
Painting or Print you draw it after.

A way to decline or bring any Painting or Print into a lesser compass.
If it be a Painting that you intend to decline, then you take a pair of
Compasses, and divide the length of it into so many equal parts as you think
convenient, and the breadth also with the very same distances, then you must
take a piece of Packthread and chalk it, then take that Line, and strike upon
all the parts which you divided with your Compasses, so many strait Lines as
there are parts in the length, then strike them Lines that go in the breadth,
quite across them in the length, so that it may be all uniformed; so the like
with that as you would have smaller or greater, according to your intention;
and by the distances in the Chequers you guess to draw it smaller accordingly.

A further direction for Drawing.
Be sure to place all the Muscles in their right and proper places: By the
Muscles I mean the shadows that are caused by some dents or swellings in the
face or body; therefore labor to find out the reason of every Muscle, that so
you may proceed to work with the more judgment; you shall perceive the most
Muscles in old and withered faces. First you must draw the principle of them,
and then place the features exactly in their right places; observe to shadow
them rightly, and be sure not to make them too dark where they should be faint,
for if you should, you can never recover it to make them light again; the
shadows are generally fainter and lighter in a fair face, then in a swarthy
complexion. And when you have finished your draught, you must give it here and
there a hard touch where it is darkest shadowed, which will add a great life
and grace to it.

Certain choice Observations concerning Miniture or Limning*
ERe you begin to paint, you must be exact at Design or Draught, so as to be
able to Copy any Picture in black and white, with Cole-black, Chalk, Black
Lead, or the like.

The Colors to be painted with are thus termed.
White Cereus. White Lead.
Red India lake. Red Lead. Mynne.
Yellow Masticot. Yellow Ocur. English Ocur.
Green Sap green. Pink. Blew Verdure. Green Bice. Terra Vert.
Blew Indico. Vltra marine. Blew Bice. Smalt.
Brown Spanish Brown. Collins earth, or Terra de Coloma. Vmber.
Black Cherri-stone. Ivory black. Lamblack.

As for Vermillion, Verdigrease, Orpiment, etc. they are too course and gritty
to paint in Watercolours; Turnsoil, Litmus blew, Rosset, Brasill, Logwood,
Saffron, are more fit for washing Prints, then curious Limning.

Grisatrice.
Faint shade for the Face] Mingle together white English Ocur, Indico, a little
Masticot.

Deep shade] White English Ocur, Umber.

Dark shades in men's Faces] India-Lake and Pink mixed.

Ruddy Compl.] Mine, Vermilion, Lake, Cereus, Ana q. s.

Mingle white Lead with all the shades.

Bise.
To Wash Bise] Grind the Bise first very purely, then fill a shell with clean
water, put the Bise therein, stir it, and let it settle an hour, then reserve
the bottom and blow often the top. To deepen this use Litmus Water.

Deepest shade] Umber, Cullins earth, Pink, Lake, Ana q. s.

Observation in Grindeing] Leave not your Color too moist, but thick and
clammy; if after your Color be dry, you rubbing your finger thereon find any
to come off, it must be better bound with Gum.

Black] Cherystone burnt good for Drapery.

Cereus.
White] To make your Cereus or white Lead that it shall neither rust nor shine
(both which are no small inconveniences) go this way to work before you begin
to grind either of them; lay them in the Sun to dry two or three days, which
will exhale those greasy and salt humors that poison and starve the Colors;
besides you must scrape away the superficies of the white Lead, and only
reserve the middle of it; grind it with fair water or Rosemary water with a
Pebble on a Porphir.

When it is ground, have in readiness a Chalk stone with Furrows in it, into
which put the Color while it is wet, and it will be exceedingly cleansed
thereby. After it is through dry, reserve it in clean papers, and when you
would use it, put it in a Muscle shell with Gum water made of the whitest Gum
Arabic.

Colors to be ground are these.
Cereus, white Lead, India Lake, English Ocur, Pink, Indico, Umber, Spanish
Brown, Cullins Earth, Cheristone Ivory.

Colors to be washed are these.
Red Lead, Minne, Masticot, green Bise, Cedar green, Ultra Marine, blew Bise,
Smalt, Verdure, Sap green.

India Lake.
Purple] Grind this with Gum water; when it is ground fine before you put it in
a shell, mix a little powder of white Sugar Candy with it, which will make it
not crack; after this Temperature, you may spread it with your finger thinly
about the shell.

English Ocur.
Yellow] This Color lies even in the shell of it self, and is of great use,
especially if well ground*

Pink.
Green] The fairest Pink is best, wherewith well ground and tempered with blew
Bise, makes an excellent green; to deepen this Color in Landscape or Drapery,
use Indico very finely ground.

Vmber.
Brown] This Color is somewhat greasy, to cleanse which burn it in a
Crucible, afterward grind it and it will be good.

Spanish Brown.
Dark Red] Because this Color is very course, you may use Umber and a little
Lake tempered instead thereof, which is as good.

Black.
Black] Cherristone and Ivory are both to be burnt in a Crucible and so ground.
Cherristone is good for Drapery; for a black Satin, temper with it a little
white, India, Lake, and Indico; heighten it with a lighter mixture; deepen it
with Ivory black: This was Hilliards way.

Ivory.
Ivory] Grind Ivory with Sugarcandy.

Colors to be washed and how.
Red Lead] One Instance may serve for all, and that shall be of red Lead,
whereof take as much as you will an Ounce or two, put it into a Basin or
earthen Dish full of fair water, stir it a while together till the water be all
colored, let it stand, and you will soon perceive a greasy scum to arise,
which with all the water cast away, put fresh water to it, and do as before a
second time; but before the water be half settled, pour all the water into a
clean Dish to this water in your second Basin, you must add more clean water,
and mingle both together, then let it settle, afterward pour out the water,
and that small pittance at the bottom is only good, which after it is dry must
be taken off with a Feather, and put up in papers for use.

To use it, spread a little of it about the sides of a shell, and with your
finger temper it with Gum water.

Pencils] Choose such Pencils as are clear, sharp-pointed, not dividing into
parts; of these you must have in readiness a several Pencil for every several
Color.

To prepare a Tablet to work on with Miniature for Pictures by the life.
Take an ordinary playing Card, pollish it with a Dogs tooth, and make as
smooth as you can the white side of it, cleansing it from all spots and
extuberances; then choose of the best abortive Parchment a piece proportionable
to your Card, which piece with fine and clean Starch paste fast on the Card,
temper the Starch before you paste it on in the Palm of your hand, that it may
be free from knots; let the Card thus pasted dry, then making your Grindeing
stone as clean as may be, lay the Card thereon with the Parchment side
downward; then with a tooth burnish or pollish the backside as hard as you can.
Note that the outside of the skin is best to paint upon, and must therefore be
outmost.

To Prime for a Face] Your Card thus prepared, you are to lay a Ground or
Primer of flesh Color before you begin your work, and that must be tempered
according to the Complexion of the Face to be drawn; if the Complexion be fair,
temper white, red Lead, and Lake; if an hard swarthy Complexion, mingle with
your white and red a little fine Masticot, or English Ocur; but note, that your
Ground ought always to be fairer then the Face you take, for it is a facile
matter to darken a light Color, but a difficult to lighten a deep one; for in
Limning you must never heighten, but work them down to their just Color.

Your Ground thus prepared, you must lay it on the Card (ordered as before)
with a Pencil bigger then ordinary, lay it on as smooth, even, and free from
hairs of your Pencil as it is possible, which that you may do, fill your Pencil
full of Color rather thin or watrish, then thick and gross, and with two or
three daubes of your great Pencil, lay it on in an instant, the nimbler it is
laid on, the evener the Color will lie.

Note] Note that you ought to cover rather too much then too little with this
Prime; cover (...) what more of the Card with the Ground Color, then you shall
use for the Face.

This done, take a pretty large shell of Mother-pearl, or another shell, and
before you (...) work, temper certain little heaps of several Shadows for the
Face, which you may dispose about the edges of the shell.

The Order of Shadows for the Face.
Shadows] In all your Shadows, remember to mix some white, exempli gratia; for
the red in the Cheeks, Lips, etc. temper Lake, red Lead; and a little white for
the blew, as the Veins, etc. a little Indico and white, for blew Bise is never
used in a Face; for the faintest and weakest Color or Shades, Lake-white, a
little Ocur, and a little Indico, adding thereto if you will a small pittance
of Pink, or Masticot; for the deeper Shadows, white English Ocur, Umber; for
the darkest and hardest Shadows, use Lake, and Pink mixed with Umber. Note that
black must not by any means be used in a Face: for other Shadows your own
observation must direct you, for it is impossible to give a general Rule for
the Shadows in all Faces, unless we could force Nature to observe the same
method in Composeing and Modelling them, so that one in every Punctilio should
resemble the other.

Light] For your Light to draw by a Northern is accounted best, which if it
fall sloping down from an high window, is best of all.

Position] Place your self so to your Desk, that the Light may strike in
sidelong from the left hand to the right; and observe that in all your work it
will show to the best advantage, when it is turned and seen by the same Light it
was drawn by.

Necessaries in Painting] Let a Saucer or clean shell of fair water be ever on
your right hand, wherewith you may temper your Colors and wash your Pencils,
which you must have on your right hand too; together with a brush-Pencil dry,
to brush and cleanse your work from dust; also a sharp Penknife, wherewith to
take away such spots or hairs as may casually mix with your Colors, or fall
into your Card; you may also conveniently cover your Picture with a piece of
paper, whereon to try your Pencils before you begin to work.

To begin a Face.
The first Draught] Having these accommodations, draw the Lines of Porphile (
i. e. the outmost strokes) of a Face with Lake, and white mingled, very faint;
by this you may conveniently mend the Draught (if false) with a deeper mixture
of the same Color; the Lines being exactly drawn, and true proportion
observed) (which is the chiefest thing of concernment) next observe the deeper
and more remarkable Shadows, and with the same faint Crimson Color of Lake and
white, give some slight touches and marks somewhat roughly of these Shadows,
which afterward you will finish.

The Order to be observed in drawing by the Life.
The Order of Drawing* First Sitting] First you must only dead-Colour the Face,
as the oyl-Painters do, and not meddle with the rest, and this first Sitting
commonly takes up two hours.

Second Sitting] The second Sitting will require four or five hours, in that
time you are to go over the Face very curiously, observing whatever may conduce
either to likeness, or judicious Coloring, and observation of the several
graces, beauties, or deformities, as they appear in Nature, or else in
smoothness of Shadows, or close and sweet Couching the Colors.

Third Sitting] The third Sitting is two or three hours work, and is spent in
closeing what was before left imperfect and rough; but principally in diveing
to every deep Shadow, the strong touches and deepenings as well in the dark
Shadows in the Face, as in the Eyes, Eyebrows, Hair, and Ears, and these
touches are ever the last part of this business, and are never to be done till
all the Hair and Drapery be finished; these touches (if well done) add
exceedingly to the life.

Concerning dead-Colouring.
The dead-Colouring of a Face is to be done the roughest and boldest of all;
having drawn your Face with Lake and white (as before) you must take to the
said Color a little red Lead, tempering it to the Color of the Cheeks, Lips,
etc. but very faintly, because you cannot lighten a deep Color, without hazard
of spoiling the Picture.

To begin to Paint] The first Color to begin the Face with is the red of the
Cheeks, and Lips, somewhat strongly, the bottom of the Chin, if the Party be
beardless; over under and about the Eyes, you will perceive a delicate and
faint redness, and underneath the Eyes, inclineing to purple Color, which in
fair and beautiful Faces is usual, and must be observed; the tip of the Ear
and the roots of the Hair are commonly of the same Color.

All this you must do after the manner of Hatching, with faint and gentle
Strokes, washing it all along. In short, in your dead-Colouring you must cover
your ground with the aforesaid red, and the subsequent Shadows.

Note] Be not too curious in your first working, but regard a good bold
following of Nature, rather then smooth Curiosity, the roughness of the Color
you may end at another Sitting.

The second Work of Painting.
The second Procedure] The red being done, the next is the faint blewes about
the corners and balls of the Eyes, and the gray and bluish under the Eyes, the
Temples, etc. which you are also to work from the uppermost part of the Face
almost all over, but exceeding sweet and faint, by degrees sweetening and
heightening your Shadows, as the Light falls. And in going over the Face, be
sure to mark out the hard Shadows in the dark side of the Face, under the Nose,
Chin, Eyebrows, etc. as the Light falls, and somewhat strong touches in those
places. Bring up your work together in an equal roundness, not giving
perfection to any particular part of the Face, but visiting all the parts
curiously, and in a kind of random, by which means you will better observe
the likeness, roundness, postures, Coloring, or whatever else is requisite to
the perfection of your work.

The third Procedure] Having done the fainter or slighter Shades, and somewhat
smoothed and wrought them into the red, you may go over the Hair, disposing
into such Forms, Folds, or Tramels, as may become your Picture best.

You must at first only draw them with Color as near as you can suitable to the
life, and after wash them lightly at the first, and then once more peruse your
work, being careful to fill up the void empty and bare places which are
uncovered with Color, and at last deepen it somewhat more strongly then before
in the deepest shady places, still carefully observing the life. Thus much for
the first Sitting.

The Order of Painting in the second Sitting.
The Party being set just in his former seat, you must most exactly observe and
curiously delineate with your Pencil, those several varieties of Nature, which
you did rudely score out before. To do this you must use the same Color in the
same places you did before, working, driving, and sweetening the same Colors
one into another, to the end that nothing be left in your work with a hard
edge, uneven, or a lump together, but all so swept and driven one into another,
with the point of somewhat a sharper Pencil then you used at first as that your
Shadows may lie soft and smooth, being dispersed and gently extended into all,
and toward the lighter parts of the Face, like air or a vapoury smoke; but
before this you must carefully observe all the Shadows and Colors.

The ground behind the Picture] For the ground behind the Picture, it is
commonly blew or crimson, somewhat like a Satin or red Velvet Curtain: If blew
you must lay it thus; your Bise being pure and clear washed, temper as much in a
shell as will cover a Card, let it be all thoroughly moist and well bound with
Gum, then with a small Pencil go about with the same Color the Porphile, that
is the utmost Stroke, and ambient Superficies of the Picture; this done take a
greater Pencil, and therewith wash over somewhat carefully the whole ground
that you mean to cover with a blew, somewhat thin and watrish, and then with a
reasonable big Pencil full of Color and flowing, lay over that place with a
thick and substantial body of Color, which before you had only washed over. In
the doing of this you must be very swift, keeping the Color moist that you
have laid, not permitting any part to dry till the whole be covered.

A Crimson Ground] If you would have your ground Crimson like Satin, you must
with India-Lake mark out where and in what places you will have these strong
and hard Lights and Reflections to fall, which is seen in Satin or Velvet,
there lay your Lights with a thin and watrish Lake, and while it is yet wet
with a stronger and darker Color of Lake thick ground, lay the deepning and
hard strong Shadows close by the other lights; your best way is to have a piece
of Satin before you to imitate.

For Method in the Touches] After this lay your linen with a flat white, and
the Drapery likewise flat, then go over your Face again, endeavoring to reduce
each Shadow to its true perfection, then draw the Lines of the Eyelids,
expressing the red dark Nostril, the shadowy entrance into the Ears, the
deepness of the Eyebrows, and those more perspicuous notes and marks in the
Face, with a Pencil somewhat more curious and sharp then before; you may darken
your ground as you see it will be most advantageous to the setting out the
Picture.

The Hair] Next go over your Hair, heightning and deepning it as you shall see
by the life, drawing some Locks loosely over the ground, which would otherwise
seem unpleasant.

Linen Shade] To shadow Linen use black, white, a little yellow, and less
blew; the black must be deepned with Ivory-black, with which mix a little Lake,
and Indico, or Litmus-blew. Thus much for the second Sitting.

The Manner of Finishing at the third Sitting.
Third Sitting] The third will be wholly spent in giving the strong Touches and
Observations necessary for the rounding of a Face, which you will now better
see to do, the Apparel, Hair, and Ground, being already finished. In this
Sitting curiously observe whatever may conduce to similitude, which is the
chiefest thing, as Scars, Moles, etc. glances of the Eyes, descending and
circumflexions of the Mouth; never make your deepest Shadows so deep as they
appear in the life.

Thus much of the Face and three Sittings: For Ornaments thus.
Ornament. Armour-Silver] For Coloring Armor, first lay liquid Silver flat
and even, which dried and burnisht with a Tooth, temper the Shadows with
Silver, Indico, Litmus, and a little Umber, work these Shadows on the Silver as
directed by the life.

Gold Armour] For the Gold Armor, lay Gold as you did Silver, for the Shadow,
Lake, English Ocur, tempered with a little Gold.

Pearls] To express the roundness and luster of Pearls, your ground must be
white, and Indico, your Shadow black, and Pink.

Diamonds] Diamonds are expressed with a ground of flat liquid Silver, the
deepening is Cherristone, black, and Ivory; the deeper the Shadow, the fairer
the Diamond.

Rubies] Lay a ground of Silver, burnish it to the bigness of the Rubie, then
take Turpentine of the best and purest, and temper with it very neat a little
India-Lake, then taking a Needle or some small iron Instrument heated in a
Candle, lay or drop a little of the Composition upon the Silver, fashioning the
Stone in a round or square, or what fashion you please with the point of your
Instruments, you must let it lie a day or two to dry; if it be too long in
drying, add to your other Composition a little powder of clarified Mastick;
this Receipt is not commonly known.

Emeraulds] For any green Stone, temper your Turpentine with Verdigrease, and a
little Turmerick root first scraped with Vinegar, then let it dry, then grind
it to fine powder and temper it.

Saphires] Mix Turpentine with Ultra Marine, etc.

Note that the ground to all must be liquid Silver polisht.

A true Receipt to make liquid Gold.
Liquid Gold] Take of fine leaf Gold the value of 2s -- 6d, grind this Gold
with a strong and thick Gum water upon a reasonable large stone, which you must
grind very fine and painfully; as you grind it still add more of your strong
Gum water, and though the Gold look never so black and dirty, it is never the
worse; having brought it to a competent fineness, wash it in a great shell as
you did Bise, etc. being very clean add to it a little quantity of Mercury
sublimate, with the point of your Knife which you must temper with it, and a
very little Gum to bind it in the shell, and as it settles and begins to dry
in the shell, shake it together, and remove and spread the Gold about the sides
of the shell, that it may be altogether of one Color and fineness, use it with
fair water as you do the other Colors.

Note] So for liquid Silver, only observe (and it is a Secret) that when your
Silver either with long keeping or moistness of the air becomes starvd and
rusty, you must to prevent this inconveniency, before you lay the Silver Cover
over the place with a little juice of Garlic, which will preserve it.

Landscape.
Landskip] In painting Landscape ever begin with the Sky, and if there be any
Sunbeams, do them first.

Purple Clouds] For the purple Clouds, only mingle Lake and white.

Yellow] The yellow Sunbeams, Masticot and white.

Note 1.] Work your blew Sky with Smalt only.

Note 2.] At your first working dead-Colour all the Piece over, leave nothing
uncovered, lay the Color smooth and even.

Note 3.] Work the Sky down in the Horizon fainter and fainter as you Draw near
the Earth, except in tempestuous Skies, work your further Mountains so that
they should seem to be lost in the Air.

Note 4.] Your first Ground must be of the color of the earth and dark;
yellowish, brown, green, the next successively as they loose in their distance
must also faint and abate in their colors.

Note 5.] Beware of perfection at a distance.

Note 6.] Ever place light against dark, and dark against light [that is] that
the only way to extend the Prospect far off, is by opposing light to shadows,
yet so as ever they must loose their force and vigor in proportion as they
remove from the eye, and the strongest shadow ever nearest hand.

Dark green
For a dark green for Trees, mingle blew Verdure, Pink, and Indico; the deepest
shadows of all in green are made with sap green and Indico.

A rare Secret to preserve colors.
Take Rosemary Water distilled, and with a few drops of it, temper your shell
of White, and you shall see it become instantly perfect White, how ever dead
and faded it was before. Besides this Water allayes the bubbles in White and
Umber, which are usually very troublesome in the Grounding them.

Some general Observations in Miniature.
1. If your Colors peel or by reason of the greasiness of your Parchment will
not lie on; mix with them a very little Ear-Wax, and 'twill help them. 2. Sit
not above two yards from him you Draw by. 3. Draw not any part in the Face of a
Picture exactly at first, neither finish a Mouth, Eye, or Nose, till the rest
of your work come up, and be wrought together with it. 4. When you have
finished the Face, make the Party stand up to Draw the Drapery by him. 5. Let
the Party you Draw be set in an higher Seat then your self that Draw.
To make Crayons or Pastils and Draw with them.
Pastils.] To instance one for all, if you were to make a Pastill for a brown
Complexion, grind on your Stone, Cereus, red Lead, or Virmilion, English Ocre,
and a little Pink, to this add a proportionable quantity of Plaster of Paris
burnt and finely sifted, mix this with the other Colors and you may role it up.

Note.] Mix white Cereus with all your other colors.

To use these Pastils, Color the Paper whereon you mean to Draw with a
Carnation or flesh Color, with a wet Sponge Draw the out-lines faintly with
red Chalk, then rub in the Pastils, finish and fill up all with black Chalk as
you shall see occasion.

To make white.
Cereus.] Take two parts of ordinary Chalk, and one part of Alum, grind these
together fine, make them up in a lump, burn them in a Crucible and use them.

To make white Lead.
White Lead.] Take a Gallypot, whereinto put several small plates of clean
Lead, cover them with white Wine Vinegar, cover the Pot, and dig an hole in a
Cellar, where let it abide for the space of six Weeks; take it up, and scrape
off the White Lead from the plates.

To prepare a Card for a Picture.
Wet a Card all over with a great Pencill so soon as the water is sunk in
burnish it smooth on the backside, having beaten some Starch with a Knife in
your hands palm spread it over, instantly lay on a piece of abortive
Parchment, let it be pressed in a book till it be almost dry, then smooth it on
the backside.

To preserve Colors fresh, some grind them with the Gall of a Neat.

To prepare White excellently.
White.] Take some Cereus which being grossly bruised and put into a fine
earthen Basen, put to it a good quantity of running Water distilled, wherein
wash the Cereus till it be thoroughly clean and purged, which you shall know by
the taste of the Water which is drained from thence.

Vernish.] Vernish is made thus, Take of Oil of Turpentine one pound, Sandrake
one pound, Oil of Spike one pound, mix the Oils together, and let all stand
over the fire till the Sandrake be ^esolved: if the fire should chance to catch
hold of this, clap a Pewter Dish over it.

Concerning Wax work or Moulding. To make the Moulds.
The Mould.] Take a good big lump of Plaster of Paris and burn it in a
Crucible till it be red hot, let it cool, then beat it very fine, and searse
it through a Tiffany Sieve; be very cautious that the Wind come not at it, for
that will hinder its hardening: after it be tempred keep it wrapped up in a
clean brown Paper. Use it thus, Take any Earthen or Pewter Vessel that is
shallow, and put ten or twelve spoonfulls of fair Water in it, then prepare
your fruit, and bind a Ragg round it like a Cord in a wreath long ways on the
fruit: then take some Linseed Oil, or (which is the more cleanly) Oil of sweet
Almonds, with which in a Pencill besmeare the Lemmon or (what other fruit it
be) on one side, which lay upermost: your Lemmon thus prepared, take up some of
your sifted Plaster of Paris and temper it in the forementioned Water to a
pretty thickness, then as speedily as may be with the help of your Spoon cast
it on the Oyled Lemmon, lay it on very thick, least the thinness of the Mould
spoil the work, when it is hardened (which will be in a small time) take away
your Ragg, leaving the Linen still fast in its half Mould; Which done, turn
the hardened side downward, then Oil the other half of the Lemmon together, with
the edges of the Mould, which the Ragg did cover; then wash your Poringer or
Vessel where the former Plaster was clean and prepared, and cast on more
Plaster of Paris as before; observe it must not be too thick when you cast it
on, and after it is hardened, you must put no more water to it, for then it will
crumble; when you have done the Moulds so, and made a notch that one may fall
fitly into the other, tie them close together having before well Oyled them,
and keep them for use.

To Cast in these Moulds.
To Cast.] Use the whitest and purest Virgins Wax.

To color the Wax answerable to the things you Mould.
To color.] For a Raddish your Ground is Cereus, which must be afterward
Painted over with Lake, the top of the Raddish Painted with Verdigrease, all
other such Colors must be tempered with Gum-Water. Gum-Water is thus made,
Disolve a lump of clear Gum Arabic about the bigness of a Wallnut in two
spoonfuls of fair Water, herewith temper your Colors.

Note that every thing Mouldable is either all of one and the same color, as
(a Lemmon,) or striped, and parti-colored with different colors, as a Pare,
Paremaine, etc. Now such as are of one color may be easily cast all of the
same color; but such as are variegated must be kept out afterward by colors
tempered with Gum-Water, (as above,) you color your Wax by putting into it
whilst it is hot and melted in a Gallypot, a little Linen Bag of that color
you use, provided that the color be before bruised very fine.

As to particulars, for the Lemmons or Apricocks, take only Turmerick in a Bag;
for Oranges, Turmerick and red Lead well tempered; Apples, Pears, or Grapes,
Turmerick and a little Verdigrease; mixed Wallnuts and Figs, Turmerick and
English Ocre, and Umber all in a bag together; Cucumbers, or Hartichoakes,
Peasecods, or Filbirds, Turmerick, Verdigrease, Eggs, and Cereus, all put in
several Bags, and steept in the Virgin Wax when it is melting as before
mentioned; for Damsons, bruise Charchoale, Indico, and blew Starch in a Bag
together; for flesh color, White Lead, and Vermilion mixed, etc.

To counterfit Rochcand'd Sweetmeates.
Rochcandy.] Disolve the quantity of a Wallnut of Gum Arabic in two spoonfuls
of clear Water, let it be very thick, then take any piece of broken Venice
Glass, the thicker the better, beat it in a Mortar so small as you please; that
it may serve your occasion, daub over some cast Sweetmeats with the
forementioned Gum-Water, strew this Powder on them, and 'twill with much
delight satisfy the expectation.

Additionall Observations out of a Manuscript of Mr. Hilliards touching
Miniature.
When you begin to Paint temper all your colors a fresh with your finger, in
your shell, or on your pallat.

Pearl.
Your Pearl must be laid with a White mixture, with a little black, a little
Indico and Mastick, but very little in comparison of the White, not to the
hundredth part; that dry, give the light of the Pearl with a little Silver,
somewhat more to the light then the shadowed side, then take a White allaid
with Masticot, and underneath the shadowed side give it a compassing stroke,
which shows a reflection, then without that a small shadow of Sea Cole
undermost of all. But Note, your Silver must be laid round and full.

The Grounds and Rules of Etching.
BEfore that you begin to Etch upon Copper, it is very necessary to practice
the Art of Drawing, till you be able if need require to Draw any Head after the
Life, or to Draw a design; Therefore if you intend to practice the Art of
Etching, you will find it very profitable to Draw after good Prints, which are
well designed and Graved, and when you, have practiced so long that you are
able to Copy any Print, or Drawing very exactly; then Draw after good Heads of
Plaster or Figures, according to your own fancy, which will learn you to
shadow according to Art, if well observed; therefore be sure when you Draw
after Plaster, to observe very exactly to take the true out-lines or
circumferences, and then take notice how the shadow falls, then shadow it very
faint and soft, where need requires accordingly. The Prints which I recommend
unto you as absolutely the best to learn to Etch after, be the Prints of Henry
Goldshis and Hermon Muller. Therefore it is very convenient to learn to hatch
with the Pen exactly after either of the aforesaid Prints of Goldshis or
Muller; and when you have brought it to that perfection, and can Draw very well
after Plaster, you may practice to Draw after the Life; but before you Draw
after the Life, you must be very exact and true in your out-lines or
circumferences.

The Instruments with their particular names which are used to Etch withal.
A Copper plate polished, a piece of Ground bound up in a piece of Silk or
Taffety, and preserved from any dust or grease; and about twenty Needles of all
sizes, the best are made at Cleafe; then take the Needles and set them
indifferent deep into some round slender sticks about a span long, with a
Needle at one of the Sticks, and a Pencill at the other, a scraper, a polisher;
and two or three good French Gravers, well ground and whetted, and a pair of
Compasses, a Ruler, some green Wax, a Bottle which holds some half a pound,
of single Aqua fortis stopped close with soft Wax, some white Lead, a Stift, a
hand Vice to hold the Plate over the fire, an Oyl-stone.

The use and property of every particular Instrument.
The Copper Plate is the only Object to Etch upon; the Ground is to lay upon
the Copper Plate, when they are both warmed* your Needles are to Hatch withal
upon the Ground; the Pencill is to wipe away the bits of Ground, which rise
when you Hatch upon the Ground with your Needles; the Scraper is to scrape out
any thing that is amiss* the Polisher is to make smooth any place that is
rough, so that you can mend any place that is amiss according to your own mind;
the Gravers are to mend here and there a stroke where need requires. But Note,
That your Gravers must be ground and whet very sharp and smooth upon an Oil
stone before you use them. Your Compasses are of very little use in Etching,
except it be to measure a distance, or strike a Circle. The Ruler is used to
Hatch all the straight Hatches or Lines upon the Plate. The green Wax is used
to make a Wall round about the edges of your Plate, to keep the Aqua fortis
from running off from the Plate. The Aqua fortis is the finisher of the work,
when you have Hatched the design upon the Plate with your Needles. The white
Lead is used to scrape upon the backside of the Drawing or Print that you Etch
after. The Stift is used to Draw through all the outmost Lines or circumferences
of the Print or Drawing which you Etch after. The Oil stone is to whet your
Gravers upon. Having these things in readiness, Note, that if it be a black
Ground that lies upon the Plate, then you must take white Lead and rub it upon
the backside of the Print or Drawing which you intend to Etch after; but if it
be a white Ground, then you must take black Lead, or a piece of Charchoale, and
rub on the back of your Print as aforesaid.

The manner and way to make the Ground.
Take a quarter of a pound of Virgins Wax* and half a quarter of a pound of
Expoltum burnt, of Amber one ounce, of Mastick one ounce. Having all these
Materials in readiness, you must take the Mastick and the Expoltum and beat
them very fine in a Mortar; this being done, take a new earthen Pot, and put
the Wax into it, and set it upon the fire till it be just melted; then take the
Mastick and the Expoltum and shake them in by degrees, stirring the Wax about
till they be thoroughly mingled with the Wax; but let it not stand too long over
the fire, nor let the fire be too hot, which if you do it will burn the Ground;
therefore when they are thoroughly melted, take it off from the fire, and pour
the Ground out into a Pot of fair Water, and make it up into a Ball and
preserve it from dust; and when you will use it, take a quantity of it and bind
it up in a piece of Taffity or Silk, and use it as hereafter.

Etching.
A red Ground.
Grind red Lead very well tempered with Vernix*

A white Ground.
Take of Wax one ounce, Rosin two ounces, melt them together, add thereto a
quarter of an ounce of Venice Cereus finely ground*

A black Ground.
Spaltum.] Asphaltum two parts, Bees Wax one part, melt them together, being
warm, lay it thinly on with a Lawne ragg*

Another Ground.
Grind red Lead with Linseed Oil; Note, your Ground must be laid very thin.

The manner and way to lay the Ground upon the Plate.
Take some Charcole and kindle them, this being done, take the hand and screw
it fast to one of the corners of the Plate, as near to the edge as you can,
because you must lay the Ground all over the Plate; then take the Plate and
hold it over the fire, till it be so warm to melt the Ground, then take the
Ground which is bound up, and rub it to and fro upon the Plate till it be
covered all over alike; then take one of the stiffest Feathers out of a Ducks
Wing that is not ruffled, and spread the Ground very thin, and smooth every
where alike upon the Plate; but have a special care you heat not the Plate
too hot, least you burn the Ground; which if it be, the Ground will break up
when you put on the Aqua fortis and spoil the Plate; you may discover when it
is burnt, by its rising sandy, which if you perceive, you must take a clean
Linen ragg, and warming the Plate, wipe the Ground clean off, and lay a new
as aforesaid. But if you perceive the Ground to be smooth and not sandy, take
it off from the fire, and when it is cold, take a piece of Link and hold under
the Ground till you have smoaked it very black, but let not the flame touch the
Ground, least you burn it; this being done, if the Plate be cold hold it over
the fire again till it be just warm, to let the smoke melt into the Ground,
that it may not rub off under your hand; then hold it off from the fire with
the Ground-side of the Plate downwards for to preserve it from the dust,
otherwise when the Ground is warm, dust will fly therein and spoil it,
therefore you must hold it with the Ground-side downwards until the Ground is
cold.

The way to Draw the outmost Lines of any Print or Drawing upon the Ground of
the Plate.
First take the Drawing or Print which you intend to Etch after, and scrape a
little white Lead upon the backside of it, then take a Feather and rub it over
every where alike, and shake off that which remains, then take the Print and
lay it upon the Plate on that side the Ground is, then fasten the four corners
of the Print to the Plate with a little soft Wax; this being done, take the
Stift and Draw upon the Print all the outmost circumferences and Lines exactly,
and when you have so done, take off the Print from the Plate, and all the same
out-lines and circumferences which you Drew upon the Print with the Stift, will
be exactly and unfailably upon the Ground.

Several Observations in Hatching.
First observe exactly and judiciously how your principle is shadowed, and how
close the Hatches join, and how they are laid, and which way the light falls
or comes; the light must fall all one way, for if the light fall side ways in
your Print, you must Hatch the other side which is furthest from the light
darkest, and so place your lights altogether on the one side, and not
confusedly to have the light come on both sides alike, as if it stood in the
midst of many lights; for neither does the light with all its brightness
illuminate any more then that part that is directly opposite unto it. Then
observe exactly how close all the Hatches join, and how they are laid, and
which way they twist and wind: then follow them as exactly as possibly you can,
but before that you begin to Hatch or Shadow, you must Draw all the outmost
Lines with a Needle upon the Ground, as Artificially as you can, and then you
must Shadow it with your Needles of several sorts according to your principle;
and when you will make a broad stroke, then break off the point of a great
Needle and whet it upon an Oil stone four square until it comes to a point;
and if you will Hatch five strokes, then you must use five pointed Needles;
and if middle size, then break off the point of a middle size Needle and whett
it as beforesaid, and so according to all sizes. But some Masters when they
make a bold stroke Hatch it fine at first, and so by degrees make them broader.

Necessary Observations in Etching Landskips.
Observe when you Etch Landskips, to make or hatch that which is nearest to the
Eye darkest, and so let it lose or decline its Shadows by degrees, and that
which is furthest off must be faintest, and so lose equally by degrees; the
same observation must be in making the Sky, for that which is nearest to the
Eye must be the darkest shadowed, but in general as faint and soft as possible;
and so also let it lose by degrees as before is mentioned, and the nearer the
Sky comes to the ground, the more it must lose and be fainter; but when they
as it were meet together, the Sky must quite be lost; and when you have
hatched it as exactly as you can possibly with your Needles, according to the
print of Drawing that you do it after; this being done, compare them exactly
and judicially together, and if you find it like the original, take some green
soft Wax and make a wall round about the edges of the Plate.

How to make the Wax wall round about the Plate, to keep the Aqua fortis from
running off from it.
Take some green soft Wax and temper it till it be warm, then draw it into a
long slender role as long as will reach about the Plate, then flat it and
fasten it about the edges of the Plate, and let it be about half an inch high;
then take an old Knife and heat it in the fire, and sear the Wax round about
under the Plate very close, otherwise the Aqua fortis will run out; but be sure
to fasten the wall as near to the edges of the Plate as you can conveniently;
then pour the Aqua fortis upon the Plate, letting it lie till it be deep enough.

How to use the Aqua fortis on the Plate.
You must use single Aqua fortis. Take a quantity of Aqua fortis and pour it
into a Glass, and mingle it with a little Vinegar to weaken it, if it be too
strong, or a little Aqua fortis which has been used before; for in case the
Aqua fortis work too strong, it will make the work very hard, and sometimes
make the ground to break up; and when you have tempered it very well, pour it
upon the Plate almost as high as the Wax wall; the deeper the Aqua fortis
lies, the harder it will eat, and when you perceive it to be deep enough, pour
off the Aqua fortis from the Plate into a Glass, and preserve it to mingle with
other as aforesaid; this being done, take some fair water and wash the Plate,
and then take off the Wax wall and preserve it for the same use again; then
warm the Plate, and take a clean linen Rag when it is indifferent warm, and
rub off the ground from the Plate very clean; then take some Oil and rub over
the Plate to clean it, and if you perceive that the Aqua fortis has not eaten
as deep in some places as it should be, then it must be helped with a Graver.

Observations by which you may know when it is deep enough.
When the Aqua fortis has layn upon the Plate a little more then a quarter of
an hour, or half an hour; there being no certainty in time, because sometimes
the Aqua fortis will work stronger then at other; therefore when you think it
is deep enough, pour off the Aqua fortis from the Plate into a Glass, then wash
the Plate with a little fair water, then take a Knife and scrape off a little
piece of the ground where it is hatched, and may be least prejudicial to the
Plate, and if you perceive it to be deep enough; warm the Plate and rub the
ground off as before-written; but if you find it not deep enough, take a
little Candle-tallow and melt it in a Spoon, and while it is warm take a Pensil
and cover the place with it where you scraped the ground off, then pour the
Aqua fortis upon it again, and let it lie till you guess it to be deep enough;
then pour the Aqua fortis from the Plate as aforesaid, and at any time when you
perceive that the Aqua fortis does not work strong enough, you pour off half
the old, and refresh it with some new, for when the Aqua fortis has been upon
the Plate about half an hour, it will be much the weaker, because the strength
of it does evaporate away, and by a little practice you will come to the
certain knowledge when the Aqua fortis has eaten deep enough.

Another way to know when it is deep enough.
Take a little piece of a Copper plate, and lay a ground upon it as you have
been showed before, and make a wax wall about it, then hatch it with several
hatches as you think best, and when you pour the Aqua fortis upon the one, pour
it upon the other, and when you think they be eaten deep enough, pour the Aqua
fortis from the little Plate, and wash it with some fair water as aforesaid,
then take a Knife and scrape off a little piece of the ground from the little
Plate where it is hatched, and in case you perceive it not deep enough, cover
the place again with some warm Candle-tallow, and then pour the Aqua fortis
upon it again till you guess it to be enough; then pour the Aqua fortis from
the little Plate again and try as before, and if you see it to be enough, pour
the Aqua fortis from the great Plate, and wash it with a little fair water
before you warm it, or else the Aqua fortis will stain the Plate.

A way to lay a white Ground upon a black.
First you must understand that most grounds are black, and when you lay a
white ground upon a black you must not smoke the black with a Link, and you
must lay the undermost ground the thinner, when you lay a white ground upon it;
and if you would lay a white ground upon a black, take a quantity of Surice, as
much as you think will cover the Plate, and grind it very fine with Gum water,
and temper it very thin, then take a Pencil and wash the Plate all over very
thin and even.

The way to lay a red Ground upon a black Ground.
Take red Chalk and grind it very fine with Gum water, then take a pretty big
Pencil, and wash the Plate all over with the red ground very thin and smooth,
as before is mentioned.

A Receipt for a Ground taken out of a Manuscript of Collots.
Take a quarter of a pound of Virgins wax; and half a quarter of a pound of the
best Expoltum burnt of Amber, and half a quarter of a pound of Mastick if it be
warm weather, because it does harden the ground and preserve it from injury,
when you lean with your hand hard upon it; if it be cold weather, then take but
an ounce of Mastick; this being observed, then take an ounce of Rosin, and an
ounce of Shoomakers Pitch, and half an ounce of other Pitch, half an ounce of
Vernish: having all these materials in readiness; take a new earthen Pot, and
put the Virgins wax into it, and when it is melted stir it about; and put in
the other materials by degrees as beforementioned, and when they are throughy
mingled and melted, take the Pot off from the fire and pour it out in a clean
Pot of fair water, and work it into a Ball, and preserve it from dust and
grease, and when you have occasion to make use of it, take a quantity thereof
and bind it up in a piece of Silk, and make use of it as beforementioned.

The Ground of Rinebrant of Rine.
Take half an ounce of Expoltum burnt of Amber one ounce, of Virgins Wax half
an ounce, of Mastick, then take the Mastick and Expoltum, and beat them
severally very fine in a Mortar; this being done, take a new earthen Pot and
set it upon a Charcolefire, then put the Virgins Wax into it and melt it, then
shake into it the Mastick and Expoltum by degrees, stirring the Wax about till
they be thoroughly mingled, then pour it forth into fair water and make a Ball
of it, and use it as beforementioned; but be sure you do not heat the Plate too
hot when you lay the ground on it, and lay your black ground very thin, and the
white ground upon it. This is the only way of Rinebrant.

The way to preserve any Ground, which is laid upon a Plate in frosty weather.
Take the Plate and wrap it very warm in a woollen Cloth, and lay it in the
warmest place you can convenient; for if the Frost is got into the ground, it
will break up, when you pour the Aqua fortis upon it.

A way to preserve the Plate from injury of the Aqua fortis, where the Ground
breaks up.
If you perceive the ground to break up in any place, pour off the Aqua fortis
from the plate, and wash it with a little fair water; then take a quantity of
Candle-tallow, and melt it in a Spoon, and while it is warm, take a Pencil and
cover the place which is broken up with the said Tallow, and so far as the
Tallow is spread, the Aqua fortis will not eat; some make use of Vernish in
stead of Tallow: and when you have covered the place that is broken, pour on
the Aqua fortis again, and let it lie upon the Plate, till you guess it has
eaten enough; then pour the Aqua fortis from the Plate, and preserve it, then
take the Wax-wall and preserve it also, and wash the Plate with a little fair
water, then rub off your ground as aforesaid, and for the places which the
ground broke up in, it must be helped with a Graver; therefore it will be
necessary for one that desires to learn this Art, to practice Graveing a
little, so much as to help a stroke where you think convenient.

A way to make the Aqua fortis eat soft or hard according to nature or Art.
First take Candle-tallow, and melt it in a Spoon, then with a Pencil cover
that place so far as you will have it to be faint, but note it to be after the
Aqua fortis has lain upon your Plate an indifferent while; and so by degrees
you must use the Tallow as you would have it fainter; this is very necessary
when you Etch Landskips, which must lose and stand at a distance by degrees;
therefore when you Etch Landskips, observe to stop off that place first which
must be faintest, and so by degrees stop it off, and make it lose equally; and
note the nearer you come to the Eye, it must be strongest and darkest shaded,
but not on that side from whence the light comes, for that side must be
preserved as faint as may be; but according to Art.

Observations in Etching Prospective.
Prospective is a thing that is one of the difficultest Arts to be rightly
understood, that is practiced; because it is not rightly understood, but by a
good Arithmetic; otherwise you can never understand Prospective, because you
can never guess rightly how much a Pillar, or a Figure, or the like must
decline, or lose at their several distances, according to Art and proportion:
therefore when you Etch a piece of Prospective after a Drawing or a Print,
observe these Rules; beware of perfection at a distance; and be sure to shadow
that, which is nearest to the Eye, perfectest and strongest; and the further
from the Eye, it must decline in length, and breadth, and height, according to
Art and proportion; observe also to let it lose and be fainter by equal
degrees.

A way to grave any Hand or Letter upon a Copper Plate.
Take some Charcole and kindle them; then take a Hand-vice and screw it to the
corner of the Plate, and hold it over the fire till it be warm; then take a
piece of Virgins Wax, and rub it all over the Plate, until it is covered every
where alike: this being done, take a stiff Feather of a Ducks wing that is not
ruffled, and drive it even and smooth every where alike, and let it cool; then
write the Hand or Letter which you intend to grave upon the Plate, on a piece
of Paper, with ungum'd Ink; then take the Paper which you have written, and lay
that side which is written, downwards next to the Wax, and fasten the four
corners with a little soft Wax; but be sure to place the writings so, that the
Lines may run straight; then you must take a Calves Tooth, and rub the Paper
all over which is fastened, and not miss any place: this being done, take off
the Paper from the Plate, and you shall see the very same Letters which you
wrote on the Paper, has left their perfect impression upon the Wax; then take
a Stift, and draw all the Letters through the Wax upon the Plate; and when you
have done that, warm the Plate, and take a linen Rag and rub the Wax clean
off, and you shall see all the Letters drawn upon the Copper; then get some
good French Gravers, and grind them as they should be, very sharp toward the
points upon a Grindestone; and afterward whet them very smooth and sharp upon
a good Oyl-stone; then grave the Letters with them.

The way to polish a Copper Plate.
At first you buy the Copper rough, then you have it plenished, if you cannot
do it your self; and when it is plenished, then you polish it with these
following Instruments.

The Names of the Instruments or Tools which are used to polish a Copper Plate.
A Plain which cuts very well, and of an indifferent bigness, but not broad;
some pieces of Pumice-stones; some pieces of Sand-stones; and some
Moulton-stones; a soft blew stone; and a Burnisher and Scraper; and some
Charcole.

The use of every particular Tool or Instrument.
First fasten your Plate with some small Nails, to a place that is as high as
your middle; then make use of the Plain to shave all the roughness off from it,
and make it very even in all places alike; and if you perceive any crackles or
little holes upon that side which you shave, then you must shave them all clean
out; and wheh you have shaved it even and smooth with the Plain, then take a
piece of Sand-stone, and wet the Plate with some water, and rub to and fro with
the stone upon the Plate, till you have worn it very smooth and even every
where alike; but be sure to choose the so ftest stones, because they make the
least scratches: and when you have worn it even and smooth with this stone,
wash off the Sand from the Plate, and take a piece of Pumice-stone and rub to
and fro upon the Plate, quite across the grain of the former stone, because it
is of a hard sandy nature, and will therefore leave some scratches; therefore
the Pumice-stone is of a more softer and spungy nature, and is always used to
wear out the former scratches: and when you have worn out all the former
scratches, you will perceive the Plate to be worked into a finer grain; then
wash the Sand very clean off from the Plate: and then make use of the
Moulton-stone, and work with it quite across the grain of the Pumice-stone,
until you have worn it quite out; withal be sure you supply this and all the
other stones with water, when you work with them upon the Plate: and when you
have worn out all the scratches of the Pumice-stone clean out; then for the
fourth, make use of the soft blew stone, it being of a very soft grain, and
softer then any of the former; then work with that quite across the grain of
the Moulton-stone, till all the grain is worn out; but if you perceive any
scratches in the Plate here or there, rub them over with your Burnisher, till
you have worked them out; but in case they are very deep, you must make use of
your Scraper, and scrape them out, and burnish it afterward: this being done,
in the fifth place you must burnish it all over. Sixthly and lastly, take a
Charcole which is thoroughly burnt, and scrape off the Rine; then put it in the
fire till it is thoroughly kindled; then take it out and quench it in
Chamber-lee, and make use of it as of the former, till you have glazed the
Plate; then wash it very clean with fair water, and let it dry.

Rules of Proportion.
Of the Ear. CHAP. I.
I Have observed this Rule, First to treat of the Ear, in a manner of my self
invented, and not by any other discovered. Being then desirous to form the Ear
by this way; you are first to describe an Ovall, in such manner as I have
represented in this Figure, at the Number 1. but to form that in more
perfection, and as easily as possible may be therein, with such Method and
Order as I design. Proceed lightly joining Stroke to Stroke, in that manner as
in each of the sequent Ovalls they are increased, even unto the 8. Number. So
imitate every Stroke of each Ovall, that the Ear may entirely be formed without
digressing from the bounds, and reasonable terms of the Art. This Rule serves
not only to form the Ear in correspondent proportion to Nature, but also with
due proportion and perfection for every greater Head, without any reprehensible
Error; that is, without making that with too great length or breadth,
hetrogeneal or disproportioned. For Observing then the Rule, there will be no
occasion for the Spectator to say (as often it happens) that that was beyond
reason, exorbitantly traced, and made without the bounds of reason.



Of the Nose, Mouth, and Beard. CHAP. II.
FOrasmuch as I think that necessary, to make a brief Discourse upon this next
Figure, in which the Nose, the Mouth, and the Beard is described, to give
thereof certain general advertisements; and that I may further define all the
difficulties from point to point; the Nose being known to be the most eminent
part of the Face, and therefore first seen; and then the Eye which rests in
the judgment, the next form of the Face: therefore I will demonstrate two of
the most easy ways has hitherto been invented, which may serve reasonable
capacities from Stroke to Stroke, to make the same well. Make then first a
Stroke like that in the 1. Number, which has the beginning of the hollowness
of the Nose: and then proceed to the 2. Stroke of the whole Nose, with the
roundness thereof: in the 3. the hole of the Nostrills: in the 4. the Nostrills
themselves: in the 5. the place of the upper Lip: in the 6. the upper Lip: in
the 7. the form of the Mouth: in the 8. the roundness of the Beard: in the 9.
the under-Throat: in the 10. the uniting of them all, with the Stroke of the
finishing of the Nose, the Mouth, and the Beard.

Describe a Semicircle downwards, which is in the 1. in the 2. make the holes
of the Nose, with the two Points on each side, and how each are placed: in the
3. the addition of the Nostrills: in the 4. the forming of all the upper Lip:
in the 5. the form of all the Mouth: in the 6. the finishing of all the Strokes
of the Beard and Chin. This for frameing the Nose is necessary to be explained,
being of importance to describe the same well; because be the Head never so
well done, the Mouth and it being not correspondent, that will be but
disgraceful, and give great distaste to any judicious beholder; be the other
parts never so well and fairly done, that will rest without grace and unworthy
of commendations.



Of the Head upright, or with a Triangle. CHAP. III.
THe manner to make the upright Head by just and safe Rules without error, is
thus: First form a perfect equal Triangle so as you see, in what position you
will, having a respect to the Draughts I have presented with the Lines that
form with the Compasses a just Equilaterall Triangle, which is with 3. Lines
just and equal every way, turning the Triangle to make the Face upon one of
the 3. sides, be it which you will, either upwards, downwards, higher or lower,
dividing that side into 3. equal parts, as in the sequent Figure. The 1. to
serve from the lower part of the Hair, to the lower part of the Forehead: The
2. thence, to the under part of the Nostrills: The 3. to the lower part of the
Chin. Now having framed these 3. Lines, as I have showed Number 2d draw a
little crooked Stroke with a Cole or Chalk out of the right Line, that that may
reach to the other point, and that will form the Forehead, From whence draw a
waved slope Line bending at the end, to form the Nose either long, short,
gross, or thin, as you would have that; ending that at the 2d point, where the
Nostrills end. Then subdivide the remaining 3d part in the midst, where the
Mouth shall be placed, for the parting of the upper and under-Lips. Then frame
the Chin, having a respect to the perpendicular Line, that that fall not out of
the middle of the Chin; adjoining thereto the under-Chin down to the
Throat-pit. So with the other two dividing Lines, the one from the top of the
Forehead downwards (and ends in the midst of the back part of the Ear;) the
other proceeds upwards from the Chin, ascending till that meet with the
superior descending Line, whose intersection directs the Ear, that the
Circumference thereof stretch not too far; which in the first Chapter I formed
by the Rule of the Circle. Thus with your judgment take the upper part of the
Forehead, and come to describe a great Circular Line about, to form with that
the roundness of the Head, unto the Nape of the Neck, keeping the proportion
that Nature teaches; and from thence downwards frame the rest of the Neck,
remembering that the tip of the Ear does not exceed the lower part of the
Nostrill. So you may have the Head in what position you will, so this abandon
not the two other Lines; each concurring in their due points.



Of the Foreright, and other Positions of the Face. CHAP. IV.
HAving demonstrated an easy way how to draw the upright Head; it will be also
necessary to show the manner how to draw the foreright Face, and in other
Positions. Being then desirous to draw the foreright Face, it will be necessary
to form a perfect Ovall, as I showed in the Rule for drawing the Ear; which
being made, divide in the midst with a Line the longest way, which must from
the lower part of the Hair be divided into 3. equal parts, by 2. Lines as you
see. In the 1. is the Eyes to be placed; in the 2d the Nostrils: then the lower
part divided; in the midst thereof must the Mouth be formed, as by the Figure
may be conceived: always remembering that the Eyes must be in the 1. Line; and
each of them distant from the other, the length of one of them: and that their
inner Corners be perpendicularly over the outside of the Nostrils punctually.
But to make the Ears in a foreright Face, the Ovall must be exceeding narrow,
yet proportional; that is, that the Ears be drawn in, and be in height from the
Nostrils to the Eyebrows: and then adjoyn the Neck with the Hair, in such sort
as may seem most pleasing to the judicious Eye.



Of the Inclining or Foreshortning of the Face. CHAP. V.
IN this Figure I will make a brief Declaration concerning the situation or
posture; and being respective of the bigness, to give easy ways to observe in
framing the altitude of the Head in any inclination, as well in Foreshortning
or other postures. This then requires small labor; and yet I have explained
the same, that the manner thereof may be plainly seen; and the path infallible
by the Lines, as they turn and concord together. Imitating the like, you may
with facility draw in their places the Nose, the Mouth, and all the parts in
good order, agreeing correspondently without much labor; as I will show with
these simple Lines; which with a little practice to prepare the hand and
judgment thereto; all which may be absolutely well effected thereby.



Of a more perfect Foreshortning. CHAP. VI.
HItherto have I treated of the Head, both foreright, and in other positions;
but that you might know all that is needful for the perfect understanding of
this profession, it is necessary that I specify the Manner how to draw the
Face by an easy, absolute, and fair way. Treating thus, I propound to you
Methodicall means therein; because my intent is to facilitate the matter in
that manner, that without writing thereupon it may be intelligible: For a
Draught well made has that power, that it makes itself understood without any
Discourse of the Author thereon. But I always observe both the one and the
other also; instructing by the Draught the intelligence first, and afterward by
Discourse thereupon. I say then that the Foreshortning which is made only with
Frets, Grates, Squares, or with Geometrical instruments, breed only a
confusion of Lines, which is not the best principle of expert ingenuity; the
reason whereof is, that it can hardly be measured by any Rule, unless the whole
Body be framed together. Therefore I will show an easy Rule, very like to that
of the foreright Face; that is, to make a Circular Draught with aspect upwards,
or downwards, as in the foreright Head, where the Traverse Lines are straight;
but these go Circularly, as in the Figures in the last Chapter going before may
be seen. For if the Heads fly upwards, the Trace, Strokes, and the Divisions,
must be raised as I have showed; with Caution that the Ears and Eyes fall not
without their due points.



Of the upright or side-Face without any Measure. CHAP. VII.
BEing desirous to make an upright Head or side-Face, without any Triangle or
other Measure; you shall not need always to make the Triangle, but with a
little care and practice to form the Eye, which will serve for direction
sufficiently; because the Head and other parts of the Body are to be
proportionals, and made from Measures, it will easily follow, framing many with
one and the same Stroke, you may not only facilitate it by the Eye and
Judgment, but also accommodate the Hand to trace and draw all things right;
for it is true that the Eye will have his place. And I have proved, that having
drawn certain Strokes and Draughts from the life of Nature, and reduced it with
the Pen and Pencil into Oyl-Colours, I have found it to come off punctually
right of a correspondent bigness to that which I have imitated. So that having
finished my work, and measured it part by part, I have not found any thing
disproportioned, but have always found it fall out right, as I would have it.
Therefore I say that this Rule and Measure which I have set down, is not any
hinderance to the excellency of the Art, nor will weaken your worth; but will
serve as a general Advertisement, being once possessed therewith; and also become
prevalent when occasion will require, to make a Head ten times as big as the
natural; for that with this Measure you shall readily frame it right by any
great Head; and that because the Understanding therein is equally extended; but
the more the Capacity is wanting, the more my labor will further, when need
requires. These then I give as principal for the first Strokes, as in the next
Figure may be perceived, which is from the Forehead, as I have already said,
for the beginning of the Nose; that is from the lower part of the Hair, to the
hollowness of the Nose and the Nostrils, and from thence to the Chin. It will
afterward be necessary to proceed accordingly from Stroke to Stroke, by
increasing the Strokes until you come to the Head, Number 10. and so make it to
be divided into 3. parts by the Eye justly, without the help of Compasses or
other Measures; and in so doing, you may easily accustom your hand, in such
sort that you may draw all you would, without any labor at all.



The Manner how to describe a Head every way without Measure. CHAP. VIII.
IT will not be needful always to set down the Measures which I have before
prescribed, because it will be too troublesome: But my intent is to show how by
an unusual manner by me invented, you may form in the Idea, the just Measures
and Distances of all sorts of Heads; and in all Positions, having the knowledge
of this Rule; and afterward making some Heads without any Triangle, or other
manner of Demonstration, knowing the errors of heights, lengths, and divisions,
into which you may otherwise run. Therefore I show in this Figure an easy
manner that must be held; and how with those few Lines, to make the Head in
what manner you will.



Of Childrens Heads. CHAP. IX.
IT rests only for me to treat of the manner how to draw the Heads of
Children, with a Rule, invented by me, and not yet by any put forth in writing.
Being then desirous to form the Heads of Children perfectly, and of what
imaginable bigness you will; take a pair of Compasses, and make a perfect
equilater-triangular Triangle, and upon each point thereof by turning the
Compasses round, make a Circle as you see, of that bigness that they may touch
each other: The like done on each, you shall so have described 3. Circles,
whereof 2. shall be even upon one side, and the 3d behind them, joined to them
both. And this is the 1. demonstration: In the 2d, upon that side which the two
even Rounds are, the one of them shall serve for the Forehead, and the other
for the Throat; and behind both where there is a space, you shall make the
Nose, the Mouth, and some part of the Chin, with a Stroke near the Throat;
afterward adjoining the Ear in the place which I show, where we conclude the
Triangle, and under those two Circles, join a little of the Nape and the Neck;
and so will the Childs Head be finished in the side Face porfill, with the
Crown, as you see Number 3d. In Number 4. I represent what force a real Rule
and Reason has in designing, as if in these 3. Circles I should open the
excellency of the Art; because as you see, there is no point nor Circle but
performs his office, with that convenience that is possible; I make you 3.
Heads in one Demonstration, of which at your pleasure you may leave away 2. and
take the 3d, without danger of committing any error therein. But as I use the
Triangle in the upright or side-Head, so do I use the Square or Quadrangle in
the foreright Face; which being first described, will be a guide to place the
Circles in their places; as in the 1. Draught I show: In the 2d falls the
Eye, the Nose, and the Mouth: In the 3d I finish all together, with the
under-Chin, Hair, and other Circumstances. But be always advised in this Face,
where and how to place the points and bigness of the Ear; and to situate the
Eye, which I have made to avoid confusion, observing the Measures in practice
by the precedent Demonstration: And so your work will come off with the greater
life and judgment.

FINIS.

