AN EXACT ABRIDGEMENT OF THE General History OF THE WORLD, From the Creation TO
THE Year 1685.

By the Acurate Pen of a Learned Historian.

Lege Historiam ne fias Historia. LONDON, Printed by James Moxon, for Samuel
Heyrick, at Gray's Inn Gate in Holbourn. School.

TO Popham Connoway, Esquire Of RAGLEY, In the COUNTY of WARWICK.
CHronology, the Display of Ages past, is here presented to You; and Time, the
wisest of all things, claims in its Transactions the wisest of Men's Judgments:
To You therefore, Honored SIR, do I make this Address, it being of that
excellency, that where History is left imperfect, by this it is rendered
complete; so that not only the what, and where, but the when those Actions were
performed, are particularized; whereas in History, they are only glanced at in
the Gross. Hence it was that Venerable Antiquity paid that Respect to
Chronologers of their Time: And I dare aver, that there is no Station where a
Gentleman's Education has been concerned, whether in Divinity, Law, or Physic,
but this part of Knowledge may be highly useful: And, as a Gentleman designing
Court Preferment, especially in Affairs of State, it will imbellish him to that
degree, to equallize, if not outvie most of his Contemporaries. As a Jewel
therefore do I Recommend this Piece to You, worthy of Your Patronage, and
Protection: And though, SIR, I have not the Honor to be known to You, yet Fame
has so transmitted to me, as to make the Choice in Your Person. The Merit of
this Subject has swayed my Balance, wholly to submit it to Your Censure, which
I question not but according to the Calculation of the Ingenuous, it will find
a safe Harbor, and favorable Reception; which will lay an eternal Obligation
on,

SIR, Your most Devoted, and most Humble Servant, Richard Ferrar.

AN EXACT ABRIDGEMENT OF THE General History OF THE WORLD.
The First Age.
THE Creation as it is Written by The Creation.
Moses, in the Book of Genesis. Of the World, 1. before Christ, 4004.

The Double Generation of the Children of Adam.

The first was of Cain who killed his Brother The Posterity of Cain.
Abel, after which all the impious Posterity of the Murderer was extinct in
the Deluge.

The second Generation was of Seth, and That of Seth.
descends to Noah, and from him directly to the Messiah.

The Second Age.
IT began at the end of the Deluge. Of The Deluge.
the World, 1657. before Christ, 2347.

The Collonies of the Three Sons of The Collonies of Japhet.
Noah, Sem, Ham, and Japhet; the Offspring of Japhet peopled the Northern parts
of Asia, and the principal parts of Europe.

Ham with his Offspring peopled some Of Ham.
parts of Asia toward the South, and Egypt with the rest of Afric.

The Posterity of Sem peopled Mesopotamia, The Collonies of Sem.
Babylon, Arabia, Persia, and India.

The Generation directly coming to the Messiah, is perpetuated from Sem to
Abraham.

In the time of Peleg, Mankind was dispersed The Dispersing of Mankind.
to people the Earth. Of the World, 1771. before Christ, 2233.

Soon after Nimrod established the first The Babylonian Monarchy.
seat of Monarchy in Babel or Babylon, which from a Tower founded by the
Posterity of Noah, took that Name from the confusion of Tongues that arose
there. Of the World, 1772. before Christ, 2232.

Much about that time, Assure the Son of The Assyrian Monarchy.
Sem, Built a City which was after called Niniveh, upon the River Tygris, and
made it the Seat of Empire, which after his Name was called the Assyrian.

The Establishment of the Kingdom was The Monarchy of Egypt.
by Misraim the Son of Ham. Of the World, 1816. before Christ, 2188.

The Chinese reckon the setting up of Of China.
their King in this Year under Fohi. Of the World, 1850. before Christ, 2154.

The Kingdom of Sycione in the Peloponese, Of Sycione
began under Aegialeus. Of the World, 1915. before Ch, 2079.

The Arabians made themselves masters Pastoral Kings of Egypt.
of Egypt, under those Kings called Pastoral Kings. Of the World, 1920. before
Christ, 2084.

Noah Died Aged 950 Years. Of the The Death of Noah.
Word, 2006. before Christ, 1998.

The Birth of Abraham. Of the World, 2008. before Christ, 1996.

The Third Age
BEgins from the calling of Abraham. The Collony of Abraham.
Of the World, 2803. before Chapter 1921. which he obeyed, and came first from Hur,
in Caldea to Caram in Mesopotamia, where his Father there Dying, he past into
Canaan. His History
Of the World, 2018. before Chapter 1896.

What happened to him till the Birth of Isaac for the space of 25 Years, is
contained in the Book of Genesis.

Sem Dyed 502 Years after the Deluge. The Death of Sem. The Kingdom of Argos.
Of the World, 2158. before Christ, 1846.

The Establishment of the Kingdom of the Argives, under Inachus. Of the World,
2168. before Christ, 1836.

The Birth of Esau, and Jacob, the Sons The Birth of Esau and Jacob.
of Isaac and Rebecca.

Thomosis King of Egypt of the Ancient Dynasty, descended from High Egypt to
the Tower, who drove out Jannias, the last of Arabian Kings, called Pastors.
These Arabs to the Number of Two Hundred Forty Thousand, past into Palestine,
and The Foundation of Jerusalem
there founded Jerusalem. Of the World, 2179. before Christ, 1825,

Abraham died after the Death of Sarah, The Death of Abraham.
he had by Ketura, Madan and Madean, the Fathers of the Madeanites. Of the
World, 2187. before Chapter 1817.

Heber died the Eldest of the Patriarchs, And of Heber.
Born after the Deluge: In his Family he preserved the primitive Language,
which from his Name was called Hebrew.

A Deluge happened in the time of Ogiges, The Deluge of Ogiges and of Deucalion
King of Thebes, which occasioned the Fable of Deucalion, and Pyrrah. Their Son
Hellenus gave the Name to that Country, afterward called Greece, from the Name
of Graecus, who descended from Hellenus. Chaldeans, Kings of Babylon. Evecous
their first King.


The Chaldeans possessed themselves of the Kingdom* of Babylon, under their first
King Evecous. Of the World, 2242. before Christ, 1762.

Jacob's flying into Mesopotamia, his Marriage, The History of Jacob.
and his Children are Recorded in the Book of Genesis. Of the World, 2259.
before Christ, 1745.

His return into Canaan is there also mentioned, and what is related of Esau
his Brother, otherwise called Edom, who gave the name to Edomia, or Idumea;
from his Grandson Amalee, came the Amalakites. Of the World, 2261. before Chapter
1743.

The selling of Joseph into Egypt, and That of Joseph.
the sequel of his History is in the Book of Genesis. As also the Arrival of
Jacob his Father into that Country. Of the World, 2299. before Chapter 1705.

The Kings who had Reigned in Egypt, The Kings of Egypt.
after Thomesis, who drove out the Arabs, are these following. Hebron,
Amenophis, the First; his Sister Arnessis, Mephres, and Mephra Mutesis: It was
to him Joseph interpreted the Dreams, and who entertained Jacob. This Patriarch
died under The Death of Jacob. The Death of Joseph.
Tomesis the second; afterward Joseph continued to Govern under Orus, in whose
Reign he Dyed. Of the World, 2305. before Christ, 1689.

The Successors of Orus are these who The Israelites Persecuted.
follow: Ratotis, Achancheres, Armais and Ramesses the first; Ramesses the
second, he began to oppose the Israelites, and his Son continued it, he was
called Amenophes the Third. Of the World, 2369. before* Chapter 1635. The Birth of
Aaron and Moses. Cecrops K(...) of Athens.


The Birth of Aaron and Moses. Of the World, 2430. before Chapter 1574

Cecrops brought a Collony from Egypt into Greece, and there founded the City
of Athens, of which he was the first King. Of the World, 2467. before Chapter 1537.

The Arabians became Masters of Babylon, T^^ Arabians in Babylon.
and having drove out the Chaldeans, and there established a new Dinasty, of
which Mardocentis was the first King. Of the World, 2494. before Chapter 1510.

Amenophis the third continued to persecute the Israelites, but God delivered
them by the hand of Moses, as it is Related in the Book of Exodus. Of the
World, 2513. before Chapter 1491.

The Fourth Age.
THat which passed in the Wilderness, is fully described* in the Book of Moses.
As to profane History, that remarks the conquests of Sesostris, the Son The
Conquests of Sesostris, or Aegiptus.
of Amenophis the Third, who past through Arabia into Persia, and went even to
India, where he past over Caucasus, and entered into Scythia, and arrived at
Thrace, and so passing the Bosphorus, traveled through Asia the lesser and
Syria, and came back into his Kingdom at the end of Nine Years, which he had
spent to make himself master of those Countries which have been named. Besides
the name of Sesostris, he had that of Egiphes, whence his Kingdom took
afterward its Name. He had a Brother called Armais, whom at his Return, he
drove out of Egypt, because he had broke the Orders given him to observe in
his Brothers Absence. It was this Armais, whom the Greeks called Danaus, Armais
or Danaus.
who being Expelled, his Country came to Greece, where he became master of the
Kingdom of Argos, of whom was The Danaids.
feigned the Fable of the Danaids. Of the World, 2522. before Chapter 1482.

Busiris the Brother of Amenophis the Busiris.
Third (Uncle of the two preceding Princes) succeeded his Nephew Sesostris,
who died without Children. This is that Busiris so famous for his cruelty to
Strangers. Of the World, 2530. before Chapter 1474. Hermes Tresmigestus.


At this time lived Hermes Tresmigestus, the most famous Philosopher, and one
of Sesostris his Privy Counselors. Agenor.


Agenor the Son of Belus the Egyptian, past from the upper part of Egypt into
that part of Palestine, which from the name of Phaenix, his Son was called
Phaenicia. Phaenix.
Caelix his second Son gave the Caelix.
name to Caelicia; Cadmus the third having Cadmus.
persued the Ravisher of his Sister Europa, Europa.
and not being able to retrieve her, stopped in Boetia at a City he called
Thebes, from Thebes.
the name of another Thebes, of high Egypt, his native Country. This Cadmus
brought Greek Characters.
to the Greeks those Characters that they used since for Writing. Of the World,
2549. before Ch 1455. The Death of Aaron and Moses.


The death of Aaron and Moses was a Year after. Of the World, 2552. before Chapter
1452

Joshua brought the Israelites into the Joshua past the Jordan.
Land of Promise, where Manna failing, they began to Eat of the Fruits of the
Earth: The first Year after the sixth, from The first Sabbatick Year.
their Entrance, is the first Sabbatick Year, by which they regulated their
Years of Jubilee. Of the World, 2560. before Chapter 1444 The Death of Joshua.


Joshua dies after he had judged the People 26 Years. Of the World, 2591. bef.
Chapter 1413.

Othoniel the Brother of Caleb Judged. Of the World, 2599. before Chapter 1405. The
Judges of Israel.


Israel. Of the World, 2659. before Chapter 1345. after him Ehud, to whom Samgar
succeeded. Of the World, 2679. before Chapter 1325.

Belus King of Assyria, of the race of Assure, drove the Arabs out of Babylon,
and united the two Kingdoms. Of the World, 2682. before Christ, 1322. Deborah
ana Baruc.


Deborah judged Israel with Baruc. Of the World, 2719. before Christ, 1245.
Belus the Assyrian. The City of Niniveh.


Ninus the Sonnet and Successor of Belus, gave the Name to the City Niniveh,
which was Built by Assure in the time of Nimrod. Of the World, 2737. before Chapter
1267.

This Ninus conquered all the Country between Tygris and India; among the Kings
whom he subdued was the famous Zoroaster.
Zoroaster King of the Bactrians. Of the World, 2781. before Chapter 1223.

Gideon judged Israel, his Son Abimelec The Judge of Israel.
usurpt the Title of King which his Father had refused.

Ninus gave to his second Son Argon the Argon King of Lydia.
Kingdom of Lydia, which he had conquered from the Descendants of Atys Son of
Hercules.

After the Death of Ninus, Semeramis Semeramis.
his Widow Reigned in his place, under the name of Ninias their Son.

Tholac and Jair governed Israel successively; Judges of Israel.
then Jephta whose History the Scripture fully relates in the 11th. and 12th.
Chapters of Judges.

The taking of Troy by the Greeks. The The Siege of Troy.
Kings of that place were Dardanus, the Son of Jupiter and Electra, the
Daughter of Atlas; then Erictonius, Tros, Ilus, with The Trojan Kings.
his Brother Asaracus. Ilus by the Daughter of Teucer, Son of Scamander King of
Creet, had Laomedon. Asaracus was Father to Capis and Tyton; Laomedon Father of
Priamus; Priamus Father to Hector and Paris; and Cassys Father to Anchyses;
Anchyses Father to Eneas, Tyton Father to Memnon.

The chief of the Greeks who were present The chief of the Greeks at the Seige
of Troy.
at the War, were Agamemnon, and Menelaus, Brothers and Sons of Atreus: The
first was King of Argos, and Missena: The second of Spanea, Thiestes their
Grandfather. Pelops who was Son of Tantalus, and of Hippodamia, the Daughter of
Enomaus King of Peloponesus. Ulisses Husband to Penelope, and King of Ithaca.
Achilles the Son of Peleus and Thetis.. Peleus Son of Jachus King of Aegina.
Patroclus Kinsman and Friend to Achilles, both of them Pupils to Chyron, the
two Ajaxes; the first, the Son of Telamon King of Salamis, the other of Oclus
King of Locris. Diomedes King of Aetolia, Palamedes King of Eubaea, Hercules,
Castor and Pollux, Brothers of Hellena born of Jupiter and Leda. Orpheus and
the young Hylas Friend of Hercules; Jason Prince of the Argonauts, The Arnauts.
he was the Son of Aeson, King of Thessaly. Jason was Husband to Medea, who
afterward married Aegeus King of Athens, Father of Theseus, who by the help of
Ariadne killed the Minotaure, she was Daughter to Minos King of Creet, Husband
of Pasiphae. This Minos was renowned for Justice, as well as Aeacus and
Radamanthus, Pyrithous the Son of Ixicon, The Judges of Hell.
and Friend of Theseus.

Ninias the Son of Ninus and of Seme^amis, Ninius.
succeeded his Mother in the Kingdoms of Assyria and Babylon. Of the World,
2824. before Chapter 1180.

Ilsam, Helon and Habdon judged Israel The Judges of Israel.
successively. Of the World, 2826. before Christ. 1178.

Then Ely the High Priest. Ely.


In the 20th. Year of his Government Gamson was Born, whose History is related
Samson.
in the 14, 15, and 16. Chapters of Judges. Of the World, 2868. before Chapter 1136.

The four first Chapters of the first Book of Samuel, relates the Birth and
Disorders Samuel.
of the Sons of Ely; their Death, with their Fathers, after the Ark of God was
taken by the Phylistins.

The seventh Chapter of Samuel relates the happy beginning of Samuels
Government. Of the World, 2903. before Chapter 1101.

The Israelites demand a King, which was Saul, Of the World, 2909. before Chapter
Saul the first King of Israel.
1095 his History is written in the first Book of Samuel form the 8th. Chapter
to the 31st. Of the World, 2949. before Chapter 1055.

His Son Isboseth succeeded him only over His Death.
Ten Tribes; David being acknowledged King by the other two, Judah and Benjamin.

Isboseth being killed, David is declared Isboseth. David.
King over all Israel.

He took Jerusalem and made it the Takes Jerusalem.
Seat of his Kingdom; the remainder o^ his History is set down in the second
Book of Samuel, from the 16 Chapter, to His Death.
the second Book of Kings, which relates his Death. Of the World, 2990. before
Chapter 1014.

Solomon his Son succeeded him in his Solomon.
Throne; The History of his first three Years is mentioned in the first Book of
Kings, from the second Chapter to the fifth. Of the World, 2993. before Chapter
1011.

The Fifth Age
BEgins from the foundation of the The Foundation of the Temple.
Temple by Solomon, who finished it in Seven Years and a half. Of the World,
3000. before Christ, 1004.

The remainder of his History is inserted in the first Book of Kings; Chapter
the 9th. and in the first Book of Chronicles, the 9th. and 10th. Chapters.

Under his Son Rhehoboam, the Kingdom Rhehoboam.
was divided into two. Of the World, 3029. before Christ, 975. The first
composed of two Tribes of Judah and Benjamin, which obeyed his Rule, and his
Successors under The Kingdom of Judah. The Kingdom of Israel. Jeroboam.
the Name of the Kingdom of Judah. The second consisted of the Ten Tribes under
the name of the Kingdom of Israel, and passed to Jeroboam and his Successors.
Of the World, 3030. before Chapter 974.

The Battle between the two Kings, in A remarkable Battle.
which were killed 500000 Men of the Army of Jeroboam.

Abiam the Son of Rhehoboam. Of the Abiam.
World, 3049. before Chapter 955.

Reigned also in the time of Jeroboam. Of the World, 3050. before Chapter 954.

Baasca the Son and Successor to Jeroboam. Baasca.
Of the World, 3062. before Chapter 942.

Asa Son of Abiam King of Judah. Asa.


Nadab King of Israel, the Murderer and Nadab.
Successor to Baasca.

Ela the Son of Baasca killed by Zimri, Ela and Zimri, and Homri Kings of
Israel.
and he in the space of 16 days by Homri, who Built Samaria. Of the World,
3088. before Chapter 916.

Jehosophat Son and Successor to Asa King of Judah.

Achab Son and Successor to Homri, he Achab.
was reproved for his Wickedness, and Elia. Echosias. Elisha.
cruel Injustice by the Prophet Elia, and his Son Echosias by the Prophet
Elisha.

Jehosophat Son and Successor to Asa Jehosophat.
King of Judah.

Joram Brother and Successor to Ochosias Joram King of Israel.
King of Israel. Of the World, 3007. before Chapter 897.

Joram Son and Successor to Jehosaphat Joram King of Judah.
King of Judah. Of the World, 3008. before Chapter 896.

Jehoachas or Achasis King of Judah was Jehoachas.
killed, as was also Joram King of Israel by Jehu, who was likewise King of
Israel; Jehu King of Israel. Athalia.
while Athalia Mother of Achasias, having killed all her Children except Joas.
Reigned in Judah the space of Seven Years. Of the World, 3020. before Chapter 884.

Joas Reigned in Judah after his Grandmother Joas King of Judah.
Athalia was killed. Of the World, 3126. before Chapter 878.

At the same time Jehoachas Son and Successor Jehoachas King of Israel.
to Jehu Reigned in Israel. Of the World, 3148. before Chapter 856.

The Athenians after the Death of Codrus Change of Government at Athens.
their last King, changed the form of their Government, and established their
Archons for life; after that for Ten Years, and at last for every Year.

Joas Son and Successor to Jehoachas Joas King of Israel.
King of Israel. Of the World, 3164. before Chapter 840.

Ozias or Azarias Son and Successor of Ozias King of Judah.
Amazius, who succeeded his Father Joas King of Judah. Of the World, 3194.
before Chapter 810.

Jeroboam the second Son and Successor Jeroboam second King of Israel.
to Joas King of Israel. Of the World, 3220. before Chapter 770.

Iphytus revived in Elida, which is in Peleponesus Iphytus.
the Olimpick Games, instituted above 400 Years before in Thessaly, at the foot
of Mount Olimpus by Hercules, in Honor of his Father Jupiter. Of the World,
3228. before Chapter 776.

From this Re-establishment the Greeks have reckoned their famous Epoche,
called the Olimpiads, of which each contains The Olimpiads.
four Years complete. After an Interregnum of Eleven Years, Zacharias succeeded
his Father Jeroboam the Second; at the end of six Months Zacharias was killed
by Ralaum, Kings of Israel.
who reigned but one Month, and then was killed by Maniur his Successor, who
was made Tributary by Pull or Pall, King of Assyria and Babylon. Of the World,
3233. before Chapter 771.

Pecaia succeeded his Father Maneheim, Kings of Judah.
and was killed at the end of Twelve Years by Pecaia his Successor.

Ozias or Azanas became Leprous for having usurpt the Office of High Priest. Of
the World, 3245. before Chapter 759.

His Son Jonathan Governed the Kingdom in his place. Of the World, 3256. before
Chapter 748. The Foundation of Rome. Three Dinastys in Italy. The first of Janus
and Corythus. The second of Saturnus.


Rome was Built at the end of the 7th. Olimpiad.

Three Dinasties are observed to have Reigned in Italy before the Foundation of
Rome. The first of Janus the Ancient, and from Corythus to Italus, whose
Daughter Roma married. Saturnus, called from thence Romanessus, who was the
chief of the second Dinasty, called the Aborigines, which he brought out of
Arcadia into Italy. There are counted among* those who descended from them, two
of the Name of Picus, and two of that of Faunus; one of the latter was Father
of Latinus, Father to Lavinia, who was married to Aeneas, The third of Aeneas.
the chief of the third Dinasty, which lasted 436 Years under Kings to the
Foundation of Rome.

At this time lived Homer and Hesiod the Home. Hesiod. Jetys and Dares.
Greek Poets, and Jetys of Creet, and Dares of Phrygia, Historians who writ in
Prose the History of Troy, as Homer did in Verse. Nabonassar and Arbaces
Lieutenant Generals The Death of Sardanapalus.
to Sardanapalus, besieged him in Niniveh; insomuch that this Prince who had
been so Effeminate, finding the Walls broken down, had the Courage to burn
himself in his own Palace with his Wives, his Children, and Treasures. Of the
World, 3257. before Chapter 747.

From the Destruction of the Empire of Babylon, and Assyria, there arose three
Kingdoms; the first in Babylon, under Nebonassar, Nabonassar King of Babylon.
called Baladam, in the Holy Scriptures; and Bellesis, by the Greeks. In the
first Year* of his Reign, the ancient Geographers have taken their Epoche. The
second Kingdom was that of the Medes; but lasted only about Thirty eight Years:
Arbaces being contented, at that time, to restore Liberty to his Countrymen.
The third Kingdom in Nineveh, was under Tilgamus, Tilgamus King of Assyria.
or Ninus the younger, called Tiglat Pilezer, in the Holy Scripture. Of the
World, 3262. before Chapter 742.

Achas succeeded his Father Jonathan, King of Judah.

Picae was killed by Hoseas, his Successor in the Kingdom of Israel* which
ended The end of the* King(...) of Israel.
in the Person of (...) King, slain by Tilgat Pylezar* King of As^yria, after
that Monarchy had lasted 254 Years, from Jeroboam.* Of the World, 3278. before
Chapter 726.

Nebonazar having reigned fourteen Years, had for his Successors, Na(...)
Ch(...), and Pon^s together: Then Elu^ius, who reigned Kings of Babylon.
successively for the space of Twelve Years: After whom, Merodachus Balladan,
so called by Isaiah, began to Reign. This King is named Mardosempades, by the
Greeks. Of the World, 3284. before Chapter 720.

Lycurgus, of the Royal Blood of the Heraclides, Lycurgus.
Guardian to his Nephew, King of Lacedemon, did there change the Government,
purely Monarchical, into a Government composed of Monarchy, and Aristocracy.

The fabulous History ascribes the Foundation The Foundation of Lacedemon.
of that City to Lacedemon, Son of Jupiter and Thais, Daughter to Atlas: But
the true History does reckon for their first King, Laelex, Contemporary with
Cecrops. He had for his Successor, Eurctas; who gave the Name to a River on
which that City was built: It was also called Sparta, from the Name of a
Daughter of that King.

Candaulus, the last King of Lydia, of the Candaule. Giges.
Din^sly of Arges, was killed by Giges, instigated by the Wife of Candaulus,
enraged that her Husband had showed her naked to Giges; who married this Queen,
and so became King of Lydia. Of the World, 3286. before Chapter 718.

The Poet Archilochus, who made Jamlike Archilochus.
Verses, was their Contemporary, and makes mention of that History. Of the
World, 3290. before Chapter 714.

Corinth changed the Form of its Government Corinth' s change of Government.
Its Foundation.
of Monarchy, to a Republic.

This City was built in the Year of the World, 2640, by Sisiphus, Son to
Aeolus, who was killed by Theseus, by reason of his Robberies. Corinthus, who
succeeded him, gave the Name to that City.

Romulus died, and was Deified under the The Death of Romulus.
Name of Quirinus. Of the World, 3293. before Chapter 731.

Zenacherib, Son, and Successor, to Salmanasur, Zenachrib
who conquered Egypt, and Syria, was constrained to raise the Siege of
Jerusalem; an Angel having killed in one Night 185000 of his Army: Being
returned to Ninive, he was there killed by two of his Sons.

Serrhaddon, or Assaradin, his other Son, Assaradin King of Assyria. Ezechias.
Esaiah.
reigned in his place.

Ezechias was then King of Judah, assisted by the Counsel of the Prophet
Esaiah. He reigned with great Justice and Piety: But Manasses, his Son, was not
like to Manasses.
him. Of the World, 3310. before Chapter 698.

The Kindom of Babylon being fallen into Babylon and Syria united.
decay, and weakened, Assaradin made himself Master of it, and joined it to
Assyria. Of the World 3323. before Chapter 681.

Numa Pompilius, who succeeded Romulus, Numa Pompilius.
died. Of the World 3336. before Chapter 668.

Jeodachim, who was Nebuchadnezzar in Nebuchadonezar King of Assyria and
Babylon. Deicos King of the Medes.
the Book of Judith, succeeds Assaradin in the Kingdom of Assyria and Babylon:
He overcame Arphaxad, called Deicos by the Greeks, King of the Medes.

Manasses died, after he had been reestablished in his Kingdom, having lain in
Prison many Years at Babylon. Ammon, his Son, followed his wicked Ways, but not
his Repentance. Josias, his Son, was always held a Godly, and a Virtuous King.

Tullus Hostillius, the third King of Rome, Tullus Hostillius
died. Under his Reign, Alba was joined to Rome* by the Victory of the Horatii
over Horaces, and Curiaces.
the Curatii. Of the World, 3369. before Chapter 635.

Chinaladanan, or Saracus, Successor to Saosduchin, Kings of Assyria.
was overcome and killed in Ninive, by Nabopalassur, who revolted against him,
and made a League with Phraord, Son, and Successor to Deicus, King of the Kings
of the Medes.
Medes. Of the World, 3380. before Chapter 624.

So Nabonahassur became King of Babylon, and of Assyria, and was in Alliance
with the Medes; and marrying Nebuchadonesur, with Am^tys, Sister to Astyages,
Son of Cyaxares, he succeeded his Father Phraord.

Anous Martius, the fourth King of Rome, Anous Martius.
died. He built the City of Ostia, at the Mouth of Tyber. Of the World 3393.
before Chapter 611.

N(...), or Neco, King of Egypt, having Necos King of Egypt.
left his Kingdom, to make War against Nab^pal^^ur, is stopped in his Way, by
Josias, who was killed in the Battle. Of the World 3395. before Chapter 609.

Necos being victorious, brought Jehoa^has, Kings of Judah.
Son of Josias, Prisoner; and put in his place, on the Throne of Judah,
J^hoachim, Brother to Jehoachas. Of the World 3398. before Chapter 609.

Nebuchadnesur carried Jehoachim into Captivity, as likewise Jeconius, Son to
Jeh^achim; The (...) of Judah.
and at last took Zedechias, Uncle to Jeconias, and put out his Eyes, and
killed his Children in his presence, while Nebuzaradin ruined the City and
Temple of Jerusalem. The D^struction of Jerusalem
Of the World, 3416. before Chapter 588.

Where Jeremiah, the Prophet, lived to bewail the Miseries of the Jews: In the
same time that Ezekiel prophesied to the Captive Jews, in Babylon. Of the
World, 3417. before Chapter 587.

The Sixth Age.
DAniel, and his Companions, gave Daniel.
Marks of their Faith and Piety toward Nebuchadnezar' s Dreams.
God; as is set down in the first Book of that Prophet: Where also is related
the Interpretation of Nebuchadnezar's two Dreams.

In this time lived Arion, Alciceus, and Epimenides, Learned Men.
Greek Po^ts, with Sappho, the Poetess; Pythagoras the Philosopher.

Nebuchadnezar took Tire from Itabulus, Nebuchadnezar takes Tyr^
and so put an end to that Kingdom, of which Itabulus was the last King of the
Race of Hiram, Contemporary with Solomon; that Dinasty having lasted from the
time of Agenor and Phaenix. Of the World, 3432. before Chapter 572.

Nebuchadnezar past into Egypt, and easily Nebuchadnezar King of Egypt.
conquered it; having found it divided by a Civil War, between Apries and
Amasis; the former lawful King having been expelled by the Conqueror.

Tarquinius Priscus, the fifth King of Rome, Tarquinius Priscus
was killed by the Sons of Ancus Martius, his Predecessor. This was that
Tarquinius Priscus, who established Triumphs for those who had obtained a
signal Victory over their Enemies.

Nebuchadnezar, grown proud of the most Nebuchadnezar turned Beast.
stately Buildings he had erected in Babylon, was, by a Judgment of God,
reduced to the Condition of a Beast, for the space of seven Years. Of the
World, 3435. before Chapter 569.

After which, acknowledging his Sins, and giving all Glory to God, he was
restored to his Reason, and Kingdom. Of He is reestablish'd.
the World, 3442. before Chapter 562.

His Son, and Successor, Evilmerodach, Evilmerodach.
delivered Jeconias out of Prison.

After two Years Reign, Evilmerodach was killed by Neriglisser, his
Brother-in-Law; Neriglisser King of Babylon.
whose Son Laborascadus succeeded him; but Reigned only nine Months, and then
was killed, and a Son of Evilmerodach was placed on the Throne. He was called
Balthazar, by Daniel; by Barotius, Balthazar King of Babylon.
Naboniclus; by Herodotus Labinithus. Of the World, 3448. before Chapter 556.

Astiages King of Media being dead, had Darius, or Cyaxar, the Second.
to succeed him, Ciaxar, the Second, who was called Darius, in the Book of
Daniel. This King gave the Command of his Armies to Cyrus, his Nephew, and
Son-in-Law. Cyrus.


The Gauls, under the Conduct of Cigorais, Cigorais, and Bellorais.
and Bellorais, past into Italy, and became Masters of that part, which is
called, Gaul Cisalpine.

Croesus, the last King of Lydia, who descended Croesus.
from Giges, was taken Prisoner, in a Battle, by Cyrus; who saved his Life,
when he was just ready to be burnt, upon hearing him call on the Name of Solon,
the Athenian. Of the World, 3456. before Chapter 548.

Historians record the Death of the fair Panthea and Abradates
Panthea, who killed herself on the Body of her Husbaud, Abradates, slain in
the Battle that Cyrus gained over Croesus.

Aesop lived at that time. Aesop* The end of the Empire of Assyria.


The end of the Empire of Assiria, and Babylon, by the Death of Balthazar, and
the taking of Babylon, in the very same Night that Balthazar made a most
impious Feast, mentioned in the Fifth Chapter of Daniel. Of the World, 3466.
before Chapter 538.

So the Assyrian Empire devolved to the The Empire of the Medes.
Medes, in the Person of Ciaxar the Second, or Darius; to whom Cyrus, his
Son-in-Law, resigned all his Conquests.

In the Time of the Seven Years Captivity of the Jews, in Babylon, flourished
in Greece, the Seven Wise Men, called, Thales, The Seven Wise Men of Greece.
the Milesian; Ch^lon, the Laced^monian; Cleobulus, of C^rinth; Byas, of
Prienae; Pittacus, of Mitelene; and Solon, of Salamis. This was he who gave
milder, and more easy Laws to the Athenians, than those of Draco; which were
so very severe, and cruel, that it was said of them, they were writ in Blood.

Cambyses, King of Persia, and Darius, or The Empire of Persia.
Cyaxar, the Second King of the Medes, both being dead; Cyrus, Son to the one,
and Nephew to the other* succeeded in all their Principalities, and gave
Beginning to the Empire of the Persians, which extended from the Hell^^p(...),
to India. Of the World, 3468. before Chapter 536.

Cyrus, in the First Year of his Reign, set The Jews (...) at Liberty.
the Jews at Liberty; and they returned into their own Country, under the
Conduct of Z^rubbabel, Son of Salathiel, Son of Jeconias, King of Judah.

Cyrus died, according to some Writers, Cyrus' s Death.
in the War against Thomiris, Queen of Scythia; contrary to the Testimony of
Xenophon, who writes, that this Prince died in his Bed, at Pasa^gade, in
Persia. Of the World, 3475. before Chapter 529.

Servius Tullius, the Sixth King of Rome, Servius Tullius.
was killed by his Son-in-Law, and Successor, Tarquinius Superbus. Of the World
3476. before Chapter 528. Cambyses subdues Egypt.


Pzametticus, Governor of Egypt, having ^ook upon him the Title of King
Cambyses, Son, and Successor to Cyrus, went thither, and subjected it; yet he
lost two Armies in the Deserts of Lybia; one which he sent to plunder the
Temple of Jupiter Ammon; and the other* which he sent against the Aethiopians.
Of the World, 34^1. before Chapter 523.

At this time flourished the Poet Anacreon Anacreon Policrates
Friend of Polycrates, Tyrant of Samos, who had been a Friend to Amasis; but
this latter renounced the Friendship of that ^yrant; because he judged, that so
much continual good Fortune, could not be attended without some remarkable
Misfortune.

Cambyses had caused his Brother Smerdis to be secretly killed. In the mean
while, the Magus Patisites placed on the Throne his own Brother, Oropastes,
under the Name of Smerdis; because he exactly resembled The Impostor Smerdis.
the Prince of the same Name. Of the World 3482. before Chapter 522.

This News made Cambyses leave Egypt, to return into Persia; but he di^d by the
Way, of a Wound he received by his own Sword, as he lighted off from his ^orse.
Cambyses Death.
He was wound^d in the Thigh in the same Place, and by the same Sword, with
which he had wounded the God Apis, in Egypt.

The Impostor, Smerdis, was killed by Seven of the chief S^trap^s of the
Kingdom; of which Number, Darius, Son of Darius King of Persia.
Istapes, was chosen King, by the cunning Intrigue of Othanes.

Zopyrus, a Friend to this King, showed Zopyrus.
him the Means to reduce Babylon under his Obedience. Of the World, 3493.
before Ch 501.

Tarquinius Superbus, was driven out of Tarquinius Superbus ^xpelled Rome.
Rome, for Reasons s^t down in the Roman History: He was the seventh, and last,
of the Kings of Rome, who there Reigned for the space of 245 Years.

In their place were elected two Consuls The Election of Consuls.
annually. The first Year they chose five; to wit, Valerius Publicola, and
Collatinus, the Husband of Leucretia. Of the World, 3500. before Christ 504.

But he having been turned out, because he was of the Family of the Tarquins,
they constituted in his place, Junius Brutus, who was killed in the Battle
against Pors^nna; and in his place they chose Horatius Pulvilius; who, also
dying, had, for his Successor, Spurius Leucretius, Father to Leucretia.

The Siege of Rome, by Porsenna, King of The Siege of Rome, by Porsenna.
the Thuscans, in favor of the Tarquins; the Noble Actions of Horatius Cocles,
of Mutius Scaevola, and of Clelia, the Roman Virgin, are remarked in the Roman
History.

Darius sent to demand Earth and Water, of the Grecian Cities of Europe, as
Marks of their Homage; which they refused, and prepared for War. Of the World,
3511. before Chapter 493.

This King having sent a great Army against The beginning of the War between
the Persians and the Greeks. The Battle of Marathon. Pisistratus his Son
killed. Armodius and Aristogeter.
the Grecians, they won the famous Battle of Marathon, under the Conduct of
Miltiades, the Athenian Captain. Of the World 3514, before Chapter 490.

Pisistratus, a Traitor to his Country, was the Cause of that War.

He was killed in that Battle: Hippias, his Son, being also in the same Treason
with his Father, was killed by Armodius, and Aristogiter; who were likewise
slain in the same Action: But the Athenians erected Statues for them, in
Acknowledgment of their Deliverance by them, from the Yoke of that Tyrant.

Darius, the Son of Histapes, chief of the Darius' s Death.
Second Dynasty of the Persian Kings, died, ^eaving two Sons, Artobasanes, and
Xerxes: This younger Brother was preferred before Xerxes' s Successor.
the eldest, to the Succession of the Kingdom; in regard he was born after his
Father was made King; and also, because he was the Son of Atossa, Daughter of
Cyrus. It is remarkable, that the eldest yielded without Regret to the Judgment
of the Satrapes, to whom these two Bro^hers had referred the Decision of that
great Affair. Of the World, 5520. before Chapter 484.

At Rome, the common People pretending to be oppressed by the Senate, stirred
up a dangerous Sedition; to appease which Tribunes of the People at Rome.
were established Tribunes of the People; powerful Magistrates, who had the
Charge to maintain the Rights of the People, and to hinder the Nobility from
oppressin^ them.

That which happened upon occasion o^ the Discontent of Q. Martius Coriolanus,
i^ Q. Martius Coriolanus. Quintus Cincinnatus, first Dictator.
remarked in the Roman History.

Quintus Cincinnatus is observed to be the first Dictator the Romans chose upon
a^ emergent occasion. Of the World, 352^ before Chapter 483.

Xerxes passed into Europe with a terrib^ Xerxes conquered the Greeks.
Land-Army, having sent another as gre^ by Sea: Three hundred Lacedemonian^
commanded by Leonidas, killed Twent^ thousand of the Land-Army, at the Pa^ of
Thermopolis: All these brave Lacedem^nians, The Battle at Thermopolis.
with their General, died upon the place. The Naval Forces were defeat^ near
Salamis, by the Greeks, under t^ The Battle of Salamis
Conduct of Euribiades, the Lacedemonia^ and Themistocles the Athenian. Of the
Worl^ Themistocles.
3525. before Chapter 479.

Xerxes being compelled, by his ill Su^cess to leave Greece, repassed the
Bospho^ in a little Bark: The Troops he had le^ in Greece, under the Command of
Ma^donius, were defeated near Platea, by the The Battle of Platea. Xerxes' s
Death.
Lacedaemonians.

Xerxes was killed by Artabanes, Capta^ of his Guards; who by that means
Reig^ed for some Months, and then was al^ killed, and Artaxerxes Longomain, Son
^ Artaxerxes. Longomaine.
Xerxes, was placed in the Persian Thron^ Of the World 3531. before Chapter 473.

Pindar and Symonides Lirick Poets; So^hocles Greek Poets.
and Euripides Tragic Poets flourisht ^t that time.

Cymon the Athenian, Son of Miltiades, Cymon.
delivered the Asiatick Greeks from the Per^an Yoke. Of the World, 3538. before
Chapter 466.

Esdras the Jew of the Sacerdotal Line, ^rought back those of his Nation who
remained Esdras.
in Babylon, since their first return under Zerobabel.

Artaxerxes having shown that favor to the Jews for the sake of Nehemiah his
favorite, the Jews finished the Building of their Temple; from thence many
begin their Seventy Weeks mentioned in the The beginning of the Seventy Weeks.
Ninth Chapter of Daniel. Of the World, 3550. before Ch 454.

The Romans named Ten Persons to digest their Laws, which were brought to The
Laws of the Twelve Tables.
them from Athens, because they were called the Laws of the Twelve Tables. Of
the World 3554. before Chapter 450.

Those Ten Persons acquitted themselves so well in that Affair, that the
Government The Decemvirate.
was committed to them, only one of them Appius Claudius having ravished the
Daughter of Virginius a Roman Soldier; this The Consuls restored.
Magistrate was turned out, and the Consuls restored. Of the World, 3557.
before Chapter 447.

At this time lived Artemiza, Queen of The two Artemizas. Mausolus.
Caria, who expressed extraordinary Grief for the Death of her Husband Mausolus.
Of the World, 3559. before Chapter 445.

There was one of the same Name her Aunt, who fought at the Battle of Salamis
for Xerxes.

Herodotus the Historian was Contemporary with the last Artemiza and her
Subject, Born at Halycarnassus, the chief City Learned Men of Greece.
of Caria: The Poet Aeschylus, and the Orator Isocrates flourisht at that time.

Brennus the Gaul having past into Italy Brennus took Rome.
with a great Army, and defeated the Romans in Tuscany, took and plundered
their City, but he could not take the Capitol Of the World, 3563. before Chapter
442.

Ju. Camillus constrained him to retire, and for that great service, was
esteemed Ju. Camillus drove them out.
by the Romans as the Founder of their City, and was called by them the second
Romulus. Of the World, 3565. before Chapter 439.

At Rome the Military Tribunes were The Military Tribunes.
chose to Govern in the place of the Consuls; then the Tribunes were turned
out, and the Commonwealth remained four Years without any Superior
Magistrate; but the Military Tribunes having been restored again, they were at
length cashiered for ever, and the Con^^ls restored. The Cons^ls restored.
Of the World, 3572. before Chapter 432.

Then began the Peloponesian War between The Peloponesian War. Hellenicus.
Thucydides.
the Athenians, and the Lac^d^monians; all the other Greeks taking part with
the one or the other. The History of this War has been Written by Hellenicus,
H^rod^t^s, and more exactly by Thucidides's Contemperaries, who have also
described the general Plague which ravaged at that time through all the known
World. Of the World, 3574 before Chapter 430.

Hypocrates writ of it as a Physician; and Hippocrates. The Cyrenians change to
a Republic.
has given great proof of his Ability and Skill on this occasion; the Cyrenians
changed the form of their Government from a Monarchy which had lasted 200 Years
to a Republic.

Artaxerxes Longomanus dyed, Of the World, 3579. before Chapter 425. his Son Xerxes
the Kings of Persia.
second was killed about a Year after by his Brother Zogdian, who also was
slain six Months after, by his Brother called Ochus, or Darius Nochus, who thus
placed himself on the Persian Throne. Of The World, 3580. before Chapter 424.

Themistocles who was retired among the The Death of Themistocles.
Persians, having been banished by the Athenians, killed himself by reason that
the King of Persia would oblige him to lead an Army against the Grecians*

At this time lived Aristophanes the Poet, Aristophanes, Socrates, and
Alcibiades.
and Socrates the Philosopher, and Alcibiades the famous Athenian Captain. Of
the World, 3593. before Chapter 411.

The Peloponesian War ended by a Peace the Greeks. made among themselves,
finding they very much destroyed each other by their Dissension. Of the World,
3604. before Chapter 404.

Ochus or Darius Nothus died leaving two Kings of Persia.
Sons, Artaxerxes Mnenon. Of the World, 3601. before Chapter 403. And Cyrus though
Younger, who made War one against the other, which was ended in a Battle, where
Cyrus was overcome and killed. Six Thousand The Retreat of the Greeks.
Greeks who had served in the Army of the vanquished Prince, made at last a
famous retreat, related by Zenophon who was there present as one of their
Officers. Of the World. 3663. before Chapter 401.

After the return of the Jews from their Captivity, they were Governed by a
Sanedrim: A Council composed of the wisest among the Priests, and of the Tribe
of Judah. In this time John the High Priest, seeing Jesus his Brother would put
himself into his place, killed him in the very Temple. Voges Governor of
Samaria, a Friend to the slain Brother, revenged his Death by a second
Profanation of the Temple, where he slaughtered a great number of People. Of
the World, 3608. before Chapter 396.

At this time lived Plato and Dionisius the Plato. Dionysius King of Syracuse.
Epaminondas.
Tyrant of Syracuse, to visit whom this Philosopher made three Voyages.

Epaminondas* the famous Thebane Captain, died Victorious over the Athenians,
at the Battle of Luctr^s; he had before dese^ted them in the Battle of
M^ntinea. Of the World. 3634. before Chapter 370.

In Egypt the Kingdom being in dispute Kings of Egypt.
between Nectana^^s and Tharos his Nephew, Th(...) prevailed by the help of
(...)us King of Spar^^, who passed over Agesi^^us
into that Country with a great Army. Of the World 3643, before Chapter 361.

In Persia, Ochus the Son of Artaxerxes Kings of Persia.
Mnemon killed his Brother Arsames, upon which the Father died of Grief: Thus
Ochus, called Artaxerxes the Third, ascended the Throne.

The Birth of Alexander Son to Philip Alexanders' s Birth.
King of Macedon and Olimpia. Of the World 3648, before Chapter 356.

The same Night the Temple of Diana The Temple of Ephesus Burnt.
at Ephesius was Burnt by one Herostratus, who left his Name to Posterity in
spite of all the care Antiquity took to have it forgot. The Tyrians set Fire
to their Ci^y, and burnt themselves with it, because they would not fall under
the power of Ochus or Artaxerxes the Third. This Victorious Ochus at last
subdued Egypt; Ochus subdeued Phaenicia and Egypt. His Death.
there he killed the Ox Apis, for which he was slain by Bagoas one of his
Eunuchs, who gave his Flesh to be devoured by Cats. Of the World 3654, before
Chapter 350. This Egyptian Eunuch having thus revenged the Affront done to his
Nation, set on the Throne Arsames Son to Ochus, and after that killed him and
set up in his place Darius Codomanus.
Darius Cadomanus. Of the World 3668. before Chapter 336.

Philip King of Macedon was killed by The Death of Philip of M^cedon.
Pausanius, a young Man of a Noble Family for a Cause dishonorable to the
memory of that King.

At this time lived Demosthenes the famous Demosthenes.
Athenian Orator, Enemy to Ph^^ and Alexander. Diogenes the Cynick lived
Diogenes. Aristotle.
at the same time, and Aristotle the Master of Alexander.

The Grecians assembled at Corinth, chos^ Alexander to command the Forces which
Alexander chief Commander of the Greeks. Thebes destroyed. Athens saved.
they resolved to send into Asia, against the Persians; the Thebanes having
disowne^ their Deputies on the account of tha^ choice, Alexander ruined their
City: H^ spared Athens which had displeased hi^ by the same ill conduct as the
Thebanes. O^ the World 3670. before Chapter 334.

Aristophanes the Comic Poet then flourisht Aristophanes the Poet. Alexander
in Asia.
at Athens.

Alexander past the Hellespont, to mak^ War against the Persians: This passage
o^ his was remarkt to have happened in the Third Olimpiad, and in the 420th
Year o^ Rome.

Immediately after he won the Battl^ The Battle of Granic.
near the Granic in Phrigia. Of the Worl^ 3671, before Chapter 333.

This Victory made him Master of the lesser Asia, there he passed the Winter
and cut the Gordian Knot; he fell dangerously sick in the Spring, by bathing
himself in a great Sweat, in the River Cidnus, which passes by Tharsus in
Cilicia; he was cured by Remedies his Physician Philip gave him* He went to
meet Darius who had an Army of Six Hundred Thousand Men, whom The Battle of
Issus.
he defeated near Issus in the streights of the Mountains of Cilicia. Of the
World 3672, before Chapter 332.

This Victory made him Master of a The Fruits of his Victory.
great number of illustrious Prisoners; among others, of the Mother, the Wife,
the Son, and the Daughters of Darius; also of the City Damascus, where the
vanquished King had left his Treasure.

None but Tire and Gaza durst oppose The Ruin of Tire and Gaza.
him; he took the first after seven Months Siege, the second after two Months,
and destroyed them both.

He spared Jerusalem, being moved to Jerusalem spared.
compassion by the submission of the Jews, and out of the respect he had for
Jaddus the High Priest. Then he passed into Egypt, which submitted to him more
Egypt submits.
willingly, because it endured with regret the Persian Yoke. Of the World 3673,
before Chapter 332.

He took measures for the Building of The Foundation of Alexandria.
Alexandria on the Banks of Nyle, while ^his Ingenier Dinocrates was there at
work, Alexander visited the Temple of Jupiter Alexander visits the Temple of
Jupiter Ammon.
Hammon, in the desert of Libia: He was there declared the Son of that God, he
went back into Egypt, and from thence into Siria, from whence he passed beyond
Euphrates, and Tygris to meet Darius, who had gathered together an Army of a
Million of Men.

Alexander conquered him in the plains The Battle of Arbella.
of Arbella, where Darius escaping out of the Battle, was killed in his Flight
by the conspiring of Bessus, and of Narbazan^^ The Death of Darius.
two of his principal Satrapes, who were afterward punished by Alexander as
their Crime deserved. Of the World 3674, before Chapter 330.

Thus ended the Empire of the Persians, which began 208 Years before in the
person of Cyrus, passing after the death of Darius Codomanus, to the
Macedonians in The Empire of the Macedonians
the person of Alexander. Of the World 3675, before Chapter 329.

It is remarkt what happened to him in that time with Talestris Queen of the
Amazons, Thalestris Queen of the Amazons. A War against the Scythians.
who came to visit him in Hircani^ on the Banks of the Caspian Sea.

The War he afterward undertook against the Scythians, which proved
unfortunate to him, made him repass the Ca^^casus, at the foot of which he
founded a^ second Alexandria.

The Conspiracy of Parmenio, and o^ The Conspiracy of Parmenio and Phylotas.
The Death of Clytus and Calisthenes.
his Son Phylotas, cost both of them their lives.

The Death of Clytus and of Calisthene^ the Philosopher, the first killed by
Alexander himself in a Debauch, the other by the hands of an Executioner, being
suspected to have conspired against Alexander. Of the World 3676, before Chapter
328.

Alexander advancing toward Indus, Taxilis Taxilis.
a King, whose Country lay on thi^ side of that River, submitted voluntarily to
him; so did Omphis another India^ Omphis.
King* who lived beyond the same River*

But Porus the greatest King of that Porus.
Country, having opposed him, was overcome and made a Prisoner, and in the end
treated very honorably by the Conqueror. Of the World 3677, before Chapter 229.

History does not forget to remark the The Death of Bucephalus.
Funeral Honors which Alexander caused to be paid to his Horse Bucephalus. And
the City he ordered to be built about his Tomb, by the name of Bucephalia on
the River Hydaspes.

His Army being arrived on the borders of Hypanis, refused by a kind of Mutiny
to pass further, so that Alexander was Alexander returns. He visits the Ocean.
forced to return back. In his return he surveyed the Mouths of the River
Indus, and sailed for a while on the Ocean; then taking his course along the
Seaside The loss of a great part of his Army.
by the great Droughts, excessive Heat, and want of Water and Provisions, he
lost three parts of his Army. He arrived with the Remainder at Pasargade in
Persia, from thence marched to Susa, where Calanus the Calanus the Gimnosophyst.
Indian Gimnosophyst burnt himself, because he found his Health begin to decay
after he had enjoyed it perfectly for the space of Seventy Years.

Alexander being at Ecbatana in Parthia, lost his dear Ephestion, who died of a
Debauch The Death of Ephestion.
of Wine. Among his various expresses of Grief for his loss, he often uttered
some cruel ones, and some very ridiculous.

He came to Babylon contrary to the Advice Alexander at Babylon.
and Council of the Caldeans, who foretold that his coming there would prove
Fatal. He staid there some time, and departed Laughing at the Prognosticators;
he took a Survey of the Mouth of Euphrates, and there received the account of
Nearchus and Onesicritus, to whom he had given order to view the Coasts between
the Mouths of the River Indus and Euphrates; being returned to Babylon, giving
His Return
himself up to extraordinary Debauches of Wine, died either by those Excesses,
or His Death.
of Poison given him by his greatest Familiars; he lived but 32 Years, of which
he had Reigned 12. His Death happened in the first Year of the 114th. Olimpiad,
and at the 449th Year from the Foundation of Rome. Of the World 3681, before
Christ, 323.

He left a Bastard Son named Hercules, and his Wife Roxalana big with Child,
who was brought to Bed of a Son called after his Name; these two Sons with
Philip His Sons.
Arideus, brother to Alexander, acknowledged Arideus his Brother Perdiccas
Governor of the Kings.
Kings by the Mecedonians, under the Tuition of Perdiccas; the two first by
reason of their Childhood, and the third in regard of the weakness of his
Understanding.

The other Friends of Alexander shared among them his Conquests under the
Titles of Governors, which they assumed during the Life of those Kings. But
after that by the Fraud and Cunning of Olimpias and Antipater, they were
destroyed, Their Death.
each of them took the Title of Sovereign in his Government.

It was not long before they fell to War among themselves, by which the chief
of them were ruined.

Perdiccas, the first, marched into Egypt The Death of Perdiccas. Ptolomy King
of Egypt.
against Ptolomy, the Son of Lagus, and was there killed in Battle by Ptolomy;
who by that Victory was fully established in that Monarchy, and joined to
Egypt, Cyrenaica, and part of Arabia.

Craterus had shared Macedonia, and the Craterus killed.
rest of Greece, with Antipater: But Craterus having past into Asia, against
Eumenes, was there killed in Battle. Of the World 3680, before Chapter 320.

Eumenes awhile after, had the same Fate Eumenes killed.
by Antigonus, who thus remained Master of a great part of Asia the Lesser;
having killed in Battle Lysimachus: After which, Lysimachus killed
Antigonus was likewise slain in a Battle against Seleucus. Demetrius, the Son
of Antigonus, after he had restored Liberty to the ancient Republics of
Greece, and had made himself Master of Macedonia, lost it again, and fell into
the Hands of his Son-in-Law Seleucus Nicanor; who kept him Prisoner, though very
honorably, and most commodiously, in a Peninsula of Syria; where Demetrius The
Death of Demetrius.
gave himself up excessively to his Pleasures, died at the end of three Years.

Antipater, Cassander, and his other Sons, the Death of Olimpias, Antipater,
Cassander, and his other Sons.
who had a hand in the Death of the Kings, and in that of Olimpias, they
perished all in the space of twelve Years. Thus the whole Succession of
Alexander was divided into three Kingdoms.

That of the Selucides comprehended Mesopotamia, The Selucides in Asia.
Syria, and Asia the Lesser, under Seleucus Nicanor, who gave Name to this
Dinasty. Of the World 3692. before Chapter 312.

That of the Ptolomy's comprizing Egypt, The Ptolomy' s in Egypt.
Cyrenaica, with a part of Arabia, under Ptolomy the Son of Lagus.

That of Macedonia under the young Antigonus, Of Macedonia under the young
Antigonus. Philosophers.
who became Master there, after that Pyrrhus, who had disputed it with him, was
gone into Italy.

At this time lived Democritus, Heraclitus, and Zeno, Prince of the Stoics;
Euclid, chief of the Mathematicians; and Epicurus who kept two Schools in Asia,
one at Lampsasche, and the other at Mytelene.

The Indians shook off the Macedonian The Indians set at Liberty.
Yoke, having valiantly repulsed Selucus, who was advanced toward them, to
keep them in Obedience. Of the World 3700, before Chapter 304.

At his Return from this Voyage, he The Foundation of Antioch, and of Selucia.
founded two Cities in the same Year; Antioch, on the River Orontes, in Syria;
and Selucia, upon the Tygris; the first after the Name of his Son Antiochus,
and the second after his own Name. Of the World 3704, before Chapter 300.

At this time lived Theocritus, the Poet, The Poet Theocritus.
Author of the Idyles, which treat of Pastoral Matters.

Ptolomy Philadelphus having succeeded his Ptolomy Phyladelphus. The Pharos
Father, built the Pharos, at the entrance into the Port of Alexandria.

He collected a great Number of Volumes, The famous Library. Demetrius
Phylareus.
in a most stately Library, by the Care of Demetrius Phylareus, the famous
Philosopher. Of the World 3727, before Chapter 277.

The Gauls, under the Conduct of Belgius, The Gauls in Greece:
and of young Brennus, passed into Greece, plundered the Temple of Delphos;
there lost a great part of their Army by the Plague; which was believed to be a
Punishment for their Sacrilege: With the remainder of their Forces they past
into Asia, and gave to that Country where they established themselves, the Name
of Galatia, Gallatia, or Gallo-Graecia. Pyrrhus driven out of Egypt.
or Gallo-Graecia.

Pyrrhus had at first great Success in the War he waged against the Romans, in
favor of the Tarentines; but at last he was so often beaten, that he was
forced to repass the Sea. He was killed awhile after, His Death.
by a Blow of a Tyle, which a Woman threw at him from a Window; having heard he
had killed her Son in a Combat against the young Antigonus, in the City of
Argos; those two Princes having been admitted into that City by their Factions.
Of the World 3733, before Chapter 271.

By the great Care and Wisdom of Phylopaemen, Phylopaemen, and Aratus The
Acaike League.
and Aratus, the Acaicke League was made; to which all the Greeks subscribed,
for the preservation of their Liberties. Of the World 3740, before Chapter 264.

The Kingdoms of Pergamus and Bythinia, The Kingdom of Pergamus and Bythinia.
began the first under Eumenes, Nephew to the Eunuch Phyleterus, who had been
Treasurer to Lysimachus; the second under Nicomedes, who rebuilt the City of
Astacia, and called it Nicomedia. Of the World 3744, before Chapter 260.

Then began the Kingdom of the Parthians, The Kingdom of the Parthians. Arsaces.
who shook off the Macedonian Yoke, under the Conduct of Arsaces, their first
King, Chief of the Dinasty, which from his Name was called the Arsacides.

At this time lived Berosus the Chaldean, Berosus.
who writ three Books of the History of the Kings of Assyria and Babylon.
Plautus Plautus.
the Comic Poet, lived then at Rome. Of the World 3758, before Chapter 246.

Antiochus Theos, the third King of Syria, Kings of Syria, Egypt, and
Macedonia.
had for his Successor Seleucus Callinicus, and Ptolomy Philadelphius, his Son
Everietes, in Egypt; The young Antigonus his Son Demetrius, in Macedonia:
These three Kings Fathers dying in the space of two Years. Of the World 3760,
before Chapter 244. The first Punick War. Hieron King of Syracuse.


This Year being the 477th of Rome, began the first Punick War in Sicily; where
the Romans got great Advantages over King Hieron, allied to the Carthaginians.
Seleucus Callinicus, and Antiochus Hierax his Brother, having a long time
disputed for the Kingdom of Syria, they both died, Kings of the Kingdom of
Syria.
and Seleucus Cerannus succeeded his Father Callinicus. Of the World 3778.
before Chapter 226.

In Egypt, Ptolomy Phylopater, having Of Egypt
poisoned his Father Everietes, succeeded him. Of the World 3781. before Christ
223.

The War was carried over into Africa, in the Sequel of which, happened that
which the Roman History fully relates of Attilius Regulus: At last a Peace was
made Attillius Regulus. The end of the first Punick War.
to the advantage of the Romans, to whom the Carthaginians were compelled to
give up S^rdinia. Of the World 3784. before Chapter 220.

The Romans past the Po, took Millan, and made themselves Masters of a great
The Gauls in Gaule-Cisalpine, and in Illyria. The second Punick War. The Ruin
of Saguntum. Hannibal in Italy. He defeats the Romans at the River Trebea.
part of Gaule-Cisalpine. They acted the same thing in Illyria, against Queen
Teuta, a Gauloise, descended from young Brennus.

Annibal, the Son of Amilcar, commanding for the Carthaginians in Spain, had
been sworn by his Father, to be an inveterat^ Enemy to the Romans: To effect
which, he began to make War in Spain, by the overthrow of Saguntum.

After which, he past into Italy, having made a Passage over the Alps, defeated
the Romans near the River Trebea, which passes by Placentia.

And a second time in Tuscany, near the The Lake Trasimene.
Lake Trasimene.

But these first Successes were a little interrupted by the wise Conduct of Q.
Fabius Maximus, 'till such Consuls succeeded, who not following the same
Method, lost the Battle of Cannae; the Circumstances of At Cannae.
which are fully related in the Roman History.

After this great Victory, if Hannibal had but known how to have made a right
use of it, he had taken Rome; the Romans being deceived by a false Report, that
he was driven away by a Storm, which Heaven caused to fall on his Fleet. Some
write, that he went into Campania, being allured by the Delights of that
Country. However, Fabius Maximus, by his great Conduct, put a stop to the
raging Fury of this Conqueror.

But that which fully reestablished the Roman Affairs, was the passing of
Cornelius Cornelius Scipio in Spain.
Scipio into Spain; where he was sent to succeed his Father, and his Uncle,
killed by Asdrubal, Brother to Hannibal.

At length Scipio going from Spain into Africa, got there such advantage over
the In Africa.
Carthaginians, that they were forced to recall Hannibal to oppose this great
Warrior. After many Skirmishes, the Affair terminated Hannibal repasses, and is
overcome.
in one Battle; where Hannibal was overcome, and could very hardly escape. Of
the World 3803, before Chapter 201.

Scipio being Master of the Field by this Victory, reduced the Carthaginians to
demand A Peace made.
Peace; which was made very advantageous for the Romans, and their Ally,
Massinissa, one of the Numidian Kings; and very disadvantageous to the
Carthaginians, and for their Ally, Syphax, another King of Numidia. By this
great Success Scipio gained the Honor of Triumph, The Surname of African.
with the Sur-name of African. Of the World 3805, before Chapter 199.

In this time lived Ennius and Terence, Roman Ennius, and Terence.
Poets; the first Heroic, and the second Comic.

The Romans from this time grown very powerful, and interessing themselves in
the Affairs of Kings, forbid Philip of Macedon to molest Ptolomy Epiphanes; who
was left by his Father, Phylopater, King of Egypt, under the Protection of the
Senate, and People of Rome.

This Philip King of Macedon had favored Hannibal: The Romans made War against
The Macedonian War.
him for that Reason; and after having beaten him in several Rencounters, with
the Lacedaemonians, his Allies, they had the pleasure to see march before the
Triumph of the victorious Consul, the eldest Son of that King, with the Son of
the Lacedemonian General. Of the World 3807, before Chapter 197.

The Syrian War was not less glorious to The Syrian War.
the Romans. Hannibal being retired to Antiochus the Great, whom he persuaded
to declare War against them; which proved unfortunate to him: For the Romans
first beat him at the famous Pass of Thermopolis, and again on the Banks of
Meander, in Asia, under the Conduct of Lucius Scipio, Lucius Scipio Asiaticus.
from thence Sur-named the Asiatick: His Brother Cornelius, the African, having
been his Lieutenant in this Expedition. Of the World 3813. before Chapter 191.

Four Years after, Antiochus having been Kings of Syria.
killed by the Persians, near the Temple of Jupiter Elemais, his Son Seleucus
Phylopater succeeded him in the Kingdom of Syria. Of the World 3817, before Chapter
187.

Hannibal poisoned himself, having discovered The Death of Hannibal.
that Prusias, King of Bythinia, designed to deliver him up to the Romans. Of
the World 3822, before Chapter 182.

In the third Chapter of the second Book of the Maccabees, is to be read what
happened to Heliodorus, when he attempted The History of Heliodorus.
to plunder the Temple of Jerusalem. Of the World 3828, before Chapter 176.

At his return from Judea, Heliodorus killed Seleucus, and so made himself
Master of the Kingdom of Syria; but did not long Kings of the Kingdom of Syria.
Antiochus Epiphanes.
enjoy it, for he was soon after slain by Antiochus Epiphanes, Brother to
Seleucus. This Antiochus had been given a Hostage to the Romans, by his Father
Antiochus the Great. Seleucus his Brother disengaged him, by sending his own
Son Demetrius in his place: So that in the Nephew's absence, it was easy for
the Uncle to usurp the Kingdom of Syria. The Romans did nor then oppose
Antiochus, but as he was entering into Egypt against the Pupils, their two
Brothers, Ptolomeus Phylometer, and Everietes the Second, Successors to their
Father Ptolomeus Epiphanes; they sent him a Kings of Egypt.
Command by Papilius Laena, who was then Pro-Consul of Asia, not to molest the
young Egyptian Kings.

In returning from Egypt, this enraged Prince brought those Calamities upon
the Jews, which are set down in the Second The Jews persecuted by Antiochus.
Book of the Maccabees, Chap. 4, 5, 6. And by Josephus in his Twelfth Book, and
the Sixth Chapter; in the Fifteenth Book, and the Third Chapter of the Jewish
Antiquities. Of the World 3836, before Chapter 168.

In the mean time, the Romans became The Conquest of Illyria, by the Romans.
Masters of Illyria, by defeating Gentius, King of that Country, and also of*
Macedonia, which they took from Perseus, who was carried in Triumph to Rome, by
the Consul Paulus Aemilius. Of the World 3838, before Chapter 168.

Judas Maccabeus, that Illustrious Jew, Judas Maccabeus.
revenged the Injuries done to his Nation, upon the Lieutenants of Antiochus,
who preparing to enter into Judea against Maccabeus, The Death of Antiochus
Epiphanes.
met with an unfortunate End, described in the Book of the Maccabees, and in
those of Josephus. Of the World 3840, before Chapter 164.

His Son Antiochus Eupater succeeded him at Nine Years of Age, and was under
the Tuition of Lysias, his Father's Friend: But two Years after, the Guardian,
and his Pupil, were killed by Demetrius, Son of Seleucus; who being escaped
from Rome, was acknowledged King by the Syrians. Of the Kings of Syria.
World 3842, before Chapter 162.

His Lieutenants, with an Army of Forty thousand Men, overwhelmed Judas
Maccabeus, The Death of Judas Maccabeus.
who had the Courage to meet them only with Eight hundred Men.

He had for his Successor, to Command the Jewish Army, his Brother Jonathas. Of
the World 3843, before Chapter 161.

Alexander Balas calling himself the Son of Antiochus Epiphanes, made himself
Master of Syria, having killed in Battle his Cousin Demetrius Soter.

This new King was a Friend to Jonathas, Jonathas, High Priest
by which means he obtained the Dignity of High Priest, and deposed the wicked
Alcymius, who had taken that Title upon him.

Onias, Son to Onias the Great, finding himself by this means excluded from
this The Affairs of the Jews
Sovereign Dignity in Jerusalem, retired to exercise it in Egypt, among the
Jews who lived there: Having obtained of Philometer leave to build a Temple
near Memphis, not unlike that of Jerusalem. Of the World 3856, before Chapter 148.

A false Philip, not long before, had been A false Philip.
driven out of Macedonia by the Romans; they soon after had the same advantage
A false Perseus.
over a false Perseus: And the Achaians, by favoring the latter, exposed their
Country to the Victorious Arms of the Romans.

This War ended by the Ruin of Corinth, The Ruin of Corinth Polybius:
under the Consul Mumius. Polybius, a Native of that City, who had followed his
Disciple, Scipio Aemilianus, into Africa; hearing of the Misfortune of his
Country, went thither to save some Remains of its ancient and precious
Monuments. Of the World 3858, before Chapter 146.

The same Year was also remarkable for The Ruin^ of Carthage. Scipio Aemilianus
Africanus
the Destruction of Carthage. Scipio Aemilianus took it, and destroyed it by
the Order of the Senate. The third and last Punick War ending in that manner;
who at the same time acquired the Sur-name of Africanus, as his Father by
Adoption had done. This happened in the third Year of the 158th Olimpiad.

Ptolomy Phylometer, took away his Daughter Cleopatra from Balas, then killed
him in a Battle, and gave Cleopatra to Demetrius Kings of Syria.
Nicator, Son of Soter; who by that means put himself in possession of the
Kingdom of Syria. Of the World 3859, before Christ 145.

Phylometer being dead, a little while after Everietes the Second, his Brother,
married his Widow Cleopatra, Sister to them Kings of Egypt.
both, and killed a Son she had by her first Husband: So Everietes Reigned sole
King of Egypt. Of the World 3861, before Chapter 143.

In Syria, Tryphon, who was a Friend to Balas, made Antiochus, the Son of
Balas, to be acknowledged King at Antioch; with so much the less trouble, by
reason Demetrius Nicator was taken Prisoner in a Battle by the Parthians. The
vanquished being honorably treated by the Victors, married Rodoguna, Daughter
to their King.

Cleopatra hearing this, married Antiochus Sydetes, Brother to her Husband
Demetrius: So Sydetes was acknowledged King of the Syrians; having overcome and
killed in Battle Tryphon, who pretended to the Crown of Syria, after he had
killed his Pupil, young Antiochus. Of the World 3866, before Chapter 138.

Jonathas had been murdered by this The Jewish A^^airs.
Tryphon; Simon, Brother to Jonathas; who succeeded him in the Principality,
and High Priesthood of the Jews, assisted Sydetes to defeat Tryphon, and was
killed a while after by his Father-in-Law Ptolomy, the Son of Abobus; his Son
John Hircanus succeeded in his place. Of the World 3869, before Chapter 135.

The Romans seized on the Treasures, The End of the Kingdom of Pergamus
and of the Kingdom of Attalus, the last King of Pergamus, under pretense he
had made them his Heirs.

Scipio Aemilianus Africanus, added to his Sur-name that of Numantinus; having
taken The taking of Numantia.
and ruined Numantia, the only City in Spain, had given Refuge to the remaining
Party of the Carthaginians. Of the World 3872, before Chapter 132.

Demetrius Nicator, set at Liberty by the Parthians, killed in Battle his
Brother Sydetes. Kings of Syria.
Afterward he was overcome by Sabynus, whom Everietes the Second, had sent to
be King of the Parthians, at their Request. Of the World 3876. before Chapter 128.

Nicator having been murdered in his escape, by his Wife Cleopatra, she caused
her Son Antiochus, whom she had by Nicator, to be received as King. Afterward
the young King having discovered that his Mother designed to have poisoned him,
forced her to take that Poison she had prepared for him. Of the World 3882,
before Chapter 122.

In Egypt, Ptolomy Everictes, called also Kings of Egypt.
Physcon, after the Death of Cleopatra his Wife, his Sister, and Sister-in-Law,
married the young Cleopatra, Daughter of the other Cleopatra, and of Phylometer
their Brother. He left two Sons by the young Cleopatra; which were Ptolomy
Laturus, and Alexander, under the Tuition of their Mother. Of the World 3888,
before Chapter 116.

Two Antiochus's, one Sur-named Grypus, Of Syria.
Son of Nicator; the other Cyzicenus, Son of Sydetes, disputed the Kingdom of
Syria.

John Hircan took this occasion to set at liberty his Nation; seized on
Samaria, and ruined the Temple, which Manasses, Brother to Jaddus, had built
there Two hundred Years before, and subdued the Idumeans, whom he compelled to
be circumcised. Of the World 3898, before Christ 106.

After his Death, Judas Aristobulus's Son, The first King of the Jews after
their Captivity.
took the Title of King. His Reign was short; for he died about a Year after,
with great Regret, that he had killed his Brother Absalon Antigonus.

Alexander Jamnes, whom he had put in Prison, was set at Liberty, and placed on
the Throne, and at the same time made High Priest. Of the World 3899. before
Chapter 105.

Grypus having been murdered by the Treason of his own Subjects, and Cyzicenus
killed in Battle by Seleucus, the Son of Gryphus; and Seleucus likewise slain
in Battle, by Philip the Son of Cyzicenus, (Of ^^^gs of Syria.
the World 3907, before Chapter 97.) the Kingdom was disputed between that Philip,
and Antiochus Son of Seleucus. Of the World 3911, before Chapter 93.

In the mean time the Romans had past the Alps, subdued the Country of the
Allobroges, and of the Saliens, with that part of the Country called the Roman
Province, and Gallia Narbonensis.

These happy Successes abroad, were disturbed by intestine Divisions between
the Senate, and the People, supported by their Tribunes, Tiberius, and Cains
Gracchus; who there lost both their Lives.

Marius, who began to make himself Marius
considerable, took the Plebeans part, by whose Favor he had Commission to go
and finish the War against Jugurtha King of Numidia, who had declared himself
Enemy to the Romans; having put to Death his two Brothers, Adherbal, and
Hiemsal, Sons to Micipsa, Allies to the Romans, as their Father had been.
Marius triumphed over Jugurtha, having overcome and taken Jugurtha. Defeated
and made a Prisoner, by Marius. The Defeat of the Cimbrians, and the Teutons.
Bellum Sociale.
him in Battle.

This Defeat of Jugurtha was attended with that of the Cimbrians and Teutons,
who were defeated by Marius, first on the Banks of the Rhone; and after that,
in Italy.

The same Marius made an end also of the War in Italy, called Bellum Sociale;
because many People of the adjacent Country had made a League against the
Romans, demanding a Right of Pretension to the Offices and Dignities of that
City.

All what is beforementioned in the Roman Affairs, was transacted between the
Year 629, and 663, from the Foundation of Rome.

The Syrians wearied with the Civil Wars between their last Kings, the
Selucides, The Syrians give up their Kingdom to Tygranes King of Armenia.
Mithridates King of Pontus.
gave the Crown to Tygranes King of Armehia, an Ally of the most powerful
Mithridates King of Pontus; who having attacked Nicomedes King of Bythinia, and
Ariobarzanes King of Cappadocia, Allies of the Romans, occasioned a long War.
This King in the first War, was overcome by Sylla; who gave such Conditions of
Peace, to the Vanquished, as he pleased*

Then Sylla hastened his Return to Rome, in order to oppose the Faction of
Marsus. These two Competitors being so powerful The first Civil War among the
Romans.
in the Commonwealth, by their Ambition, occasioned the first Civil War among
the Romans.

Marius who had been six times Consul* Marius overcome and killed by Sylla,
p^rpetual Dictator. His Death.
was there overcome and killed by Sylla* who became Master of Rome, and made
himself perpetual Dictator; yet he divested himself of that Sovereign Dignity
sometime before his Death; which was occasioned by the lousie Disease.

Mithridates having renewed the War* The Second War against Mithridates,
overcome by Lucullus. Pompey' s Explo^^s.
was often defeated by Lucullus; to whom Pompey was sent to succeed, to carry
on that War.

Pompey had already gloriously acquitted himself in the Civil War, where he was
o^ Sylla's Party: At Twenty four Years o^ Age he had triumphed for his
Victories in Sertorius overcome and killed.
Spain, where he overcame and killed Sertorius, who took Marius's part: He had
drove out the Gladiators, supported by the Power of Spartacus. He did the same
With Spartacus chief of the Gladiators. The Pirates defeated.
to the Pirates of Cilica, who infested the Seas. The like good Fortune
attended him in the War against Mithridates: He forced him from that side of
the River, and from Tygris; where he was at last reduced to that Extremity,
that the miserable King The Death of Mithridates.
forsaken by his own People, was constrained by his Son Pharnaces to kill
himself.

Pompey having likewise reduced Tygranes King of Armenia, to accept those
Conditions of Peace he imposed on him, returning into Syria, stopped at Damas,
and there Pompey in Syri^
was informed of the Difference between the two Brothers, Hircanus, and
Aristobulus, Sons of Alexander Jamne, and of Alexandra King and Queen of the
Jews.

This Queen, after the Death of her Husband, had most prudently Governed the
Kingdom, as Guardianess of her Children for the space of Nine Years: But they
quarrelled, and made War one against the other.

After her Death, Pompey commanded them to lay down their Arms, and imposed
certain Conditions; which not being observed by Aristobulus, Pompey besieged
him, and took him at Jerusalem, and brought him Prisoner to Rome; leaving the
High Priesthood to Hircan, forbidding him to take the Name of King. He put the
Government of the Kingdom into the Hands of Antipater, the Father of Herod; who
made himself a while after so Renowned. Of the World 3242, before Chapter 62.

In Egypt, Alexander having killed his King of Egypt.
Mother Cleopatra, who was so indulgent to him, that she set him on the Throne,
to the greatest Injustice to her eldest Son Lathurus: The Egyptians set him
up, after they had expelled the other. Both being dead, Galinius Pro-Consul of
Syria, received Orders from the Senate, to put in possession of that Kingdom
Ptolomy Auletes, Son to Lathurus, whom the Egyptians had expelled.

Crassus plundered the Temple of Jerusalem: Crassus plunders the Temple of
Jerusalem. is overcome and killed by the Parthians. Caius Julius Caesar subdues
the Gauls.
The Jews did artribute for that Sacrilege, the unhappy Success of the War he
made against the Parthians; where he, and his Son, were overcome and killed.

C. Julius Caesar, after his first Consulate, having had the Government of
Gaule-Cisalpine, subdued the Trans-Alpines in Nine Years time.

The Senate being jealous of his growing Power, commanded him to disarm; upon
his Refusal he was declared an Enemy to the Commonwealth: Which occasioned The
Civil War.
a Civil War, Of the World 3255, before Chapter 49.

The Senate having given the Command of their Army to Pompey; upon Caesar's
coming he was forced to pass the Sea to Dyrachium.

In the mean time he made himself to be chose Consul at Rome, then passed into
Caesar Consul the Second time. Reduces Spain.
Spain; where without hardly a Blow struck he forced Afranius, and Petreius, to
deliver up to him the five Legions they commanded for Pompey: And the like
Submission was shown by Varro, who commanded a Legion for the same Faction,
which lay toward the Streights of Gades, in that Kingdom.

At his Return, he pressed the Siege of Marseilles, which he left blocked up
when Takes and ruins Marseilles
he went into Spain. He took it, and destroyed it, making that miserable City
an Example to those that took part with his Enemies.

Then he came back to Rome, but stayed He comes back co Rome.
no longer there, than was necessary to regulate his own Affairs: So he went to
Brundusium, and from thence to the other Passes the Sea to fight Pompey.
side of the Sea, to fight Pompey.

After some Skirmishes between the two Armies, the Business was at last decided
in the Plains of Pharsalia, where Pompey was The Battle of Pharsalia.
overcome, though he had had an Army far more numerous than that of Caesar's. Of
the World 3956, before Chapter 48.

Pompey flying after this great Misfortune to the Coasts of Egypt, was there
killed Pompey killed.
by the Treachery of the Counselors of young Ptolomy Denis, who had succeeded
his Father Auletes.

Caesar arrived soon after in Egypt, where Caesar arrives in Egypt.
by his Policy and Strength, he defended himself against the Ambuscades of the
Egyptians: And after an open War had been declared, he defeated them by Sea
and Land; their young King being killed in The End of Ptolomy in Egypt.
Cleopatra Queen of Egypt.
a Land-Battle.

Then Caesar falling in Love with Cleopatra, Sister to the slain King, made her
Queen of Egypt, though he might have reduced it to a Province.

Pharnaces, the Son of Mithridates, who Caesar against Pharnaces
remained in possession of some Provinces near the Bosphorus, judging this
Opportunity of the Civil War, favorable to his Designs he had taken; not only
enterprized upon the Pontus, the ancient Patrimony of his Royal Family, but
also on Bythinia, and Cappadocia.

Caesar returning from Egypt, advanced toward him, and ended the War with as
much Facility as Expedition: So that he writ to one of his Friends, it was the
same thing for him, To come, to see, and to overcome.

In his Return to Rome, he set at Liberty the Prince Aristobulus, who had been
taken by Pompey.

Caesar likewise assisted him with some Forces, in order to put himself in
possession of the Kingdom of the Jews: But having been poisoned by the
Treachery of his Enemies, his eldest Son Alexander fell into the Hands of
Scipio; who cut off his Head at Antioch. His younger Son Antigonus retired to
the Parthians: So that in Judea the High Priesthood remaining still in the
Hands of Hircanus, elder Brother to the deceased Aristobulus. The Political
Government was administered by Antipater, and his two Sons, Phaselus, and
Herodes.

Caesar passed over into Afric against Caesar in Afric.
Cato, Scipio, Massinissa King of Numidia and others, who having got together
the Remains of Pompeys's Army, had powerfully renewed the War in those parts.
They were all defeated by Caesar near Tapsus; The Battle of Tapsus.
his Victory was so great, that the chief of them despairing to be able to
renew Catos's Death. The Death of Massinissa, Paetreus and Scipio.
the War, killed themselves: Cato at Utica, Massinissa and Petraeus at Cirta,
the capitol City in Numidia; Scipio at Sea finding his Vessel taken by one of
Caesar's. Of the World 3959, before Chapter 45.

The Conqueror being returned to Rome, took possession of his fourth Consulat,
then went into Spain against the two Sons of Caesar goes into Spain.
Pompey, who had seized of that Province, and had got there a numerous great
Army. The decisive Battle was fought near The Battle of Munda.
Munda, where the Eldest of the two Brothers Cneius Pompey was killed with a
Thousand Knights, and Thirty Thousand other Romans. The younger Brother Sextus
Pompeius escapt being* reserved for another Fortune.

Caesar returned to Rome, and there celebrated Caesars' s Triumphs.
five Triumphs, first of the Gauls of that of Egypt, of Pontus, of Afric,
and of Spain, without making mention of the Battle of Pharsalia, of Tapsus, and
of Munda.

It was at that time, that the Calendar He reforms the Calender.
was begun to be used; for Caesar as Sovereign Priest had reformed it the Year
before.

Caesar by so great and fortunate Successes being Master of the Commonwealth,
the Senate conferred on him the highest Honors, with an Absolute Power to
command all the Roman Empire, which gave occasion of the Conspiracy made
against him by the two Brutuses, Marcus and Decimus, Caius Cassius, and others
of the chief of the Nobility who killed him Caesar's Death.
in the Senate, as he was preparing to make War against the Parthyans. Of the
World 3960, before Chapter 44.

Octavius Caesar, Grand Son to Julia, Octavius Caesar. And mark Anothony united.
Sister of Julius Caesar, and his adopted Son, took the Name, Inheritance, and
all the Rights of his Father, and maintained it with the help of Marcus
Antonius, the zealous Friend of Julius Caesar.

These two in a short time fell out. Marcus Antonius having besieged Modena,
the Senate gave Octavius a Commission to raise the Siege, where Decimus Brutus
was shut up. Octavius accomplished the design so well, that Anthony being
overcome, Mark, Anthony overcome at Modena, and retires to Lepidus
fled into Gaul, where he was kindly received by Lepidus,, who commanded in
that Province. Of the World 3961. before Chapter 43.

But their mutual Interests having obliged them to a Reconciliation, in order
to revenge the Death of Caesar, and to oppose the power of his Murderers
favored by the Senate; these three Men made themselves Masters of the
Republic by joining together, and forming the famous The Triumvirat.
Triumvirate so fatal to many illustrious Persons of the Roman Empire. Of the
World 3962, before Chapter 42.

Lepidus one of the Triumvirs stayed in Italy, while the other two Octavius and
Anothony passed the Seas to make War against Marcus Brutus, and Caius Cassius,
who had great Forces in Greece.

That Affair was ended in a Battle near The Battle of Philippi.
Philippi in Macedonia; Caius Cassius overcome by Anthony killed himself,
fearing the same fate had fallen on Brutus his Colleague, but it fell out
contrary, he having The Death of Cassius and Brutus.
had some advantage over Octavius: But the next day the two Armies again joining
Battle, Brutus was defeated, and killed himself in Despair. Of the World 3964,
before Chapter 40.

After this Victory the two Conquerers The Alliance between Octavius and
Anthony.
allied themselves by Marriage, Octavius Marrying Antonia Daughter to Anthony,
and Anthony with Octavia, Sister to Octavius, though she was a Widow a little
before, and with Child by Marcellus her first Husband.

These two Triumvers having little regard for their Colleague Lepidus, divided
They divide the Provinces between them.
between them the Provinces of the Empire; Octavius took those of the West, and
Anthony those of the East. Of the World 3968, before Chapter 36.

Sextus Pompeius had considerable Forces, Sextus Pompeius.
chiefly Naval on the Coasts of Sicily, and all along the Eastern part of
Italy. Octavius made use of the Forces of Lapidus to Defeat Sextus Pompeius, so
that this last Son of Pompey the Great, being forsaken of all, fled into Asia,
where he fell into His Death.
the hands of Anthony's Party who killed him.

After that Octavius having corrupted the Army of Lepidus, this Triumvir was
reduct, being abandoned by all to obey Octavius his Command who banished him to
a little Island in the Mediteranean, Lepidus' s Death.
where he died an Exile.

Anthony having attackt the Parthians, Anthonys War aagainst the Parthians.
that War proved fatal to him, for he there lost a great part of his Army, yet
with the remainder he made a safe and honorable Retreat.

Antigonus Son to Aristobulus, by the help of the Parthians, was established in
Judea, in the time of the civil War between the Romans; but these great
Disorders being some what appeased, Herod favored by Anthony, his intimate
Friend first of all, made use of the Forces Ventidius commanded in Syria; after
that more effectually of those commanded by Sosius, with which he besieged and
took Jerusalem, where The Death of Antigonus.
Antigonus was, who falling into the hands of his Enemies, was Beheaded:
Whereupon Herod having been already declared Herod King of the Jews.
King of the Jews by the Senate, established himself in that Dignity.

Anthony fell Passionately in Love with Cleopatra, Anothony in Love with
Cleopatra.
past his time at Alexandria, in a shameful manner while Octavius was preparing
to make War against him, under pretense of the high Injury his Sister Octavia
received by this disloyal Love of Anthony her Husband. At last the business
being come to an open Rupture, the Affairs ended by one Naval Battle between
the two Parties; it was fought in view of the Promontary of Actium.

Anthony lost the day by deserting his The Battle of Actium.
Fleet to follow Cleopatra, who retreated with her ships at the beginning of
the Fight; he followed her to Alexandria, whereupon a false report raised by
her means, that she had killed her self, gave himself a mortal Wound, but being
immediately The Death of Anthony.
after assured Cleopatra was living, he caused himself to be carried where she
was, and died in her Arms.

So Octavius, who from that time was Octovius Augustus, Master of the Roman
Empire.
called Augustus, became sole Master of all that belonged to the Republic; it
was from that Battle, and from the Death of Anthony: History begins to reckon
the Forty Four Years that Augustus Reigned alone.

He came frequently after to Alexandria, The Death of Cleopatra.
where having seized on Cleopatra, she frustrated his Design, notwithstanding
all the care he took to preserve her Life. Intending her for the chief Ornament
of his Triumph; to avoid which, she killed her self, applying a Serpent to her
Arm, which was brought to her in a Basket of Figs. In her, ended the Line of
the Ptolomys who had Reigned in Egypt since the The end of the Kingdom of
Egypt.
death of Alexander to that time, the Kingdom being reduced to a Provinee by
Augustus.

He employed the two following years to set in order the Affairs of the East;
then he returned to Rome, where he celebrated three Triumphs, that of Actium,
of Dalmatia, Augustus his Triumphs.
and of Alexandria, with that vast Magnificence which had never been shown
before.

After he had been powerfully settled in the Sovereignty, he expressed a desire to
His Soveranity over all the Empire.
divest himself of it; but the Senate, and People inured to servitude, hindered
him from executing his design, whether true or feigned, conferring on him
excessive Honors, with an absolute power over all the Empire. Of the World
3977, before Chapter 27.

He did not abuse his Power, for his Government His Wisdom in Governing.
was such, That the Romans never regretted the loss of their liberty under his
Reign.

The Reputation he required by the clemency of his Government, was spread about
even to all Foreign Nations, of His good Fortune.
which some of the most Barbarous, and most remote courted his Friendship and
and Alliance as the Indians, but above all the Parthians, who not only rendered
him the Ensigns taken from him at the defeat of Crassus; and that of Anthony,
with all the Prisoners taken at the last Battle, but that which never happened
to this Warlike Nation, they presented him with two Sons of their King in
Hostage, as a pledge of their Treaty.

This great prosperity was only disturbed by some small losses on the Frontiers
of the Empire. The most considerable, and which most afflicted him, was the
loss of the Legions, commanded by Varus in The los^ of Varus.
Germany, who were surpized and cut in pieces by the Germans.

But Augustus so happy in all other respects, The inward troubles of Augustus.
had great Domestic Troubles, by the irregular conduct of the two Julias,
Mother and Daughter: One his Daughter, the other his Granddaughter, by the
Death of his two Grand-sons, Caius and Lucius, whom he had adopted, and as it
was thought, designed them for his Successors to the Empire; also by the Death
of Drusus, Son to his Wife Livia, whom he had Married to his Neice the Young
Antonia. In fine, by the conduct of his dear Livia, who was suspected to have
contrived the Death of his two Grandsons, to advance her own Son Tiberius.

All these things happened in the space of 22 Years, from the 7th Cons^lat of
Augustus, to the end of that Age, which was the sixth of the World, and the
beginning of the seventh Age of the World. Of the World 3999, before Chapter 5.

The Birth of our Savior Jesus Christ, The Birth of Jesus Christ.
the Son of God, God blessed for ever, made Man to save us, Born of a Vingin in
Bethlem of Judah. Of the World, 4000.

Herod had been of Anthonys's Party, yet Herod the Great.
having found means to gain the favor of Augustus the Emperor, had fixed him in
the His good Fortune.
Throne of Judea.

This King though he was fortunate in His Domestic Misfortunes.
all other respects, had yet very great intestine Troubles. He had put to Death
his Wife Mariamne, who was of the Blood Royal of the Asmoneans, together with
two Sons he had by her, Alexander and Aristobulus. He was also the Death of
Hircanus, Grandfather of Mariamne, and Aristobulus Brother to that Princess
with Alexandra their Mother. Toward the end of his Life, he put to Death
Antipater, his eldest Son he had by Cypris, one of his Wives; at last having
attempted to put Jesus Christ to Death, by destroying many Innocents. He died
of a Disease both Shameful and Painful. Of the World 4003* His Death.
before Chapter 1.

The beginning of the vulgar Christian The Christian Era.
Era.

The First Age.
AUgustus banished Archelaus, Son to Herod Archelau^ Banished. Coponius
President of Indea*
to Vienna in Gaul, and put Judea under the Government of a President; the
first who had that charge was Coponius a Roman Knight. From Christ 3.

Augustus made the last numbering of the The number of the Roman Citizens.
Roman Citizens, which were computed to be Four Millions, One Hundred
Thirty-Seven Thousand, as well in Rome as in the Collonies of the Provinces.

He died a little while after in the 77th Augustus Death.
Year of his Age, in the 57th of his Empire, counting from the Death of Julius
Caesar. From Christ 13.

Among the rare Qualities of Julius and Augustus, they were both Learned, and
very great favorers of Learning; under Learned Men.
their two Reigns flourished Leucretius the Poet and Philosopher. Terentius
Varo the most Learned of the Romans. Vitruvius Prince of Architects, denies of
Halicarnassus, and Titus Livius Historians, who writ the Roman History; the
first in Greek, the second in Latin. Strabo the Geographer; Catullus, Tibullus,
Prospertius, Virgil, Cornelius, Gallus, Horace, Ovid, Poets* Crispus, Salustus,
Historians, and Orators; Cicero Orator and Philosopher.

Tiberius the Son of Livia, the Wife of Tiberius Emperor.
Augustus, adopted by this Emperor, succeeded him in the Empire.

Augustus when he adopted him, obliged him to adopt Germanicus Son to Drusus,
Germanicus his Death.
Brother to Tiberius, and Nephew to Augustus by Antonia, Daughter of Octavius,
and of Mark Anthony. But Tiberius being jealous of the Affection the Romans had
for Germanicus, Poisoned him.

Tiberius wearied with the Fatigue of Tiberius retires to Caprea. Elius Sejanus.
Governing, put it into the hands of Eliu^ Sejanus his Favorite, and retired
into the Isle of Caprea, where he gave himself wholly up to all kinds of
infamous Debaucheries.

The Holy Evangelists have mentioned nothing since the Birth of our Savior
Jesus Christ, but of his flight into Egypt of his return to Nazareth, and of
finding Him at the Age of Twelve Years Old among the Doctors of the Law in the
Temple of Jerusalem, they began to write more perticularly his History from his
Baptism, and the Preaching of St. John the Baptist, relating all along what our
Savior did, and spoke from that time to his Death; and then of the glorious
circumstances of his Resurrection, and at last of his Triumphant Ascension into
Heaven.

Tiberus abandoned Elius Sejanus to the fury of the Roman People, who could no
longer endure the Injustice and Cruelties of this insolent Favorite. The Senate
The Death of Sejanus.
condemned him to die, and his Body to be draged through the Streets. From
Christ 36.

Not long after, Tiberius, worn out with Tiberius his Death.
old Age and Debaucheries died, leaving no Issue; so Caius Caligula, the Son of
Cailus Caligula.
Germanicus came to the Empire, with the applause of Senate and People, as well
by reason this Prince appeared at first endeued with good Qualities, as also
for the Meof his Father Germanicus, who was in great esteem by the Romans.

The Martirdom of St. Steven, the Baptizing of the Eunuch of Candace Queen of
Ethiopia; the Conversion of the Samaritans and of Saul, called afterward Paul,
are to be read in the Acts of the Apostles. From Christ 39.

Caligula discovering his own cruel The Horid Life of Caligula.
Nature, gave himself up to all kinds of Debaucheries, Injustice and Cruelty,
and to such an insolent Pride, that he caused Adoration and Sacrifice to be
made to his Images: He likewise commanded one to be set up in the Temple of
Jerusalem, which occasioned that miserable Nation to be reduced to a most
lamentable condition. At length the World not being able longer to endure this
Monster, he His Death
was killed by the Conspiracy of the Senate, with his most familiar Domestics.
From Christ 40.

Claudius his Uncle, Brother to Germanicus Claudius his Successor.
succeeded him.

Agrippa Son to Aristobulus, and Grandson Agrippa King of the Jews.
to Herod the Great, had been Favorite to Galigua; he was also in great favor
with Claudius, so that he possessed all that his Grandfather enjoyed with the
Title of the Kingdom excepting Cesarea, where the Roman Governor made his usual
Residence. From Christ 42.

This King being come to Jerusalem, did The Death of St. James. Agrippas' s
Death.
there cut off St. James his Head, and imprisoned St. Peter; concerning which,
with the unfortunate end of Agrippa, is fully set down in the Acts of the
Apostles.

Claudius subdued Great Britain and Triumphed for it. From Christ. 43.

The Faithful Disciples of Jesus Christ The nam^ of Christians. The Voyages of
St. Paul and Barnabas.
increasing, began to be called Christians, which first happened at Antioach;
St. Paul and St. Barnabas having the care of that flourishing Church. The
Voyages of those two Apostles, the Miracles that attended them; their Preaching
with their happy Success, are at large described in the Acts of the Apostles,
where likewise is to be read the dispute of the pretended necessity of
Circumcision, which was decided by the Apostles, and the Elders of the Church
of Jerusalem at a Counsel held there. From Christ 49.

Claudius died Poisoned by his second The Death of Claudius.
Wife Agripina, who was his Neice: She had by her first Husband Domitius, a Son
called Nero, who by the help and means Nero his Success^r.
of his Mother, came to be Emperor; the Mother and the Son Poisoned Britanicus,
whom Claudius had by Messalina his first Wife. The Voyages and Travels of St.
Paul, and his Imprisonment, are at large set down in the Acts of the Apostles.
From Christ 58.

Young Agrippa, Son to him who died, Young Agrippa King of the Jews.
struck by an Angel, was placed on the Throne of his Father, by Nero: This
young King took away the High Priesthood from Ananias, because he had put to
Death St. James, the Son of Alpheus, The Death of St. James the Son of Alpheus.
whose Sanctity was so highly revered by the Jews, that Josephus attributes to
his Death, all the misfortunes that happened to that Nation.

Nero, who had appeared Wise, Just Neros' s Debauches and Cruelties.
and Clement for the first Five Years of his Reign, afterward gave himself up
to all kind of Impieties, Injustice, and Cruelties; killed his Wife Octavia,
and Seneca his Tutor, with many other persons of Quality, Colonia Agripina.
and at last his own Mother Agripina; it was she who founded a Colony on the
Rhine, that still retains her Name.

In the mean time Corbulon maintained Corbulons Exploits in Armenia.
with Glory, the Honor of the Roman Empire in Armenia, and forced Tyridates,
Tyridates at Rome.
Brother of Volgeses, King of the Parthians, to come to Rome, and there to take
the Title of King, and his Crown from the hands of the Emperor.

In Great Britain the Romans did not succeed The War in Great Britain. Bonduca.
so happily; for the Britains revolted under the Conduct of their Queen
Bonduca, and though this brave Princess was killed in a Battle, the Peace made
afterward was most shameful to the Romans* From Christ 61. Nero burns Rome.


Nero burnt Rome, and accused the Christians to have been the Incendiaries: And
under that pretense, raised a most cruel Persecutes the Christians. The War
against the Jews.
Persecution against them. From Christ 65.

The War against the Jews began upon the occasion of opposing the Roman
Officers, who exacted very great Tributes from that miserable Nation.

Cestius Gallus besieged Jerusalem, took The Siege of Jerusalem.
the lower part of the City; but on a sudden he raised the Siege, without any
apparent Cause: But Heaven decreed it so, to save the Christian Church, which
retired for safety to a little Village called Pella, a little beyond the River
Jordan. From Christ 66.

In the mean time Nero went into Greece, Nero in Greece.
where he made himself as despicable as he was at Rome; exposing his Person and
Dignity upon Theaters, and at Races* where he played the Comedian, and the
Charrioteer. He attempted, but in vain, to cut the Isthmus of Corinth, to join
the two Seas, the Ionian, and the Aegrean. From Christ 67.

Upon the News of the Revolt of his Armies in the West, he returned to Rome;
where finding himself at last abandoned, even by all the World, he fled basely,
then fell into Despair, stabbed himself, and Nero' s Death.
died. From Christ 68.

Sergius Galba, already proclaimed Emperor Galba his Successor.
by the Army, in Spain, and in Gaul, came to Rome, and was there received as
Emperor, by the Senate, and the People of Rome.

Most Ecclesiastic Writers remark, about this time the Martyrdom of St. Peter,
and St. Paul. It is most certain, that they sealed their Faith and Doctrine, by
the effusion of their Blood; but cannot tell exactly in what Year.

Clementius Romanus, is the only ancient Writer, who mentions their Martyrdom,
says nothing more in his Epistle to the Corinthians, but that they suffered
under the Emperors, without naming which of them. From Christ 69.

Galba aged Seventy four Years, having not Reigned one complete Year, was
killed Galba killed by Otho his Successor
by Otho; who by that means seized on the Empire, yet Reigned a shorter time
than his Predecessor: For Vitellius being proclaimed Emperor by the Army in
Germany, being come into Italy, the two Competitors fought a Battle at Brebia,
in Gaule-Cisalpine; where Otho being worsted, would Otho overcome and killed.
not tempt his Fortune a second time, but killed himself, and left Vitellius
Master of the Empire. From Christ 70.

But the Armies of the East having given up the Empire to their General
Vespatian, his Lieutenants in Italy, pressed Vitellius so forcibly, that having
defeated his Vitellius killed.
Army, they took him Prisoner in Rome, and there killed him.

Vespatian coming into Italy, and finding Vespatian Emperor.
the Business done, was received at Rome with great applause, by the Senate and
People; joyful to find themselves delivered from those last Emperors, whose
scandalous Reputation caused all* Nations to dread their Government.

Vespatian, in Nero's Reign, had begun a The War against the Jews.
War against the Jews: He had defeated their Forces in the Field, took all
their Towns, except Jerusalem, which he besieged: Coming into Italy, he left
his Son Titus to make an end of that War; which The Ruin of Jerusalem.
he did, by taking, and destroying Jerusalem.

The dreadful Calamities that happened to that miserable City, during the
Siege, by the unnatural Divisions of their Fellow-Citizens; with the rest of
that lamentable Tragic Story, may be read with horror in Josephus's Book, who
was an Eyewitness of the Ruin of his Country.

The Roman Historians make mention of The Triumph of Titus.
the magnificent Triumph Titus made, at his Return to Rome. From Christ 71.

Vespatian Reigned Nine Years; worthy Vespatian his Death.
of great Praise in all things, except his A^^rice.

His Son Titus, styled, The Delight of Mankind, Titus his Successor.
succeeded him. While he applied himself to make his Reign perfectly happy, a
dreadful Fire wasted Rome, and another at Campania, by the Fire broke out at
Vesuvius.

These two Misfortunes gave occasion to the good Emperor, to bestow his
Liberality to a great Number of miserable People, whom these Accidents had
reduced to extreme Poverty. From Christ 79.

Titus having Reigned but two Years, died, bewailing himself, that his Life was
Titus' s Death.
taken away so soon, protesting he had done but one thing to be repented of:
Which made some believe, that it was to have associated his Brother Domitian to
the Domitian his Successor
Empire; who was endowed with as many ill Qualities, as Titus was possessed with
good ones. He was covetous, unjust, and most His ill Qualities.
cruel to the Romans in general, and to the Christians in particular; who felt
it very much all the time of his Reign.

He put to Death a great Number of the Noblest Citizens, and plundered the
Goods of the richest Families. From Christ 81.

He raised up a bloody Persecution among He persecutes the Christians.
the Christians. In the Number of those who were Crowned with Martyrdom, Lynus,
and Cletus, Bishops of Rome, Lynus and Cletus, Bishops of Rome.
gave the Example of a constant Faith to their Flocks, sealing it by shedding
of their Blood. From Christ 83.

The Ecclesiastical History sets down the Martyrdom of St. John the Evangelist,
at St. John the Evangelist.
that time: He was brought from Asia to Rome, where being thrown into a
Cauldron of boiling Oil, he came out of it safe and well. He was banished to
the Isle of Patmos.

About the end of Domitian's Reign, Anacletus Anacletus Bishop of Rome.
also received the Crown of Martyrdom. From Christ 90.

A Paper, containing the List of those whom Domitian intended to put to Death,
fallen by chance into the Hands of his Wife; she seeing her Name at the Head of
it, prevented his Design, by causing him to be killed by those whom he had
Domitian his Death.
destined for Death. From Christ 96.

Nerva, his Successor, a Person of high Nerva his Successor.
Desert, was proclaimed Emperor by the Conspirators, and received with great
Joy by the Senate and People.

He Reigned like a wise and just Prince, one Year and four Months; at the end
of which he died, Aged Sixty six Years, leaving His Death. Trajan his Successor.
the Empire to Trajan, whom he Adopted.

The Ecclesiastical History makes the Death of St. John the Evangelist to
happen The Death of St. John the Evangelist.
at the end of that Age: Yet there is no Certainty of the Time of his Death,
any more than of the rest of the Apostles.

The Learned Men of this Age, besides Learned Men.
those who were remarked before, were Persius, Propertius, Seneca the
Tragedian, Seneca the Philosopher, Petronius Arbiter Silius Italicus, Martial,
Juvenal, Statius, Pliny the Ancient, Quintilian the Orator, Strabo the
Historian and Geographer. Likewise Pomponius Mela, and Solinus.

Among the Christians, Clement Bishop of Rome, was Author of an Epistle to the
Corinthians, which is extant. There are also some Epistles under the Name of
Ignatius, Bishop of Antioch: Yet many learned Critics doubt of their Truth.
There is one of Polycarpus, Bishop of Smirna, to the Philippians.

The Heretics of that Age were the Nicholaits, whose Author was never known.
Menander the Disciple of Simon the Magician. Cerinthus and Elion, Enemies to
the Divinity of Jesus Christ.

The Second Age
BEgins with the Persecution Trajan raised The Christians persecuted. Clement
Bishop of Rome.
against the Christians.

Clement, Bishop of Rome, after fifteen Years Confinement to Chersonesus
Taurick, received there the Crown of Martyrdom. From Christ 101.

Trajan spent the five following Years in The War against the Daces.
the War against the Daces. It proved a very glorious War to him, having
overcome many times that Nation; insomuch, that their King Decebalus killed
himself out of Despair. From Christ 106.

Pliny the younger, Pro-Consul of Bythinia, writ in favor of the Christians 3*
yet the Persecution continued against them.

Ignatius, the Colleague of Evodius, in the Episcopal See of Antioch, being
brought to Ignatius Martyr.
Rome; was there Crowned Martyr. From Christ 107.

Trajan employed the nine following Years in the War against the Parthians; War
against the Parthians. Trajan' s Conquests.
over whom, and their Allies, he conquered Mesopotamia, Armenia, part of
Arabia, and all that is beyond Tygris, even to India: But finding it was
impossible to keep all those Countries, he restored to the Parthians all that
lay beyond Tygris; giving them for their King Parthamasparus, of the Blood of
the Arsacides, on whom he placed, with his own Hands, the Diadem; after he had
obliged him to swear Fealty to the Romans. From Christ 116.

Evaristus Bishop of Rome, having been Bishops of Rome.
Crowned Martyr in the Eighth Year of this Age: In which time also his
Successor Alexander had the same Happiness.

Trajan returning from all his Conquests died at Selinonta in Cilicia. With his
great Trajan' s Death.
good Qualities, he was endowed with no small Vices: For he was given to
Drunkenness, and to most abominable Sins against Nature, and was very cruel
against the Christians. From Christ 1117.

The Learned Men in his time, were Learned Men.
Plutarch his Master, Pliny the Younger, Suctonius, Florus, the two Historians,
Aulus Gellius, Lucius Epictetus, an excellent Moral Philosopher, and Galen the
famous Physician.

Aelius Adrianus, Adopted by Trajan, succeeded Adrianus Successor to Trajan.
him in the Empire. In the Persecution which he carried on against the
Christians, Sixtus Bishop of Rome, Successor to Bishops of Rome.
Alexander, was enrolled among the Martyrs. From Christ 120.

The Roman Empire flourishing in Peace, Adrian took a Journey to visit all his
Provinces. While he was in the Eastern parts, he rebuilt Jerusalem, and called
it Aelia, Adrian rebuilds Jerusalem.
from his own Name: And in derision and scorn to the Jews, he caused the Figure
of a Hog to be set on their Gates. He erected a Temple to Jupiter, in the very
place where had been the Temple of the true God.

And to express the like scorn and hatred toward the Christians, he also built
a Temple in Venus on Mount Calvary; and another to Adonis at Bethlem, in the
same place where Jesus Christ was born. From Christ 135.

Adrian died of a Bloody Flux. His good Adrian' s Death.
Qualities were defiled by the same Vices that dishonored the Reputation of
his Predecessor.

Antinous, a Boy whom he loved, being dead, he was so shameless to make his
Subjects pay him Divine Worship. From Christ 138.

Titus Aurelius Antoninus, Adopted by Adrian, Antoninus Pius his Successor.
succeeded him: He was Sur-named Pius, by reason of his sweet Disposition and
Goodness. Nevertheless, the Persecution continuing, many Christians suffered
Martyrdom; and among the rest, Thelesphorus Bishops of Rome.
Bishop of Rome, Successor to Sixtus and Higinus, and after him, Pius, the
Successor of Higinus. From Christ 150.

At length Antoninus, persuaded of the Innocence of the Christians, caused the
Persecution to cease; moved to it by two excellent Apologies, addressed to him
by Justin the Christian Philosopher. From Christ 151.

The Peace of the Church, as it was outwardly disturbed, so it was inwardly
perplexed by Heretics; that is to say, by the Heretics. Gnostics Saturninus.
Bazilides.
Gnostics, followers of Carpocrates, to whom were attributed most detestable
Opinions: Saturninus, and Bazilides, Disciples of Menander; as he, so were they
Enemies to Jesus Christ.

Tatien, Author of the Encratites, or Continents, Encratites
a Sect very austere in their way of Living.

Montanus, the Disciple of Tatien, with Montanists.
his two Prophetesses, Maximilla and Priscilla. His Followers were Cataphriges;
because their Errors began to spread in Phrygia; but they called themselves
Cathares, in regard of their pretended Purity of Life; boasting, with their
Master, they had received a more abundant Effusion of the Holy Ghost, than the
Apostles ever had.

Papius, Bishop of Hieropolis, with his Chiliasts, had less dangerous Opinions.
Chiliasts.


Antoninus died, Aged more than Seventy Antoninus' ^ Death
Years. From Christ 261.

Marcus Aurelius, whom Antoninus had Marcus Aurelius, and Lucius Verus,
Successors. Anicetus Bishop of Rome.
Adopted; and Lucius Verus, Adopted by Aurelius, succeeded him.

Anicetus Bishop of Rome, Justin the Apologist for the Christians, with a great
Number of others, were Crowned Martyrs, in the Persecution Marcus Aurelius
raised up against them. From Christ 162. War against the Parthians.


In the beginning of his Reign, he had sent his Colleague to make War against
the Parthians; but Lucius Verus, a debauched Man, staying at Antioch to take
his Pleasures, sent his Lieutenants upon that Expedition; which proved very
successful to the Romans; the Parthians having been defeated in many
Rencounters. From Christ 165.

Polycarpus Bishop of Smirna, and Disciple St. Polycarp.
of St. John the Evangelist, ended his long Life by a glorious Martyrdom.

In like manner suffered Photinus Bishop Martyrs of Lions.
of Lions; where many of his Flock, instructed by him in their Faith, received
the same Happiness. From Christ 167.

Lucius Verus died as he came back from Lucius Verus' s Death.
Illyria, with Marcus Aurelius. After his Death, Marcus Aurelius found him
better disposed to receive the Apologies presented Apologies for the Christians.
to him, by Meliton Bishop of Sardis, and the Philosopher Athenag^ras, who so
far prevailed to mitigate the Persecution: Yet the Idolaters persevered to
sacrifice many Christians to their Hate, even at Rome, Bishops of Rome.
where Soter, Bishop, and Successor to Anicetus, suffered Martyrdom. From
Christ 170.

The Persecution, at length, wholly ceased, The Persecution ceases.
by the miraculous help that Aurelius received from Heaven, by the fervent
Prayers of the Christians, which composed a Legion of the Army he had brought
to fight against the Macromans.

This Legion was called the Thunderers; The Thundering Legion.
because it had prevailed with Heaven to extirpate the Barbarians by a Tempest,
that discharged itself only upon them, without falling on the Romans. From
Christ 173.

Nevertheless Aurelius was forced to quit that War, in order to compose a Civil
A Civil War.
War, broke out in Syria, by the Pro-Consul Cassius.

Aurelius having happily concluded it, The Exploit of Marcus Aurelius.
returned to the Northern Parts, against the Germans, Panonians, and
Sarmatians; all which he overcame with great Glory.

He died as he lived, with that Constancy Marcus Aurelius' s Death.
and Resolution, worthy a Stoic Philosopher, as he professed himself to be.
From Christ 180.

His Son Commodus succeeded him in the Commodus' s Son and Successor.
Empire, but not in his Virtues.

The first five Years of his Reign, were only remarkable for excessive
Debaucheries. From Christ 185.

However, the Church enjoying Peace.

Eleutherius, Successor to Soter Bishop of Bishops of Rome.
Rome, died of a Natural Death. He was the first Bishop of that City, who died
so.

Many Heretics disturbed this outward Heretics.
Peace, by their extravagant Opinions, such as were those of the Adamites,
Abelites, Sethites, Ophytes, and Cainites, with others more dangerous; as those
of Theod^sien, of Praxeus, Hermogenes, and of Artem^n, Enemies to the Divinity
of Jesus Christ.

Tertullian, a Priest of Lions, and Irenaeus, Tertullian. Irenaeus.
Bishop of Lions, disputed on the contrary, for the true Doctrine, by their
Learned Works; but the first had the Misfortune to yield to the Errors of
Montanus, and the Encratites.

The Learned Men who flourished since Trajan to this time, were Appian, Aelian,
Learned Men.
Pausanias, Justin the Abreviator of Trogus Pompeius, Historians. Ptolomy, the
Geographer. Diogenes Laertius, Athneus, Apuleus, Julius Pollux, Maximus of
Tire, Rhetoricians, and Philosophers. Marullus the Poet. Among the Christians
Egesipus, the Historian.

In the last Seven Years of Commodus, the Empire was rendered desolate by the
Plague and Famine; and Rome particularly by a horrible Fire, and by a terrible
Earthquake.

This Monster of a Prince, being not in the least reclaimed by all these
Calamities, still persevered in his most dissolute Debauches, till the World
being no longer able to suffer them, he was poisoned, and Commodus' s Death.
then strangled by a Faction of his own Domestics. From Christ 192.

Helvius Pertinax, chosen by the Conspirators Pertinax his Successor.
to succeed him, was received with Joy by the Senate and People, by reason of
his good Qualities, which recompensed the Meanness of his Birth: But the
Praetorian Bands, suffering with Regret, the want of those licentious
Liberties, to which they had been accustomed during the former Reign, killed
him within less than He is killed.
three Months.

After that, the Murderers retired, and fortified themselves in their Camp,
crying out, That the Empire was to be sold: For in effect, they bestowed it on
Didius Julianus, Didius Julianus his Successor.
who gave them more Money than was offered them by his Competitor Sulpitius,
Son-in-Law to Pertinax: So the Senate and People chose an Emperor after this
manner, who in himself was very debauched. From Christ 193.

In the mean time, three Generals of the Armies were proclaimed Emperors in
three Three other Emperors.
several Provinces; Pescenius Niger, in Syria; Albinus, in Great Britain;
Septimus Severus, in Illyria, and Panonia.

Severus being more politic than the others, came into Italy, with design (as
he said) to incite the People to Revenge the Death of Pertinax. The Senate,
encouraged by his Conduct, Arraigned, and Condemned Didius Julianus, who was
executed; The Death of Didius Julianus. Severus Emperor.
so that Severus coming to Rome, was there received, and acknowledged Emperor,
by the Senate and People.

The Year following he went into the East against Niger, who was killed, after
The Death of Niger.
he had been overcome in a Battle in Cilicia. From Christ 194.

At that time there arose a Dispute touching The Dispute about Easter Day.
the Day of the Celebration of Easter, between Victor Bishop of Rome, and the
Bishops of Asia: The Bishop of Rome would have it celebrated the Sunday after
the 14th of the New Moon of March. The others, to be celebrated on the 14th of
that Moon, precisely on that Day of the Week it should happen: From thence they
were called, the Quarto Decimans. Quarto Decimans


Though the Business was of no great Importance, yet the learned Churchmen were
so inflamed by the Dispute, that reciprocal Excommunations past between Victor
Bishop of Rome, and the Asian Bishops. From Christ 197.

Though Severus was overcome by Niger, yet he had the good Fortune to defeat
Albinus, who afterward killed himself near The Death of Albinus
Lions; the Battle between them was so bloody, that the River Arar thereby
changed its Color, and was since called Sangone, and by abbreviation Saone.
From Christ 198.

The City of Lions was of Albinus's side, even all the Inhabitants were
Christians.

Severus took that occasion to persecute Severus persecutes the Christians. St.
Ireneus Martyr.
the Faithful. He put to Death a great Number at Lions, and among them their
holy Bishop Ireneus.

Severus spent the two last Years of this Age, in making War against the
Parthians; from whom he took Babylon, Ctesiphonte, and all Mesopotamia. From
Christ 200.

The Third Age.
SEverus in his Return from that War, came to Egypt, where he put to Death
Severus ^n Egypt.
many Christians, who were constant in professing their Faith. From Christ 201.

Among others, Leonidas, a Citizen of Leonidas Martyr.
Alexandria, Father to Origin, who was about sixteen Years old; Clement of
Alexandria, Clement.
the famous Master of that renowned Disciple, did fly from the Cruelty of those
Persecutors. From Christ 203.

Tertullian writ his Apologetick, and Minutius Faelix his Octavius; two
excellent Minutius Faelix.
Pieces in favor of the Christians, to defend them against the Calumnies
thrown upon them.

Severus, after he had triumphed at Rome, for his Parthian Conquest, passed
over to Great Britain, to reduce those Islanders Severus in Great Britain.
who had revolted. From Christ 208.

Which he accomplished in one Year's time; and after that, stayed there two
Years, and there died of the Gout; attended He there dies.
with an extreme Grief, occasioned by an inveterate Hatred between his two
Caracalla and Geta his Sons, and Successors.
Sons, Bassianus, Sur-named Caracalla, and Getd. From Christ 211.

These two Brothers came to Rome, by two different Ways, where they were
received by the Senate, and People, to reign together.

But their Hatred increased so highly between them, that the eldest Brother The
eldest kills his Brother.
killed the other in his Mother Julia's Arms. From Christ 213.

Then he put to Death many great Persons, because they would not approve of his
Fratricide. Among others, the famous Civilian Papinian* who being solicited by
Caracalla to defend the Murder he had committed, answered him boldly, That it
was more easy to commit a Crime, than to justify it.

Papinian had for his Contemporaries, Paulus, and Caius, of the same
Profession; Learned Men.
Philostratus, Alexander, Aphroditius, and Censorinus, flourished at that time.

Bassianus Antoninus Caracalla, being very much touched with Remorse for this
horrid Crime, and his other Cruelties, which made him to be hated at Rome, took
occasion to depart from thence, under pretense of making War against the
Parthians. While he was there thus employed, Materianus, Governor of Rome, writ
to advertize him, that there was a Conspiracy against him, of which Macrinus, a
Captain of the Praetorians, was chief. The Letter fell, by chance, into the
Hands of Macrinus; who having perused them, hastened to accomplish his Design,
causing Caracalla to be killed by a Sentinel, and immediately Caracallas's Death
the Sentinel himself was Murchered, that the Conspiracy might not be
discovered; by which means he got to have the principal charge of the Army, and
easily influenced them to proclaim him Emperor. From Christ 217.

Zepherinus Bishop of Rome, and Successor to Victor died that Year.

Macrinus made a Peace with the Parthians, Macrinus his Successor.
and retired to Antioch; while he stayed there with his Son Diadumenes, whom he
had Associated to the Empire, Maesa corrupted the Army in Phaenicia with Money,
and caused a Boy to be Proclaimed Emperor, who was her Grandson by the Daughter
she had of the Emperor Caracalla. Macrinus at first despised that Faction which
was headed only by an Old Woman and a Child; but his Leiutenants having before
been defeated, The Death of Macrinus and Diadumenes.
he himself was afterward slain in a Battle with Diadumenes his Son and
Colleague. So Bassianus better known by the name of Heliogabalus, was first
acknowledged Emperor in the East, and afterward at Rome. Heliogabalus.
From Christ 218.

The World endured this detestable Prince for the space of four Years, at the
end of which, the Horrors of his monstrous Life being become insupportable to
the very Soldiers, they killed him. From His Death*
Christ 222.

His Cousin Germain, Marcus Aurelius, Alexander Severus his Successor.
Alexander Severus, a Prince as Virtuous as his Predecessor had been Vicious,
was chose in his place.

Ulpian an excellent Civilian, and the chiefest of the Praetorian Bands, but an
inveterate Enemy to the Christians, put to Death a great many for confessing
their Faith, among whom was Calistus Successor Bishops of Rome.
to Zepherinus Bishop of Rome.

During the first Six Years of Alexander Severus, the Empire was at Peace. This
Young, but excellent Prince applied himself to redress the disorders which were
introduced into all parts of the Empire, in the time of the former Reigns. From
Chapter 228.

He accumulated to this, the Glory he acquired by his Arms in the War against
War against the Persians.
the Persians. Artaxates, or Artaxerxes, a Prince of that Nation resigned to
him his Soveraignity, after he had overcome and killed in Battle Artaban the
last King of the Parthians, of the race of the Arsacides. The end of the
Arsacides.
From Christ 229.

In this Emperors absence, Urbinus the Prefect of Rome, put to Death another
Urbin, Bishops of Rome.
who was Bishop and succeeded Calistus. From Christ 231.

The War against the Persians lasted three Years, but Alexander concluded it
with very great Glory and advantage to the Romans. The exploits of Alexander
Severus.
He staid some time in the East to set in order those Provinces; then he
returned to Rome to reap the Honor of a Magnificent Triumph, after which he
past over into Gaul to stop the revolt of the Germans. But the Soldiers not
being able to suffer that severity of Discipline, to which he had inured them,
killed him His Death.
before he past over the Rhine. From Chapter 235.

Rome never enjoyed a Prince more accomplished in all kinds of Virtues, but His
Virtues
chiefly for Justice, having exactly practiced, that best of Maxims, which
forbids to do that to another, we would not have done to our selves. It is
believed he had learned it from his Mother Mammea, who had imbued him with that
Moral of Christianity, in which she had been instructed by Origin.

Maximus Successor to Alexander Severus, Maximus his Successor.
and principal Author of his Death, was as Vicious as his Predecessor had been
Virtuous; he persecuted the Christians, of whom he put to Death a great number,
among whom was Pontianus Bishop of Rome, who succeeded Urbin, as also Anteros
Successor to Pontianus. From Christ Bishops of Rome.
236.

The Army in Africa proclaimed for their Emperors their two Generals, the two
Gordians Father and Son, but they The two Gordians, Father and Son Emperors.
were presently killed by Capellinus their Enemy, Governor of Mauritania: In
the mean time the Senate declared Emperors two Senators, Pupienus Maximus, and
Celius Balbinus, to whom to please the Soldiers, they joined the young Gordian
Grandson to one, and Son to the other Gordian, who were killed in Africa.

Maximus quitting the design of making War against the Sarmatians, past into
Italy Their Death
and besieged Aquilia, which held out, for the Emperors declared by the Senate,
bu^ the Soldiers killed him and his Son of the same Name, and of the very same
humo^ of his Father. From Christ 237.

Soon after the Praetorian bands kille^ their two Emperors chose by the Senate
Pupienus and Ballinus Emperors with the young Gordian.
so the young Gordian remained sole Emperor: He was carried to the War against
the Persians, which lasted three Years, and became glorious to the Romans, by
the Conduct of Misetheus, a Person of very great Prudence and Courage, who was
Father-in-law to Gordian: But Philip one of the chifest Officers of the Army,
having poisoned Mizetheus, and persuaded the Soldiers to kill Gordian, the
traterous The Death of Gordian.
Murderer was proclaimed Emperor by the Army. He was an Arabian, though some
Writers style him a Christian, but there Philip his Successor.
was not the least appearance of it, for his Cruelties and Treacheries did not
at that time agree with the Rules of Christianity.

This new Prince made a very advantageous Peace with Sapor King of Persia; then
he came to Rome, where he celebrated with great Magnificence, the Thousandth
The 1000 Year of Rome.
Year from the Foundation of that City. From Christ 247.

The Goths, a People originally of Scy^hia The Gochs invade the Empire.
past the Danube, and placed themselves on that side of the Lands of the
Empire. There was sent against them Decius, a Person of high Merit, and one of
the Senators: The Army in Panonia, having proclaimed Philip their Emperor, he
with his The Two Philips killed.
Forces marched against Decius, but being come to Verona, his own Soldiers
killed him, while the Praetorian Bands did the like to his Son of the same
Name, whom he left at Rome.

So Decius being acknowledged Emperor Decius Emperor.
by the Armies, he was also declared with great Joy by the Senate and People.
He was endued with excellent Qualities, but he was an utter Enemy to the
Christians, against whom he stirred up a most cruel The Persecution of the
Christians Bishop of Rome.
Persecution; among a great number of Martyrs he made to suffer, was Fabian
Bishop of Rome, Successor to Antheros Before Christ 250.

This persecution though it was very bloody, yet it lasted not long; for this
cruel Emperor was slain in the War against The Death of Decius.
the Goths in Panonia, one part of the Army being cut to pieces by the
Barbarians; Gallus his Successor.
the other part who had not fought, proclaimed Gallus Emperor, who was their
chief Commander. Corelius, Bishop of Bishops of Rome.
Rome, Successor to Fabian, Sealed by Faith the effusion of his Blood. From
Christ 352.

Under the Pentificat of this Cornelius, the The first Schism at Rome.
first Schism broke out in the Church of Rome. Novatus a Priest of Carthage
being come to Rome, had that Interest to cause the Novatian Priest to be
elected Bishop, in opposition to Cornelius, pretending he had been too
indulgent in admitting to the Peace of the Church, those who were fallen from
Christianity, in the time of the Persecution.

Gallus and Volutianus his Son and Colleague Gallus and Valutianus Emperor.
in the Empire, gave themselves up to all pleasure at Rome, while the Persians
ravaged Syria, took and plundered Antioch.

And the Goths did the like in Greece, yet the latter were most of them cut in
pieces by the Romans, under the conduct of Aemilianus, who after this glorious
exploit, Aemilianus Emperor. The Death of Gallus and Volutianus. And of
Aemilianus. Valerian Emperor.
was proclaimed Emperor by the victorious Army. Gallus and Volutianus left
Rome, and marched together to fight him, but before the two Armies could meet,
both Father and Son were killed by their own Soldiers. Aemilianus, was
afterward overcome and slain in Battle by Valerian, who was then acknowledged
Emperor. From Christ 253.

He cruelly persecuted the Christians, and among the great number, he put to
Death for their Faith, was Lucius Bishop of Bishop of Rome.
Rome, Successor to Cornclius; then followed Stephanus and Sixtus the Second,
and in Africa, St. Cyprian Bishop of Carthage; St. Cyprian.
there had been great disputes in Writing between this Holy Man, and Stephanus
Bishop of Rome upon two Subjects; the first concerning the appeal of some
Priests of Africa, addressed to the Sea of Rome, by that means to avoid the
correction of their own Bishops. The other subject was, upon a Question
touching the validity of Baptism administered by Heretics, St. Cyprian being
for the Negative, and Stephanus for the Affirmative.

The famous Origin died in Palestine, The Death of Origin.
where he had retired in a deep Melancholy, because his Bishop Demetrius of
Alexandria had laid to his charge erroneous Opinions.

The Emperor Valerian making War against Valerian made prisoner by the Persians.
the Persians, was overcome and took Prisoner by Sapor their King, who kept him
in a shameful and base Captivity; while Galienus insensible of this high
Disgrace, past his time at Rome in all Pleasure and Luxury, which gave occasion
to many Governors of Provinces, to assume the Title of Emperors, each in his
The 30 Tyrants. Gallienes ki^led.
peculiar Government. They were Thirty in number who were called Tyrants.
Gallienus was killed by the Captains of his Guards, who could no longer endure
his vicious way of living. Claudius the second Cladius the second his Succssor.
Aureolus, one of the Thirty Tyrants killed
was put in his place, and received with Joy by the Senate for his good
Qualities; he went presently against Aureolus, one of the Thirty Tyrants who
Governed Illyria, he overcame him, and slew him in Battle. From Christ 268.

Denis, Bishop of Rome, and Successor to Bishop of Rome.
Sixtus the Second died a Martyr.

Claudius having past into Greece, there defeated a great Army of the
Scythians, who had made an irruption into those parts. All who escapt that
overthrow, retreated to a Mountain; Claudius encompast them with his Army, and
so straightly blocked them up, and kept them from all manner of Provisions,
that the Plague was got among them, from whence it infected the Roman Army,
where many died; The Death of Claudius. Quintilius his Successor. Aurelian
Emperor.
and among the rest, the Emperor Claudius, as also his Brother Quintilius chose
to succeed him by the Army, who upon his Death, set up Aurelianus in his place,
and their choice was approved by the Senate. From Christ 270.

There remained of the Thirty Tyrants only Macrian in Asia the lesser, and
Posthumous Macrian and Posthumous two of the 30 Tyrants. Zenobia.
in Gaul; these two were powerful enough to make the Emperor fear them, bur
Aurelian having overcome them one after the other, marched into Syria against
Zenobia Queen of Palmerina, the Widow of Odenatus; she had the Courage to
maintain for her Sons the Title of Emperors, which her Husband had assumed
while he Reigned. Aurelian highly esteemed the Victory he had obtained over
this brave Warlike Queen; and bringing Overcome.
her to Rome, bound with Chains of Gold, and enriched with precious Stones,
made her the noblest Ornament of his Triumph. From Christ 274.

Aurelian having accomplished all these Affairs, most cruelly persecuted the
Christians, The Christians persecuted. Bishops of Rome.
of whom he put to Death a great number for their Faith, and among the rest,
Faelix Bishop of Rome Successor to Denis.

Aurelian preparing to make War against Aurelian killed.
the Persians, was killed by the Treachery of one of his Secretarys, whom he
had threatened, and who fearing the effect of his menaces, seduced several
Officers of the Army, persuading them that the Emperor designed their Death.

It was very strange that there happened no trouble in the Empire, during an
interregnum of seven Months, in all which time the Army and Senate had
complemented each other about the right of Election; at last the Senate
absolutely refusing to Elect, obliged the Army to name an Emperor, who was
unanimously received, called Claudius Tacitus: He highly Claudius Tacitus
Emperor. His Death. Florian his Successor. Probus Emperor.
deserved it for his great parts, but the Empire enjoyed him only Seven Months;
his Brother Florian who succeeded him, Reigned but Twenty Days. From Chapter 277.

Aurelius Probus their Successor, was generally approved by all the Noble
Degrees of the Empire with great reason, being endued with exceeding rare
Qualities, suitable to his Name.

During the five Years he Reigned, he suppressed all the designs of those who
affected Tyranny in several Provinces of the Empire, and drove out of its
limits all the Barbarians, who infested them: But the Soldiers not being able
to endure that great severity of Discipline, to which he restrained them,
killed him, and put in His Death.
his place Carus, Prefect of the Praetorian Bands, who associated to the
Empire his Carinus and Numerianus Emperors.
Sons Carinus and Numerianus. From Christ 282.

The Persecution being revived against the Christians, Eutichius Bishop of
Rome, Bishops of Rome.
and Successor of Faelix suffered Martyrdom.

Carus pursued the design of Probus, and obtained great advantages over them;
but as he was resolving to pursue them with more Force and Vigor, he fell sick
and The Death of Carus.
died, whether of his Sickness, or by a Fright occasioned by a dreadful Tempest
of Thunder, which killed many of his Army, and wept so much for the death of
his Father, that he was fain to be carried in a close Litter: Aper his
Father-in-law who took Numerianus killed.
that occasion to kill him secretly, hoping by that means to attain to the
Empire. He concealed this Murder for some days, but it being discovered by the
nauseous smell of the dead Body, the Soldiers killed the Murderer, and
proclaimed Emperor Dioclesian Emperor.
one of their chiefs called Diocles, who adding some Letters to his Name;
called himself Dioclesian.

This new Prince marched presently against Charinus, the Son of Carus, who
being informed of what had happened in the East, took his way on that side to
fight his Competitor. They met in Panonia, where Charinus was overcome and
killed in Battle; so Dioclesian being Conqueror, was received Emperor by the
Senate Maximinian, Hercules Associates to the Empire. Maximinian Galerus and
Constantius Chlorus.
and People, and with their Consent associated to the Empire Maximinian
Hercules. Four years after the two Emperors took the Title of Caesar's,
Dioclesian, Maximinian Galerus, Armentarius. Maximinian took Constantius
Chlorus, the great Grandchild of the Emperor Claudius the Second. In the
terrible persecution that Dioclesian raised up against the Christians, as
infinite number of the Faithful suffered Martyrdom, and amongst them Caius the
Successor to Eutychius Bishop of Rome. From Bishop of Rome.
Christ 296.

The four Princes Triumphed magnificently The Triumph of the Four Princes.
at Rome, having victoriously driven out the Barbarians, each of them from that
part of the Empire, where they waged War against them. From Christ 298.

This Age was pestered with many Heretics; Heretics.
among others Sabellius, an Enemy Sabellius.
to the Holy Trinity: In like manner was Paul of Samosatus Bishop of Antioch.
Paul of Samosatus. Manes.
Manes, who asserted two new Principles, she one Good and the other Bad. The
Fathers of the Christian Church did not Fathers of the Church.
exactly set down in what Year of this Age Origin died.

Gregorius Thaumaturgius, Bishop of Neocesaria, Gregorius Thaumaturgius.
Arnobius.
Flourished at that time, as also Arnobius who writ against the Gentiles, and
against Porphyrius, an Apostate to Christianity, Jamblicus was his Disciple.
The Pagan Authors.
most remarkable Historians of this Age were Herodian, who writ in Greek Eight
Herodian.
Books of the Roman Emperors. Dion Dion Cassian.
Cassian writ also in Greek in the time of Severus, a Roman History, comprising
the space of 981 Years. Julius, Capitolinus, Aelius, Lampridius, Flavius,
Vopiscus, Spartianus, Vulcatius, Gallicanus, who were almost all contemporary
Authors of the Imperial History.

The Fourth Age.
THe Persecution against the Christians Mercellinus Bishop of Rome.
still increasing, Marcellinus Bishop of Rome persevering in his Sufferings,
obtained a crown of Martyrdom, From Ch, 301. says Theodoret, against what some
had Writ, that he fell into Idolatry, as he confessed in the Council of Sinuessa
before 300 Bishops there present; but there is little likelihood, that in the
time of so terrible a Persecution, when the poor Christians hid themselves,
that so many Bishops could be assembled. From Christ 304.

By the resigning of Dioclesian, and of Dioclesian and Maximian resign the
Empire. Constantius Chlorus. Maximinian Galerus. Severus and Maximin Emperor.
Maximinian Hercules, the Empire remained in the power of Maximinian Galerus;
Armentarius and Constantius Chlorus, who divided it in that manner, that
Maximinian had the Provinces of the East, and Chlorus those of the West.
Maximinian Galerus adopted his two Nephews Caesar's, Severus and Maximin, at the
very same time that Maxentius the supposed Son of Maximinian Hercules made
himself Master of Rome, and there stood for Emperor; so that when Severus came
to Besige it, he found him so very strong, that he was forced to raise his
Siege, retreating to Ravenna, where Maxentius Besieged him. From Chapter 306.

These disorders caused Maximinian Hercules to write to Diocletian, to persuade
him to reassume the command of the Empire; but Dioclesian answered him like a
Philosopher, and remained in his retired way of Life, yet Maximinian left his
Retirement, and having reassumed the Marks and Title of Emperor, came to the
Siege of Ravenna, and under pretense of a Treaty of Peace, to bring Severus out
of the City, and having him in his power, he caused him to be Strangled; but as
he intreagued Severus strangled.
with the Soldiers to bring them over to Maxentius, they detesting his base
proceedings, expelled him shamefully. He fled into Gaul to Constantine,
Constantius Chlorus the Father of Constantine being dead in great Britain, his
Son had there been Constantin Emperor.
saluted Emperor by the Army, then having past into Gaul, he was there
acknowledged with the same Title; his Wife Minervina was then dead, by whom he
had a Son named Crispus; he not only received Maximinian into his favor, but
made him his Father-in-law, by marrying his Daughter Fausta: But Maximinian
having taken measures to seduce the Army of Constantine, his own Daughter to
whom he had imparted his designs, discovered it to her Husband, so the Traitor
was obliged to fly, but being followed very close, he was at last taken in the
City of Marseilles, where he was strangled either by Maximinian strangled.
the command of Constantine, or that he strangled himself out of Despair. From
Christ 309.

In the mean time Maxentius was Master of Rome and all Italy, where he
exercised very great Tyrannies, especially against the Bishop of Rome.
Christians; he put to death Marcellus, Successor to Marcellinus, but Eusebius
who succeeded Marcellus, died of a fit of Sickness at the end of two Years,
having held the Sea but two Years. From Christ 311. The (...) agai^s^
Constantin and Maxentius. The Vision of the Cross.


The Romans wearied with the Tyranny of Maxentius, sent for Constantine to help
them. It is said that being on his way, he beheld the Vision of a Cross shining
with a most glorious Light, that appeared to him in the Air at Noonday, with
an Inscription that promised him Victory, which made him send for Rheticius
Bishop of Autune, he having seen the same Vision near that City, so that by the
care of that Holy Bishop, Constantin being fully instructed in the truth of
Christianity, made public profession of it; all the Cities of Italy which he
found in his way surrendered voluntarily. At his approach to Rome, there was a
Bloody Battle between him and Maxentius, in which after a vigorous Resistance,
Maxentius was overcome Maxentius' s Death. Constantin Emperor.
and slain; so that Constantine was received with Triumph at Rome, and with a
general Joy was acknowledged Emperor throughout the Western parts.

It was in this remarkable year that the Roman Indiction began, which was the
The Roman Indiction.
Revolution of Fifteen Years, beginning at the year of Rome 1065, the number
that makes Seventy one Fifteens.

After the Death of Severus, Maximinian Galerus had created Caesar Licinius,
his old Caesar Licinius.
Companion in Arms; a little while after Galerus died of the lousie Disease, so
the Empire was divided between Constantine, who had all the Western parts
except Illyria and Panonia; Licinius was master of Greece and Thrace, and
Maximin possessed the Provinces of Asia.

Licinius having espoused Constantia the Sister of Constantine, these two
Emperors made an Edict in favor of the Christians, The Death of Maximin.
Maximin continuing to persecute them, till at length he died at Tharsus of a
languishing Disease. The Provinces under his Government fell to Licinius; then
Constantine and Licinius condemned by an Edict the memory of Maximin as a
Tyrant. From Christ 314.

Dioclesian died the Year before of a natural Dioclesians' s Death.
Distemper, as some Write, or as others will have it, that he poisoned himself
out of despair, to find the Christians were so much favored by the two
Emperors.

Melchiades Bishop of Rome died the same Bishops of Rome.
Year, he had been appointed with some other Bishops of Italy by Constantine,
to examine The Donatists.
the Schism of the Donatists in Africa, who refused to acknowledge Cecilian
Bishop of Carthage, because he had been put in the place of Mensurius, accused
to have delivered the Books of Holy Writ to the Idolaters, during the
Persecution.

Constantine employed the following ten The Exploits of Constantine.
Years, in several Expeditions against the Barbarians, who attacked the
Frontier Provinces of the Empire; in all which he succeeded with great Glory:
For he defeated them in all Rencounters, so that they were disabled to make any
further Attempts against him.

Licinius, who had only favored the Christians, in Complaisance to
Constantine, discovered at length his Aversion to them: Whereupon Constantine
took that occasion The Quarrel between Constantine and Licinius.
to fall out with him. This Rupture brought them to a Battle, in which Licinius
was overcome. Constantine pardoned him, because he was his Brother-in-Law: But
Licinius finding himself freed from this first Misfortune, raised another Army,
and was again defeated, near Chalcedon. At that time Constantine compelled him
to resign his part of the Empire: The Vanquished taking it for a Favor, that
the Conqueror had given him his Life, suffering him to live at Thessalonica.

But as he could not be satisfied to live in Peace, and as he still endeavored
by his secret Practices, to set up his Party again, Constantine ordered him to
be strangled. The Death of Licinius
From Christ 324.

Thus Constantine Reigned sole Emperor, Constantine sole Emperor*
acknowledged as well in the East, as in the West.

The Empire being then at Peace, Constantine applied himself to make Justice
and Piety flourish; and endeavored to give that Peace and Quiet to the Church,
she had not 'till then enjoyed; having been not only turmoil'd abroad, by the
Persecutions of Idolaters, but harrass'd at home by the Opinions of Heretics;
particularly of those who were called Arrians, from Arrius the Heretic.
the Name of Arrius, a Priest of Alexandria, an Enemy to the Divinity of Jesus
Christ.

To redress this intestine Disorder of the The Council of Nice.
Church, Constantine commanded a Council to be assembled, of a great Number of
Bishops, in the City of Nice, in Bythinia. From Christ 325.

There they condemned the Errors of Arrius condemned.
Arrius, and consequently made Canons of Discipline, and Ecclesiastical Polity:
Particularly they ordained the Paschal Cycle, The Paschal Cycle, or the Golden
Number.
called the Golden Number, containing the Lunary Revolutions, completed in
Nineteen Years; to the end, that by that, all the Churches might regulate their
Celebration of Easter.

This Year was fatal to the Family of Constantine, by the Death of Crispus,
whom The Death* of Crispus, the Son of Constantine.
Constantine had by Minervina, his first Wife: Fausta, his second Wife, having
in vain solicited this young Prince, to gratify the Passion she had for him:
His refusal, made her to accuse him, of soliciting her Chastity. Constantine
unadvisedly believing her, put his Son to Death; and after that, did the like
to Fausta; having discovered her The Death of Fausta, his Wife.
Treachery, by putting her into a Bath, which he caused to be heated boiling
hot: And this to comfort his own Mother, Helena, afflicted to extremity, for
the Death of her Grandchild.

In the mean time, Christianity flourisht, Christianity received.
under the Protection of this mighty Prince; insomuch, that powerful Nations
abroad, embraced the Truth of the Gospel.

The Abyssinians, by the means of Edesius, In the Indies.
and Frumentius, Brothers, whose Father, Meropius, a rich Merchant of Tire, had
brought them young into Abyssinia, when they were grown up Men* they preached
the Gospel with that success, that they built there many stately Churches;
which were approved of by Athenasius, Bishop of Alexandria, who ordained one of
the Brothers, Bishop of those parts; who came from thence, to give him an
Account of what they had done there, relating to the Church.

A Woman, taken in the Wars, by the In Iberia.
Iberians, gave them their first Knowledge of the Gospel: So that when they had
embraced it, they addressed themselves to Constantine; who sent them Preachers
to perfect their Instruction.

He also sent others into Armenia, to Tyridates, In Armenia.
King of that Country, who had been called to the Faith of Christ by a Vision.
From Christ 328.

The two following Years were also very remarkable, from the Foundation of New
Rome; which, from the Name of its Constantinople, New Rome
Founder, was called Constantinople, upon the Bosphorus of Thrace, in the place
where was the ancient Byzantium. There he erected Buildings, as well public as
private; which were so numerous and magnificent, as rendered it not inferior to
ancient* Rome.

He established the same Constitution of Government, with the very same kind of
Magistrates as at Rome, designing that it should be the Seat of the Empire.
From Christ 330.

Constantia, Sister to Constantine, and Widow to Licinius, had, among her
Domestics, a Priest, in outward appearance a Man of Virtue, but proved to be
an Arrian: Constantia dying, recommended him to her Brother, the Emperor. This
Priest having insinuated himself into the Emperor's The Affairs of the Arrians.
Favor, persuaded him, That Arrius had been unjustly condemned; and that he
ought to be heard a second time. Constantine complied, and being deceived by
this Arch-Heretick, he sent Arrius back to his Church in Alexandria.

But Athenasius, who was then Bishop, Athenasius Bishop of Alexandria.
refusing to receive him, the Enemies of Athanasius assembled a Council at
Tire; where he was condemned by the Arrians, who were there very numerous; and
afterward was banished to Treves; where he was kindly received by Constantine,
eldest Son to the Emperor, and by Maximus, Bishop of that City. From Christ 336.

Silvester Bishop of Rome, and Successor Bishops of Rome.
to Miltiades, died.

Arrius triumphing in his Re-establishment, came to Constantinople; where
disposing himself to enter by Force into the Church, he died in a most shameful
manner: As is related by the Ecclesiastical The Death of Arrius.
Writers.

Constantine finding himself very much The Death of Constantine.
weakened, by a Disease that made him to languish for a long time; he was
baptized in the Suburbs of Nicomedia, and died a few Days after.

As Eusebius of Caesarea reports, in his Book of the Life of this Emperor; who
assisted at his Baptism: Which shows the falseness of what others have writ, a
long time since: That Constantine had received this Sacrament at Rome, from the
Hands of Silvister; with all the Circumstances they remarked, as true as the
pretended Donation of Rome; which they allege Constantine made to this Pope,
and to his Successors.

Constantine left behind him three Sons* who, according to their Father's
Testament, shared between them the Empire.

Constantine, the eldest, had the Gauls* His three Sons Emperors.
Spain, Germany, and the Brittannick Isles.

Constance, the second, had Thrace, with all the East, comprizing Egypt.

Constant, the third, Italy, Illyria, Greece, and Africa.

They Reigned in Peace for three Years* at the end of which, Constantine
showing that he was not content with his own share* set upon Constant in his
own Country; their two Armies met, near Aquilia, where Constantine being
killed, before he was The Death of Constantine the Second.
acknowledged, the Provinces under his Rule, submitted themselves to Constant.

Constantine the second, with his Brother Constant, making a constant
Profession of the Faith of the Council of Nice, had prevailed with Constance to
re-establish Athanasius in his Bishopric; but he was again put out by a
Council held at Antioch; the Number of the Arrians prevailing against the
Orthodox Party.

But he being returned to Rome, Bishop Julius, Successor to Marcus, did there
Bishops of Rome.
assemble a Council, who asserted the Innocence of Athanasius.

The Eastern Bishops, who had not been at that Council, did not acquiesce to
it; and therefore called another Council, composed of Bishops of both parts of
the Empire, The Council of Sardis.
to assemble at Sardis, in the upper part of Illyr^a.

Osius, Bishop of Cordova, was there chose to preside over 170 Bishops, who
were there met, as well Eastern as Western: As the Number of the last was
somewhat greater than the first, it was so decreed, that Athanasius should be
re-invested in his Bishopric: But the Eastern Bishops reassembled at
Philippolis, in Thrace, and there Assembled at Philippolis.
made Decrees contrary to those of Sardis. However, Athanasius did not fail to
return to his Church: For Constance could not refuse to re-establish him, by
reason of the pressing Instances that Constant urged in his behalf. Constant
was truly Orthodox as to his Faith, but given up to his Pleasures, neglecting
much the Care of his Affairs, it was easy for Magnentius, one of the chief
Officers of his Army, to take away his Life, and to cause himself to Constant
killed by Magnentius the Tyra^^.
be received Emperor, by the Army, in Rome it self.

Constance having heard the News, while he was making War against the Persians,
made a Peace with them, and created Caesar, his Cousin Gallus, to Govern in his
Gallus Caesar.
Absence in the East, and so marched Westward, against Magnentius. From Christ
350.

This War lasted two Years before the two Armies came to a decisive Battle; at
last it was fought near to Murza in Pannonia. Magnentius was there worsted, but
Magnentius (...) come.
not so much as to hinder him from retreating in good Order, toward Gaul.
Constance followed him, and wholly routed his Army near Lions. The Vanquished
Killed himself.
killed himself out of Despair, after he had with his own Hands killed his
Mother, and some of his nearest Relations. From Christ 353.

Constance thereupon being acknowledged sole Emperor, exercised his Power most
cruelly toward his Cousin Gallus Caesar; The Death of Gallus Caesar.
whom he put to Death upon light grounded Suspicions; and even against the
Orthodox Bishops, who agreed to the Decisions of the Council of Nice; to which
Constance was averse, being an Arrian: So Constance an Arrian.
that he expelled Athanasius from his See, and persecuted him, even to the
Hazard of his Life. From Christ 355.

They put in his place a most wicked Man, called Georgius, who committed a
thousand Mischiefs in that Church.

Liberius was likewise expelled at the Sea of Rome, because he had supported
Athanasius. Bishops of Rome.


In the place of Liberius, they put the Deacon Faelix, upon Condition he should
favor the Arrians: He was ordained by three of their Bishops.

The Persecution against the Orthodox Divines was so severe, that Hosius and
Liberius Hosius and Liberius.
were forced to yield, by the Cruelties they suffered in their Exile; and
signed to the Arrian Confessions, framed in the Councils held at Sirmium, in
Pannonia, by the Arrian Bishops.

By this means Liberius got leave to return Liberius re-establish^
to his Church; yet he could not be established there, but with great Violence;
and Faelix opposed him in the same manner. There were many Persons killed on
both sides; and even Faelix himself, according Faelix deposed.
to some Writers; yet others say, that he survived his being deposed.

The Confusion was very great in the Church, by the infinite Number of
Confessions of Faith, which were made in diverse places, of which the most part
of them were Arrians.

To redress these Disorders, two Councils were assembled, one in the East, at
Seleucia; the other in the West, at Rimini. The Council of Seleucia, and of
Rimini.


But in both Councils, the Arrian Bishops being far more numerous than the
Orthodox, the latter being overpowered, the Arrians prevailed: So that the
Mischief was thereby so much increased, that, as St. Jerome testifies, the
whole World was astonished to find themselves Arrians, and sighed for it. From
Christ 359.

However, the Council of Selucia did one good Act, in re-establishing St.
Hilarious, St. Hilarious Bishop of Poitiers A Council at Constantinople.
Ulufilus Bishop of the Goths.
Bishop of Poitiers, in his Diocese; from whence he had been banished for being
Orthodox.

A third Council that Constance assembled at Constantinople, added to all those
general Ills, this one in particular, that Ulufilus, Bishop of the Goths, was
there infected with the Contagion of Arrianism, and afterward all that Nation,
by his Example.

While that Council was held, Constance ordered to be brought to
Constantinople, in very great Pomp, the Bodies of St. Andrew the Apostle, St.
Luke the Evangelist, and Timothy, St. Paul's Disciple, upon a Revelation he
reported to have had of the place of their Burial.

Julius Constantius, Brother to the Father of Great Constantine, had left two
Sons, viz. Gallus Caesar, whom Constance, as has been mentioned, had put to
Death; and Julian, who having also been created Caesar, Julian Caesar.
by his Cousin Constance, and made Governor of Gaul, behaved himself so well in
that Charge, and with so much Glory, that having driven out, many times, the
Barbarians, who made Incursions into that Province; the Army which he
commanded, ravished with his great Pro^laimed Emperor.
Courage and Conduct, proclaimed him Emperor Augustus; which he accepted, though
he had been expressly forbid by Constance, to assume that Title.

Constance had employed himself three Years in a War against the Persians; over
whom he had got so great Advantages, that they freely offered Proposals of
Peace: To which he agreed, desiring to be freed of that Business, in order to
compose those of more Consequence in Gaul.

But in his way thither, he was stopped at Antioch, by a most desperate Fit of
Sickness; which made him to be baptized; which he neglected to do, according to
the Custom practiced at that time by great Persons, especially by Princes.

This Sacrament was administered to him by Euzoius, Bishop of Antioch, an
inveterate Euzoius an Arrian.
Arrian, whom those of that Sect had placed in that See, in opposition to
Melecius, whom Melecius Orthodox.
they had first of all seated there, believing he would have favored them; in
which they were mistaken, for Melecius was Orthodox. From Christ 361.

Constance being somewhat recovered in his Health, pursued his Journey, but
went not very far; for he was again stopped by his Sickness, at a little Town in
Cilicia, where Constance his Death.
he died, aged Forty five Years, having reigned Twenty four.

A little while after, Julian coming to Julian the Apostate Emperor.
Constantinople, was there received Emperor, without any difficulty.

This was that Julian, Sur-named, The Apostate; because he turned Pagan, after
he had been brought up in the Christian Religion.

During the first two Years of his Reign, he endeavored to ruin Christianity,
by all the Ways he could invent. He was killed in a Battle against the
Persians, by a His Death.
Blow from Heaven, as some write; or, as others will have it, by an ordinary
Accident of War. However, it may be said of him, and of his Predecessor, that
both being endowed with excellent Parts, 'twas great pity, that one should be
seduced by the Arrians, and the other by the Idolaters.

After the Death of Julian; the Army Jo^ian Emperor.
gave the Title of Emperor to Jovian, or Jovinian, one of their principal
Officers, who had all the good Qualities, yet none of those ill ones of his two
Predecessors: So there was great hopes of a prosperous Reign, had he ruled
longer than eight Months, at the end of which he died. From His Death.
Christ 364.

After his Death, the Army set up in his place, Valentinian; who immediately
chose Valentinian, and Valens Emperors.
his Brother, Valens, to be his Colleague. These two Emperors sharing the
Management of their Affairs; Valentinian passed into the West against the
Germans, who had revolted; Valens stayed in the East, to oppose Procopus, a
Prince of the House of Constantine, who had took the Title of Emperor. A Battle
was fought between them, near Nice; where Procopus was overcome, Procopus
overcome, and killed.
took Prisoner, and was afterward beheaded. From Christ 365.

Liberius Bishop of Rome, being dead, Bishop^ of Rome.
there arose a Schism, which was reckoned to be the second of that Church,
between Damasus, a Spaniard, and Urcin, or Urcisin, a Roman; each being elected
by two different Factions of the Clergy and People: Which was carried on with
so much Violence and Animosity, that 130 Men were killed in a bloody Dispute
between the two Parties, in the very Church where they were assembled for that
Election. From Christ 367.

Of the two Emperors, Valens was an Valens, an Arrian.
Arrian, and persecuted the Orthodox. His Brother Valentinian being Orthodox,
made Valentinian Orthodox.
it his Business to procure the Peace and Prosperity of the Western Church. He
was fortunate in the War against many of the barbarous Nations, who invaded
Germany; particularly against the Quades; he reduced them to beg Peace, by
their Ambassadors. Valentinian being extremely offended at the wretched Mien,
and miserable Equipage of those Ambassadors, put himself into so violent a
Passion, and exclaimed against his own, and the Empire's Misfortune, to be
concerned with such beggarly Enemies, that he broke a Vein in his Breast; of
which he died, losing His Death
much Blood. He was fifty Years old, and had reigned twelve Years. From Christ
375.

This News being brought to Treves, where Gratian, his eldest Son, then was;
this young Prince was saluted Emperor, Augustus, Titles his Father had bestowed
on him, in his Lifetime.

The Army in Pannonia, where the Father Gratian and Valentinian II. Emperors.
died, gave the like Title to the second Son, the young Valentinian. His eldest
Brother Gratian, at first was displeased at it; but at length he approved of
it, as well as Valens, Uncle to these two Princes.

The Goths had possessed themselves of those Countries bordering on Tanais. The
Huns, who came out of Scythia, as the others drove them out, and forced them to
make their Abode elsewhere. So soon as they were entered into Thrace for that
purpose, Valens went against them, to drive them out; but he was overcome by
them The Death of Valens.
in a Battle, and being pursued, was burnt in a Peasant's Cottage, where he was
retired. From Christ 378.

By his Death, Gratian finding himself oppressed with the Weight of Affairs,
discharged himself of half of it, by associating Theodosius to the Empire. He
was Son Theodo(...) ^ssoc^ated to the Empire.
to another Theodosius, a Person of high Merit, who had rendered considerable
Services to the Empire, under Valentinian, and Valens: The Son inheriting the
good Qualities of his Father, in a short time made himself famous, by expelling
the Goths from Thrace, which they had miserably ravaged, after their Victory
over Valens. From Christ 379.

Macedonius, Bishop of Constantinople, denied Macedonius an Enemy to the Holy
Ghost. The first Council at Constantinople.
the Divinity of the Holy Ghost. Theodosius, a very Orthodox Prince, caused a
Council to be assembled at Constantinople; where the Fathers condemned this
Heresy, and deposed Macedonius; in the place of whom was put Nectarius, a
Person most worthy of that Dignity. In that Council they declared, That the
Bishop of the second Rome, should from that time be the next in Rank to the
Bishop of the first, and so by Consequence to take place of those. of
Alexandria, and Antioch.

Maximus, Governor of Great Britain, The Revolt of Maximus.
had caused himself there to be proclaimed by the Army; then past over into
Gaul, made himself Master of that Province; surprised, defeated, and killed
Gratian; The Death of Gratian
who had many excellent Qualities, and no ill ones.

Conen Meriadec, a British Prince, had past Conen Meriadec, a British King.
over the Sea with Maximus; and settling himself with the Troops of his own
Nation, in the Maritime part of Gaul, which was afterward called Little
Brittany, where he erected a Monarchy almost for twelve Ages. From Christ 383.

The Death of Damasus, Bishop of Rome, Bishops of Rome.
which happened in that Year, did not put an end to the Schism of that Church:
For though Syricius was there chose in the place of Damasius, Ursicinus still
pretended, that his Election was good. From Christ 384.

Maximus being Master of the Isle of Britain, of Gaul, and of Spain, entered
Italy with so great an Army, that Valentinian not being in a Condition to make
Head against him, fled, with his Mother Justina, to Thessalonica, where
Theodosius then lay.

Maximus having likewise reduced Italy, advanced toward Aquilia, where he
stayed, resolving to wait for Theodosius; who was marching toward him to fight
him.

Theodosius being arrived with his Army, they fought, in two Days, two bloody
Battles: In the last of which, Maximus was wholly routed, and taken Prisoner.
Theodosius was willing to save his Life; but the Soldiers judging him unworthy
of that Favor, killed him, against the Emperor's Pleasure.

So that Valentinian was reestablished in Maximus overcome, and killed.
the Western Empire, which he peaceably enjoyed four Years; at the end of which
Arbogastus, a Gaul, one of his principal Commanders, discontented, because he
had taken away some of his Commands, caused him to be stifled in his Bed, by
the The Death of Valentinian II.
Grooms of his Bedchamber, whom he had corrupted to do it.

This Prince was but Twenty six Years old: His Mother, Justina, being an
Arrian, had infected him with that Heresy; but he renounced it after her Death.

Arbogastus had that great Power in the Army, that he prevailed with the
Soldiers Eugenus, Tyrant with Arbogastus*
to proclaim Eugenius Emperor; a Man of mean Extraction, whom Fortune had
raised to great Commands. This was the Cause of another Civil War. Theodosius
spent two Years in making Preparations for it: And all that time the Tyrants
reigned in the West.

At length Theodosius marched against them; the Armies met, and fought, near to
Aquilia. The Tyrants being defeated, Arbogastus killed himself; Eugenius being
Arbogastus and Eugeneus killed.
taken Prisoner, suffered Death by the Executioner.

Theodosius did not long enjoy the Fruits of that great Victory; which made him
sole Master of the Empire: He had been for some time troubled with a Dropsy,
his Disease increasing at Millan, where he came after the Defeat of the
Tyrants, he fell extremely ill, and died in that City, at Theodosius' s Death
the Age of Fifty, having reigned sixteen Years.

There was but two things to be blamed in him: That he made Laws to deprive
Heretics of their Estates and Liberties, unless they would renounce their
Errors. The other was. The Murdering of a great Number of Thessalonians, to
punish their Insolence, who resisted his Power by a Sedition. Being reprehended
by St. Ambrose for that Cruelty, he expressed so great a Repentance for it,
that his Contrition, joined with his other excellent Virtues, may serve for a
Pattern to all Christian Princes.

By his last Will and Testament, he divided the Empire between his two Sons,
Arcadius, and Honorius; and accordingly Arcadius and Honorius Emperors.
the eldest took possession of the East, the other of the West.

They were both disturbed at first with the Revolt of Rufinus, a Prefect of the
Praetorian Bands, who brought an Army of Barbarians into Thrace, and of Gildon
who played the Usurper in Africa; but these Disorders were presently quelled by
the death of the Traitors. Theodosius held the first Ecumenical Council at
Constantinople. In his time lived St. Austin, St: Jerome, and Claudian the Poet.

Syricius Bishop of Rome, died after he Bishops of Rome.
had the Happiness to see the end of tha^ Schism, which the Election of
Ursicinu^ had caused in that Church; Syricius was the first who declared
against the Marriage of the Clergy. From Christ 398.

The last Year of this Age, saw the rise The Revolt of Gainas.
and fall of the Revolter Gaianus, who was by extraction a Barbarian: His great
Conduct and Experience in the trade of War* had raised him to be General of
Honorius his Army; the services he had done for him, made him pretend to have a
Church in Constantinople for those of the Arria^ Sect, of which he was a
favourer, which the Emperor refusing by the persuasion of St. John Chrisostom,
Bishop of Constantinople. The disdain to be refused, provoked Caianus to Ravage
Thrace with that Army he commanded; this Tumult was as violent, as it was short
lived, being extinguished in a little time, by the death of the Author, the
Officers of the Army being Loyal to the Emperor. From Christ 400.

So at the end of that Age, both the Empires were at Peace, excepting among the
Heretics.
Monks who contended about different and erroneous Opinions.

There were some who were called Originists, Originists
who held false Opinions attributed to Origin.

Anthropomorphites were those who attributed Anthropomorphytes. Priscillianists.
to God a Humane Figure.

Priscillianists were the followers of Priscilian a Spaniard, and a Person of
Quality, who had received old Errors of the Gnostics, of the Sabellians, and
the Manicheans: This Priscillian was the first who was put to death by the
Christians for his Religion; after his Errors had been condemned by a Council
held at Bordeaux, some Bishops inflamed with an outrageous Zeal, persuaded the
Tyrant Maximus to cut off his Head.

The Photinians, followers of Photinus, Photinians.
Bishop of Syrmium, were the worst of all the Arrians. The Appollinarists had
for Apollinarists.
their Authors the two Appollinarys, Father and Son; one a Priest, and the
other a Reader in the Church of Laodicea, who denied the Distinction of Persons
in the Holy Trinity.

The Antidichomarianites, who denied the Antidichomarianites. Collyd^ans.
Virginity of the Mother of our Savior.

The Collydians, on the contrary so called, because they offered great Cakes to
the Holy Virgin, in the way of Sacrifice.

The Luciferians who were only a sort of Luciferians.
Schismatics, who refused to Communicate with those of the Communion of
Milecius, Bishop of Antioch.

The Fathers of the Church who flourished Fathers of the Church.
in this Age, were Macairus the Ancient Monk of Egypt; Optatus Bishop o^
Mileva in Africa; Bazilius Bishop of Caesarea in Cappadocia; Gregory his
Brother Bishop of Nissena; Gregory of Nazianzer Eusebius of Verceil, Ambrosius
of Millan, an^ Martinus of Tours.

The Fifth Age.
IN the first Year was Born a Son to The Birth of Theodosius.
Arcadius, called Theodosius.

The next year Died Anastatius Bishop of Bishops of Rome.
Rome, and Successor to Syricius.

The five following Years were fatal to the two Empires; to the Western part,
by the Ravaging of the Vandalls, who entered there under the Command of
Godegisil Godegisil King of the Vandalls.
their King. To the Eastern, by the persecution of Eudoxa, Wife to the Emperor
Arcadius, against St. Chrysostom Bishop of Constantinople, even St. Epiphanius
Bishop of St. Epiphanes.
Salamina in Ciprus, with most of the Eastern Bishops who opposed him in
complaisance to the Empress, and deposed him in an Assembly held at
Constantinople, upon the result of which he was sent into Exile, The Death of
S^. Chrysostom. The death of Arcadius. Theodotius the Second.
where he died of the Miserys they made him endure. From Christ 407.

Arcadius died at the Age of Thirty Two Years, leaving his Son Theodosius about
Seven Years Old, under the Protection of Isdigerdes King of Persia, who
acquitted himself of that Charge with great care and fidelity. From Christ 408.

At that time flourished Ausonius a Gaul, Learned Men.
Prudetius a Spaniard, Venantius Portunatus an Italian, but Bishop of Poiters,
who were as well Poets, as Christians.

In the West, Honorius having put to The death of Stillicon. Alaric. King of
the Goths. Rome twice taken
Death his Father-in-law Stilicon, accused to have held Intelligence with
Alaric King of the Goths. That King revenged his Death with great Cruelty; for
in the two following Years he twice took Rome, and laid it waste in a most
desolate manner; then adding Mockery to his Cruelty, he gave the Title and
Ornaments of Emperor to one Attalus, a man of obscure Birth, and Attalus the
false Emperor.
then divested him of them, when he was disgusted with him. From Christ 410.

Honorius was at Ravenna, and saw all these lamentable and shameful Miseries,
not being able to redress them, but the The death of Alaric. Astolfus his
Successor.
death of Alaric gave him some respite.

Astolfus or Adolphus Successor to Alaric, made a Peace with the Romans, upon
conditions that Honorius should consent to Marry his Sister Placidia with
Astolfus, and that the King should Reign quiet Possessor of that part of Gaul,
called Narbonensis, which Alaric had conquered. From Christ 411.

So Honorius being no longer disturbed, by this so formidable power, found the
means to chastize by his Lieutenants three The Ty^ants p(...)sh'd.
Tyrants, who in the time of the last Miserys in Italy, had took on them the
Title of Emperors, viz. Constantine with Jovian his Son in Gaul, Maximin in
Spain, and Heraclian in Italy.

But he could not hinder several Foreign Nations, to establish themselves
powerfully in many of the principal Western Provinces which they had invaded,
and was forced to suffer the Sweves in Andalouzia Sweves. Vandalls, and Allains
in Spain. Burgundians in Gaul.
the Vandals, and the Allains in part of Baetica, which from their name was
also called Andalouzia; he was constrained to give the like suffrance to the
Burgundians, who had posted themselves in that part of Gaul, which from their
Name is still called Burgundy. The Huns who could not possibly Huns in Panonia.
be driven out of Pannonia, gave the Name of Hungary to that Province.

Astolfus having broke his Peace with the Romans, was forced again to begit of
them, by the great advantages that Cantance a Lieutenant General of Honorius
had gained over them; but the Goths, thinking this Peace disgraceful to them,
killed Astolfus who had made it, and put in his place Kings of the Goths.
Sigerie, who dying about a Year after, had Vallius to succeed him, who agreed
with Honorius on reasonable conditions, which pleased the Goths, to wit, That
besides that part of Gaul, called Narbonensis, they should have a part of the
Country of Spain, which bordered on the Mediteranean. From Christ 415.

Innocentius Bishop of Rome, Successor to Bishop of Rome.
Anastatius died. Zozimus who succeeded Innocentius, held the Sea but Sixteen
Months: After his Death there arose a Schism in that Church, between Boniface A
Schism in the Church of Rome.
and Eulalius, both chosen by a party of the Clergy and the People. From Christ
418.

The French descended from Chersonesus Cimbrike, advanced toward the Maine,
and gave to the Country where that River passes the name of Franconia, which it
still retains. Pharamond King of the French. The death of St. Jerome.
They chose for their King Pharamond, who is recorded to have been the first
King of that Nation. From Christ 420.

St. Jerome, a very Learned Person in the Holy Scripture, and the Hebrew
Language, died at Bethlem, where he retired himself from Rome: He had been
Secretar^ to Pope Damasus, but being Secandalized at the Luxury of the Roman
Clergy, he went over to Palestine, where he lived a long time like a Monk; he
had brought over with him Paula, and his Daughter Eustochia, the best qualified
Ladies in Rome. After he had made a great Friendship with Ruffinus a Priest of
Aquilia, he broke it off Ruffinus.
with him when he found him to be an Origenist.

He writ most severely against Vigilantius, Vigilantius.
a Spanish Priest, who was an Enemy to the unmarried Clergy; he also vigorously
opposed the Errors of Helvidius, who Helvidius
denied the Honor due to the Holy Virgin, Mother of our Savior.

At this time flourrish'd Paulus Orosius, Paulus Orosius.
Author of the Seven Books of the Universal History, from the Creation of the
World to his time. The Emperor Honorius The Death of Honorius.
died of a Dropsy, Aged Thirty Nine Years, having Reigned Twenty Eight: Some
time before his death, he conferred the Title of Emperor Augustus, on Constance
his Brother-in-law, who married Placidia, Widow to Astolfus King of the Goths.
Constance died not long after he was Married, leaving Valentinian his Son under
the Tuition of his Mother Placidia, she and her Son lived at Constantinople
when Honorius died; so Italy being destitute of the Royal Presence of the
Princes, John the Tyrant.
John a Prefect of the Praetorian Bands, took upon him the Title of Emperor.

Placidia having heard of it, marches with her Son to Fight the Tyrant, who was
taken by surprise at Ravenna, by the means of some Officers, faithful to the
Princes: He was brought Prisoner to them at Aquilia, when they there were, and
where the Rebel had his Head cut off; His Death.
so the Empire was divided between the Theodosius the 2d. and Valentinian the
3d. Emperors. Bishops of Rome.
two Cousins, Theodosius the Second, and Valentinian the Third: The first
keeping his Court at Constantinople, and the other at Rome. From Christ 423.

Boniface Bishop of Rome, and Successor to Innocent, died in the same Year as
Honorius the Emperor.

Count Boniface, Governor of Africa, incensed on a false Accusation, that
Placidia Regent of the Western Empire, designed to put him out of his
Government, called T^^ Vandalls in Africa. Genseric their King. The Death of
St. Augustine.
the Vandals out of Spain into Africa, of which they easily took Possession
under the Conduct of Genseric their King.

St. Augustine, Bishop of Hippo, in the same Province of Africa, died a little
before the taking of that City by the Vandalls.

This Great Father of the Church opposed the Errors of the Manichees, though he
had been infected with them in his Youth; he boldly Combated against the Errors
of Pelagius, the Heritick. The Council of Carthage and of Mileva.
Pelagius, who at that time declared himself an Enemy to our Savior Christ.
They were Condemned in two Councils held at Carthage, and at Mileva at the same
time.

Pelagius had two Disciples, Celestius and Julien; Celestius was wholly of the
Opinion of his Master, Julien was not altogether of that Opinion, but
acknowledged a necessity of the Grace of Jesus Christ, for the Conversion, and
entire accomplishment of Salvation, he affirmed, that the Beginnings and
Inclinations depended on the will of Man.

John Cassian, a Monk, who had been a John Cassian.
Disciple of St. John Chrysostom, being retired to Marseilles, infected the
Priests and Monks of that City, and all thereabouts, with this Error of
Semipelagianism.

Prosperus of Aquitaine opposed it most Prosperus of Aquitaine.
Vigorously in Gaul, as his Master St. Augustine had done in Africa.

At this time flourished in Gaul, Severus Sulpitius, Author of the two Books
of the Learned Men.
Sacred History. And in the East, Theodoret Bishop of Cir, who Writ the
Ecclesiastical History from Constantine to Theodosius the Younger.

Genseric, King of the Vandals, took Carthage, Carthage taken.
and made it the Metropolis of the Kingdom he Established in Africa.

In the same Year Theodosius assembled a The Council of Ephesus against
Nestorius.
Council at Ephesus, to enquire into the Opinion of Nestorius, Bishop of
Constantinople, who asserted two Persons in Jesus Christ. This Error was
condemned there Cyrillus Bishop of Alexandria.
by the Council, in which presided Cyrillus Bishop of Alexandria; John Bishop
of Alexandria in Thrace, pretending that that precedence belonged to him,
because that Ephesus depended on his Metropolis, and had drawn away several
Bishops to its Faction; among others, Theodoret Bishop of Cir, with whom he had
Assembled another Council in the same City of Ephesus, not to countenance the
Errors of Nestorius, but to demonstrate that they had mistaken the Forms of
Proceeding. In the mean time Affairs were embroiled to that Degree, that the
Emperor not being able at first to discover the Truth, imprisoned Cyrillus and
Nestorius, but at last being better informed of the justice of the Cause, he
set Cyrillus at Liberty, and sent Nestorius The Death of Nestorius.
to utter Banishment, where he died Miserably. From Christ 432.

Caelestin, Bishop of Rome, died the Year Bishops of Rome.
after that Council was held: He had there his Legates, who Subscribed to the
Condemnation of Nestorius, who had been already Condemned at Rome, in a Council
which had been there Assembled by the same Caelestin.

Sixtus, the Third, his Successor held the Sea Eight Years, during which time
all was very quiet in the Church. From Christ 440.

But the Church was again disturbed in Eutychus the Heritick.
the East by Eutychus, a Priest and Abbot of the Monks of Constantinople, who
by an Error contrary to that of Nestorius, asserted but one Nature in Jesus
Christ; he found so many Adherents among the A false C^uncil at Ephesus.
Eastern Bishops, that a great number of them being Assembled at Ephesus; his
Error was approved of in that false Council, where things were carried with
that Violence, that Flavian who had been made Flavian Bishop of Constantinople.
Bishop of Constantinople, in the place of Nestorius, for having opposed the
Judgment of the Council that favored Eutychus, suffered Martyrdom, not by the
hands of the Pagans, but by those of Barsumas an Abbot, and of Dioscorus Bishop
of Alandria, and President of the Assembly* From Christ 449.

These great Troubles were redrest at Pulcheria Sister to Theodosius.
the return of Pulcheria, to the Court of her Brother Theodosius.

There had been formerly some Disgust between her, and her Sister-in-law
Eudosia, Eudosia his Wife.
which had obliged that Empress to retire to Jerusalem, where she had wholly
Devoted her self to Piety and Charity toward the Poor.

From that time, the Eunuch Chrisapius Chrisapius.
was become so great a Favorite to Theodosius, that Pulcheria making that
Minister jealous of her, was removed; but the pressing necessity of Affairs
obliged Theodosius to recall her, she made her Brother highly sensible of the
ill Conduct his Favorite used in Governing the Empire, and of his most
inveterate Malice to foment the Troubles of the Church; so the Eunuch having
been punished as he deserved, the Government was Reestablished in its right
Method: The Emperor persuaded by his Wife and pious Sister, resolved to
Assemble a Council, to Redress the Divisions of the Church; but he could not
execute his Resolution, being prevented by Death, which seized on him that
Year, in The Death of Theodosius.
the Fiftieth of his Age, and the Forty Third of his Reign.

A Prince without Vice, Pious and of an extraordinary Good Temper, but Weak and
very easy to be Governed by those who were near him. From Christ 450.

He dying without Issue, the Senate, People, and Soldiers, chose with a common
suffrage, Martian for their Emperor, Martian Emperor.
who from a common Soldier, rose by his Valor and great Conduct, to the
highest Commands in the Army: Pulcheria having Pulcheria Marrys him.
procured by her Interest, to raise him to this high Dignity, married him on
this Condition, as the Historians of that time have Written; That they should
live Chastely together as Brother and Sister. From Christ 451.

A little while after, by the Authority of the two Emperors, Valentinian and
Martian, a Council was Assembled of Six Hundred The Council of Chalcedon.
and Thirty Bishops in the City of Chalcedon.

The Errors of Eutychus were there Condemned, and their Author Banished, as
also some Bishops his Adherents; among others, Dioscorus Bishop of Alexandria.
The Council, confirmed what had been already Decreed, by that of Constantinople
under Theodosius the Great, touching the Equality of Precedence, between the
Bishops of Rome and Constantinople, notwithstanding the Displeasure resented by
the Legates of Leo, Bishop of Rome.

Attyla King of the Huns, was come with Attyla King of the Huns.
a formidable Army, which reached from the Banks of Tanais, even unto the heart
of Gaul, Ravaging and Destroying all that dared to oppose him. The City of
Orleans refused to Surrender, and while he besieged it, Aetius Prefect of the
Gauls, made a League with Meroveus King of the French, Theodorick King of the
Goths, and Gondicar King of the Bu^gundians, against this common Enemy. The
Confederates came to meet him before Orleans, with their united Forces; so soon
as they approached, Attyla raised the Siege and retreated; they followed and
overtook him in the Cataulaunike Plains, where they overcome him with a mighty
Slaughter of Overcome near Chalons.
Men. After this great Overthrow, he retired into Illyria, where he gathered
together another Army greater then his first; he came back into Italy, took and
destroyed Enters into Italy.
Aquilia, and after that, all the other Towns he past through, so that he might
have gone even to Rome, if he had not been diswaded from going there by Bishop
Leo, who came to meet him, and prevailed with him to March another way.

He past a second time into Gaul, where Is again defeated in Gaul.
he was once more Defeated by Torismond King of the Goths, and Sangiban King of
the Allanes; so being forced to retire, he stopped in Panonia with his Huns, from
whom Panonia, called Hungary.
that Province was called Hungary: There as he was Celebrating his Nuptial with
a Young Lady, a Daughter of the King of the Bactrians, who voluntarily had
followed him, he Gorged himself so Excessively The Death of Attyla.
with Eating and Drinking, that it choked him. From Christ 352.

The People round about Aquilia, and other neighboring Counties of the
Continent, to preserve themselves from the Fury of Attyla, retired to the
Islands, at the end of the Adriatic Sea; which gave there the first Beginning
to that wonderful City, which from the Name of Heneti, or Veneti, was called
Venice; which by process of Venice.
time, is become chief of a powerful Republic.

The British Islanders being infested by the frequent Incursions of the Scots,
or Picts, applied themselves to Aetius, Prefect of the Gauls, to help them
against their cruel Enemies.

He could not well supply them with Succors, having to deal with Attyla, and
other Barbarians, who ravaged Gaul.

Whereupon the Britains implored the Aid of the Saxons: Who came over under the
Command of Hengist, with so vast an Army, that in a little time they became
Masters of that Country; which took the Name of England.

Whether it was from the Angles, the The Saxons in Britain.
chief People of the Saxons; or else from Hengist, by Contraction with the Word
Land, which signifies the Earth; from The Name of England.
whence was derived the Name of England.

Valentinian was an imprudent Prince, and was also wicked and debauched: He The
Death of Aetius.
put to Death Aetius, Prefect of the Gauls, upon false grounded Suspicions of
his Fidelity: And to fill up the Measure of his great Injustice, he made use of
a cunning Stratagem, to violate the Wife of the Senator Maximus, Grandson to
that Maximus, who had taken the Title of Emperor, and had been overcome and
killed by Theodosius the Great.

This last v^^lent Act of Valentinian, cost him his Life: For the Wife of that
Senator died with extreme Grief, for the irreparable Injury she sustained. Her
Husband to Revenge himself, seduced the Soldiers; The Death of Valentinian III.
who without making it known who did set them on, killed Valentinian.

So Maximus having made an Interest Maximus Emperor.
with the Paetorian Bands, they proclaimed him Emperor; and the Senate
acquiess'd to it more willingly, because, he married Eudoxia, Daughter to
Theodosius the Younger, and Widow to Valentinian. From Chapter 455.

Maximus reaped small Advantage by his Treason; he was so indiscreet, to
discover the Secret to his new. Wife* thinking by that means to give her a full
Assurance of his Loyal Love: But the only Effect it wrought upon her, was to
make her resolve to Revenge the Death of her first Husband, by that of the
Second: To which end she privately solicited Genseric, King of the Vandals, to
come into Italy. Where he arrived with that Expedition, that Maximus being not
in a Condition to resist him, fled from Rome to save himself in the Mountains;
but he was stoned to Maximus killed.
Death by the People, enraged against him for his base Flight. From Christ 456.

Three Days after Genseric had entered* Genseric takes Rome.
Rome, and wasted it more cruelly than the Goths had done, he had not time to
ruin it utterly: For the Winter approaching, obliged him to set Sail for
Africa, to secure the vast Riches he had plundered, and the great Number of
Illustrious Prisoners he had taken; among whom were the Empress Eudoxia, with
her two Daughters, Eudoxia, and Placidia.

After Genseric was retreated, Avitus was acknowledged Emperor of Rome: The
Avitus Emperor.
Army of the Gauls having before proclaimed him: But the Romans soon grew weary
of him; finding his Court composed, not only of Gauls, but also of Officers and
Soldiers of his Army, being the most part Barbarians: Finding himself to be
very much hated for that Cause, he willingly resigned up the Empire, and
retired to Auvergne, his Native Country, to live there as a private Person;
expressing a great Mark of his Moderation and Temper.

Martian, a good and pious Prince, died The Death* of Martian
as he was designing to redress the Troubles of the Western Empire.

The Senate and People of Constantinople, Leon Emperor.
put in his place Leon, who highly deserved that Sovereignty.

He took presently a Colleague, who was endued with the same Qualities: He was
Najoranus. Emperor.
called Majoranus, whom he sent into the West, to settle Affairs there in the
best Order, after the miserable Ruins the Barbarians had made. All which he
effected; for he repaired the City of Rome, settled all His Exploits.
things in very good Order and Peace, in the Provinces; then past over into
Africa, against Genseric; whom he defeated in many Rencounters, besieged in
Carthage, and had, by taking that City, given Satisfaction for the Disgrace of
Rome, if Sickness had not surpised him; being forced to raise the Siege, and
to go back into Italy. His Death.
He was there killed by Rycimer; who being originally a Barbarian, had been
raised to the Dignity of Patrician, by the Emperor Leon; and in regard he
commanded the Army that was come with Majoranus, it was not difficult for him
to kill this good and brave Prince, and to put in his place the Senator
Severus, who came along with Severus Emperor.
him into Italy. From Christ 461.

In the same Year died Leo Bishop of Rome, Bishop of Rome.
Sur-named the Great, as well for his extraordinary good Qualities, as also
because he had done more than any of his Predecessors, to establish more and
more the Grandeur of his See.

The same Rycimer, who had killed Majoranus, The Death of Severus
killed also his Successor Severus, who was very much regretted by the Romans,
because he had spent the four Years of his Reign, in making War against the
Barbarians.

After his Death, the Western Empire was two Years without an Emperor; at
length Anthemius was sent there in that Anthemius Emperor. Bishops of Rome.
Quality.

The same Year he arrived at Rome, Hilarious, Successor to Leon, died there.

In the five following Years, they made most unfortunately a War against
Genseric; A War against Genseric.
which was occasioned by the Cowardice of Basiliscus, Brother-in-Law to Leon,
to whom that Emperor had given the Command of his Army.

The same Rycimer, who had killed Majoranus, and Severus, murdered also
Anthemius; Anthemius killed. Olibrius Emperor.
and Rycimer dying soon after, Olibrius succeeded Anthemius; having married
Placidia, after she had been set at Liberty, and was sent back into Italy, by
Genseric.

A little while after, Olibrius being dead, The Death of Olibrius.
Gondibar, Grandson to Rycimer, and Successor in his Royal Power, raised to
the Empire Glycericus, who had a great Employ Glicerius Emperor.
in the Court of the last Emperors.

The Emperor Leo died, leaving his Grandson The Death of Leo.
to Reign in his place, under the Tutelage of Zeno, an Isaurian, Father of the
young Prince, whose Mother was Ariadne, Daughter to Leon.

Some time before, there was sent into Italy, in the Quality of Emperor, Nepos,
a Nepos Emperor.
Person of high Birth: Upon his Arrival at Rome, Glicerius willingly resigned
the Empire to him, and retired to Salona, in Dalmatia, where he was Bishop:
From Christ 475.

Orestes, a Goth by Nation, and Lieutenant to Nepos, in Gaul, revolted against
The Revolt of Orestes
him, came into Italy, and forced him from thence: He retired to Salona, to
Glicerius; so he left the Empire of the West to be disposed of by Orestes: Who
there placed his Son Momillus, to whom he gave the Name of Romulus. The Romans,
in derision, called him Augustulus: They had so Augustulus Emperor
great a Disdain and Hatred, for the Father and Son, they sent for Odoacres,
King of the Herules: He came, conquered, took Orestes killed.
Prisoner, and put to Death Orestes. Then the Romans having acknowledged him
for their Chief, Odoacres put Augustulus into Augustulus in Prison.
Prison, where he spent the Remainder of his Days. From Christ 476.

So Odoacres being Master of Italy, the Odoacres King of Italy.
Title of Emperor was there changed to that of King; contrary to the last Will
and Testament of the Emperor Leo.

The great Zeno, his Son-in-Law, had Basiliscus Emperor.
taken the Title of Emperor; Basiliscus, Brother-in-Law to Leo, assumed it
also; and drove Zeno out of Constantinople: But for a short time; for Zeno soon
after reestablish'd himself there, and expelled Basiliscus again. From Christ
477.

Hunric succeeded his Father Genseric, King Genseric dies. Hunric his Successor.
of the Vandals in Africa, who died that Year, having Reigned Thirty eight
Years, in which time he had much embroiled the Empire.

He gave as great Disturbance to the Church; for being a fierce Arrian, he most
cruelly persecuted the Orthodox: As may be read in the History which Victor
Victor of Utica.
of Utica, has writ of that Persecution.

There has been already mentioned the Establishment of the French Monarchy,
Kings of the French.
under Pharamond their first King.

Clodion had succeeded him, Sur-named Le Cheveleux, from the Custom he
introduced among the Princes of that Nation, to wear long Hair. He had past the
Rhine, and gained remarkable Victories on the other side of that River.

He was afterward driven out by the Romans, and died as he was preparing to
repass the Rhine. Meroveus, his Successor, was firmly established in Gaul, by
the Defeat of Attyla, and by the Death of Aetius; so that a part of that
Country began to be called France, since the time of that King's Reign; from
whose Name also, those of the first Line were styled Merovingians. He died, and
left a vast Dominion to his Son Childeric.

The Adventures of this King, are Recorded in the History of France; where may
be seen, that after he had been Dethroned, and Reestablished, he considerably
enlarged his Kingdom, and left it in a very flourishing Condition to his Son
Clouis. From Christ 482.

Simplitius, Bishop of Rome, Successor to Bishops of Rome.
Hilarious died. From Christ 483.

The Emperor Zeno, falling into a Fit of Zeno' s Death.
the Epilepsie, his Wife Ariadne caused him to be buried for dead, and the
Vault to be closed up; being come out of his Fit, he died there most miserably,
crying out for help; but all in vain: For the Empress had placed Guards near
the Tomb, to hinder any from taking him out.

Soon after Anastatius doubly filled his Anastatius Emperor.
place, in his Bed, by marrying Ariadne; and in his Throne, to which he was
raised by the means of that Empress. From Christ 491.

Faelix, Bishop of Rome, Successor to Simplicius, Bishops of Rome.
died: He had condemned two Peter's; one of which was Bishop of Alexandria,
Sur-named Mungus; the other of Antioch, called Fullon, Favorers of the
Theopaschytes, Spawns of the Sects of the Theopaschytes.
Eutychians. From Christ 492.

Faelix had also condemned Acacius, Bishop of Constantinople, because he had
consented out of Complaisance to the Emperor Zeno; that those two Heretics
might possess those two great Sees.

Theodoric, Sur-named Veronensis, from his taking that City, King of the
Ostrogots, or Eastern Goths, had rendered considerable Services to the Emperor
Zeno; and, as a Recompense, he demanded to have his Consent, (others say, Zeno
invited him) to make War against Odoacre, King of Italy; to which he willingly
complied.

So Theodoric having past into Italy, there The War between Odoacre, and
Theodoric.
was a bloody War between him and Odoacre: Both of them behaved themselves very
bravely; so that the Business could not be decided by Arms. At length,
Theodoric being more politic, after he had besieged Odoacre, above three
Years, in Ravenna, made use of very indirect Ways: He proposed an Agreement,
and during the Treaty, he invited Odoacre to a Banquet, where he had him
treacherously killed. So ended Odoacre killed by Theodoric The Kingdom of the
Ostrogots in Italy. The French Christians.
the Kingdom of the Herules in Italy; and then began that of the Ostrogots,
which Theodoric firmly established. From Christ 493.

The French embraced Christianity with their King Clouis, by the Ministry of
St. Remy, Bishop of Reims: Some time before, Clouis had put out of Gaul, all
who remained of the Romans; so that there was none of them left. From Christ
496.

Gelasius, Bishop of Rome, Successor to Bishops of Rome.
Faelix, died.

Gelasius was to be commended, that he made a just Collection of the Canonical
Books of Scripture, and to have set down as Apocriphal, many that past before
for Canonical. From Christ 498.

Anastatius the Second, his Successor, having held the Sea but two Years, there
arose a Schism between Symachus, and Laurentius, both chose by different
Factions of the Clergy and People. This Division caused many Disorders, and
also Murders, which continued to the End of this Age. From Christ 500.

The Sixth Age.
AT the Beginning of the Sixth Age, the East afforded nothing remarkable for
History. From Christ 501.

But in the West, Theodoric expelled out of Pannonia, the Bulgarians, who had
made an Incursion there. From Christ 505.

Clouis had married Clotilda, Niece to The Exploits of Theodoric.
Gondibald, King of the Burgundians. This King had put to Death three of his
Brothers, one of whom was Father to Clotilda; which occasioned a War between
Clouis and Gondebald; in which the latter conquered the greatest part of
Burgundy, only Savoy, and Provence, remained to Gondemar, Son to Gondebald.
From Christ 506.

Clouis added to this Conquest; all that Clouis' s Exploits.
the Wisigots possessed in Gaul; after he had vanquished, and killed their King
Alaric, in a Battle fought near Poitiers; and after that, having overcome
Amalaric, the Son of Alari^, near Bourdeaux; the Vanquished* fled for Refuge to
Theodoric, King of Italy, who was his Grandfather, by the Mother's side. And
by his help, Amalaric recovered almost all he had lost in Gaul. From Christ 509.

This unfortunate Success, with some others that attended Clouis, toward the
end of his Life, reduced him to an extreme Melancholy, and so very much
indisposed him, that he died in his middle Age. His Death.
From Christ 511.

According to his last Will, his four His Four Sons.
Sons divided his Dominions among them, and each of them had the Titles of King
of the French.

Symachus Bishop of Rome; Successor to Bishop of Rome.
Anastatius the Second died. From Christ 514.

Anastatius, Emperor of the East, had applauded and congratulated the Conquests
Anastatius Emperor.
of Clouis, by a solemn Embassy, and sent him the Consulary Ornaments, with a
rich Crown which Clouis consecrated to the Church of St. Peter's at Rome.

While Anastatius reigned, he favored the Eutychians. He was afraid of
Thunder, and built him a round House, to secure himself from it; but all in
vain: For in a violent Storm of Thunder, and Lightning, His Death.
he was found dead in his Bedchamber, at the Age of 88 Years. From Christ 518.

Justin, his Successor, who from a very Justin his Successor*
low Birth, having been a common Soldier, rose to the highest Command in the
Army, and in the Empire. He redressed those Disorders had been a long time in
the Church, by a Schism between the Western, and the Eastern Churches,
occasioned by Acatius; who notwithstanding the Excommunications of Faelix,
Bishop of Rome, had discoursed with the two Peter's, Mungus, and Foulon, Bishops
of Alexandria, and Antioch, who favored the Theophasticks.

Hormisdas, Bishop of Rome, and Successor Bishop^ of Rome.
to Symachus, died.

John, who succeeded Hormisdas, was sent by King Theodoric, in an Embassy to
the Emperor Justin; upon whose Head he set the Imperial Crown: The first that
ever was Crowned by the Roman Pontiff.

For which, at his Return, Theodoric under pretense that he had not faithfully
acquitted himself of his Commission, put him in Prison, where he died of
extreme Want. From Christ 526.

Theodoric, upon false Suspicions, had put Simmachus and Boethius.
to Death Symachus, with his Son-in-Law Boethius, who were qualified for
Consuls, and were Persons of high Merit: Theodoric being one Day at Table,
imagined he saw the Head of Symachus, instead of the Head of a great Fish,
served up before him; which put him into so great a Fright, that he fell into a
violent Fever, of which he died; leaving his Dominions to Athalaric, The Death
of Theodoric.
Son of his Daughter Amalazuntha, Widow of Euthairc.

Aurelius Cassidorus, a very Learned, and Orthodox Person was Secretary to
Theod^ric, though that Prince was an Arrian, yet Cassiodorus. The Tripartite
History.
Cassidorus, after the Death of his Master, retired from the World, and
compiled many excellent Works, among others the Tripartite History taken from
that of Eusebius, Socrates, and Zozimenus, adding to it what happened since the
last, even to his Time.

The good and pious Emperor Justin dying, had his Nephew Justinian for his
Successor; The Death of Justin. Justinian his Successor.
who in the beginning of his Reign caused to be collected, and put in order the
Roman Laws.

Among the Civilians, who labored Tribonien the Civil Lawyer.
three Years about them, the famous Trebonianus, was particularly taken Notice
of.

This great Work consisted of fifty digested Books, or Pandects; the four first
of Institutes, and those which contained the New, or Authentic Constitutions.
From Christ 530.

Faelix the fourth Bishop of Rome, who Bishops of Rome.
succeeded John, died this Year; and had for his Successor Boniface, who kept
not the Sea above eleven Months.

Bellisarius went, by Order of Justinian Bellisarius in Africa.
his Master, to make War against the Vandals in Africa; having ruined their
Forces in the Field, he besieged and took Carthage, The end of the Kings of the
Vandals in Africa.
in which was King Gilimer, and so put an end to the Kingdom of the Vandals in
Africa, which had lasted Ninety* five Years, under four Kings, since Genseric.
From Christ 534.

John the Second, Bishop of Rome, had Bishops of Rome.
succeeded Boniface, and Agapetus was Successor to John: Agapetus died in a
Voyage to Constantinople, where Theodatus, King of the Ostrogoths, in Italy,
had sent him to excuse the Murder, that this Theodatus the Usurper, had
committed upon Amalazunta, and her Son Athalaric, who were allied to Justinian.

Vitige having succeeded Theodatus, Justinian sent Bellisarius against him.
This great Captain met with the like good Fortune in Italy, as he had in
Africa: He made himself Master of Rome, and took Vitige, whom he brought to
Constantinople to Justinian. From Christ 540.

During this War, there happened a very great Scandal in the Church of Rome:
Silverius A Schism of Silverius, and Vigilius.
had succeeded Agapetus; the Deacon Vigilius bad promised Theodora, the Wife of
Justinian, who was an Eutychian, to favor those of that Party, if she would
put him in the place of Silverius; which was effected by the means of
Bellisarius, who executing the Commands of the Empress, turned out Silverius;
who died in Banishment at the end of two Years, and put Vigilius in his place.
From Christ 542.

This same Year was remarkable by abolishing the Consulates of the Roman
Empire. The abolishing the Consulates.
It was believed, that Justinian did it by the Advice of Trebonianus; who was
enraged for having been disappointed of that Dignity to which he had aspired.

Hildebauld had been set up by the Ostrogoths Kings of the Ostrogoths.
of Italy, in the place of Vitiges. Then Hildebauld being killed by the Great
Persons of that Nation, they chose Totyla for their King; who was very worthy
of their Choice, as well by his Birth, as by his personal Qualities.

Bellisarius had been recalled from Italy by Justinian, to go and make War
against the Persians; but was again sent back into Italy to oppose T^tyla;
where Bellisarius Totyla.
finding he had not sufficient Forces to maintain a War with Honor against
that King, prevailed with Justinian to recall him a second time, in order to
send him against the Persians, who had broke the Peace that Bellisarius had
made with them, in the Name of Justinian.

So Totyla regained almost all that Bellisarius His Exploits
had conquered of the Ostrogoths in Italy, and particularly Rome; all which was
done in the space of eight Years. From Christ 550.

In this term of time, happened the Death of St. Benedict, the famous Institutor
of the St. Benedict.
Monks in the West. And at that time, Silverius Bishop of Rome died of the
Miseries he suffered in his Exile.

In that space also, Vigilius, who usurped Vigilius sent to Constantinople.
the Sea of Rome, during the Life of Silverius, was sent for to Constantinople,
by the Emperor Justinian, to answer an Accusation of many heinous Crimes
alleged against him.

The Historians differ about the manner how the Emperor received him; yet they
all agree, in observing the inconstant variation of the Conduct* of Vigilius
toward the Emperor; who was then Orthodox, and toward the Empress Theodora,
Wife to Justivian, who was an Eutychian.

The Eastern Church being in great Trouble, occasioned by this Heresy,
Justinian ordered a Council to be assembled A Council at Constantinople.
at Constantinople, of more than One hundred and sixty Bishops.

Vigilius, who was in that City, opposed the holding of the Council; but at
last he was compelled to consent to it, by the Emperor's Authority. From
Christ 553.

The principal Design of assembling that Council, was to condemn Eutychianism,
and its Consequences: But it served only to condemn what was called, The Three
The three Chapters condemned.
Chapters; against which the Emperor did passionately protest: Which were
Propositions pretended to favor Nestorianism, and were attributed to three
famous Bishops of the last Age* viz. Theodorus of Mopsuesta, Theod^^t of Cyr,
and Ibas of Edessa; though in the Council of Macedonia they had been acquitted of
all Suspicion of Heresy, after a strict Examination of those Propositions.

As for V^gilius, who was at Constantinople, he refused to represent the
Council, because Eutychius, Bishop of Constantinople, had declared, that he
would not give place to him; or else, that there* should be an equality between
them.

Vigilius being come to Constantinople out The Inconstancy of Vigilius.
of Complaisance to the Emperor, had condemned the Three Propositions; but
being very angry with the Council, he retracted his Condemnation, sending a
Declaration of it to the Council. The Emperor offended at this ill Conduct of
his, sent him to Banishment; where he remained but a short time, being soon
after recalled upon his Submission to the Emperor's Will, in approving the
Council, and by condemning the Three Chapters. He approved the three Chapters.
From Christ* 554.

By this means he had leave to return to Rome; but before he could arrive
there, he died in Sicily. His Death.


Before that time, the Emperor had named for that See, Pelagius, a Deacon; yet
gave Liberty to the Romans, to receive for their Bishop, him, of the two* they
should like best.

By Virtue of this Nomination, and without any other Formality, Pelagius stood
for His Successor.
Bishop: Which displeased the Romans so much, that upon his coming to Rome, he
found not one Bishop to Consecrate him; so that this Ceremony was performed by
one Andrew, a Priest of Ostia. From Christ 555.

Two Years were expired, when Narses, Narses in Italy.
the Eunuch, who had a very Courageous Spirit, and highly experienced in the
Art of War, went into Italy, against Attyla; whom he overcame, and killed in
Battle. He became Master of Rome, and of many other Citys; in the four
following The end of the Kingdom of the Ostrogoths.
Years, he completed the entire ruin of the Ostrogoths in Italy, having
defeated and killed in Battle Teia, Successor to Totyla. From Christ 559.

In the mean time Bellisarius made War Bellisarius sent against the Persians.
very successfully against the Persians, which he ended at last by a Peace he
made with them to the Glory and Advantage of the Romans.

About the end of this Year died Pelagius, Bishop of Rome. He was very much
Bishops of Rome.
disgusted by the Romans, both for the manner of his entering upon the
Episcopate, for his approving the Council of Constantinople, and for Condemning
the three Chapters, which made the Bishops of Millan, and Ravenna, to separate
from his Communion, and Assembled themselves in A Council at Aquileia.
a Council at Aquileia, with the Bishops of their Provinces, where they
declared against the last Council of Constantinople.

The four Sons of Clouis, as has been mentioned, shared their Fathers Kingdom.

Clodomir, one of them, was slain in a Battle against the Burgundians, and his
Children were killed by their Uncles Clotaire and Childebert, and the
Successors to Thierry were extinct in Theobald, who died without Issue, so that
Childebert also, leaving no Children, all the French Monarchy devolved to
Clotaire, the only remaining Son of Clouis. From Christ 560.

He enjoyed this Sovereign power but two Years, after his death, his four Sons
French Kings.
divided again the Monarchy: Childebert was King of Paris, Gontran of Orleans,
Chilperic of Soissons, and Sigebert of Mets, or Austratia. From Christ 562.

The Great Captain Bellisarius, died in The Death of Bellisarius.
disgrace with his Prince, and by that means, fell into so great Poverty, that
History observes it, as a very extraordinary Example of the instability of
humane Affairs; though there are some Writers, who not only doubt of what has
been remarked of him, but say on the contrary, that he died in the greatest
height of Glory and Riches, cherished by Justinian as he deserved, for the
great services he had rendered to the Emperor, and Empire. Others say, it was
John the Exconsul, who carried on the Wars in Africa after Belisarius, who was
deprived of all his Dignities, and reduced to Beggary by Justinian.

Justinian died, he had done things worthy The Death of Justinian.
of Eternal Memory, but he eclipsed the Glory of them, having showed himself
too Passionate in Business of very little importance concerning Religion; yet
by his Obstinacy, he disturbed the Peace of the Church, and was at last
infected with Eutychian Errors. From Christ 565.

Justin, the second of that Name, Son Justin the II. his Successor.
to the Sister of Justinian, succeeded him in the Empire. A vicious Prince, and
very cruel to one Justin, his near Kinsman, whom he put to death out of Envy,
sugjested against him, because of the Reputation he acquired by his excellent
Qualities.

He was ungrateful to Narses, whom he treated ignominously, after the great
Services this brave Eunuch had rendered to The History of Marses. The Lombards
in Italy.
the Empire, which occasioned considerable Disorders; for Narses incenst by his
ill usage, called the Lombards into Italy.

Neither Be^isarius nor Narses, are to be thought to have been Eunuchs,
according to the common Acceptance of the Word, but rather Lord Chamberlains
to the Emperor; Eunuchs being one who looks afther the Chambers of a Prince.

These People, originally from Scythia, had planted themselves in the Northern
part of Germany, from whence invited by Narses, they were brought into Italy,
by Albovin or Alboinus their King, who easily became Masters of Friouli, having
taken Aquileia, and afterward Pavia, and Millan, with all that part of Italy,
which from the Name of this People, is still called Lombardy.

In the mean time, Narses being dead, the Emperor sent Longinus into Italy with
the Title of Exarke; he and his Successors The Exark^^e of Ravenna Bishop of
Rome.
in that Command, made their usual residence at Revenna, a Neighboring City to
the Lombards, with design to oppose them, John the Third Bishop of Rome, and
Successor to Pelagius died. From Christ 572.

Albouin, King of the Lombards, having Albouin King of the Lombards
at a great Feast, made his Wife Rosamunda, drink out of a Cup made of the
Scull of her Father; this cruelty so incensed her, that she caused her Husband
to be killed. From Christ 574.

The Lombards put in his place Clophis or Clephes, who died within a Year; the
People The Duke of Lombardy.
being wearied with the Kingly Government, chose Thirty Dukes, to whom the
Administration of the Kingdom was committed. From Christ 575. Bishop of Rome.


Benedict, or Bonosus, Successor to John the Third died. From Christ 577.

Justin by his Debaucherys, fell into a Justin the second's Death. Tiberius the
second Emperor.
great weakness of Body and Mind, and at length died: Tiberius who had
Governed, during the infirmity of Justin, succeeded him at his Death with a
general applause as his great Qualities deserved, being reproved by his Wife
for being too liberal to the Poor; he replied, God would repay him, and soon
after found a vast Treasure, which had been hid by Narses the Eunuch.

In the four Years of his Reign, the Exarks maintained a War in Italy against
the Lombards, while Mauritius, the Lieutenant of Tiberius, made War against the
Persians, with great Glory and Advantage; so that this brave chief, not only
obtained the Honor of a Triumph, but also to marry the Daughter of his Master,
and to be His Death. Mauritius his Successor.
designed his Successor in the Empire; at length Tiberius being dead, Mauritius
took his place with the applause of the Senate and People. From Christ 583.

Lenigildus, King of the Wisigoths, submitted Kings of the Wisigoths in Spain.
himself with all that the Sweve^ were possessed of, viz. Lusitania, and some
other parts more Northern of that Country, where six or Seven Swevish King^ The
end of the Swevish Kings in Spain.
had Reigned successively for the space of a Hundred and Seventy Years.

The Lombards took away the Government Kings of the Lombards.
of their States, from their Thirty Dukes, and reestablished their Monarchy,
by setting Antaris, rather Autharus on the Throne, the Son of Cleophis, or
Clephes, who had been their King.

Under this Antaris, or Autarus, his Subjects who till that time were
Idolaters, They become Christians.
embraced Christianity. But by great misfortune, they who Catechized them,
being Arrians, infected them with their Errors.

On the contrary, the Wisigoths in Spain of Arrians, became Catholics with
their King Ricaredus, the Son and Successor to Lewigildus, Hermenigildus; the
Eldest, had before made profession of the Catholic Faith, by the persuasion of
his Wife, a French Princess, which caused a great difference between this
Prince and his Father, who was extremely bigoted to Arrianism, so that at last
they came to an open War, wherein Hermenigildus being taken Prisoner, his
Father caused him to be beheaded.

Pelagius the second, Bishop of Rome, Bishop of Rome.
Successor to Benedict, died of the Plague, which desolated Italy. From Christ
598.

Antaris, or Autharus, King of the Lombards Kings of the Lombards.
being dead, they gave to Theodolinda his Queen Dowager, the power to name a
Successor for her Bed, and for the Throne: She chose Aigulphus, to whom, as
well as to all the Kingdom, she procured the greatest Happiness, persuading
them to become Catholics. In the six Become Catholics.
Years that followed this Conversion, Aigulphus or Egilolphus, enlarged his
Kingdom by the conquest of Perousia, Spoletta, Beneventum and Cortona.

Of the four Sons of Clotaire, Charibert Kings of the French
King of Paris, dying without issue Male, Sigibert King of Metz, and Chilperic
King of Soissons, quarrelled about the Succession. Sigibert having overcome
Chilperick in Battle, took Paris, but he was killed soon after by the
Intriegues of Fredegonda, whom Chilperic had espouzed in the place of Audery
his lawful Wife; so Chilpric became Master of Paris, yet but for a short time:
For Frediganda caused him to be killed by Landry de la Tour, her Gallant, to
prevent Landry de la Tour.
the Effects of the Kings just displeasure, who had discovered the Intreagues
of Fredigunda and Landry. Chilperic had put to death Meroveus and Clovis, whom
he had by his Wife Audery; so Clotaire the second, whom he had by Fredegunda.
Fredegunda, succeeded him.

On the other side, Gontrian King of Orleans, dying without Children, let by
his last Testament, his Dominions to his other Nephew Childebart, King of
Austrasia, who by what was left him, becoming very powerful, made a resolution
to revenge the death of his Father on Fredegunda, but he was overcome in Battle
by her, who was there present, holding in her Arms the Young. Clotaire.

Childebert, being deeply perplexed, and, ashamed to have been overcome by a
Woman, fell sick and died, leaving two Sons, Theodobert King of Austrasia, and
Thierry King of Burgundia both of them under Brunehault.
the care of Bruneh^ult their Grandmother, the Widow of Sigebert, King of
Austrasia.

So all the French Monarky being Governed by two Women, one as wicked as the
other, it was not long before they fell out.

Fredegunda was the more Fortunate; for she had always great Success in War
against Brunehault, so that she left her Son Clotaire in quiet Possession of
the Kingdoms of Paris and Soissons. This Woman though she was guilty of many
Crimes, yet died a natural Death.

Aigulphus King of the Lombards, had made Peace with the Exark in Italy; the
Emperor Mauritius, also concluded a Peace with Cosroes, the Son, Successor and
Murderer of his Father Hormisdas; and in France, Brunehauld lost her credit
with her two Grandsons. The three Kings lived in great Amity, so that there was
a A General Peace.
General Peace at the end of this Century. From Christ 600.

The learned Men, who lived at that The Learned Men. Jornandes
time, were Jornandes a Gothish Bishop, who Writ the History of the Wars
between his Nation and the Romans. Agathyas, Agathyas.
a Grecian, Writ the History of Justin, and of Justinian, with the Exploits of
Bellisarius and Narses.

Count Marcellinus composed the Annals Marcellinus.
from the death of Valens, to the 20th Year of Justinian. Evagrius, the
Ecclesiastical Evagrius
History from the time where Zozomenus ended to the 12th. year of Mauritius.
Gregory Gregory of Tours.
Bishop of Tours, the History of the French, from the beginning of their
Monarky, to the end of this Age.

The Seventh Age.
THe Sclavonians, a people of Scythia, The Sclavonians.
past the Danube, and and possessed several Provinces of the Empire, from whence
they were expelled by an Army which the Emperor Mauritius sent against them;
but this victorious Army having Mutined, proclaimed Phocas Emperor, one Phocas
Emperor.
of their chief Leaders: This Rebel marched presently to Constantinople, and
made himself Master of it, where he seized on The Death of Mauritius.
the Emperor Mauritius, and cut off his Head. From Christ 603.

After he had done the same to his Children before their Fathers Eyes, which he
endured with a Resignation and Patience, most like a Christian: He was ^ Prince
worthy of high esteem for his great Qualitys, had he not dishonored them by
his extreme Avarice, of which he gave a most cruel Example, upon an occasion
where he suffered a great number of Prisoners, taken by the Sclavonians to be
slaughtered, rather then he would ransom them at a Crown a head, the
Sclavonians offering to release them for that price.

Gregory, Bishop of Rome, called the Great, Gregory the Great, Bishop of Rome.
Successor to Pelagius the second, died.

Among his Works, there are somethings very curious; others tainted with
Superstition, which began to be introduced into the Church. It is also marked of
him, that he refused to explain the Maxims of Christianity; he is likewise
much blamed for the flattering ways he used to Phocas, who was rather looked on
as a Tyrant, then a lawful Emperor. From Christ 604.

The Native Britans had been Christians for three or four Centurys; but the
English The affairs of England
Saxons, who had been Masters of that Island, for a Hundred and Fifty Years,
were Pagans: They had divided their Conquests into several Monarkys; Ethelbert,
King Ethelbert turn^d Christian.
King of Mercia, which was the greatest of those Kingdoms, by the persuasion of
Birtha his Wife, a French Princess, was very willing to embrace Christianity;
upon which, Gregory sent him Augustine the Augustine the Monk sent into England.
Monk, with some others, who Baptized him, and introduced as much, as they
could possibly, the Ceremonies of Rome into that Church, which the Ancient
British Bishops fiercly opposed. From Christ 605.

Sabinianus, Bishop of Rome, and Successor Bishop^ of Rome.
to Gregory, was remarkable for nothing, but for his hatred he expressed against
the Memory of his Predecessor, and for his most sordid Avarice: There was a
Years interval between his Death, and the Election of Boniface the Third; and
ten Months from the Death of that Boniface, and the choosing of Boniface the
Fourth. From Christ 607.

In the time of Gregory, John, called the Younger, Bishop of Constantinople,
had assumed The Title of universal Bishop.
the Title of Universal Bishop. Gregory had reprehended him for it, in very
sharp Terms; alleging, that this haughty Title could not be usurped by any
one, but the Forerunner of Antichrist: In the mean time, the two Bonifaces, who
succeeded Gregory, addressed themselves to Phocas, to obtain that Title; to
which he complied, on Condition, that they should acknowledge him lawful
Emperor. So that the Roman Pontificate may be said to have obtained the Title
of Head of the Church, not from St. Peter, but from the Emperor Phocas.

The Tyrannick Government of this Usurper, Phocas killed.
provoked at last the Grandees of the Empire to kill him. The Conspirators set
up in his place, Heraclius one of the Heraclius
chiefest among them. From Christ 610.

Theodebert, King of Austrasia, scandalized at the most dissolute Life of his
Grandmother Kings of the French
Brunehauld, banished her his Court: She being retired to the Court of her
other Grandson Thierry, King of Burgundy, persuaded him, that Theodebert was
not the Son of Childebert, which made a War between the two Brothers, where
Theodebert was killed: Not long after, Brunehauld disgusted by Thierry,
poisoned him, and set up for King, one of his Bastards: But The Death of
Brunehault.
the Nobility of the two Kingdoms of Austrasia, and Burgundy, not being able
longer to suffer this most wicked Woman, delivered her up to Clotaire; who
punished her as her most heinous Crimes deserved: So all the Royal Members of
the French Monarchy were reunited, under one Chief, Clotair the Second. From
Christ 614.

John the Exarch was slain by the People, enraged against him, for laying too
The affairs of Italy.
heavy Taxes on them.

Eleutherius, who was chose in his place, abusing the Peoples Favors, declared
himself King of Italy. He enjoyed that Royalty but a very short time; for he
was soon after killed by those who had chosen him.

Deodatus, Bishop of Rome, and Successor Bishop of Rome.
to Boniface the Fourth, died, and had for his Successor Boniface the Fifth.

The eight following Years were spent A War against the Persians.
by Heraclius, in making War against Cosroes King of Persia, who had seized on
a part of Asia the Lesser, and of all Syria: Heraclius drove him from thence,
and pursued him even beyond Euphrates, having gained many Advantages over him
in all Rencounters. From Christ 625.

Boniface the Fifth, Bishop of Rome, being Bishop ^f Rome.
dead, Honarius succeeded him. From Christ 626.

Cosroes having chose his younger Son Kings of Persia.
for his Successor, was, for that Reason, killed by his eldest Son Siro^s; who
by that means ascended the Throne, and presently concluded a Peace with
Heraclius; restoring to him, among other Condititions, a piece of the Wood of
the Cross, A piece of the Cross.
on which it was said, our Savior was crucified: Heraclius believing it,
carried it back to Jerusalem, from whence Cosroes had brought it. From Christ
628.

Anastatius, Bishop of Antioch, framed the Heresy of the Monothelites, which
was Monothelites.
a Sequel of Eutychianism.

Mahomet died: He had begun to publish Mahomet.
his Errors in the twelfth Year of this Age, in Ziden, a City of Arabia Faelix,
his Native Country; where his Doctrine being not at all relished, he was
constrained to fly to Meccha; where he was well received: From the Time of his
Flight, which happened in the Two and twentieth Year of this Century, they took
their Era, or Epoche, which they call Elgeir; that is The Egira of the
Mahum^tans.
to say, the Flight; which is termed Egira by Corruption. From Christ 631.

In the space of nine Years after his Retreat, he seduced all Arabia, and a
part of Persia.

After his Death, his Father-in-Law, Abubeker, Abubeker. C^^im
conquered the rest of the Country; with Isdigerdes, Son of Siroes, who
murdered his Father.

With the Death of Isdigerdes, ended the Dinasty of the Kings of Persia,
originally of that Country.

The remainder of Persia having been conquered by Abubeker, who was then made
Caliph of the Mahometans; which Dignity empowered him with an absolute
Authority over them, as well Spiritual as Temporal. From Christ 632.

Omar, Successor to Abubeker, and Sonin-Law Omar Successor to Abubeker. His
Conquests.
to Mahomet, conquered in six Years from Heraclius, Mesopotamia, Syria, with
Palestine, Egypt, and all the Coasts of Africa, which at present is called
Barbary. From Christ 638.

Pope Honorius died. It appeared by his Honorius a Monothelite.
Writings, that he approved the Errors of the Monothelites. From Christ 639.

The Sea of Rome had in a short time Popes of Rome.
these three Popes, Severinus, John the 4th, and Theodorus. From Christ 641.

Heraclius died. He was infected with The Death of Heraclius.
Monothelitism, by the three Patriarchs, of the three great Sees, in the East,
Sergius of Constantinople, Cyrus of Alexandria, and Anastatius of Antioch.

Constantine the Third succeeded his Father Constantine the III. Emperor.
Heraclius. This new Prince was poisoned at the end of four Months, by his
Stepmother Martina, the Widow of Heraclius; who, by that means, placed on the
Throne, her Son Heracleon, whom she had by Heraclius: But the Senate, and
People, soon after expelled this Woman; and having cut off the Nose and Ears of
her Son Heracleon, set on the Imperial Throne, Constant, the Second Son to
Constantine the Constantine the II. Emperor
Third, and Grandson to Heraclius. From Christ 642.

Dagobert succeeded his Father- Clotaire, the Second; and Aripert, to whom his
Father Kings of France.
had given Aquitain, being dead without Issue, his Brother Dagobert was King of
The Abbey of St. Denis.
all France. He founded the famous Abbey of St. Denis, near Paris. From Christ
644.

In his Lifetime he gave Austrasia to his eldest Son Sigibert; when he died,
he left the rest of his Kingdom to Cl^uis the Second, his younger Son. Both of
the Kings being very young, their Persons, and their Kingdoms, were governed by
the Majors of their Courts; and from Majors of their Palaces.
thence, those who possessed this high Charge, and Command, began to assume a
Sovereign Authority in France, which was continued by their Successors. From
Christ 649.

Pope Theodorus died. He had condemned a Type, or Form of Confession of the
Popes.
Faith of the Monothelites, framed by Pyrrhus, Patriarch of Constantinople, and
other Patriarchs of Constantinople had maintained it, under the Emperor
Constant.

Theodorus had condemned this Type in a Council at Rome, where the Condemnation
had been signed, with Ink mixed with Wine of the Eucharist.

Martinus, Successor to Theodorus, did also condemn this Type; and for that
very The Type of the Monothelites.
Cause, the Exarch, Calliopas, sent him Prisoner to Constantinople, to
Constant; who banished him into the Taurick Chersonese; where, at five Years
end, he died of extreme Want. From Christ 654.

In the mean time the Mohammedan Arabs, who began to be called Saracens, made
The Saracens. Their Conquests. The Coloss of Rhodes broke in pieces.
themselves Masters of Syria, of the Isle of Rhodes, and of part of Sicily. At
Rhodes they broke in pieces the famous Colossus, fallen down about a thousand
Years before. They sold it in several Pieces to a Jew, who was forced to employ
Nine hundred Camels to carry them away.

After the taking of Rhodes, the Saracens Constantinople besieged by the
Saracens.
besieged Constantinople; but were repulsed, though they gained a Naval Victory,
where there was so much Blood spilt, that the Sea was colored with it.

The Exarch Calliopas, ordered Eugenius Popes.
to be sent to Rome, in the place of the banished Martinus; after whose Death
Eugenius possessed the Chair again six Months; Vitallianus was his Successor.
From Christ 655.

Haly, one of the Sons-in-Law of Mahomet, Haly Caliph.
after he had for some time disputed the Dignity of Caliph of the Saracens,
with one Mahuvias, at last he willingly gave place to him. From Christ 660.

Constant forced his Brother Theodosius to be a Deacon in the Church; and after
that, he cruelly put him to Death. The great Remorse he had after it, made him
to leave Constantinople. He past into Sicily, and from thence to Rome; where
the Pope Constant comes to Rome.
with all his Clergy, went out to meet him. The Romans expressed exceeding
great Joy, to see an Emperor there, when they had been deprived a long time of
that Honor: But their Joy was soon turned to Sorrow; for Constant plundered
them with as much Barbarity, as ever the Goths and Vandals had done.

Clouis the Second, had left for his Successor, Kings of France.
Clotaire the Third, King of Neustria, or the Western part of France; who also
became King of the Easterns, or Austrasia, by the Death of Sigebert, who left
no Sons.

Clotaire the Third, had for his Successor, his Son Childeric, and he his Son
Thyerry. From Christ 667.

Constant died in Sicily: His Son Constantine The Death of Constant.
Constantine IV. called Pogonat. Mizizius the Usurper
the Fourth, called Pogonat, or the Bearded Prince, being come to
Constantinople, did overcome and kill Mizizius, who had usurped the Imperial
Throne in the absence of the Emperor: So Constantine was acknowledged Emperor
by the Senate and People.

Adeodatus succeeded Vitalian in the Sea Popes.
of Rome. From Christ 669.

The Saracens, who possessed Syracusa in The Saracens repulsed before
Constantinople.
Sicily, twice besieged Constantinople in one Year, and were as often repulsed,
with very great loss of their Army and Ships. From Christ 672.

Adeodatus had for his Successor Domnus, Popes.
and after him Agathon; all three were so inconsiderable, that History only
names them, without any Remarks; excepting the last, who obtained of
Constantine, to be exempt from paying a certain Sum, which the Emperors
required of the Popes, and to have leave to be Consecrated. From Christ 678.

Constantine called a Council at Constantinople, against the Monothelites,
where their A Council at Constantinople.
Errors were condemned. All those Bishops and Priests who were infected with
it, were deposed, and the Memory of the Dead, who had asserted them, were
Anathematized; among the rest, that of Pope Honorius. From Christ 680.

Agathon had to succeed him, Leo the 2d. There were two Things of him not
unworthy Popes.
to be observed; one, That he forbid to take, from that time, Money, as his
Predecessors had used, for the Pallium, which they sent to Archbishops.

The other, He put an end to the Schism, which had been, a long time, between
the Church of Rome, and that of Ravenna.

He had obtained of the Emperor, That the Archbishops of Ravenna, should from
that time, be always Consecrated at Rome.

Benedict the Second, prevailed also with Constantine, That the Popes should,
from that time, be Consecrated, without waiting for the Emperor's Permission.
From Christ 684.

Constantine died this Year, and Justinian Justinian II.
the Second, his Son, succeeded him. From Christ 685.

John the Fifth, Conon, and Sergius succeeded, Popes.
one after the other, in the space of less than Two Years. From Christ 687.

Abdelemech the Caliph, took possession Abdelmelech Caliph
of Armenia, and ravaged the Oriental Provinces of the Empire. From Christ 693.

Leontius usurped the Throne, and expelled Justinian; and after he had cut off
his Nose, banished him into the Taurick Chersonese. From Christ 694.

The Army that Leontius sent into Africa against the Saracens, revolted, and
proclaimed for Emperor, one of their Chiefs, named, Tiberius Absimarus; who
being Absimarus deposes Leontius.
come to Constantinople, deposed Leontius, and placed himself in the Throne,
having cut off his Nose, as he had done to Justinian.

Cracus, Duke of the Sarmatians, or Cracovia founded.
Polanders, founded Cracovia. From Christ 398.

In France succeeded to Thierry, one after Kings of France.
the other, his Sons, Childebert the Second, and Clouis the Third. From Christ
700.

The Eighth Age.
JOHN the Sixth, succeeded Sergius in Popes.
the Sea of Rome.

Justinian escaped out of Prison, and being Justinian reestablished.
supplied with the Forces of the Avarians, and Bulgarians, took Constantinople,
put himself again in possession of the Empire, cut off the Heads of Leontius,
and Leontius and Absimares beheaded.
Absimares, and imprisoned all those who abetted to depose him; and by degrees
he treated them all in the same manner, as they had served him; that is, he
caused their Noses to be cut off. From Christ 704.

Aripert, King of the Lombards, gave to Pope John the Seventh, Successor to
John Popes.
the Sixth, the Alps.

Justinian assembled at Constantinople, the A Council in Trullo.
Council, called, In Trullo, from one of the Halls in the Imperial Palace,
where it was held. The Greeks called that Council the Sixth; because they did
nothing, but only confirmed the Condemnation that had been before made against
the Monothelites. From Christ 707.

Pope Zizinnius succeeded John the Seventh, Popes.
and Constantine succeeded him. From Christ 708.

Justinian, under pretense he had been ill treated in his Exile, by the
Inhabitants of the Taurica Chersonesus, took a most cruel Revenge of them;
which made them to revolt against him, under the Conduct Philippicus Emperor.
of Patricius Philippicus, their Governor; who found means to kill Justinian,
and to Justinian killed.
set up himself in his place. From Christ 713.

A little while after, Philippicus had his Anastatius Artemius Emperor.
Eyes put out by his Secretary, Anastatius Artemius, who thus raised himself to
the Imperial Throne.

Roderic King of the Wisigoths in Spain, The end of the Kings of the Wisigoths
in Spain.
having ravished the Wife of Count Julian, Governor of those Places this King
possessed on the Coasts of Africa: The injured Husband being enraged, to revenge
himself, brought the Saracens into Spain; of which they became Masters in a
short time, having overcome and killed Roderic in Battle. From Christ 714.

Theodosius Treasurer of the Army, which Theodosius III. Emperor.
Anastatius sent to Rhodes, against the Saracens, is proclaimed Emperor by that
Army; with which the new Prince being come to Constantinople, he seized upon
Anastatius, caused him to be shaved, and to be shut up in a Cloister; and so
Theodosius the Third, possessed himself of the Empire. From Christ 715.

But the Army that made War in Armenia, Leo II. Emperor.
proclaimed. Emperor, Leo Isauricus, their General; who vanquished Theodosius
in a Battle: Upon which this Theodosius divesting himself of the Empire, was
made a Priest, and Leo was acknowledged Emperor by the Senate, and People, of
Constantinople.

In the two following Years, the Saracens The Saracens defeated before
Constantinople.
twice attacked Constantinople: But Leo forced them to retire back the first
time, and at the second he totally routed their Army. From Christ 718.

The Saracens being possessed of Rhodes, and the greatest part of Sicily, in
that very same Year, likewise, made themselves Masters of Sardinin. It was
credibly reported, that the Body of St. Augustine was The Relics of St.
Augustine.
buried in that Island; it having been brought thither from Africa. Luitprand,
King of the Lombards, bought it at a great Price of the Saracens. From Christ
720.

In France, Dagobert the Second, had succeeded his Father Childebert; and the
Successor to Dagobert, was one Daniel, who was Kings of France.
called Chi^peric; to whom succeeded Thierry de Chelles. Under the Name of
these Fantoms of Kings, Charles, Surnamed Martel, Charles Martel.
had the Sovereign Administration of the Kingdom, with the Title of Prince, or
Duke of the French: He was Bastard-Son to Pepin, who had been Mayor of the
Palace, under the Kings, Predecessors to those before named.

Gregory the Second having succeeded Popes.
Pope Constantine, excommunicates, and declares Leo to have forfeited his Right
to the Empire, because this Emperor had A Quarrel about Images*
made a Law against Worshipping of Images, which was introduced into the Greek
Church.

In consequence of the Pope's Excommunication, Luitprand King of the Lombards,
being in League with Gregory, seized on the Exarchat of Ravenna; the Exarch,
and almost all the Emperor's Officers, having been killed in that War. The King
of Lombardy, and the Pope, divided between them the conquered Towns. From
Christ 729.

A great Number of the Saracens of Spain, The Saracens defeated near Tours, in
a Battle.
having past into France, under the Command of Abderacmanus, or Abderamus,
Charles Martel defeated them near Toursin; a Battle where Abderamus was killed,
with more than Three hundred thousand of his Soldiers. From Christ 430.

The Quarrel about Images depending* Gregory the Third* Successor to Gregory
the Popes.
Second, continued to maintain their Worship, against the Emperor Leo.

After the Death of Thierry, Titular King The Affairs of France. Th^^ p^o^ts of
Charles Martel.
of France, there were six or seven Years of an Interregnum: Charles Martel, in
the mean time, possessed of the whole Sovereign Power, and Authority, forced
Eude, Duke of Aquitain, with his Sons, and Successors, Hunaut, and Hatton, to
pay him Homage: He drove out the Saracens from Provence, and the Lower
Langu^do^, and pursued his Conquests against them into the midst of Spain.

In that Country, Pelagius, as he said, was descended from the ancient Kings of
the W^sigoths, and had set up himself against the Saracens, in the Mountains of
Asturia; as likewise did his Son Favila, who left his small Dominions to
Alphonso his Brother-in-Law, who found means to aggrandize himself, by the
Advantages Charles Martel had gained over the Saracens. From Christ 740.

The Emperor Leo died: His Memory The Death of Leo.
has been as much calumniated by the Image-Worshippers, as it was revered by
the contrary Party. The Historians of his time, applaud him for many Virtues,
and say, he was a Religious Observer of the six first Councils.

Constantine the Fifth, Sur-named Capronimus, Constantine Capronimus succeeds
Leo. Popes.
his Son, succeeded him. From Christ 741.

Gregory the Third died; he was fallen* out with Luytprand, K. of the Lombards,
who had besieged him at Rome, and had taken him there; had it not been by the
Intercession of Charles Martel, whose Help the Pope implored; and at the same
time sent him the Keys of the Sepulcher of St. Peter, with the Title of
Patrician. Gregory had to succeed him, Zachari^s.

In that time lived John Damascene, and Beda. The Death of Charles Martel. H^^
^^ree Sons.


Charles Martel died: He was so powerful, that he left his Three Sons,
Ca(...)an* P^pin, and Grypho, Masters of the Kingdom of France. From Christ 742.

Artabasades, Brother-in-Law to Constantine, Artabasades Revolt punished.
caused himself to be proclaimed Emperor, at Constantinople; where re-assuming
his Authority, he seized on the Usurper, and ordered his Eyes to be put out.

Hildebrand, Grandson to Luytprand, King Kings of the Lombards
of the Lombards, was by them deposed, and Rachis set up in his place. From
Christ 743.

This Prince compiled a Supplement to the Laws of that Nation: He made himself
a Monk; upon which the Lombards substituted Aistulphus.

Carloman turning also a Monk, the sole Pepin sole Monarch of France.
Power of the French Monarchy devolved to Pepin: Grypho being so
inconsiderable, that they made no Account of him. From Christ 750.

At length Pepin was solemnly declared He is declared King.
King, by an Assembly of the principal of that Nation. After the Death of his
Father, he had given the Title of King to Childeric, who was said to be of the
Blood Royal.

This wretched Fantom was shaved, and put into a Monastery. From Christ 752.

Pope Zacharias died: He had consented Pope^*
to all that was done in France: He was neither a skilful Geographer, nor a
learned Theologian: For as to the first, he excommunicated a Bishop, for
asserting, there were Antipodes. And for the second, he held the Opinion of the
Jews, in what related to the eating of clean or unclean Meat.

Constantine* caused a Council to be held T^^ Council cond^mned Images.
at Constantinople, where the Worship of Images was condemned. From Christ 754.

Alstulphus, King of the Lombards, having taken Ravenna, Pope Stephen the
Second came into France, to implore Help of Pepin.

This King going into Italy, forced the Pepin in Italy.
King of the Lombards to restore what he had taken. From Christ 756.

Hunau't, Duke of Aquitain, being turned Monk, and Giafre his Son refusing to
pay Homage to Pepin, this Prince compelled him to do his Duty.

Pope Paul had succeeded his Brother Popes.
Stephen the Second; Paul being dead, Toto Duke of Nepesinum, set up by Force,
in that See, his Brother Constantine. At the same time, an opposite Faction
chose one Philip: And a Third Faction, Stephen, the Third of that Name; whose
Faction being the strongest, prevailed, and sent Philip back to the Monastry,
whence he was taken, and caused the Eyes of Constantine to be put out. There be
those also who write, that he was burnt by the Priests of a Synod, where he had
been deposed. From Christ 768.

Pepin died, leaving Neustria to Charles, (...) Death (...) P^pin.
his eldest Son; and Austrasia to his younger Son Carloman. From Christ 769.

Carloman having lived but two Years after his Father, all the French Monarchy
descended to Charlemain, so called for his high Merit, and great Actions. From
Christ 771.

After Stephen the Third, Adrian was Popes.
Pope; who being at Difference with Dedier King of the Lombards, Successor to
Aistulphus, this King divested him of the greatest part of the Exarchat of
Ravenna: The Pope had recourse to Charlemain, who past into Italy, and in the
space of two Years, having had great Success over Dedier, at last took him in
Pavia; which put an end to the Kingdom of the Lombards, after it had lasted
above Two hundred Years. Dedier died in France, where he was sent Prisoner.
From Christ 774.

Charlemain being victorious, made himself Charlemain King of Italy.
to be Crowned King of Italy, by the Archbishop of Millan, in a little Town
called Monza; where was kept the Iron The Iron Crown.
Crown of the ancient Kings of Lombardy.

The Emperor Constantine died, leaving The Death of Constantine.
his Memory to be detested by the Image-Worshippers, and to be honored by
those who opposed that Worship.

His Son, and Successor, Leo the Fourth, Leo IV. his Son, and Successor.
followed his Father's Opinion in that Point. From Christ 775.

Adalgize, the Son of Dedier, having by Adalgize the Son of Dedyer, drivec ou^
of Italy, by Charlemain.
the Assistance of the Emperor Leo, regained part of Lombardy, Charlemain
returned thither, drove out Adalgize, and recovered all he had taken. From
Christ 776.

Charlemain made his first Expedition against His first War against the Saxons.
the Saxons; which was attended with his usual good Success.

In an Assembly held by him at Paderburn, he was importuned to pass into Spain
Against the Saracens in Spain.
against the Saracens, by Adala, one of their Kings, who was at Difference with
the other Kings of that Country. From Christ 777.

Charlemain went thither, where he conquered all the Country that lies along
the Pyreneans, from one Sea to the other; containing Navarre, Arragon, and
Catalonia; yet he received a Check in his return, at the Pass of Roncevaux, in
the Pyreneans; where he lost, among others, his Nephew, Orlando killed.
the famous Orlando.

The Saxons having been often beaten, Vindikind Duke of the Saxons.
and as often reduced, at last submitted themselves, embracing Christianity
with their brave Duke Vindikind.

The Emperor Leo the Fourth died, in The Death of Leo IV.
high Esteem with those who were against Worshipping of Images; and, on the
contrary, as much condemned by those who favored it.

His Son, and Successor, Constantine the Sixth, called Porphyrogenitus, being
not above Constantine VI. Irene his Mother.
Nine Years old, was left under the Tutelage of his Mother Irene. From Christ
780.

She called together a Council at Nice, The Second Council at Nice for Images.
to establish the Worship of Images, which was done by a Concert between the
Eastern Bishops of Irene's Party, and the Legates of Pope Adrian. From Christ
787.

Charlemain caused a Council to be assembled The Council at Franckfort against
Images.
at Franckfort, on the Main, where he was present with Three hundred Bishops,
from all parts of the West; who condemned the Worship of Images: Nor did Pope
Adrian, whose Legates were there, oppose this Condemnation. From Christ 794.

This Pope died, having sat in the Papal Popes.
Chair Twenty four Years: In all which time, he managed himself so dexterously
between the two great Powers of Christendom, that he was equally esteemed by
both, though their Interests and Sentiments were very different, especially in
what related to Images. Pope Leo III. his Successor, demanded, and obtained of
Charlemain, to be confirmed in his Election. From Christ 796.

Constantine being grown up a Man, Irene, Irene' s Cruelty to her Son.
his Mother, finding she could no longer support her Authority in the
Government, in a Rage, put out her Son's Eyes. Heaven was so highly incensed at
this horrid Cruelty, that for Seventeen Days Constantinople was deprived of the
Light of the Sun. From Christ 797.

Pope. Leo having been put in Prison by his Predecessor's Kindred, who accused
him of many Crimes, the Commissaries of Charlemain released him: He then came
into France, to justify himself before Charlemain, The King sent him back to
Rome, where he also went himself, in the last Year of this Century, to be fully
informed of that Affair. The Pope cleared himself by his Oath, which the King
made him take. This being done, the Romans proclaimed Charlemain Emperor.
King Charlemain, Emperor; the Pope, with the chief of the City, paid him
Homage on their Knees. From Christ 800.

The Ninth Age.
THE Senate and People of Constantinople, wearied with the ill Government of a
very perverse, unnatural, Woman, Irene expelled. Nicephorus Emperor. The Treaty
between him and Charlemain.
expelled Irene, and placed on the Imperial Throne, Nicephorus, one of the
chief Officers of the Court.

Charlemain treated with Nicephorus, about the Rights and Laws of the Empire.
The two Emperors agreed to divide the Titles and Privileges of their Empires;
so that Charles, and his Successors, should have the Western Parts, as
Nicephorus, and his Successors, the Eastern, From Christ 803.

The Seven following Years were peaceable in the West; on the contrary, in the
East, the Caliph Aaron waged War so successfully, A disadvantageous Peace with
the Caliph.
th(...)e forced Nicephorus to demand a Peace, disgraceful to him, and the
Empire: For by the Articles, he was obliged to pay a Tribute to the Caliph, and
particularly for his Head, and for the Head Nicephorus killed. Michael
Curopalatus, Emperor, and made himself a Monk
of his Son Stauratius. From Christ 810.

Nicephorus was killed in a Battle against the Bulgarians; his Son Stauratius
being dangerously wounded, fled to Constantinople: But he was there compelled
to resign the Empire to Michael Curopalatus; who enjoyed it but two Years; for
in an extreme Fit of Melancholy, occasioned by his being overcome by the
Bulgarians, he turned Monk, and Leo the Fifth, an Armenian, Leo V: Emperor.
made Emperor of the East in his place. From Christ 813.

The Emperor Charlemain died in the The Death of Charlemain.
Seventy Second Year of his Age, and the Forty Eighth of his Reign in France,
and the Fourteenth of his Emperialship: A Prince endued with all the greatest
Qualities could be desired in a Monarch, except his Incontinence: He was
greatly learned; he had for his Tutor, the famous The University of Paris
founded. Grimbaud founded Oxford and Cambridge. Kings of England.
Alcuin, an Englishman; who, it is said, was the first Founder of the
University of Paris; as also, that Grimbaud, his Disciple, went over into
England, and laid the Foundations of the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge.
From Christ 814.

England was become one sole Monarchy, under King Egbart; Edgar, his Successor,
reigned at that time: It was he who sent for Grimbaud, upon ^^e Occasion
beforementioned.

Of three lawful Sons that Charlemain The Three Sons of Charlemain.
had, Charles, the eldest, died without Issue.

Pepin, who died before his Father, had left his Son Bernard, to succeed him in
the Kingdom of Italy. Louis the Debonair, Emperor and King of France.


Louis, Sur-named, The Debonair, enjoyed all the rest, with the Title of
Emperor, and King of France.

Pope Leo the Third, had for his Successor, Popes.
Stephen the Fourth, who did not wait to be confirmed by Louis, but came
presently into France, and Crowned Louis at Rheims; This Pope died, and had
Pascall for his Successor. From Christ 817.

Bernard King of Italy, attempted to dethrone his Uncle Lewis; but this young
Prince being abondoned by all his adherents, came and threw himself at his
Unkles feet, but this Louis so Debonair, and Clement, to all others, was not at
all so to his Nephew, for he most cruelly caused his Eyes to be put out, of
which he soon after died. From Christ 818. The Death of Bernard King of Italy.
Michael Balbus, Emperor.


At Constantinople Michael Balbus, a great person in the Court but of obfcure
Parentage, convicted of Treason, for which he was condemned to dye; found means
to escape out of Prison, and to kill the Emperor Leo, and to set himself on his
Throne.

Pascall died, he had acquitted himself Popes.
by his Oath of the Accusation made against him, to have put to death two Noble
Romans, Friends to the French, to whom this Pope was an Enemy. Eugenius the
second Succeeded him, and to this last Valentine, who dying at the end of
forty days, Gregory the Fourth was Elected in his place. From Christ 826.

The Saracens of Spain had reconquered all that Charlemaine had took from them,
except Catalonia: The Naverroise abandoned by the French, chose for their King
Eneco, or Inigo Arista, who was also chose Inigo Aristo King of Navarre, and
Arragon.
King by those of Arragon

Michael Balbus, Emperor of the East, died, after he had lived such a Life,
that witnessed he had neither Conscience, nor Religion: Theophylus his Son and
Suecessor Theophylus Emperor of the East.
had Qualities, far different from those of his Father. From Christ 828.

The Emperor Louis by his first Marriage had Three Sons, Lothaire, Pepin and
Louis; he gave to each of them a part of his Dominions, with the Title of King.

Italy to Lothaire, whom he had also Associated to the Empire. Aquitain to
Pepin, and Bavaria to Louis. The three Brothers displeased that their Father
had also given Burgundy, with the Title of King, to his Fourth Son Charles,
whom he had of Judith his second Wife; They conspired against They Conspire
against their Father.
the good King and his Queen, and put them up in a Convent; then Degraded Louis
of the Empire in a Council held at Compeign; But within a year after he Then
Re-established.
was Re-establisht by the Grandees of the Kingdom. From Christ 834.

Pepin King of Aquitain dyed, leaving a Pepin the younger King of Aquitaine.
Son of the same name, from whom his Grandfather, took away a part of his
Dominions to bestow them on his beloved Son Charles, Louis the Debonaire died,
Louis le Debonaire Dies.
he had that Surname beause of his sweet Disposition and obliging Nature, which
was thought to have been too great, because it degenerated into an Easiness,
and Softness, unbecoming a King.

After his Death, his Sons made a bloody War against one another; Lonhair who
had the Title of Emperor, Joined with his Nephew Pepin King of Aquitain,
against Louis King of Bavaria, and Charles King of Neustria. The two Parties
came near to Fountaney in Burgundy, and found such a bloody Battle, that never
were so many French slain in one day; for there was killed a Hundred thousand
Men on both sides, so that the Armies being equally disabled, they were forced
to make Peace. From Christ 841.

The three Brothers, concluding a Treaty without making the least mention of
Pepin, agreed that Charles should have The Empire divided between the Three
Brothers.
Neustria or the Western France, Louis the Eastern with Bavaria, and all that
lay beyond the Rhine; from thence it had the Surname of Germany: Lothaire with
the Title of Emperor had Italy, France, Gaul, Narbonese and Austrasia: This
last Country was called Lotherne, or the Kingdom of The Name of Lorraine.
Lothaire by Contraction or Corruption, it was afterward called Lorraine. From
Christ 834.

Gregory the Fourth died, he had Abetted Popes.
the Revolt of the Sons of Lewis against their Father; his Successor Pope
Sergius did not wait for the Emperors Confirmation, but the Emperor resented
that Affront as became him, and took those* Measures, that the like should not
happen again; so that From Christ 844.

Leo the Fourth, who succeeded Sergius, durst not offer to Execute the Papal
Authority without the Emperors Confirmation. From Christ 847.

The Normans began to infest the Seas, The Normans.
and to Ravage the Coasts of France.

The French Britains re-establisht their The Re-establishment of the Kingdom
of Brittany.
little Monarchy, disturbed by the Conquests Charle^ain had made of their
Country, Neomenes Prince of the Blood of their Ancient Kings, resumed the
Quality of his Ancestors. From Christ 849.

The Saracens ravaged Italy, even to the The Saracens in Italy.
Gates of Rome, where they Plundered and Burnt the Suburbs.

Ramire Son of Alphonso the Chaste King of Leon, obtained a great Victory over
the Saracens in Spain; and by that made himself Master of a part of Castile the
Old.

King Charles of Neustria got to himself Charles recovers Aquitan.
Aquitain from Pepin his Nephew, whom he shut up in a Prison: Where he ended
his Life. From Christ 852.

After Leo the Fourth, there be those who place in the Sea of Rome, a Woman
named Joan, who held it two years: Pop^ Joan
Others say there could be no other than Benet the Third, who immediately
succeeded Leo. From Christ 855.

The Emperor Lothaire made himself a The Emperor Lothaire. made himself a Monk.
Monk in the Abbey of Prom in Lorrain, where he died a little after. He had
divided his Dominions among his three Sons; giving to Lewis the eldest Italy,
with the Title of Emperor Lorrain or Austrasia to Lewis 2d. Emperor.
Lothaire, Burgundy and Provence to Charles. To Bennet the Third, succeedd
Nicholas a strong vigorous Man, and very much inclined to Agrandize the Sea of
Rome. From Christ 858.

Charles King of Neustria, gave Holland The Earledoms of Holland and Flanders.
with the Title of Earldom to Thierry, from whom are descended the Earls of
that Country: As also those of Flanders from Baldwin, to whom the same Charles
gave that County, under the like Title. This Baldwin had stole away one of the
Daughters of Charles, and had Married her against her Fathers consent. The Pope
excomunicated the Lorrain Bishops, who had Divorced their King Lothaire from
his Wife Thidberga: The Bishops on their part Excomunicated the Pope, and the
King Married annother Wife called Valdrada. The Pope having likewise
Excommunicated Popes.
Photius, Patriark of Constantinople, was also Excomunicated by him; the
principle cause of the Quarrel was, that Photius did A Quarrel between the Pope
and the Bishops of Lorrain.
not at all acknowledge the Superiority Nicholaus pretended over all the other
Bishops: The apparent cause was the Deposing Ignatius by Bardas Uncle to the
young Emperor Michael Porphirogenitus Son to Theophilus; Bardas having put
Photius in the place of Ignatius, Nicholaus took the part of the Deposed; the
business remained thus, Basilius of Macedonia whom Michael had raised to the
Empire, from one he had made use of to tame his Horses, and drive his Chariots,
having ungratefully killed Michael, and by that means placing himself on the
Imperial Throne, immediately deposed Photius. From Christ 866.

Pope Nich^las died, he had principally employed himself to aggrandize the
Papal See; and took no Notice of an essential A Dispute between Paschasius and
Bertram, touching the Eucharist. Affairs of France.
Dispute between Paschasius Ratbert, Abbot of Corbia, and Bertram his Monk,
concerning the Eucharist. Adrian the Second succeeded Nicholas.

Lothaire, and Charles being dead, Charles King of Neustria seized on their
Dominions; giving part of Lorrain to his Brother Lewis the Germanick, but
nothing at all to the Emperor Lewis, Brother to the two deceased Kings. From
Christ 869.

The Emperor Bazilius ordered a Council The Eighth General Council.
to be held at Cinstantinople, which was called the Eighth General Council. The
Pope's Legates were there, and prevailed to have Photius deposed, and to have
Ignatius reestablished. In this Emperor's time The Russians turned Christians.
the Russians were converted to Christianity. Adrian the Second died three
Years after this Council was held. From Christ 872.

Lewis the Second, Emperor, died: Charles King of France, his Uncle, arrived at
Rome, before his Brother Lewis the Germanick, and was there Crowned Emperor by
John the Eighth, Successor to Adrian the Second, to the great Regret of Lewis
the Germanick; who died, leaving three Sons, Carloman, Charles, and Lewis, who
shared among them their Father's Dominions, comprising all Germany, and that
part of Austrasia that borders upon it. From Christ 876.

The Emperor Charles, the Second, called The Death of the Emperor Charles the
Bald.
the Bald, died, poisoned by his Physician, a Jew.

Lambert Count of Spoletto, and Albert Marquess of Tuscany, put Pope John in
Prison; from whence being escaped, he fled into France, where in a Council held
at Troy, he crowned Lewis le Begue the Third, Lewis le Begue Emperor.
Emperor, who died about a Year and a half after. He left two Sons, Lewis, and
Carloman, whom he had by a Wife of low Extraction, whom his Father had forced
him to repudiate. From Christ 880.

Tortulus, a Lord of Brittany, having married a Kinswoman of Charles the Bald,
from which Marriage came Ingelger, who was Father to Foulques Rufus, the first
Count of Anjou.

Carloman King of Bavaria, being dead The Death of Carloman.
without lawful Issue, Lewis and Charles divided his Dominions.

Five Princes at that time shared the French Princes.
French Empire: Lewis and Charles, Sons of Lewis the Germanick, in Germany; in
Neustria, Lewis and Carloman, the Sons of Lewis le Begue; and in Burgu^dy, and
in Provence, Boson, who had married the Sister of Charles the Bald.

Of these five Princes, Charles le Gras having Charles le Gras Emperor, the
Third of that Name.
made himself Master of Rouse, was Crowned Emperor by the Pope.

King Lewis died in Germany; the Emperor Charles inherited his Dominions:
Lewis, one of the Kings of Neustria, being The Death of the two Kings, Lewis's.
also dead, Carloman, his Brother, remained the sole King of that Province.
From Christ 882.

He Reigned but two Years, at the end of which dying, the whole Monarchy was
reunited in the Person of Charles the Charles le Gras sole Emperor of France.
Third, Emperor, called the Fat; though there was another Posthumus Son of Lewis
le Begue, named Charles; but so very young, that he was not in the least
capable to Reign.

Pope Adrian the Second died, and had Popes.
to succeed him, Stephen the Fifth. From Christ 885.

Paris besieged, by the Normans, for two The Siege of Paris, by the Normans.
Years, was raised, not by Force of Arms, but by a large Sum, which Charles le
Gras sent them. From Christ 887.

Basilius, Emperor of the East, died, and Leo V. Emperor.
left for his Successor, his Son Leo the Fifth, Sur-nam'd the Philosopher,
whose Diligence in the Government of the Empire, is very much applauded. From
Christ 888.

The Emperor, Charles le Gras, died so Charles le Gras starved to Death.
forsaken, and abandoned by all, that he had not Bread to eat.

There remained but two Princes of all Arnold King of Germany*
the Line of Charlemain; Arnold, Bastard of Carloman, who was acknowledged King
of all the French possessed beyond the Rhine; that is to say, of all Germany: The
Second was Charles called the Simple, the Posthumus Son of Lewis de Begue:
Neustria belonged to him by Right; but Eudes, the Eudes King of Neustria.
Son of Robert the Strong, Count of Anjou, was, by the Neustrians, preferred
before him.

Two other Princes, who were of the Collateral Line of Charlemain, shared
between them what was on this side of the Rhine; that is, Raoul had the two
Burgundies; Raoul King of Burgundy
and Boson, beforementioned, possessed all from Lions, to the Mediterranean,
which was called the Kingdom of Arles. From Christ 889.

In Italy, Guy Duke of Spoleto, and Berenger Guy Emperor of Germany. Berenger
King of Italy.
Duke of Friuli, made an Agreement, That Guy should have the Title of Emperor,
with the Kingdom of France; and Berenger, Italy: But Guy finding his place in
France possessed by another, returned into Italy, and drove out Berenger. These
two Princes were also of the Collateral Line of Charlemain, by the Wives. From
Christ 890.

Arnoldus came to Rome, and was there Arnold and Lambert Emperors.
crowned Emperor, by Pope Formosus, Successor to Stephen the Fifth; though
Lambert, the Son of Guy, had took the same Title, with that of King of Italy.
From Christ 896.

Pope Formosus being dead, his Memory Popes.
was condemned by his Successor Stephen the Sixth, with that Barbarity and
Disgrace, Formosus condemned.
that his Body was taken out of his Tomb, and thrown into the River Tyber.
Theodorus, Successor to Stephen, being dead within a year, his Successor John
the Ninth, reestablished the Memory of Formosus, but he disannulled the
Installment of Arnold, Crowned by Formosus, and confirmed the Title of Emperor
to Lambert. From Christ 897.

Charles, called the Simple, had been Charles the Simple, King of France.
brought into England by his Mother Avoiza, Daughter to Edward King of England.
Eudes, who had been made King, being dead, the Neustrians recalled Charles, and
acknowledged him their King. From Christ 898.

Arnold, King of Germany and of Lorraine, dyed, leaving two Sons; Lewis his
Legitimate Lewis, King of Germany and Lorrain.
Son, and Zwendipold his Natural Son: the latter dying soon after, Lewis became
Master of all his Fathers Dominions, under the Guardianship of Otho Duke of
Saxony, or Hatto, Archbishop of Ments, as others say; and Leopold, Duke of
Bavaria, in his time the Hungarians most miserably afflicted the Empire, after
they had beaten the Emperor in a Battle, that lasted three days one after
another. From Christ 900.

The Tenth Age.
LEWIS King of Arles, having made Lewis, K. of Arles, made b^ing by Berenger
the second Emperor.
two Expeditions into Italy, against Berenger the Second, who had there taken
the Title of Emperor, was unfortunate in both of them. From Christ 901.

In the first, he was shamefully Expelled; in the second, he lost his Eyes by
the Command of Berenger, who immediately caused himself to be Crowned by the
Pope; so there were two who assumed the Title of Emperor in Italy. From
Berenger and Lambert. Popes.
Christ 902.

John the Ninth being dead, Benedict the Fourth held the Sea for two Years; and
after him, Leo the Fifth, who was Deposed about the end of forty Days, by
Christophilus; and this latter turned out at the end of seven Months, by
Sergius, assisted by the Famous Marozia, Wife to Guy Mar^zia.
Marquis of Tuscany. From Christ 906.

Rollo, Duke of the Normans, made himself Rollo, Duke of Normandy.
Master of the Country; which from the Name of that Nation, is still called
Normandy. Charles the Simple, not being able to hinder him of it, yielded it to
him with the Title of Dukedom, and gave him his Daughter Gizell^ i^ Marriage.
From Christ 909.

The Famous Abbey of Cluny was founded The Abbey of Cluny.
near Maconois, by William the Merciful, Lord of that Country, Count of
Auvergne, and Duke of Aquitain. From Christ 910.

Sergius, infamous for his Debauched Life Popes.
with Marozia; being dead, Anastatius the Third succeeded him: many Crowned
Heads dyed that Year. From Christ 911.

The First King of Burgundy, to whom succeeded Racul the Second, his Son. In
Italy, the Emperor Lambert left Berenger the Second, to possess that Title.
Lewis in Germany, the last Sovereign in that Kingdom, of the Male-Line of
Charlemain, left only two Daughters; the first Married to Conrade, Duke of
Franconia; the second to Henry, called L'Oiseteur, Duke of Saxony.

At Constantinople, Leo the Fifth, termed Alexander, Emperor of the East.
the Philosopher, being dead; Alexander his Brother succeeded him in the
Empire, and Reigned but one Year; after whose Death, Constantine the Seventh,
Son to Leo, Constantine VII.
was set on the Throne. From Christ 912.

Under the Guardianship, first of his Mother Zoe, and then of Nicephorus
Lacapenus, Nicephorus Lacapenus.
who assumed the Title of Emperor, and put Zoe into a Convent.

Anastatius the Third, with Lando his Popes.
Successor, being dead in less than a Year, John the Tenth was made Pope. From
Christ 913.

In Germany, Conrade Duke of Franconia, by the consent of other Princes, took
the Title of King, and in a Year after, Dying; Conrad, King of Germany. Henry
Loiseleur his Successor.
Henry, called Loiseleur* Duke of Saxe, assumed the same Title by the Suffrage
of the Princes. From Christ 918.

Robert, Brother to the dead King Eudes, took the Title of King of France, in
opposition to Charles the Simple. From Christ 920.

Then Robert having been killed in Battle, Raoul Duke of Burgundy, took his
Kings of France.
place, seized on the Person of Charles, and kept him Prisoner. From Christ 923.

Berenger, Duke of Friouli, who wore the Title of Emperor in Italy, being dead,
no Person was styled Emperor in the West, till the year Nine hundred sixty two.
From Christ 925.

The Italians invited Raoul King of Burgundy to be their King; not long after,
they expelled him, and chose in his place Hughes, who was Son to the Daughter
of young Lothaire, King of Lorrain.

Theodora, Mother to Marozia, had made John the Tenth Pope; but Marozia put
Popes.
him to Death in Prison, and poisoned his two Successors, Leo the Sixth, and
Stephen the Seventh, to place in that See a Son of hers, whom she had by Pope
Sergius: According to some Writers, this young Man, was called Octavian, before
he was Pope; The change of the Names of Popes.
and having changed his Name to that of John, from thence came the Custom of
his Successors to alter their Names. From Christ 930.

Hughes, King of Italy, Married Marozia, his half Sister, who was both the
Widow of Guy, and of Alberies, Marquis of Tuscany: by that means, Hughes firmly
Kings of Italy, of Burgun^y, and of Arles.
established himself in the Kingdom of Italy, having also made a Treaty with
Raoul, King of Burgundy, by which Raoul yielded up to him his Pretensions over
Italy; and Hughes Resigned to Raoul his Right to the Kingdoms of Arles. From
Christ 931:

John the Eleventh, infamous for his Debaucheries, Dyed and had for his
Successor, Leo the Seventh. From Christ 935. Popes.


After the Death of Raoul, King of France, the Nobility recalled out of
England, Lewis the Fourth, Son of Charles the (...) D' Out(...)scing of France.
Simple; whose Mother having fled thither with him, at the time of his Father's
Misfortunes; for that cause Lewis had the Sur-name of Outremer. From Christ 936.

He had Married a Daug^^er of Otho King of Germany, who had succeeded Henry
Loyzeleur his Father: the two Kings having adjusted the Difference they had at
Otho, King of Germany.
first, about Lorrain: Otho mad^ a reconciliation between Lewis his Son-in-Law,
and the chief Nobility of France, who were disgusted with him: Among those
great Persons was Hughes the great Count of Paris, Son to King Robert; Hughes
had Hughes the Great.
Married a Sister of the Queen, who was Daughter to King Otho. From Christ 942.

To Stephen the Eighth, succeeded Martin the Third; and Agapetus the Second,
Popes.
was his Successor. From Christ 946.

To Rollo, Duke of Normandy, succeeded Dukes of Normandy.
William, who dying, left his Son Richard very young: upon which, Lewis formed
a Design to molest Normandy, but was prevented by the chief of the Nobility of
the Kingdom, and particularly by Hughes, Count of Paris. From Christ 950.

The Italians expelled their King Hughes, Kings of Italy.
and retained his Son Lothaire; who, soon after dying, Berenger the Third,
Count of Juree, was acknowledged King of Italy.

Adelais, a Beautiful Princess, Daughter to Lothaire, refusing to Marry the Son
of Berenger, espoused Otho King of Germany; The Affairs of Germany.
upon which, Luidolph, Son to Otho by a former Queen, grew discontented, which
occasioned a War between the Father and the Son, for three Years.

Agapetus the Second, dyed, and had for his Successor John the Twelfth, a
worthy Popes.
Grandson of the famous Marozia.

Lewis King of France, dyed, leaving Kings of France.
two Sons, Lothaire and Charles, very young. From Christ 955.

Romanus poisoned his Father Constantine, Romanus, Emperor of the East.
and possessed the Empire of the East: this most detestable Parricide dyed of his
Debaucheries. From Christ 960.

The Army in Asia proclaimed Emperor, Nicephorus and Phocas.
their General Nicephorus Phocas. From Christ 963.

Who during the Six years of his Reign, regained with great Glory from the
Saracens, Cicilia, Antioch, with a part of Syria, and the Isle of Cyprus: He
was killed by a Conspiracy of the Nobility, who put in his place John Zimiscus,
chief of the John Zimiscus.
Conspirators. From Christ 969.

Otho, King of Germany, passed into Italy Emperor of the East.
against the Emperor Berenger, overcame him in Battle, took him Prisoner, and
sent him into Germany, where he died: Otho the second Emperor.
the Conqueror being Master of Italy, caused himself to be Crowned at Rome, by
Pope John; but so soon as Otho was gone Popes.
from Rome, the Pope made that City revolt against him, which obliged Otho to
return there; where, in a Council he Assembled, John was Deposed, having been
Convicted of all sorts of enormous Crimes, and Leo the Eighth elected in his
place. Otho having again left Rome, John the Pope returned, and there committed
horrible Excesses; at last he was killed, taken in the Act with a Married
Woman: the Romans having also expelled Pope Leo, placed Bennet the Fifth in the
Chair: Otho, who was gone back into Germany, returns upon his occasion,
Reestablished Leo, and carried Bennet into Germany: Leo being dead, John the
Thirteenth was made Pope, and confirmed by Otho: the Romans offended that the
Pope waited to be Confirmed, put him in Prison; but Otho punished them very
severely for their Insolence, and Reestablished John in the Papal See.

Otho the First died, having acquired the Title of Great, by his mighty Deeds.
His Son Otho the Second, succeeded him. From Christ 973.

In the remaining space of time, Rome had these following Popes: After the
Death of John the Thirteenth, Domnus; three Months after, Bennet the Sixth; a
Popes.
year after, Boniface the Seventh; he was Deposed by a Council, and fled to
Constantinople. From Christ 975.

Bennet the Seventh, Son of Alberic, Count of Tusculum, was placed in the
Chair, with the consent of Otho.

John Zimiscus, Emperor of Constantinople, had great Success in the War against
Basilius and Constantin, Emperors of the East.
the Saracens: After his Death, were placed on the Throne the two Sons of
Romanus, Basilius and Constantin. From Christ 977.

Otho the Second, Emperor, and King of The Death of. Otho the Second. Kings of
France.
Germany dyed. From Christ 982.

Lewis the Fifth, Son of Lothaire, succeeded his Father in the Kingdom of
France: Lewis had justly the Surname of the Idle Prince; he Reigned but Sixteen
Months, Lewis the Fifth deposed.
and was Deposed by the States General convened at Noyon, who placed on the
Throne Hughes, surnamed Capet, the Son Hugh Capet, King of France.
of Hughes, Count of Paris; contrary to the Rights and Pretensions of Charles
Duke of Lorrain, Brother to their Deceased King Lothaire: The French refusing
Charles, because Charles Duke of Lorrain excluded
he had acknowledged the Sovereignty of the Emperor Otho, by paying him him
Homage for Lorrain. From Christ 987.

Charles used his utmost Endeavors against Hughes; but all to no purpose, and
most unhappily in the end: For being Died in Prison. Popes.
betrayed by Ancelin, Bishop of Laon, he fell into the Hands of Hughes, who
shut him up in a Tower at Orleans, where he died at three Years end.

He left two Sons, Otho, and Lewis; the first died in Lorrain, without Issue;
and History makes no mention of the other, but only of his Name. From Christ
994.

To Pope John the Sixteenth, succeeded Otho III. Emperor.
John the Seventeenth.

Otho the Third, Emperor, and King of Germany, Son, and Successor to Otho the
the Second, came into Italy, and deposed Pope John the Seventeenth, by reason
Popes.
of his wicked debauched Life, and put Bruno in his place, who was of the House
of Saxe, and Kinsman to the Emperor.

This Pope took the Name of Gregory the Fifth.

The Romans expelled him the Sea, so soon as Otho was returned into Germany;
but the Emperor coming back to Rome, Popes.
reestablished. Gregory, and deposed John, the new Pope, who was in the place
of Gregory. From Christ 998.

The latter being dead, Otho ordered Gebert for his Successor, who had been
Tutor to this Emperor, and also to Robert, Son to Hugh Capet, King of France.
From Christ 999.

Boleslaus, Duke of the Polanders, received Poland made a Kingdom.
the Title of King from the Emperor Otho. From Christ 1000.

The Eleventh Age.
STEPHEN, Duke of Hungary, had King of Hungary.
the same Title of King, but held it from the Pope. From Christ 1001.

Otho the Third died in Italy, as it was thought, by Poison.

Henry, called Le Boiteux, Duke of Bavaria, was elected Emperor by the German
H^nry II. Emperor.
Princes. From Christ 1002.

Silvester the Second died with the Reputation Popes.
of a Magician, by reason of his profound Learning.

John the Eighteenth, his Successor; deprived the People of Rome, of the Power
they had, to give their Voices for the Election of Popes. From Christ 1003.

John the Nineteenth, his Successor, excommunicated Robert King of France
excommunicated.
Robert King of France, because he had married one of his Kinswomen of the
Fourth Degree.

This strange Thing came from the exceeding great Superstition of those Times,
that the King's own Subjects, and even Domestic Servants, durst not approach
his Person, by reason of the Excommunication: So that he was forced to go to
Rome, in order to be absolved by the Pope. From Christ 1006.

There is another Example of the prevailing The Force of Superstition.
Power of Superstition, in those Times of Darkness: Guy, Viscount of Limoge,
having imprisoned a Bishop, his Subject, was obliged to go to Rome to answer
the Matter of Fact: He was there condemned to be drawn by two wild Horses; and
the Sentence had been executed, but that the Bishop, his Adversary, had
generously saved him.

The Christians had driven out the Saracens from Castile: The Princes of that
Castile a Kingdom.
Country had only the Title of Counts; but Sanches, who was King of Navarre,
took the Title of King of Castile, by marrying the Heiress.

Their Son Ferdinand, joined to it the Kingdom of Leon, having married the
Heiress of that County.

John the Nineteenth being dead, had Popes.
to succeed him, Bennet the Eighth; who ordained, That none from that Time
Emperors confirmed by the Pope.
should assume the Title of Emperor, but with the Consent of the Pope: So Henry
of Bavaria, in Submission to that Decree, came to Rome to be Crowned, by the
Hands of that Pope. From Christ 1014.

This Emperor Henry died, he had the Surname of Boisteux, because he was lame;
and of Chaste, having lived with his Wife Cunigundo, without Carnal Knowledge,
by an Agreement between them.

The Princes of Germany elected in his Conrad II. Emperor.
place, Conrad the Second, Duke of Franconia. From Christ 1024.

The Polanders took Cazimir out of the Cazimir, a Monk of Cluny, King of Poland.
Monastry of Cluny, where he had made himself a Monk, and had taken the Order
of Deacon, they made him their King, by reason there was no other Prince living
of the Blood Royal.

To Bennet the Eighth, succeeded John Popes.
the Twentieth, who Crowned the Emperor Conrad, coming to Rome for that
purpose. From Christ 1027.

Constantine Reigned sole Emperor of the East, by the Death of his Brother
Basilius, which happened some Years before: Constantine dying this Year, in his
place Romanus Romanus the Third, Emperor of the East.
Argyrophilus, his Son-in-Law succeeded him in the Empire. From Christ. 1029.

Robert King of France, a wise and brave Kings of France.
Prince, died: He had reunited to the Crown, the Duchy of Burgundy; which
returned to him by the Death of his Uncle Henry; the County of Burgundy
remaining to Otho William, Son to the Wife of Henry, by another Husband, Nephew
to Berenger, formerly King of Italy, and Emperor.

Henry, Son, and Successor, to King Robert, gave the Duchy of Burgundy to his
Brother Robert. From Christ 1033.

Raoul the Third, and last King of Burgundy, dying without Issue, left, by his
Testament, his Dominions, to the Emperor The Kingdom of Aries (...) to the
Empire.
Conrad, his Brother-in-Law, who married his younger Sister: By which Act he
wronged his eldest Sister, Wife to Eud^s, Count of Champaign.

Zoe, Wife to Romanus Argirophylus, caused him to be killed, and married her
Gallant, Michael of Payhlagonia; and by her Interest, Michael of Paphlagonia.
placed the Second Husband on the Throne, at Constantinople. From Christ 1034.

At this time, Humbert was Count of Maurienna: From him are descended the
Counts, and Dukes of Savoy. Others derive their Extraction from the House of
Saxe, viz. from Lewis the Blind, King of that Country, Son to B^son, and
Son-in-Law to Charles the Bald.

Bennet the Ninth had succeeded John the P(...)
Twentieth. The Romans, scandalized at his debauched Life, expelled him from
that See; and chose John Bishop of Salina, under the Name of Silvester the
Third: A Person of as wicked a Life as the other; who was also for that very
reason deposed, and Bennet restored; who, to avoid to be T(...) Rome.
too narrowly observed in his Debauches* retired into the Country, after he had
sold his Papacy for the Sum of Fifteen hundred Pounds, in Gold, to a Priest,
named Gratian, who took the Name of Gregory the Sixth.

In a short time after, these two deposed Popes came back to Rome* So that
there were three Popes sitting together; Bennet the Ninth, at St. John de
Lateran; Gregory the Sixth, at St. Peter's; and Silvester the Third, at St.
Maria Major. From Christ 1045.

Henry the Third, Son, and Successor to Conrad the Second, came to Rome to
redress this Scandal; where, in a Synod, he caused the three Popes to be
deposed; and Sugger, Bishop of Bamberg, was elected in their place, under the
Name of Clement the Second. From Christ 1046.

The Emperor Henry confirmed the Principality of la Pouille, to Humphry, and
Drogon, Norman Princes of la Pouille.
two Brothers, and Normans by Birth, who had conquered it from the Saracens.

The Emperor being returned into Germany, Bennet, who was deposed, caused
Clement to be poisoned, and re-seated himself in the Chair: But the Romans not
being Popes.
able to endure his most lewd Life, addressed themselves to the Emperor, to
give them a Pope: He sent them Bappo Bishop of Frizingen, who was called
Damasus the Second. He was poisoned in the same manner as Clement, his
Predecessor. Then Bennet again enjoyed the Papacy for six Months; but then was
forced to give place to Bruno Bishop of Toul, Son to the Count of Hapsburg, who
was sent by the Emperor, and took the Name of Leo the Ninth. From Christ 1049.

Michael, the Paphlagonian, had confined his Wife Zoe to a Monastry.

This Emperor being dead, his Nephew Michael Colophates, Emperor of the East.
Michael Colophates, ru^led the Empire, only four Months: For the People
deposed him, and set on the Throne Theodora, Sister to Zoe; but the latter
leaving her Monastry, Theodora. Zoe. Constantine. Monomacus.
reassumed the Empire, and gave it to her Third Husband, Constantine the
Ninth, called Monomacus.

At that time Guy was Count of Grenoble; The Dauphins of Viennois. Berengarius
Archdeacon of Angers.
from whom are descended the Dauphines of Viennois.

Berengarius, Archdeacon of the Church of Angers, professed the Doctrine
touching the Eucharist; affirming, That the Body and Blood of Christ, was in
the Bread and Wine, not naturally, or substantially, but sacramentally: Which
in the Ninth Age had been supported by Ratrum, and other learned Men of that
Time, against Paschasius.

He was a Man of that great Learning, that coming to Rome, the Pope rose up to
meet him, saying, He admired his Wit, and Parts:

Berengarius was condemned in a Council held at Verceil, by the Authority of
Pope Leo; being first. opposed by Lanfrank Archbishop of Canterbury, and
Guitmund Archbishop of Aversa. From Christ 1050.

This Pope being dead, the Emperor put Popes.
in his place, Guebard, Bishop of Aichstat, the Son of a Bavarian Count, who
took the Name of Victor the Second.

Constantine Monomachus being dead, Theodora remounts the Throne; but the
Eunuchs of the Court again dethroned her, and elected in her place Michael the
Sixth, Surnamed Stratioticus.

In the three Years that Victor was Pope, he twice condemned Berengarius:
First, in a Council held at Florence, where the Pope was in person: The Second
time, in a Council held at Tours, by Hildebrand, his Legate.

Berengarius made his Personal Appearance before this last Council, where he
was condemned; yet he preserved himself from the Penalties, declaring, he
believed as the Church believed, concerning the Eucharist.

Henry the Third, called the Black Prince, dying, left a Son of the same Name,
not above Seven Years old: For which reason he was under the Guardianship of
the Empress Agnes, his Mother.

Stephen the Tenth, from a Monk of Mintcassin, was made Pope; who took
occasion, by reason of the Nonage of that Emperor, not to demand to be
Confirmed. This Pope being dead, the Counts of Tusculum placed Bennet the
Tenth, their Kinsman, in the Papal Chair: But the Cardinals, who began to
assume to themselves the Right of choosing Popes, having The power of the
Cardinals.
had no Voices in the Election of Benet, assembled themselves in a Council at
Florence, where Benet was deposed; and Gerrard, Bishop of that City, seated in
his place, by the Name of Nicolaus the Second. From Christ 1059.

He assembled a Council at St. John de Lateran, where Berengarius appeared, and
Berengarius r^treats.
pronounced his Retraction, composed by Cardinal Humbert; importing, That the
Body of Christ is sensibly in the Eucharist, chewed and broken with the Teeth
of the Communicants: This was done by the compulsion of Pope Nicholas the
Second.

In the same Council married Priests, who were called Nicolaits, were
condemned, in imitation of the Decrees of several preceding Popes.

At Constantinople, Michael Stratiocus was consined to a Monastery by Isaac
Comnenus, who was proclaimed Emperor; and two Constantin Ducas, the Tenth of
that Name.
years after, voluntarily resigned up the Empire to Constantin the Tenth,
surnamed Ducas. From Christ 1061.

After the Death of Nicolas the Second, a Council Assembled at Basle, by the
Emperor Henry the Fourth, chose for Pope Cadclus, Bishop of Parma, under the
name Popes.
of Honorius the Second: On the other side, the Cardinals elected at Rome,
Anselmus, Bishop of Luca, by the name of Alexander the Second; who, after many
bloody Skirmishes, at last prevailed, and was acknowledged for Pope by a
Council assembled at Mantuc, by the Authority of the Emperor. From Christ 1065.

William the Bastard, Duke of Normandy, William the Conqueror, King of Enland.
made himself Master of England, and had the Surname of Conqueror: He was Son
of Robert Duke of Normandy, who without any regard to the Right of William
Count of Arles, his lawful Son, had left his Duchy at his Death, to his
Bastard Son William. From Christ 1066.

At Constantinople, Eudoxia the Widow of Constantin Ducas, marrying Romanus
the Ramanus IV. Emperor of the East.
Fourth, surnamed Diogenes* caused him to be chosen Emperor. This new Prince
was taken Prisoner by the Sultan of Egypt; who, after having rudely treated
him, at last restored him his Liberty without Ransom; but being returned to
Constantinople, his Eyes were put out by Michael Ducas, Michael Ducas, Emperor
of the East*
the seventh of that Name, who ascended the Throne of his Father Constantin.

After the Death of Pope Alexander the Second, the famous Hildebrand was made
Pope, under the name of Gregory the Popes.
Sixth: He was Native of Sienna, and had been a Monk at Cluny: He enjoyed the
Estate of the Countess Matilda, Princess Ma(...)a. Countess and Princess of
Tuscany. A Quarr^l b^twe^n the Pope and the Emperor.
of Tuscany, in possession of a part of Liguria, which she inherited of her
Father the Marquis Bonifacius. From Christ 1072.

This was the first occasion of the Quarrel between the Pope* and the Emperor
Henry the Fourth; the second cause, was, the Right the Emperor claimed, to
invest Bishops by the Crosier and the Ring: the Emperor on his side, Assembled
the Estates of the Empire, who declared Gregory a false Pope; on the other
part, Gregory excommunicated the Emperor, and all The Emperor Excommunicated.
those of his Party. From Christ 1023.

This Sentence had corrupted all Germany; so that in an Assembly of the
Princes, and other Members of the Empire held at Oppenheim, it was resolved,
That Henry should not be acknowledged Emperor, till he was reconciled to the
Pope; He humbled himself to the Pope.
so Henry was obliged to go upon this occasion, into Italy, where he humbled
himself before the Pope, in a very surprising manner: But the Reception and
Treatment he received from the Pope, seemed so very insolent to the Germans, as
also to the Italians, that they all returned to the Obedience of Henry, who by
that means, easily destroyed the Faction of Rodolphus, Rodolphus overcome by
Henry.
to whom the Pope had given the Title of Emperor. From Christ 1077.

Henry having thus Reestablished himself, caused Gregory to be Deposed in a
Council held at Brixen in Bavaria; and put Gilbert Archbishop of Ravenna, in
his place, under the Name of Clement the Third. From Christ 1078.

At Constantinople, Michael Ducas the Seventh, was put into a Monastry by
Nicephorus Botoniates, the Third of that Name: Nicephorus Botoniates the Third.
this Nicephorus was treated in the very same manner, by Alexius Comnenes. From
Christ 1080.

Henry passed into Italy, Besieged Rome; Henry Besieges Rome.
but the Pope, during the two Years the Siege lasted, made a League with Robert
Guichard, a Norman Prince de la Pouille, who The Pope deliver^d* by Robert
Guiccard.
raised the Siege, and reinvested the Pope. From Christ 1083.

After Guichard was gone back, Henry entered Rome, and there caused himself to
Henry in Rome.
be Crowned by Clement the Second, who was acknowledged Pope, by a Synod held
in that City. From Christ 1084.

A Year after, Gregory the Seventh died Gregory die(...)
at Salerna, highly revered by those of his Party, and as much blamed by those
of the opposite Party.

Gregory's Faction gave him no Successor, till a Year after his Death, then was
elected Victor the Third; called before, Dedier, Popes.
an Abbot of M^ntcassin, Son to the Duke de Benevent. He held the Sea but a
Year: his Successor was Otho, a Monk of Cluny, who took the Name of Urban the
Second: Nevertheless, Clement the Third maintained his Authority all the time
in Rome.

Bruno of Cologne, a Chanoine of Reims, The Order of the Carthusians.
instituted the Order of the Carthusians. From Christ 1088.

The Emperor. Henry came into Italy, and there supporting Clement; Urban not
finding himself safe, went into France, having great assurance of a kind
Reception from ^
the greatest of the Nobility of that Kingdom: He there held that famous
Council The Council of Clermont.
of Clermont, in which were resolved these important Decrees. From Christ 1095.

First, the Decree against the Marriage Marriages forbidden to the Clergy.
of the Clergy, was renewed and confirmed.

Philip King of France, was Excommunicated, Philip, King of France,
excommunicated.
for having taken the Wife of Foulkes Rechin, Count of Anjou.

The Right to bestow Ecclesiastical Livings, taken away from all Princes, and
secular Powers.

In consequence of which, the Emperor Henry was Excommunicated, as well as for
other Causes, which have been before recited.

Lastly, Upon the Remonstrances of Peter the Hermit, they were resolved on the
first Croisade, against the Saracens, to recover The first Croisade.
the Holy Land.

Alphonso, King of Castille, was supplied with Forces against the Saracens, by
many French Lords. Henry of Lorain, one Henry of Lorrain, King of Portugal.
of them marrying a Daughter of Alphonso; by that Match had Portugal, and with
it the Title of King.

The Army of the Croizaders, in which was Prince Conrade, serving the Pope
against his Father, brought Urban to Rome, Urban established at Rome.
where he established him, and turned out Clement.

Urban dying within the same Year he was reestablished, his Successor Paschal
Paschall the Second.
the Second, appeared on the day he was Consecrated with the marks of Royalty,
covered with a Purple Robe, with seven Seals hanging to an Embroidered Belt.

The Croisaders arrived by several ways The Croisaders exploits.
to Constantinople, committing every where horrible Outrages; they passed the
Bosphorus with Forces the Emperor Alexis gave them; taking many Places in Asia
the lesser, and in Syria: They arrived in Palestine, besieged Jerusalem; took
it, and* Jerusalem taken.
chose for their King, the famous Godfrey Godfrey of Bouillon chosen King.
of Bovillon, preferring him before many Princes, who were in the Army; among
others, Conrade, Son to the Emperor Henry; Hughes, Brother to Philip King of
France; and Robert, Brother to William Rufus, King of England.

This new King had but Twenty thousand Men left, of more then Three hundred
thousand, who listed themselves in this Expedition of the Croisade; yet with
these Twenty thousand Men, defeated The Sultan of Egypt defeated.
Five hundred thousand, which the Sultan of Egypt had brought against him,
designing to retake Jerusalem. From Christ 1100.

The Twelfth Age.
THere was a second Croisade more numerous, The second Croysade proved
unfortunate.
but less fortunate than the first. From Christ 1101.

For there was a great number killed in the lesser Asia, where they fell into
the Ambuscades of the Saracens, by the Fraud of the Old Emperor Alexus, with
whom the chief of the Croisaders were at Difference. From Christ 1102.

The Emperor Henry died at Liege, in a most lamentable condition; to which, his
Son Henry the Fifth, had reduced him; Henry the Fifth Emperor.
having before, compelled him to resign the Empire. From Christ 1106.

Philip King of France, died also, after he had lived long in Luxury with
Bertrade; Kings of France.
whom he still retained, notwithstanding two Excommunications; and was at last
reconciled to the Pope, who gave him leave to enjoy her as his lawful Wife.
From Christ 1108.

Pope Paschal, in a Council held at Troy, The Council of Tr^y.
in Champagne, renewed all; his Predecessor had order in that of Clermont,
against the A Quarrel between the Pope Emperor.
pre^tended Investitures by the Emperors. Henry the Fifth, had dissembled with
the Pope, in order to settle himself more firmly in the Empire. But when he
found himself powerful enough to assert his Right, he passed into Italy, made
himself Master of Rome, and concluded a Treaty with Paschal, very advantageous
to the Emperors. From Christ 1110.

But, after Henry was returned to Germany, the Pope retracted, though he had
swore to the Treaty, and upon it received the Sacrament with the Emperor. From
Christ 1112.

Henry was not then in a condition to show his Resentment for that high
Affront, by reason of great Disturbances the Pope Troubles in Germany.
had fomented in Germany; which caused much Blood to be shed in the five Years
these Troubles lasted.

The Emperor at length, having surmounted them all, went a second time into
Italy, to disannul the Deed of Gift, made The Death of the Countess Matilda.
by the Countess Matilda, which she bequeathed to the Sea of Rome after her
Death. From Christ 1117.

At Constantinople, the Old Emperor Alexus, had resigned the Empire to his Son
Calo John, being very much troubled at Calo John Emperor of the East.
the ill Success he had, for opposing the Croisaders; having repented he had
invited them, at length he died with very great Grief. From Christ 1118.

Henry passed a third time into Italy, to reduce Gelasius the Second, who had
succeeded Paschal upon the point of the Investitures. The new Pope fled into
France. In the interim, the Emperor placed in the Popes.
See of Rome, Maurice Bourdin, Archbishop of Bracara, in Portugal, under the
Name of Gregory the Eigth. Gelasius dying in France, the Cardinals, who had
followed him, chose in his place, Guy Archbishop of Vienna, under the Name of
Calixtus the Second; He was Brother to the Count of Burgundy, and Cousin to the
Emperor.

This Pope held a Council at Rheims, in The Council at Rheims.
which was renewed and confirmed all that had been Decreed in that of Clermont,
upon the matter of the Investitures, and marrying of Priests.

Calixtus returned into Italy with an Army; he Conquered, and took in Battle
the Antipope Bourdin, and had also that Popes.
good fortune to settle Affairs in Germany, in such a manner, that the Emperor
Henry, in an Assembly of the Empire held at Worms, renounced the Right of
Investitures. From Christ 1122.

Calixtus being dead, there was a great Division in the Election between
Celestinus and Honorius the Second; but the last carried it: those of his
Faction being the greatest Persons in Rome.

After the Death of the Emperor Henry the Fifth; his Sisters Son, Frederick
Duke of Swabia, with Conrade, disputed the Empire against Lothaire, the second
Duke Lothaire, the second Emperor.
of Saxe; but the latter prevailed at last. From Christ 1125.

William Rufus, Son to the Conqueror, Kings of England.
had given his Daughter, Adelais to Stephen, Count of Boulogue, who in her
Right was King of England: Stephen and his Queen Adelais, dying without Issue,
Robert the Second, Son of the Conqueror, had his Eyes put out by his younger
Brother Henry, who assumed the Crown of England.

Under this King, and Lewis le Gros, King The first War between the French and
the English. Kings of Arrgon.
of France, the Son and Successor to Philip, began the first War between the
French and English.

Alphonso, King of Arragon, having been killed by the Moors, his Brother
Ramire was taken out of a Monastery, and made King in his place.

At that time lived one John of Estampes, who had been a Soldier under
Charlemaine; He was called Johannes de Temporibus; because John D' Estampes,
very Aged. Amideus, Count of Savoy.
of his extraordinary long Life.

Amedeus, Count of Maurienna, received the Title of Count of Savoy, from the
Emperor.

Hugh de Paganis, first instituted the Military Order of the of the Knights,
Templars The Order of the Knight Templars.
in the City of Jerusalem. From Christ 1127.

Honorius the Second, being dead this Year, Innocent the Second was put in his
place: while this new Pope made War P(...)
with Roger, Prince of Apulia of Calabria and Sicily; The Romans in his
absence, chose an Antipope, called Anacletus; so that Innocent was forced to
fly into France. where he was acknowledged lawful Pope The Council of Estampes.
St. Bernard.
in the Council of Estampes, by the means of St. Bernard; who also afterward
persuaded Victor the Fourth, to resign the Chair to Innocent; who for that
purpose, was brought back into Italy by the Emperor Lothair; so that Schism
ceased. From Christ 1132.

To Lewis the Sixth, Sur-named Le Gross, succeeded his Eldest Son Lewis the
Seventh, called Le Jeusne; besides whom, he had Kings of France.
Robert Count of Dreux, Peter Lord of Courtnay, and Philip Archdeacon of
Paris; who resigned the Bishopric to Peter Lombard, the famous Doctor, and
Author of the Book of Sentences, where Divinity is treated of by Questions;
which Method Learned M^n.
was introduced by John Rosselin, and Peter Abeillard, two Natives of Bretagne.

Some time before, Robert Abbot of Molesme, had instituted the Order of
Cisteaux, The Order of Cisteux.
which took its Name from the Principal Abbey of that Order, which became more
Illustrious by St. Bernard, Abbot of Clerveaux. From Christ 1130.

Baldwin of Flanders, Successor to Godfrey in the Kingdom of Jerusalem, being
Kings of Jerusalem.
dead; the Daughter of Baldwin, who had married Foulques of Anjou, gave the
Kingdom to her Husband.

Lothaire being dead, Conrad the Third, Conrade, the Third Emperor.
Duke of Swabia, was chose Emperor in his place.

Pope Innocent the Second, having been taken in the War he made against Roger,
was set at liberty by that Prince, on condition, that Roger should have the
Title of Apulia and Sicily, which he and his Successors were to hold, paying
Fealty to the Sea of Rome. From Christ 1143.

To Innocent the Second, succeeded Caelestin, and Lucius, both named Seconds:
Then, Eugenius the Third, a Disciple and (...).
Monk of the Order of St. Bernard; The Romans not willing to acknowledge him
for their Temporal Sovereign, no more than his three Predecessors had done; He
went into France, where he held a Council A Council at Chartres.
at Chartres, in which was instituted a new Croysade, which proved most
unfortunate to the Latin Christians, who most of them perished in the way, by
the treachery of Manuel Comnenes, Son and Successor to Calo, John Emperor of
Constantinople. From Christ 1147.

The Emperor Conrade, who commanded The Emperor Conrade's Army lost. And Lewis
King of France.
the Land-Army, escaping with much difficulty. From Christ 1149.

Lewis, King of France, going by Sea, avoided the Treachery of the Greeks; but
the Malice of the Eastern Latins, whose Vices were most enormous, caused his
Army to perish at the Siege of Damas; so the Emperor, and the King, having done
nothing, but suffered great Losses, returned home; the King by the way, fell
into the hands of the Greeks; whom, as they were carrying him Prisoner, the
brave Rogor, King of Sicily, rescued him from them. From Christ 1150.

Anastatius the Fourth, Successor to Eugenius the Third, did nothing remarkable
Popes.
in the fifteen Months of his Papacy. Adrian the Fourth, his Successor, Crowned
Frederic Barbarossa, who had been chose Emperor in the place of Conrad his
Uncle, who died two Years before. From Christ 1155.

The Pope and the new Emperor fell out immediately, on the same occasions as
their Predecessors; which gave Birth to the Factions of the Guelphs and the
Gibelins; The Guelphs, and the Gibelins.
by which, Italy and Germany were ruined: The Gu^lphs of the Party of the Pope,
and the Gibelins of the Emperors: which Quarrel grew more hot between Popes.
the Emperor, and Alexander the Third, Successor to Adrian. The Emperor
supporting Anti-popes.
three Antipopes, viz. Victor, Paschal, and Calixtus, against Alexander. From
Christ 1159.

At length, the Pope agreed with the An Agreement b^tween the Emp^ror and the
Pope.
Emperor at Venice, where they met; Historians have writ diversely of the
Treatment Alexander used to Frederic; but it is very certain, the Agreement was
most advantageous to the Pope. From Christ 1164.

The Institution of the Military Order of The Order of the Knights Hospita(...).
the Knights, Hospitalers of St. John of Jerusalem, was some Years after that
of the Templars; then after that of the Hospitalers, was instituted the
Teutonick Order. T^ Teutonick Or(...).
From Christ 1177.

Henry the Second, King of England, Son Henry ^^ Second, King of England.
of Jeffery, Count of Anjou, had married Eleanor Duchess of Aquitaine, and
Counless of Poitou, repudiated by Lewis the Seventh, King of France; so Henry
became very powerful; he was Excommunicated by Pope Alexander, upon the
occasion of the Death of Thomas a Becket, Archbishop Thomas a Becket,
Archbishop of Canterbury. Kings of France.
of Canterbury.

The two Kings, Lewis and Henry, made War several times; at last a Peace was
concluded, which held till the Death of Lewis, who had for his Successor,
Philip the Second: It was at his Coronation, that the Peers of France were
twelve in T^rlve Pe^rs of France. Alexis the Second Emp^r^r of the East.
Andronicus his S^ccessor:
number.

Manuel Emperor of the East died, left his Son Alexus the Second, then a very
Child; He was strangled at two yearsend, by Andronicus his Kinsman, who by that
means made himself Emperor; He Reigned but two years, for the People killed
him; and put in his place Isaac the Second, called Isacius Angelus. From Isaac
the Second, his Successor. Saladin takes Jerusalem.
Christ 1184.

Saladin, Sultan of Egypt, took Jerusalem from Guy, King of Lusignan, Eighty
eight Years after the Croyzaders had taken it, under the Conduct of Godfrey of
Bovilton. From Christ 1187.

After the Death of Alexander the Third, which fell out in the year Eleven
hundred eighty one; Lucius the Third, Urban Popes*
the Third, Gregory the Eighth, and Clement the Third, held successively the Sea of Rome. From Christ 1190.

The Emperor Frederic had been took The Death of the Emperor Frederic.
Prisoner, and generously released by Saladin, in a Voyage that Emperor made to
the Levant; after Jerusalem had been taken, he went there again, and was
drowned as he was Bathing in the River Orontes, near to Antioch.

Henry the Sixth, his Son, was chose Emperor Henry the Sixth, his Successor.
in his place. It is not found, that Frederick was taken by Saladin, but that
he fought with good success, and that he had ruined the Saracens and Turks, had
he lived longer. From Christ 1192.

The Voyage of Philip King of France, The King of France and England fact one.
and of Richard King of England, was not more Fortunate: They took only Acre,
or Ptolemais; but falling out among themselves, each retired to his Kingdom;
these two Kings had already made War one against the other, and had put a stop
to it, upon the Design of the Croizade; but after their return, they again
revived it more furiously than before. From Christ 1197.

Henry the Sixth dying, left by his Wife. The Emperor Henry the Sixt^'s Death.
Constantia, Daughter, and sole Heiress of William King of Sicily; Frederic, a
Child too young to Rule the Empire. The Princes were divided in the Election;
one Party chose Philip, the Brother of Henry; Philip and Otho dispute the
Empire. Popes.
the other Otho Duke of Saxe; this latter prevailed, being supported by
Innocent the Third, Successor to Caelistin the Third.

Richard, called Caeur de Lion, being dead; the Succession of England, with his
other Kings of England.
Dominions, belonging to Arthur Duke of Bretany, Son to Jefery, the second Son
of Henry the Second; but John, who was but the third Son, usurped it, to the
prejudice of his Nephew Arthur. From Christ 1200.

THE Thirteenth Age.
ABout the end of the foregoing Age, the Croyzade had been published; at The
Croyzade.
the beginning of this Century, the Croyzaders met at Constantinople: Isaac the
Angel, had his Eyes put out by his Brother Alexis, who by that means usurped
the Empire. The young Alexis, Son of Isaac, Emperors of Constantinople.
stopped the Croyzaders, and persuaded them to employ their Arms to depose the
Usurper, which they did; and reestablished the Father and Son: But these two
Princes not having satisfied the Croyzaders, they set up the Grecians: Alexis
Ducas, surnamed Murzuffle took occasion in this confusion, to kill the young
Alexis; but he The Croyzaders take Constantinople.
himself was taken, and killed in Constantinople, by the Croyzaders, who made
themselves Masters of the City, after sixty days Siege. From Christ 1204.

By the Agreement of the Army, twelve of their Chiefs having the power to elect
Baudwin, Emperor of Constantinople.
an Emperor, the choice fell upon Baudwin, Count of Flanders. They also chose
for Patriarch, Thomas Morosini, a Venetian.

Alexis, a Prince of the Blood of Comnenes, Alexis, Emperor of Trebizonda.
retired to Trebizonda, upon the Euxine Sea in Asia; and there having gathered
together the Remnant of the Grecians, he was by them acknowledged Emperor.

The Schism of the Western Empire ceased, Otho the Fourth, sole Emperor of the
West.
by the death of Philip: Otho the Fourth, remaining sole Emperor. From Christ
1208.

From the precedent Age, Peter Valdo of Lions, abandoning his Wealth, had
preached against the Corruption of the Clergy, chiefly against that of Rome;
they called his Disciples Vaudois, the poor Beggars of The Vaudois.
Lyms; they held the Doctrine of Berengarius, in what relates to the Eucharist;
as also Peter de Brus, and Henry his Companion, who were followed by an
infinite number of Disciples at the beginning of this Age, and were called
Albegois, because The Albegois.
their Doctrine had been first of all received in the Diocese of Albi; from
whence it was spread all over Languedoc. From Christ 1209.

The Pope excommunicated them, and published a Croyzade against them: Five
hundred thousand Croyzaders, under the The Croyzaders oppose them. Simon, Grant
of Montfort.
command of Simon Count of Monfort, made a horrible Slaughter of those poor
People.

Peter, King of Arragon, there lost his Life, with the Army he had brought to
their Assistance, in favor of his Cousin Raymond Berenger, Count of Tholouze,
who had embraced their Doctrine. From Christ 1213.

Pope Innocent had Crowned the Emperor Otho at Rome; but the old Quarrel about
the Investitures being revived between them, the Pope raised up Enemies in all
Parts against Otho, and abetted the Party Frederic the Second, against Otho.
of young Frederic, Son of the Emperor Henry the Sixth, against Otho.

Philip the Second, called Augustus, King A War between Otho and Philip King of
France.
of France, entered into that Party against Otho; because that Emperor was
Allied to John King of England, an Enemy to Philip: which occasioned the War
between Otho and Philip; in which was fought the Battle of Bovines in Flanders;
where Otho The Battle of Bovines.
being overcome, saved himself by Flight, leaving to Philip, among other
Prisoners, Ferrand, Brother to Sanchez, King of P^rtugal, Son-in-law to
Baldwin, Emperor of Constantinople.

The Pope quarrelled with King John of A Quarrel between the Pope and the King
of England.
England, upon the occasion of the Election of an Archbishop of Canterbury; the
King having named one, contrary to the pretension of the Pope, who said, the
Nomination belonged to him; whereupon the Pope excommunicated King John, and
interdicted all his Kingdom, and gave it to the King of France; the King laid
the Storm, by humbling himself to the Pope, and declared himself his Vassal,
with an obligation to pay him a Thousand Marks every year, besides the
Peter Pence.

The Barons of England incensed at this Treaty, so dishonorable to the Nation,
abandoned King John, and having called over Lewis, the Son of Philip King of
France, Lewis the Son of Philip. King of France crowned King of England. Henry
III King of England.
they acknowledged him for their King, and Crowned him at Westminster; but
their Anger was appeased by the Death of King John: So they sent back Lewis,
and restored the Crown to Henry the Third, Son to King John, who had the
Surname of Sans Terre, because he died divested of his Kingdom.

Innocent held a Council at Latran, where was concerted the greatest Number of
Bishops, The Council of Latran.
had been seen. What related to the Eucharist, they there determined,
Transubstantiation as a Point of Faith; and Transubstantiation.
that they should keep the Host in their Box, and to carry it with Solemnity to
the Sick, with ringing a little Bell. Then followed the Necessity of Auricular
Confession: There they established the Sovereignty Auricular Confession. The
Sovereignty of the Pope.
of the Pope, above all Degrees of Persons, over Emperors, Kings, and other
Powers, to deprive them of their Dominions, and to dispose of them as the Pope
shall think best. From Christ 1215.

After this manner had he used King John of England; and yet with better Effect
against Raymond Count of ^^olouze, whose Dominions he had really transferred to
Simon Count of Montfort, because Raymond had favored the Albigenses.

Honorius the Third, Successor to Innocent, approved of the four Orders of
Mendicants; The four Orders of Mendicants.
that is to fay, the Preachers, or Dominicans, the Franciscans, the Augustines,
and the Carmelites.. From Christ 1216.

Otho being dead, Frederic the Second remained Frederick the Second, Emperor of
the East.
sole Emperor in the West.

Raymond, Count of Tholouze, reestablished himself in his Dominions, after the
Raymond Count of Tholouze recovers his Dominions. Emperors of Constantinople.
Death of Simon de Montford, who was killed at the Siege of Tholouze. From
Christ 1218.

To Baldwin, Emperor of Constantinople, succeeded Henry his Brother; and to him
succeeded his Son-in-Law, Peter de Courtnay, Count of Auxerre; who going to
take possession of that Empire, was stopped in Thessaly, by Alexis-Comnenes;
notwithstanding the safe Conduct he had given him, Peter was killed, at the end
of three or four Years Imprisonment, by the Command of this perfidious Grecian
Prince. From Christ 1222.

During the time of Peter's Imprisonment, Jolante, his Wife governed at
Constantinople, like a brave, and wise Heroin. Philip Count of Nemours, their
eldest Son refused the Empire, and resigned it to his younger Brother Robert.

Philip the Second, King of France, called Kings of France.
Augustus, for his very great Qualities, died: He was also called the
Conqueror, having taken away from the English, the greatest part of what they
possessed in France.

Lewis the Eighth, his Son, and Successor, had took away from the English,
Rochel, and Avignon from the Albigenses. From Christ 1226.

He Reigned but three Years; Lewis the Ninth, his eldest Son, succeeded him. Of
the three younger Sons, Robert had the County of Artois; Alphonso, Poictou; and
Charles that of Arjou: The two last taken from the English. From Christ 1227.

To Honorias the Third, succeeded Gregory Popes. A Quarrel between Gregory and
Frederick.
the Ninth; who fell out with the Emperor Frederick the Second, because he had
taken away from one of the Pope's Nephews, all that the Emperor Philip had
bestowed on him in Italy. In the mean time, Frederick having married Jole, the
Daughter of John de Bregna, King of Jerusalem, past into the Levant, and
regained Jerusalem, after he had made an honorable Truce with the Sultan for
ten Years; while the Pope took Naples in his Absence: But the Emperor, at his
Return, retook it, without any great trouble. From Christ 1230.

In the eleven following Years, Italy and Germany were in continual Troubles,
occasioned by the Quarrel between the Emperor and the Pope.

The Emperor being Excommunicated, The Issue of the Quarrel.
his Son Henry revolted against him; upon which his Father overcame him in a
great Battle, and past into Italy, where he reduced to his Obedience those
Cities the Pope had made to revolt: He besieged Rome, and had like to have
taken it; yet he took several Cardinals flying from thence.

Pope Gregory died of extreme Grief for his ill Success: Under his Papacy were
published the Pontifical Ordinances, called the Decretals; as in the former Age
Gratian had compiled the Decrees, under the Authority of Alexander the Third.
In the Emperor Frederick's time, began the two implacable Factions of the
Guelfs, and Gibellines. From Christ 1241.

Celestine the Fourth having enjoyed the Popes.
See of Rome but eighteen Days, the Chair was vacant for the space of twenty
Months, at the end of which was chose Innocent the Fourth; who went into France
to act more powerfully against the Emperor Frederic.

The Pope assembled a Council at Lions, The Council of Lions. Cardinals in
purple.
where the Cardinals were clothed in Purple, by Virtue of a Decree of that
Council.

Frederick having been a little while excommunicated, had forfeited his Right
to the Empire; which the Pope offered to Robert, Brother to the King of France;
but the good King refused it, offering on his part a Mediation, to reconcile
the Quarrel. The Pope not regarding the King's Offer, combined with a Party of
the German Princes, who chose for their Emperor, Henry Lantgrave of Turinge
Henry Lantgrave of Turing; who soon after dying, they elected William Count of
Holland. Emperor. William Count of Holland.
From Christ 1246.

King Lewis beng engaged in the Croysade, went into Egypt against the Sultan;
there he took Damietta, and defeated the Mamulecks, in two great Battles; but
in the third, this good King's Army was wholly routed, and himself taken
Prisoner, with the chief of his Nobility: He was set at Liberty, paying a
Ransom of Four hundred thousand Livres: He went into Palestine, and at last
returned back to France, six Years after he had left it.* From Christ 1254.

Frederick the Second being dead, Conrad Conrad the Fourth Emperor.
the Fourth was chosen Emperor by a Party of the German Princes: But finding
himself strong enough to maintain his Right in Germany, he retired into his
Kingdom of Naples; where he was poisoned by his Brother Manfred, a Bastard of
Frederick the Second.

Alexander the Fourth, succeeded Innocent Popes.
the Fourth. From Christ 1255.

William, Count of Holland, having been killed in a War against the Frizons,
one Party of the Princes chose for their Emperor Alphonso King of Castile:
Another Party Alphonso King of Castile, and Richard Duke of Cornwall Emperor^.
Richard Duke of Cornwall, Brother to Henry King of England: Richard was crowned
at Aix la Chapelle: Alphonso never came into Germany. From Christ 1257.

The History of this Age makes mention of a Prince in the Levant, whose
Dominion was among the Mountains of Armenia; The Ancient of the Mountains.
from whence he was called the Ancient of the Mountains: and had likewise the
name of Prince of the Arsacides, or Assassins, who by promising an imaginary
Paradise, persuaded all his Subjects to kill whom he pleased.

Robert of Sorbonne, from the name of a The Coll^dge of Sorbonne.
Village near Paris, where he was Born, founded the famous College, which
still bears his Name in that great City.

Alexander the Fourth died, and had for his Successor Urban the Fourth, Son of
a Popes.
Shoemaker in Troyes, in Campaign; this Pope instituted that superstitious
Ceremony of carrying the Host in public Procession* and causing it to be
adored.

Baldwin, Emperor of Constantinople, being The Latins drove out of
Constantinople.
absent from that City, Michael Paleologus drove out the Latins, who had ruled
the Empire for the space of Fifty seven Years.

Urban the Fourth died; he had transferred to Charles of Anjou, Brother to King
Popes.
Lewis of France, the Right of the Kingdom of Naples and Sicily, which the
Bastard Manfred had usurped over Conradin, Son to the Emperor Conrade. From
Christ 1264.

Clement the Fourth, a Frenchman, like his Predecessor, continuing to support
Charles of Anjou, King of Naples and Sicily.
Charles; put himself in possession of the Kingdom of Naples and Sicily: after
he had defeated in Battle the young Conradin, who being afterward with his
Cousin Frederick, Duke of Austriche, fallen into Contradin and Frederic
beheaded. Manfred killed.
the hands of Charles, he caused them publicly to be Beheaded; the Bastard
Manfred having been before killed in a Battle Charles had won against him. From
Christ 1268.

King Lewis of France, made a second A Croyzade.
Croyzade, with Edward, Son to Henry King of England; Prince Edward taking the
way to Palestine, and the King the way to Africa, where he took Carthage, which
was then considerable only for its Name; after that, he besieged Tunis, and
dyed at The Death of Saint Lewis.
that Siege of the Plague, which infected his Army. From Christ 1270.

Philip the Third, called le Hardi, his Philip the Third, King of France.
eldest Son succeeded him; Robert the youngest of his Sons, Count of Clermont,
was chief of the Branch of Bourbon. St. Sons and Brothers of St. Lewis.
Lewis had three Brothers, Robert Count of Artois, who was chief of one Branch,
and Charles Count of Anjou, King of Naples, made another Branch: Alphonso,
Count of Poitou, left no Issue by his Wife, Daughter and Heiress to Raymond,
Count of Tholouze. From Christ 1271.

After the Death of Clement the Fourth, Popes.
the Sea of Rome was vacant for two or three years; about the end of which, the
Archdeacon of Liege was elected, under the Name of Gregory the Tenth. From
Christ 1273.

The Emperor Richard being dead* the Princes of Germany having no regard for
Alphonso, King of Castille, chose for Emperor Rodolphus, Count of Hapsburg, a
little Rodolphus, Emperor.
Signory in the County of Berne: Gregory confirmed this Election, in a Council
held at Lions, where Alphonso resigned by Proxy A Council at Lions.
his pretensions to the Empire. From Christ 1274.

Michael Paleologus being in Person at that Michael Paleologus, Emperor of the
East.
Council,* where having acknowledged the Authority of the Pope, he was there
declared, and confirmed Emperor of the East.

In the same year, died Gregory the Tenth; he had three Successors in a very
short time, Innocent the Fifth, Adrian the Fifth, Popes.
and John the One and twentieth; who all held the Sea but a few days: After the
Death of the last* was chosen Nicholas the Third, of the House of Ursini. From
Christ 1276.

Otochaire, King of Bohemia, to whom Otochaire King of Bohemia, overcome by
Rodolphus.
Rodolphus had been an Officer, refusing to obey the Emperor, was forced to
submit. From Christ 1277.

Having been overcome in a Battle by Rodolphus, who took from him the
Marquisate of Austria, which Rodolphus gave The Surname of Austria.
to his Son Albert; he and his Successors taking the surname of Austria. From
Christ 1278.

To Nicholaus the Third, succeeded Martin the Fifth, who being a Frenchman,
Popes.
heard with great regret, the news of the horrible Massacre, which the
Sicilians committed on the French, at the hour of Vespers Sicilian Vespers.
Peter, King of Arragon seized Sicily.
on Easter Day: Whereupon, Peter King of Arragon, seized on Sicily, to which he
pretended a Right by his Wife Constantia, Daughter to the Bastard Manfred. From
Christ 1282.

Martin the Fifth, and Charles of Anjou, The Death of Pops and the Kings of
France and Naples.
King of Naples, died with Grief, for what happened in Sicily: And, King Philip
of France also died, highly troubled at the loss of a great Army, he had sent
to seize Arragon, upon the Interdiction the Pope had laid on that Kingdom,
because King Peter (as has been mentioned) had by treachery made himself Master
of Sicily. From Christ 1285.

Charles the Second, called le Boiteux, or Their Successors.
the lame Prince, succeeded his Father in the Kingdom of Naples: Philip the
Fourth, called le Bell, succeeeded his Father in France.

To Martin the Fifth, succeeded Honorius the Fourth, who dying about the end
Popes.
of two years, had for his Successor, a Cordelier, called Nicolaus the Fourth.
From Christ 1287.

The Croyzade, this Pope had caused to be preached up, had very little effect.
The Sultan took Acre, the only City that remained to the Latins in Palestine.

After the Death of Nicolaus the Fourth, the Chair was vacant fifteen Months:
At length, the Cardinals chose a devout Hermit, called Peter Moron, who took
the Name of Celestin the Fifth. From Christ 1294.

This good Man being highly disgusted Celestin resigns the papacy.
at the Grandeur attended the Papacy, was easily persuaded to Resign to the
Cardinal of Cajeta, who took the Name of Boniface Boniface the Eighth.
the Eighth. This Pope kept his Predecessor Celestin under Confinement; where
The Celestin Monks.
he spent the remainder of his days, with those Monks he had formerly
instituted; who from his Papal Name, were called Celestins From Christ 1295.

The Emperor Rodolphus died in the year 1291. He was so overpersuaded, that the
Voyages his Predecessors made into Italy, had been unfortunate to them, which
diverted him from going there, and likewise made him neglect to keep up his
Authority in those Parts; so that he made Sale of the Franchises of the Towns
of Severa^ Rep^blick* in Italy,
Pisa, Pistoya, Genoa, Luca, Sienna, and Florence; which became so many
Republics: The Popes also did not let slip that opportunity, to establish
themselves more firmly in their Temporal Soveraignties.

Adolphus of Nassau, elected in the place Adolphus of Nassau, Emperor.
of Rodolphus, Reigned with very little good Fortune, being Deposed at the end
of four years, or as others say, six years and some months, by a Party of the
German Albert of Austria, E^peror.
Princes, who set up Albertus, M^rquess of Austria, Son to R(...)s: The War
between these two Competitors ended in a Battle, where Adolphus was overcome,
and killed by Albert, with his own Hand. From Christ 1298.

Pope Boniface concludes this Century, The Institution of the Jubilee.
with the Celebration of a Jubilee, which he instituted to be Celebrated every
hundred years. From Christ 1300.

He suborned a certain Person, by thrusting a hollow Cane into a hole in the
Wall of Celestin, his Predecessors Chamber, to mutter these words to the Pope
as he lay in Bed: Celestin, if thou will be happy, resign the Pontificate.

THE Fourteenth Age.
THe Pope and King Philip le Bell fell A Quarre^ between Boniface* and Philip
le Bell.
out, upon occasion of the Popes pretended Right of Sovereignty over all
Kingdoms. This Quarrel lasted till the Death of Boniface, which befell him by
the means of William de Nogaret, a French Captain, and Seiarra Colonna, an
Italian Exile, sent by King Philip into Italy, to seize on the Pope; which they
performed, and killed him in Prison. From Christ 1303.

Benet the Eleventh, of the Order of the Dominicans, being his Successor,
disannul'd Popes.
all that Boniface had acted against King Philip.

Benet having held the Sea no more than eight Months, it was vacant eleven
Months; at the end of which, the King made Bertram of Goot, Archbishop of
Bourdeaux, to be chosen under the Name of Clement the Fifth.

At his Coronation performed at Lions, in the presencc of King Philip, John
Duke of Bretany was killed by the tall of a Wall, as the Duke was leading the
Popes Mule by the Bridle. Charles, Count of Valois* Brother to the King, was
maimed; and the Pope having his Miter struck off, lost a Jasper of a great
price. He translated the Papal See to the City of Avignon in France, where it
continued 70 years. From Christ 1304.

The Emperor Albert having been killed by the Sons of the Emperor Adolphus;
King Philip had a design to have his Brother Charles, Count of Valois, to be
elected; but the Pope fearing by that means, that France would become too
powerful, prevented the Design, persuading the Electors, Henry the ^^venth,
Emperor.
to give the Empire to Henry the Seventh, Count of Luxemberg. From Christ 1308.

Charles le Boisteux, King of Naples, had Kings of Hungary and Naples.
married his Son Charles, called Martel, with the Daughter and Heiress of
Stephen, King of Hungary; Martel dying, leaving a Son, named Corobert, who
representing his Father, had all the right to succeed him in the Kingdom of
Naples; however, his Uncle Robert carried it before him. From Christ 1309.

The Knights, Hospitalers of St. John of T^^ Hosp^(...) Rhodes.
Jerusalem* took the Isle of Rhodes, and there established the principal Seat
of their Order. From Christ 1310.

At the Council held at Vienna by Clement, the order of the Templers, was
Abolished. The Hospitallers had some part The Templers abolished, with the
Beguars, and the Beguins.
of their Lands; yet King Philip had the greatest share. They raced out also,
in the same Council, the Beguars, and the Beguins, a sort of Friars and Nuns,
accused for very great Disorders in their Life, and of Errors in their Faith.
From Christ 1310.

The Emperor Henry the Seventh, going The Emperor Henry the Seventh poyso^'d in
the Sacrument.
into Italy, to re-establish the Rights of the Empire, died there, as it is
believed, poisoned by one Bernadine, a Predicant Friar, as he gave him the
Sacrament. From Christ 1313.

Pope Clement, and King Philip died, both at the same time. The Pope and the
King summoned at the first Day, by the Great Master of the Templers Lewis Hutin
King of France.


The Great Master of the Templers, at the Hour of his Execution, summoned both
the Pope, and the King, to appear before the Tribunal of God. The Pope died in
forty Days, and the King within a Year. From Christ 1314.

Lewis the Tenth, called Hutin, or the Contentious, reigned but two Years;
during which time the Sea of Rome was vacant. At length the Cardinals having
empowered James of Ossa, Son to a Shooemaker Pope John the 22th.
of Cahors, who was of their College, to name a Pope, he chose himself, under
the Name of John the Two and twentieth. From Christ 1316.

The Electors divided the Empire among A Schism in the Empire.
themselves; one part for King Lewis Duke of Bavaria, the other for Frederick
Duke of Austria, Son to the Emperor Albert. The Pope declared himself against
Lewis; who opposing the Pope, favored the Cordeliers, whom the Pope
persecuted: He writ against them, and they against him; particularly William
Okam, an Englishman, and very learned, and of that Order, protected by the
Emperor Lewis. From Christ 1322.

In France a Posthumus Son of Lewis, named Kings of France.
John, having not lived above six Weeks, Philip the Fifth, called Le Long,
Brother to Lewis, succeeded him, against the Designs of some who would have
maintained the pretended Right of Jean, Daughter to the deceased King, by the
same Right of the Salick Law. Charles the Fourth, called Le Bell, succeeded his
Brother Philip; and to Charles, Philip the Sixth, called of Valois, Cousin
German to the three last Kings, maugre the Pretensions of Edward the Third King
of England, who said, he had more Right, because he was Son to Izabella,
Daughter to Philip le Bell.

The Emperor had set up an Antipope, Antipope.
a Cordelier, under the Name of Nicholas the Fifth, in opposition to Pope John:
But the Popes.
unfortunate Nicholas being fallen into the Hands of John, was shut up in a
Prison, where he died miserably. Not very long after, Pope John being dead,
they put in his place Bennet the Twelfth, a Gascoign. From Christ 1334.

At Constantinople* Michael Paleologus had Emperors of Constantinople.
for his Successor, his Son Andronicus; and to this, a Grandson of the same
Name: Who dying, left his Sons, very young, under the Tuition of John
Cantacusenes: This John behaved himself so well in his Trust, and with so great
Authority, that he acquired the Title of Emperor. From Christ 1338.

To Bennet the Twelfth, succeeded Clement Popes.
the Sixth, of Lymousin. From Christ 1342.

The War, which lasted for some time, between the English and the French,
proved fatal to the latter in this Year; King Philip having lost the Battle
near Cressy, in Picardy, The Battle of Cressy.
against King Edward, who took Calais, after a Year's Siege. From Christ 1346.

Lewis of Bavaria was called Emperor, for some time; part of the Princes of
Germany did not acknowledge him: He being dead, they all, at last, unanimously
Charles the Fourth, Emperor.
agreed in the Election of Charles the Fourth, of the House of Luxemburg, King
of Bohomia. From Christ 1347.

A dreadful Plague broke out in Cathaia, A great Plague.
and spread it self in Persia, Mesopotamia, Syria, and in Asia Minor: Europe
was infested with it, even to the most Western parts, and caused very strange
Desolations through all places.

Clement the Sixth died: He reduced the Popes.
Jubilee of a Hundred, to Fifty Years. Innocent the Sixth, his Countryman,
succeeded him. Christ From 1352.

The People of Constantinople, compelled Emperors of the East.
John Cantacusenes, to resign the Empire to John Paleologus, Son to Andronicus
the Second. From Christ 1354.

John King of France, who succeeded his The Battle of Poitiers.
Father Philip, lost the Battle at Poitiers, and there became Prisoner to
Edward Prince of Wales, Son to Edward King of England. From Christ 1556.

Charles Son to King John, governed the Kingdom with great Prudence, during his
Father's Imprisonment. Then followed Affair^ betwe^n France and England.
the Treaty of Brittany, in consequence of which, King John returned to France,
upon his Parole; but having not that Interest to oblige the Nobility of his
Kingdom, to consent to the Demands of the English, he went over into England,
according to his Parole, and most suitable to that just ^e ^rue Maxim for
France^.
Maxim he often repeated, That if Truth and Faith were banished from the
Dwellings of the rest of Mankind, yet they ought to be found in the Hearts and
Tongues of Princes. He died in England.

He had instituted, or reestablished the Order of the Star, much about the
Time The Order of the St^^, and ^^e Garter.
that King Edward instituted that of the Garter.

John left four Sons; Charles the Fifth, called the Wise, was his Successor: He
was the first who had the Title of Dauphine The first Dauphine of France.
according to the Treaty made with Humbert, Dauphine of Vienna; by which he
resigned up his Dominions to King John.

The other Sons of this King, were Lewis The Second House of Anjou.
Duke of Anjou, chief of the Second* Royal House of that Name.

Philip, called the Hardy, Duke of Burgundy, The Second House of Burgundy
a Stock also of the Second Royal House of that Name; and John Duke of Berry,
who left no Branch.

The Duchy of Brittany had been disputed A Quarrel for the Duchy of Brittany.
a long time, between Charles of Blois, who pretended to it by Jane his Wife,
Daughter of Guy, Brother to Duke John the Third, who died without Children; and
John Earl of Montford, who boasted to have the most Right, as he was the
nearest Male.

The Battle of Auray, that Charles lost, The Battle of Auray.
where he was killed upon the place, decided the Difference in favor of John;
who entered into the full and quiet possession of the Duchy, and had the
Surname of Conqueror, and Victorious.

The French and the English had taken Parties in this long War; the first for
Charles, near Kinsman to King Philip the Sixth, and the second for John.

These two Nations were also concerned The Civil War in Castile.
in a Difference between Don Pedro, called the Cruel, and Don Henry his Bastard
Brother, about the Kingdom of Castile: At last, after various Successes on both
sides, the War was decided by a Battle, where Don Pedro was defeated and killed
by Don Henry: So that this Henry being assisted by the French, under the
Command of the brave, and famous Betrand of Guesclin, Bertrand of Gueslin.
a Gentleman of Brittany, remained King of Castile. From Christ 1369.

This great and fortunate Captain Bertrand, had brought for this Expedition,
Troops of disbanded Soldiers; who, passing through the County, forced Pope
Urban Popes.
the Fifth to pay a Ransom: Which made him resolve to return to Rome, that he
might not any more be exposed to the like Affronts; but after he had made a
Journey there, he returned into France, where he died. From Christ 371.

David Bruce, King of the Scots, dying Robert Stuart King of Scots.
without Children, Robert Stuart is acknowledged King of the Scots, in right of
his Wife, Sister to King David.

By the Council of St. Bridget of Swede, and of St. Catherine of Sienna,
according to the Revelations they pretended from Heaven, Gregory the Eleventh,
Successor to Urban the Fifth, returned to Rome, where The Pope returned to Rome.
after fourteen Months he died, repenting to have believed those Revelations
against the Light of his own Understanding. From Christ 1377.

The Cardinals compelled by the Romans to choose an Italian Pope, elected the
Archbishop of Paris, under the Name of Urban the Sixth; but the Cardinals
being at liberty, retired to Fundi, in the Kingdom of Naples, where they made a
Second Election, of a Cardinal of Geneva, under the Name of Clement the
Seventh; so that Urban residing at Rome, and Clement at A Schism.
Avignion, Christendom was divided between the two Popes: France, Castile,
Scotland, and Naples, acknowledged Clement: The rest of Italy, with England,
declared for Urban: The States of the Kingdom of Arragon, remained Neuters.
From Christ 1379.

The Emperor Charles the Fourth died: The Death of Charles the Fourth, Emperor.
He had been Crowned at Rome, by the Legates of that Pope, who then resided at
Avignion: But this Ceremony was performed with that Disgrace, that they obliged
him to leave Rome, the same Day he was Crowned; which he did. However, he was
to be praised for making the Golden The Golden Bull. Wencelaus Emperor.
Bull, in which was regulated all that relates to the Election of an Emperor.
He had for his Successor, his Son Wencelaus, King of Bohemia.

Charles the Fifth, King of France, died; Kings of France.
and his eldest Son, Charles the Sixth, succeeded him. From Christ 1380.

While the Tartars, and the Turks, disputed A Sophy King of Persia.
for the Kingdom of Persia, a certain Sophy declaring, he was descended from
Haly, Son-in-Law to Mahomet, made himself Master of it; whose Posterity Reigns
there to this time.

The Flemins revolting against their Count of Flanders, the young King Charles
took his part, and defeated the Rebels at The Battle of Roesbeck.
Roesbeck in Flanders, where Philip of Arteville, their chief Commander, was
killed. From Christ 1382.

John Paleologus had been deposed from Emperors of Constantinople.
the Empire of Constantinople, by his Son Andronicus; but was a while after
re-invested: After whose Death, Manuel, his Second Son, succeeded him.

The Turks were grown very considerable since the beginning of this Age, being
so powerfully established in Bithynia, and in other neighboring Countries of
the lesser Asia, under Ottoman their first Sultan, The Sultans of the Turks.
and afterward under his Successors, Orcan and Solomon.

Amurath the Son of Solomon, who reigned at this time, past into Europe, and
made his Conquests in the Country of Bulgaria, along the Danube. From Christ
1384.

Jane Queen of Naples had succeeded Kings of Naples.
her Father Robert, and had no Children by her four Husbands: She had a Sister
married to her Cousin Charles of Durus, who had no Children; but Jane being
displeased with her Brother-in-Law, adopted Lewis Duke of Anjou, and to him
resigned the Right of her Kingdom. From Christ 1385.

Charles, called the Wicked, King of The horrid Death of Charles King of Navar.
Navar, died in a most deplorable manner: For the Surgeon, who wrapped him, and
sewed him up in Linen dipped in strong Spirits, which having took fire by
carelessness, burnt him. From Christ 1387.

Urban the Sixth being dead, the Roman Popes.
Cardinals put in his place Boniface the Ninth, Clement still keeping his See
at Avignion.

After his Death, the Cardinals chose for his Successor, a Spaniard, of the
House of The Continuation of Schism.
Luna, who took the Name of Benoit the Thirteenth. The Schism thus continuing,
the Christian Princes to no purpose endeavored to put an end to it. From
Christ 1394.

In the last Year of this Age, the Electors Wencelaus deposed. Henry of
Brunswic Emperor, then Rupert Count Palatine.
deposed Wencelaus, judging him unworthy of the Empire, because of his ill
Qualities. They put Henry of Brunswick in his place; who having been killed in
the same Year, they then made choice of Rupert, Count Palatine of the Rhine.
From Christ 1400.

The Fifteenth Age.
ABout the end of the former Century, John Count of Nevers, attended with a
great Number of the French Nobility, marched to the Relief of Hungary, against
Bajazet Emperor of the Turks. The Christian The Battle of Nicopolis.
Army had been beaten at the Battle of Nicopolis.

John was taken Prisoner, with the famous Boucicaut, with many French
Gentlemen. John and Boucicaut were released.

The Turks attacked Constantinople in the Bajazet attacked Constantinople.
beginning of this Age.

The Emperor Manuel having applied himself to King Charles for Succors, he sent
him some under the Command of the same Boucicaut, who relieved Constantinople;
which obliged Manuel to come into France, to thank the King, and to beg of him
fresh Supplies. From Christ 1401.

During the time that Manuel was in Tamberlain Cham of the Tartars. Bajazet
overcome, and kept Prisoner.
France, Tamberlain the Cham of the Tartars, overrun the Eastern parts, with a
most formidable Army.

He overcame, and took Bajazet Prisoner, and treated him with that scorn, that
the most miserable Prince dashed out his Brains against the Bars of the Iron
Cage, in which he was shut up like a wild Beast. From Christ 1402.

At Rome, Boniface the Ninth being dead, Popes.
Innocent the Seventh succeeded him; and after him, Gregory the Twelfth, a
Venetian of the House of Cornaro, upon Condition that he should resign, if
Bennet the Thirteeenth, who always lived at Avignion, A Continuation of Schism.
would do the like: They both of them met to concert the Business at Sazona;
but as they took their Journey to meet there, every one on a sudden did quit
their Faction; Gregory retired to Sienna; Bennet into Catalonia, his Native
Country.

The greatest part of the Cardinals having abandoned them, assembled in Council
at Pisa, where Gregory and Bennet were The Council of Pisa.
deposed, and a Cordelier, called Peter Phylargus, chosen in their places,
under the Name of Alexander the Fifth, who died Three Popes.
about ten Months after.

The Cardinals who had followed him to Bologna, elected Balthazar Cossa, who
took the Name of John the Twenty third. From Christ 1410.

There was also a Schism in the Empire, between Sigismund, Brother to
Wenceslaus Sigismund Emperor.
deposed, and Josse Marquess of Moravia, his Kinsman; but by the sudden Death
of Josse, Sigismund was acknowledged Emperor by all the Princes. From Christ
1411.

This Prince ordered a Council to be A Council at Constance.
held in the City of Constance, where they resolved on Five remarkable Things:

1. They burned as Heretics, John Hus, John Hus, and Jerome of Prague, burnt.
though he came there under a safe Conduct of the Emperor; they treated in the
same manner, Jerome os Prague, a Disciple of John Hus.

2. They abolished the Use of the Cup, The Cup taken away from the Sacrament.
in the Sacrament of the Eucharist.

3. They declared a Council superior to the Pope.

4. In Consequence to that, they deposed Three Popes deposed.
the three Popes, of whom John was there present.

5. They elected Martin the Fifth, of the House of Colonna, after he had
promised on his Oath, to keep the Decrees of the Council. From Christ 1417.

Of the three deposed Popes, John, and Gregory submitted to the Sentence of the
Council.

Bennet persisted even 'till Death, though he had but two Cardinals with him;
whom he commanded, when he was dying, to elect a Successor; which they did,
naming a Chanoine of Barcellona, who took the Name of Clement the Eighth: But
at length he deposed himself, and was in exchange made Archbishop of Majorca.
From Christ 1422.

In France, King Charles had before lost a The Battle ^ Agincourt.
Battle near Agincourt, in Piccardy: Henry the Fifth, who won it, became very
powerful in France; the more, because there happened very great Troubles by a
madness King Charles fell into, upon the Death of his Brother Lewis Duke of
Orleans, whom his Cousin John, Duke of Burgundy, had caused to be Assassinated
at Paris. By the Death of the same John, killed at* Montereau in Brye, by the
Servants of Charles Dauphin, in the presence of that Prince. Lastly, by the
hatred of Queen Izabella of Bavaria, against her Son the Dauphin, which grew so
violent, that she joined in a Faction with Philip Duke of Burgundy, whose
Interests prevailed with the States General, to deprive the Dauphin of his
Right to the Succession of the Crown, and to acknowledge for the Heir of King
Charles, Henry King of England his Son-in-Law, who married Katharine his
Daughter.

The famous Captain John Zisca, a Bohemian, John Zisca, a famous Captain.
died, after he had vindicated the Liberty, and the Evangelick Religion of his
Countrymen against Wens^laus, and Sigismond, Kings of that Country: over whom,
he gained many Battles, even after he had lost both his Eyes in that War. From
Christ 1425.

It was resolved in the Council of Constance, that another should be held seven
years after. Pope Martin was averse to Popes.
it; but about the end of his Papacy, being importuned to call one, he summoned
it at Pi^a. But the Pope so ordered Affairs in that manner, that this Council
had no effect. A little before his Death, he appointed another at Basle, and
his The Council of Basle.
Successor Eugenius the Fourth, sent his Legates to cause it to be opened. From
Christ 1431.

After several years of great Confusion in France, King Charles the Seventh,
reestablish'd himself, by forcing out the English; so that there remained in
their Possession nothing but the City of Calais.

This great Revolution was begun, and advanced by a certain young Wench, called
the Maid of Orleans, who pretended, The Maid of Orleans.
she was inspired from Heaven, to employ her self to reinthrone King Charles.

The Emperor Sigismond being dead, his Albert the second Emperor.
Son-in-Law Albert the Second, succeeded him in the Empire, and in the Kingdoms
of Hungary and Bohemia. From Christ 1438.

The Pope Eugenius fell out with the Council of Basle, and signified to them,
That it should be removed to Ferrara. In effect, a Council was called there,
where The Council of Ferrara.
he was in Person with John Paleologus, Emperor of Constantinople, who had
brought with him many Grecian Bishops; then they went from thence to Florence,
where the Greeks made an Agreement with the Latins, on many Articles of Belief;
in which till that time, they had differed.

In the mean time, the Council of Basle not at all fearing the Fulminations of
Eugenius, A^^hism.
proceeded legally against him, deposed him, and elected in his place Amideus,
Duke of Savoy, under the Name of Foelix the Fifth Antipope.
Foelix the Fifth: This Prince had resigned his Dukedom to his Son, Duke Lewis,
and was retired to the delitious Hermitage of Repaille, on the Lake of Geneva.

At last, Peace being made between the French and the English: Lewis the
Dauphin, to discharge the Kingdom of the Soldiers, who ruined it, brought a
great Army out of the Empire: Four thousand A remarkable Action of the Switzers.
Switzers were so bold, to oppose his Paslage; they sold their Lives at a dear
rate, but they were all killed but one; who being returned to his Canton, lost
his Head as a base Deserter. From Christ 1444.

The young Ladislaus, King of Hungary, broke very rashly the Peace he had swore
to the Turks. It was believed, that the Misfortune of the Battle of Varne was a
The Battle of Varn^
just punishment for the breaking his Oath. He was there overcome, and killed
by Amurat the Second, Sultan of the Turks.

Nicolaus the Fifth, Successor to Eugenius the Fourth, saw an end of the
Schism, by the free* Resignation of Faelix, who remained Cardinal and Legate of
his own Country, and the adjacent Places: The Council of Basle having no more
power, broke up; so that Nicolaus was acknowledged Pope without any Dispute.
From Christ 1449.

Mahomet the Second of that Name, Emperor Mahomet the Second, takes
Constantinople.
of the Turks, took Constantinople from Constantin the Eleventh Paleologus, the
last Christian Emperor of that City. It was taken by Assault; and the Confusion
was so very great, that Constantin endeavoring to save himself, was stifled at
a Gate of the City, by the multitude of flying People. From Christ 1453.

Alphonso Borgia, a Spaniard, under the Popes.
Name of Calixtus the Third, succeeded Pope Nicholas the Fifth. From Christ
1455.

He acted nothing remarkable.

Pius the Second his Successor, made himself more Eminent, for his great
Learning, and extraordinary Zeal against the Turks. His Name was Aeneas Silvius
Picolomini, a Citizen of Sienna. From Christ 1458.

Since Henry the Third, King of England, Affairs of England.
three Edwards had Reigned, successively from Father to Son: Edward the Third,
had Edward Prince of Wales, who died before his Father; leaving his Son Richard
the Second, who Reigned after the Death of his Grandfather: Richard was
Dethroned by Henry the Fourth, Son of Henry Duke of Lancaster, youngest Son to
Edward the Third. Lyonel, Duke of Clarence, being the next to Edward Prince of
Wales. Lyonel had a Daughter, who was married to the Duke of York: From Henry
the Fourth, came Henry the Fifth, who had been received in France to succeed
Charles the Sixth, in right of his Wife Catharine, The Quarrel between the
House of York and Lancaster.
Daughter to Charles. From that Marriage, came Henry the Sixth, who was
Crowned, being a Child, King of France, in the Church of St. Denis. Not long
after Edward the Fourth, Duke of York, descended from Lyonel Duke of Clarence,
second Son to Edward the Third, dethroned, and put to death Henry the Sixth,
and set up himself in his place. From Christ 1460.

Charles the Seventh, King of France, suffered himself to die of Hunger, for
fear of being poisoned, having Conquered his Affairs of France.
Kingdom from the English. He might have been called Fortunate, if he had had
another Father, another Mother, and another Son. This Son was Lewis the
Eleventh, who succeeded his Father, whom he had very ill treated. From Christ
1461.

After the Death of Tamberlain, who had conquered the Persians; Hussan Cassan,
possessed himself of that Kingdom; he succeeded Sophys Kings of Persia.
the Hermit Sophy, from whence came the Sophyes, who have Reigned in Persia to
this time. From Christ 1463.

Pius the Second, died: No private Person ever labored more than Aeneas
Silvius, to restrain the Authority of the Popes, within the limits of their
ancient Popes:
Cannons; yet no Pope ever took more pains to extend the Papal Power beyond all
bounds: He obtained of Lewis the Eleventh, to abolish the pragmatick Sanction,
which were Rules extracted from The pragmatick Sanction.
what had been resolved in the Council of Constance, and Basle, to curb the
exorbitant Authority of the Popes. These Rules had been received in France,
where they were in form and force as Laws.

The Emperor, Albert the Second, died; leaving his Empress big with Child: She
Kings of Hungary and Bohemia.
was delivered of a Son, called Ladislaus, who succeeded his Father in the
Kingdoms of Hungary and Bohemia.

Frederic the Third, Cousin to Albert, and Frederic the Third, Emperor.
of the same House of Austria, was Successor to the Empire.

The young King Ladislaus, dying before he was married; the Hungarians chose
for their King, Mathias Corvin, Son Mathias Corvin, King of Hungary.
of John Huniades, a great Captain, who had made himself famous in the War
against the Turks.

The Bohemians for their part, chose for George Polebrac, King of Bohemia.
their King, George Polebrac, one of the Grandees of their Country: This King
being of the Evangelick Faith, protected those of that Religion, in his Kingdom.

Paul the Second, called Barbaro, Avenetian succeeded Pius the Second. Then to
Popes.
Paul succeeded a Cordelier, named Riara, who was styled Sixtus the Fourth.

Charles, the last Duke of Burgundy, had Charles the last, Duke of Burgundy,
defeated by the Switzers.
continually waged War with Lewis King of France. He had conquered Lorraine of
Rayner, who had Right to the Kingdom of Naples, and was Duke of Anjou: He
endeavored to subject the Switzars, which Design proved fatal to him; for they
overcame him twice in their Country, where he went to attack them, at Granzona,
and at Morat, and the third time near to Nancy, which he Besieged, making War
against Rayner, King of Naples, and Duke of Lorraine: Charles having been His
Death.
killed in this last Battle. From Christ 1477. Mary, Daughter and Heiress,
married to Maximillian of Austria.


His Daughter, and Heiress Maria, married Maximilian, Son to Frederic the
Third, Emperor. By this Marriage, she brought to the House of Austria, the
Sovereignty of the seventeen Provinces in the Low Countries, with the County of
Burgundy; the Duchy having been reunited to the Crown of France, by King Lewis
the Eleventh.

There was another Heiress, who had The Right of the Kingdom of Cyprus.
brought the Right of the Kingdom of Cyprus to the House of Savoy; She was
Charlotta, the only Daughter to John the Second of Lusignan, King of Cyprus: By
marrying Lewis Duke of Savoy, who having In the House of Savoy.
no Children, she bequeathed her Kingdom by Testament: But James her
Bastard-Brother, having took possession of Cyprus, Catharina Cornaro his
Widow, To the Venetians.
transferred to the Venetians, the Right she pretended to that Kingdom; of
which, the Venetians put themselves into a present Possession.

The House of the Medices having for sometime swayed the Government of
Florence; several Conspirators of other A Conspiracy against the Medices.
great Families of that City, supported by the Pope, set upon the two Brothers
Julian and Laurence, in a Church, at the time of Mass; where Julian was killed;
Laurence having saved Himself, did stir up the People against the Conspirators;
some of them were hanged up in the heat. Among others, Salviati, Archbishop of
Pisa. From Christ 1478.

The Pope employed his Arms, Spiritual and Temporal, against the Florentines;
but they maintained the War with Forces the King of France sent them, under the
Command of Philip de Comines, whose Name is Philip Comines.
famous for his curious and judicious Memoirs. After the Death of Edward the
Fourth, King of England, his Son Edward the Fifth, though a Child, was presently
after Affairs of England.
killed with Richard his Brother, by Richard their Uncle, who usurpd' the
Crown. From Christ 1483.

Lewis the Eleventh, King of France, died; a Prince who had Reigned with Of
France.
more absolute Power, than any of his Predecessors: for which reason, some
write, that he invested the Kings with more Regal Authority; others, that he
had exalted them beyond all sense and reason: His great Qualities were attended
with as many ill ones, as Cruelty, Injustice, and Hypocrisy; and about the end
of his Reign, he fell into very great imbecility, by his fear of Death. His
only Son Charles the Eighth, very young, succeeded him.

John Cibo, a Genouese, under the Name Popes.
of Innocent the Eighth, succeeded Sixtus the Fourth.

Henry the Seventh made himself King of England, having overcome and killed in
Battle Richard the Third. Henry was of Affairs of England.
the House of Lancaster, by his Mothers side: He united the two Houses, York
and Lancaster, who were Enemies, by marrying Mary of York, Daughter to Edward
the Fourth, and Sister to Edward the Fifth. From Christ 1485.

Ferdinand, King of Arragon, and his Granada taken from the Saracens.
Wife Izabella, Queen of Castille, took Granada from Boadilla, the last King of
the Saracens, in Spain. From Christ 1492.

A little while after, Christopher Colombus, Christopher Columbus.
a Genouese, found out the new World with great Success, and infinite Advantage
to Ferdinand and Izabella. From Christ 1494.

King Charles went into Italy, where all Charles the Eighth in Italy.
the Cities received him as Conqueror; so he entered Rome, where Alexander the
Sixth, Successor to Innocent the Eighth, either could not, or durst not oppose
him: from thence he marched to the Kingdom of Naples, and made himself Master
of it with incredible facility. His Design was, to carry on the War even to
Constantinople; to which end, he had delivered from the hands of the Pope,
Zizim* Brother to Bajazet the Second, to make use of him against Bajazet; but
the Design miscarried by the Death of Zizim, but chiefly by the League the
Pope, the Venetians, and Lodowike Sforza, Duke of Millan, made against the
King, to fight him as he came back. The Battle was fought The Battle of Fornova.
near Fornova, a Village near to Piacenza. where the King wholly routed them,
though they were six times more in number than those of his Army: but the French
lost the Kingdom of Naples in as short a time, as they had Conquered it; that
there remained to them nothing more than a filthy The Neopolitan Disease.
Disease, which cannot modestly be named.

Two Years after, Charles being dead, Lewis Duke of Orleans, first Prince of
the Blood, succeeded him. The new King broke off his Marriage with Jeane, the
Daughter of Lewis the Eleventh, and Sister Affairs of France.
to the last King, marrying his Widow Ann, Duchess of Britany. In a short
time, he marched into Italy, and retook the Duchy of Millan, from that Traitor
and Usurper Lodowike Sforza, whom he sent Prisoner into France, where he died.
From Christ 1500.

THE Sixteenth Age.
THE King having made that Conquest Frederic, King of Napl^s, dyed a Prisoner
in France.
in his own Person, regained also the Kingdom of Naples by his Lieutenant
Generals, who took King Frederic: Lewis treated him very honorably, even to
his Death; which happened in France, where he was kept a Prisoner with great
respect. From Christ 1501.

Alexander the Sixth, died of Poison Popes.
he drank by a mistake of his Servants, having prepared it for the Cardinal
Cornetto. This Pope had great Qualities, and among them very ill ones; the same
as his Sons, especially the Eldest, Caesar Borgia. From Christ 1503.

Pius the Third Picolomini, Nephew to Benet the Second, having held the Sea but
twenty days, Julius the Second, was chose in his place. From Christ 1504.

Ferdinand, King of Arragon, retakes the The King of Arragon retakes the
Kingdom of Naples.
Kingdom of Naples from the French, by his General Gonzalvo: the Spaniards
called him the great Captain. From Christ 1505.

The Genoueses, who had submitted to The Genoueses punished for their Revolt,
by K. Lewis.
King Lewis, did Revolt; but King Lewis severely punished them for it. From
Christ 1507.

King Lewis marched into Italy, to preserve the Millanese: He gained the
Battle, The Battle of Gyra D' Adda.
called Gyra D'Adda, from the Venetians, and others confederated against him.
From Christ 1509.

Three years after, the French obtained The Battle of Ravenna.
another Victory at Ravenna, over the Popes Army, in League with the Venetians.
This Battle, fought on Easter Day, proved dismal to the Conquerors; their
General Gaston du Foy, Duke of Nemours, was killed, The Duke of Nemours killed.
Nephew to the King, as he was too hotly persuing those who fled. From Christ
1512.

By his Death, the French Army disbanded themselves; which occasioned the loss
of all had been got in Italy. The Reestablishment of Maximillian Sforza in the
Maximillian Sforza, Duke of Millan. The Council of Pisa and Millan, come to
nothing.
Duchy of Millan, and the Dissolution of the Council, which the King had
caused to be Assembled at Pisa, and was from thence transferred to Millan, in
opposition to the Pope. These Assemblies proved at last to be of no effect.

Benhemet, an Arabian, reputed a Saint, persuaded the Inhabitants of Fez and
Morocco, The Kingdoms of Fez and Morocco.
that he was of the Line of Mahomet; upon which, they received him for King of
those two Kingdoms. From Christ 1513.

Julius the Second, finding himself strong enough to fall violently on the
French, by reason of the ill Success of their Affairs in Italy, was prevented
in his Design, by Death. His Successor was Leo the Tenth, Popes.
of the House of Medices; a young Person, about Thirty six years old; who had
more Moderation, than his old Predecessors had for King Lewis: for so soon as
he was made Pope, he reconciled his See to France. King Lewis had married Ann
Duchess of Britany, Dowager to Charles his Predecessor: She had four Sons by
her first Husband; but they died before their Father: She had but two Daughters
by the second.

After her Death, Lewis married Mary, The Affairs of France and England.
the Daughter of Henry the Seventh, King of England, and Sister to Henry the
Eighth, who then succeeded his Father. From Christ 1514.

Lewis lived but one year after his late Kings of France.
Marriage. A Prince who had no very ill Qualities, but many excellent ones:
which acquired him the name of Father of his People. He leaving no Sons,
Francis Duke of Angolesme succeeded him, being next Prince of the Blood: King
Lewis made him marry Claudia his eldest Daughter. He had by his first Wise, Ann
of Britany. From Christ 1515.

The new King presently marched, to The Battle of Marrignan.
Conquer the Duchy of Millan, which succeeded happily to him, having defeated
a great Army of Switzers, near to Marignan.

Though this great Success did not please the Pope, yet he came to Bolognia,
where he conferred with the King. The Agreement between the Pope and the King.
There he made the Concordate concerning the Provision of the great Benifices
of the Kingdom, upon condition, that the King should name them, and the Pope
should have a years Revenue out of each Benefice.

Selim, Emperor of the Turks, had conquered Egypt, and all that depended on The
Conquests of Sultan Selim.
that Empire of the Mamalukes, or Sultans of Egypt. This formidable Enemy
threatened Italy, which made the Pope to publish a Croisade against him: They,
to whom the Pope had given Commission to preach it up, and to collect Money for
Indulgencies, which were distributed to those who would contribute to the
Expense of that Expedition, behaved rhemselves so very insolently in that
Employment, especially Martin Luther.
in Germany, that Martin Luther of the Order of the Augustins, supported by
Frederic Duke of Saxony, took upon him to preach against this enormous Abuse.
From Christ 1516.

Maximillian had succeeded in the Empire to Frederic the Third. Philip, the Son
of Maximillian, had married Jane, Daughter of Ferdinand, King of Arragon, and
of Izabella, Queen of Castille. Philip dying before his Father, left two Sons,
Charles and Ferdinand. This Year Charles was Charles V. Emperor.
elected Emperor, after the Death of Maximilian, his Grandfather. From Christ
1519.

The French lost Millain, with their other The French driven out of Italy.
Conquests in Italy: It is said, that Pope Leo died with extreme Joy of it.

His Successor was Adrian the Sixth, born Popes.
at Utrech, who had been Tutor to the Emperor Charles the Fifth. From Christ
1522.

Solomon the Second, Emperor of the Rhodes taken by Solomon, from the
Knights-Hospitallers They go to Malta. Popes.
Turks, took Rhodes from the Knights-Hospitallers: After they had wandered about
for some time, the Emperor Charles gave them the Isle of Malta, where they
still reside. From Christ 1523.

Julian de Medices, under the Name of Clement the Seventh, succeeded Adrian.

King Francis having past a second time K. Francis taken Prisoner before Pavia.
into Italy, was taken Prisoner before Pavia, by the Generals of the Emperor
Charles the Fifth. From Christ 1525.

After a Year's Imprisonment, this King He is set at Liberty.
was set at liberty on such Conditions as the States of his Kingdom would not
allow of. From Christ 1526.

The Pope having left the Emperor's Rome plundered.
Party, the Imperial Army commanded by the Duke of Bourbon, took, and plundered
Rome.

This Duke had quitted France, upon The Duke of Bourbon killed.
some kind of Discontent: He was killed as he entered Rome, some few paces from
the Breach.

The Pope being made a Prisoner in the The Pope made a Prisoner, escaped.
Castle of St. Angelo, was kept there for six Months; from whence he escaped,
and was reconciled to the Emperor: Who gave his Natural Daughter in Marriage to
The Medices are Sovereigns of Florence. Andrea Doria, a Genouese.
the chief of the House of the Medices, of which was the Pope: So the Medices
became Sovereigns of Tuscany.

Andrea Doria behaved himself better toward Genoa, his Country: For having
abandoned the King of France's Service, in which he had been a long time
engaged, offered himself to the Emperor, upon Condition, that the Liberty of
his Country should be preserved. From Christ 1530.

The Peace made between the Emperor, A Peace between the Emperor, and the King.
The Siege of Vienna raised.
and the King of France, forced Solomon to raise the Siege of Vienna.

The Separation of England from the Church of Rome, occasioned by the Divorce
of Henry the Eighth, and his Queen Catherine of Arragon.

John Calvin was called to Geneva, to John Calvin at Geneva.
make a Reformation of Religion. From Christ 153^.

The Emperor Charles the Fifth passed Charles V. in Barbary.
over into Barbary, took Tunis, and there reestablished Mul^y Hassan, who had
been deposed by the famous Corsair, Barbarossa.

In his Return from that Expedition, the Emperor lost a great part of his Ships
and Galleys in a Storm.

He was also as unfortunate in an Enterprise He came t^ Provence, and retired
with great loss of his Soldiers.
against France: He came into Provence, without acting any thing there, he was
constrained to retire with the loss of the greatest part of his vast Army.

A Peace being made, he past through A Peace with France.
France, in order to quell the Rebellion of Gaunt. From Christ 1541.

But having not performed what he promised A War broke out again.
to the King of France, when he past through his Country, the War broke out
again between them. From Christ 1543.

Then followed the Battle of Cerisolles, The Battle of Cerisolles.
won by the French, under the Conduct of the Duke D'Anguien, Francis of
Bourbon, over the Imperialists.

Then a Peace was concluded between A Peace.
the two Potentates, each of them being at the Head of a powerful Army, upon
the Frontiers of the Low Countries. From Christ 1545.

Edward the Sixth succeeded his Father Kings of England.
Henry the Eighth, King of England.

Francis King of France died also, and his Kings of France.
Son Henry succeeded him.

To Clement the Seventh succeeded Paul Popes.
the Third, who appointed a Council to assemble at Mantua, then at Vicenza, and
at last at Trent, without having effected The Council of Trent.
any considerable Business. This Pope gave the Duchy of Parma, and Plaizance,
to Lodowick Farnese, one of his Sons. From Christ 1549.

The Cardinal d' Monte, under the Name of Julius the Third, succeeded Paul the
Third.

The Emperor had weakened the Protestant The Battle at the pass of the Elb.
Princes of Germany, by defeating their Army at the passage of the Elb.

Then they had recourse to King Henry, A War between the Emperor, and the King.
Metz, Toul, and Verdun, taken by the King.
who in his March to Germany, seized on Metz, Toul, and Verdun. The Emperor
having afterward besieged Metz, was forced to raise the Siege, by the wise and
courageous Defense of the Duke of Guize. From Christ 1553.

The young King Edward of England being dead, his Sister Mary was acknowledged
The Siege of Metz raised. Affairs of England.
Queen: After that, she beheaded her Cousin the Lady Jane Gray, with her
Husband the Lord Dudley. From Christ 1554.

The Emperor Charles resigned his Hereditary Of the Empire, and of Spain.
Dominions to his Son Philip, and Ferdinand King of the Romans, younger Brother
to Charles, was acknowledged Emperor.

Julius the Third died, and Twenty one Popes.
Days after, his Successor Marcellus; Paul the Fourth, of the House of Caraffa,
in the Kingdom of Naples, was chose Pope. From Christ 1557.

The War being inflamed between the The Battle of St. Quintin.
Kings of France and Spain, Philip, in Person, won the Battle of St. Quintin,
of the French, where the Constable, and many* other Lords of Quality, were made
Prisoners.

The Duke of Guize, in some manner, The taking of Calais.
repaired this Loss, in taking of Calais; upon which Mary Queen of England died
with Grief. She had succeeded her Brother Affairs of England.
Edward the Sixth, and having married her near Kinsman, Philip King of Spain,
she was engaged in this War. From Christ 1558.

Elizabeth, Daughter to Henry the Eighth, by Anne of Bullen, succeeded her
Sister Queen Mary.

A Peace was made between Henry and A Peace between France and Spain.
Philip, by the Marriage of Elizabeth, with Philip, and that of Margaret,
Sister to Henry, with the Duke of Savoy.

In a Turnament held at Paris, in Honor of these Nuptials, the King Tilting
against the Count of Montgomery, was wounded in the Eye, by a Splinter of the
Count's Lance; of which he died in a few Days.

He had put to Death a great Number of Hugonets; among others, he condemned Ann
du Bourg, a Counselor of the Parliament The Death of Bourg.
of Paris, and swore, that he would see him executed; but his unexpected Death
prevented him. Yet some Days after, Du Bourg suffered Death with great
Resolution, in the Presence of the young King, the Queen Mother, and all the
Court.

Paul the Fourth had for his Successor, Popes
Pius the Fourth, of the House of the Medices, or of the Med^qui^s of Mil^ai^.

The Conspiracy of Amboise was then The Conspiracy of Amboise.
made against the Duke of Guize, and the Cardinal of Lorrain, to take away the
King from their Custody, by the Grandees of the Kingdom, who professed the
Reformed Religion; pretending, that those two Princes kept the King as
Prisoner. From Christ 1560.

In an Assembly held at Fountainbleau, it was there resolved to call a National
Council; to prevent which, the Pope again declared for that of Trent, begun by
Paul the The Council of Trent.
Third, continued by Julius the Third, and broke off under both Popes.

In the mean time, the States of France assembled Affairs of France.
at Orleans, where the Prince of Conde was made Prisoner, and had been put to
Death, but for the sudden Death of the young King Francis the Second.

Charles the Ninth, his Brother, being yet a Child, succeeded him, under the
Tuition, and Regency, of his Mother Catherine de Medices. From Christ 1561.

The Conference held at Poissy, between The Conference at Poissy.
the Doctors of both Religions, had no good effect.

The Affairs of France being much embroiled on the Account of Religion, the
Guizes being Masters of the King's Person, the Queen Mother writ to the Prince
of Conde, to come and set him at liberty. This was the true Cause of the first
taking up of Arms, by those of the Reformed Religion in France. From Christ
1562.

The Siege of Roan followed, which held out for them: Anthony of Bourbon, who
was The Death of Anthony King of Navar. The Battle of Dreux.
King of Navar, by the Right of his Wife Jane d'Albert, was there killed.

Soon after a Battle was fought near Dreux, between the two Armies of both
Parties: The King's Army commanded by the Constable of Momor^ncy; and that of
the Hugonets by Lewis Prince of Conde, who was there taken Prisoner, as was
likewise the Constable, though at the last the King's proved victorious.

Not long before, some Conditions had been agreed on, advantageous enough to
the Hugonets, which were granted by a Decree called the Edict of January, and
were again confirmed this Year, by a Peace made after the Death of the Duke of
The Duke of Guize killed by Poltrot.
Guize, killed by Poltrot, a Hugonet Gentleman, while the Duke besieged
Orleans. From Christ 1563.

Pius the Fourth put an end to the Council Popes.
of Trent: This Pope being dead this Year, Pius the Fifth, a Dominican
succeeded him. From Christ 1564.

Maximilian the Second succeeded in the Empire, to his Father Ferdinand the
First. From Christ 1565.

Solomon the Second had taken Rhodes, from the Knights-Hospitallers, yet he
could not drive them out of Malta, his Commanders having been forced to raise
the Siege of that Island. This Sultan died at the The Death of Solomon.
Siege of Sigeth, in Hungary. From Christ 1566.

The Peace being broke in France, the The Battle* at St. Denis
Battle followed at St. Denis, near Paris, where the Constable of Momorency was
wounded, and died. From Christ 1567.

The Prince of Conde, who commanded the contrary Party, acquired much Honor,
on that occasion. From Christ 1568.

A little while after, the Peace being again The Battle of Jarna, ^here the
Prince of Conde was killed.
broke, there was a Battle fought near Jarna, in Xaintonge: The Prince of
Conde, who was there taken Prisoner, was killed in cold Blood, by a Captain of
the Duke of Anjou's Guards. From Christ 1569.

The Admiral De Coligni, by the Prince's Death, became chief of the Hugonet
Party; besieged Poitiers, raised the Siege, and lost the Battle near to
Monconture, against the The Battle of Monconture.
Duke of Anjou. From Christ 1570.

Selim took the Isle of Cyprus, which obliged the Pope to make a League between
the King of Spain, and the Venetians, against the Turks.

Then followed the Battle of Lepanto, in which the Turkish Fleet was routed by
the The Battle of Lepanto.
Christians, commanded by Don John of Austria, Natural Son to the Emperor
Charles the Fifth. From Christ 1571.

The principal Persons of the Religion, were invited to Paris, under pretense
of Celebrating the Nuptials of Henry King of The M^ssacre of Paris
Navar, with Margaret, Sister to the King: Jane Queen of Navar, Mother to the
Bridegroom, was there poisoned, and the Admiral wounded, and afterward killed,
with a great Number of the Nobility, and above Ten thousand Persons, in the
very City of Paris, on St. Bartholomew's Day. From Christ 1572.

The Duke of Anjou having, after that, The Siege of Rochel raised. The Duke of
Anjou King of Poland.
besieged Rochel, was forced to retire, without taking it, to go and receive
the Polonian Ambassadors, who came to bring him the News of his being elected
King of that Country. From Christ 1573.

While he was there, his Brother Charles The Death of Charle* IX
the Ninth died, stifled with the Blood that issued from all parts of his Body.

Amurath the Third, succeeded his Father; Emperors of the Turks, and Germany.
and Rodolphus the Second, succeeded his Father Maximilian the Second. From
Christ 1576.

King Henry the Third being returned Henry III King of France.
from Poland, was compelled by the States, assembled at Blois, to become chief
of the League, that the Catholics had made against the Hugonets. From Christ
1577.

Philip the Second, King of Spain, seized Philip II. seizes Portugal. The Death
of Sebastian King of Portugal.
on Portugal, after the Death of their King, Don Sebastian, supposed to be
killed in Africa, where he went to make War, in favor of a Moorish King, who
disputed the Kingdoms of Fez and Morocco, with another.

Henry the Third, of France, instituted The Order of the Holy Ghost.
the Order of the Holy Ghost. From Christ 1582.

Pope Gregory the Thirteenth reformed The Calendar reformed. The Death of the
Duke of Alenson
the Calendar.

The Duke of Alenson, Brother to the King of France, died deprived of the
Government of the Low Countries, to which he had been invited by those People;
but he lost his Interest, by his ill Conduct. From Christ 1584.

Sixtus the Fifth, a Cordelier, of low Birth, but of great Courage,
Excommunicated A B^ll against the King of Navar, and Prence of Conde.
Henry King of Navar, with his Cousin, Henry Prince of Conde, having declared
them to be fallen from the Right of Succession to the Crown of France. From
Christ 1585.

Mary Stuart, Queen of Scots, after a The Death of the Queen of Scots.
long Imprisonment, was Beheaded, by the Sentence of Judges appointed by Q.
Elizabeth. From Christ 1587.

The Spanish Fleet, called, The Invincible The Spanish Armada.
Armada, was three Years preparing, with great Labor and Cost.

It consisted of One hundred and thirty Sail, with Twenty thousand Soldiers on
Board; set out by Philip the Second, to invade England, was part of it
destroyed by Sir Francis Drake's Fireships; and the other part lost and
dispersed in a great Storm: So that amazing Terror of Europe vanished. From
Christ 1588.

France being in a very great Consusion, the King, at length, made an Agreement
with the King of Navar, to oppose the League: But having both together The
Death of Henry III.
besieged Paris, the King was stabbed in his Bedchamber, at St. Clou, by James
Clement, a Jacobine Friar. From Christ 1589.

Henry the Fourth, King of Navar, the Henry IV. King of France The Combat of
Arques, and the Battle of Yuri.
next Prince of the Blood, succeeded him, with very much difficulty, at his
first coming to the Crown: But he soon gave great Reputation and Vigor to his
Affairs, by the Combat of Arques, and the Battle of Yuri, which he won. From
Christ 1590.

To Sixtus the Fifth, succeeded Urban the Popes.
Seventh, Gregory the Fourteenth, and Innocent the Ninth; who all held the Sea
of Rome no longer than a Year. After them, came Clement the Eighth, a
Florentine. From Christ 1591.

The Duke of Pa^^a had made the King, The Duke of Parma.
not long before, to raise the Siege of Paris; he forced him again to raise
that of Orleans: But the Duke was wounded, passing the River of Sein, at
Caudebec, and was never well cured of his Wound; being returned to his
Government of the HB Death.
Low Countries, he soon after died. From Christ 1592.

King Henry the Fourth having made Profession of the Roman Catholic Religion,
was received into Paris, and in like manner Henry IV. a Roman Catholic.
was acknowledged by all the Kingdom. From Christ 1593.

John Chastel, a Scholar of the Jesuits, John Chastel wounded K. Henry The
Jesuits banished. The Pope absolves the King of France.
wounded the King in the Mouth; whereupon the Jesuits were banished France.
From Christ 1594.

The King received Absolution of the Pope, and so was acknowledged for King by
all the Princes and States of Christendom. From Christ 1595.

He declared a War against Spain, which A War between France and Spain.
proved very unfortunate to France.

The Spaniards surprised Calais, Cambray, and Amiens.

King Henry re-took the last.

Cambray remained in the Hands of the Spaniards.

Calais was restored by the Peace; which The Edict of Nants.
was treated and concluded at Vervins, by the Ministers of the two Kings, and
the Pope's Legates. From Christ 1598.

The King made an Edict, called that of Nants; because he signed it in that
City, The Edict of Nants.
to revive the Union between his Subjects, that were divided by their diversity
of Religions.

King Philip the Second died of the lousy Kings of Spain.
Disease.

He had put to Death his Son, Don Carlos, upon Suspicion that he favored the
poor Protestants of the Low Countries, who had thrown off their Allegiance to
King Philip, because he designed to introduce the Inquisition.

Nor were they any longer able to endure the barbarous Cruelties of the Duke D'
Alva.

Philip the Third, succeeded his Father. From Christ 1600.

THE Seventeenth Age.
HENRY the Fourth, King of France, The Marriage of Henry with Maria de Medices.
being Divorced from Margaret, Sister to the three last Kings, married Mary de
Medices, Neice to the great Duke of Tuscany. In the first year of this Age, she
was brought to bed of a Dauphin, who was since called Lewis the Thirteenth.
From Christ 1601.

King Henry and the Duke of Savoy, were The Affairs of France and Savoy.
entered into a War for the Marquisate of Saluces. A Peace was made upon
conditions, with an exchange of Bresse, and some other Lands given up to the
King, for the Marquisate.

The Marshall Duke of Biron, convicted The Death of Byron.
of Treason, was beheaded. From Christ 1602.

Charles Emanuel, Duke of Savoy, attempted to take Geneva by scaling of it, The
scaling of Geneva.
which Design concluded to his Disgrace.

Elizabeth, Queen of England, being dead, in the Seventy one year of her Age,
The Death of Queen Elizabeth.
having Reigned forty five Years; most courageously asserted the Protestant
Religion, which her Brother, Edward the Sixth, had reformed. She was as highly
qualified for War, as for Peace: She deserved the favor of Fortune, by her
great Care, and wise Conduct, in Governing. The English received for their King
James K. of England.
James the Sixth, King of Scotland, the first King of that Name in England.
From Christ 1603.

The Archduke Albert and Clara Eugenia, Ostend taken.
at length took Ostend, after more than three years Siege.

Paul the Fifth of the Borghese Family, Popes.
succeeded Clement the Eighth. From Christ 1605.

At London was discovered the Powder The Gunpowder Treason at London. A Quarrel
between the Pope and the Venetians.
Plot, to blow up King James, and his Parliament. From Christ 1606.

The Quarrel between the Pope and the Venetians, was chiefly made up by the
Mediation of King Henry.

A Truce for many years between the Archdukes and the United Provinces of A
peace with States of Holland.
the Low Countries. From Christ 1609.

King Henry the Fourth, preparing to make a great War, was killed by Ravaillac.
The Death of Henry IV.
Lewis the Thirteenth, his Son, about the Age of nine or ten years, succeeded
him, under the Regency of his Mother Lewis the Thirteenth, King.
Maria de Medices. From Christ 1610.

Count Maurice, assisted by the French in Count Maurice took Juliers.
July, Besieged the City of Juliers; and in September following, took it by
Surrender.

Philip the Third, King of Spain, made Philip King of Spain takes Alrach.
himself Master of Alrach, a strong Castle, built by the Moors, upon the
straight of Gibralter. He commanded all the Moors to depart Spain within three
days, under pain of Death, having confiscated all their Estates, but what Money
and Goods they could carry along with them: And that year Nine hundred thousand
was expelled, and in the following years not a few.

Certain Ministers in Holland, offered to Remonstrant Ministers, and contra
Remonstrants.
the States a Remonstrance, wherein they declared their opinion, concerning
Predestination; for which reason they were called Remonstrants, and their
Opposites contra Remonstrants.

The Muscovite endeavoring to raise The Muscovite beaten by the Po^es. The
Muscovites burn Vilna.
the Siege of Smolensko, is beaten by the Polanders. The Muscovites in revenge,
burn Vilna, where 4700 Houses were laid in Ashes.

The Sophy of Persia having defeated the Turks near Babylon, sends an
Ambassador to The Sophy of Persia makes a League with the Emperor. The
Archduke of Austria made King of Bohemia.
the Emperor Rudolphus, and confirms a League between them.

Mathias, Archduke of Austria, and King of Hungary, was made King of Bohemia.

A Conference between six Remonstrants at the Hague, before the States General,
yet they could not agree about the Points in Controversy.

The King of Denmark declares War against Su^den, Besieges C^lmar on the 2d. of
May, and takes it on the 29th. putting The King of Denmark declares War against
the Sw^de.
all to the Sword, but those who escaped into the Castle.

Smolensko was taken by the Poles: two years after,* the Muscovites not only
recovered that place, but several other Cities of Lithuania.

Prince Henry created Prince of Wales. Prince Henry created prince of Wales.
From Christ 1610.

Christiem, Elector of Saxony, died of an Apoplexy, and his Brother John George
succeeded him. The Elector of Saxony's death* The King of Sweden's death.


Charles King of Sweden, sinks under the loss of Colmar, and died; his Son
Gustavus succeeded him. From Christ 1611.

Mathias, King of Hungary and Bohemia, Mathias married to Anna Arch-Dutchess of
Austria.
married with Anna, Arch-Dutchess of Austria.

Margaret Queen of Spain, Wife to Philip the Third, died in the 27th year of
her Age. The Queen of Spains death.


Frederic the Fifth, Count Palatine of the Rhyne, married with Elizabeth,
Daughter to James the First, King of England. Frederic the Fifth, married with
the princess Elizabeth.


John George, the Son of John George, Duke of Saxony, was born.

Rudolphus the Emperor, having Reigned almost 35 years, and having lived 59,
The Emperor Rodolphus death Mathias King of Hungary, Emperor.
died; after whose death, Mathias, King of Hungary and Bohemia, was chosen.
From Christ 1612.

The Danes in the beginning of this year, 1613. invaded Swedeland: On the other
side, the Swedes fell into Norway, and did the Danes much damage: However, the
The intermarriages of Lewls XIII. with Anna of Austria, and of Philip prince of
Spain, with Elizabeth, Sister to Lewis XIII.
Danes took Elsburg, and Gotzberg by surrender; but going to make a further
Progress, the King of Denmark's Army was so oppressed with the Plague and
Famine, that the Swedes recovered most of their Losses.

Great Rejoycings and public Carouzels were at Paris, for the intermarriages
of Lewis the Thirteenth, with Anna of Austria, Daughter of Philip the Third,
King of Spain: And of Philip, Prince of Spain, with Elizabeth, Sister to Lewis
the Thirteenth. Holland makes a League with Achmet. The Death* of prince Henry.
A peace between Sweden and Denmark.


The States of Holland make a League with Achmet, Emperor of the Turks,* by his
Ambassador he sent to the Hague.

Henry Prince of Wales, the eldest Son of James the First, King of Great
Britain, died in the Eighteenth year of his Age. From Christ 1612.

A Peace between Sweden and Denmark; and Colmar restored to the Swedes.

Gabriel Bathor, Prince of Transylvania, The prince of Transylvania beaten by
Bethlem Gabor.
beaten by Bethlem Gabor, assisted by the Turks, was killed by his own
Subjects. From Christ 1613.

The Prince of Conde, with some other Princes joining with him, took Arms
against The prince of Conde opposes the Queen Regent, but is made friends by
(...)m of M(...).
the Queen Regent of France, in order to put her from the Administration of the
Government, pretending, that the Marshall d' Ancre was too great in Authority
with her; but the Queen pacifyed them with Money.

William Wolfang, Prince of Neuburg, Sonin-Law The Princ^ of Newburg turn^
Papist.
to the Duke of Bavaria, abdicated the Reformed Religion, and embraced the
Romish.

The States of Holland made an Edict, to The Edict of Holland refused by the
Contra-Remonstrants*
reconcile the Remonstrants, and Contra-Remonstrants; to which the Remonstrants
obeyed, but most of the Contra-Remonstrants refused to submit to it.

Frederic the Fifth, having completed Frederic the Fifth, returns to his
Electorate. Frederic Henry born.
his Marriage with the Princess Elizabeth, Daughter of the King of England,
returned to his Electorate. From Christ 1613.

Frederic Henry, Son of Frederic the Fifth, and of Elizabeth, was born. From
Christ 1614.

Muscovie, long wasted by the Poles and Fedrowitz chose Great Duke of Muscovy*
Lewis the Thirteenth* married o^ Burdeau^*
Swedes; the Nobility made choice of Fedrowitz for their great Duke.

Lewis the Thirteenth, going to marry Adna Maria Mauritia at Bordeaux, invites
the Prince of Conde to go along with him, because it would be pernicious to the
King and Kingdom.

The States of France, according to the Promise which the Queen Regent had made
to the Prince of Conde, are summoned, and met at Paris, where it was
unanimously resolved, that the King under no pretense, could be put to death by
his Subjects. Whether the Power of the King was immediately subject to God?
Whether he might be excommunicated by the Pope, or dispossessed of his Crown,
by reason of the Dissent of the Clergy? And the third Order was left
undetermined.

The Jews by reason of their usurious The Jews expelled Worms.
Exactions, were expelled the City of Worms, by the Populacy, to the Will of
the Senate, and their Synagogue pulled down.

The Prince of Conde defeated at St. Maxents, The Prince of Conde beaten.
by the King's Forces. From Christ 1615.

A Peace concluded between the Spaniard A Peace between the Spaniard and the
Duke of Savoy.
and the Duke of Savoy.

Flushing, the Brill, with the Fort of Rammekens, which were made Pledges to
Queen Elizabeth, restored by King James the First, for Thirty three hundred
thousand Florins.

The Prince of Conde having made his Peace with the King, and living secure at
Paris, upon the King's Word, is unexpectedly committed to Prison, and there
detained above three years: upon which, the Marshall D'Ancre his Palace, was
plundered by the Populacy.

The Turks beaten at Sea by the Spaniards The Turks beaten at Sea and at Land.
in the Mediterranean, by the Cossacks in the Lake Maeotis, and at Land in Asia
by the Persians; where, partly by the Sword, and by the Pestilence, they lost
above Forty thousand Men. From Christ 1616.

Lewis the Thirteenth, by the Advice of the Count de Luynes, caused the
Marshall D' Ancre, who there bore the greatest The Marshall D' Ancre pu^ to
Death at Courts.
sway to be put to Death; which was done by Vitry, Captain of the Guards, at
the entrance into the Court; after which, being presently buried in the next
Church, his Body was, the day after, taken up again, and drawn by the Rabble
through the Streets of Paris. His Widow, under pretense of being a Witch, and
addicted to the Jewish Ceremonies, was condemned to death by the Parliament of
Paris.

Achmet, the Emperor of the Turks, being dead, Mustapha was set up in his
place: but being found unfit to Govern, Achmet died, and Osman made Emperor of
the Turks.
was the next year dethroned: And Osman, the Son of Achmet, about eleven years
of Age, was made Emperor.

This being the hundredth Year from the Reformation, first begun by Luther, was
kept as a year of Jubilee, by the Protestants The Lutheran Jubilee.
all over Germany; and some days were spent in public Thanksgivings. This was
first done in Saxony; and after that, in the Palatine, and Brandenburgh
Electorates, and in other places.

The Tartars provoked by the frequent Incursions of the Cossacks, invade
Podolia; burnt four Cities with four hundred Villages, and carried away a vast
number of People and Cattle.

Prince Charles created Prince of Wales: prince Charles prince of Wales.
With the Differences about Religion, that turmoil'd Holland; a political
Controversy intermixed it self, who should have the Supreme Administration of
the Government: Whether the several Orders of each Province, in their several
Jurisdictions, or the States General over all the Provinces? The States General
thereto, asserted this Authority to themselves, and proposed the calling of a
National Synod at Dort; Holland, Overysell and Utrecht, only assenting: and
Prince Maurice, to obtain prince Maurice takes upon him the Administration of
Holland.
the consent of those three Provinces, removed the Magistrates of Nimegen, and
Utrecht, from their Places; as also, in most other Cities of Holland, and
placed in their rooms, such as he thought most addicted to his Party. Moreover,
he imprisoned John ab Olden Barnevelt, Advocate of Holland. Rumold Hogerbet,
Syndic of Leyden, Hugo Grotius, Syndic of Rotterdam, and Giles Ledemberg,
Secretary of Utrecht. And now all Obstacles being removed, a National Synod was
held at Dort, whither resorted English, Palatine, Switzers, with other Divines;
and there the Opinion of the Remonstrants was condemned: but they refused to
stand to the judgment of that Synod. And thence arose a new Schism among the
Protestants.

A dreadful Comet began to appear; the A dreadful Comet.
Tail of which was above sixty four degrees in length.

Queen Ann of England died. From Christ Queen Ann died.
1618.

The City of Pleurs in Rhaetia, ruined by the fall of a Mountain tumbling upon
it, when 1500 people were buried in the Ruins.

The Destruction of the Spanish Army The Spanish Army destroy^d by the
Venetians.
sent against the Venetians.

Tumults in Bohemia, by reason that some of the Evangelick Nobility were
offended, that their Grievances were slighted by the Emperor's Counselors;
upon An Insurrection in Bohemia.
which, they entered the Council Chamber, and threw three of the Counselors
out of a Window, thirty yards high, into the Castle-Yard; by which fall,
however none of them got any harm.

At Venice was discovered a Conspiracy of certain Ruffians, who proposed to
themselves, A Conspiracy at Venice discovered.
to break into the Senate House, kill the Senators, burn the Arsenal, throw
down the Bridges, and to lay waste the whole City: but most of them were taken,
and all who did not make their escapes, were punished according to their
Deserts.

In this year, died Cardinal Peronne. The Death of Cardinal Peronne.


A great Fight between the Turks and the Persians, where the Turks lost Forty
thousand Men, and the Persians Nine thousand: But, though the Persians got the
Victory, A Fight between the Turks and the persians.
yet having lost so many Men, they offered the Turks Peace, with an Anual
Tribute of Silk, which the Turks willingly accepted. From Christ 1618.

John Barenevelt, condemned to death Barnevelt' s death.
by the States General under pretense, that he had disturbed the Peace, and
Order of the Republic: but on the Scaffold, he publicly protested, that he
died for defending the Liberty of his Country.

Hogerbet and Grotius were condemned to perpetual imprisonment; but Grotius
made his Escape about a year after, and fled to Paris, where he printed his
Apology, for those who presided over Holland, in the year 1618. a Work very
worthy to be read.

In March, Mathias the Emperor died; The Emperor Mathias' s death.
in whose room sometime after, was elected Ferdinand the Second his Son, King
of Bohemia.

Sir Walter Rawleigh Beheaded.

The Administrators of the Kingdom of Bohemia, upon the Abdication of
Ferdinand, Frederic Elector Palatine, Crowned at prague.
made choice of Frederic, the Elector Palatin, for their King, who was Crowned
at Prague.

A new Order of Knighthood, instituted at Vienna, by certain Catholic Princes,
as A new Order of Knighthood.
the Duke of Nevers, Prince Radzeville, the Duke of Saxon Lawenburgh, and
others, who took an Oath to prosecute all Infidels, and to defend the Catholic
Religion; having for their Badges a Cross, with the Effigies of the Holy
Virgin, which they wore on their Cloaks.

Bucquoy having utterly defeated Mansfeild, did overrun Bohemia.

Prince Charles of Spain, Crowned King The prince of Spain, King of portugal.
of Portugal.

The Prince of Conde released from his The Prince of Conde released.
Imprisonment, returned to Paris, and: was congratulated by the Peers, and
Princes of Franee.

Ann, Queen of England, died. From Queen Anns Death. ARebellion against the
Emperor.
Christ 1619.

The Bohemians, Austrians, and Hungarians, rebel against the Emperor.

A great Battle fought between the Imperialists, and Frederic the Palatins
Army, The palatin's Army beaten by the Imperialists.
where the Impe^^lists proved Victors; Frederic fled, and the next year took
Refuge in Holland, where he spent the remainder of his days with his Queen and
Children: so Bohemia with the adjoining Provinces, returned to the Obedience of
the Emperor.

Spinola with a numerous Army, entered Spinola entered the Palatinate
the Palatinate, and in a short time, took many Towns.

The Civil War against the Protestants, The Civil War in France.
began in France. The Inhabitants of Bearn refusing to obey the King's Edict;
by which, they were commanded to quit all Ecclesiastical Livings, and to
restore them to the Popish Bishops; for the King going thither, constrained
them to yield Obedience, and gave the Cities, which the Protestants held to be
kept by the Catholics.

The Polanders with an Army of Ninety The Polanders beaten by the Turks.
thousand Men, invading Walachia, were all cut off by the Turks, except a few,
who made their escape; and the great Chancellor of the Crowns Head, was carried
to Constantinople.

Sigismund the Third, King of Poland, The King of Poland wounded.
wounded by a Ruffian; who being taken, was torn with Horses, his Members
burnt, and his Ashes thrown into the Air.

Gustavus Adolphus, King of Sweden, married Gustavus marriage with the Daughter
of Brandenburgh.
with Mary Elenora, the Daughter of John Sigismund, Elector of Brandenburgh.
From Christ 1620.

Frederic the Elector Palatine was proscribed by the Emperor.

A West India Company first erected by A West India Company erected by the
States of Holland.
the United Provinces; to which the States granted the same Privileges as to
the East India Society.

A General Assembly of the Protestants from all parts of France, held at
Rochel, The Hugonots rebel, and are beaten by the King of France.
where they resolved to take up Arms in their own Defense, against the Religion
which their Enemies professed. Whereupon the King undertook an Expedition
against them. At which time, Mornay du Plessis delivered up Saumurs to him, of
his own accord. Afterward the King besieged the City of St. Angelo, and forced
it to a Surrender; and then took above sixty other Towns in Xantoign and
Gascony, part by force, part by fear; but he could not get Montauban, which he
besieged in Autumn, where the Duke of Mayenne was killed by a Musket Shot in
the Head: which News coming to Paris, the Rabble Charenton burnt.
incensed with Fury, ran to Charenton, and s^t the Protestant Church on fire,
which was reduced to Ashes.

Gustavus, King of Sweden, took Riga, King of Sweden takes Riga.
the Metropolis of Livonia.

The Truce for twelve years, between Philip of Spain, and the States General,
being expired, the Archduke Albert desired earnestly to have it expired, but
the States absolutely refused it.

Paul the Fifth, departed this Life in the Sixty ninth year of his Age; and
Gregory Popes.
the Fifteenth, was chosen in his place.

Philip the Third; departed this Life in The Death of Philip the Third.
the Forty third year of his Age; his Son Philip the Fourth, succeeded him.

Albert, Archduke of Austria, Governor The Death of the Archduke of Austria.
of the Low Countries, died in July; and in September following, died Cardinal
Bellarmine. From Christ 1621. The Death of Cardinal Bellarmin.


Heydelbergh for some time, besieged by Tilly the Imperial General, was at
length by him taken by Storm, and given up to the plunder of the Soldiers, who
exercised Heydelbergh taken by Storm.
all manner of Cruelties upon the Inhabitants; the Library, which wa^ stored
with most choice and excellent B(...)s, was removed, part of them to Munick,
and part to Rome.

A Peace concluded in France, with the Protestants at Montpellier, but not
lasting.

Christian, Duke of Brunswick, invaded The Duke of Brunswick took Westphalia.
Westphalia, and carried away a vast Treasure out of the Cathedral of
Paderburne, with the image of St. Liberius, their Patron, all of massy Silver.

Osman, the Son of Ac(...)et, Emperor Osman strangled, and Mustapha Emperor.
of the Turks, was strangled, and Mustapha advanced in his room, whom Osman
before had imprisoned. From Christ 1622.

Maximillian, Duke of Bavaria, was created Elector of the Empire, in the room
of the Palatine Frederic, and the Dignity granted to his Heirs. Frederic with
his Heirs, being removed from that Title, for making War against the Emperor.

King James entered into a War for King James made Wa^ with the Emperor about
the Palatinate
the recovery of the Palatinate.

Frankendale having been a long time besieged, surrendered to the Spaniards.
Spinola, who a little before had taken Breda from the Hollanders, was forced to
rise from before Bergen ap Zome, upon Mansfeild's march to its Relief.

Gregory the Fifteenth died, and Urban the Eighth, a Florentine, elected to
succeed. Popes.


Charles, the Son of James the First, Charles I. takes a Voyage into Spain
through France.
King of Great Britain, Prince of Wales, travel(...)hro' France into Spain, and
arriving safe at Madrid, on the 17th of March, and staying there till the 9th
of September, returned to London on the 16th of October. From Christ 1622.

Peace between his Holiness and the A peace between the Pope and the King of
Spain.
King of Spain; upon condition of Restoring the Valtolin to his Holiness.
Christian Duke of Brunswick defeated by Tilly, and several great Persons taken
prisoners.

Mustapha Emperor of the Turks, who Mustapha resigned up the Empire of the
Turks. Amurath made Emperor.
was the last year in the room of his Nephew Osman, freely Abdicated the
Empire, and Resigned it to Amurath the Brother of Osman, a Youth of 16 years of
Age. Others say, that having Reigned a Year after the Death of Osman, he was
shut up in Prison. 1623.

Armandus Plessy Richelieu, first Bishop of Cardinal de Richelieu his
Administration.
Lusson, then made a Cardinal, obtained the Supreme Administration of France,
under Lewis the XIII, who gave up all things to his Management: In which
Office, some things he did Honorably for his Reputation, other things
tyrannically, and cruelly.

The Jesuits, with other Popish Orders, The Jesuits banished England.
who upon the Marriage of Charles the First, with Henrietta Maria, the French
King's Sister, crowded into England, within a short time after are commanded to
depart the Kingdom.

On the other side, the Protestant Ministers The Protestant Mininisters and
their Religion proscribed by the ^mperor.
are proscribed out of Austria, Bohemia, and Moravia, by the Emperor's Edict,
and all the Exercise of the Reformed Religion forbidden within his Territories.

The Tartars designing an Irruption into Poland, with forty thousand Men, were
The Tartars over-thrown by the Poles.
stoutly repulsed, and received a very great Overthrow.

Marc Antonio de Dominis Archbishop of The Archb. of Spalato changed his
Religion.
Spalato, came into England, and pretended to change his Religion, was kindly
entertained by King James the First. But he not thinking the Preferment the
King gave him sufficient, returned this Year to Rome, where he made his
Recantation; but notwithstanding that he was clapped up in the the Castle of St.
Angelo, where he died this Year, and his Body being burnt for his Apostasy, his
Ashes were thrown into the River Tibers

A terrible Battle was fought between The Turks beaten by the Tartars.
the Turks, and the Tartars, where the Turks were overthrown, with an
extraordinary slaughter.

Urban the Eighth, with the usual Procession The Year of Jubilee.
opened the Sacred Gate, in St. Peter's Church, and began the Year of Jubilee
1624.

James the First, King of Great Britain, The Death of King James the First.
departed this Life, the 66. year of his Age; to whom succeeded Charles the
First his Son.

Maurice, Prince of Orange, Governor The Death of Maurice prince of Orange
of the United Provinces, died in the 58. year of his Age: to whom succeeded in
the Government his Brother Frederic Henry, by the Election of the States.

A great Plague in London, whereof died A gr(...) plag^^ in London.
thirty thousand four hundred and seventeen.

Gustavus Adolphus King of Sweden, came The King of Sweden took Riga,
with a Fleet to Riga, and made himself Master of several Cities of Livonia,
possessed by the Polanders.

Breda, which Prince Maurice had won by a Stratagem from the Spaniards, is by
them again recovered.

A War between the Emperor, and the Breda retaken by the Spaniards.
King of Denmark, with various Success.

A Confederacy between the King of England, Sweden, and Denmark, with the A War
between the Emperor, and the K. of Denmark.
States General of the United Provinces for fifteen years, to carry on the War
against the King of Spain; against whom also the King of England declared War
by Sea and Land. A Confeder. against Spain. Charles the 1. Married.


Charles the First of England, married to Henrietta Maria, Daughter to Henry
the Fourth King of France.

The Bores in Austria took up Arms, in order The Bores in Austria take up Arms.
to recover the free Exercise of their Religion taken from them: And made
themselves Master of some Places by force of Arms: But the next year were
subdued, and severely punished.

The Persians gave a total defeat to the The Persians defeated by the Turks.
The Danes beaten by the Imperialists.
Turks near Babylon, so that very few escapt.

The King of Denmark defeated in a great Battle by the Imperialists, wherein
all his Foot was cut off, and lost the greatest part of his Cavalry.

The King of Sweden made an Expedition The K. of Sweden' s Expedition into
Prussia.
into Prussia, and landing at Pillaw, made himself Master of Braunsberg,
Traunsburg, Marienberg; and reduced all the neighboring Country under his
Subjection. From Christ 1625.

The Emperor by an Edict commanded The Emperor banished all the Protestants out
of Germany.
all the Inhabitants of the Kingdom of Bohemia, not excepting any Degree, that
refused to embrace the Catholic Religion, to depart the Kingdom in a certain
time.

A most terrible Earthquake shook all An Earthquake at Apulia.
Apulia, and swallowed up whole Towns, Villages, Castles, Woods, together with
about twenty thousand People.

The English called by the Rochellers to assist The English assist the
Rochellers.
them, landed in the Isle of Ree, under the Command of the Duke of Buckingham,
who was expelled from thence, with a great Slaughter.

The King of France closely besieged Rochelle^ The King of France besieged
Rechel, and stopped up the Arbor.
and made a great Mount of vast Stones in the Sea, to hinder Relief from coming
to the City.

Frederic Henry Prince of Orange, General for the Hollanders, compelled Groll
to surrender. The prince of, Orange takes Groll


The Imperialists pursuing the Danish Army, possessed themselves of the greatest
part of Holsatia, and Jutland. From Christ 1626.

Rochelle pressed by Famine, was compelled Rochelle surrendered to the French.
to surrender to the King of France, after above 12 thousand Men had been
starved to death; all the Walls and places of Defense being demolisht.

The King of Sweden granted free Liberty The K. of Sweden, admits the
protestants Liberty.
to the German Exiles, who fled for Religion, or were compelled from their
Calamities of War, to live with all Security, and the free Exercise of their
Religion in his Kingdom. The Death of Sir Francis Bacon.


Sir Francis Bacon, Viscount of St. Albans died.

The King of Denmark possessed himself of the Island of Usdom, the Fortress of
Phinmund, and Wolgast; but was beaten out again by the Imperialists, under the
Duke of Fredland.

The Cham of Tartary, being expelled his The Cham of Tartary recovered his
Kingdom.
Kindom by his Brother, assisted by the Turks; to revenge his loss, by the help
of the Cossaks, defeated his Brother in Battle, and recovered his Kingdom.

The Admiral of the Dutch Fleet, met with The Dutch Admiral took the Spanish
West India Fleet. Prince of Orange takes Boisleduc.
the Spanish West India Fleet, and took it, to the value of three hundred Tuns
of Gold. From Christ 1628.

The Prince of Orange, having taken before Boisleduc at the beginning of May,
took it by surrender in September following.

A Peace concluded at Lubeck, between A Peace between the Emperor and the Danes.
the Emperor, and the King of Denmark, upon equal Conditions.

The Duke of Buckingham basely murdered by Felton, a discontented Officer. The
Duke of Buckingham killed


Rochelle surrendered, and called Borgo Maria.

The King of Sweden relieved Stralsond, Rochelle surrendered.
disengaged himself from his Polish troubles, made sure of the Daae, and
prepared for a War with the Emperor. From Christ 1629.

Gustuvus Adolphus entered Pomerania* Gustavus took Stetin.
made himself Master of Stetin, and several other Places, and filled all
Germany with the terror of his Arms.

The Duke of Savoy denied the French to The Duke of Savoy denied the French
passage through his territory. Magdeburg taken by Tilly.
pass through his Country; upon which Cardinal Richelieu made himself Master of
Pignerol, and of the Marquisate of Saluc^s.

A Peace concluded with France. Magdeburg stormed by Tilly, the Imperial
General, plundered and burnt; so that of so great a City very few Houses were
left standing entire.

Gustavus Adolphus having made a League Gustavus his great Success in Germany
with the Elector of Saxony, in September vanquished the Imperialists in a great
Battle. From that time all things succeeded with him to his desire: so that he
made himself Master of several Cities, and Provinces of the German Empire.

King Charles the First his second Son Charles the Second born.
born, at whose Birth a Remarkable Star appeared at Noonday. From Christ 1630.

The King of England made a Peace with England made a peace with Spain.
Troubles in France.
Spain, which was proclaimed.

The Court of France in great confusion while the Queen Mother went about to
shut up the King, her Eldest Son, in a Monastery, and to set up her Youngest
Son in his Room: for which the King having his Liberty, the Queen made her
escape to Antwerp, and the Duke of Orleans* flies into Burgundy and Lorain,
throwing all the Blame upon Richelieu.

The Princess Mary born, eldest Daughter The Princess Mary. born.
to King Charles the First.

The famous School at Amsterdam erected; in which the first Professors were,
John Vossius and Jasper Barlaeus.

Maestrick, after a Siege of two months Maestrick taken by the prince of Orange
and two weeks, surrendered to the Prince of Orange.

A great Battle at Lutzen, was fought between the Swedes and the Imperialists,
Battle of Lutzen, where Gustavus was killed.
where the Swedes got the Victory; but the King Gustavus was there killed. To
whom Christina his Daughter, an Infant, succeeded. In the mean time, during her
Minority, Christina his Daughter succeeded.
the Nobles of the Kingdom took upon them the Administration of Affairs.

Sigismund the Third, King of Poland, Death of the K. of Poland.
died; to whom succeeded his eldest Son, Uladislaus the Fourth.

The King of France made himself Master of Nancy, the Metropolis of Lorrain.
From Christ 1632. Death of the Governess of the Low Countries.


Izabella Clara Eugenia, Daughter to Philip the Third, King of Spain, and
Governess of the Low Countries departed this Life.

Frederic the Elector Palatin, who reigned Death of the Elector Palatin. K.
Charles I. crowned in Scotland. James D. of York born
but a short time King of Bohemia, died at Mayence.

King Charles the First crowned in Scotland.

The Third Son of King Charles the First, born Octeb^r the Thirteenth, and
baptized James, afterward created Duke

The Dispute began of England's Right to the Sovereignty of the British Seas,
and defended by the learned Seldom, against Hugo Grotius.

The Prince of Orange besieged and took (...) of Orange took Rhynebergh.
Rhynebergh. From Christ 1633.

Wallestin, Duke of Fridland, and General of the Imperial Army, stabbed at
Egra, by the Emperor's command; being discovered to have a Design to join with
the Wallestein killed at Egra.
Swedes, and to have made himself Master of the Kingdom of Bohemia.

Ferdinand the Cardinal, Brother to the Ferdinand Governor of the Netherlands.
King of Spain, took upon him the Government of the Low Countries.

The Cardinal Infanta, joins with the King of Hungary, and fights the Battle of
Swedes beaten by Cardinal Infanta.
of Norlinghen, where the Swedes were utterly defeated. From Christ 1634.

The King of France declared War against the King of Spain, because he detained
The Fr^nch declared War agst. Spain.
in Prison the Elector of Treves, whom he had taken into his Protection.

The Fortress of Skinken Skonce, which Skinken Skonce taken by the Spaniards,
and retaken by the P. of Orange.
is as it were, the Key of Holland, taken by the Spaniards; but in a little
time after, besieged by the Prince of Orange, was took about the beginning of
the following Spring.

This year and the next, a dreadful Pestilence raged in Holland, and in the
Neighboring The plague in Holland.
places, which swept away a world of people.

The Imperialists with Eighty thousand The Imperialists invade France.
Men under the Duke of Lorrain, and other Imperial Commanders, threaten to
invade France, and to encamp about Masieres, and Rambervillers; but being
opposed by the French, in conjunction with Saxon Weymar, are forced to return,
without acting any thing considerable.

A Battle between the Turks and the Persians, The Persians beaten by the Turks.
wherein Ninety thousand of the Turks, and Twenty thousand of the Persians,
fell; yet the Turks being more numerous, became Victors.

The Princess Elizabeth born, second The princess Elizabeth born.
Daughter to King Charles the First. From Christ 1635.

A Peace renewed between the Emperor The Elector of Saxony d^s^rted the Swedes
and the Elector of Saxony, at Prague; so the Elector deserted the Swedes, and
the rest of the Confederate Princes.

About this time the Tartars, who harassed The Tartats Conq^^re^ Chyna.
the Chyneses with continual Wars, entering into Chyna, with numerous Forces,
within the space of twenty years, quite subdued those people, and became their
Masters.

The Imperialists received a great overthrow The Imperialists routed by the
Swedes
near Wistock in Germany, being routed from their Camp, with the loss of all
their Baggage and Canon, by General Bannier, General of the Swedes.

In Transylvania, Stephen the Brother, and Peter, the Son of Bethlem Gabor,
endeavored to make themselves Masters of that Principality, with the
Assistance of the Turks, but were defeated by Ragotsky, assisted by the Emperor.

Ferdinand, King of Hungary, elected Ferdinand K. of the Romans. Breda took by
the prince of Orange from the Spaniards
King of the Romans. From Christ 1636.

The Prince of Orange, after a Siege of about three months, recovers Breda from
the Spaniards.

The Liturgy first read at Edinburgh, occasioned a great Tumult.

Bernard, Duke of Saxon Weymar, having a long time besieged Brisac, a strong
City upon the Rhyne, compelled it at length to surrender for want of Provision;
yet the Duke of Lorrain and Lamboy, both attempted to relieve it. From Christ
1637.

The Count Pallatin assisted by the English, raised Forces, and possessed
himself of Meppen in Westphalia, but was defeated by Count Hatfieild, and his
Brother, Prince Rupert, taken Prisoner.

Maria de Medicis, Queen Mother, arrived Queen Mother of France arrived in
England.
in England.

The French besieged St. Omers, but all in vain: But the Duke of Longeville
defeated the Duke of Lorrain in Burgundy; and at the same time, the Prince of
Conde was repulsed from the Siege of Fontatabie.

A Sea Fight in the Downs, between the Dutch and the Spaniards, where Trump,
the A Sea Fight between the Dutch and the Spaniard.
Dutch Admiral, though inferior in number to the Enemy, did beat the Spanish
Fleet; of which he burnt one part, and took others, so that very few returned
back into Spain.

Ferdinand the Second, Emperor, died of a The Death of Ferdinand II.
Dropsy; in whose room not long after, was elected his Son Ferdinand the Third.

General Bannier defeated the Imperialists The Swedish General d^feated the
Imperialists. Another Sea Fight between the Dutch and the Spaniard
near Kemnitz in Saxony, and persued Furstemberg into Bohemia.

Another Sea Fight between the Dutch and the Spaniards side, wherein of 50 Sail
on the Spaniards side, not twenty escaped.

The King of England Armed against the Scots, by Sea and Land, and sent over
for the Lord Deputy of Ireland.

The Turks take Babylon, after they had cut off 40 thousand of the Persian
Horse. From Christ 1639.

Amu^rath, the Emperor of the Turks, The death of Amurath. Ibrahim succeeded.
Civil Dissentions in Scotland. The Imp^rialists defeated.
died in the 23d. year of his Age, to whom Ibrahim the First his Brother,
succeeded.

Civil Dissentions first began in Scotland, occasioned by the Scots refusing to
admit the Liturgy of England.

General Bannier obtained a great Victory over the Imperialists, near Homburg
in Hassia.

A terrible Earthquake felt over all the An Earthquake in Flanders.
Low Countries, and parts adjoining.

A Parliament began in England, and dissolved, and several of the Members
imprisoned.

Charles the First, his fourth Son born; Henry Duke of Gloucester born.
baptized Henry, and created Duke of Gloucester.

King Charles sets up his Standard at York (...) in England.


The long Parliament began in November.

The Earl of Stafford impeached of High Treason; The Earl of Stafford's and
Archbishop Laud' s ^mp^ach^n. of High Treason. Ferdinand Cardinal Infanta,
died.
and the Archbishop Laud impeached of High Treason: after which, the Bishops
Votes in Parliament taken away. From Christ 1640.

Ferdinand, the Cardinal Infanta of Spain, and Governor of the Low Countries,
died at Brussels.

The Duke of Soissons, assisted by the Imperialists, and relying on the
Friendship of the Duke of Bouillon, who was then possessed of S^dan, threatened
to break into France: The King bends all his Forces The Duke of Soissons kill^d.
against them, so that after a dubious Fight, wherein Soissons was slain, the
Attemp^ was given over. Princess Mary (...) the P. of Orange.


The Princess Mary, Daughter to Charles the First, was married to William of
Nassaw, Prince of Orange, at Whitehall.

The Earl of Strafford beheaded; and the The Earl of Stafford beheaded.
Irish Rebellion broke out, where were twenty thousand Persons barbarously
murdered. The Irish Rebellion broke out. K. Charles l^ft London* and went to
York.


King Charles the First left the City of London, and went to York. From Christ
1641.

Maria de Medicis, Queen Dowager of Henry the Fourth, King of France; and
Mother of Lewis the Thirteenth, died at The death of Maria de Medicis, Queen
Dowager* of France.
Collogn in great poverty.

Not long after, Cardinal Richlieu died at Paris in the sixty sixth year of his
Age.

Saxon Waymer and Eberstein, gave Lamboy, Lamboy defeated by Saxon Weymar, and
Eberstein. Tortenson did beat the Imperialists, and took Lipseich.
the Imperial General, a total Defeat.

Tortenson, the Swedish General, gave the Imperialists another Defeat near
Leipsich, and after that took Leipsich by surrender.

The French prosper in Catalonia, defeated the Spaniards, and took Cosibre, but
are beaten by the Spaniards near Cotelet in Picardy, and lost La Basse on the
confines of Artois.

Sir John Hotham denied King Charles the First his Entrance into Hull. The Earl
Civil Wars in England.
of Essex made General of the Parliaments Forces, while the King did set up his
Standard at Nottingham.

Edgehill Fight, where the Earl of Lindsey, the King's General, was slain.

The Queen of England left Holland, and Landed at Burlington in Yorkshire. From
Christ 1642.

Lewis the Thirteenth, King of France, The Death of Lewis XIII. K. of France.
departed this Life, leaving* Lewis the Fourteenth, to succeed him, an Infant
of five years of Age. During whose Minority, Ann of Austria is appointed Queen
Regent, while Cardinal Julio Mazarini, an Italian, obtained the same power at
Court, which Richlieu had before.

The Prince of Conde won the famous The Battle of Rocroy. A War between the
Duke of Parma and the Pope.
Battle of Rocroy.

A War between the Duke of Parma and the Pope, who was beaten by the
Florentines.

Cheapside-Cross demolished, and the solemn Leage and Covenant taken by the The
solemn L^ague and Covenant by the Parliament.
Parliament.

The City of Gloucester* besieged by the King; and the Siege raised by the Earl
of Essex. After which, happened the first Newberry Fight, where were slain on the
The Civil War of England.
King's side, the Earls of Carnarvan and Sunderland, with the Lord Faulkland.

The Queen of England delivered at Oxford, of the Lady Catharine, who died soon
after.

The Scots came into England to assist the Parliament. From Christ 1643.

The Emperor's Ambassadors, as also the Ambassadors from Spain, France,
Swedeland, Holland, and others met at Munster in Westphalia, to treat of Peace.

Urban the Eighth, departed this life in the 77th year of his Age, after he had
held Popes.
the Pontificate 21 years. In whose place was elected Baptista Pamphilio, in
his 70th year, who gave himself the Name of Innocent the Tenth.

The French after a long fatigous Siege, The French took Graveling.
took Graveling.

Christina, Queen of Sweden, took the Government of the Kingdom into her The
Queen of Sweden Reigned.
own hands.

The Queen began her Journey from Oxford to the West, took her leave of the
King of Abbington.

The Queen brought to bed of the Princess The Princess Henrietta born
Henrietta at Exeter.

Marston-Moor Fight between the King and Parliament, where Cromwell first made
himself known. After which, happened Civil War of England.
the second Fight at Newberry, both unsuccessful to the King.

Archbishop Laud Beheaded. Archbishop Laud beheaded.


The Queen arrived at Breast in Britany.

Sir Thomas Fairfax made General by the Parliament, and received his Commission
Civil War.
from the House of Commons.

The Treaty at Uxbridge, for a Reconciliation between the King and Parliament,
broke up without effect. From Christ 1644.

The Emperor sinding his Forces very much diminishing, raise a newd Army, and
The Imperialistt beaten by the Swedes
Ordered, public Supplications to the Virgin Mary, whose Image he had redeemed
out of the hands of the Swedes: But notwithstanding all this, meeting
Fortstenson, the Swedish General, near Janowitz in Bohemia, he suffered so
great an overthrow, that Vienna seemed to be in great Danger.

In the mean time, General Wrangel, as The Swedish General defeated the Danish
General.
terribly oppressed the Danes, and deprived them of several Towns, after he had
utterly defeated Buckwald the Danish General. Besides these Successes, the
Swedes assisted by the French at Allersheim, obtained another great Victory
over the Imperialists, and drove the Bavarians beyond the Rhyne.

In this year was fought the fatal Battle Civil War of England
of Naseby, near Leicester: After which, Fairfax carried all before him for the
Parliament. From Christ 1645.

In the Low Countries, the French took Mardyke, Winnoxberg, Courtray, Dunkirk,
with other places, but not long after lost all again.

King Charles the First, left Oxford in Disguise, and went to the Scottish Army,
who carried him to Newcastle; and there upon the payment of two hundred
thousand pounds, delivered his Majesty up to the Parliament, who ordered the
King to be brought under Custody to Holmby-House.

The Great Seal of England broken, and defaced.

Prince of Orange, aged 63 years, died The Death of the P. of Orange.
of a Fever; to whom his Son William succeeded as well in his Principality, as
in his Dignity; according to the Conceffion of the States, made in the year
1631. From Christ 1646. Leopold, Arch Duke of Austria made Governor of
Flanders.


Leopold William, Archduke of Austria, made Governor of the Low Countries, by
the King of Spain.

The Neopolitan Populacy, headed by Thomaso Masinello, a poor Fisherman, made a
great Insurrection in that City, but were The Death of Mazinello.
quelled at length, and their Leader killed in a Monastery.

Fairfax marched with his Army through the City of London; and soon after, the
Forts and Outworks were slighted.

The Parliament voted no further Addresses to be made to the King.

King Charles escaped from Hampton Court, into the Isle of Wight, but was kept
Prisoner by Colonel Hammond in Carisbrook-Castle. From Christ 1647.

A Peace concluded between the Emperor on one side, and the Kings of France and
Sweden on the other* also between the King of Spain, and the States of Holland.

Lewis, the Son of Frederic the Palatin, was restored to the lower Palatin, and
made the eighth Elector of the Empire. The upper Palatinate continued in the
possession of the Duke of Bavaria.

Christian the Fifth, King of Denmark, departed K. Charles a prisoner in the
Isle of Wight.
this Life, to whom his Son, Frederic the Fifth, before that Bishop of Breme
succeeded.

Uladislaus, King of Poland, died; to The Death of the K. of Denmark.
whom his Brother Cazimir succeeded; whose Reign was extremely shaken by the
The Death of the K. of Poland. Philip IV. married Maria Anna of Spain.
Seditions of the Cossacks.

On the other side, Philip the Fourth, of Spain, married with Maria Anna of
Austria.

The Treaty between King Charles the First, and the long Parliament, broke off;
and the King brought Prisoner to St. James's; sentenced to death by that bold
The Death of King Charles the First. D. Hamilton. the E. of Holland and Lord
Capel beheaded.
Traitor Bradsh^w, and most barbarously Murdered before his own Palace.

King Charles the Second, began his Reign from that day.

Duke Hamilton, the Earl of Holland, and the Lord Capel, beheaded in the
Palace-Yard before Westminster Hall.

The Kingly Office, voted unnecessary and troublesome.

King Charles the Second, proclaimed in K. Charles proclaimed in Scotland.
Civil War in France.
Scotland. From Christ 1648.

A great Discord arising between the King of France, and the Parliament of
Paris, by reason of Cardinal Mazarine's Government. Paris besieged by the King;
but in a little time after these Troubles were composed, tho but for a short
time, and Paris sustained the loss of a second siege.

The Venetians burnt the Turks Fleet. The Venetians beat the Turks in a Sea
fight.


In the Port of Foggia, seventy two Galleys, eighteen Men of War, sixty Ships
of Burden, and six thousand Men, with a Basha slain. The Christians losing but
ninety Men killed, and forty wounded.

Cromwell made General of the Parliament's Army, marched into Scotland. From
Christ 1649.

Toward the end of July, William Prince of Orange attempted to make himself
Master of Amsterdam by Surprise, but failed of Success: Not long after he died
of the The death of the Pr. of Orange
Smallpox, and his Son William Henry was born eight days after his Decease.

Descartes, the Founder of a new kind of Descartes death.
Philosophy, died at Stockholm, in Swedland.

The Princes of Conde, and Conti, with The princes of Conti, etc. made
prisoners.
the Duke of Longueville, committed to the Castle of Bois de Vincennes, by the
Queen Mother, and Cardinal Mazarin.

The Spaniards sold the Duchy of Pontremoly, Pontremoli sold to the Duke of
Florence.
to the Duke of Florence, for a hundred thousand Crowns. From Christ 1650.

The Earl of Montross defeated, took prisoner, and brought to Edingburgh, and
The Earl of Montross beheaded.
there beheaded.

The Scots routed by Cromwell at Dunbar.

Charles the Second Crowned at Skone in Scotland.

The Pope ordained a Jubilee. The Pope's Jubilee. Ferd. the III. married the
princess. Elionora: Popes.


Ferdinand the Third, Emperor of Germany, married the Princess Elionora, of the
House of Mantua, at Newstadt. From Christ 1651.

Innocent the Third, endeavoring to break the Peace concluded at Osnabrug,
because there was too much Liberty granted to the Protestants, died in the
Attempt.

Maximillian, Elector of Bavaria, departed The death of the Elector of Bavaria.
Conde, etc. set at Liberty: Cardinal Mazarin le^. France
this Life in the 88 year of his Age.

In France, by the Decree of the Parliament of Paris, the three Princes of the
Blood, Conde, Conti, with the Duke of Longueville, were set at liberty; and
Cardinal Mazarin within fifteen days to depart the Kingdom. In the mean time
Lewis the XIV. entering on the fourteenth year of his Age, was declared Major.

An Assembly of the States of Holland at the Hague, did consult about
confirming their Union, and preserving their Form of Government for the future,
the Prince of Orange being dead.

Charles the Second marched into England Charles the II. entered Engl. with an
Army.
with an Army of Scots, and came as far as Worcester, and was there defeated by
Cromwell: But made his Escape, and in a short time after got safe into France.

The King of Poland did overthrow the The King of Poland defeated the Tartars.
Cossacks and Tartars, in a great Battle, that continued for three days. There
were killed twenty thousand, and amongst them a Greek Patriarch, sent on
purpose from Constantinople, to animate the Cossacks in that Battle.

Troubles in France, by reason of Cardinal Mazarin's Return into the Kingdom.
But Mazarin having the young King, and Mazarin recalled to France.
the Queen Mother on his side, prevailed. From Christ 1652.

A fight in the Downs, between the Sea Fight between the English and Dutch.
English and the Dutch. Another great fight also between the Dutch and the
English, near to the Isle of Wight and Portland, where the Dutch were beaten.

In a most solemn Assembly at Ratisbone, Terdin. the Fourth Crowned King of the
Romons. C^omwell m^de Prot(...).
Ferdinand the Fourth, Son of Ferdinand the Third, was Chosen and Crowned King
of the Romans.

The Speaker, and most of the Members of Parliament, surrendered up the Power
to Cromwell, who took upon him the Title of Protector. The D^k^ o^ Lorrain ^ad^
pri(...) Th. K. of Fr^^ce Cr^^ned.


Charles Duke of Lorraine, was kept a prisoner in the Castle of Antwerp.

L^wis the XIV. King of France, entering upon the seventeenth year of his Age,
was most solemnly Crowned at Rheims.

In Sweden, Queen Christina resigned up Qu. Christina resiged up her Crown.
her Kingdom to Charles Gustavus, her Nephew, who entered Upsalia, and was
there Crowned.

The Queen after this changed her Religion; She turned Papist.
left her Country, and spent the remainder of her days at Rome.

The Great Duke of Muscovy invaded The Duke of Muscovy took Smolensko.
Poland, and took the City of Smolensko. But the King of Poland, having got a
considerable Army of Cossacks, took that City from the Russians, and drove them
out of his Kingdom. From Christ 1654.

Peace concluded with the Hollanders; A peace with Holland, and Pen' s
Expedition to the West Indies.
and a Fleet under the Command of Sir William Penn, sent by Cromwell to the
West Indies.

Don Pantaleon Sa, Brother to the Portugal Ambassador, beheaded on Towerhill.

In Sweden, the Chancellor Oxensterne, a The death of the Chancel. of Sweden.
Popes.
Person of great Wisdom, and famous for his Administration, died aged 71. years.

At Rome, in the place of Innocent the X. Fabius Chigi, by the College of
Cardinals, was chose Pope, under the Name of Alexander the VII.

The Duke of Savoy, being incensed by The persecution in Piedmont
the Jesuits against those of Piedmont, by reason of their dissenting from the
Romish Religion, spared neither Sex nor Age, but slaughtered seven thousand of
them.

The English Fleet took the Island of Jamaica The Engl. took Jemaica.
from the Spaniards.

The Learned Dr. Usher, Archbishop of The death of Doctor Usher, and of
Gassendus. Cracovia taken by Swedes.
Armach, and Primate of Ireland, died: As also Peter Gassendus, a famous
Philosopher at Paris. From Christ 1655.

A great Battle was fought between the the Polanders and the Swedes, where the
Swedes being Victors, took Cracovia, and Thorn.

John IV. King of Portugal died, and left The death of the K. of Portugal.
his Kingdom not well settled to his Eldest Son, an Infant.

A terrible Pestilence raged in Holland, Aplaguo in Holland.
and in the Neighboring Provinces, which swept away thousands of People.

At Dresden, John George, the famous Elector The death of the Elector of Saxony.
of Saxony, Prince of the Empire died, and left his Eldest Son his Successor
John George.

Sindercomb, one of Cromwell's Lifeguard, being sentenced to die, for plotting
his Death, poisoned himself in the Tower of of London. From Christ 1656.

Ragotsky, Prince of Transylvania, fell into Poland, by an Agreement made with
the King of Sweden, but was beaten back by the Polish Generals.

The French King made a League with A League between the French and Cromwell
Mardike delivered up to the English.
Cromwell, upon which Mardike having been taken by the French, was surrendered
up to the English.

The Danes declared War against Sweden, upon which the King of Sweden left
Poland to oppose the Danes.

The King of Sweden, having marched Copenhagen besieged by the Swedes.
his Army over the Ice, possessed himself of the Island of Fuenen, and besieged
Copenhagen.

The Emperor Ferdinand the III. died, in The death of the Emperor.
the 48th. year of his Age, after he had reigned about eighteen years. From
Christ 1657.

Dunkirk taken by the English.

The Great Usurper Cromwell died of a The death of Cromwell.
Malignant Fever, at Whitehall.

His Son Richard was proclaimed Protector. From Christ 1658.

The Dutch in the East Indies beat the Portugals, and turned them out of Ceylon.

The Pyrenean Peace was concluded: And The Marriage of Lewis the XIV. Civil War
in England:
the King of Spain's Eldest Daughter was married to Lewis the XIV. King of
France. Richard Cromwell's Party deserting him, he consented to dissolve his
Parliament; after which he himself was laid aside. Lambert advanced with his
Forces against Sir George Booth, and routed him. He turned out the Rump
Parliament; but General Monk signified his Dislike of the Army's Proceedings,
and advanced out of Scotland into England, and declared for a Free Parliament.
The Secluded Members were restored, and Long Parliament dissolved, and another
called at Westminster. From Christ 1659. A peace between Sweden, and Poland,
and with the Danes.


A Peace was solemnly concluded between the Swedes, and the Polcnians: And at
the same time a Peace was made between the Danes and the Swedes.

In France, after the Pyrenean Peace was made, the Royal Bride Maria Teresa,
Daughter to the King of Spain, was received in in very great State.

The New Parliament met, and voted the K. Charles the II. arriv^^ in England.
Return of King Charles the Second: He was accordingly Proclaimed, and landed
in England, and made his public Entry through London. General Monk, created Duke
of Albemarle, and made Knight of the Garter.

The Princess of Orange came into England, (...) de^^h of the Pr^^ Orange And
Duke of Gloucester.
but died soon after.

Henry Duke of Gloucester died.

Cardinal Mazarin removed by Death.

This year was concluded the famous Peace of Oliva, between the Emperor, the
Swedes, the Polanders, and the Elector of Brandenburg. From Christ 1660.

The Dolphin of France was born upon The Dolphin of France b^rn K. Charles II.
crowned Q(...) of Bohemia came to England.
All Saints Day, and Christened Lewis.

The Magnificent Cavalcade of King Charles the Second from the Tower of London
to his Palace at Whitehall; the next day after he was Crowned at Westminster.

Elizabeth Queen of Bohemia came into England.

The Marquess of Argile beheaded at Edinburg. Argile beheaded.


James Duke of Ormond, made Lord Leiftenant of Ireland.

The Queen of Bohemia died. From Christ Qu. of Boh^mia(...).
1661.

Dun(...) sold to the Fren^^ King, for five ^unki^k ^. ^.
mi^^ions of Ficrius.

The Duke of Crequi, the French Embaisador affronted at Rome, by the Corsi, for
which the King of France demanded Satisfaction, and had it.

King Charles the Second, and Donna Catharina Charles II. married to the
Infanta of Portugal.
Infanta of Portugal married at Portsmouth.

The Emperor celebrated his Nuptials with Margaretta of Spain. The Emperor
married to Margaretta of Spain.


The Vaudois most cruelly persecuted for their Religion in Savoy, relieved by
the Hollanders.

The French made themselves Masters of The French took Gigery.
Gigery, upon the coast of Africa; but were beaten again by the Barbarians.

The Turks destroyed Hungary, and Moravia; Newhausel surrendered to the Turks.
and after a long Siege took Newhausel by surrender. From Christ 1663.

Count Serini destroyed the Bridge of Essek, but in the midst of his Victory, a
Peace on a sudden was concluded with the Turks, which very much incensed the
Hungarians. From Christ 1664.

The Edict against the Jansenists by the Parliament of Paris, confirmed by the
King: But the Infallibility of the Pope, and his Authority over Councels, the
Sorbonists would not allow.

Philip the Fourth King of Spain died; The death of the King of Spain.
and his Son, an Infant of four years old, succeeded him, by the Name of
Charles the Second; upon which, the King of France laid claim to the Spanish
Netherlands, which occasioned a bloody War.

The King of England, upon refusal of Satisfaction demanded for several
Injuries, declared War against the Dutch.

A Sea fight between the English and the The K. of England declared a War
against the Dutch.
Dutch, where the Dutch lost several Men of War, and Admiral Opdam with his
Ship was blown up, where six thousand of the Dutch were killed; and two
thousand brought prisoners to Colchester.

A great Plague in London, of which A plague in London.
there died seventy thousand five hundred; upon which the Court, and the
Parliament removed to Oxford, and the Terms were kept there.

The Arabs, with a great Insurrection took Mecca; at which time a false Prophet
coming from Smirna, deluded the Jews with a vain Expectation of their Messiah,
but being put in prison, he turned Mahumetan. From Christ 1665.

Alphonso, King of Portugal, married Mary The King of Portugals Marriage with
the Duchess of Aumale.
Francis Duchess of Aumale, of the House Savoy.

This year, on the second of September, began the great Fire of London, which
burnt in the space of four days the greatest part of that City.

A terrible Engagement between the The Fire of London.
Dutch and the English, under the Command of Prince Rupert, and the Duke of
Albemarle, which proved doubtful for 3 days; but at last the Dutch were chased
by the English. However not long after, the same Admirals obtained undoubted
Victory against all the Dutch Fleet, which they pursued into their Harbors.

The Parliament made an Act for the Rebuilding of London, which was past by the
King. From Christ 1666.

The King of France invaded Flanders, Flanders invaded by the French
because the Spaniard denied him his Claim of Succession by right of
Devolution, as they called it, and the Spaniard not being prepared for War,
lost many Cities.

A War declared against the King of Denmark.

A Peace concluded at Breda, between the English and Dutch; whereby the
differences betwixt the French and English were likewise terminated.

Pope Alexander the Seventh died, and Popes.
Julio Rospigliosi, having taken the Name of Clement the Ninth, succeeded.

A Peace concluded between Spain, and Portugal, by the Mediation of the Earl of
Sandwich, the King of England's Extraordinary Ambassador. From Christ 1667.

The French made themselves Masters of The French took Burgundy. The Dauphin of
France Baptized.
all Burgundy.

The Dauphin of France was solemnly Baptized, by the Name of Lewis of All
Saints.

The Pope begged of the French King, that the Obeliske set up in Disgrace
against the Corsi, who affronted the French Ambassador in the year 1664. might
be taken down.

A Peace was concluded, by which Burgundy was to be restored to the Spaniards:
but the French were left in possession of what they had in the Spanish
Netherlands.

Mareshal Turene, who had formerly been Mareschall Turene turned Papist.
a Patron to the Hugonots in France, turned Papist in his old Age.

Peter, Brother to King Alphonso, with the Pope's Dispensation, married his
Brother's Wife, his Brother still living: And Governing the Kingdom, took upon
him the Title of Regent. A triple Leagu^ between the English, Swedes, and Dutch
Cazimir King of Poland resigned up his Crown. Canea taken by the Turks.


A triple League between the English, Swedes, and Dutch, to enforce the
observance of the Pyrenean and Aix la Chapelle Treaties.

John Casimir, King of Poland resigned his Crown, and went into France, where
he lived a Retired Life. From Christ 1671.

Canea, in the Island of Cadia, which the the Venetians with a great loss of
Men and Money for three years bravely defended, surrendered at last upon
Articles to the Turks: The Venetians still retaining in the same Island; Sucla,
Spyndlonga, Carabuza, with the lesser Islands of Tyna and Cerygo, not far from
thence.

At Rome died Pope Clement the Ninth: Pope^ death
In Sicily, Mount Etna shook with an Earthquake, and cast forth flames, and
streams of Sulphur.

Henrietta Maria, Queen Mother of England, The death of the Queen Mother of
England.
and Daughter to Henry the IV. died at Columbe near Paris.

Alphonso, the Deposed King of Portugal, was conveyed to the Island Tercera.

In Poland, Michael Wisnowisky, an Illustrious Winowisky (...) King of Poland.
Prince of the Kingdom, was chosen King.

The Prince of Tuscany came to London, The Prince of Tuscany arrived at London
The prince of Denmark came to England The Duke of Albemarle' s death.
visited Oxford and Cambridge, and departed for Holland.

Prince George arrived in England.

The Duke of Albemarle died.

The Counts of Serini, Nadast, Frangipany, and others were accused for
conspiring against the Emperor, for which they were imprisoned, and beheaded.

The Duke of Crequi, by the King of Three German Counts beheaded. The French
took Lorrain.
France his Command, no War having been proclaimed, took the Duchy of Lorain,
and reduced it to a French Province: The pretense was that the Duke of Lorain,
contrary to the Pyrenean Articles, had bred up Soldiers.

The Triple League between the King of The death of the Duchess of Orleans.
England, Sweden, and Holland, concluded in the year 1668. this year broken by
the King of England: About which time the Duchess of Orleans struck up the
Dover Treaty with France; and a little while after she died at St. Clou in
France.

Frederick the Third, King of Denmark, The death of the K. of Denmark.
departed this Life, to whom succeeded Christian the Fifth.

In Russia, the notorious Rebel Stephen Razin, occasioned great Troubles, and
took the City of Astracan. Popes.


In Italy, Cardinal A^nilio Altieri, was made Pope, and assumed the Name of
Clement the Tenth.

The Duke of Florence died, leaving his The death of the Duke of Florence.
Son Cozmo to succeed him, who had traveled through many Countries in Europe.

The Prince of Orange arrived at White Hall. T^^ ^. of Orange arrived at London.
From Christ 1670.

Charles the Second, King of England, sent the Order of the Garter to John
George the Second, Elector of Saxony.

Ann, Duchess of York, died, and was The death of the Duchess of York.
interred in Henry the Seventh's Chapel.

Colonel Blood, in the habit of a Parson, made an attempt to carry away the
Crown out of the Tower of London.

Sir Robert Holmes, the English Admiral, fell upon the Dutch Smirna Fleet.

The Pope acknowledged the King of Portugal a free Prince, and honored him
with a Nuntio. From Christ 1671.

The King of England declared War against Holland.

A terrible Engagement between the English and Dutch Fleets, at Southwold-Bay,
where the English being surprised by De Ruyter; after a sharp Dispute, the
Dutch Fleet gave way, and retreated; where was unfortunately lost the Earl of
Sandwich, Vice Admiral of England.

The King of France invaded Holland, and in the space of one Month, took three
Provinces, Amsterdam being in very great danger.

Two Brothers, Ruart van Putten, and The death of De Wit and his Brother.
Pensionary De Wit, killed by the multitude.

The Prince of Orange restored to the Dignities of his Ancestors, was declared
The prince of Orange made Capt. General of the States Armies.
Captain General of the States Armies.

The King of England stopped all Payments of Money out of his Exchequer.

John Cazimir, King of Poland, having The Exchequer shut up. The death of
Cazimir K. of P lan^.
left his Kingdom, lived a retired life in France, where he died.

Charles Duke of Richmond, died at Elsynore, in Denmark, where he was his
Majesty's extraordinary Ambassador. From Christ 1672. The death (...) ^. of
(...) mond.


The Emperor made a League with the Spaniard, Hollander, and other Princes,
against the King of France, and sent away The Emperor ^ clared War against
France. Mastrick taken by the French The death of the K. of Poland.
the French Ambassador from Vienna.

The King of France took Mastriek, and after that subdued ten Cities in Alsatia.

King Michael died in Poland; but the next day, the Poles under the Conduct of
John Sobiesky, gave the Turks a great overthrow, who by that Victory gained so
much the favor of the Polish Nobility, that they chose him King the year
ensuing.

The Spaniards declared War against the French, and the French against the
Spaniards: The King of France finding so many Enemies confederated against him,
did quit his Conquests in Holland.

A first, second, and third Engagement, between the Dutch and the English
Fleets, under the command of Prince Rupert.

In the last of which, Sir Edward Spragg was lost; in the second, the English
forced the Dutch to shelter themselves among their Flatts and Shoals.

The Duchess of Modena arrived in England, and was married to the Duke of York.

A Peace concluded between the King A peace between England and Holland.
of England and the States General. From Christ 1670.

The French Ambassador commanded to depart Ratisbone, because the French were
declared public Enemies of the Empire.

The Battle of Sensheim in the lower Palatinate, T^^ Battle of Sensheim.
between the Saxons joined with the Imperialists, against the French, where
Marshall Turenne got the better of them.

The Battle of Seneff, where the Prince The Battle of Seneffe.
of Orange remained Master of the Field.

Messina in Sicily, revolted from the Spaniards, Messina submitted to France.
and submitted to the K. of France, who sent the Count de Vivonne for their The
Danes made a League with the Spaniard and Hollander.
Governor.

The King of Denmark made a League with the Emperor, the Spaniard, and the
Hollander, while the Swedes inclined to the French; and by the instigation of
the French Ambassador fell into Brandenburgh, which enforced the Elector to
observe the Sobietsky King of Poland.
Peace made with France.

John Sobyetzsky elected K. of Poland, with great applause of the Nobility and
People.

King Charles having been pleased to accept The Freedom of London presented to
K. Charles.
of the Freedom of the City of London, the Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen,
humbly presented his Majesty with the Copy of the Freedom, in a Box of Massy
Gold, set with Diamonds. From Christ 1674. The death of Marshall Turenne,


Marshall Tarenne killed by a Canonshot, and the French forced to retire out
of Alsatia.

The Duke of Crequy defeated by the Confederates, under the command of the Duke
of Zell, did fly to Treves, and defended Treves taken.
the Town for a short time; but at length the City was taken by the Victors,
and the D. of Crequy made a Prisoner.

Nimmegen appointed the place of Treaty, Nimmegen the place of Treaty.
for a Peace between the Potentates at variance, where Charles II. King of
England, interposed as Mediator. From Christ 1675.

A Marriage solemnized at St. James's, The prince of Orange married to Lady
Mary.
between the P. of Orange and the Lady Mary.

Stetin in Pomerania, after a long Siege, surrendered upon honourabe terms to
the Elector of Brandenburgh. Stetin taken by the Elector of Brandenburgh. G^^nt
sarr^ndred to the French.


The City of Ghent surrendered to the King of France.

Phillipsburgh besieged by the Imperialists, was taken by composition.

Admiral De Ruyter, engaging with the French in the Mediterranean, received his
deaths Wound, and died in the Bed of Honor, The denth of Admiral de Ruyter.
in the seventy year of his Age.

The Danes in conjunction with the Hollanders, did beat the Swedish Fleet,
consisting of 40 Men of War; and then landing in Schonen, took several Towns
from the Swedes: But in the midst of their Victories, near Helmstade, were
defeated by the Swedes with a great loss. And after that, they lost a second
Battle to the Swedes, near the City of Lunden, where, after a bloody Fight,
above 9000 Men were killed on both sides.

A Battle between the Prince of Orange Cambray and St. Omers taken by the French
and the Duke of Orleans, at Mount Cassel. After which, Cambray and St. Omers
were taken by the French.

Cardinal Benedict Odescalchi, was chose Pope, in the room of Clement X. who
died Popes.
in the 87th year of his Age. He assumed the name of Innocent XI. And it was
said, that Donna Olimpia, a cunning Woman, and powerful in the Court of Rome,
prepared the way for him to that Dignity. From Christ 1676.

The Swedes did again defeat the Danes in a terrible Conflict, near
Landscroone. On the other side, the Danes overcame the Swedes in a Sea Fight,
and took several of their Men of War.

A Peace concluded at N^meghen, between Luxemburgh quitted the Siege of Mons.
the French and the Dutch.

The Prince of Orange forced the Duke of Luxemburgh to quit the Siege of Mons.

Dr. Oats made the first discovery of the Popish Plot; upon which, Sir
Edmundsbury The death of St. Edmundsbury Godfrey. Coleman hanged. Messina
submitted to the Spaniard. The peace between France and Spain.
Godfrey was murdered; and one Coleman, who called himself the Duke of York's
Secretary was executed at Tyburne, as were afterward several others.

Messina in Sicily, wearyed with the French Government, submitted it self to
the Spanish Monarchy. From Christ 1678.

The Peace between France and Spain, concluded at Nimeghen, proclaimed in both
Kingdoms.

A most grievous Persecution of the Hugonet's in France.

The King of Spain married the Daughter The K. of Spain married the D. of
Orleans Daughter.
of the Duke of Orleans, which displeased the Emperor.

A great disorder in England, by reason of several Persons, who did second Dr.
Oats in the further discovery of the Popish The D. of York sent into Flanders,
and after into Scotland.
Plot, while the lower House of Parliament used all their endeavors to
disinherit the Duke of York, for being a Papist. Upon which, the Duke was sent
out of the way, first into Flanders, then into Scotland. From Christ 1679.

The Elector Palatin built a new Church at Fredericksberg, which was dedicated
to Concord, and consecrated by a Lutheran Doctor, with whom were joined a Roman
Catholic Priest, and a Calvinist Minister.

The King of France by sundry Acts of Hostility committed in Alsatia, the
Palatinate, and in the Bishopric of Treves, disturbed the Peace concluded but
the year before.

The Duke of Mantua sold the strong Casal ^old to the French. Lord Stafford
beheaded.
Town of Casal to the French.

The Lord Stafford being found guilty of High Treason by his Peers, was
Beheaded upon Tower Hill.

Charles, Count Palatine of the Rhyne, and Prince Elector was created Knight of
the Garter, and installed at Windsor.

The Parliament sat at Oxford, but was on a sudden dissolved. The death of Don
John of Austria.


Don John of Austria departed this life. From Christ 1680.

A Diet held at Francfort on the Main, where the Articles of the Treaty at
Nimegen in Controversy, were argued with the King of France, who made slight of
that Treaty, and had offered several Injuries to the Princes bordering upon the
Rhyne: for contrary to his Faith given, he seized Strasburgh took by the French.
on Strasburgh, and caused the Cathedral to be consecrated anew by the Bishop
of Furstemberg, for the use of the Roman Catholics.

The Hugonots by reason of their being The Hugonots came (...) England.
so cruelly persecuted, did fly out of France, into England and Holland.

The Hungarians were promised their freedom, with the restitution of their
Liberties, by the Emperor: But the free Exercise of their Religion being denied
them, by the persuasions of the Jesuits, those promises came to nothing.

The Pope was angry with the King of France, for assuming the Collation of
Ecclesiastical Benefices; upon which, the Gallican Clergy being assembled, gave
their Opinions for the King.

A Peace between the Emperor of Morocco A peace between* the Emperor of Morocco
and the King of England.
and the King of England, for four years.

An Ambassador from Muscovy, arrived in England: And in the same year also,
came another Embassy from the King of F^z, and Morocco, and a Peace was
concluded with the M^^rs. The death of Thomas Thynne, (...)


Count Conningsmark caused Thomas Thynn, Esquire to be basely murdered,
Conningsmark was acquitted, but his Accomplices were Hanged. From Christ 1681.

In the Diet of Francfort, the Affair of the Reunions, unjustly challenged by
the King of France, began to be disputed with the French Ambassadors; but
because the French Ambassadors refused to treat with the Germans in the Latin
Tongue, according to custom, but persisted to give in their Memorials in the
French Language; the Diet broke up reinfecta.

The King of Denmark, Elector of Brandenburg, and the Bishops of Cologne and
Munster, en^er into a mutual League, which many, interpreted to be done in
favor of the King of France.

The King of France ordered the Walls of the City King of France took the City
of Orange. The Gallican Decree against the Pope.
of Orange to be pulled down, and took the Principality from the lawful
possessor the Prince of Orange.

The Gal^^an Clergy assembled at Paris, decree, in opposition to the Court of
Rome, that the Pope had no power to absolve Subjects from their Oath of
Fidelity to their Sovereign; that a universal Council was above the Pope; that
the Popes Authority was limited by the Canons of the Church; and that the Pope
was not infallible.

The Great Duke of Muscovy being removed by The Death of the great Duke of
Muscovy. Count Teckley submitted to the Turks. Four Bantam Ambassadors.
poison, after many Tumults and Slaughters, his two Sons agreed to divide the
Empire between ^em.

Count Teckly did put himself under the protection of the Turks, and possessed
himself of Cass^via, (...), and the Fort of Villeck.

Four Bantam Ambassadors arrived at London, and two of them Knighted by King
Charles.

The Morocco Ambassador entertained at Oxford.

Prince Rupert, Prince Palatine of the Rhine, died of a Fever and Plurify, in
the sixty third year of his Age. From Christ 1682.

(...) besieged by the T^rks, and the Siege raised The death of prince Rupert.
Vienna besie^ed by the Turks.
by the King of Poland, in conjunction with the Duke of Lorrain. At the same
time, the King of Poland and the Duke of Lorrain, pursued the flying ^nemy, and
defeated them on a bloody Battle near Ba^can; after which, followed the
surrender of Gra^

Because the Spania^d rejected the Demand^ of the French, the King of France
fell upon Oudenard, and Oudenard and Dixmude took by the French. P. George of
Denmark married to the Lady Ann.
Dixmude, and took them.

Prince George of Denmark arrived at Whitehall, and was married to the Lady
Ann, the younger Daughter of the Duke of York.

Judgment given against the ancient Charter of the City of London, in the
King's Bench Court. From Christ. 1683.

The Emperor, King of Poland, and the Republic of Venice, enter into a League
against the Turks.

A Truce for twenty years between the Emperor, the States of the Empire, and
the King of France, consented to by the Emperor, provided it should be no way
prejudicial to the Treaties of Westphalia and Nimeghen. A Truce also concluded
for the same Term, between the States General and the French King, contrary to
the Advice of the Spaniard, Swede, and others.

The French Bomb the flourishing City of Genoa. The French Bomb Genoa.


The Tide ran strong against all that had stood up for the ancient Liberties of
England, and all the Corporations, Cities, and Towns in the Kingdom, were
forced to surrender their Charters, and accept of new ones from the Court. The
death of King Charles II.


Charles II. died at Whitehall, as it was said, of an Apoplexy; and the same
day, James Duke of York, was proclaimed King in his room.

FINIS.

