A Farther REVIEW OF Mr. Collier.

The Second Part, etc.

A Farther DEFENSE OF Dramatick Poetry: Being the Second Part of the REVIEW OF
Mr. COLLIER's View OF THE Immorality and Profaneness of the STAGE.

Done by the same Hand.

LONDON: Printed for Eliz. Whitlock, near Stationer's Hall. School.

PREFACE.
I Must beg my Reader's Pardon, that my Bookseller's overhasty Publication of
my former Discourse in Defense of Dramatick Poetry, has forced me to give him
my Full Review of Mr. Collier, thus in Fragments. However, I am in hopes that
his favorable Reception of that First Part will pave my way for the Last; and
then I have my Wishes.

And here in my full Survey of the Merits of Mr. Collier' s View of the Stage,
and the Success of it together; I cannot but think how little Honesty, Truth or
Conscience, are required, to make a Popular Piece upon a Religious Subject. I
confess this looks like a Paradox, and perhaps an uncharitable one: But I am
sorry I must say, it is too true for a Jest. I am sure the many strained
Constructions of Profanation and Blasphemy, and the other ill-grounded
Arguments, the many Falsities among the few Truths in that Treatise,
sufficiently prove my Assertion. And the unhappy Reason of the too Epidemical
Popular Deception from Subjects of that kind, is this, That the Honest Features
of the Face conceal the Fucus of it; and the Well-meaning of the Cause covers a
great many of the False Reasonings that champion for it. And here I may say,
it is almost a whole National Misfortune, that Sentence in these Cases, is given
with hearing but One side. The Indictment's laid full, and the Accusation
charged home; but the poor Criminal at the Bar shall never speak for himself,
produce one Witness in his Cause, or move for an Arrest of Judgment. It Is thus
Mr. Collier carries the Victory, and gains all the Trumpets that Echo his
Triumph.

All this is a little hard: But here lies the Misery. There Is no Restraint upon
the Quill that runs Gall upon Pious Themes. In any Misrepresentation of Humane
Affairs, Untruth and Fiction are under some Lash of the Law. The Broachers of
Falsity stand in Awe of Authority, and their Fear of the Punishment restrains
the Offense. Whilst on the contrary, such is the Impunity of these Religious
Misrepresentations, that there seems to be no truly general Privilege of Lying,
but in God's Name.

This I will farther positively aver, That when a single private Hand sets up
for a Public Reformation, especially in a Cause where all Tongues are silent
but his own, we have all the Reason in the World (if we'd give our selves
leisure but to think) to suspect either the Enthusiast or the Hypocrite, viz.
That either the Mad Zeal or the Pretended One sets Pen to Paper.

I Shall begin this Second Review of the Ingenious Mr. Collier, in his Remarks
upon the Relapse: And here I must prepare my Reader for a New Entertainment.
For hitherto, in our First Part, we have only Discoursed him in his Diviner
Qualification, as the Churchman and Philosopher, viz. in his Moral and
Religious Objections against the Stage. But here we find him, in the Humane
Capacity, carrying on his Attack, not only as a Church-Champion, but that
Humbler Stage-Combatant, a Critic. But no doubt, he is a Man of Universal
Learning, and therefore to do himself Justice, as well as the Stage, there is no
Reason that this shining Talent should lie any more hid than the other.

I confess, he has singled out a very sturdy Play to grapple with, and if he
has Prowess enough for a complete Conquest here, he may hope to drive the whole
Stage before him.

The Remarks on the Relapse Examined.

Engaging this Play immediately after some small Triumph over Mr. Durfey's Don
Quixot, he gives this Reason why this Author should next enter the List, viz.

The Relapse should follow Don Quixot, upon the Account of some Alliance
between 'em.

Now, which way the Kindred enters between these two Plays, I am afraid Mr.
Collier's whole false Heraldry will hardly be able to make out. For it is the
Opinion of the whole Town, the Vox Populi on my side, that neither those two
Authors nor their Works, especially the Quixot Labors, have any such great
Affinity. I durst venture to say, the Relapse and the Quixot are no more of
Kin, then the Cavalier to the Churchman; not so much as Mr. Collier's Modern
Beau Wigg, Crevate and Sword, to his old cast Gown, Cassock and Scarf. Nor is
there half so much Reason why the Relapse should follow the Don Quixot, as why
Mr. Collier the Sword-man should follow Doctor Collier the Gown-man.

The Resignation of his Quondam Divinity, and his whole Spirituality for his
present Temporal and Carnal Assumption, no more the Church-Militant, but the
Lay-Militant Hero, is all but a natural Consequence, a Product we see every
Day. This very Master of Arts himself, when but a Junior Soph, could have
produced a very substantial Maxim in Natural Philosophy to justify this
Transformation, viz. Corruption Optimi, etc.

I shall spend a few more Thoughts [More Words he means] then ordinary upon
this Play, and examine it briefly [in Twelve Leaves of Paper] in the Fable, the
Moral, the Characters, etc. The Fable I take to be as follows.

Fashion, a lewd Prodigal younger Brother is reduced to Extremity; upon his
arrival from his Travels, he meets with Coupler an old sharping Match-maker.
This Man puts him upon a Project of Cheating his Elder Brother Lord Foppington
of a rich Fortune. Young Fashion being refused a sum of Money by his Brother,
goes into Coupler's Plot, bubbles Sir Tunbelly of his Daughter, and makes
himself Master of a Fair Estate.

From the Form and Constitution of the Fable, I observe, First, There is a
Misnommer in the Title. The Play should not have been here called, The Relapse;
or, Virtue in Danger. Lovelace and Amanda, from whose Characters these Names
are drawn, are Persons of Inferior Consideration, etc. The Intrigue and the
Discovery, the great Revolution and Success turns upon Young Fashion. He,
without Competition, is the Principal Person in the Comedy, and therefore the
Younger Brother, or the Fortunate Cheat, had been much a more proper Name. Now
when a Poet cannot rig out a Title Page, it is but a bad sign of his holding out
to the Epilogue.

Here I am afraid this Gentleman that has so curiously examined through the
whole Play, has unfortunately read but half the Title Page. For is not the Play
called, The Relapse; or, Virtue in Danger, being the Sequel of the Fool in
Fashion? And did not all the Playhouse Bills call it the Second Part of the
Fool in Fashion? And consequently is not here Lovelace, Amanda, Lord
Foppington, all the whole Walks of the Play, etc. the full Contents of the
Fabric expressed in the Frontispiece? And why, the Younger Cheating Brother is
a greater Person in the Play than the Elder Cheated Brother, when the Younger
is only concerned in the Walk of Sir Tunbelly, and the Elder through the whole
Play with Amanda, Lovelace, etc. is that unaccountable Riddle, that nothing but
such an Oedipus as Mr. Collier can solve?

Now if his Twelve Leaves of Remarks upon that Play, end no better then they
begin, it is shrewdly to be suspected that the Remarker has more bad signs of
not holding out, than the Relapser.

2dly, I observe the Moral is vicious. It points the wrong way, and puts the
Prize into the wrong Hand. It seems to make Lewdness the Reason of Desert, and
gives Young Fashion a second Fortune, only for Debauching away his first. A
short view of his Character will make good this Reflection. To begin with him,
He confesses himself a Rake, Swears and Blasphemes, Curses and Challenges his
Elder Brother, cheats him of his Mistress, and gets him laid by the Heels in a
Dog-Kennel. And what was the Ground of all this unnatural Quarrelling and
Outrage? Why the Main of it was only because Lord Foppington refused to supply
his Luxury and make good his Extravagance. This Young Fashion after all is the
Poets Man of Merit. He provides a Plot and a Fortune on purpose for him. To
speak freely, a Lewd Character seldom wants good Luck in a Comedy: So that when
ever you see a thorough Libertine, you may almost swear he is in a Rising way,
and that the Poet intends to make him a great Man. In short, this Play perverts
the End of Comedy, etc. For the Relapsers Moral holds forth this notable
Instruction. First that all Younger Brothers should be careful to run out their
Circumstances as fast, and as ill as they can; And when they have put their
Affairs into this posture they may conclude themselves in the High Road to
Wealth and Success. For as Fashion Blasphemously applys it, Providence takes
care of Men of Merit. 2dly. That when a Man is pressed, his Business is not to be
governed by Srcuples, or to formalize upon Conscience and Honesty. The quickest
Expedients are the best for in such Cases the occasion justifies the Means, and
a Knight of the Post is as good as one of the Garter.

In this View of Young Fashion, I wonder by what unintelligible Light of
Discovery this Characterizer finds him that Blasphemer, Lewd Debauchee, or
Thorough Libertine, as he is here set out. It Is true his Man Lory in a piece of
Rally, puts the Iacobite upon him. But that I suppose is none of the Blots in
Young Fashion's Scutcheon; at least of Mr. Colliers Discovery.

But to draw this Libertine to the full Length. He is a Young Fellow, Brother
to a Baronet, (now a Lord) Guilty of no Vice but Extravagance; this
Extravagance too, amounts to no more, then that he has spent 500 l. anticipated
upon his Annuity of 200 l. per Annum; not in Whoredom, Dice, Riot, nor any
other Brutal Prodigality, but only in three Years Travel beyond Sea, Travel
that has been accounted the most Honorable Improvement of a Gentleman; a great
part of this Extravagance occasioned possibly to bear up the Port of his Birth,
and the Honor of his Family; a Sin not altogether so Capital; nor his
Circumstances so very ill run out, as this Remarker endeavors to persuade us.
This is the whole Character of Young Fashion, excepting what relates afterward
to his cheating his Brother; and what ground he stands upon there, how far the
Debauch, the Libertine, or the Knight of the Post, we shall examine.

This Young Extravagant, it is true, at his return to London, resents his
unhappy Circumstances, the low Ebb of his Pocket, with a little too free Air of
a Gentleman; does not fall upon his Knees like the Prodigal at the Swine
Trough, a Fault perhaps scarce pardonable with the Divine Mr. Collier.

However in this Distress he applies himself to his Brother, not an Addressor
to his Periwig, his Crevate, his Feather or his Snush-box, as Lory advises: For
he absolutely declares against so low-spirited and servile a baseness as
Flattery. His Brother, whom he finds newly Lordified, is so taken up with his
Looking glass and Dressing-Box, and his whole Wardrobe Retinue, that he scarce
speaks to him, takes less notice of him, gives him that cold welcome, though
after three Years absence, and uses him with all that Scorn and Contempt, as
justly provokes our Young Spark to no little Indignation against him. Here
Coupler enters, caresses Young Fashion, tells him what Match he had made for
his Brother with Sir Tunbelly's Daughter, in consideration of a Bond of a 1000
l. for helping him to this Fortune; and for 5000 l. from Young Fashion, agrees
to cheat the Lord, and so manage the Game as to carry the Prize for the Squire.
In the Raptures of which fair hopes, Fashion tells Lory, Providence thou see
takes care of Men of Merit, we are in a fair way of being great People. Now
this is the whole Sum total of Young Fashion's Blasphemy. Had he said Fortune,
Fate, Destiny, or the Kind Stars had took such care of Merit, it had been much
at one; so little is the Divinity pointed at, or touched in this Expression.

But notwithstanding this fair occasion offered, not only to revenge all the
Indignity received from his Brother, but to Enrich himself with a Fortune of
1500 l. per Annum; yet all this Temptation will not carry the Point, provided
his Brother will but supply him with poor 500 l. to redeem his Annuity.
Accordingly, he says, I Will try my Brother to the Bottom, I Will speak to him with
the Temper of a Philosopher, my Reasons, (though they press him home) shall be
clothed with so much Modesty, not one of all the Truths they urge shall be so
naked to offend his sight; if he has yet so much Humanity as to assist me,
(though with a moderate Aid) I Will drop my project at his Feet, and show him I
can do for him, much more then I ask he would do for me, etc. Relapse. page 20.

This very address he makes to his Brother in all the Terms of Modesty, and
finds him so wholly inveterate, so deaf to all Arguments of Reason, Justice or
Pity, though to save him from Starving or Hanging; that upon this only Repulse,
he enters into Couplers Plot, and puts on the Jacob's false Hands for the
Blessing; resolving to Cheat the Lord and carry the Lady. Now how much this
Play perverts the end of Comedy, which as Monsieur Rapin (he tells us)
observes, ought to regard Reformation and Improvement, will soon be examined.

As the Lord Foppington's is the Character of the Play, justly designed to be
most exposed; accordingly by the Rules of Comedy, his Pride, his Vanity, his
unnatural Inhumanity to his own Brother, and all the other Vices of his
Character, ought to be punished, with all the Insults, Defeats, Disappointments
and Shame, that the Dramatick Justice can heap upon him, through the whole
Play. But as no overreach or defeat in Comedy can well be performed, but by
some Fraud or Cheat or other; and consequently he that carries on the Cheat,
cannot reach to the full heights of a perfect Character, viz. wholly
unblemished; however it is the work of the Poet in that Case to raise those just
Provocations for every such Insult, and lay that reasonable Ground for every
such Cheat, especially in the prosperous Characters of the Comedy; that their
Successes, in the Catastrophe of the Play, may seem the Reward of some Virtue
and Justice even in the Cheat himself, comparative to the Vice and Injustice
they punish.

This Ingenious Conduct of Comedy is highly justified in the Authors admirable
Fabric in this part of his Relapse: For here is a Younger Brother under no
better Paternal Provision then 200 a year Annuity, which at seven Years, the
Life's purchase, is worth little more then a 1000 l. whilst the Elder Brother
runs away with 5000 l. per Annum Inheritance, to the value of a 100000. l. Yet
this Younger Brother, that in all Equity might expect some reasonable Favor
and Succor from his Elder Brother, if for no other Consideration than the
unequal Division of the Estate between 'em, has those innate Principles of
Honor and Virtue, as to sit down contented with the honest Reparation of his
Morgaged Annuity, at the poor price of 500 l. rather then Embrace the
Temptation of a Fair Lady, and 1500 l. per Annum thrown into his Arms by any
Irregular or Fraudulent Means.

But when this unmerciful Brother thus shamefully denis him so inconsiderable a
Trifle, and all to the reparing the Breaches of so Innocent an Extravagance in
his Honorable Travels: Thus the inevitable prospect of starving on one side,
and the just resentments of a Brothers unnatural Barbarity on the other, carry
that Face of Justification along with the Cheat; that among all the Thousand
Patrons of that Darling Play, I fancy this strait-lac'd high Moralist Mr.
Collier, is the only Repiner at Young Fashion's Felicity in the Arms of Miss
Hoyden; and if the Author be never Duell'd but upon that Quarrel, undoubtedly
he may die in his Bed. Nay, besides Young Fashion's supplanting his Brothers
pretensions, here is another piece of Poetic Justice in carrying off the Young
Heiress: For when the Young Hoyden is thus snared into Wedlock, not by any
ignoble rascally Impostor, but a Young Gentleman, at least of equal Birth and
Quality with her; the other part of the Delusion, viz. his being a Younger
Brother, and a Man of no Estate, seems but an honest Dramatick overreach,
imposed upon so fordid and avaricious a Character, so over-cautious a Coxcomb
as her Father Sir Tunbelly: Nor is the Young Lady her self, under the meaness
of her rustic Education, so Exalted a Character; but that Young Fashion may
fairly and innocently carry the Prize, without one murmuring Word, or envying
Eye from the severest Critic in the whole Audience.

In the next place, Mr. Collier is pleased to look a little into the Plot of
the Relapse.

Here the Poet (he tells you) ought to play the Politician, if ever; this part
should have some strokes of Conduct, etc. There should be something that is
admirable, and unexpected to surprise the Audience. And all this Fineness must
work by gentle Degrees, by a due preparation of Incidents, and by Instruments
which are probable [And all the Reason in the World.] It Is Mr. Rapin's Remark,
That without probability every thing is Lame and Faulty. [He's much in the
Right:] Where there is no pretense to Miracle or Machine, Matters must not
exceed the Force of Relief. To produce Effects without proportion, and
likelihood in the Cause is Farce and Magic, and looks more like Conjuring than
Conduct. ['Tis all granted.] Let us examine the Relapser by these Rules. [Ay,
and welcome.] To discover his Plot, we must lay open somewhat more of the Fable.

Lord Foppington, a Town Beau, had agreed to Marry the Daughter of Sir Tunbelly
Clumsey, who lived Fifty Miles from London. Notwithstanding this small
Distance, the Lord had never seen his Mistress, nor the Knight his Son-in-Law.

And where lies the wonder on either side? Is not Sir Tunbelly that Avaritious
Miser, that Interest is all the Concern in his Daughters Disposal; And
consequently as long as a Lordship and Five Thousand a Year are full Smithfield
Weight in his Scales; the Lord himself may be the Plaindealer's
Leaden-shilling, for any Curiosity he has to be acquainted either with his
Personal or any other Accomplishments? And for the same Indifference on my Lord
Foppington's side; The striking of this blind Bargain for Miss Hoyden, is
possibly one of the greatest Master-strokes in the Character. Is not this Fop,
a true Narcissus all along, through both the Plays, in Love with nothing but
himself? Has his Match with Miss Hoyden any other Temptation than the
gratifying his Pride in Marrying so rich an Heiress; and heightening his Pomp,
Luxury and Vanity, by that considerable addition of her Fortunes? So that
here is no occasion either of disordering himself or his Coach-horses to run
backwards and forwards a Fifty Mile Stage, only to show his own, or see his
Mistresses sweet Face.

Both Parties, out of their Great Wisdom, leave the treating the Match to
Coupler, etc. Here we may observe the Lord Foppington has an unlucky
Disagreement in his Character. This Misfortune is hard upon the Credibility of
the Design. It Is true, he was Formal and Fantastic, smitten with Dress and
Equipage, etc. But his Behavior is far from that of an Idiot. This being
granted, it is very unlikely this Lord should leave the Choice of his Mistress
to Coupler, and take her Person and Fortune upon Content: To Court thus
blindfold, and by Proxy, does not agree with the Method of an Estate, nor the
Niceness of a Beau, etc. And for Sir Tunbelly, here we have that prudence and
wariness (in his Character) to the Excess of Fable and Frenzy. And yet this
mighty Man of suspicion trusts Coupler with the Disposal of his only Daughter,
and his Estate into the Bargain. And what was this Coupler? Why, a Sharper by
Character, and little better by Possession.

Here our Authors Criticismes, like Bay's Plot, begin to thicken upon us. This
notorious Misconduct of the Relapser will not give him a Foyl, but a fair Fall,
if he has not a Care: But to recover his Hold, and save him from Tumbling; I
remember before the Lord Foppington was invited down to Sir Tunbelly, the Poet
tells us, That the Marriage-Settlement was prepared for Signing and Sealing.
And now though the Relapser makes Coupler a Match-maker, I cannot see where he
makes him a Iointure-maker. Whatever other Faculties he may be Master of, Ne
suitor ultra crepidam, I cannot find him either a Coke or a Littleton, or any of
those long Robe Gentlemen, a Law Headpiece for drawing of Settlements; and
consequently we may very reasonably suppose, both on Sir Tunbelly and Lord
Foppington's side, here were the Learned in the Law called to the Consult, a
preliminary Inspection into Records, the Terra Firma Foundation Examined, and
all the precautionary Articles of Treaty adjusted, for so important a Cause,
before Matters went so far as to send down for the Son-in-Law Elect. So that
here is poor Coupler so far from having the Disposal of Sir Tunbelly's Daughter
and Estate, that our Diminitive Love-broker has no more Hand in the Affair,
then mere starting the Game; it is the strength of the Fortune-hunter must catch
it. And therefore I may presume to say, neither the Lord nor the Knight have
hitherto made one false step in their Conduct, to deserve the hard Names of
Cuddens and Idiots, Mr. Collier has unkindly thrown upon them; but may venture
to vie Wit even with Mr. Collier himself; This I am sure, His Critismes savor
a great deal more of the Ideotism, then their Politics, at least in this part
of their prudential Faculties.

To proceed with the Criticiser.

As for Young Fashion, excepting Coupler's Letter, he has all imaginable Marks
of Imposture upon him. He comes before his time, and without the Retinue
expected, and has nothing of the Air of Lord Foppington's Conversation. When
Sir Tunbelly asked him, Pray where are your Coaches and Servants, my Lord? He
makes a trifling Excuse. Sir, that I might give you and your Daughter a Proof
how impatient I am to be nearer a Kin to you, I left my Equipage to follow me,
and came away Post with only one Servant. To be in such a hurry of Inclination
for a Person he never saw is somewhat strange! Besides, it is very unlikely Lord
Foppington should hazard his Complexion on Horseback, out-ride his Figure, and
appear a Bridegroom in Deshabille, etc. As Pomp and Curiosity were this Lords
Inclination, why then should he mortify without Necessity, make his first
Approaches thus out of Form, and present himself to his Mrs. at such
Disadvantage? As this is the Character of Lord Foppington, so it is reasonable
to suppose Sir Tunbelly acquainted with it. An Inquiry into the Humor and
Management of a Son-in-Law is very Natural and Customary: So that we cannot
without Violence to Sense, suppose Sir Tunbelly a stranger to Lord Foppington's
Singularities. These Reasons were enough in all Conscience to make Sir Tunbelly
suspect a Juggle, and that Fashion was no better then a Counterfeit, etc. why
then was the Credential swallowed without chewing, etc. More wary steps might
have been expected from Sir Tunbelly: To run from one Extreme of Caution to
another of Credulity is highly improbable.

This Misconduct looks almost as formidable as the last. For this Critic never
Flaggs. Young Fashion comes before his time, etc. That is, Sir Tunbelly had
sent a Letter to invite the Lord Foppington down to Marry his Daughter, all the
main Wedlock Preliminaries, viz. Jointure, Settlements, all but Consummation
already adjusted, etc. And therefore Young Fashion, the supposed Lord
Foppington, comes down before his time, because he comes when he is invited;
and has all the marks of a Counterfeit Son-in-Law, for obeying his
Father-in-Laws Summons. It Is true, he makes a little too much speed; Posts down
in one Day, when the True Lord makes a two Days Stage of it; And because this
Activity of Riding Post does not look like the flower Movement of a Traveling
Beau; for this single Gigantick Objection to the Lord Foppington's Veracity,
both the Credential of Coupler's Letter, and the very Obedience of Sir
Tunbelly's own Command, shall signify nothing; here may be a Snake in the
Grass; the Sir Politic Tunbelly has all the Reason to look about him. For did
this Justice never hear of such a thing as Knavery? [Nor this Critic of such a
thing as Foolery?]

However, Sir Tunbelly could be no Stranger to the Lord Foppington' s
Singularities? Why, truly not over-well acquainted with them at Fifty Miles
distance. For if we could suppose Sir Tunbelly so over inquisitive, in so
needless a Curiosity, about his Son-in-Law; Yet I cannot well apprehend how all
the particular Nicer Singularities of a London Beau, should enter the
Understanding of a Country Clodpate Justice upon a bare Description only; but
rather that this very Riding down Post, with his Equipage following behind him,
might look like as Natural a Singularity, of so Fantastic a Character, as any
other of his Fantasticks, and rather confirm Sir Tunbelly's Faith then shake
it. And why should Sir Tunbelly's Intellects suspect an Impostor in his Beau
Son-in-Law, for appearing before his Mrs. in his half Glory the first Day, viz.
in Deshabille, to Dazzle her in his full Glory the next? Or rather is not this
Critic a little too hard upon that whole prevailing Party the Beaux, when he
will not allow one Cavalier amongst 'em all, that dares trust his Complexion
but to one Days Journey on Horseback?

But now for the true Lord's Misconduct. His going down to Sir Tunbelly, was as
extraordinary as his Courtship. He had never seen this Gentleman. He must know
him to be beyond measure suspicious, and that there was no Admittance without
Coupler's Letter. This Letter was the Key to the Castle: he forgot to take it
with him, and tells you, 'twas stolen by his Brother Tam. And for his part he
neither had the Discretion to get another, nor yet to produce that written by
him to Sir Tunbelly. [that written to him by Sir Tunbelly, I suppose he means]
Had common Sense been consulted upon this occasion, the Plot had been at an
End, and the Play had sunk in the Fourth Act.

But to consult common Sense in this case, possibly a little farther then this
Critic himself has done;

First then, let us inquire into the Strength of this Castle Key, viz. without
which there was no admittance. This we have in the Fifth Act, after Young
Fashion's Return to Town, by a Letter of the Lord's to Coupler from the
Country, viz.

Dear Coupler,
I have only time to tell thee in three Lines, or thereabouts, that here has
been the Devil, that Rascal Tam, having Stole the Letter thou had formerly
writ for me to bring Sr. Tunbelly, formed a Damnable Design upon my Mrs, etc.


Whatever Introductory Power, this Letter formerly written by Coupler,
(possibly more a Flourish upon the Merits of the Noble Peer the Bearer, than
any considerable Key to his Admission) might be supposed to carry; yet upon the
Receipt of Sr. Tunbelly's particular Invitation, this Coupler's Letter,
(however serviceable to the smaller Figure of the false Lord, Young Fashion,
and necessary to his Plot) was so little wanted to the True Lords Approaches;
that what could he expect less than that the Gates were all ready to fly open
at his Appearance? Could the Lord Foppington's Vanity and Pride, with an
Equipage of twenty Liverys and two Coaches and Six, and so solemnly invited,
think so little of himself, as to want any old or new Pasport from Coupler,
when such mutual satisfaction on both sides had paved his way, and so much
Grandeur carried its own Credentials; so that the preservation either of one
Letter or the other, upon so poor a score as a Testimonial of his Veracity, was
rather below the thoughts of a Lord Foppington; and all this more an Essential
to his Character then a disagreement or blemish in it.

This dead - doing Critic thus flushed with all this success against the
Relapser, is resolved to make through Work with his slaughtering Hand, and
consequently the Characters in the Play, shall be as Monstrous as the Conduct.

Let us see how Sr. Tunbelly hangs together. This Gentleman, the Poet, makes a
Justice of Peace, and a Deputy Lieutenant, and Seats him fifty Miles from
London; but by his Character you would take him for one of Hercules's Monsters,
or some Giant in Guy of Warwick. His Behavior is altogether Romance, and has
nothing agreeable to Time or Country, etc.

The Stage Paintings of Dramatick Poetry have always been allowed to take the
Features a little larger than the Life. And generally there is a very strong
Reason for it. For it is not One Fool that sits for the Picture; but the Imagery
in one single Character sometimes may include a whole Sect of Fools or Knaves.
How many excellent Dramatick pieces would otherwise be lost, such as a Morose
in the Silent Woman, Sir Nicolas Jimcrack, in the Virtuoso, and indeed most of
the Characters of Fools or Humorists, if their Authors had no Poetical grains
of allowance for a little stretch in the Pencil work? And for the Romantic Sir
Tunbelly; in my weak Eyesight, he looks no more like one of Hercules's
Monsters in his over-cautious Guardianship of his Rich Heiress; then Mr.
Collier, like an Herculean Champion, in his Batteling the Stage: Nay, I am
rather afraid Mr. Collier instead of doing the work of a Hercules, has found
work for one; whilst he has heaped Dirt enough, (not of the Stages, but of his
own) for an Augaeas's Stable.

Next let us see how he makes Miss Hoyden hang together.

Here is a Compound of ill Manners and Contradiction. Is this a good
resemblance of Quality, a Description of a great Heiress, and the Effect of a
cautious Education? By her Coursness you would think her Bred upon a Common. To
present her thus unhewn, he should have suited her Condition and Name a little
better. If he had resolved to have shown her thus unpolished, he should have
made her keep Sheep, or brought her up at the Wash-bowle.

If Descent and Education can perform such wonders; yet as high Veins as this
Young Lady can boast of, and though an Heiress to 1500 l. per Annum, methinks
she has no great Hereditary claim to those Extraordinary good Manners and
refined Conversation as Mr. Collier expects from her, when she derives from a
Sir Tunbelly to her Father: Nay nor any such over-promising Hopes, such very
great Effects from her Cautious Education neither, when She lived in the
Country, fifty Miles off, with her Honored Parents, in a lone House, which no
body comes near, she never goes abroad, nor sees Company at home; to prevent
all Misfortunes, she has her Breeding within Doors: The Parson of the Parish
Teaches her to Play on the Base-Viol, the Clerk to Sing, her Nurse to Dress,
and her Father to Dance. Relapse, page 18.

Now considering both her Genealogy, and her Nursery, methinks the Relapser's
Miss Hoyden, though a little of the Coursest, is not that unnatural Flower,
when reared from such a Root, and in such a Garden. But if this peevish
unsatisfied Naturalist, will expect such Miracles of Perfection, Wit, Manners,
Politeness, and all from so uncultivated a piece of Quality; methinks this
Critic would make a rare Courtier to King Pharaoh, for he is most Divinely
Qualified for an Egyptian Task-master.

He has much the same Quarrel against the Lord Foppington.

Vanity and Formalizing is his part. To let him speak without Aukwardness and
Affectation, is to put him out of his Element. There must be Gum and Stifning
in his Discourse to make it Natural. However the Relapser has taken a Fancy to
his Person, and given him some of the most gentile Raillery in the whole Play.
To give an Instance or two, This Lord in Discourse with Fashion forgets his
Name, flies out into Sense and smooth Expression, out-talks his Brother, and
abating the Starched Similitude of a Watch, discovers nothing of Affectation,
for almost a page together. He relapses into the same Intemperance of good
sense, in another Dialogue between him and his Brother.

This fault Mr. Collier has here found in the Lord Foppington, he resolves
shall outdo his own perfections. It Is true this Critic flies out generally
into smooth Expression, but not into overmuch Sense; but however he has given
you a very stanch Reason why good Sense in this case, should be the least of
his Care. For being a Virtuous, Modest and Sober Gentleman, possibly he thinks
it a piece of his Christian Duty to guard himself safe from Lapsing into
Intemperance.

But methinks this Gentleman might have read in an Old Greek Authority, (...).
A Fool may sometimes throw in a word to the purpose. Besides this Critic
strangely forgets himself. For 'twas but four pages before that he himself was
clearing Lord Foppington's Character, bating his Vanity, Formality and
Fantastickness, from any thing that looks like Fool or Idiot. And why he
Quarrels a Man that is no Fool, for speaking a little Sense, is somewhat
unaccountable. But if the plain Truth were known, he is not so pettish at the
Lord Foppington's speaking Sense, as the Relapser's writing it. Ay! there is the
Heart burning! This unhappy Author, whether because he is none of his own
Royalists, or has not made his Parson Bull one of them, or lies unabsolved for
some other heinous Transgression; one way or other, he languishes under the
utter Displeasure of the angry and irreconcilable Mr. Collier.

The next Critic Work he takes in hand are the three Unities of Time, Place
and Action; and to show us how far the Relapse breaks those Rules.

The Design of these Rules is to conceal the Fiction of the Stage, to make the
Play appear more Natural, and to give it an Air of Reality and Conversation.
The largest compass for the first Unity is Twenty four Hours; but a less
proportion is more Regular, etc. The whole Business of the Play should not be
much longer then the time it takes up in Playing. To observe the second Unity,
the Scene must not wander from one Town or Country to another. It must continue
in the same City, where it was first laid, etc. The third Unity, viz. of
Action, consists in contriving the chief Business of the Play single, etc. All
the Forces of the Stage must as it were serve under one General, etc. To
represent two considerable Actions independent of each other destroys the
Beauty of Subordination, weakens the Contrivance, and dilutes the Pleasure. It
splits the Play, and makes the Poem double. He that would see more upon this
Subject may consult Corneille.

These Unities are no new Stage-Doctrin, but what, by some of the greatest
Modern Brothers of the English Quill has been very often, most Learnedly, and I
much fear, as impertinently handled. For the strict Observation of these
Corneillean Rules, are as Dissonant to the English Constitution of the Stage,
as the French Slavery to our English Liberty. It Is true, that strictness may be
much more practicable in the French Model of Plays; and for this amazing
Reason, viz. that the French who are the sprightliest Conversation of all
People in the World, can nevertheless be the dullest of Mankind at their
Play Houses; can be contented to hear a Play made up of a short-winded Plot,
and a few long-winded Speeches, much about enough for the Argument of one of
our Acts, and go home as much regaled as from a Misers Feast: And the Devils
in it if their Dramatick Authors cannot furnish out so scanty a Banquet, with
all the forementioned Unities; and pride in it accordingly.

I shall expatiate a little more then Ordinary upon this Argument, not only to
answer Mr. Collier, but also some Modern woudbe-Criticks, that are wonderfully
tickled with their own nicer Stage performances, under this strict Cornelian
Model of Unities. First then I shall so far join with Mr. Collier, That
concealing the Fiction of the Stage; and making the Play appear with the more
Air of Reality, is a great work of the Poet. For indeed Dramatick Poetry, is
Supported chiefly by Theft and Delusion. The Images we steal or borrow, whether
Historical or Fictitious, must be set out with all that liveliest Art, that
like Zeuxes his Grapes or Apelles his Curtain, the Picture may best deceive.
For Poetry, especially the Dramatick, is but Painting; only this Picture finds
a Tongue; and is a speaking Painting. I had occasion in a late Copy of Verses
to give a little Description of Painting, which upon my second Review looks so
very applicable to Poetry, that not to treat my Reader with all downright
Reasoning, I Will give him a few Taggs of Rhyme too, and venture for once to
repeat them. If Heav'n-stol'n Fires could animate the Clay;
What nobler Theft the daring Pencils play?
So much the bolder Painter does out-fly
The old Promethean Petty Larceny;
Not a poor spark snatched from his Chariot Wheels;
Not steals from Jove, but Jove himself he steals.
Him not the Skies Imperial Rover scapes;
He hunts him through the Gold, Swan, Bull, all shapes,
The very God exposed in all his amorous Rapes.
Nay the still more Audacious Rifler pryes
Into the inmost Chambers of the Skies.
He steals his very Juno from his Arms;
And with a Sacrilege even yet more bold,
Unveils to Humane Eyes the Naked Goddess Charms;
And gives the Trojan Boy once more the Ball of Gold.
Illustrious Art, whom Ministering Nature, all
Thy Handmaid, waits on thy commanding Call!
Like the Great FIAT, thou both Day and Night
Call'st forth, and deck'st in their own Shades and Light.
Even Heaven's whole Hierarchy, the Lords above,
By thee their whole Triumphant Chariots move,
From th'Harnest Dragon to the bridled Dove.
Mercurial Art, who captived Eyes to take,
Thou do a Virtue of Delusion make;
Thou only Honest Cozener, Fair Deceit,
Who can even consecrate both Theft and Cheat.


But, (returning to our Argument) notwithstanding all this Analogy between the
Pencil Draughts and the Poet's; yet there is one infinite distinction between
the Air of reality on the one side and the other. For in a Draught of Pencil
Painting, that Air is the whole Perfection of the Piece. A single Rose, a half
Face, the least piece of Life, nay an AEsop or a Cripple, even Deformity it
self, well performed, shall carry an Excellence; and consequently this Air of
Reality give, the whole Delight. But in the Dramatick Painting, that Air is
only the Handmaid to our delight, only the Light to set off the Picture. It Is
the Charms and Beauties of the Object Painted, not the Painting it self that
gives the complete satisfaction and pleasure. Here therefore Mr. Collier has
laid a little too much stress upon his Air of Reality (the Foundation of his
Unity Rules;) as if the Entertainment of the Stage lay only in the well
performance in that point, when in has a prospect infinitely beyond it.

Now therefore, as the Painter is not so much to please himself, but him that
buys the Picture; so (to leave the Allegory and come closer to the point,) we
must examine what sort of Dramatick Entertainment will please an English
Audience, and that will show us how far his Unity Rules will bear in England,
and consequently settle the whole Controversy between us.

Here the shortest way to tell you what will please an English Audience, I
think, is to look back and see what has pleased them. And here let us first
take a view of our best English Tragedies, as our Hamlet, Mackbeth, Julius
Caesar, Oedipus, Alexander, Timon of Athens, Moor of Venice, and all the rest
of our most shining Pieces. All these, and the Rest of their Honorable
Brethren, are so far from pent up in Corneilles narrower Unity Rules, viz. the
Business of the Play confined to no longer Time then it takes up in the
Playing; or his largest Compass of 24 Hours; that nothing is so ridiculous as
to pretend to it. -- The Subjects of our English Tragedies are generally the
whole Revolutions of Governments, States or Families, or those great
Transactions; that our Genius of Stage-poetry can no more reach the Heights
that can please our Audience, under his Unity Shackles, then an Eagle can soar
in a Hen-coop. If the French can content themselves with the sweets of a single
Rose-bed; and nothing less then the whole Garden, and the Field round it, will
satisfy the English; every Man as he likes: Corneille may reign Master of his
own Revels; but he is neither a Rule-maker nor a Play-maker for our Stage. And
the Reason is plain: For as Delight is the great End of Playing, and those
narrow Stage-restrictions of Corneille destroy that Delight, by curtailing that
Variety that should give it us; every such Rule therefore is Nonsense and
Contradiction in its very Foundation. Even an Established Law, when it destroys
its own Preamble, and the Benefits designed by it, becomes void and null in it
self.

It Is true, I allow thus far, That it ought to be the chief care of the Poet,
to confine himself into as narrow a Compass as he can, without any particular
stint, in the two First Unities of Time and Place; for which end he must
observe two Things. First upon occasion (suppose in such a Subject as Mackbeth)
he ought to falsify even History it self. For the Foundation of that Play in
the Chronicles, was the Action of 25 Years: But in the Play we may suppose it
begun and finished in one third of so many Months. Young Malcom and Donalbain,
the Sons of Duncomb, are but Children at the Murder of their Father, and such
they return with the Forces from England to revenge his Death: whereas in the
true Historick Length they must have set out Children and returned Men.
Secondly, the length of Time, and distance of Place required in the Action,
ought to be never pointed at, nor hinted in the Play. For example, neither
Malcomb nor Donalbain must tell us, how long they have been in England to raise
those Forces, nor how long those Forces have been Marching into Scotland; nor
Mackbeth how far Schone and Dunsinane lay asunder, etc. By this means the
Audience, who come both willing and prepared to be deceived, (populus vult
decipi, etc.) and indulge their own Delusion, can pass over a considerable
distance both of Time and Place unheeded and unminded, if they are not
purposely thrown too openly in their way, to stumble at. Thus Hamlet, Julius
Caesar and those Historick Plays shall pass glibly; when the Audience shall be
almost quite shockt at such a Play as Henry the 8th. or the Duchess of Malfey.
And why, because here is a Marriage and the Birth of a Child, possibly in two
Acts; which points so directly to Ten Months length of time, that the Play has
very little Air of Reality, and appears too much unnatural. In this case
therefore it is the Art of the Poet to show all the Peacocks Train, but as
little as possible of her Foot.

And as to the second Unity of Place. Here our Audience expect a little
Variety, viz. some change of Scene. To continue it all on one spot of Ground,
in one Chamber or Room, would rather disgust then please: And an Author that
toyls for any such difficiles Nugae, such an overcurious Unity, only labors
to be dull; and deserves a success accordingly.

Now for these two Unities in our Comedies. Though that Inferior Walk of Fable
may come into a little narrower enclosure of Time and Place then Tragedy;
however we rarely meet with a good Comedy-plot all fairly lodged under one
single Roof, and dancing within the Circle of twenty four Hours; much less in
the Acting Time of the Play. It Is true we have an Adventure of Five Hours in
some Quondam Repu

(...) scribble of small Reputation, that possibly have crampt themselves into
much the same Circumference; and the Authors perhaps not a little Vain in the
wrong place; and challenging a Merit for even just nothing. However the general
Cast of all our best Comedies take a great deal larger liberty then these
precise Limitations, and lose little or no Air of their Reality by that
Freedom. However our Audience have naturally such a Dispensing Goodness, in
relation to these Tyrannick Rules, that they are never for tying up good Wit
and good Plot to so short a Teddar, as to pinch and starve them. And thus in
the case of the Relapse, our Audience are so far from angry at Lord Foppingtons
or Young Fashion's Travels to Sir Tunbelly's, that they rather wish 'em a good
Journey, and find the whole Entertainment there worth fifty Miles Ramble for;
and their own Diversion not at all too dear bought, for being so far fetched.

To come to our last Unity of Action. Here both Corneille and his Voucher, are
both as downright dull, and as seriously impertinent, (as to our Stage
Regulation) as their worst Enemies could wish 'em. The contriving the chief
Business of our Plays single, is so nauseous to an English Audience, that they
have almost peuk'd at a very good Dish for no other Fault. For example Mr.
Gildon's Phaeton, that almost sunk under that only Disrelish. On the contrary
here must be Under-plots, and considerable ones too, possibly big enough to
justle the Upper-plot, to support a good English Play; nay though the
Under-plots do not much fight under the great General, and consequently the
Play splits and the Poem is double, as Mr. Collier calls it; yet this instead
of weakening the Contrivance or Diluting our Pleasure, shall rather strengthen
the one, and double the other. For instance in such a Play as the Spanish
Friar. Here Is Gomez, Elvira and Father Dominick, etc. so far from marching
under the Bannors of Torrismond or Leonora, that it is enough they are Subjects
of the same Government, and Denizens within the same City Walls, to recommend
them to so considerable an underwalk in the same Play. And though as Mr.
Collier very fancifully observes. This strangeness of Persons, distinct
Company, and Inconnexion of Affairs, destroys the Unity of the Poem. And that
therefore the Contrivance is just as wise as it would be to cut a Diamond into
two. Increasing the Number, abates the Value, and by making it more, you make
it less. Yet suppose the Audience in the same Play of the Spanish Friar,
instead of Fancying Mr. Dryden has cut one Diamond into two, should be rather
of the Opinion, that he has joined two Diamonds together, and so gives us a
Locket, instead of a single Jewel; and consequently both the Luster and Value
increased; how will this Diamond-splitter get himself off? And will not the
World be apt to think him as indifferent a Lapidary as he is a Critic?

Now, Reader, as I have here stated the whole Prowess of Mr. Collier, and
mustered all his Forces against the Relapse (his Batteries of Immorality and
Profaness against it only excepted; and upon that Subject the Ingenious Author
has taken up a much abler Pen of his own:) so I hope I have done him all this
public Right, as to inform the World, that he never deviates from himself. His
Divinity Lectures and his Critic ones, are spoken with the same Oraculous
Eloquence: He keeps up to his Principles, and lapses into no more Intemperance
of Reason in the one then the other.

But some untoward Reflections I cannot forbear, viz. upon Mr. Collier's so
extraordinary Dudgeon against that Play. Has the Author sinned more then any of
his other prosane Brothers of the Quill, that the Divine Spirit of Mr. Collier,
Tantae animis coelestibus Irae, swells so very high against him? Or has this
singular Critic, in all this direct Contradiction to the whole Opinion of the
Town, concerning the Relapse, either the same value of his own Judgment, as the
Philosopher at his Morality Lecture had of Plato's, viz. Plato est mihi pro
omnibus: And consequently his own single dissenting Authority out-weighs all
their whole United Favor to that Play? Or rather (now I fancy I have hit it)
as he has all along endeavored through his Learned View, etc. to prove the
whole Audience wanted their Christian Senses about them, when they can relish
the present Profaness and Debauchery of the Stage; so he is resolved to deny 'em
their Common Senses too, when they can hug so Monstrous a Darling as the
Relapse.

Having in my first Part of my Review, already discharged a great Load of some
of the most Capital Blasphemies from King Arthur, Amphytrion, etc. I should
proceed in clearing some more of the Inferior Rubbish of that kind from the
Stage. But as a great part of that work has been done to my hands, by the
Ingenious Author of the Relapse; I shall rather only make some general
Observations of that part of Mr. Colliers Remarks. -- Here I must acknowledge
there is some looser expressions of that kind that may admit of Censure and
Correction; yet Mr. Collier's Charge against them is too vehemently aggravated
with too Remote and Uncharitable Misrepresentations. Besides all those too
loose or Libertine Expressions are charged as the private Sense of the Author,
when a great many of them are only the Language of the Libertine Characters
that speak them. For Instance the Lord Foppington says, Sunday is a vile Day, I
must confess; a Man must have little to do at Church that can give an account
of the Sermon. Is this any laughing at the Public Solemnities of Religion, as
if 'twas a ridiculous piece of Ignorance to pretend to the Worship of God? Does
this Expression of Lord Foppington amount to any more, then that he has no
kindness for Sundays, because they baulk his Course of Pleasures; and that if
he goes to Church it is not to mind the Sermon, but to Ogle the Ladies? And is
this answer to Amanda any thing but what the Audience would expect from a Fop
of his Vanity? And what the Author therefore has but honestly put into his
Mouth? And is it for that Reason the Sense of the Author himself?

The Fool in the Psalmist, says in his Heart, there is no God; but I hope Mr.
Collier will not tell us the Psalmist himself says so. If the Poet was
accountable for every Excursion, Levity, Looseness or Atheism it self from every
Character in his Play, the Author of the Libertine Destroyed, if he were alive,
would have a long Black Scroll to answer for; in his Don John and his two
wicked Companions: at least if Mr. Collier had the handling of him.

But granting the Poets have Launched a little too boldly, and have put the
Libertine Language in the wrong Mouths; yet still Mr. Collier has made but a
very lame Collection of them; when the greater part of his Quotations have so
little shadow of offense, that nothing but Mr. Colliers Magnifying-glass can
discover them.

For Instance,

Sir Sampson, in Love for Love says, Nature has been provident only to Bears
and Spiders. This (says Mr. Collier) is the Authors Paraphrase on the 139th
Psalm. And thus he gives God thanks for the Advantage of his Being. The Play
advances from one Wickedness to another, etc.

Could any Interpreter but himself have made this Gloss upon that poor Text? or
who but the bold Mr. Collier durst have brought God himself upon the Stage,
from so Innocent an Expression? But Mr. Collier's Readers are desired not to be
over-surpriz'd at so many Visionary Profanations and Blasphemies as he will meet
with through that Learned Author. For to tell you the Truth, the Arguing part
is not so much his Business, as the Conjuring. His Work is not so much to find
the Devils upon the Stage, as to raise 'em there.

In the Fourth Act of Don Sebastian, Mustapha Dates his Exaltation to Tumult
from the second Night of the Month Abib. Thus you have the Holy Text abused by
Capt. Tom, and the Bible torn by the Rabble. The design of this Liberty I cannot
understand, unless it be to make Mustapha as considerable as Moses, and the
prevalence of a Tumult as much a Miracle, as the Deliverance out of Egypt.

Here Mustapha, a Moor of Barbary, for nothing but speaking a word in his own
Language, and calling the Month Abib in its proper Name, because forsooth that
Month is mentioned in Scripture, is therefore Tearing of Bibles, setting up new
Prophets equaling Moses, and Bantering of Miracles. Risum teneatis Amici!


If every Word in the Bible, upon its admission into Holy Writ, is so exalted
and incorporated into the Divinity, that it must never descend into the World
again, nor enter profane Lips or Humane Conversation, under the praemunire of
Irreligion or Blasphemy; at this rate a Man must have a care how he sends for
his Cloak, or a Scholar for his Books, especially upon a Stage, for fear of
Burlesquing of Scripture, Bantering of Apostles, and even profaning the very
Gospel it self; and Why? Does not St. Paul in his Divine Writ, desire Timothy
to bring him his Cloak his Books and his Parchments?

Well, to show my Reader that Mr. Collier is not the only Muster-Master General
of the Black List of the Stage Blasphemies. I durst lay him a Wager, that I Will
cull him a whole Set of them, out of the poor Innocent Sir Martin Marral, as
topping ones as the very biggest in his whole Collection, and all founded upon
as Natural a Construction, etc. And possibly in so doing, I may give my Reader
a little clearer Light into the Strength and Dint of Mr. Collier's Eloquent
Reasoning upon that Subject.

To begin therefore at the lower Form, and so rise Gradatim. Warner says of Sir
Martin. His Follies are like a Sore in a Surfeited Horse: Cure it in one place,
and it will break out in another. Is not this plain Burlesque upon Holy
Scripture, and a profane Ralley upon the Divine Solomon himself? For does not
he tell us, Bray a Fool in a Mortar, yet his foolishness will not depart from
him. And though Mr. Dryden, for his incurable Fool, does not borrow the Words, he
borrows the plain Sense from Solomon; and his disguising the Language, (to
speak like Mr. Collier) is too thin a Screen to cover the profanation.

Sir Martin. I am resolved to Kill my self.


Warner. You are Master of your own Body.


Sir Martin. Will you let me damn my Soul?


Warner. At your pleasure, as the Devil and you can agree about it.


What, does this Author make a Jest of Damnation? The most serious
Consideration of Death and Eternity thus trifled with? Is there no Diversion
without insulting the God that made us, the Goodness that would save us, and
the Power that can Damn us? page 95. I cannot forbear expressing my self with
some warmth under these provocations; what Christian can be unconcerned at such
Intolerable Abuses? page 80.

Lord Dartmouth to Mrs. Christian. Pretty Innocence! let me sit nearer to you,
you don't understand what Love I bear you; I vow it is so pure, my Soul's not
sullied with one spot of Sin. Were you a Daughter or a Sister to me, with a
more Holy Flame I could not Burn.


How now! What is this Hypocrite Libertine, in seducing his Young Mrs. Courting
her in the very Language of Divine Inspiration? For who can burn with Holy
Flames, but Saints, Confessors and Martyrs? Nay does not the Divine Spouse, the
very Type of our Savior, in the Canticles, all along burn with Holy Flames?

What a spite have these Men to the God that Made them, and the Savior that
Redeemed them? How do they Rebel upon his Bounty, and attack him with his own
Reason? These Giants in wickedness, how would they Ravage with a Stature
proportionable? They that can swagger in Impotence, and Blaspheme upon a
Molehill! What would they do, if they had strength to their good Will?

Sir Martin to Warner. Well well, I am a Fool! but what am I the nearer for
being one?


Warner. Oh, yes; a great deal the nearer: For now Fortune is bound to provide
for you, as Hospitals are Built for Lame People that cannot help themselves.


What does this Author mean by Fortune? Is not this spoken by the principal
Character, the only Man of Sense in the Play? And coming from the Mouth of a
Christian; consequently, here are no Pagan Divinities in the Scheme (page 83)
Fortune is no Goddess in the Christian Theology, it is the Divine Providence
alone, is the Dispenser of our Humane Blessings. So that all the Atheistick
Raillery must point upon the true God. Here Profaness is shut out from Defense,
and lies open without Color or Evasion: For is not here under the Notion or
Name of Fortune, even Divine Providence, and what is that but G -- himself, (Oh
the very Essence and Spirit of Blasphemy!) brought in upon the most ridiculous
Occasion? viz. to provide for a Fool? Nay, he is bound, tied, obliged; it is no
less then his very Duty to provide for him. Oh Execrable, Execrable! It Is too
hideous to lie upon Paper.

Nay the latter half of the Diabolical Sentence savours almost as rank of the
Cloven-Foot, as the beginning. For is not here a Sarcastical squint upon
Hospitals? And pray what are Hospitals, but the most Religious Foundations of
Charity; and possibly the most shining Structures of Christianity! Let your
Light so shine, that Men may see your good Works, and Glorify your Father
which is in Heaven. Besides are not those Hospitals generally of Royal
Foundation? And therefore does not this Scurrilous Scribler rally even upon
Crown'd-Heads themselves? Nay does not One of those Hospitals stand upon a
Protestant Foundation, Raised by the Pious Young Edward? And dare this Impudent
Banterer pass his scoffing Jests upon the very Reformation? In short, he begins
his most audacious Profaness upon the Majesty of Heaven, and ends it upon the
Majesty of Kings.

Warner tells Sir Martin, That his Mistress is to be Married in Private, to
save the Effusion of Christian Money. What! Is the Title of Christian, the very
Badg of our Faith, and Seal of our Baptism, given to that filthy Idol Money?
Are we setting up the Old Golden Calf, and displaying the very Bannor of our
Salvation before him? The design of this Liberty I cannot understand, unless it
be the making a God of Mammon, the Chests of Old Moody the Shrine of the Deity,
and the squandering the least Relic from so Sacred a Divinity, as much as the
Effusion of the whole Blood of the Martyrs. And all this in a Christian
Country, in a Reformed Church; and in the Face of Authority? Well I perceive
the Devil was a Saint in his Oracles, to what he is in his Plays. His
Blasphemies are as much improved as his Style; and one would think the Muse
were Legion.

Lady Dupe (speaking of Mrs. Christian, whom my Lord Dartmouth had Debauched)
Did your Lordship win her soon?


Lord. No Madam, but with great Difficulty.


Lady Dupe. I am glad on it. It shows the Girl had some Religion in her.


Religion! What in playing the Whore! Is not Religion the whole Duty of Man,
the whole Basis of Christianity, and the very Key to Heaven? And is this Author
therefore making a Saint of a Dalilah, turning Wantonness into Piety, Lewdness
into Devotion, etc.

This is plain Blasphemy within the Law, comes as it were from the
Pandaemonium, and almost smells of Fire and Brimstone. This is an Eruption of
Hell with a Witness; I almost wonder the Sun, and turned the Air to Plague and
Poison!

These are outrageous Provocations, enough to arm all Nature in Revenge; to
exhaust the Judgments of Heaven, and sink the Island in the Sea!

I could run on with this Spiritual Cant, (for that is the honestest Name I can
here give it) and collect you a whole Volume of this kind of Jargon; but this
Sample will suffice, to show you how easy it is to extract Blasphemy from Mr.
Collier's Limbeck. And here I Will positively (all jesting laid aside) justify,
That these Quotations from honest Sir Martin, have as solid a Foundation for
all the foregoing blasphemous Constructions; and every Inference I have here
made is as Genuine, as above two thirds of Mr. Collier's whole Collection upon
that Topic. Now, if this be really the whole Dint of his Constructive
Reasoning, and consequenrly there is nothing here quoted, or harangued, but what
Mr. Collier might honestly father; I would ask any rational Man, where lies the
Blasphemy in the Text, or the Comment; and, Who Is the Blasphemer, the Poet, or
the Collier? And thus, as Mr. Collier's Top-Eloquence and, Reasoning, stands
upon this crazed Basis, Is it not time to wish him clean Straw, a dark Room,
and good Nursery, for his Recovery?

But to make a littler farther Answer to the unreasonable Offense Mr. Collier
has taken against the Stage upon the profane Account; we shall give one
remarkable Evidence, That Profaness, Irreligion, or Irreverence to God, or his
Divine Word, or any Expressions tending to Blasphemy, (however several may be
misrepresented such, more than really so) are not wilfully the Stages Fault.
For it has been a customary Practice, more especially of late, and which has
gained the very Force of a Law, upon the English Stage; not only to avoid the
irreverent, or idle using of the Name of God, but even not to use it at all.
For Instance, in all our Plays that are founded upon a Chistian Story; in all
the deepest Distresses of Tragedy, where it is highly natural, and even as
reasonable, (and therefore more Pardonable) for the suffering Characters to
start into any Invocation, or other Mention, of Heaven; the Language of that
kind, speaks always in the Heathen Dialect: For either Fate, Stars, Destiny; or
otherwise, Gods, Powers, Deityes, Immortalls, all in the plural Number, and
consequently Heaven and Providence upon the same Heathen Basis, are
promiscuously used upon all Occasions. And thus we break the very Unity of the
Stage, in bringing the old Heathen Theology, to speak English in our own Modern
Subjects, on purpose to give no shadow of Offense to the Christian Religion,
nor to use that Great Name upon a Fictitious Occasion. It Is true the Name of
God may sometimes but rarely be used, as for instance by Cardinal Woolsey after
his disgrace, in the Play of Henry the Eighth. Had I but served my God with
half that Zeal
I served my King, he would not in my Age
Have left me Naked to my Enemies.


But here, both the Solemness of the Occasion, and these the Express Words of
Woolsey, taken from the Chronicle, excuse this Liberty. But otherwise even in
our Comedies, we Write and Speak all upon the Heathen Scheme of Divinity; as
Philocles in the Maiden Queen. So when it Thunders,
Men reverently quit the open Air,
Because the angry Gods are then abroad.


To answer a little farther to the Dangerous Impressions upon the Affections,
that both the primitive Fathers, and Mr. Collier seem to fear from the Stage, I
have this to urge. -- If it be Lawful to read a Profane History either True or
Romantic; it is equally, if not more Lawful, to hear that Truth or Romance
digested into a Drama, and personally represented on the Stage: And for these
Reasons.

But before I proceed, I fancy Mr. Collier will assent with me; That both
History and Romance are lawful to be read; I am sure he seems to be strongly of
that Opinion in his Introduction to his Remarks upon Don Quixot, where he tells
us, This Poet, (meaning Mr. Durfey) writes from the Romance of an ingenious
Author: By this means his Sense and Characters are cut out to his Hand. He has
wisely planted himself upon the Shoulders of a Giant; but whether his
Discoveries answer the Advantages of his standing, the Reader must judge.

This high Encomium upon the Author of the Romance of Don Quixot, seems in some
measure to applaud, or at least justify the composure it self: And if Fiction,
even in its lowest Class, viz. in that Mock Romance, may bear so fair Character
from Mr. Collier's own Acknowledgment; sure we may conclude, that History, and
the higher Rank of Fiction, may come within the pale of Licenceable and Lawful.

To proceed then with my Argument.

What is History or Romance, but the Relation of Human Actions, Passions, and
Conversation? And that Relation Narratively, or Dramatically set forth, differs
only in the Modus and Form, not Substance: Thus, whether I read or hear a
History or Romance read to me, and consequently what is spoken or delivered to
me in the single Narration one way, from one Mouth; or in the Theatrick
Representation another way, from twenty Mouths; still the difference lies only
in the Form and Manner of the Conveyance of that Truth or Fiction to my Ear,
Apprehension and Affections, and not in the Truth or Fiction it self: So that
if the Stage be any ways Dangerous or Offensive, that Offense and Danger lies
not in the Play or Subject of it, but the bare playing of it, as it is set
forth upon our Stages.

What then, so extraordinary does the playing it self perform? Does it imprint
the subject of the History, or Fiction, too lively in the Fancy, more than the
bare Reading it can do; and consequently leaves too passionate a Fondness
behind it, for any of the Characters represented in the Play? No, quite
contrary. For he that Reads a History, or Romance, if a sensible Reader, raises
in his own Fancy some Idea of this or that Hero or Heroine, or perhaps
Libertine or Lover, which he shapes to himself more or less lovely; chiefly
from the personal Description of the Character, the Bravery, the Adventures,
and Distresses, etc. which he reads in the History; and partly from his own
Humor or Inclinations which possibly may recommend one particular Character,
more to his Favor then another. The personal Idea of this Historical or
Romantic Favorite, he carries with him from his Closet to his Bed, and can
rise with it to morrow: For as it is a Form of his own Creation, his Scene of
Fancy gives it an Air of Truth and Life.

But when you see the Hero or Heroine, or any other Darling in a Play, it is in
the person of the Actour or Actress. And though this Actour or Actress possibly
by their Meins, their Gectures and Actions, for the time they are playing, may
transport you into as many Raptures of Tenderness, Admiration, or what not, as
the Darling in the History or Romance; yet here when the Play's done, the Charm
is ended. No sooner is the Curtain fallen, but both the Hero and the Heroine are
no more to you, than the Betterton and Barry. You carry away the pleasure
indeed of knowing you have been wittily cheated for two hours and a half. But
all your whole Concern for 'em, even those most lasting Impressions, viz. of
Pity and Compassion, are now all over: For you are cheated no longer. And all
for this plain reason, viz. you want that darling personal Idea, which the
Reading only can give you, not the Playing. It Is true, you will say, the seeing a
Play may raise an Affection in us for the Virtues, Honor or Bravery, or
possibly for some worse Qualification in some darling Character in a Play,
abstracted from the Person in the Play, viz. the Comedian that presents it:
However the History or Romance does all this, rather more then the Drama; for
much the same reason, as Precept alone is not so prevalent as Precept and
Example together, viz. here is nothing but the Charms of the Argument in the
Play can leave an Impression; but in the History or Romance, here is not only
that Charm, but the personal Charms too in the forementioned Idea that make the
Impression, and thereby strengthen and heighten the forces of Reading, by a
more lasting Image of Reality above those of Actions,

Nay, Reading it self gives us a kind of Theatrical Representation of the whole
subject we read. The Reader can no sooner en^er into a great or passionate
Story, but he builds a Stage in his Fancy; he follows, in his Eye of
Imagination, both the Hero to the Field, and the Lover to the Bour, the Grott
or the Closet; and has not only the aforesaid personal Ideas, but also all the
whole Scene of Action painted in his Fancy. And a too dangerous Impression (if
such can be received from either of them) may as easily be taken from a
favorite Character upon this Stage, as the Playhouse one. So that if Reading
of Books, as it is plain, be equally, or rather more dangerous, than Acting of
Plays; when Mr. Collier shuts up the Play Houses, and denies the Ladies and
Gentlemen their Diversions on the Stage, he must dismantle their Closets too;
nay, he must carry his slaughtring hand too, from Drury Lane and little
Lincolns-Inn-Fields, to Paul's Churchyard and Little Britain; and make a more
general Conflagration amongst them, than that in St. Faith's Church under Paul's
after the Fire of London.

Amongst the many Scandals and Offenses this Author meets with from the Stage;
that of Swearing and Cursing upon it, is a very crying one. It Is true he does
not descend to particulars, and tell us which and what are those Oaths, so
frequently used in the Stage. However he quotes a Statute of the 3d of Iac.
Chap. 21. against Swearing in the Playhouse.

For the preventing, and avoiding of the great Abuse of the Holy Name of God in
Stage Plays, and Interludes, etc. Be it Enacted, etc. That if at any time,
after the end of this present Session, etc. Any Person, or Persons do, or
shall, in any Stage Plays, Interlude, show, etc. Iestingly or Profanely Speak,
or use the Holy Name of God or of Christ Jesus, or of the Holy Ghost, or of the
Trinity, which are not to be spoken, but with Fear and Reverence, shall forfeit
for every such Offense, etc. Ten Pounds.

By this Act not only direct Swearing, but all Invocation of the Name of God is
forbidden. It Is true, Here is Swearing by any or all of the Three Persons in
the Godhead, or Speaking, or using their Holy Names, viz. Iestingly or
Profanely, (so that Cardinal Woolsey's Naming of God, as mentioned before,
falls not under this Praemunire) is expressly fordidden by this Act. But all
this while, Cursing on the Stage is not at all forbid: Nor the General Rate of
Swearing upon the Stage; such as By this Hand. By my Hopes. By this good Light.
By Jove. By Heaven's; and a hundred more of them; which though of a Minor Class
are all Swearing.

Now as the whole Wisdom of the Nation in Parliament Assembled, at the making
this Act of Iac. were here sat in Consult for the Honor of God, and his Great
Name; and consequently had Profaness, Cursing, and Swearing immediately under
their pious Consideration; and the Playhouse in parlicular, in Examination
before them: Would not one reasonably imagine, that this great Council of the
Nation, would have made more thorough-work of the Reformation, that lay then
upon their Hands; and consequently, have laid some Mulct, or punishment,
though possibly but of Ten Groats, instead of Ten pounds, upon these Inferior
profanesses of the Stage, viz. If they had thought these Swearings, or the
Cursings, upon the Stage, had been Offensive to God, Good Manners or Religion?
All this, I say, might very Reasonably be supposed. But on the contrary, their
universal Silence in that point looks like a tacit Confession, that, here were
both King, Lords, (Spiritual and Temporal) and Commons, a whole Nation, all
possessed with a much more favorable Opinion of the Stage, than Mr. Collier;
and not such over-violent Censors of the Faults of it. At this rate a Timons of
Athens, with repeated Curses against all Mankind; nay, a raving Oedipus,
confounding the whole World, jumbling Earth and Heaven together; blotting out
Sun, Moon and Stars, and leaving the very Gods to Iustle in the Dark; would
have found more Mercy at the Tribunal of a whole Kingdom, then from one Judge
Collier upon the Bench against them.

Another Objection he makes against Swearing in the Playhouse, is this:
Besides that it is an ungentlemanly, as well as unchristian Practice, the Ladies
make a considerable part of the Audience. And Swearing before Women is reckoned
a Breach of Good Behavior; and therefore a civil Atheist will forbear it.
Besides, Oaths are a boisterous and tempestuous sort of a Conversation, etc. A
Woman will start at a Soldier's Oath, almost as much as at the Report of his
Pistol, etc.

I doubt not but a Soldierly Oath may be a little terrible to the Fair Sex: But
a Lover's Oath, I fancy, is not altogether so dreadful to 'em: And it is that
sort of Swearing reigns most upon the Stage. By those fair Eyes; and, By those
sweet Charms, and Twenty others of the same kind, are Oaths that carry not
altogether so much Thunder in 'em, as a Volly from the Black-Guard: And,
possibly, the Discharge of one of those Oaths would scarce fright the Ladies,
in their Night-Gowns, and their Bed-Chambers. Nay, if the Feminine Courage
dares not stand a greater Shock than this, they must have a Care how they open
their dear Cowley, for fear of being frighted there too. By Heavens! I Will
boldly tell her, that it is she:
For, why should she ashamed, or angry be,
To be beloved by me?


Another great, or rather greatest Transgression of the Stage, is, the Abuse of
the Clergy: Hinc illoe lachrimoe. Ay, it is this Mortal Crime that pulls down
all the Vengeance; and, possibly, it is from hence the mourning Stage lies under
the heaviest Weight of this Canonical Author's Displeasure. All the rest of the
Arbitrary Licentiousness of the Stage, perhaps had never provoked all this
Spiritual Indignation, had it not touched that Maudlin.

This Author, in his Voluminous Chapter upon that Head, gives us a long and
laborious Declamation upon the Honor of the Priestood. He sets out their whole
untainted Heraldry at full View; and bids the In

(...) have a care how they dare presume to find a Blot in so fair a Scutcheon.
Here Mr. Collier lays a very loud Charge against the Stage, for this particular
Profanation: But, methinks, he is hard put to it for Evidence and Proof to
support the Indictment, when the first Witness he brings in is Father Dominick,
in the Spanish Friar. This Dominick is made (he tells you) a Pimp for Lorenzo:
He is called a Parcel of Holy Guts and Garbage; and said to have Room in his
Belly for his Church-Steeple. Methinks, I say, it looks a little odly, that Mr.
Collier, to prove these Stage-Abuses of the Clergy upon us, should be forced to
run to Rome for the Scandal; viz. in the Character of a Father Dominick. But,
perhaps, his own particular Tenderness for the Ecclesiastics of that Cloth,
may make him resent a Dramatical Stain in a Hood and a Cowle, as a more Capital
Abuse of the Clergy, than one in a Scarf and Cassock.

But if our English Stage has now and then a little exposed some of the
Tattered and Daggl'd Gowns, etc. methinks, the Author of the Persuasive to
Consideration, that falls himself so heavy, both upon the Head and Body of the
Church, should not be so severe upon the Stage, for only rallying some part of
the Tail of it. Nay, it is yet a little more strange, that this Author should
quarrel with the Stage for this Boldness with the Clergy, when he himself has
furnished it with one of the most Divertive Characters for a Comedy; and one
that would bear as just and as honest a Satyr, as any that ever appeared upon
it: For his very Remarks upon the Relapse, as he has managed them, abstracted
from the rest of Mr. Collier's Singularities, would supply a Subject even for a
whole Farce; and carry as fair a Title, called, The Parson turned Critic, as
ever graced a Playhouse-Bill. But, to show this Divine Author, that the
Stage-Spirit of Scandal is not so very rampant against the Clergy, I am
commissioned to tell him, that notwithstanding he has furnished them with so
copious, and so pregnant a Subject; yet still his Gown, even his quondam Gown,
shall protect him: Nay, the Play Houses are resolved to bear all the false and
malicious Insults and Barbarities he has heaped upon them, with that Return of
Meekness and Forgiveness; that Mr. Collier himself (if not past it) the very
Divine, may go to School to the Theater, to learn even Christianity from a
Playhouse Example, whilst the Stage shall preach to the Parson.

Next, For the Immoralities and Licentiousness of the Stage. Here I am sorry
Mr. Collier has any Occasion to find Offense; and more sorry that the Age has
corrupted the Stage; whilst the Effeminacy of the two last Reigns has both
furnished the Stage with so many Libertine Pictures, and indulged their
Reception.

I shall join farther with Mr. Collier, and heartily wish, that both the Levity
of Expression, and the too frequent Choice of Debauched Characters, in our
Comedies, were retrenched, and mended: That also the Prize in the Comedy might
be always given to some deserving Virtue that wins it; and consequently, our
Comedies, even Fiction it self, might be made more Instructive, by a Poetic
Justice, in rewarding and crowning the Virtuous Characters with the Success in
the Drama. I Will join with him farther, and acknowledge that he has given us one
very true Reason, why our Comedies are not so well furnished with that better
Choice of Virtuous Characters, as it is to be wished they were; and that is,
from the Laziness of the Authors. To fetch Diversion (as he says) from
Innocence, is no such easy matter; there is no succeeding in it, it may be, in
this Method, without Sweat and Drudging: Clean Wit, inoffensive Humor, and
handsome Contrivance require Time and Thought: And who would be at this Expense,
when the Purchase is so cheap another way.

This more innocent Model of Plays, I confess, would give both that greater
Luster to the Stage, and that fairer Reputation to the Authors, as were truly
worth the Poet's Sweating and Drudging for, as he calls it. But, all this
while, I hope Mr. Collier does not expect that All the Characters in the Comedy
should be Virtuous: A Composition of that kind cannot well be made; nor would
such a Composition truly reach the whole Instructive Ends of the Drama.
Contraria juxta se posita magis elucescunt, is a very great Maxim, The Foyl
sets off the Diamond. And that Foyl, I may venture to say, is wanted in the
Comedy, to make the Virtue shine the brighter. For Instance, in the Relapse;
There seems to be a Necessity of a Treacherous Berinthia, (even with her
loosest Arguments) to ensnare, and a Libertine Worthy to attack a Virtuous
Amanda. Virtue cannot very well be wrought up to any Dramatick Perfection, nor
sparkle with any considerable Brightness and Beauties, unless it stands a
Temptation, and surmounts it. We have a Proverbial Saying, that will hardly
allow that Woman to be truly chaste, that has never been tried. This I am sure,
the noblest Triumphs of Virtue are made by the Assaults it can resist and
conquer. Thus the Relapser's Amanda crowns her Character even with a double
Laurel; not only by Illustrating and (I may, not improperly, say) Aggrandizing
her own Invincible Virtue in the Assault she has repulsed; but likewise, in the
Conversion of her Assailing Libertine. It Is not supposed therefore that the
Dramatick Poet must be obliged to borrow his Characters of Virtue from Lazy
Cells, and Melancholy Cloisters; a Copy from a Hermit, or an Anchoret. No; His
Characters of Virtue must come forth into the gay World, with Levity, Vanity,
nay, Temptation it self, all round them. They must go to the Court, the Ball,
the Masque, the Musick-Houses, the Dancing-Schools, nay, to the very Profane
Play Houses themselves; (to speak in Mr. Collier's Dialect;) and yet come off
unconquered. These are the Virtues that, to be Instructive to an Audience, are
what should tread the Stage.

And consequently, if our Poets will set forth such Virtue, they must find her
all this Worldly Conversation, and furnish the Drama accordingly.

But now to come to a Conclusion, and sum the whole Merits of his View of the
Stage, etc.

Considering the Weakness and Falsity of his greatest and most important
Arguments in that Piece. I may say, He Is the Counsel at the Bar, not the Judge
upon the Bench. All that bawling Eloquence pleads not for Truth, but Conquest;
and with the very same Triumph, both the Gown and the Long Robe, pride
themselves in their success. It Is he gains the Reputation and Applause of being
the Ablest Lawyer, that can carry the weakest Cause.

Oh Truth! Divine Truth! How beautiful would thou appear in thy native Glory,
naked! But when thy Orators have rigged thee out with all their false
Rhetoric, and a whole superfaetation of stretched Sense, racked Argument,
extorted Suggestions, and so much additional Fictions and Forgeries to fill up
thy spurious Train; what with the Paint, Patch, Plume, and all the false
Drapery about thee, they bring thee forth in all that pomp and magnificence,
when thou art least thy Self. And thus if all this Fucus, and all these gaudy
Trappings unhappily mislead the Weak, the Easy, and the Ignorant, the fond
Eyes, and captivated Hearts before thee; it is not thy own, but thy Iezabel
charms, that conquer them!

Here I must beg my Reader's pardon for speaking too much in the Style of Mr.
Collier, and running a little into Rapture upon this occasion. But to bring the
plain matter home to his own door, I do declare in all the Triumphs he has
gained by his View of the Stage, amongst all the Captives his Eloquence has
made him; the great Proselites to his Cause are not gained by the Truth, but by
the Falsehood, in that Treatise. For Instance, It Is not the setting out of the
Libertine, or Jilt, in our Comedies with a little too much free Air; or the
larding our Modern Plays with sometimes too much of the Smut, and double
Entendres, etc. And for the profane part, it is not Mr. Durfey' s Furniture of
Lucifer' s Kitchen; his Garbidge of Souls, nor Rashers of Fools, etc. nor his
profaning of Balaam' s Ass in his Epilogue, p. 199. nor Lady Froth' s making
Jehu a Hackney Coachman, p. 64. nor Sharper's making himself a Godfather to
Vain Love, vowing and promising in his Name, etc. p. 63. Nor Angelica's telling
Sir Sampson, that the strongest of his Name pulled an old house over his head;
nor Sancho's sending the Jew, his Father, to Abraham' s Bosom, p. 72. nor
Cynthia for saying Marriage makes a Man and Wife one Flesh, but leaves 'em two
Fools, p. 82. nor Fashion for kicking his Conscience down stairs, p. 79, etc.
nor Scandal, for saying, That Solomon was a wise Man, for his great Judgment in
Astrology.

It Is not these, nor all the rest of those minor Brethren in Iniquity; No, not
with all Mr. Collier's perverse Discant upon them, that run down the Stage: But
the more blasphemous Execrations in King Arthur, and Absolon and Achitophel;
and that more prodigious mass of Blasphemy, Mr. Dryden's whole Play of
Amphitryon (as we have set forth in our first Part) and to all these, the
Fulminations of the Primitive Fathers, with their Seat of Infection, their
Chair of Pestilence, etc. (how foreign to his Cause, and how feeble their
Authority, we have already discoursed,) It Is upon this last Babel work, a pile
that almost reaches Heaven, that Mr. Collier gives the Stage the most mortal
Blow, and consequently gains all the aforesaid Proselites.

But the Reader is not to wonder that Falsehood is the great Charmer in that
Treatise; for, to tell you the Truth, 'twas both founded in Falsehood, and
stands supported by it. For though Religion and Reformation was the pretense;
instead of a Cole from the Altar to inspire the Zeal, here was a warmer Dulcis
Odor, fifty Guinea's Copy-money that animated the Cause. And though, God
forbid, I should infer, That the Labors either of Learning Piety should go
unrewarded; yet, to confirm my Assertion, that Interest was here the Governing
Ascendant: Piety never falsifies, nor prevaricates: He had never built so
malicious, and sophistical a Fabric, upon so holy a Ground, had Conscience
laid the Corner stone. But as that Inferior first Mover set him at work, so he
managed with Tools accordingly. Like the Lawyer at the Bar, as I said before,
the Fee was large, and Pleadings must deserve it. And therefore as nothing but
a total Overthrow of the Stage could make it so selling a Copy, and
consequently afford the Author that Encouragement; for gaining that point, he
lay under the necessity not only of Sophistry, Misconstruction, etc. stretching
every least Peccadilio more unmercifully, than a Dwarf in a Procrustes Bed, but
even of dragging in the Primtive Fathers; nay, the Apostles, and Gospel it self
rightor wrong, to do the last Execution.

'Twas thus this Dagon rose, and thus it gained the popular Knees that bend
before it; and indeed it is much such another Spirit of Falsehood, that gives it
Fame and Reputation: For it goes for Current Authority round the whole Town,
that Mr. Dryden himself had publicly declared it Unanswerable; and thanked Mr.
Collier for the just Correction he had given him; and that Mr. Congreve, and
some other great Authors, had made much the same Declaration; which is all so
notoriously False, so egregious a Lie, that Mr. Dryden particularly always
looked upon it as a pile of Malice, Illnature and Uncharitableness, and all
drawn upon the utmost Rack of Wit and Invention.

Thus Falsehood employed the Workman. Falsehood found the Materials. Falsehood
raised the Structure, and Falsehood upholds it.

To give my Reader a particular Instance, how far the Temptation of a Selling
Copy, even upon the most sacred and religious Subject, will prevail. Some Years
since was published a small Treatise, with the Imprimatur of Authority, called,
The Second Spira, being the Relation of a young Gentleman, the Son of a Person
of Quality, who died in Despair, December the 8th. 1692. containing the
Conferences of several Orthodox Divines, at several times, with the Particulars
of their Spiritual Arguments, Reasonings, Admonitions, together with all the
young Gentleman's Replies, his Execrations, Impenitence, Apostasy, and the
whole Narrative of his Blasphemies to his last Gasp. This Piece was compiled by
an Author as Ingenious as Mr. Collier, and that values himself as much upon his
Morals and Religion; the Bookseller as Eminent, as Wealthy, and as zealous a
Professor of Christianity, as most of the Trade. Of this Book several
Impressions, near 20 Thousand were sold. Several prefatory Advertisements were
printed, to support its Authority, and long and repeated Insinuations were
almost daily made by the Publisher for the same Assertion. And yet all this
while, there was not so much as one Syllable, Tittle, or Jota of Fact or Truth
in the whole History, but all pure Invention. Now though I dare not say with Mr.
Dryden, that Priests of all Religion are the same, yet I may venture to say,
that pious Craft in all Relgions is much the same; and Legends will creep into
all Churchs. I do not urge this as a Parallel to Mr. Collier's view of the
Stage. His Labors upon that subject, I confess, are not all legend; I
acknowledge his view has some matter of Truth in it; but at the same time its
Veracity a little agrees with the Description of Dr. Oats his Plot, in Absalom
and Achitophel. Some Truth there was, but brewed and dashed with Lies,
To please the Fools, and puzle all the Wise.


And here I must give Mr. Collier the Honor of leading a small Squadron of
Truths to attack the Stage; but like Dr. Oats too, with a whole Legion of
Pilgrims and Black Bills to back them.

And here again I must make one serious Reflection, to think how Truth is the
best Mistress, but worst served. For that Learning and Ingenuity like Mr.
Colliers, that is most able to do her the best and honourablest Service, makes
her the worst and ignoblest Servant. And thus I may join with Lactantius (only
changing one word,) The Rule is, the more Rhetoric, the more Mischief, and the
best Penmen are the worst Commonwealthsmen. For the Harmony and Ornament
serves only to recommend the Argument, and fortify the Charm.

FINIS.

