AN APPEAL TO Scripture and Antiquity, In the Questions of 1. The Worship and
Invocation of Saints and Angels. 2. The Worship of Images. 3. Justification by
and Merit of good Works. 4. Purgatory. 5. Real presence and Half-Communion.
Against the ROMANISTS.

By H. FERN D.D. late Bishop of CHESTER.

LONDON, Printed for R. Royston, Bookseller to His most Sacred MAJESTY, 1665.

THE PREFACE.
BEing both provoked and invited to make some Answer to Mr. Spencer's Book of
Scriptures Mistaken, I assayed to do it as briefly as I could; and it was
needful I should confine my self to the Order, he observed, and to the places
of Scripture, he examined as urged by Protestants against the Romish Doctrine
and Practice, and to those he alleges as witnessing for it.

But seeing he boasts in his Preface, that he will deal with the Protestants,
and beat them at their own Weapon, Scripture: and so comes not to the trial of
Antiquity, which he pretends, and with too much confidence presumes to be their
own: therefore I shall add A Brief Survey of the Ancient Doctrine and Practice
of the Catholic Church, as to the points here Controverted; that it may
appear, how they are worsted there, what brags soever they make of Antiquity.

But it may be said, There are Bocks enough and too many: which do but continue
the Controversy, and keep the breach open; More need there is to endeavor
some closing, and to make offers of Agreement. True, if we could conceive any
hope of condescension on their parts, or perceive any intent of Peace in them,
whom we still find lying at the catch, and laying hold upon all advantages,
which may promote their cause with all sorts of people: into whose hands they
thrust such Books, as may render it more plausible, and into whose ears they
are continually whispering, what may represent the Protestant as guilty of
Schism, and Heresy: thereby enforcing us to break silence, and to inform our
People (if we will not have them seduced) of the cunning of our Adversaries, to
discover their Dawbings, and vain Pretenses, such as Mr. Spencer and others
sent over to the same purpose, do use for deceiving of the Unwary.

Peace among Christians, surely is the most beseeming, the most desirable Thing
in the world; and would be, considering how it now stands with the too much
divided Catholic Church, the greatest blessing; and we have been sufficiently
taught how to value it by the past and present distractions and differences
amongst us. But when we talk of Peace to them of Rome, they are ready to
reproach us with Physician heal thy self, make up your own breaches and
Divisions, before you speak of being received into the Unity of the Catholic
Church. Let them alone a while with their so much pretended unity: our first
care certainly is to make peace at home, and in the mean time (as we see it the
care and prudence of all States to guard the Borders against the Foreign and
Common Enemy) to fortify those Doctrines wherein the Parties dissenting do
agree, and are as within common bounds enclosed.

And blessed be God, we have a great expedient for the restoring of our Peace
by the return of our gracious Sovereign unto us; who is the true Defender of
the Faith, the great Example of Constancy in Religion, and of Clemency in
fogiving and forgetting injuries. And when we his Subjects, being assured of
the Truth and Religion which he defends, have also learned to obey by His
Example, and with mutual condescentions and endeavors of peace, to entertain
and embrace one another: then shall our hearts be better prepared with a
charitable compliance for the Adversary abroad, when soever he shall think it
convenient to admit thoughts of Peace, and shall seriously consider how we are
all bound to profess and believe One (not Roman, but Christian) Catholic
Church.

We cannot but be sensible, what hand they that style themselves Catholics,
have had in kindling this fire among us, and bringing fuel to it: and we would
have them (being so often convinced and told of it) sensible, how unchristian,
uncatholick a part it is; how contrary to the Peace of the Church.

But could they that are sent over amongst us to blow the coals, forget their
Instructions, and Vow of Obedience: and they that send them learn to value the
Peace of Christendom: yet what hope (may some ask) could there be of an Accord
in Doctrine? If we consider what passed in the Germain Colloquies, during the
Time of the Trent Council, and observe what condescension and moderation
appeared then, notwithstanding the intervention of so many Nuncio's from Rome,
and the so much boasted pretense of Infallibility in that Church: If also we
carefully look into their Controversie-Writers, and note what concessions they
sometimes make in the point, what mincings of the Romish doctrine, when they
are put to it: there may appear a possibility in the thing it self, if
peaceable men had the handling of it. But when we consider on the other hand,
how all those endeavors for Peace became Fruitless: and all the offers made at
Truth by moderate Men in that Council were silenced and rejected; and
notwithstanding all their mincings and concessions in those points, the
Doctrine and Practice of that Church goes as high as ever: We may imagine there
are some overruling points of State-doctrine, (of the Court rather then Church
of Rome) which command the Rest and forbid all condescension and moderation:
such at least, as may give us any hope of a tolerable agreement.

And thus it will be, what ever we endeavor, till order be taken with him,
that pretends to the Infallibility and exorbitant Power: of whom we may say in
this particular, as the Apostle does of that lawless person, 2 Thessalonians. 2.7. He
who now lets, will let, until he be taken out of the way: that is, until he
be reduced within the bounds of the Canons of the Catholic Church. A glorious
work for Christian Princes: a work of greatest concernment to the Peace of
Christendom.

But till that be done, I would commend those considerations following, to All,
that delight, or are inclined to be in the Communion of that Church, and in
subjection to that pretended infallible and all-powerful Head.

I. Why should they desire to be under a lawless boundless Power? under a Head
so notoriously perjured? If this seem harsh; let them seriously consider, what
they in reason and conscience find to excuse him from that charge, who binds
himself by Oath in the Conclave, and then in the Papal Chair holds himself
loose from what he swear to observe; who also swears to observe the Canons of
the Ancient General Councils, yet will not keep within the bounds, they have
set Him; but challenges and exercises an Universal Jurisdiction, to the
overthrow of that Government, which those Canons have fixed in the Way of the
Church.

II. Why they should so much desire to be of the Communion of that Church, which
(while the Court of Rome is suffered to desine all, to overruled all) is in so
dangerous a condition. This will appear, if they consider:

First, that through the pretended infallibility of their Head, they can have
no certain groundwork or Reason of their belief; but are in a way to lose all
true Faith. For let the Cardinal make the Proposition: If the Pope could Err
or turn Heretic, then would the Church be bound to this Absurdity or
inconveniency of taking Vice for Virtue, Error for Truth. (This he plainly
lays down in his 4. Book de Pontifice, and its good Doctrine in Italy and
Spain.) Then let the Gallican Church and more Moderate Papists make the
Assumption: But the Pope may turn Heretic; what can the Conclusion speak, but
the hazard of that Church, which will be under such a pretended infallible Head?

Secondly, That by being of that Communion they are taught to appropriate to
themselves the Name of Catholic: and thereby bound to an uncharitable
condemning of all other Christians, and to a necessity of proving many Novel
Errors, to be ancient Catholic Doctrine. We do not envy them, the Title of
Catholics, that they should enjoy it together withal other Chrictians, who
are baptized into the Catholic Faith, and do profess it without any
destructive Heresy; but the appropriating of that Title to themselves, (and
that in regard of those special superadded Articles of Faith, proper to that
Church) implies all other Christians to be no better then Heretics, and
excludes all conditions of Peace, unless they will come in, as the Israelites
to Naash, with their right eyes put out, 1 Samuel 10. Whereas upon due trial we
may confidently affirm, it will appear, that no Church of known and ancient
denomination, as Greek, Asian, African, British, does less deserve to be called
Catholic, or has more forfeited that Name: because none so much falsified her
trust; whether we consider the Errors entertained, or the Imposing them as
Catholic, and Christian Faith.

The three great concernments of Religion, and so of the Church are, the Faith
professed, the Worship practiced, the Sacraments administered: all which are
dangerously violated in that Church. For first, How have they kept the Faith
undefiled, (which the Athanasian Creed so severely enjoins) that have mixed it
with such New superadded Articles, and lay the foundation of their belief upon
the uncertain persuasion of a pretended Infallibility?

Secondly, The Worship of God is there violated by the performing it in an
unknown tongue; for without understanding the people cannot say Amen; The
prayer on their parts is but a sacrifice of fools, not a reasonable service.
Again, Violated in yielding to the Creature an undue religious service; as may
appear by what is said in the three first Chapters of this Book.

Lastly, Sacraments violated, by addition of New ones, and those properly so
called. A great invasion it is upon Gods property, if any man or Church hold
out that for the Sacramental Sign and Instrument of Grace, which God who is the
only Author of Grace, has not appointed to be so.

Again, upon that which our Savior did undoubtedly institute, a great invasion
is made, by first taking away the substance from the outward Elements, and then
taking away from the people half of that, which remains. Our Savior said,
Drink ye all of it, Mat. 26.27. The Church of Rome says Ye shall not all Drink
of it: Nay, None of you shall, but the Priest only.

Add to this, the Impossibility they put themselves upon (as I said) to prove
all their New Articles of belief (for which they will be the only Ca^holicks)
to be the Ancient Faith, and Catholic Doctrine of the Church. They will hardly
be brought to say, The Church may make New Articles of Faith: but rather, The
Church may declare, what was before but implicitly believed. This is true if
duly explained: yet will it not excuse the boldness of that Church. For when
the Church declares any thing as of Faith, which was not expressly taught
before, it is such a Truth, as was necessarily contained and couched in the
confessed Articles of the Creed, and by immediate consequence clearly thence
deduceable; as the Consubstantiality of the Son, declared against the Arrians:
the two Wills in Christ, against the Monothelites: the continuance of the
Humanity in its own nature and substance, against the Eutychians: This is that
which Vincentius says in his 32. chap. What else did the Church endeavor in
the Decrees of Councils, but that, what before was simply believed, might
afterward be more diligently and explicitly believed -- And to show that the
Articles of faith do not increase in Number, but in the dilatation of more
ample knowledge, He aptly uses the similitude of the several parts of the
Natural body, which are as many in a child as in a grown man; no addition made
of new parts; for that would render the body monstrous; but each part is
dilated and augmented by degrees. To this purpose he, in his 29. chap. When
therefore the Romanists can show their Novel Articles by immediate and
necessary consequence deduceable from the confessed Truths of that Creed, into
which we are baptized: then and not till then can we excuse this boldness in
adding to the Christian Faith, and this uncharitable Pride in boasting
themselves the only Catholics.

III. May they consider, how their Masters being engaged in such necessity of
making good the pretended Catholic Doctrine of that Church, are often forced
to wink at the light and go on blindfold.

Their Masters acknowledge, and so does their Trent Council, that the worship of
Saints and Angels, Invocation of them, Adoration of Images, is not commanded,
but commended as profitable. Why then should Scripture be so often alleged to
deceive the unwary? why are they retained as profitable, when Experience shows
what a scandal is thereby given to Jews and Turks? what offense to so many
Christians as protest against them? what a stumbling block to their own people,
exposed thereby to the danger of Idolatry?

They acknowledge, that our Savior instituted the Sacrament and administered it
in both kinds; and that it was so from the beginning received and practiced in
the whole Church, yet will not the Court of Rome suffer the people so to
receive it. And in their defense of this half Communion, they acknowledge, if
the Church alter any thing in or about the Sacraments, yet it must be Salva
illorum substantia, saving their substance, Council. Trid. ses. 21. c. 2. which
notwithstanding, they can take away the whole substance of the Elements, and
defraud the people of the half of what is left: and notwithstanding our
Saviors Institution, and the Custom of the whole Church for so many ages: This
custom must be held for a Law, which none may contrary: as that Council decrees
in the same chap.

They acknowledge, it is fit the people communicate with the Priest in every
Mass, i.e. they acknowledge it is fit there should be no private Masses, and
they wish it were so, and yet decree the contrary, cap. 6. de Missa. So they
acknowledge the Mass conteins (magnam populi eruditionem) great edification and
instruction for the people; yet decree it not expedient to have it (or the
Liturgy) in the popular or vulgar tongue, cap. 8. But if the Court of Rome had
seen it equally to their advantage, they could have held the people to that
which they ought, viz. the Communion, as well as keep all their Priests from
that, which they ought not, viz. Marriage.

They acknowledge that Justification precedes good Works. Sos. 6. c. 8. yet
deliver this doctrine (Justified by Works) grossly to the People; They know, how
it is to their advantage. And in the 16. chap. of that Session, They
acknowledge the grace of God for performance of the work, and his gracious
promise of the reward: yet decree, that good Works do truly Merit.

Add to this, their mincing of points of doctrine, when they are put to it. As
when the enquiry is driven home, what worship is due to Saints and Angels. What
Invocation to be used. What worship or adoration to be given to Images. We see
how they lessen it, and seem to be contented with very little, as we observe in
Mr. Spencers concessions upon those points: yet do they keep up the practice,
in the height and full extent, suffering (if not encouraging) the people to
perform it grossly and superstitiously: as they must needs do, being incapable
of such nice distinctions, as are used to excuse that worship.

So when they are put to it in the points of Satisfactions, Purgatory,
Indulgences, to show what is satisfied for, what is remitted, and consequently
what is granted in the Indulgence, and to what sort of Persons; they are forced
to bring it to such an uncertainty, and to so small a scantling, that the
people, if they knew it, would consider well what they laid out that way,
before they parted with it; but these points are so in gross propounded to the
people, that they have cause to think (as generally they do) they are by these
satisfactions and indulgences freed from any sin, and do escape thereby Hell
fire it self.

This which has been said, speaks concessions and yieldings on their part, and
shows a possibility of agreement, and that some fair way might be found for
some tolerable accord: did not filthy lucre, gotten by those points, and the
exorbitant greatness of Papal power obstruct it: the Court of Rome (as we see
in all the offers made for reformation) being always more sollicitous of
upholding it self, then of reforming the Church: of advancing its own
greatness, then of promoting the peace of Christendom.

To conclude. The peace of Christians, the agreement of the Roman and other
Churches is possible, if (...)e possible for the Pope to do his duty, or
Christian Princes, theirs: that is, if he would do the duty of a Bishop of
Rome, or prime Patriarch, the duty he is bound to, sworn to, in taking oath to
observe the Canons of the Ancient General Councils, which prescribe the bounds
of the Roman, and other Patriarchal Jurisdictions. But if he make light of this
and all other bonds of duty, why should it not be possible for Christian
Princes to do their duty in reducing him within those known and confessed
bounds, fixed by the Ancient Church?

In the mean time, let them cease to reproach us with Schism, till he return to
his station, where he may receive the obedience due to him by those Ancient
Canons: let them rather consider, whom they follow, in all his transgressions
and extravagances, thereby engaging themselves in his Schism against the whole
Catholic Church. And let them not please themselves with the specious Name of
Catholics, for holding such points of Difference from other Christians, as
will upon trial appear to be far from the Truth and soundness of Catholic
Doctrine. And to make this appear by the undeniable Rules of Christian verity,
Scripture, and Catholic Tradition, (as they are solidly set down by
Vincentius) is the scope and purpose of this ensuing Treatise. If any of their
Masters shall think fit to make any Reply, let him do it, not as one carping at
small things, and catching at seeming advantages: but as one really intending
the Manifestations of Truth, and the Expedients of Peace: the restoring of
which, throughout the Catholic Church, is the Prayer of

H. Fern.

The Points of Doctrine here Examined.
I. OF the worship of Saints and Angels. II. Of the Invocation of Saints and
Angels. III. Of the worship of Images. IV. Of Justification by Works. V. Of the
Merit of Good Works. VI. Of Purgatory. VII. Of Real Presence. VIII. Of
Communion under one kind.
An Answer to Mr. Spencers Book ENTITLED, SCRIPTURE MISTAKEN By the
Protestants.
CHAP. I. The first Point. Of the Worship of Saints and Angels.
THis Author first tells us, Introduction.
what the Council of Trent delivers touching the Worship and invocation of
Saints and Angels, not as Gods or Saviors, but as Creatures dependent on God
and Christ -- and that it is not commanded as necessary, but commended as
profitable -- and this, to disabuse vulgar Protestants, who think the Roman
Church teaches, it is as necessary to salvation, to invoke and worship the
Saints, as to invoke and worship Christ himself -- Page 3.4. The Council indeed
touches this point warily, and in general: which circumspection and cunning we
find used in most of the decrees; they best know wherefore. But Vulgar
Protestants are not abused, when they are told, that according to the practice
of that Church (if we look into the applications made to Saints and their
shrines, both for the forms and the frequency) there appears not much of that
dependency on Christ, but very much of an opinion (connived at, if not rather
cherished) among the Vulgar Papists, that it is as necessary and profitable, if
not more, to invoke and worship them, then Christ himself. But if they will
commend this as profitable, why did not the Council for the disabusing their
own people, condemn those unprofitable, poisonous forms of invocation yet
extant in their books, and used in their Churches? why has it not yet
anathematized that blasphemous Lady Psalter, and that horrid doctrine, broached
by Aquinas, and still maintained by most of this Authors so^iety, that the
Image is to be worshipped Greg. de Val. in Th^disput. vi. Qu. xi. punc^o. 6.
Azor. Instit. Mor. To. 1. li. 9. c. 6. qu. 5.
with the same worship, with which he is whose Image it is? So that if it be
the Image of Christ it is to be worshipped with divine worship. The Bell. de
Imaginib. l. 2. c. 22,
Cardinal acknowledges, they which speak so, are forced to use distinctions,
which they themselves scarce understand, much less the people: So that Mr.
Spencer had need look home, to disabuse his own people.

The first place of Scripture. Matthew. 4.10. Thou shall worship, the Lord thy
God, and him only shall thou serve.
worship and service may be given to others besides God; The quest. is about
Religious worship.
and therefore notes it as a double mistake of the Protestants, to infer from
this place that worship and service are only due to God: pa. 5. etc.

It seems he was bound to make up his tale or number of mistakes, he does so
causelessly fasten them upon the Protestants: for he knows they do not argue
from this place, that all kinds of worship or service are to be given to God
only: but that kind of worship, which according to his own expression, page 8.
is performed by an act of Religion: i. e. religious worship: or as S. Aug.
gives us the limitation of that Word Worship, and indeed the determination of
the question, that if we add Religion to that word, Aug. de Civ. l. 10. c. 1.
then it speaks that worship, which is due to God only. This Author knew well
enough that Protestants confine their dispute here to a Religious worship: and
he speaks it pa. 11. that this place Mat. 4.10. must according to Protestants
be understood to forbid only religious worship to any save God: and therefore
applies himself under his second pretended mistake to the consideration of it,
endeavoring to find out such a worship given to Creatures, as may be called
Religious. All that he brings we shall see very far short of the purpose,
altogether insufficient to excuse their practice, or answer what we charge them
with, for their encroachments upon the Worship and Service due to God, in the
way of Religion.

The Acts of Worship inward and outward.
into Interior and Exterior, as subservient to his purpose, ( pa. 1.2.) telling
us ( pa. 13.) The External deportment, as prostration, may be the very same,
when we worship God, or Saint, or Angel, Bishop, Apostle, King, Magistrate,
Father, Mother: yet they become different kinds of Worship, according to the
different humiliations, intentions, and acknowledgments; which he who worships,
desires to express by those outward deportments of the body. It is true that
the inward intent makes a difference in the worship given, when the outward act
is the same, though not always so different a kind of worship, as he would
have the worship of Saints and Angels to be, in regard of the Civil worship and
honor, as we shall see below. But here note (for there will be use of it
hereafter) that in all this discourse of worship he only insists in such
outward expressions, Some Acts of worship proper to God.
as properly fall under the word ((...)) as bowing, kneeling, prostration,
which are indeed common to the worship of God and Creatures: but there are
other, which both in Scripture and in the nature of the thing, appear proper to
God, and the worship due to him, Altars, burning incense, oblations,
nuncupation of Vows; upon which score we may find the Church of Rome faulty,
as in doctrine, so much more in practice. The Bell. de Beat. sanctorum l. 1. c
12.
Cardinal having said, the external acts are common to all worship, makes his
exception, of sacrifices, and those Greg. de Val. in Tho. 2.2. Disp 6. qu. 5.
de virt. Riligionis puncto. 2.
things which have relation to them: And Greg. de Val. acknowledges it of
Prayer, Oblations, Sacrifices, etc. that they immediately belong to Religion,
and do peculiarly contain a certain subjection of the creature to God.

Excellency and Dignity how the Reason of Honor and Worship.
is that to lay some groundwork for raising such a worship on, as they give to
Saints and Angels, he sets himself to show, that besides the Civil and Divine
dignities or excellencies, there is a third sort neither infinite as the
Divine, nor humane as the Civil; but Spiritual and Supernatural, and would make
his Readers believe that all the difficulty in this matter consists in showing,
there are three worths or excellencies to be acknowledged and honored by an
act of worship, page 14. Whereas we grant such supernatural excellencies in
Angels and Men, and that there ought to be an acknowledgment and honor in the
mind commensurate to such a worth or excellency, and that to be expressed by
such acts as are fitting: and we believe that the Romanists have not such an
acknowledgment in their minds when they worship Saint or Angel, as they have
when they worship God Almighty: but whether that acknowledgment they have, be
commensurate to created Excellencies, and no more, they know best: We cannot
but say, the expressions they make of it in the several particulars of their
Religious Worship, do too plainly show, they yield them more devotion of soul
then is due to mere Creatures, entrenching far upon the religious worship and
service due to God.

Of the words Religion, and Reliigous worship.
All the difficulty consisted in clearing the third sort of worth or excellency
to be acknowledged and honored; yet he knew well enough, the difficulty stood
not in that, but in the acknowledging and honoring them with acts of Religious
worship. And therefore ( pa. 20, 21.) he sets himself to distinguish of the
words; Religion and Religious, that among all the acceptions of those words
mentioned in Scripture, he might find some, according to which, the worship of
Saints and Angels may be called Religious.

Religion (says he pa. 20.) may be taken either in a strict sense, for the
virtue of Religion: So when the School Doctors dispute about the nature of
infused graces; or largely, for the whole belief or profession of those that
esteem themselves to have the true way of serving God: so when we say, the
Religion of the Christians, or of the Jews: having thus distinguished, he
determins (pa. 22.) It will be sufficient for the defense of the Cathol. Roman
faith in this point: to affirm, that when the Doctors say, that any thing
created may be or is worshipped with religious worship, it is religious in the
larger sense: i. e. virtuous, pious, Christian, as belonging and proper to our
Religion, and tending finally to the acknowledgment of God and our Saviors
honor, as Author of our faith and religion, and pa. 23. instances in Levit.
7.6. where the giving of the breast and shoulder of the sacrifice to the Priest,
is called a perpetual religion in their generations; and then in Ia. 1. ult.
where a work of mercy done to the poor (to a Creature) is called Religion, i.
e. proceeding from and belonging to Religion. But this, together with all the
instances be can give of Religion or Religious in such a sense, comes not home
either to the thing in question, (Religious worship) or to defense of his
Catholic Roman Church, attributing more to Saints and Angels, then he can
bring out of Scripture or Fathers either, either to parallel or excuse it. For
upon examination, and for reasons following, it will appear plainly, that the
worship as by them allowed and performed to Saints and Angels, must be called
Religious, according to his first and stricter sense of Religion, and so by his
own confession undue to Creatures.

But before we come to our reasons let us hear how Greg. Val. in Tho. 2. 2ae.
disp. 6. qu. 1. punct. 2.
de Val. expresses this matter a little more clearly. He speaking of the Acts
of the virtue of Religion (as the School calls it) tells us some of them
pertain to it remote and imperative, remotely and only as commanded by it;
(this with Mr. Spencer is religious in the larger sense:) some pertain to it
proxime and elicitive, immediately, and more inwardly proceeding from it, and
declaring a subjection due to God; such acts are prayers, oblations,
sacrifices, vows, etc. This is religious in Mr. Spencers first and stricter
sense: accordingly the Schoolmen treat of those particulars, as Acts or
immediate exercises of the virtue of religion. Now albeit Valentia, and Mr.
Spencer and all of them affirm, that religious worship according to this sense,
is due only to God: which is a great truth; and do deny, that the worship they
give to any creature is to be called religious so: or that it pertains to
religion in that stricter sense; which is also true, as to many things they do
to Saints and Angels, (being not so much as remote and imperative, by way of
command from true religion) yet as used and exercised by them, those acts of
their worship are interpretative, acts of religion according to the first
sense: so to be interpreted and accounted of as to them, and their performance:
as all undue and misapplied worship, given to the Creature in way and exercise
of religion, yea given to a false God, is to be accounted of. This will appear
in the reasons following.

Azorius (one of the same Society) gives; How the Romish creature-worship must
be accounted religious. Azor. Instit. Mor. part. 1. l. 9. c. 10. qu. 2.
because, the virtue of religion is not of two kinds, one which gives God his
worship, and another which gives worship to Saints, their Images and Relics.
And they (says he) that think religion is not of one kind, are moved by the
reason of the several kinds of dignities and excellencies in things; (this was
Mr. Spencers reason of his several sorts of worship, as above nu. 3. and so it
is Bellarmines reason) but religion (says Azor) is not a virtue which
generally gives to any one worship for the excellency, but which gives Divine
worship and honor to God: and Non igitur religio, quicquid excellit, honorat
and colit, sed ^^icquid divinum est, et qua ratione divinum est: quemadmodum
ergo unus Deus est, fic una quoque specie relig^o est. Azon^ ibid.
therefore the virtue of religion does not honor and worship whatsoever
excels, but whatsoever is Divine, and as it is Divine: wherefore as God is but
one, so religion is but one in kind. Now this is very true and rational, and
concludes all religious worship to be Divine, and only due to God: and that
albeit there be an honor due to such excellencies, (an honor commensurate to
them) yet not a religious worship.

But what will Azorius then say to the religious worship given to Saints and
their Images in the Church of Rome? It is the objection immediately following,
and he answers not by mincing the matter, as most of his fellows do, by saying
it is religious in a remote or a large sense, such a sense as (considering what
they do, and allow in that Church) speaks nothing to the purpose; or by saying
it is an act of special observance, as Greg. de Val. would lessen it to no
purpose, as see below, number. 8. or by other frivolous distinctions used by them
in this point of worship: No. He seemed to consider what is done and allowed in
their Church, and that all such excuses help not: therefore Sanctos honoramus
non solum co cultu quo homines virtute and dignitate praestantes, sed etiam
divino cultu, qui est actus religionis -- Sed divinos cultus and honores non
dam^s sanctis propter se^psos sed propter deum, qui eos sanctos effecit. Azor.
ibid. qu. 5.
he says down right, (and says it often in this chapt.) that it is Divine
(which in Mr. Spencers strict sense is religious) honor and worship which is
given to Saints, in erecting Altars, Offering, making vows to them, invoking
of them, etc. and excuses it from Idolatry by saying it is given them, not for
themselves, but for Gods sake, that made them such. But there is enough in
Greg. de Val. and Bell. and other Romish writers to show, that divine honor
given to the creature, though with such reference to God cannot be defended:
which is a great truth; so then between these truths the Church of Rome must be
in a great strait; it gives and allows according to what Azorius proved, a
divine and religious worship to creatures, and according to the truth that the
other deliver, it cannot be defended in it.

Second reason. What does religion in Mr. Spencers strict sense sound, but that
virtue and devotion of the heart which sends out such expressions of subjection
and worship in the exercises of religion! and what is the Romish worship but
the exercise of that devotion or religion which is in the heart of any Romanist
so desiring to express it self? and how is it expressed and performed but by
their addresses to God, Saints, Angels by the former acts of Religion, Prayers,
Praises, Vows, Offerings? Look into their offices private, public: observe
what is done at their Altars, Shrines, Images: what prayers, offerings, vows
made there! see their incense burned before an Image, which is a consumptive
oblation, and as much as was done to the brazen Serpent: and as for Prayer,
(one of the Acts of religion) under it Val. disp. 6. qu. 2. de oratione ^unct.
10.
Valentia puts their daily recital of the office, which contains prayers to
Saints and Angels; and therefore this worship by prayers, vows, to Saints in
their way of religion must belong to religion in the first sense, as immediate
exercises thereof.

Thirdly, they do not only use those immediate acts of religion, prayers,
praises, vows: giving them to Saints in their exercise of religion: but in
these religious acts join the Saints with God: Athan Orat. 4. contra Arianos.
which Athanasius makes an Argument of the unity of the Son with the Father,
else he could not be joined with him in prayers; -- in praying (...), to join
the Son to the Father, which he denies to all creatures -- so when St. Paul
prays -- 1 Thessalonians. 3.11. Now God himself and our Lord Jesus direct, etc. Now
see how in the Church of Rome they join the Saints with God: in their vows, as
at entrance into some religious orders; I vow to God and the blessed Virgin; in
their Praises that Psalm or Hymn venite adoremus, Psalm. 99.
is in some of their books thrice broken, by Ave Mary's inserted: Bellar. and
Valentia close some of their books thus, Laus Deo and Beatae Virgini, praise to
God and the blessed Virgin; and as I remember in the Lions Edition Bellarm.
closes his book de cultu Sanctorum, thus, Laus Deo, Virginique Mariae, Jesu
item Christo: praise be to God, and to the blessed Virgin Mary, also to Jesus
Christ the Eternal Son of God; the like is done by Valentia at the end of some
of his books. Now what is this but to set her if not in equal rank with God,
yet surely as high as the Collyridians did? And what can this import but
religion in the first sense? A presumptuous entrenching on what is due to God.

Fourthly, when they divide worship into Latria and Dulia, it is not a Division
of the word worship at large (as when it is divided into religious and civil)
but it is a division of religious worship, given by them with this distinction,
to God and the creature, in the way and exercise of their religion: also the
word service implied in Dulia, being not a civil service with them, necessarily
implies a religious service; such as God forbids to be given to creatures: also
when they affirm the same worship given to the Image of Christ, as to Christ,
is it not religious in the high sense? The defenders of this take ground from
their known Church Hymn. Hail O Cross, our only hope, etc. as the Bell. l. de
Imag. c. 19. fundamen^.
Cardinal acknowledges, and would shift it off by many figures in the speech.

Lastly, when they pray to God, which they grant is the exercise of religion in
the strict sense, they acknowledge they do it by the mediation of Saints and
Angels prayed unto for that purpose: and what is this else but a performing of
the creature-worship out of the virtue of religion, and in way of religious
offices or devotions, in and together with, and in order to a worshipping of
God, at the same time begging of God the gift of mercy, and begging the Saints
mediation, for presenting that prayer, or joining his intercession with it?

religious for that which proceeds from and belongs to religion, Religious in
their large sense not excuse their creature-worship.
it is so general that it brings in all the duties of the second table, as that
act of mercy he instanced in out of Ja. 1. ult. And here by that and his other
instance out of Lev. 7.6. we might expect, if he will have this
creature-worship any way belong to religion, he should have showen it commanded
by God, as those two particulars were which he brought as instances: but it is
the profession of this Author in the name of his Church, that it is not
commanded but commended as good and profitable: i. e. as invented and taken up
of themselves, and pertaining to, and proceeding from religion, i. e. the
religion of the Romish Church, far from being Catholic in this point; indeed
if we speak of a worship due to Saints and Angels, that is, an acknowledgement
and honor we owe them, answerable to the worth and excellency in them: it is a
duty or thing commanded, and so religious in that large sense, by the fifth
commandment; yea, and tends finally to Gods honor, as the Author of all gifts
and excellencies in the creature. And we are ready to express this inward
acknowledgment or honor (and do it sufficiently) by celebrating their
memories, by thanksgiving to God for them, by proposing their virtuous examples
for imitation; but as for the worship they perform and plead for, whatever
inward acknowledgment they pretend to have commensurate to the worth of those
glorious creatures, yet such are the acts they express it by, as do plainly
show it a worship neither commanded nor commended, nor consistent with that
worship which we find commanded, those acts, and acknowledgments of honor and
subjection, which God requires in his worship.

Lastly, the examples he brings out of Scripture for countenancing his worship,
who sees not how far they fall short of what he should prove? They are of Lots
bowing to the Angels that came unto him; and of the Shunamite worshipping
Elisha, and the Captain of fifty, Elias, p. 25. and this he will have religious
worship, because of their Authorities derived and acknowledged only from faith
and religion. Be it so: and that they had a motive for that worship more then
merely ^ivil: we need not fear if it be called religious in so large and remiss
a sense, viz. such a religious worship or reverence as is given to holy men
living. But I would ask this Author, if it would not be held abominable in the
Church of Rome, to give unto any holy men living, the worship and service they
do to Saints departed: as to erect Altars, Temples to them, fall down before
their Images, burn incense to them, make vows and prayers to them at any
distance, and in the same forms, and in the same place and time, where and when
they do to God?

Mr. Spencers mincing of the matter.
hear how he concludes this discourse, page 27. where (to the praise of his
ingenuity, but prejudice of his undertaking) he says: If any wilfully deny all
kind of religious worship, in how large a sense soever, to be lawfully
exhibited to any save God alone; so long as he yields the thing it self, that
is, to exhibit reverence and worship to persons and things, in acknowledgment
of the supernatural gifts and graces and blessings of God, wherewith they are
enriched: let him call that worship Christian, or pious, or an extraordinary
rank of civil worship, I shall not contend about the name, when the thing is
done. This is fair, if he deal plainly, and do not expect (by seeming to be
content with the thing we yield,) such a thing as they make of this worship;
for we are ready to yield the thing that is due: that is a reverence and honor
commensurate to their excellency: as much or more then was given to holy men
living: and to do it by a (...) (a bowing or prostration) where it can be done:
to an Angel, if visibly appearing to us as to Lot. And as for the Saints
departed, they are not by reason of their absence, capable of that which was
given to holy men living; but we are willing to express the honor we owe them,
as we can: by commemorating and praising their virtues, propounding their
examples for imitation. And if we must properly speak, what the worship is,
which they exhibit to the Saints departed, Superstition.
it must be called superstition, which as the notation of the word shows, is a
worship of the dead exhibited to them by those that overlive them, or remain
after them; or as Lactantius tells us, they are called Superstiriosi sunt, qui
superstitem memoriam defunctorum colunt, eorumque Imagines celebrant. Instit.
l. 4. c. 28.
superstitious, who worship or religiously honor the remaining memory of the
dead, and celebrate (or honor with religious service) their Images. And now
let this Author if he can, defend his Catholic Roman Church in her pretended
religious worship, from this charge of superstition: and then consider if she
be not also so far chargeable with Idolatrous practice, as those applications
to Saints and Angels, those expressions of worship which they make by vows,
oblations, prayers and adorations, shall be found to yield to the creature any
thing proper to God.

The honor due to Saints and Angels of what sort i^ it?
but unduly give to Saints and Angels stands charged: now if for the perfecting
of this discourse, it be enquired to what sort of worship, that honor, which
we acknowledge due to Saints and Angels (the thing, which he said, we yield)
may indeed be reduced: we have two sorts of worship apparent and
unquestionable, Divine and Civil: the divine is due to God by reason of his
supereminent majesty, and by reason of his dominion over the whole man, and
contains all the religious worship and service, all the obedience man can give
him according to any of his commands, all the honor he can return him upon any
due occasion. The civil, is due to man upon that dominion he has over others
according to the outward man and affairs of this life, and contains the honor,
subjection, and obedience due to Magistrate, Masters, Parents, Between these
two, the Cardinal (whom this Author follows every where) fixes the worship or
honor due to a finite supernatural excellency, such as is in Saints and
Angels: And it is true, that if we give the creature no more then is
commensurate or due unto it, the honor given will not be a Divine or
Religious, nor yet a Civil worship properly, because given without respect to
dominion or subjection. But there is a worship or honor due to persons (to
whom we owe not subjection) as they are endowed with qualities and
excellencies, though not supernatural, as Wisdom, Learning, Justice, and other
Virtues: which worship is not Divine, or Civil properly, but as some call it,
the worship or honor of Moral reverence due to all moral virtuous endowments;
or as others Cultus officiosus, officious, or out of courtesy. So likewise the
honor due to gracious and supernatural gifts and qualities, may though in a
higher degree be called the honor of moral reverence, making but one kind of
both, because the motive or ground of both is a thing of moral persuasion,
arising from the worth and excellency of gifts and endowments without the
reason of dominion.

Greg. de Val. Val. in Thom. 2.2. disput. 6. qu. 11. punct. 5.
has a phrase for it not much differing; telling us, the worship due to Saints,
is not an act of religion immediately, but singularis observantiae, of a
singular observance, or respect to saints; and that it is not religion
immediately, which procures them that esteem, commensurate to excellent
Creatures; but peculiaris observantia, i.e. that special observance and
reverence which. such excellencies deserve. Now this is to speak what is due to
saints, not what the Romanists allow them, or suffer their people to give them:
which. often falls into the way and acts of Religion, by their vows, prayers,
raise, oblations to Saints.

That this worship or honor (which may be called an act of moral reverence or
of officiousness, or of special observance, if they please) is of a differing
kind, from the religious or divine, and may be differenced from the civil or
humane, cannot be denied; but if asked, to which of the two it is reducible, or
analogical, we say to the civil. For gifts and virtues which for their
principle and Original are supernatural, are for their use, civil, i. e. for
the good of the concives, fellow Citizens, members of the same society of the
Church; yea Saints and Angels are concives fellow Citizens with us, Ephesians. 2.19.
So that civil worship might be divided, into that humane civil according to the
Polity of the world; and this of moral reverence, which is analogically civil
according to the Polity of the Church society. But they must reduce it to
Religious worship which they divided into Latria and Dulia, as above; ehre its
made medius cultus, a middle worship between Divine and Civil, as the Card inal
and they all do, Bell. de Beat. Sanctor. l 1. c. 12.
to bring it nearer to the Divine; and then to make it entrench upon the divine
or religious worship by such applications and expressions as we heard above. As
for their usual starting hole (to which they commonly retire in this point of
worshipping of Saints, Angels, Images,) to say they have no such acknowledgment
of them, as of Gods, or infinite excellencies, it will not secure them; so long
as they yield them some acknowledgment not commensurate to them, and express it
by such acts and exercises of religious worship as above said. We shall find
the Heathens made the like excuses for the worship, they gave to the inferior
Deities, and to their Images. Nor could the people have such a conceit of
Moses's dead body or carcass, as of an Infinite and divine excellency, which
yet God hid from them, least they should make an Idol of it, as the Cardinal
says Bell. Apol. pro respons. sua ad Reg. Jacob. cap 8. Sect. jam. vero.
; that is, least they should do to it, and give it such acts of worship, as the
Church of Rome does to Angels, to Saints, and to their Relics.

Of the Authority and Rule, that Saints and Angels are said to have over us.
which he seemed to raise not only upon supernatural gifts and graces, but also
upon that dignity and authority which is more then humane or Civil, and truly
by him called Ecclesiastical, such as was in Prophets and Apostles: and withal
mentioned several places of Scripture, to imply the dignity and authority in
the Saints and Angels, as 1 Cor. 6.2. that they shall judge the world -- Rev.
5.19. that they shall reign upon the earth. And that the Angels were
Promulgators of the Law, Act. 7.53. Captains of the Armies of God, Jos. 5.14.
Controlers of Kingdoms, Dan. 10.12. So he pa. 17.18. I say, least by this
Authority which he seems to ascribe to them, he should imply (for he does not
plainly infer) a subjection to them, and upon that account, a duty of worship:
therefore to exclude all pretenses; It may be said 1. That in Prophets and
Apostles there was a dignity of authority as well as excellency of grace and
holiness: and still there is such Authority in the Bishops and Pastors of the
Church; and that Authority not Civil properly, but Ecclesiastical; and upon
that Authority a subjection due to them (Heb. 13.17.) in things pertaining to
Religion and Conscience; and the honor or worship thereupon due to them, as it
may in his large sense be called Religious (which we every where grant without
prejudice to our, or advantage to his Cause) so may it better be called the
Civil Ecclesiastical worship, because as in the world, so in the Church there
is a policy or government: for the Church below, as a City and society within
it self, and does also with that above make up the whole City of God. Therefore
are we called by the Apostle (Concives) fellow Citizens Ephesians. 2. But 2ly, Albeit
Saints and Angels belong to the higher part of this City, the triumphant, and
as to the state they enjoy are of higher dignity and glory then any in the
militant, or part below: yet being not capable of that conduct of souls as the
Governors and Pastors in the lower city are, they cannot challenge that
subjection from us, nor the worship that arises upon it, Nor can they by reason
of their distance receive from us those tenders of worship and honor which are
applied to holy men living. Eo cultu dilectionis and societatis qu in h^c vita
Sancti homines. contra Faust. l. 20. l. 21.
S. Aug. determins it thus: We honor the Martyrs with that worship of love and
fellowship, wherewith Holy men in this life are worshipped: Of fellowship --
with reference to the Apostles fellow-citizens, and of holy men living, with
reference to supernatural gifts and graces, and the honor thence arising; such
as we give to men upon the account of holiness and such graces, though they
have no authority over us; and let the Saints departed have all such honor
(inward or outward) that they are capable of. Lastly, If this Author will drive
those places of Scripture he cited for authority of Saints and Angels, so far
as to prove the worship due which they give unto them: as his Mr. the Cardinal
endeavored by the like places to defend the invoking of them: He may take
answer from S. Aug. determining what manner of worship is due unto them, as
above (the worship of love and fellowship,) and Charitatis non servitutis. Aug.
de vera Relig. c. 55.
elsewhere, the worship of charity not subjection or service; or from S. Paul
Ephesians. 2. saying we are fellow-Citizens; or from the Angel, Rev. I am thy
fellow servants: And if they will still make use of such places as this Author
alleged, it will be easy to show how inconsequent the argument is from such
places of Scripture, how insufficient to prove such a worship as is allowed by
the Church of Rome.

mistaken, Recapitul. of the premises.
when we affirm, that all worship properly religious, and according to his
first and stricter sense, is due to God, and not to be exhibited to any
Creature; Nor can he say we are mistaken, in proving that truth by this
Scripture, Thou shall worship the Lord, etc. unless he will deny this Scripture
speaks of worship properly religious. It remains then, that our mistake (if
any) must be in concluding by this Scripture, their creature-worship to be
unlawful. That we are not herein mistaken appears by what has been said
already; First, by that which is said above to show the worship they exhibit,
by Oblations, Incense, Invocation, Vows, adoration of Images, belongs and must
be reduced to that sort of worship, which is proper to Religion, in the first
and stricter sense. Not only the effect of Religion but part of it, I mean as
performed and misapplyed by them; and I would it were not the greater part of
their Religion. Secondly, by the insufficiency of what this Author has said to
the contrary, in putting off the imputation from themselves, and fastening the
mistake on us: As first, his pretense from the immediate signification or bare
importance of the word ((...)) in the text; which speaks a bowing or
prostration of the body, and is common to the religious and the civil worship,
to the worship of God and the Creature: and accordingly all the instances and
examples he brought, speak no more then that outward reverence and worship
shown in bowing the body: Whereas this comes not home to our charge laid upon
their worship, and cautioned against by this Scripture: viz. their worship
exhibited to creatures by the above said acts, and exercises of religion and
devotion: Secondly, his pretense of religious in his larger sense as
sufficient, which is as short of the purpose as the former; for so all the
duties of the second Table (as we saw above) may be called religious, i. e.
pertaining to, and commanded by Religion; but here we speak of the acts of
worship proper to religion, or exhibited in the way and exercises of Religion
and Devotion; which in their worship are such, as are proper to the worship of
God, the same by which our religion and devotion to God is exercised, (as Vows,
Invocation, etc.) or such as are proper to the Heathen worship, in the exercise
of their religion and devotion to their greater or lesser deities, as adoration
of their Images, whom they pretend to worship.

All this will farther appear by the next part of this Scripture, and him only
shall thou serve.

Him only shall thou serve Mat. 4.10.

Of Latria or service properly due to God.
by a misunderstanding of the word Serve pa. 28. why so! because having
examined all the places of Scripture where this word ((...)) which is here
translated serve, he finds it signifies that religious worship which is
exhibited to God, never used for a religious service done to a Creature as to a
Creature, pa. 31. Again, that word is never used, but for the serving either of
the true or of a false God, when it is referred to worship belonging to
religion. And he provokes any Protestant to prove the contrary, pa. 32. But how
did he conceive we understood the word; when we affirm the same thing, which to
find out he bestowed as he says, some days study by examining all the places
of scripture; where the word (...) is used, we say, it is very true that in all
the scripture neither that word nor any other is ever used to express religious
service done to a creature, as to a creature, that is, as due to it. Again we
affirm, that this word, when it is referred to worship belonging to Religion is
never used, but for serving either the true, or a false God: and therefore it
is easily seen whether the Romanists be mistaken in their Inference; therefore
there is another religious service, which may be given to some Creature: which
is altogether inconsequent, unless they can show some other word in Scripture,
that imports such a Religious service: or whether the Protestants be mistaken
in their inference: therefore there is no religious service, (or as he
expresses it, no worship belonging to Religion) save what is due to God. So
that, whereas he provokes any Protestant to show that the word ((...)) imports
any religious service save Divine: the Protestant provokes him to show any word
in Scripture that signifies a religious worship or service, save that which is
divine or due to God: and therefore duly infers from scripture, that a
religious worship or service is due only to God. No Roman Catholic teaches
(says he) that divine service due to God only, is to be given to any Creature.
pa. 33. But seeing the scripture teaches no other religious worship, but what
is given to God: you teaching there is another, teach besides the book, broach
your own invention, and consequently give to the Creature something of that
which is due to God. Whatever you reserve for God, this is plain, your devoting
your selves to such or such Saints, does very much express the notion of the
word (...), which is from (...), a slave or mancipated servant; and the
frequency of your performing outward acts of religion and devotion to them, in
Pilgrimages, Vows, Oblations, etc. speaks a plain serving of them, and takes up
(I fear) the greater part of your religious service.

Roman Catholics, Insufficient excuse of their worship.
by saying this word always implies the serving of the true, or a false god,
but their serving of Saint or Angel, is not such a service as is given to God,
or a false god: for they do not think them to be Gods or serve them as Gods;
and this I suppose was the Authors meaning and design, in adding a false god,
that he might ly safe, as he thought, under that covert. But this will not
serve his turn, for if by a false god, he means, that they which worship, must
think it to be God, or apply the worship and service to it as to a God: then it
is not true, that this word always signifies the serving of a true, or false
God: but this is true, that the word, when it is (as he said) referred to
worship belonging to religion, always signifies a service due to God, whether
given to him, or misapplied to any other thing, although that thing be not held
a God by him that worships, or the worship not given to it as to a God: For
this obliquity of worship or religious service; it is not necessary, that the
thing worshipped be Greg. de Val. in Tho. Disp. vi. qu. punct. 3. de Idolatria.
thought to be a God, is acknowledged by their own Authors: It is plain in
scripture, the worship given the Golden Calfe Exodus 32. was Latria misapplied,
yet that not thought a God, nor given to it as to a God, but only as to a
visible representation, to be used in the worship of the true God that brought
them out of Egypt. Of which more below, in the question of Imageworship. So the
worship given to the brazen Serpent, was a misapplied Latria, yet given to it
not as to a God, but as to a holy thing, that had been instrument of such
saving operations. So the Apostle Romans 1.25. speaks of them, that served the
Creature, (the word is Latria there) more then (or besides) the Creator: but
together with him, yet not serving the Creature as God, but reserving something
more for God, as S. Ambr. in locum Quasi aliquid plus sit, quod Deo reservetur.
Ambrose notes their vain excuse. And therefore the limitation which the Trent
Council gives here, that they invocate and worship the Saints not as Gods,
(which this Author made use of pa. 3. and for that as it seems added here a
false God) is a poor and empty excuse; for the Heathen were not so gross in
their worship or the defense of it, but that they could plead this and other
excuses, which the Romanists make for their creature-worship, as we shall see
In Survey of antiquity cap. 1.
below.

From this ground, says he, proceeds the ordinary distinction of religious
worship into Latria and Dulia. A distinction this, that (as the Romanists use
it) has neither ground in Scripture nor yet in St. August. who first used it,
but to another purpose: as we shall see.

First for Scripture, Impertinent distinction of Latria and Dulia in the Romish
use.
as he said of Latria, that when it is referred to worship belonging to
religion, it signifies the serving of God, or some false God, (which he makes
the ground of this distinction) so we say of Dulia, when this word is referred
to worship belonging to religion, or to religious worship it always imports the
service of God, that is due to God, and given to him or misapplied to other
things; and so this distinction has not ground in Scripture: the places are
infinite, wherein this word as well as Latria is used in expressing the service
and worship of God, and of other false Gods: take one just parallel to this
text of Mat. 4. and that is, 1 Samuel 7.3. serve him only -- where it is (...).
So is this distinction against St. Augustinu's mind, as appears by the Contra
Faust. l. 20. 21. de Civi. Dei l. 10. c. 1. Qu. in Genesin. l. 1. de Trinit. c.
6.
several places where he uses it. For he finding the word serve applied in
Scripture to God and man, thought the first service might be called Latria, and
the other Dulia, not making it a distinction of religious worship or service
into several sorts, but a severing of the divine from the civil by these words,
putting nothing of religious service in the Dulia, but placing it in the Latria
as wholly due to God; and this he confirms often, as in opposition to their
design in their Dulia, so to their whole endeavor of having religious service
or worship given to the creature, as we shall see by several places of that
Father, cited below in the trial of Antiquity. Lastly, as we see this
distinction has no ground in Scripture; as to the use of the words Latria and
Dulia, both being used there indifferently to express the religious service
given to God: so likewise as to the thing it self intended by the Romanists, (
viz. a sort of religious worship due to the creature besides that which is
given to God) it is so far from having ground in Scripture, that it is against
the strain and severity of Scripture, which is very strict in securing Gods
worship; and it serves finely to evacuate the force of the Apostles argument,
Heb. 1.6. who proving the Deity of our Savior by that of Psalm. 97.7. Let all
the Angels worship him; might receive this answer, it is a religious worship of
the inferior rank, such as may be given to the most excellent creatures; and
doubtless the Arrians would have made use of this distinction, had the Church
of Rome then taught this doctrine: so then, either the Apostle was mistaken in
his argument, or the Church of Rome is in her distinction. And if we be
mistaken in our argument from this Scripture, then was their Gregory the great
mistaken, who against Image Worship urges the same text, Greg^ ep. l. 9. ep. 9.
quia scriptum est dominum Deum odorabis, and soli servies.
because says he, it is written, thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him
only shall thou serve.

To conclude, Peresius a Romish writer moved with what the Scripture and St.
Aug. says against this cultus servitutis, this worship of service given to the
creature acknowledges (as Bell. de Beat. Sanctorum l. 1. c. 12.
the Cardinal relates it, and checks him for it) that he did not approve the
name of Dulia to signify the worship of Saints, for we are not servants of the
Saints, but fellow servants.

Rev. 22.8, 9. See thou do it not, for I am thy fellow servants, worship God.

Of worship refused by the Angel and by St. Peter.
repeating what he had above of Angels receiving worship from Lot; and of men
receiving worship, as Elias and Elisha, though Peter refused it from Cornelius,
Act. 10. and affirms, the worship of Elias and Elizaeus to be the very same
with the worship which by Roman Catholics is given to Saints and Angels, pa.
35, 36. How all this comes short of the purpose, both as to the worship which
the Church of Rome gives by many more expressions, then prostration or bowing of
the body, which is all the worship that his places of Scripture and instances
concern; and also as to the term religious, which in his large sense comes not
home to the question; I say how far all this falls short: was abundantly shown
above. Now for the Text Revel. 22. That which we gather from it against their
Angelworship, does not arise from the bare prohibition of worship, but rather
from the reason of it, for I am thy fellow servant: and so from St. Peter's
reason, for I am a man, which shows some undue worship was given, yet not as to
a God, but too much entrenching upon that which was due to God. The Romanists
feign two reasons of this prohibiting or refusal of worship: first, Bell. Post
Christi adventum prohibuisse ob reverentiam humanitatis Christi, de Beatit.
Sanctor. cap. 14.
that the Angels refused, after Christ's coming in the flesh, to be worshipped
of men, for the reverence of the humanity of Christ: But if they did right in
refusing it, then must the Romanists think they do ill in giving it to them;
for we men are bound to have as great a reverence and respect to Christ as the
Angels are, and note the Cardinal says, not only that they refused the
worship, but forbad it, prohibuisse says he. Secondly, because John took the
Angel for Christ: but we may ask, how did the Angel know what St. John thought?
Besides, it was improbable that he took the Angel for our Savior Christ, for
this is the second time, that he thus worshipped: neither do we find that our
Savior in all the visions appeared to him after such a manner. But this
falling down at the Angels feet, shows it was in St. John a transport of joy,
for the revelation of such things as the Angel brought, and thereupon an
expression of that (more then beseeming) reverence to the messenger: and it is
evident the Angel conceived he gave some undue reverence, for which he
admonishes him to give none, but what befits a fellow servant, which ought not
to be a religious worship or service entrenching upon any thing due to God: the
very reason that Aug. de vera religioone cap. 55. Honoramus Angelos charitate
non servitute.
St. August. gives to exclude all such worship by the word service or
servitude. We honor Angels (says he) in charity, not service; and immediately
before insinuated, God is communis Dominus, our common Lord, Lord of Angels and
men; that is, as the Angel said, we are fellowservants. So we need not contend
so much, what the Angel thought, as look to what he said; whether he thought
St. John took him for our Savior (which this Author strives to make probable)
is uncertain, but the reason the Angel gave is clear, and enough to exclude
their Angel-worship.

Peter refused, Acts 10. was not a Divine worship, and therefore refused; for
this Author grants pa. 38. that Cornelius could not suppose him to be a God:
nor was it a due bounded worship, and refused only out of humility, as he
supposes here: for then he would not have given this reason, I am a man. The
Protestants are not bound to say (as he thinks they must, pa. 37.) one of the
two, either that Cornelius gave him divine worship as to a God, or that St.
Peter refused it out of humility. For though the Protestants acknowledge there
was humility in this refusal, (for humility is seen in refusing not only due,
but undue honor too) yet have they cause to say, it is evident that Cornelius
gave him some undue worship, exceeding his condition; and entrenching upon
something due to God, and therefore St. Peter gives him the reason of his
refusing it, for I am a man, as the Angel, for I am thy fellow servants.

Col. 2.18. Worshipping of Angels.

this text speaks of a worshipping of Angels, How far the Romanists agree with
those worshippers of Angels.
whereby they are made equal to Christ, or that Christ is depending on them,
which Roman Catholics (says he) condemn as injurious to Christ, pa. 43. His
reason is, because the Apostle adds not holding the head, by which it appears
such a worshipping of Angels is forbidden, as destroys the belief of Christ's
being sovereign head of the Church, pa. 44. to which he subjoyns as a proof,
the Testimonies of several Fathers witnessing that Simon Magus, and other
ancient Heretics broached such phansies of the Angels, pa. 48. That there were
ancient Heretics, that held strange phansies about Angels is very true: but
that these worshippers of Angels were such as held such a fancy of making
them equal or superior to Christ, cannot be proved: that they were not such,
appears rather; for the Apostle first tells us this was done in a pretense of
voluntary humility; now what humility is there in going to God by any equal or
superior to his Son? therefore they went to God by Angels as inferior
mediators: and they of the Church of Rome have a pretense not unlike, in their
applying to God by the mediation of Saints and Angels. Secondly, the Apostle in
this chapter speaks against those that joined the observation of legal
ordinances with the profession of Christ, and therefore it is very probable he
condemns such worshipers of Angels, as did it upon that account, because the
law was given by the disposition of Angels. In Colos. c. 2.
Theodoret, who is shuffed in among the rest of the Fathers cited by this
Author, speaks directly to this purpose, that these worshippers of Angels were
such Christians as joined the observation of the law with the Gospel, and
therefore used them as mediators, because the law was given by their ministry.
The other Fathers cited by him speak of strange phansies of some Heretics
about Angels, but without such reference to this place of the Apostle, as
Theodoret does, who comments upon the Text, and cites the canon of the Synod of
Laodicea, (a place not far from Coloss) forbidding any to pray to Angels:
Oecumenius also upon the text agrees with Theodoret touching these
Angel-worshippers, and out of Chrysostom (for he borrows it from him) shows
the pretense they made of humility in this their going to God by Angels,
saying, (...). Christ. and Oecum. in locum.
It was more then belonged to us, to go to God by Christ: which excludes Mr.
Spencers pretense above that these were such as made Angels equal or superior
to Christ; when its plain they in humility applied to them as of inferior rank.

not holding the head; that proves not, that they placed the Angels in Christ's
stead, or destroyed his sovereign headship directly, as the fancy of those
Heretics, he would have here to be meant, did; for he may be said not to hold
the head, that holds it not in that manner he ought, or because this
worshipping of Angels was the way to let go the head; as in the Church of Rome,
their worshipping of Angels and Saints, and their Images draws off the people
much from Christ.

And albeit the Church of Rome does not retain the observation of the law, as
these did: and so has not the same cause of their worshipping Angels as they
had: yet let the cause or motive be what it will, (for the same deslexion from
truth and duty has not always the same motive) they of the Church of Rome have
the same pretense of humility in their coming to God by the mediation of
Angels, and do place the Angels where they should not, intruding into things
they have not seen, and not holding the head (the one mediator between God and
man) as they ought.

(...) Religion of Angels.
in rendering the word ((...)) a worshipping, when it should be translated a
religion of Angels, and thereupon declaims against Protestants, as having a
design in it, pa. 45.46. But this is needless, for the word religion had been
more advantageous to us, in as much as we yield a worship to creatures, but
when religion is added to it, we mean it a worship due to God, as St. Aug. also
said above. Indeed if we look into the Church of Rome, and well consider their
exercises of devotion, how they are directed, how frequented, there will appear
a very religion of Saints and Angels. And as in this point the Romanists are
too like these half Christians, whom the Apostle blames for their worship or
religion of Angels; so will they appear not much unlike to the Heathen
Platonicks, in their worship or religion of their Demons and Hero's, whom they
placed and worshipped as celestial messengers, and mediators between men and
the supreme God. Of which below * in the consent of Antiquity.

But to make up his number of mistakes: he must needs repeat here also pa. 49.
how worship was given to Angels by Lot and Joshua, and that it may be called
religious by Ja. 1.26, 27. not remembering how much he is mistaken, in giving us
still, for the worship we blame in them, examples only of the worship we allow,
the bowing of the body to Angels when they appeared: whereas we charge them
with the worship, which the Laodic. Synod forbad, which the Apostle here
blames, the praying to them, and making them mediators; nor will he remember
how he is mistaken in telling us still St. James calls a work of mercy,
religion, as if this were any thing to the religious worship they give to
Saints and Angels; which is the exercise or performance of their religion and
devotion, as religion belongs to the first table in a stricter sense; whereas
that work of mercy as all duties of the second table because commanded, and
proceeding from religion, may in that general sense be called religious works,
not religious worship. But indeed this Romish worship cannot truly be called
religion in the larger sense, or in any sense: for it is not commanded, it
proceeds not from religion, not dictated by that devotion and religion we owe
to God; it pertains not therefore to religion, unless it be to the Romish. Of
all this more largely above.

CHAP. II. Of Prayer and Invocation.
Come unto me, Mat. 11.28. Ask the Father in my name, Jo. 16.21. When ye pray,
say, Our Father -- One mediator -- 1 Timothy 2.5. We have an advocate -- 1 Jo.
2.1. The Protestants inference (therefore we must come to God by no other Name,
Mediator, Advocate) he will have inconsequent: Indeed such arguments from the
affirming of one to the denying all others, are not for the most part
concluding and valid, yet in the point of Gods worship they are of good force,
if we allow the truth of the rule which S. Aug. de consensu Evang. l. 1. c. 18.
Aug. says, that Socrates allowed; God is so to be worshipped as he has
commanded himself to be worshipped. A general Rule for worship.
So that it must be a bold presumption in man, when the Lord has in so many
places prescribed the way, to add thereunto, by admitting and using other
Mediators, though inferior to Christ.

Lords Prayer, comes to this: The form of the Lords prayer.
that Protestants by like argument might prove, We are only to pray to God the
Father -- and that one Christian living may not pray for another, pa. 57. But
this is not alike, for we have command and direction to come and pray unto the
other persons of the Trinity: and also for one another living: And we may call
any of the Persons Father, for all the works of the Trinity ad extra, toward
the Creature (as giving life and being, nourishing and preserving, Fatherly
acts toward us) are as the School says, undivided, common to all the persons:
but because we can also call God the Father our Father upon special relation by
and through his only Son; therefore this form implies we ought to come in
prayer to God the Father only by his mediation, by and in whom we can call him
Father; and for his other part of reply, then one Christian living may not pray
for another: who sees not the disparity between praying for, and praying to, or
invocating, and that at such distance, as they do Saints and Angels; but of
this of the living to pray for one another, more conveniently Nu. 6.
below.

Tim. 2.5. 1 Jo. 2. 1. He will have the protestant mistaken, The office of
Mediator and Advocate.
in excluding thereby all Mediators or Advocates of Intercession: the Text
speaking only of a Mediator of Redemption, because it follows in one place, who
gave himself a ransom -- and in the other, He is the propitiation for our sins.
Secondly, that the Text speaks of such a Mediator or Advocate that deserves to
be heard for his own worth and merits, pa. 69. That we may better discover this
usual but ungrounded evasion; Note First, others besides Christ may be said to
Intercede for us, Intercession of Saints.
as the blessed Saints no question do: but that makes them not Mediators or
Advocates of Intercession; for they do it without our Invocating of or
application by prayer to them, out of that charity and propension which all the
members of Christ have to one another; also they do it in general, in such
desires as make for the accomplishment of that body, of which they are members.
Out of which propensity we pray also for them, i.e. for their consummation and
glorious resurrection, etc. yet this renders us not their mediators. Secondly,
Note, that to state them in the condition of Mediators and Advocates: they must
be enabled to receive our particular requests and prayers, and so to present
them unto God: yea as the word Advocate significantly implies they must be
admitted in that Court to plead their cause for whom they appear. This being
made manifest that they are no way enabled thereunto: it will easily be seen
whether the Protestants are mistaken, in excluding them from this office, or
the Romanists in admitting them to it, without, or rather against scripture.

For this Author was wont in his imputed mistakes to show the word or thing in
which he placed the mistake, otherwise taken, and applied to others in
scripture: and its but reason, that he who will enlarge to others, what the
scripture seems to restrain, should be bound to make it appear by scripture,
and not do it by limitations, and distinctions of his own invention; as it
fares with all Romanists, in this point and that of Image Worship. That which
this Author makes the pretense of his distinction, or limiting to Christ only
such a kind of mediation (viz. of redemption) from the words following, viz.
ransom and propitiation, overthrows his distinction, and shows the whole office
belongs to Christ only: for it shows that his mediation of Intercession, or
Advocateship, and his fitness thereunto, is grounded on his bloodshed or
ransom, or making God thereby propitious; which the Apostle through the Epistle
to the Hebrews speaks most evidently: showing our high priest is entered to
appear for us, Heb. 9.24. i. e. to be our Advocate, or Mediator of
Intercession; and that he entered with blood.

Distinction of Mediator of Redemption and Intercession.
for one member of it is grounded upon the other; in the Intercession of our
Mediator and Advocate upon his redemption; for that tells us none can come
under one member of it, to interceed as an Advocate with God to whom the other
belongs not too. So for his other exception or limitation; That Christ is the
only Mediator or Advocate, that can intercede by his own worth and merits,
comes to the same purpose, for he that can do so, must be a Redeemer too; It is
a great Truth: but that it should not exclude (as they pretend) the Saints and
Angels from being Mediators in and by the merits of Christ, is only a saying of
their own, without all proof or warrant of scripture, and a bold saying it is;
For when scripture says, there is one Mediator and tells us of no other;
points us out our Advocate, and tells us of no other: directs us by whom, and
in whose name we must come to God, and shows us no other, how can we without
great presumption take upon us to appoint others, though in order to him that
is appointed? For our coming to or praying to God, is a worship of God, an
immediate serving of him, and therefore binds us to go the way he prescribes,
as the rule Nu. 1.
above directs us, and reason also persuades it, for else there would be no
thing fixed and certain in religion and worship; For if in this point we may
invent new ways and new distinctions that have no ground in Gods word, then
that One God in the same verse would be obnoxious to man's conceit (in framing
other gods of lower rank) as that one Mediator is to this distinction of the
Romanists.

Reasons against their Invocation.
that of the Apostle takes place, What is not of Faith is Sin, Romans 14. ult.
For how can it be of faith to come unto God by Mediators, whom they cannot
believe to be appointed of God to stand between himself and us, or between our
Mediator Christ and us; whom they cannot believe to hear or know our requests
and desires: having no warrant from God to assure their people, that he will
reveal or make known their desires to the Saints they invocate. Furthermore, it
may be another reason against this presumption; because it is God himself that
prepares the heart to pray and inspires it; what boldness then is it for any
Creature as Mediator to present our prayers? or, as the Apostle Romans 8.26. In
our prayers according to Gods will the spirit makes intercession, therefore
prayers to Saints, are not of the spirit, not according to Gods will, or else
the spirit then makes intercession by the Saints. Lastly it is a senseless
perverting of the order God has set us: for our prayers (at least mental) must
as the Romanists acknowledge, Saints how said to know men's prayers.
be known to the Saints by revelation from God: so our prayers must first come
to God, then by him to the Saints, so by them to Christ to be presented to God.
The best account which the Bell. l. de Beat. Sanctor. c. 20.
Cardinal can give us of their knowing prayers made to them is this, First he
rejects wholly that way which some have conceited, that the Saints know prayers
of the living by the report of Angels. Of the two other ways, that they know
by seeing in God (as in a glass) from the beginning of their beatitude, those
things that do any way belong to them: or that they know by revelation, from
God, when the prayers are made. Of the former of these, he says it is
probable, then comparing it with the latter, he says it is more probable then
it, yet the latter is more fit for convincing the Heretics. Where note, that
their best way is but probable, and the Heretics must be convinced in this
point, by that way which is less then probable. So uncertain is this Article of
their faith, so unlikely to convince Heretics, however they persuade their
people to it.

This Author says nothing to their knowing of prayers; he had indeed no reason
to give himself the trouble of disputing that which their Church cannot agree
on. Beside all that has been said to it, methinks reason should tell them, how
improbable it is, that a finite Creature should admit and take care of ten
thousand suits put up to it at once; or that it should be consistent with the
state of bliss, for those glorified souls to be taken up or avocated, by the
care of earthly affairs; yea, such as for the most part are of a dolorous
nature. If God reveal unto them the conversion of a sinner, (as Luke 15.7.
which sometimes is made an argument by them) its a matter of joy, and
answerable to their general votes and intercession, for the accomplishing of
the Church, and consistent with their state of bliss.

Prayers of men living for others, no argument for praying to Saints departed.
often urged by this and other their Authors: who having no permission or
appointment from Gods word, for making the Saints departed, their Mediators and
Advocates in the Court of Heaven, seek pretense from this duty of the living.
Therefore to a Protestant asking, how dare they admit of any other Mediator or
Advocate then Christ? this Author rejoynds: How dare Protestants permit their
children to pray them, to pray to God for them? for what is this but to be
Mediators and Advocates? pa. 61. And of Protestants usually commending
themselves to the prayers of others: This (says he) is the very same
intercession we put among the Saints and Angels. pa. 62. Thus they are fain
some times to mince it; But a great disparity there is between the desiring of
the prayers of the living and their invocating of Saints or Angels: also
between the prayers or interceding of men living for others, and that Mediation
or Advocateship they put upon Saints departed. First, We have warrant for the
one and not for the other; we therefore dare desire the prayers of the living,
because we are commanded to pray one for another: and diverse reasons there are
for it, which hold not in the other case. The mutual exercise of charity among
those that converse together on earth, and much need that bond (as the Apostle
calls it) to hold them together; Ephesians. 4.3. Col. 3.14.
also, the benefit we receive by being made sensible of others wants and
sufferings: Heb. c. 13 3.
we our selves being also in the body, as the Apostle tells us. Lastly, in this
there is no peril of superstition, as there must needs be in their religious
addresses to the dead. Secondly, our praying others to pray for us, is not
Invocation or a Religious worship, as theirs is to the Saints departed; they
placing a great part of their offices of Religion both public and private in
such Invocations. Thirdly, As the living when they are desired to pray for us,
are capable of this charitable duty, knowing our necessities, which Saints
departed do not: so their praying for us does not make them Mediators and
Advocates for us: that is, of a middle order between us and God Almighty, (as
they make their Mediators of intercession; but as Comprecatores
fellow-suiters, of the same rank, condition, and distance with us from God: in
the mutual exercise of this charitable duty, they praying for us at our
entreaty, and we for them at theirs.

Aug. speaks home to this purpose in two instances from Scripture: Aug. contra
Epist. Parmen. l 2. c. 8. Non se facit mediatorem inter Deum and populum, sed
rogat, pro se orent invicem, si Paulus mediator esset, non ei constaret ratio,
qua dixerat, unus mediator.
St. Paul makes not himself a Mediator between God and the people, but entreats
they should pray one for the other (so the living praying for one another are
not therefore Mediators; nay doing it, upon mutual entreaty and intimation,
are therefore not mediators) If St. Paul should be their Mediator, it would
not consist with what he had said: there is one Mediator, (which proves the
former consequence, that the mediation they give to Saints will not stand with
that one Mediator. His other instance is from St. John's, we have an advocate,
1 Ep. c. 2. from which he infers the Apostle could not make himself a
Mediator: and so makes it conclude against Parmenian, who placed the Bishop a
Mediator between God and the people: we shall examine the Cardinals answer, by
which he would shift this off, when we come to trial of Antiquity. But

Aug. when he says pa 63. The Texts admit only one Mediator and advocate of
redemption and salvation: but more then one of praying to Almighty God with us,
and for us by way of charity and society, as St. Aug. says, citing, contra
Faust. l. 22.21. I suppose it should be l. 20. for in the place cited he speaks
of no such matter, but in the l. 20.21. where St. Aug. speaks of our honoring
them by way of charity and society, as we honor holy men living, which this
Author misreports, as if said they pray for us, which is truth; but his adding
with us, supposes they pray for us, when we pray, upon knowledge of our
particular necessities and requests; which is false.

Their Invocation destitute of Scripture Proof.
If any desire to have the Invocation of Saints and Angels proved by Scripture,
he may please to examine, Job 5.1. Genesis 48.16. 1 Samuel c. 28. Pitiful proofs; in
the first, Eliphaz tells Job, if he take it thus impatiently, he cannot expect
relief or comfort from God or Angels, whose ministry in those days was
frequent; in the second place, Jacob prays to God for his blessing upon the
lads, and wishes the ministry of Angels for them, as it had pleased God to use
it, in blessing and delivering him in all his troubles; or we may say as
Athanasius and other Fathers do, that the Angel there was Christ. In the third
he produces Saul worshipping and invoking Samuel; which many ways fails of
proving Invocation of Saints, both in the truth of the thing and the
consequence; Proofs these, fitting for such Articles of Faith.

CHAP. III. Of Images.
Trent, as we see by the Decree touching Images, Pretended care for the people.
would seem very careful that the people be taught, how they may safely
conceive of, and worship Images: and that all superstition and filthy lucre be
taken away in the use of them. This is easily said and pretended, but what
boots it, when people are taught contrary to the commandment to bow down and
worship: and to direct and secure them in it, do hear a company of
distinctions, Vid. supra in introduct. ex Bell.
they understand not? Whatever therefore becomes of the truth of that doctrine
now to be examined, we may without rash judgment (which this Author lays to
our charge, pa. 72.) challenge the Church of Rome for so needlessly exposing her
people to the peril of Idolatry or superstition; in this and other points of
worship.

The first Protestant position, says he, is; That it is unlawful to represent
God the Father in any likeness: and the Scripture is, Deuteronomy. 4.15, 16.

Rome, Of picturing God the Father.
pa. 75. Before we ask his reason, note here how they of the Church of Rome are
divided in this point Bell. de Imagine. l. 2. c. 8. Docent imaginem Dei non recte
fieri.
the Cardinal acknowledges some of his Catholics ( Abulensis, Durand, Peresius
and others) to be of Calvin's opinion herein, that an Image of God is not
rightly and lawfully made. And though these be the smaller number in the Church
of Rome, specially since the Jesuits arose and multiplied: yet are they in
this more suitable to the ancient Christians, who had no Images of God, as
Minutius Foelix, and other ancient writers affirm.

Now see this Authors reason, why that Scripture is mistaken, and misapplied by
us. First, because they of the Church of Rome do not represent God by any Image
directly, that is, to signify he is of a figure or shape like that Image, pa.
27. Nor did the understanding Heathens say, they did so represent their Gods by
their Images. Again, we represent God (says he) only historically, as he
appeared to the prophets (as Dan. 7. the ancient of days) neither is it
forbidden to represent him, as he pleased to represent himself, pa. 75. But we
must put a difference between the representing of a Vision and of an History:
Difference in picturing of a Vision and History.
to represent a vision in which God Almighty pleased to show himself to the
eye, is tolerable; but the Church of Rome takes greater liberty, (as appears by
the decree set down by this Author, pa. 72.) of figuring Historias and
narrationes Sacrae Script. Conc. Trid. Sess. 24.
histories, and passages of Scripture, in which God did not show himself to the
eye under any kind of figure, thus also in the story of our Saviors baptism,
they figure him like an old man looking out of the clouds, when as they only
heard a voice, saw no shape: so in the story of Creation, they figure him like
an old man with a globe in his hand; and without reference to history, they
figure the Trinity, God the Father as an old man with the Son on one hand, and
Holy Ghost in shape of a Dove on the other hand.

His Hieroglyphical figuring of Gods attributes, as of providence by an eye,
and the figurative speeches of Scripture attributing hand, wings, feet, to God
Almighty, I let pass as altogether unfit to make any argument for representing
God by an Image; neither is he so confident of them as to make any concluding
argument, but only some semblance for representations of God: for if he will
make Images of these Hieroglyphical or Emblematical expressions, they will not
prove innocent Images, which according to his own definition of an Image do
represent the things as they are in themselves.

The second protestant position (says he) is, That no Image ought to be
worshipped. The Scriptures are Levit. 26.1. Exodus 20.4, 5.
The pretended distinction of Idol and Image.
to amuse the Reader in examining the thing it self, spending thirty pages upon
the words, Idol, gravenimage, likeness: and quarrelling at our Translation as
false and partial; for says he, no word in the first Text signifies Image, and
that which we render gravenimage (out of the Hebrew Pesel) every where
signifies an Idol, and so it is rendered by the Septuagint in the second Text
(...) Idolum; now there is a great difference between Idol and Image; for an
Image is the representation of a true thing, but Idol a representation of what
neither is, nor can be, as he who makes or uses it intends; thus he, in pa. 78,
79, 80, 81. But he should remember that in the first text the Septuagint has
it (...), and the Latin sculptile, and our Translation then does duly render
it gravenimage; also that (...) (by which the Septuagint in the second Text
renders the same word Pesel) does generally imply Image, likeness,
representation, although when taken with connotation of Idolatrous worship
given it, it signifies an Idol in his sense; and seeing the Heathen false Gods
were worshipped by Images and representing statues, he should not be so
offended that we in rendering those texts put in the word Image; well, let the
texts run as rendered in their latin Bible, our reasoning and argument against
Imageworship will stand firm: it being but the simple truth which all antiquity
for 600. years, according to Scripture asserted; and after the Cardinal (whom
this Author follows) had labored so much in his conceited difference between
Idol and Image, he is forced to admit that which defaces it, as this Author, we
shall see, is content to do, in acknowledging any Image may be made an Idol by
the worship given it.

The prohibition of the Commandment.
was the device of the goodly second Council of Nice after the year 700. which
Council, to introduce or defend the Image Worship then begun, so grossly abused
both the words of Scripture, and the Testimonies of the ancient Fathers. They
of the Church of Rome see themselves concerned for the maintaining of their
Image Worship, to defend that hold, and in order to that, conceive it necessary
to make such a distinction between Idol and Image, as may seem to clear their
Images and statues from the prohibition of the Commandment, and leave only that
which they call an Idol under it. Upon his long descant upon the words, we may
note, 1. this their acception of the word Idol restrains it to the visible
thing representing (and such was Pesel the graven images, statues, pillars
forbidden in those texts) whereas the things represented, or the reputed
Deities, Baal, Jupiter, Diana, were Idols too, and the main ones: and they that
prayed or offered sacrifice to them, without sight or presence of their
representations or graven Images, were Idolaters by the first commandment. And
this note is necessary for distinction of the first Vt infra, (...) 12.
and second Commandment, which they would confound. 2. Note, that he fixes the
whole notion of his Idol in the false representation as we saw above; whereas
the notion and reason of an Idol, if we will speak of it as Scripture intends
and forbids it, stands chiefly in the worship unduly given to it, for that
makes the representation forbidden; else if we set aside the consideration of
undue worship, all Chimaera's and monstrous phansies of man's brain, expressed
by the painter, would be Idols forbidden in the Commandment. 3. Whereas
according to that restrained notion of an Idol (as he usually expresses it, to
be a representation made to represent any thing as God which is not so) he
would vindicate the Images of the blessed Saints from being made Idols, because
they represent them as they are, pa. 83. This is a lame defense. For first, any
representation made to worship the true God by, may be, nay is an Idol; such
were Labans Images, Genesis 31. and Micha's Teraphin, Jud. 17. and such was the
golden calfe, Exodus 32. and it is apparent that the likeness or representation
forbidden, Isa. 40.18, 19. refers to the true God; and so by Deuteronomy. 4.15. that
to make them an image or representation of the true God, was a corrupting of
themselves; so by Exodus 20.22.23. Ye shall not make with me Gods of silver --
the worshipping of the graven image Bell. de Imaginib. c. 24. Idololatria est
non solum cum adoratur idolum relicto Deo, sed etiam cum adoratur simul cum
Deo, ut Exodus 20.22, 23. True difference of Image and Idol.
with God is forbidden. Secondly, the images of the Saints, although
representing them as they are, yet become idols by undue worship given them:
this Author is forced to acknowledge, pa. 81. and that the same material
representation may in diverse respects be an image and an idol; the image being
made an idol, by attributing to it any thing proper to God, pa. 82, 83. so then
the distinction of idol and image comes to this: first it is an image or
representation, whether painted or graven, then made an idol in the use of it,
Qui colit ille facit, he that worships makes the idol: so little does their
distinction of idol and image serve the turn.

Temounah in Exodus 20. albeit in Scripture-use it signifies any kind of
likeness, The likeness of any -- sorbidden in the Commandment.
natural, artificial, or spiritual, yet here he will have it of no larger
extent then the other word Pesel as he restrained it to signify an idol or
representation of any thing as God, pa. 84. and concludes pa. 86. line 3. No
other representation, picture or likeness of any creature is here forbidden,
but such as are intended to represent them, by way of idolatry as Gods and
Deities, which they neither are, nor can be; so he. But this is not
demonstrated (as he boasts) from the places of Scripture, which he brought for
these words. For though it be true, that idols and the gross idols of the
Heathen are forbidden, Exodus 20. and that in those places he brings, the words
do import such idols; yet can it not be concluded from those instances, either
that such idols only (i.e. the representations of false Gods, or of any taken
for a God which is not, as he usually and cunningly renders the notion of an
idol) are here forbidden; or that the col Temounah, any likeness of things in
heaven or earth should be restrained to such idolatry; for who shall restrain a
Commandment of God so generally expressed, without warrant from the same God,
to tell us some likeness or images of things in Heaven or earth may be
worshipped, so they be not counted for Gods, or worshipped as Gods? Tertul.
Tertul de Idol. l. 5. Situ eundem Deum observas, etc.
gives a good caution to this purpose: If thou observest the same God, thou
have his law, that thou adore nothing besides God: and if thou look at the
precept that came after: (touching the Ark) imitate thou the prophet, and do
not adore any images, unless God command thee. Not that he commanded any where
to adore images, but did command to make them, viz. the Cherubin.

The worship forbidden.
will the better be seen through when we have looked upon the words following,
not bow down, nor worship; for whether the representation be pesel a graven
image, or Temounah, the likeness of anything, it is no idol till the using of
it, by bowing down, and worshipping of it or the like, do come. Here therefore
he makes the like restraint of worship forbidden by the Commandment; it must be
says he, proportionate to the thing those idols represented, a God, and so a
Divine worship, pa. 86. and then he heaps up places of Scripture, noting the
grossest of Heathen idolatry: esteeming the material picture, as a God, to hear
prayers, to be able to help; and therefore they bowed down to it, prayed to it,
and put hope in it: that it may appear how far the Church of Rome in her fubtil
and refined worships of creatures, is from the idolatry of the Heathen here
forbidden. But I fear the gross fort of Papists fall down to their stocks and
images, much like as those gross idolaters did to theirs; (some honest Romish
writers have complaints to that purpose) and as for the understanding and
learned Heathens, they were almost as subtilin their conceits and distinctions
of their worship, as the more knowing Papists are: as will appear below in the
Trial of Antiquity.

worship them, Of our translating worship for serve.
which should be, nor serve them, by which word he will have a Divine worship
only forbidden: for the word serve shows an homage done to those Idols, as to
things capable of such offices, and endued with knowledge, power, and divinity;
so he pa. 88.89. We answer, Though service be more and may perform more (then
worship) to persons endowed with understanding, and power to give commands: yet
in regard of inanimate statues, Images, and likenesses, serving them, stands
only in acts of worship, and therefore the one may in that case be
indifferently put for the other: and both of them are put as indifferent
expressions of the same thing Deuteronomy. 4.19. to worship them and serve them: so
Jos. 23.16. serve and bow down as equal expressions: Only serving may imply a
frequenting of those acts of worship, in an order and way of Religion toward
those objects of worship; and so the Romish worshipping of Images and Saints may
be called a serving of them. And unless he will exempt those Heathens (before
spoken of) from the serving of graven Images which they worshipped: it may
appear, that the importance of that word, serve them, does not infer such a
divine worship, or homage given to such as they esteem endued with
understanding, power, divinity, as he expressed it; for if by this importance
of the word serve, the Romanists think to secure their worshipping of Images,
because they do not give divine worship or homage to them, nor esteem them
endowed with understanding, power, and divinity: then I say those more
understanding Heathens may be excused from serving of Images, because they did
not give Divine honor to them, or esteem them so endued with, etc. and yet
their worshipping was a serving of them. So we see there was no need of such an
outcry as he makes against our Translation, saying worship, where it should
have said serve; we had no advantage by the one, nor has he by the other.

worship for serve, he busieth himself to find three other mistakes in our
translating that one verse of the Commandment, Other needless exceptions
against our translation.
which in his zeal to Image Worship he brands with the note of fraud and double
dealing. The one in translating Pesel a graven Image, which should be Idol, as
he would make us believe and all because the Septuagint has it in this place
(...), and the Latin Idolum; so he will have us contrary to the Hebrew, Greek
and Latin texts, so he p. 91. But what if here the Septuagint rendered it (...);
in the parallel place Levit. 26.1. it renders the same Hebrew word Pesel by
(...), and the Latin Sculptile, and who can deny that this signifies a graven
Image? and if their Latin Sculptile be not contrary to the Hebrew, then we are
safe enough. His second exception is, that we translate it any graven Image.
But his Logic might teach him, that the force of Indefinites, amounts to an
Universality: that to say there is not a man in the Church, is as much as to
say, there is not any man in the Church: so thou shall not make to thy self a
graven Image, and, thou shall not make to thy self any graven Image: Where Is the
difference? besides he acknowledges, that in our New Translation the word any
is put in a different character. His third exception is not much unlike the
former: To make the Text (says he) sound yet more against us in the ears of
the Vulgar they make it say, nor the likeness of any thing that is in heaven:
when as it should be, nor any likeness which is in Heaven, pa. 92. But what
English man would make any difference in these, more then that the first is the
rounder expression? and the zeal Mr. Spencer has for the Images of Saints
(which are in heaven) makes him so suspicious (if not uncharitable in judging)
we had a design in the translation, to make the unlearued think that the
likeness of all things in heaven, and consequently of our Savior, and of the
Saints, is here forbidden; so he pa. 93. But the words any thing are here also
put in a differing character to show they are added for the rounder English
expression; and as for the Religious or Romish worshipping of the likeness or
Images of our Savior and Saints, we conclude it forbidden not by any
consequence of an advantageous translation, but by the force and intent of the
Commandment. Besides Deuteronomy. 4.16. will bear printing it out so in the
Catechism, for there is Col. after Temounah, the likeness of any --

Of (...) Romans 11.
pages in noting places of our translations, where the word Image (as he
pretends) is unduly and fraudulently put in; but because most of them were so
in the old Translation, and are corrected in the New: I will only note two,
where the word stands still in our present Translation. The one is To. 11.4. to
the Image of Baal. But how could (...) be better rendered? whether we supply it
with (...) (as Erasmus did) which signifies Image, or with (...) which
signifies statue and may well be understood, it being the word which the
Septuagint uses in that History of Baal 1 Kings 10.27. -- the (...), statuam
Baal sic. Vul. Lat.
Image or statue of Baal. Mr. Spencer for fear the word Image should be here
supplied, would make it refer to a Femal Deity. But let him show that any femal
Deities, came under the name of Baals, or Baalim; he acknowledges that in 1
Kings 19.18. (to which this place of the Romans relates) it is, that bowed not
the knee (...), therefore no femal Idol is here meant: but because the falsely
supposed Deity was acknowledged and worshipped, by bowing the knee to his Image,
S. Paul more expressly and elegantly put it (...). The other is Act. 19.35.
where he quarrels at our Translation for adding the word Image, in rendering the
word (...), which signifies that which fell from Jupiter: But seeing that which
was supposed to fall was a statue or Image, what harm is there or fraud in
adding the word Image, and rendering it more clearly, the Image that fell --?
And what need this tenderness in Mr. Spencer for the word Image, if he would
not show himself zealous for that, against which God Almighty has in this
Commandment declared himself a jealous God.

words to return again to the consideration of the thing, worshipping of Images;
which he begins to do pa. 107. where he undertakes to show that the very
Translations of the Protestants prove nothing against the use of Images, Of
Graven Images.
practiced in the Romish Church: Certainly much may be proved against what is
practiced there: but here we are to consider the Doctrine: see then how he
makes good what he said. He supposes, the Protestant must take Graven Image,
either in his sense above, for an Idol and false God, or in the sense he put
upon the word Image, i.e. for a true representation of some holy person: the
Church of Rome detests Graven Images in the first sense, and in the other sense
a Graven Image is not forbidden. Thus he. But he should consider that
Protestants can tell him of Graven Images, which may and have been made to
worship by them not a false god, but the true; and so forbidden in the
Commandment: such were those we spoke of above, Labans Images, Mica's, the
Golden Calf: and note that those Images which were stolen from Laban, are called
strange Gods, Genesis 35.2. not that the false Heathen gods were worshipped in them
by Laban or any of Jacobs family, but because they used these in the worship of
the true God, which was to worship God after a strange manner, as the Heathens
worshipped their gods; Again the Protestants can tell him of Graven Images,
which represent neither the true nor false God, yet falling under the
prohibition by undue worship given unto them; and such was the brazen Serpent,
and so their Images as used in the Romish Church, may by undue worship become
prohibited.

Exodus 20. Worship toward the Ark no proof for Image Worship.
then David contradicted Gods command in bidding them, worship his footstool,
Ps. 99.5. so he pa. 108. By better warrant may we say, the Church of Rome
contradicts the Commandment of God: He says, Thou shall not bow down and
worship: she says, bow down and worship, and commends the practice as
religious and profitable. But seeing he alleges Scripture, to prove his
Position: let it be our turn now to show his many mistakes, in urging that of
Psalm. 99.5. for worshipping of Images. He begins with a complaint of our
Translation, for rendering it worship at his footstool, when it should be,
worship his footstool, the Ark and Cherubins upon it. First, we might quit him
with a more just complaint of their rendering Heb. 11.21. Jacob worshipped the
top of his staff, which the original (...), will not bear. But the Original in
Ps. 99. will admit ours, at or toward his footstool, the same word and phrase
being used in the last verse: worship his holy Mount; or at or in his holy
Mount: Pagnin and Montanus rendering both places alike (to show the indifferency
of the phrase) Incurvate Scabello, and incurvate Monti: so that by Mr. Spencers
argument, they were commanded to worship the Mount as well as the Ark or
Cherubins; and if the latter be capable of this sense, worship at or in his
holy Mount (as the Septuagint turns it (...)) then may the former place be also
rendered, worship at or toward his foot stool; so the Chalde Paraphrase renders
both alike, Adorate in Domo Sanctuarij, worship in or at the house of his
Sanctuary that is his footstool, or place of presence on earth: and so the last
verse, Adorate in Monte Sanctuarii, worship in the Mount of his Sanctuary: the
place where his Temple stood. Now as the same phrase in the last verse directs
the rendering of the fifth verse, worship at his footstool, so does reason also
persuade it; for the people could not see the Cherubins which were in the
holiest place, how then commanded to worship them, and that as Images and
representations? But the intent of the Psalm is to bid them frequent that place
of worship where his footstool was; and in worshipping to look that way, not
for the Cherubins sake, but for Gods presence sake of which the Ark was a sign
and witness; so the Ark or place where it stood did but circumstantially
determine the worship, ( i.e. that way) it did not objectively receive the
worship. Secondly, he will have (which also he repeats pa. 127. and 133.) The
Cherubin there no proof for Imageworship.
images commanded to be made and set in holy places for worship, because these
Cherubins were so; but how many mistakes and inconsequencies are here? First,
in drawing warrant from Gods action to their inventions; Secondly, in supposing
them the images or representations of Angels, which being set out for worship,
must according to his own definition of an image represent the thing or person
as they are -- but let him say, what individual Angels these did represent? Or
what Angel is like, or did ever appear like to those Cherubins? Therefore
images according cording to his own notion of image are not here commanded.
Thirdly, the truth is, those Cherubs were symbolical or emblematical
representations of the ministry of Angels, which God as it pleases him uses
in and about his Church: and therefore is said to sit on the Cherubins, and to
ride upon them: and this pair of Cherubs over the Ark is called the charet of
the Cherubins, 1 Chro. 28.18. Lastly, his mistake in supposing them set there
for worship, which is a great falsehood, and injurious to Almighty God that set
them there, and I fear a wilful mistake; for he cannot be ignorant how it is
acknowledged, that the Jews did not worship Angels themselves, much less their
images; that the Jews had not those images of the Cherubins and Brazen Serpent,
Azor. par. 1. Instit. mor. l. 9. c. 6 qu. 7. Vasq. de Adorat. l. 2. disp. 4.
nor any images for worship, this is asserted by several ^athers, acknowledged
by some of this Authors Society.

Their maiming of the Commandment in their Catechismes.
thou shall not make to thy self any graven image, nor the likeness, etc. in
their shorter Catechisms; Did we (says he) deliver the Commandments as
Protestants do, with the Preface: The same which God spoke -- we were obliged
to put them word for word, or else the Commandments would not be answerable to
the Title, pa. 114. But though you set not that preface before them, yet
prefixing the Title of Gods Commandments, and pretending to deliver in your
Catechisms the ten Commandments, you are obliged to deliver all the fubstantial
parts or things commanded or forbidden; otherwise you make them unanswerable to
the title, and to your pretense.

division of the Commandments, The division of the Decalogue.
which reckons but three in the first Table, by crowding the second commandment
into the first; and making seven Commandments in the second table, by breaking
the last into two. The division of the Decalogue, if it were a point of great
moment, might be cleared on the Protestants side, as more agreeable to the
greater part of Antiquity, and more rational in it self. For though Aug. de
december chordis, and qu. ^1. in Exodus
St. August. with some few others liked the former division, into three and
seven: conceiting three in the first table (which prescribes the worship of
God) suitable to the three persons in Trinity: yet Romanists have another and
more dangerous reason, because they see it more suitable to their
image worship, to make the first and second Commandment but one, and forbidding
only an Idol or false God, and to be rendered in brief, Thou shall make to thy
self no idol. Therefore this Author, pa. 119. and 121. where he gives the sum
of the Commandment, would have the strange God in our first Commandment, and
the graven image in our second, to be all one. But if we consider the Heathen
Deities or strange Gods were idols, and their praying or sacrificing to them Vt
supra, Nu. 3.
without an image, was idolatry, according to the first Commandment; so also
the worshipping of their images, yea, the worshipping of the true God by an
image, is another sort of idolatry by our second Commandment forbidding the
graven image. The worship also which the Turks give their Mahomet (I hope our
Romanists will say) is forbidden by Gods Law here: yet do they not worship him
as a God, but at his Tomb, (and therefore the thing forbidden must not be
restrained to a false God as he would have it;) nor do they worship him by any
graven image, for they have no representations or likenesses of things:
therefore it is fit that our second commandment, which forbids such should
stand divided from the first. And for the last commandment which they break
into two, and pretend a reason from the several objects, Goods and wife: yet
the unity of it rests upon the desire forbidden (in the word covet) let the
object or thing coveted be what it will; therefore the Apostle renders the
commandment by that one word, non concupisces, thou shall not covet, Romans 7.7.
And God himself has so disposed the words of this commandment, Exodus 20. that
he has put the not coveting of a neighbors wife (which they make the ninth
commandment) into the midst of their tenth commandment; putting before and
after it the not coveting of his goods, which shows them but one commandment.

But enough of this. It is not the division of the Commandments that is so much
to be stood upon, as the observing and keeping of them; did the Romanists hold
this way of dividing the Decalogue, with the same simplicity and uprightness
that St. Aug. and some others with him did, we should not quarrel at it; but
this we have cause to charge upon them, that in dividing they maim the
Commandments, either by leaving out some material parts, as what concerns the
graven image, likeness, bowing down to it, and Gods jealousy against it, or by
restraining the sense of them, as we have heard.

The pretended respects upon which worship is given to Imates.
under which they give reverence and worship to images, pa. 124. But it is in
vain to show in what respect they give, if the Scripture exclude it. First he
pretends it is but such a reverence as is given to holy things dedicated or
tending to the worship of God: and in this respect (says he) we give them no
more honor or worship then Protestants do to Churches, pa. 129. This is too
remiss and comes short of their worshipping and serving of images. For we
worship not holy things used in Gods service, but use them reverently with
difference from common things; also sometimes they determine our worship (we
give to God) circumstantially, ad hic and nunc, for the performing it then and
that way: not objectively receive it; but who can without shame make images,
holy things dedicated, or tending to Gods service, when there is such caution
in Scripture against that danger? Or affix a special presence of God to them?
For this would be what the grosser sort of Heathens conceited of their images:
yet does this Author allege for the worship of their images, that reverence
which the ground had as made holy by the presence of God, Exodus 3.9. where in
token and acknowledgement of that presence, shoes were to be put off. The
presence of Patriarch, Prophet, or Saint made not the ground or place holy
where they stood themselves: much less can the representation of them in or by
an image, render that image holy, and to require our reverence and worship.

Cardinal) from the necessity of the inward image or representation we have in
our mind of the thing to be worshipped, to prove the convenience of an outward
image to help our imagination -- and to help us to think of God, pa. 126. That
outward images and representations may help our imagination in conceiving of
the object, yea, and raise our affections, Philosophy tells us: but in the act
of worshipping God, the danger of using images is great, least they possess our
minds and carry away what belongs to the thing represented; as St. Aug. on
Psalm 113. shows how hard it is for him that prays, beholding an image (such
is the manner in the Church of Rome) to keep his mind from thinking, the image
hears and helps him; where also he tells us that the Heathens who would
seem to be of a more refined religion, Use of in ages.
Qui videntur sibi purgationis esse Religionis: di^unt, simulachrum non colo
utc Damonium: sed per offi^iem co^poralem, ejus rei signum intueor quod color
debeo. August. in Psalm 113.
alleged in excuse of their worship such respects as these, of helping and
fixing the imagination, and conveying the worship to the thing represented. We
allow not only the historical use of images, but in some sort the affective
also: yet that only as to meditation and preparation; not for or in the
exercise of prayer or worship: much less to be the medium or instrument of
coveying the worship; hereby images in the Church of Rome become great
stumbling blocks to the people that are not capable of the nice distinctions
and limitations, which their learned ones are fain to use in defense of this
imageworship.

that put us in mind of God, Bowing at name of Jesus no prerence for
Imageworship.
from our bowing at the name of Jesus: and is so courteous as to say; what
reverence a Protestant would judge to be given to that name printed or
engraven: let him say the like may be given to any image of our Savior, and no
more will be required, so he pa. 128. But a Protestant may say; first, if he
bow at the name of Jesus, he has a Text will bear him out, Phil. 2.10. which
cannot be said of doing so to an image: Secondly, he may say, that the
adoration done at the name of Jesus in our holy offices, is given to Christ
only as the object, but is circumstantially determined ad nunc, by or at the
naming of him, that is, such worship is given to Christ at the hearing of that
name, or when he is named: and if upon sight of that name printed or engraven,
any man worship Christ, then is that name the occasional motive of his worship;
now as for an image as it may not be the object of worship (in which point the
Romanists do require more then a Protestant can yield) so it may be the
occasional motive of worship, as should a man upon sight of a Crucifix worship
the Lord Christ, lifting up his heart, putting off hat, and bowing; and in that
we may say the image determines the worship circumstantially as to the nunc,
the time (worship being given upon the sight of it) but should not determine it
ad hic, to do it toward the image, for fear of making it any object of the
worship, or medium in conveying the worship to the thing it represents, and
minded us of; and in all this there is no more of worship done to the image,
then there would be to an iron chain, which he, that was bound with it in his
captivity, looking upon, takes occasion to remember Gods mercy in his
deliverance, and so worships God uncovering his head and bowing.

Kneeling at Communion no pretense for it.
from our kneeling at the Communion: that if we say we afford any reverence to
the sacred signs, it must be religious, and then (says he) I have my intent,
pa. 130, 131. This seems to be fairly spoken; but here is the cunning: to go
very low in their doctrinal concessions, but still hold up the practice, for
there they may easily exceed and extend it as occasion requires. But first,
reverence speaks less then adoration or worship; far less then that adoration,
which is allowed in the Church of Rome to images.

Secondly, we do not make our kneeling at the Communion a sign or profession
of that reverence we have toward the holy signs: there being other reasons of
it. But we express our reverence toward them, by handling them duly as becomes
such holy things, using them only in that holy administration: taking order
with the remainder, that no undecent usage happen unto them; all worship and
adoration that is performed in the use of them, is given to God: and not
belongs any way to them but only circumstantially, in as much as it is done
toward them; because that which they represent and convey unto us, is the
great motive of our worship and adoration But thirdly, what boldness is this,
by the reverence due to the sacred sacramental signs instituted of God, to
challenge like reverence to images invented by man, Images not capable of the
reverence due to holy things.
and not capable of that holy use? They have a kind of relation to the thing
represented, such as arises from representation, which is the weakest relation:
not such as arises from dedication to holy use, of which, as I said, images are
not capable; being such things as God will not accept of, if dedicated to
worship: and therefore not capable of that reverence which belongs to holy
things piously dedicated by man: much less of that which holy things instituted
by God may expect; and yet much less capable of that honor and adoration,
which is allowed in the Church of Rome. And what if this Author says, he has
his intent, as satisfied with so slender a reverence to be given to his holy
images? It behooves them to speak and write warily of such points in English:
but which of their Latin controversie-writers would or could say, he had his
intent, if no more were yielded then this Author pretends to be satisfied with?
There being two respects upon which (as the Romish writers dispute it) worship
is held due to images: either propterse for their own sakes, as a reverence is
due to holy things, or propter exemplar for the things sake which they
represent: Bell. lib. de Enagin. c.
the Cardinal disputes honor and worship is due to them in both respects, and
so could not have his intent, if only a reverence were given to them, such as
is to holy things dedicated: though indeed they are not capable of so much; as
was said before; nor would Azorius (though disagreeing with the Cardinal) have
his intent: who casting off the first respect (as deserving little or no
honor) holds only to the second. (...) part. 1. Instit. mo. l. 9. c. 6. qu. 9.
Dupli^i honor non coli^ur Ima^^ --
The image (says he) is not worshipped with a double, but one single honor,
and that for the exemplars sake -- and that honor is the worship of Latria, if
to the image of Christ; of Hyperdulia, if to the image of the blessed Virgin;
and of Dulia if to the images of the Saints. This is downright, and scarcely
can be excused from idolatry, even in the opinion of the Cardinal, Bell. l. de
^mag. c. 24.
passing his judgment upon that doctrine, which yields Latriam to the Image
for the exemplars sake.

Let us now hear what St. Instrumenta in usum administrandorum sacramemorum.
Aug. says to the Allegation (such as Mr. Spencer made) of things dedicated to
holy use, as about the Sacrament. He shows a difference between them and
images, as to this point of reverence. For albeit, (says he) they be made of
the same metal, and are work of men's hands, as images are, -- quo ipso
ministerio consecrata -- in ejus honor, cui pro salute nostra inde servitur.
yet by that ministry those vessels are consecrated, and called holy, in his
honor, to whom for our salvation we do service by them. And it is not said of
them as of images, they have eyes and see not, mouths and speak not -- this he
adds to show the danger of images (by reason of their representation) when used
in holy duties: for as he says there, -- Valet in affectibus miserorum, etc.
Aug. in Psalm 113.
the form of the image, like to one having life, much prevails upon the
affections of silly men; and more to this purpose this Father has there; which
see added below in trial of Antiquity, Chap. of Images.

Rev. 13.15, 16. Image of the beast made an argument for Image Worship.
which speaks of worshipping the image of the beast: whereupon he argues to
this purpose. If worship of the image tend to his honor, that is represented
by it, (as is evident by that place;) and it be lawful to do all that tends to
the honor of our Savior, then the worship of his image and so of all the
Saints is lawful, pa. 133. As if he should reason thus; if the Devil or
Antichrist or that accursed thing (as he calls it) will have, and takes it for
an honor to have his image worshipped; then is it so with Christ or God; who
says notwithstanding I am a jealous God -- And albeit the reverence done to
the Emperors image tends to his honor, because this is but civil respect, of
conveying which the image is capable; yet is it far otherwise in this religious
worship; for there the representation of God or Christ or Saint by images for
worship, is like the stamping of the Kings image upon adulterate money without
his leave: which is so far from passing current among his subjects, or that he
takes it for his honor, that he will command it, notwithstanding his image on
it, to be defaced and cut in pieces. Again it is too unreasonable for him,
either to take image in that place of Rev. 13. for such a material
representation we speak of; or to draw the argument from that image of the
beast, to such material representations; (much like the arguments their Nicen
Council makes for worshipping these material images, from what some Fathers had
spoken of worshipping Christ as the image of the Father:) In that place of the
Revel. is meant one power, state and government, which for likeness may be
called the image of the former: and it is probable, that image speaks some
state among Christians, that shall imitate or be like the first beast or
Heathen Rome: and I know not wherein one can be like the other, more then in
erecting a new kind of Idolatry or imageworship, and in persecuting the
gainsayers, that will not receive the mark or worship the beast. So that this
Author and those of his communion may be concerned in this prophecy more then
they are aware of; I am sure they can have no advantage from hence for their
image worship.

Irenaeus his days, and thought tending to Christ's honor, then would those
Heretics he speaks of (who held our Savior not to be the Son of the God of
the Old Testament, that made the world and gave the Law) have had a fair plea:
for how should they think him his Son, if allowing and taking it for honor,
what was so cautioned against and abominated by God in the old Testament, and
for which the Jews still do abominate Christian Religion, viz. the use of
images in religious worship? It is a great piece of cunning in the Dragon or
Devil, to induce men to believe, that this service of images, and creatures, so
strictly forbidden by Moses Law, is authorized by the Gospel, allowed by Christ.

CHAP. IV. Of Justification by Works.
Trent decree, against Justification by works before grace, Merit of congruity.
and against the merit of them: he challenges the 13. Article of our Church for
charging the School-Authors with the merit of congruity in such works, which he
denies any of them to have held, and is something passionate against the
composers of the Articles, pa. 138. and 139. But what need such anger here?
Seeing the Article determines the same truth, as to this doctrine, that the
Trent decree does; it might have so far pacified him as to allow that
parenthesis in the Article (as the School-Authors say) such a candid
interpretation as it is capable of; for it may refer to their expressing of the
doctrine by that phrase of their invention, (deserve grace of congruity) not to
their holding of that doctrine, for thus the words stand in the Article neither
do they (works done before grace) make men meet to receive grace, or (as the
School-Authors say,) deserve grace of congruity, do but for say put in express
or phrase it, and you have that sense plainly. But suppose the Article had
directly said the School-Authors held that doctrine: will Mr. Spencer hazard
his credit and call it a great untruth, and say none can be produced that held
it?

It seems, He is acquainted only with Thomists; for though their Angelical
Doctor did not approve it, yet their Seraphical (Bonaventure) does not account
it such an honor, no more does Scotus, and they were not without their
followers. Yea, since the Council of Trent the two Trigosius and Fr. Longus a
Coriolano.
Commentators or Epitomizers of Bonaventure acknowledge it may be defended, and
do answer the objections from the Trent Decrees. And as they say it may be
defended and do defend it; so I think, to defend it is as little or less to
Gods dishonor, then their merit of condignity in works after grace: which
besides its own untruth, is attended in that Church by more corruptions both of
Error and Practice, then the other is possibly capable of.

Trent Definitions pa. State of the question.
142, 143. he should have told us, which he opposes to Protestant doctrine, for
not any one of them can be framed into a just Controversy. Only he tells us,
that in the last chiefly consists the Roman doctrine of Justification by works,
pa. 143. See then what that last particular is, and mark what this great noise
they make of Justification by works comes to.

His last particular or collection out of the Trent decrees stands thus, Being
freely justified, we may do good works, and by them (accepted through Christ's
merits) become more and more just in the sight of God: To fix it upon the
second Justification, is to yield the Gause.
Wherein chiefly consists the Roman doctrine of Justification by works. He
might have added, wherein we yield up the cause to the Protestants; for this is
the second Justification as they call it: and he knows unless he will grossly
mistake, that when we say, justified by faith, and not by works, we mean their
first Justification, which indeed and properly is Justification, and from which
they themselves exclude works, as the words above also do imply, Being
Justified we may do good works: they follow Justification. As for that which
they make the second justification, and is thus described by the Council of
Trent, Being therefore thus justified, and made the friends of God (there is the
first or true and proper justification) going on from virtue to virtue, they
are renewed from day to day, and using those arms of justice to sanctification
(you have Mr. Spencers words) by the observance of the Commandments of God and
the Church: their faith cooperating with their good works, they increase in
the justice they have received, and are justified more and more, as it is
written, he who is just let him be justified still, Revel. 22. Now if this be
their second Justification, and they intend no more by it then is here
expressed in the Trent decree, viz. renovation day by day, and yiedling up our
members as weapons of righteousness to sanctification, and increase in
righteousness. We have no cause to quarrel at the thing, but only that they
will call that Justification, which indeed is Sanctification. But if under this
their Justification they intend also a meriting of remission by good works, or
a redeeming of sins (done after grace) by the merit of good works, (which
neither the Council nor Mr. Spencer mentions, but their earnest contending for
Justification by works, and some arguments their writers use for it too plainly
shows they are concerned in it) I say if they intend so, and would speak it, we
would think our selves more concerned in the cause. Now, as Mr. Spencer thought
good to premise seven collections he made out of their Council, the better (as
he conceived) to show, wherein the Roman doctrine of Justification by works,
did consist: so I shall take leave before I come to examine his confused labor
and impertinencies in the defense of that pretended doctrine, to set down some
particulars, the better to show, wherein the true Protestant doctrine of
Justification by faith does consist.

good works do not justify, but follow Justification, Preparatory works to
justification.
yet are there many works, or workings of the soul required in and to
justification; what the Council of Trent says; Can. 9. pronouncing Anathema,
to him that shall say, a wicked man to be justified by faith alone, so that he
mean, there is nothing else required, which may cooperate, to the obtaining of
the grace of Justification, nor that it is necessary, he be prepared and
disposed by the motion of his will. It implies that which I said, and that such
preparatory works are not excluded by every meaning of Justification by faith
alone, for it condemns him that says, a wicked man to be justified by faith
alone, so that he means, there is none of these required.

II. These works or workings of the soul, are preparatory and dispositive to
Justification, for there are many acts and motions of the will that go before,
desire, fear, love, sorrow, purposes, (which may be called Initials) upon the
ministry of the word, the threatenings and the promises: as before childbearing
many throws, so in the travail of the soul, for the second birth: Faith it self
rises by degrees of persuasions (for there are diverse acts and persuasions of
faith) till it come to that last act, (that believing with the whole heart)
immediately requisite to Justification. Now faith in all those preparatory
motions has the preeminence, for it gives beginning to them; for by the
persuasions that faith has (of those threats and promises in the Gospel,
Preeminence of faith in them.
and of all the truths of Christ's performances and merits) arise desires and
fears, sorrow, love, the motions of the heart or will, and these Initials
advance, and gather strength, according to the advance that faith has in its
apprehensions and persuasions; for this the Trent Council, acknowledges Faith
to be the beginning of man's salvation, the foundation and root of
Justification. Chap. 8. this is well said, in regard of faith's preeminence and
efficacy in the preparatory works, had they but given to it, its due in the act
of Justification, that singular efficacy and property it has above all other
graces in the apprehending and receiving of the meritorious cause of our
Justification, Christ and his righteousness. Now let not any think these
preparatory acts or workings to be without grace preventing: as if a man did of
himself and by the proper motion of his own will, dispose himself to
justification; the Trent Council condemns such doctrine, Can. 3.

Conditions and qualifications, in Justification.
which according to their measure are required in Justification, as conditions
of receiving remission of sins; so repentance, and the act of charity in
forgiving others. But Faith here also has the preeminence, no other act or work
of the soul having the capacity or efficacy to apprehend the meritorious cause:
and so notwithstanding that other workings of the soul, as those of Repentance
and Charity according to their measure, be required as conditions of receiving
the benefit, Preeminence of faith.
which is remission of sins, or as qualifications of the subject that receives
it; yet not as Instrument of receiving and apprehending the meritorious cause
of justification and remission, as faith is: for which justification is
specially ascribed to Faith.

Inherent Righteousness.
which the Church of Rome lays so much upon in the point of our Justification,
seeing it is the Work of God, as they acknowledge, it is no proof of their
doctrine of justification by works: and they might forbear to make it the
formal cause of our justification, when we acknowledge the presence of it in
and with justification, as a necessary qualification of the person Justified: A
needless dispute it is, what should be the formal cause of our Justification,
seeing the meritorious cause is acknowledged on both sides.

But if they will talk of a Formal cause it can be no other then Christ's
righteousness as imputed, Formal Cause.
and by faith apprehended, and made ours; for that phrase of the Apostle, he is
made unto us righteousness, 1 Cor. 1.30. and we made the righteousness of God
in him, sounds something to a formal cause, not inherent, but by way of
imputation and account: not that God imputes his righteousness as if we had
done it, but that for his righteousness performed for us, he not only forgives
sin to them that apprehend it duly by faith, but accounts of them, receives
them as righteous. Therefore instead of asking after the formal cause in us,
more proper it is to enquire according to the Apostles expression ( To. 4.13.
it was counted to him for righteousness and v. 23. it shall be imputed to us.)
what is that which is imputed to us for righteousness, i. e. upon which being
performed on our part, God receives accounts of us as righteous? We find by
the Apostle it is our believing, for it was so with Abraham, He believed and it
was imputed to him for righteousness: not the To Credere the very act of
believing, but more concretely considered with that which it apprehends, the
receiving of what is offered in the promise, Christ and his righteousness.

V. Lastly, as for those that are commonly called good works, which being done
in the state of grace are more perfect then the former (such as were
preparatory, and dispositive to justification, or according to their measure
required in Justification, as Conditional to the remission of sins given in
it.) Those good works I say, are the only works concerned in their doctrine of
Justification by works; yet is not the first justification by these works, for
they follow it; Our Adversaries when put to it, do grant it, and draw the whole
dispute (as we see by this Author) to that which they call the second
Justification of which if they will make no more then (as I hinted above) their
Council makes of it: we might here sit down, having the cause yielded up to us;
but that they think themselves concerned to propound the doctrine in gross to
the people, Justified by works, and in their disputes for it, to confound the
first and second Justification, using places of Scripture, which treat of the
first, or true and proper Justification, as we shall see in examining of them.

This Author begins with S. James. 2.24. which he brings as a confirmation of
the Romish Position, that Faith only does not Justify: where it is our turn now
to observe his mistakes. Should we therefore demand, what justification is this
that S. James treats of, first or second? he must confess his impertinency: for
the Apostle here treats of the first, the true and proper Justification, and
that both he and his Trent Council acknowledge most free, and not by works; now
this Author acknowledges it is the same Justification which S. James and S.
Paul treats of, and its evident by S. James citing the same Scripture for his
Justification v. 23. whic S. Paul does Romans 4.3. Abraham believed and it was
imputed to him for righteousness; But it is plain that S. Paul every where
treats of the first and proper Justification; The other example also that S.
James makes use of, ( viz. of Rahab) plainly speaks the first Justification.
And therefore this Author spending his whole discourse against that distinction
of being Justified before God and before men; to prove that S. James speaks of
true internal Justification before God, does but prove what we allow, and what
makes against himself, who must acknowledge a man is truly justified before God
before he does such works.

Seeing then this is the first Justification which S. James intends, and that
as both they and we say, is not by works: this cannot without gross mistake and
impertinency be objected (as it is by them) against us; but they and we are
both of us concerned to reconcile the seeming contrariety between the two
Apostles. As for the distinction of Justification before God, and before men
(albeit there may be a several consideration of Justification to that purpose,
and good works do declare a man Justified, and (as I may say) do justify his
faith, yet) we need not here make use of it; but the purpose of S. James in
writing this Epistle does direct us rather to a several consideration of Faith
or believing: for when he denies a man to be justified by faith alone: he
speaks not of a lively working faith, (to which S. Paul attributes
justification) but of a bare and seeming faith, in profession only, and (as to
good works) dead and barren, such as they rested in against whom he writes.
This is plain by S. James his subjoyning v. 23. and the Scripture was fulfilled
which says Abraham believed etc. how could the Apostle bring this Scripture
(the same that S. Paul does for justifying faith Romans 4.3.) in confirmation of
what he says of works, but to show, that Abraham's faith which justified him,
was a working faith?

Romanists conceive themselves less concerned (for fear of the former truth) to
labor in the clearing of the contrariety which seems to be between the
Apostles; Romanists confound their First and Second Justification.
and think it more popular, and for their advantage, to cry up S. James his
bare words of justification by works: we cannot help it; but must only note
their wilful mistake and impertinency, in so eagerly urging S. James, who
speaks of the first justification. Mr. Spencer indeed promises pa. 148. to
reconcile the two Apostles: but does it so, as neither of them will be
reconciled to his second justification; as we shall see by examining the places
of S. Paul, which he insists on, to show the Protestants mistaken: but first
take notice of what he says here upon occasion of the former Text of S. James.
Justified by good works, working with faith, and perfecting it, informing and
vivificating it, as S. James describes them here, p. 148. This is not only
impertinent but guilty of falsehood, belying the Apostle; for first he said not,
(...) Ja. 2.22.
that works wrought with faith, but that his faith wrought with his works.
Secondly, Albeit the Apostle says, by works was faith made perfect, yet does
he not therefore describe works as informing and vivificating it; for here is
no other perfection meant, then what the effect brings to the Agent, fruit to
the tree, operation to the power or virtue from which it is; as every thing
that is made for use, ordained to practice and operation, is then said to be
made perfect and consummate, when it comes to working; but this is far from
informing or vivificating it; he may as well say the breath which proceeds from
the life of the body (its S. James his similitude v. 26.) does inform and
vivisicate it; In like manner good works do not inform, or give life to faith,
but receive from it: proceeding from it as effects, and fruits: the whole
chapter Heb. 11. shows it, speaking the effects of faith, even of Abraham's here
mentioned. And that which this Author pa. 143. gathers from his Trent Council,
speaks plainly (as we noted above) that men are freely justified, and then do
good works: And this shows his impertinency, for they require (fidem formatam)
faith informed, for the first justification, how then by works that follow? and
his inadvertency in again crossing their own doctrine, for they say, Faith is
informed by charity infused in the first justification: how then by works that
come after?

Now for the Places out of S. Paul, which he insists on to show the Protestants
mistaken. The first is, Romans 3.28. Without the works of the Law.



Here, and in all such places which exclude the works of the Law: he will have
Protestants mistaken in the undestanding of the works of the Law: Because by
the Law is understood, that which is written in the books of Moses both Moral
and Ceremonial, and by works of the Law, Saint Paul understands such works as
are done by force and knowledge of the Law, before the faith of Christ is
infused into the soul, or that it is enlightened, and assisted by his grace, pa.
149, etc. It is true that the Law is often so taken: but when the Apostle
excluds works of the Law in relation to Abraham's justification, it cannot refer
to Moses Law after given and written. But the speech by faith and not by works,
comes to this issue: no man can be justified by doing or working according to
the Law he is under: Not Abraham by the works of the Law then; Not Jews by the
works, of the Law then, the Law of Moses: Not Christians by works, or by doing
what they are bound to do, by the Law and Commandments which they are under;
But by reason of their many failings in those works and doings, they must stand
by faith apprehending Christ's obedience and satisfaction, to bear them out
against the sentence of the Law, or Gods judgment.

And it is true also, that the Apostle sometimes takes the works of the Law for
such as are done by force and knowledge of the Law, before the faith of Christ,
etc. as when he speaks of such as sought righteousness by the works of the Law
without Christ; but we cannot think the Apostle excludes works of the Law, i.
e. such as are done before grace (as this Author says) from justifying, to
admit works done in grace into their stead for justification: nor think, that
as Pharisees sought it by the former works and mist of it, Romans 9.31. so the
Romanists may seek it by the latter sort of works, and find it; for Romans 10.3,
4, 5, 6, 9. he sets the righteousness of the Law and of faith simply one
against the other: neither can the righteousness of faith be imagined to be any
righteousness of our working. Observe farther what this Author says pa. 150.
that Romans 3. v. 20. is added By the law is the knowledge of sin, which is a
reason wherefore such works as are done by the knowledge of the Law only,
cannot justify; from whence we likewise infer; If by the Law is the knowledge
of sin, and the Law still convinces those that are under grace, of sin: they
cannot be justified by their works before God: David and holy men in his time
had the same way of justification as we (notwithstanding they were under Moses
Law) who when they were justified and in grace, were concerned to acknowledge.
If God would be extreme to mark what is done amiss, who could abide it, or
stand? Psalm. 130. and to pray, Enter not into judgment with thy servant, for in
thy sight shall no man living be justified: Psalm. 143.2. that is, if thou in
strict judgment wilt examine what he does. The latter part of the verse is
sometimes thus repeated by the Apostle, No flesh can be justified, Romans 3.20.
Gal. 2. v. 16. which word flesh Mr. Spencer, vainly takes hold on as implying
one not yet spiritual but carnal, under the guilt of sin and corruption of
nature: So pa. 158. But David speaks it in relation to himself: No man can be
justified, not thy servant, by his own doings. So that still upon the same
reason, no man under the Gospel can be justified in the sight of God, by what
he does: because the Law convinces him of sin, (and to the same purpose it is
said, We make God a Liar if we say we have not sin, 1 Io. 1.10.) So that if God
enter with him into judgment he cannot be justified, if the Lord mark what is
done amiss he cannot abide it.

What he says to Gal. 2.16. as to the works of the Law, is the same he said
above to Romans 3.28. and needs no farther reply. But that which is the main
exception, and will ease us of farther trouble in this controversy, is his
limiting of the word Justify in those and the other places of S. Paul's
Epistles acknowledging they speak every where of the first justification, which
is not by works. So then the Protestant position (as he calls it) of
justification by faith only, stands good as they intend it: by faith only, i.
e. not by works, and this also shows their exception against the word only, is
needless and therefore the mistake he fastens on us pa. 148. groundless; the
word only being but exclusive to works, which he and his Council exclude from
the first justification.

Paul says of justification: Sanctification, and increase of grace, and
righteousness.
it is not worth our contending about, as to proper speech, which controversies
require; for we acknowledge all that he or his Council speaks of this second
justification, to be done in sanctification, and to be properly so called, viz.
the renovation and increase of that grace and sanctification received: and that
such increase is made by works or acting: Philosophy teaches, it is so in
ordinary habits, much more in these which have also the influence, and
assistance of Gods spirit for their increase. But if he would have said any
thing to purpose, whereby this Increase of righteousness by works, should seem
to deserve to bear any sense of justification: he should have resolved us (as I
noted above) whether a man in grace may by good works merit the remission of
his sin into which he is fallen, as David; and as he granted pa. 142. that the
first justification could not be merited by works, so he should have told us
plainly, whether remission and restoration of a justified person after his
fall (which may be called in some sort a second justification) can by any works
of that person be merited? They sometimes pretend to this, when they urge
Daniels saying to Nebuchadnezzar, Redeem (break off) thy sins by righteousness
-- c. 4.27. Where let the Translation go as they would have it by the word
redeem: yet must they confess, this remission of sins to Nebuchadnezzar, would
have been the first justification, and not to be acquired by works; in like
manner they must acknowledge their impertinency, when by Luc. 7.47. for she
loved much, they endeavor to prove, that her love was the cause of her
forgiveness, when this was her first justification: But thus do they confound
their first and second justification, in their proofs of justification by
works, and being pressed by argument, they retire for answer to their second
Justification.

That which they cite out of Revel. 22. justificetur adhuc, let him be
justified still, is all the pretense they have for this second justification:
where we accord with them that by the justificetur is meant a progress and
increase of righteousness, but its their mistake to make this (which is
sanctification) to be justification which stands in remission of sins. That
part of the Trent decree which pretends to this justification by the increase
of righteousness, Exhibendo arma justitiae in Sanclificationem cap. 10 de
justific.
says -- by yiedling up (our members) weapons of righteousness unto
sanctification, and thereby confesses it is sanctification rather then
justification.

And therefore it is to little purpose, that he says pa. 154. If Protestants
would conclude any thing against us, they must produce a Text which says, good
works of such as are justified already, done by virtue of the grace of Christ
do not justify, that is augment and increase, that righteousness already
received, and make us more just: for we must tell them this is sanctification,
and no text of Scripture uses the word justify in that sense, unless that place
of Revel. c. 22. be so translated: and we need not fear it should be, seeing
the word there is to signify no more then a continuance in the state of
justification, or an increase of righteousness, which we grant to good works,
yea we grant them more, the increase of the favor of God: if they will put
that also into their second justification, for the more good works a justified
person does, the more he is accepted of God; But such a person if he fall into
sin (as David did) must come unto remission of sins, Justification by Faith
by the same way as he did in his first justification, viz. by faith and
repentance. And albeit repentance has its works or workings, and charity also,
in the first justification or remission of sins as Iona 3. ult. God saw their
works, i. e. of repentance in turning from their evil way, and our Savior saw
the works of repentance and love in Mary Magdalen, Luc. 7. yet it is faith that
properly justifies; because they are required (according to their measure) as
conditions present, but it is faith from whose apprehensions the acts of
repentance and charity do arise and take their advance; its faith which has a
proper efficacy in laying hold upon, and bringing in its hand as it were, the
meritorious cause for justification, and so that only and properly on our part
said to justify.

Justifying Faith.
in regard of the word faith, pa. 153. is needless; we must understand (says
he) a faith vivificated, informed, animated by charity and other Christian
virtues joined with it. The impropriety (I may say absurdity) of his speech, in
saying faith is informed and vivificated by charity and other virtues, we noted
Nu. 6.
above, where he said it was vivificated by good works, which was somewhat more
absurd: for charity receives life from faith, arising and advancing according
to the apprehensions that faith has of the goodness and mercy of God, and his
several manifestations of it: and therefore S. Paul says it works by
charity, Gal. and note, that all his proof for this informing or vivificating
of says by charity, is S. James his saying, that Abraham's faith was made
perfect by works; wherein (as I noted Ibid.
above) appear both the falsehood of his interpretation, and the impertinency of
his argument, for works belong to his second justification, but that informing
of faith by charity is supposed to be done in the first. A working faith it is
that S. James requires, and so do we, to justification, a believing with the
whole heart, as Philip required of the Eunuch Acts 8.37. a faith that engages
the whole heart in receiving Christ, not only for the benefits of his merits
and participation of his righteousness, but also for obedience to his command,
and performance of every Christian duty. Such was Abraham's faith or believing
(to which his justification is ascribed) the acts of it were pure acts of
faith: though virtually including works, because a readiness to do works of
every kind, or obey any of Gods commands. Lastly, Albeit such a faith
justifies; as gaining at present remission of sins past, and giving a right to
the heavenly inheritance, yet no man shall gain final justification, and
absolution if he continue not in doing good works, i. e. if his faith continue
not to work, as Abraham's did. And this is that S. James intended by propounding
Abraham's example for works, not denying his justification by faith, but urging
it was such a faith or believing, that continued working, by fuitable obedience
to every command of God.

CHAP. V. Of the Merit of good works.
Trent has defined, The notion and reason of merit.
that good works do (vere mereri) truly merit increase of grace, and eternal
life, but neither the Council nor Mr. Spencer, tells us wherein the reason of
merit stands, that we might know what it is they contend for, when they speak
of a work truly meritorious. Many fair acknowledgements their Council makes, as
of the free grace, mercy, promise of God, merits of Christ: Sess. 6. c. 16.
which Mr. Spencer calls the grounds of merits pa. 162. But if they stand to
this, we have the cause yielded to us; and nothing left but a verbal
controversy: for those former particulars are so far from being grounds of our
meriting truly and properly, that they directly overthrow it. One would have
thought that the vere mereri our truly meriting, should imply all the
conditions requisite to merit truly and properly taken; and that the doctrine
of condignity, or merit upon worth of the work, (which the men of Mr. Spencers
society generally contend for) should be the sense of the Councils definition:
but that Council was wiser then to speak too plain in this point, in which
there is so great difference amongst them, and therefore may seem to content
both parties: the one with this vere mereri^ truly merit, and the other
dissenting party with the former acknowledgments of free grace, mercy, promise,
Christ's merits, as grounds of merit; And Mr. Spencer may remember of what
society he is, and how most of his Fellows speak out, and say, The righteous
merit eternal life by their good works, even as the wicked do eternal death by
their evil works; this is plain and home to a (vere mereri) truly meriting:
however he minces it at the beginning, with professions of free grace, divine
acceptance, and promise, as pa. 164, 165. Well notwithstanding all the fair
proressions they make (when put to it) such indeed as overthrow merit truly
taken, yet will they hold the name and thing of man's meriting eternal life, and
so propound it grossly to the people. They know best how it concerns them.

Goodworks acceptable to God.
he will have some words in our 22. Article, to favor merit of good works:
because it says, they are pleasing and acceptable unto God in Christ. From
whence he infers. 1. Then are they no way sinful but truly and absolutely good
and just, for no sin can be pleasing to God in Christ, pa. 167. But this is too
carlessly spoken, for if absolutely good (say we) then had there been no need
to have added, in Christ: such works would been pleasing and acceptable of
themselves. We say also, good works are truly good and just, but not absolutely
so: they are not sins, but something sinful may stick to them in the
performance: some imperfections, and defects, some mixture of by-respects and
glances at self-interest; yet because they are good, both for substance, and
for manner of performance, as to the chief respects, and motives, upon which
they are done: they are truly good, though not absolutely; for which the
Article says, they cannot endure the severity of Gods judgment; Not that God
accepts those sinful imperfections or accrescencies (as he would infer upon
us) but pardoning and over-looking them in Christ, he accepts the good works.
And what else is the cause that they acknowledge it so hard for a man to know
he has merits, (upon which Tutissimum est, fiduciam totam in sola Dei
misericordia reponere. De justific. l. 5. c. 7.
Bellar. concludes it most safe to put our whole confidence in Gods mercy only)
what but defects and imperfections which are less perceptible, when the works
themselves are notorious enough? 2. He infers, seeing such good works have the
promises annexed to them, and shall be rewarded in Christ: they are truly
meritorious in Christ, having such a supernatural goodness in them, The
conformity of good works to the Reward.
conformable to that heavenly reward: and this is all which is taught by the
Church of Rome in this point. So he pa. 168. This is the most he speaks to the
reason of merit, or why works are meritorious: viz. Reward and Conformity; but
the first, Reward upon the free promise (as he affirms it to be) takes away
more from the reason of merit, then the latter (which is Conformity) can add
unto it: for that conformity (if our works or sufferings be weighed or examined
with the weight of glory) falls short by infinite degrees, 2 Cor. 4.17. Romans
8.17. A conformity we grant between good works and the reward, as between grace
and glory, the way or means and the end; but it must be equality in worth and
value that makes merit; And that Conformity or Equality, (were it to be had) is
but one of the things requisite to make truly meritorious; there are other
conditions; as that the service be of our own, not his enabling us, of whom we
are said to merit, also that the service be not of antecedent duty to the
Compact, also that the reward be (though by compact, yet) not out of free
promise and liberality. Seeing then the matter stands clean otherwise between
God and man, as appears by the former concessions of free grace for the
performance, of free acceptance of it unto reward, of free and liberal promise
in appointing the reward: the service or work cannot be truly meritorious.

Rome, to decline this truly meritorious, Against merit of condignity in
goodworks.
or merit of Condignity, as we may gather by the Bell. l. 5. de justific. c. 16.
sect. quod attinet.
Cardinal acknowledging it of Tho. Waldens. And of P. Brugens, who would have
them called meritorious, not ex condigno of condignity, but ex gratia Dei
tantum, only of the grace of God, which is the ancient notion of the word
meriting, as it signifies the obtaining of the reward, through the grace and
liberal promise of God; and speaking of Durand, he says, that the same
arguments that fight against the Heretics, fought against his judgment in this
point; Bell. de Just. l. 5. c. 17. sect. Al^j contra.
Also of Scotus and other Schoolmen, and of Viega, that they held good works
meritorious only ratione pacti, in regard of Gods compact and promise, not
ratione operis, for the worthof the work, which falls in with the former: so
that the Cardinal finds only this difference between the Lutheran doctrine, and
theirs: They hold good works vere bona and non peccata, truly good and not
sins, which the Lutherans did not: That we grant them truly good and not sins
was said above. But this satisfies not the Cardinal, and therefore chap. 18.
endeavors to prove them meritorious ex condigno, not only ratione
promissionis, because of the promise assuring the reward, but ratione operis,
because of the worth of the work it self: and fears not to affirm, that God is
made our Debtor, Non sola pro missione, sed etiam ex opere nostro, Deus
efficitur Debtor. Bell. ibid cap. 18.
not only by virtue of his promise, but also by reasonof our work. This I note,
to show, how the reason of vere mereri, truly to merit, does force from the
Cardinal, (who strives to defend it) such affirmations, and from others (who
did not see how merit could be properly between God and man) such concessions
and yiedling up of the Cause. For this being agreed according to former
Concessions, First, What is required to make a work truly meritorious, and then
what man receives of Gods free grace to enable him for working, and how man
stands indebted to God, the controversy is at an end; all their proofs fall
short, as not (ad idem) to the point: all our proofs from Scripture stand good,
against merit properly taken, and the mistakes Mr. Spencer would fasten on us,
appear frivolous, as we shall now see.

The first place he sets down, as alleged by us is. Romans 8.18. The sufferings
of t his present time, are not worthy to be compared with the glory.
Nothing here (says he) against merit. Why so? because, Goodworks produce
eternal life but not, ex condigno.
as a grain of mustard seed, is not to be compared with the great bulk it
bears, yet it produces it: so do sufferings -- the fair tree of life -- as
Saint Paul 2 Cor. 4.17. This flourish of a similitude in transferring things
Physical to Moral, neither proves nor answers any thing Controversal: Again, it
comes not home, speaking only to the word Compared, whereas the force is in the
((...)) not worthy, which in comparing things Moral, as the work and the
reward, is mainly considerable; so is here a great deal of difference between
Physical or Natural productions, and Moral. For we grant that the small
sufferings of this life, may produce or work (as S. Paul says there) in their
way and measure, a more exceeding and eternal weight of glory: but if this
Author will have it any thing to the reason of merit, he must affirm, that
sufferings and good works do produce it veritate insita, by their own virtue
and worth, as that seed does the bulk (which comes of it) by its own inbred
virtue.

The next place is Luc. 17.10. When ye have done all -- say, Unprofitable
servants, we have done that which was our duty.
mistake here he imputes to us, is, because we will have merit excluded here,
Unprofitable servants in respect of God.
by this acknowledgment of doing but our duty, and being unprofitable. Why then
(says he) deserves a servant his Wages, by doing his duty and nothing else?
pa. 169. Because duty of a servant does not exclude merit or desert, for the
servant is not bound to that duty antecedently, or before his voluntary compact
or Covenant with his Master, as man stands bound to God. Neither does the
Master supply the Servant with life, health, ability: these the servant brings
with him, and therefore may be said to merit or deserve his wages, though his
service was duty after covenant with his Master. It is not so between God and
Man. For the acknowledgment of being Unprofitable servants; Who (says he) can
bring profit to God? hence is only proved that God is no way beholden to us,
but we owe to him for all our good works, (this is good Catholic doctrine, but
contrary to what his Master the Cardinal says, as Number. 2.
above cited, and directly overthrowing the v^re mereri, the merit of works in
any proper sense, for if we owe to him for all our good works, as we do,
because he enables us to do them by his grace, how can we merit properly by
those works at his hands?) therefore we are all to humble our selves before
him, and to acknowledge that all our merits are his gifts, and the reward
bestowed on them, grounded on his free promise, and acceptance of them, for
the merits of Christ, so he pa. 169. This is good doctrine again, but still
contradictory to merit: for if his gifts, then not our merits; if reward upon
free promise, and divine acceptance, then are not our works truly meritorious
of such reward. Nor will such concessions which Truth and shame forces from
you, salve the matter, whilst your doctrine delivered in Gross, teaches to
plead merit, and to place confidence in it; that is, to be proud of your own
works, and to excuse it by saying, Thou O Lord have given me to be confident,
and think thus well of my doings; Thou O Christ have merited that I should
merit. That saying, Our Merits are his Gifts, though it be S. Augustines: yet
as used by you, together with your other sayings, do no more witness you humble
in this point, then the Pharisee was, who said, God I thank thee, etc. yet all
the while was proud and conceited of what he had done, and so returned
unjustified; nay he did not, as we can gather, add the conceit of merit to his
doings, and therefore more justifiable then a Romanist, holding the doctrine of
Works truly meritorious, and accordingly trusting in them.

The next place is, Romans 6.23. The wages of sin is death, but the gift of God
is eternal life.
Wages, Life eternal the gift of God excluding merit.
and gift misapplied by us: Why so? because (...) which is rendered Wages,
signifies the base stipend of common Soldiers, but (...) which is rendered
gift, signifies a donative, a more noble reward anciently given to them that
had carried themselves more valiantly, thus pa. 171. thence he will have the
true meaning of the Text to be, the base recompense of sin is death, but the
high and noble reward of God is life eternal, pa. 172. But first, who taught
him to render the true meaning of Scripture, by such significations of the
word, as the Scripture does not own, for where can he find in Scripture the
word Charisma to signify such a Donative, Charisma free gift.
but always the free gift of God? his own Latin edition renders it gratia
Dei, the grace i. e. free favor or gift of God. Again, be it so, that the
Apostle (whose purpose is to show the different reward of sins service, and
Gods) had some reflection that way of stipend and Donative among Soldiers, its
but verbal, an using of like words, not affording any plea or answer in this
point: when we speak of Gods gift or donative.

For first, If Soldiers could pretend any merit for a donative, it was for
some special service above duty; or of custom upon the succession of a new
Prince: and then it was (...), a gift, rather then, (...) a free gift, such as
that word in Scripture-use signifies, and such as Gods gifts and rewards to us
are.

Secondly, Soldiers have not from the Emperor (that so rewards or gratifies
them) the strength, courage, and valor which he so rewards in them; but this
Donative of Gods gift implies such notions of grace (free grace, for the
performance of the service, free grace for the acceptance of the service, free
grace in the promise of the reward) as exclud all merit.

At length he begins to yield to the true signification of the word (...), If
we take the word (says he) for a pure free gift, we may answer with S.
Augustine and the Council of Trent, that because the good works and merits
themselves are the free gifts of God: so also the glory of heaven, which is
deserved by them, is called truly a gift; also because the primary title and
right which all Gods children have to eternal life, is that of inheritance,
which is the free gift of eternal life, may be properly called the gift of God.
172. Thus does his answers and concessions which truth forces from him,
overthrow the doctrine of merit properly taken. For if eternal life is called
properly the gift of God, and our good works be the free gifts of God, then
cannot they in any proper sense be truly meritorious of eternal life. And
because he mentioned Saint August. take his sense of this Text. Cum possit
dicerectrecle dicere, stipendium justitiae vita aeterna, maluit dicere, gratia
Dei vita aeterna, ut intelligeremus, non pro meritis nostris Deum nos ad vitam
aeternam, sed pro sua miseratione perducere. Aug. de gratia and lib. Arbitrio
cap. 9.
Whereas the Apostle might say, and say it truly, the wages of righteousness is
life eternal, he chose rather to say, the gift of God is life eternal, that we
might understand, how God brings us to eternal life, not for our merits, but
for his mercies sake.

Another place is Ephesians. 2.8, 9. Saved by Grace not by works, least any should
boast.
The Grace of God excludes merit properly taken.
That these works are such as are done before Justification of Grace,
distinguished from the good works of the Regenerate, of whom it is said v. 10.
Created to good works: so he p. 170. True they are to be distinguished: but
here the opposition stands between Works and Grace, not only in regard of
Justification, but even to the last, Salvation, and with a denial of merit,
which is here boasting; so Romans 4.4. to him that works, etc. he directly
shows that meriting by works (which challenges the reward as of debt,) is
excluded by grace in the way of salvation; so that if any man will merit by
works, he must do them of himself: according to the condition of the Legal
Covenant; but if he must come into the way of grace, to stand in need of a
Redeemer, for forgiveness of sins past, for a supply of free grace for
performance of good works for divine acceptance of his performances through
the merits of that Redeemer, he is clean out of the road of meriting, or
challenging the reward as debt, in any proper sense.

And therefore how vain are their pretty sayings for evasions, That our merits
are his gifts; That they merit through the merits of Christ, or that Christ has
merited that we should merit: and that good works are meritorious through
divine acceptance: All which speaks contradiction or folly. For to say Christ
has merited that we should merit, is to acknowledge we are indebted to God, for
giving his Son to die for our sins, and for his purchasing or meriting the
first grace for us; but then that we enabled thereby, should begin to make God
and our Savior endebted to us, in the reward of eternal life. Christ indeed
has merited that we should not be bound to merit, that is, to obtain salvation
by our merits, or performance of exact obedience by our selves, according to
the Legal Covenant. Again, he has merited that we might be under grace, and so
perform good works, created unto good works. To say that Christ has merited
that we should merit, or that God accepts our works as truly meritorious, is to
allege that for the merit of works, which excludes it: To obtain the reward by
works, because they are done in Grace, or of grace, is sense; but to merit by
works, because done in or by grace is folly and contradiction.

Catholic Position, as he calls it. That the works of the Regenerate are such,
as can deserve Heaven: where it is our turn again to observe his mistakes in
the places of Scripture, which he brings to prove his Catholic Position. The
argument from them is altogether inconsequent to prove a deserving of heaven in
any proper sense of merit.

His places are, 2 Timothy 4.7, 8. God is righteous in rewarding, yet works are
not meritorious.
wherein he will have the words, righteous or just judge, and (...), give or
render, and a Crown of righteousness to favor his plea for merit; as if by
these expressions were implied, that God in justice rewards, that he renders or
restores, so he will have the importance of it p. 173. as if due before: that
the reward is a Crown of justice, so he will have it, that is, says he a true
reward or price gotten by labor -- Which appears says he, by 1 Cor. 9.24. our
running for it; and by 2 Cor. 4.17. by afflictions working for us an eternal
glory -- whence he gathers, if they work a Crown of glory, then are they a true
cause of it, which cannot be but by merit, pa. 173. then to show they are
worthy of eternal life, he cites Revel. 3.4. for they are worthy: adding, Heb.
6.9. for God is not unrighteous to forget your work, which must imply the same
as, the righteous judge will render, 2 Timothy 4.8.

If he will stand strictly on these words according to the reason of true
merit, he overthrows his former true concessions of free grace, promise,
acceptance: which also gives us the true meaning of these words or
expressions, not such as he would draw out of them. For the free grace, which
he and his Council yields, is given us for performance of the work, that is, of
that fighting and running, and then cannot merit truly, what follows on it in
the way of reward: also that free and liberal promise of the reward, in
performing of which God is just and righteous to render the reward, the Crown
of righteousness, will not suffer good works either to challenge the reward of
Gods justice as due to the worth of the work, or to be true causes of eternal
life by way of merit: they have their work and causality, in their way or
measure: Non causa regnandi sed via Regni.
They are not the cause of reigning, but the way of or to the kingdom, says a
Father: Conditions of obtaining the promise, not true Causes, in the way of
meriting it; we may add, 1 Jo. 1.9. where God is said, to be just in forgiving
our sins, in regard of his promise of it to them that perform the condition of
it, confessing their sins. Lastly, that divine acceptance which Mr. Spencer
and his Council do yield, is that by which they are accounted worthy, Rev. 3.4.
And we may note, that when the Scripture says, not worthy, as Romans 8. How said
to be worthy.
v. 18. and in other places says, are worthy; the Negative must be taken
properly as to true value and worth; the affirmative must be understood in some
respect, are worthy as to Gods account and gracious acceptance. Also note that
the Scripture says, not worthy of our doings or sufferings, to show they are
so if examined, compared with the reward; but says, Worthy of the Persons,
which argues its divine acceptance that makes them so, and then accepts their
works also to the rewarding of them, though imperfect and unanswerable to it.
See what this Author acknowledges pa. 175. All their merits are his gifts as S.
August. says, and rewarded, through the free acceptance of them through the
merits of Christ.

Protestant argument of the Saints ever ready to acknowledge their
unworthiness, The best acknowledge unworthiness.
he answers, that by this cannot be understood, that no just man has any works
truly good and pleasing to God, pa. 175. Neither do we understand or prove by
unworthiness that they have no good works, but no merit in proper sense -- So
to Ps. 130.3. If thou Lord wilt be extreme to mark what is done amiss, who may
abide it? This proves not, says he, that no Saint has any good works or
merits: for they do many things amiss, yet through the grace of Christ may do
somethings aright, pa. 177. Good works and merits go for the same with this
Author, which is his perpetual mistake: and that which he grants, they do some
things amiss, some things aright, shows good works may be where no merit is, i.
e. where many things are done amiss: Merit cannot be where there is still need
of pardon, where there is still need to beg, Lord enter not into judgment with
thy servant, Psalm. 143.2. that is, that God would not deal with him in
extremity of judgment, or as he deserves: How then can any just person that
needs divine acceptance for mercy and pardon of many things amiss in him, and
again needs divine acceptance for his good works that they may be rewarded,
notwithstanding they are accompanied with many things done amiss, and are in
themselves imperfect, -- how can such a person by his works be said truly or in
any proper sense to merit the reward of eternal life? There is a saying of S.
Augustine, Multum nobis in hac carne tribueremus, si non usque ad ejus
depofitionem sub venia viveremus.
We should attribute too much to our selves in this flesh (or time of this
life) if we did not live under Pardon to the very deposition of it, or to the
end of our life. So then to conclude, as S. Augustine said, our merits are Gods
gifts, which excludes merit a part ante in the original of our works, because
done by Gods free grace or gift, so was it a saying of an ancient Father, my
merit is the mercy of God: which excluds merit a part post, in the end when
our works are admitted to the reward, because that is done through Gods
merciful acceptance.

CHAP. VI. Purgatory.
Spencer notes out of the Trent Council, The unreasonableness of Romish
Purgatory.
three of them speak their own unreasonableness, and carry their condemnation
in their forehead. 1. That just persons after they have (as they hold) merited
heaven at Gods hand by their justice: and died acceptable to him, should go to
a Purgatory to be tormented. 2. That the merciful God, after the Remission of
their sin, after he had forgiven them for the all-sufficient satisfaction of
his Son, should exact of them such extreme satisfaction or punishment, and that
only for some remainder of temporal pains, not satisfied or born in this life:
when as that punishment exceedingly goes beyond all that can be suffered in
this life though never so long. 3. That the Church of Rome forbidding all
temporal gain to be made of this doctrine of Purgatory, should notwithstanding
suffer it daily to be done, where the poor must be content with the general
suffrages of the Church, but the Rich that die (and can pay for it) have many
particular Masses, Indulgences in order to their ease or delivery.

The places of Scripture here brought, in the sense of which he will have us
mistaken, are such as are intended for comfort against sufferings in this life,
and against dissolution or death, by the bettering of their estate: but this
doctrine makes all these miserable comforts, and his answers miserable (not
only mistakes, but) wrestings of Scripture.

The first place is Revel. 14. Blessed are the Dead, who die in the Lord -- that
they may rest from their labors, and their works follow them, or follow with
them.
presently after death; that is his first exception: The present blessedness of
them, that die in the Lord.
and he pretends for it Mat. 5.3. where the poor in spirit are called Blessed,
and and yet in their misery: but blessed, because the kingdom of heaven
belonged to them, pa: 181. It is true, that hope in this life makes blessed:
but the blessedness of the next life stands in fruition, according to the
measures God has appointed: But the force of the Argument stands not on the
Term Blessed, but the reason, their dying in the Lord, and resting from their
Labors; for dying in the Lord, and sleeping in Christ are all one, and that
sleeping does necessarily infer, that the Rest begins at death, as the sleep
does; and little comfort would it be, if they went not presently to Rest: for
what joy is it to be taken from the Labors of this life, to go to worse?
again, that which enforces this presently is their works following them, that
they follow them for reward, he grants pa. 182. that they follow them not at a
distance but presently, if the reason of giving the reward after Labors cease,
do not evince it, the expression here may, for it is not (...), follow them,
which might be at some distance, but more then the translation expresses, it is
(...) follow with them, that is immediately: As Rev. 6.8. Death is described
sitting on a horse going out to destroy, and Hades followed with him, (...),
that is, immediately, as Hades, or the invisible state to which the soul goes,
follows immediately upon death. More to confirm this presently going to rest or
some blessed condition after death, in the next place of Scripture. His second
exception is like the talking of a man in his dream; that we mistake the word
Labors, which here is not taken says he, for all labors, but the labors and
persecutions of this life; or that they cease from their good works, pa. 182.
But if the endeavors of good works were here meant by labors, then reason,
and the comfort intended by this Text would infer, that those labors being at
an end, the service performed, the reward should immediately follow; the
warfare and combat being ended, some Prize or Crown should be received, and so
indeed their works following them, or with them, does imply; but here instead
of receiving reward, or rest, the Combatant that has labored, and conquered,
is carried to the house of Correction, delivered up to certain torments. And
take the labors here for sufferings of this life as they must, and to the
excluding of sufferings and torments after; then is the Romish Purgatory
excluded, which wholly perverts the intent and scope of the Scripture spoken
for their comfort: and allows them no more in this Rest, then the wicked have
when they die, a freedom from the labors of this life, leaving them only hope
of coming out after some time.

The next place is, 2 Cor. 5.1. For we know that if the earthly house of this
tabernacle were dissolved, we have a building of God, a house not made with
hands, eternal in heaven.
for the words say not they go presenly after death into that heavenly house,
The same again proved.
pa. 183. But surely the Apostles argument here for comfort against the
dissolution of this house, must imply a present entering into the other or into
some part of it: also the word uncloathing (which is in death) must imply a
clothing with that house, v. 2. The Apostle desired to be clothed upon,
without uncloathing, (which shall be the condition of all just persons of the
last age, that are taken alive at the last day; no Romish Purgatory can be for
them,) but if that clothing upon were denied to them of the Apostles age as it
was, so that it came to an uncloathing: the Apostle had said little to their
comfort, in telling them of their house from heaven, if he had not implied,
that upon their uncloathing they should be received into it; but that
contrarily they should first go to a house below, and there suffer, in the next
region to hell, exquisit torments for many years. Also the opposition he makes
between, at home in the body, and absent from the Lord, v. 6. and absent from
the body and present with the Lord v. 8. plainly shows the denial of the one,
inferrs the other: if absent from the body, then present with the Lord; and so
the application which our Savior makes of the wisdom of the unjust Steward
Luc. 16.8. that when ye fail, (there is this dissolving, or going out of the
body) they may receive you into everlasting habitations: there is the heavenly
house: a present reception is necessarily implied, even as the Steward meant to
be provided of a place to receive him, as soon as he should be turned out of
his Lords house.

The next place is Wisd. 3.1. The souls of the righteous are in the hands of
God and no torment shall touch them.
Righteo^^ souls a^^^^ Death, (...) from T^^ment.
because it is in the Greek, (...), a torment, that malefactors, or suspected
to be so, are put to, to make them confess the truth: Now no such torment shall
touch the righteous, for God has sufficiently tried them, and proved them, and
found them worthy of God, v. 5. which is a plain place for merits, pa. 184. If
he loose one thing by this Text, he will catch at another. If it make against
Purgatory, he will have it make for merits. Well if it be so plain for merits,
he must wring them out of the word worthy: which being cap. 5. number. 8.
objected above in the point of merits, was answered too. But as for the word
(...), which concerns Purgatory: let the original use or strict importance of
the word be it what it will: the Text excludes all pains by saying no torment,
and what matters it, if they that go to Purgatory, suffer not the pain upon the
like account of question and examination as suspected persons; so that indeed
they suffer the like, as Malefactors do? It would be mockery and not comfort,
to tell them they shall suffer not under that name, but as much. And to suffer
this, now that they are come from under the hands and volence of their enemies
(against which this is their comfort) into the hands of God, (which the Text
puts as the reason, why no torment can touch them,) and thus to be handled
there? and that after God had proved, and found them worthy of himself, as this
chapter v. 5. has it; how can this stand with the goodness of God or the
intent of this Text, which is spoken for their comfort?

Purgatory to be expressed in Scripture as much as Trinity, (...),
Consubstantial, pa. 185. His Argument for Purgatory punishment
This is great boldness, whether we look at the comparison of the things, or
the difficulty of the undertaking: but he learnt this from his Master the Bell.
l. 1. de Purgat. c. 15.
Cardinal who was not ashamed to say it, and Mr. Spencer is not afraid to
follow him, let him say and undertake what he will. His pretended Demonstration
proceeds thus, Purgatory is the place where temporal punishments are suffered
by just persons after death, which they deserved in their life, now if any
justified soul be liable to suffer such after death, then there is a place
where they must suffer them. To prove them liable to such punishments, he
endeavors to show, that justified persons yet living after remission of their
sins, and consequently of eternal Torment are liable to some temporal
punishment, pa. 185, 186. This proposition is too infirm to make a
demonstration or proof of Purgatory: for we may ask if upon remission of sin
consequently there be a remission of eternal, why not consequently of temporal
punishment? he dare not say that temporal punishment is not remitted when sin
is forgiven, and therefore says, liable to some temporal punishments; and pa.
187. he says, God retains part of the punishment, he means, to be satisfied or
paid by us; which will be found true, only when it pleases God to reserve
some, and inflict it, yet not as satisfactory punishment, but for other
purposes, as we shall see. Again we may ask, though it be true that remission
of sin be consequently the remission of eternal punishment, and that so me
living are after remission of their sin temporally afflicted with respect to
that sin: yet how will this consequently fall upon just persons dead?

that just men living are liable to some temporal punishment, he brings the
example of David punished with the death of his child 2 Samuel 12.13, 14. Of
punish. meant reserved and inflicted after forgiveness of sin.
, and of Adam who after his sin forgiven, was notwithstanding liable to death,
as all just persons are for the same reason, pa. 186. His alleging the example
of Adams sin punishmed by death -- is altogether impertinent to the question,
and Mr. Spencer surely knew it well enough; for his question is not concerned
in the punishments immediately upon Original sin, which cleaves universally to
our nature, and from which no just persons whatsoever, though they have fully
satisfied (as they suppose) for temporal punishments, are free: but the
question is concerned only in the temporal punishment due to actual sins
committed after baptism; for to these only belongs the doctrine of
satisfaction, as he knows their Trent Council has defined; for mortality and
bodily infirmities following the natural state, are not matter for
satisfactions, or indulgences to work on, as the Romanists will grant. Let us
therefore examine his other example of David whether it will prove his
Proposition. We say, just persons after the remission of their sins are not
liable to temporal punishment Ordinary, ordinarily and of course, that is, God
does not always reserve some temporal punishment or part of the temporal
punishment due to their sin, and to be inflicted, or satisfied for by
themselves; but does reserve such punishments to be inflicted, when and as he
thinks fit. Again when he does reserve and inflict them it is not in ordine
justitiae, in order to his justice requiring punishment as satisfactory to it,
which he must suppose when he says, if not suffered here, it must be else
where; But Almighty God inflicts such punishments for other reasons and
purposes: as for correction and amendment of persons so fuffering, or at least
for admonition to others, as when the person suffering dies, or is taken away
by the punishment; So that such punishments after sin forgiven are not properly
satisfactory (as the Romanists must and do suppose) but Castigatory, at least
admonitory to others.

Other reasons of punishment besides satisfaction.
and that with relation to and by occasion of sin, as David's was, not out of
vindicative justice requiring satisfaction, as they must suppose, but for other
reasons of Correction, or admonition, as was said, and as appears by the reason
the Lord gives of David's punishment, Howbeit (that is, notwithstanding that thy
sin is taken away, and the punishment due unto it) because thou have by this
deed (or sin) given great occasion to the enemies of the lord to blaspheme --
which also gives us another reason of Gods some time punishing such persons,
that he may show he does not approve sin in his children, but that it is
displeasing to him, as is said 2 Samuel 11. ult. but the thing that David had
done, displeased the Lord: Now that God Almighty does not ordinarily and
always reserve such punishment after forgiveness: appears, 1. Because he has
no where declared, that such punishments are reserved or do remain after
forgiveness, to be satisfied for by us: but every where has declared, he is
well satisfied with the fruits of repentance: that is, if the person to whom he
forgives sin, carefully avoids the like sin, and performs the contrary duties.
2. because he has set out his forgiveness as perfect and full, a pardoning of
the whole debt, of which the temporal punishment due to sin, is part; and in
this point of forgiving he would have us imitate him, Be merciful as he is
merciful, Luc. 3. Another reason of our denying satisfactory punishment
inflicted after forgiveness of the sin, is because that forgiveness is imparted
for the satisfaction of Christ, which was full and all-sufficient, paid by him
for the whole debt or punishment due to sin: for he bore our griefs, and our
chastisement (Isa. 53.4, 5.) even all that sin made us liable to, whether
eternal or temporal. And yet is the Cardinal so bold as by distinguishing of
satisfaction for sin, to give us part with and under Christ in the work:
saying, that our Savior satisfied immediately, (i. e. Bell. l. 4. de poenit. c.
15. porro. Immediate pro culpa and reatu mortis aeternae, media^e pro poena
etiam temporali, quatenus gratiam praebet, per quamipsi nos Domino satisfacimus.
by himself) for the fault, and for the guilt of eternal death, and mediately
for the temporal punishment also, in as much as he affords us grace, whereby we
our selves satisfy the Lord. Had he said, our Savior satisfied for the
Temporal punishment also: so that it is either wholly remitted to the
Righteous: or if any be inflicted, grace is given to bear it, and the
affliction sanctified to their advantage, even death it self, with all other
corporal infirmities and afflictions whatsoever: Had he spoke to this purpose,
it had been wholesome doctrine.

That Reservation of punishment whether it can hold after death.
as concerning just persons living liable to some Temporal punishment after
forgiveness; which how far, and in what sense, true, we have seen; Now let us
see how supposing it true in the Romish sense (as indeed it is not) he can
transfer it from the living to the dead, that it may be a ground and proof of
Purgatory after death, as they suppose it is of satisfactions in this life: for
if ask, supposing such persons in this life liable to some temporal
punishment, why should they be so in the next? it rests upon that false
assertion of his Council, that such punishment must be satisfied or paid
either in this world or the world to come; for there is a third way, which Vid
Alens. sum. l. 4. qu. 15. mem. 3. artic. 3.
some have allowed: and that is, a removal of all the stains of sin and guilt
of punishment by the final grace, and in the passage of the soul from the body:
And how bold is this Author to make God a respecter of persons, if he should
not punish in the other world one that had sinned as David, and not paid for
it in this, pa. 187. for then he should not (says this Author) reward every
man according to his works? God no respecter of persons, if he forgive all
Temporal punish. meant with. out our satisfaction.
But this is, First, a bold inference upon the former falls supposal, of such
punishments retained and inflicted in the Course of vindicative justice, if not
satisfied for by us: whereas we saw three reasons against it, and other
purposes which God has in so retaining and inflicting punishment when he sees
fit, for chastisement, amendment, admonition to others, and to show how he is
displeased with sin in his children; yea it is very profitable for us that he
should retain and inflict it after forgiveness, as, and when he sees fit: But
none of these purposes can hold in the punishments of Purgatory. Secondly, that
Rewarding every man according to his works, is misapplied to sins of just
persons forgiven: for the reward of punishment which God without respect of
persons renders to works, is to works not reckoned for, i. e. not repented of,
not forgiven: And whereas they will not allow that God either in mercy or
justice, can remit the remainder of Temporal punishment, without being a
Respecter of persons: why do they contend for the power of Indulgence to be in
the Pope? and allow him to be a Respecter of persons, as the Rich find him to
be? And whereas they hold Christ to entreat and intercede for souls in
Purgatory, yet none come out upon his Intercession, but upon the Popes
Indulgence.

Papal Indulgences.
But why should they allow the Pope to be a respecter of persons in applying
the merits of Christ with respect (as he does) to friends, or those that can
pay well, when they will not allow God Almighty to dispense his own mercy or
justice to them that have not satisfied here, unless they do it in Purgatory?
or why do they allow the Pope to extend that power of loosing to souls in
Purgatory (that is, under the earth) which was given to the Church, for loosing
only things Mat 16.19. Mat. 18.18.
upon earth? Indeed God has appointed many ways and means in his Church of
applying Christ's satisfaction, such as his Word, both Sacraments, and
Absolution: but as for the many new invented ways of the Church of Rome, they
are unwarrantable, and ineffectual to the purpose: deceiving the people not
only of their money, but of their souls, by staying on things that must be
paid for, yet profit not, false applications of (what they pretend) the merits
and satisfaction of our Savior Christ.

Purgatory, it will not be amiss to add something concerning satisfactions. Of
satisfactions and of doing the things signified by that name.
We do not here condemn, or deter people from doing the things, which in the
language of the Church of Rome, come under the name of satisfaction, viz. those
Penals, self-afflictives, acts of self-denial, or such spiritual exercises, or
bodily austerities reasonably used that way: But we commend them as profitable,
and to good purpose, if rightly undertaken and directed; only we cannot allow
the grounds upon which that Church has established her satisfactions, nor the
purposes that Church seems to have in the commending or injoyning them.

The grounds we saw in the discourse of Purgatory, That God does retain part of
the temporal punishment, which may by works of penance be remitted here in this
world, or paid in the world to come, as this Author expresses it, pa. 187. of
this sufficiently above. Nor can we allow the purposes (or at least practices)
of the Romish Church, in commending those Penals as meritorious and
satisfactory to Gods justice, that I may say nothing of the no small gain that
is made thereby. But we allow and commend the doing of the things, these
self-afflictives, First, in order to the obtaining of remission of sin and
punishment, so the Sackeloth, Ashes, Lying on the ground; as in the Ninivites,
Ion. 3. this they do, not as having any merit, or satisfaction for punishment
due by Gods justice unto sin, nor yet as the prime conditions of forgiveness,
but as expressions of that inward Repentance and humiliation, of which they are
effects, and which they conduce to increase, by a reaction or working back
again upon the soul. Secondly, After forgiveness they are profitable when
done, either in respect to sin past, by way of wholesome discipline to make more
wary of such sins, more careful to avoid them hereafter, and more diligent in
doing the contrary duties; or when done, in order to the averting some Temporal
judgment, wherewith God might strike us justly for some failing, remisness, or
want of due carefulness, as is requisite for that avoiding of sin, and
performance of duty: For these are the fruits of Repentance, which God accepts
as the great and only satisfaction on our parts, as for those Penals and bodily
afflictives, they are pleasing unto him so far as conduce to enforce care and
strength of the spirit against sin, and as they are expressions and effects of
that humiliation and Repentance, which is the Condition of forgiveness.

And these Afflictives or exercises of self-denial, may be either voluntary
undertaken of our selves, or by advise of the Priest, that has the ministry of
reconciliation, and the power of loosing committed unto him: and the less that
God does inflict on us, i. e. the greater prosperity, health, ease, quietness,
that any man enjoys in the world: the more is he concerned to impose on himself
such acts of self-denial, and keep the soul exercised by sometimes afflicting
the body, or else the flesh will gather strength against the spirit, and bring
in the world too fast into the soul.

Upon the aforesaid Respects, we commend and allow the things, and leave it to
the Church of Rome to draw Gods example, (his sometime inflicting punishment
after forgiveness) to their own advantage, and make a General Rule of it for
themselves to practice by.

CHAP. VII. Of the Real Presence.
Romanists we find, State of the Controversy.
had rather dispute under the Title of Real presence, then of
Transubstantiation: Whereas, First I do not observe, that the Ancients
expressed the being of Christ's body and blood in the Eucharist, by the word
presence, but rather by affirming it to be his body, blood. -- And in the time
of Bertram's, Pascasius, and so down to Berengarius, the question was, how it
is his body, and this more consonant to Scripture exprestion, This is my body,
this is my blood. Secondly, Seeing we admit the old saying praesentiam
credimus, modum nescimus, We believe the presence, know not the mode or manner:
it is needless for them to dispute about the presence, unless they add the
mode which they have defined, Transubstantiation. For the Arguments that make
against Transubstantiation conclude also (though not against all real presence
yet) against theirs. Their Council also having defined in the first Canon, that
the body and blood of Christ, are really and substantially contained in the
Eucharist, which speaks a presence, does in the next Canon define that which
concerns the mode: the not remaining of the substance of Bread and Wine,
together with the body and blood of our Lord.

Durand proves the remaining of the substances of Bread and Wine, In 4. sent.
did. 11. qu. 1.
together with the body and blood of Christ in the Eucharist to be possible:
and albeit he adheres to the way of Transubstantiation, yet he grants that
other way to be pressed with fewer difficulties. It is indeed most evident,
that he who denies Transubstantiation, does not therefore deny a Real presence:
nor does the remaining of Bread and Wine in the Sacrament exclude the real
presence or communication of the body and blood of Christ, but cleares it of
many Difficulties, and needless miracles, (which must accompany the way of
Transubstantiation) and makes a fairer interpretation of the words, This is my
body, This is my blood: According to S. Paul's explication: The bread which we
break is communion of, etc. 1 Cor. 10. to let us understand, where there is a
due participation of this Bread broken, and this Cup blessed, there is a real
participation of the body and blood of our Savior. Let the Romanists take away
their mode of Transubstantiation (which as we shall see by the following
discourse is pressed with so many difficulties, infers so many inconveniences)
and we will not quarrel with them about a Real presence or participation of
Christ's Body and Blood; believing such a one is afforded as is fitting and
necessary to all the ends and purposes of the Sacrament.

Now for the Arguments of Protestants, which equally serve against
Transubstantiation, and against their Real presence: Mr. Spencer sets them down
in this order, with his answers to them.

That the substance of Fread remains.
as we have them in three Evangelists, and in S. Paul. 1 Cor. 11. that Jesus
took bread blessed it, brake, and gave to his Disciples; which shows plainly,
he brake and gave what he took and blessed; true bread, not the species only.
His Answer is a denial that our Savior gave what he took and blessed, the same
substance of bread; and for a pretense of this denial, he complains of our
translation or addition of the word, it to blessed, brake and gave, which is
not in the Original Greek, nor the Latin: and upon this silly exception makes
an invective against the cunning which Protestants use in their Translations,
pa. 194, 195. But he that knows any thing in those languages Greek and Latin,
finds they are not forced to repeat the pronoun it, as our English is; in which
there would be else, but an imperfect sense; and when it is not expressed in
the other Languages, it must be implied to give a subject to those transitive
verbs, blessed, brake, gave. And if to make the sense perfect, we ask what did
he bless, break, and give? the subject first mentioned still must be meant,
unless the change be expressed in the story, or made evident to the sense: this
rule he must grant, or else nothing can be certain in such contextures of
Scripture Language. It is said 2 Samuel 23.16. They drew water and took, and
brought to David. So the Greek, Latin, and Hebrew; the English renders, took
it, and brought it; Will he say, this is a fraud and falsification, as he
complains here? But that he may see and acknowledge, how answerable the manner
of speech in the one is to the other: It follows, David said (of it, or of that
Water) is not this the blood of these men? answerable to these sacramental
speeches of the Text in hand, but of this manner of speech more hereafter.

A Rule to be observed in change of substan^^s.
therefore he gave the same in substance which he took; the bread which he took
being changed (as he will have it) into his body which he gave: as when in
Gallilee, the Water was turned into Wine, it could not be thence proved, that
as the servants filled the Vessels with natural Water, so they drew, and
carried, and the Master of the feast drank natural water. But this is answered
by the Rule above, The subject first mentioned must still be meant, unless the
change be expressed in the story, or made evident to sense: Now we have it not
either in the story of the institution of this Sacrament, or elsehwere
expressed, that our Savior would or did change the very bread into his very
body, neither does the effect or change sensibly appear, therefore it must
follow, that what he took and blessed, the same also for substance he gave. As
for those words, this is my body, they do not expressly speak a substantial
change, but more suitable to the purpose of the Sacrament, admit another
meaning, like as David's speech (above mentioned) did, and many other such
figurative speeches in Scripture do. And for his instance of the Water turned
into Wine, Joh. 2. the story expressly speaks, and the senses evidently showed
then there was a change; and therefore though it follows not (as to that story)
they filled water, therefore they drew and carried, and drank water, yet here
it does follow, that as he took bread, and blessed it, so he brake bread and
gave it, when neither the story nor the sense showed such a change of the
subject.

Of breaking the bread which proves substance remaining.
is of his own framing, and so may easily be answered by him. But thus I may
object what he cannot answer. What our Savior brake that he gave, but he brake
substantial bread, therefore he gave it; The exception Mr. Spencer used in
answer to the former objection, viz. He gave the same he took, unless it were
changed, which they affirm it to be before he gave it, did not serve him there
it will less here: for the affirming of such a change of the subject in such
contextures of Scripture we found unreasonable, unless the story or our senses
did evidence the change; but here its more unreasonable to answer, ^e gave what
he brake, the same for substance, unless substantially changed: for the end of
our Saviors breaking it, was to give or distribute it to his Disciples: if
therefore he changed the substantial Bread, which he brake, he did not give
them, what he brake for them; and brake that which he brake, to no purpose; it
being presently to be changed and annihilated. To no purpose I say, of
Communion and distribution; which our Savior intended in this Sacrament: For I
acknowledge another purpose of breaking, and that mystical, to show the
breaking of his body on the Cross: which might hold, though the substance of
the bread had been presently annihilated; but the other purpose of distribution
must needs be frustrate; That this was the end and purpose of our Saviors
breaking, the Romish Commentators upon the place acknowledge; saying our
Savior brake it into so many parts, that every Disciple might have one; But
the Church of Rome does not break now, in order to Communion, or distributing
to the people; but in order to a sacrifice, the Priest breaks a Wafer into
three parts; and this only to himself, not for others to take or receive.

Here they cannot serve themselves of the Species, as when they say of the
eating, and showing, (which is a breaking of the Sacrament with the Teeth) that
the Species of the bread are only broken, the body of Christ remaining whole
under them, which is senseless enough; but here in the breaking for
distribution, more senseless, for it supposes only the species remaining to be
distributed; which cannot answer the purposes of the Sacrament (nourishing
incorporation, of which as enforcing the necessity of substantial bread to
remain, more below) nor can it answer S. Paul's purpose in saying, The bread
which we break is it not the Communion of, etc. Nor answer the purpose of the
Scripture, expressing the Administration of this Sacrament by the breaking of
bread; as sometimes in the Acts of the Apostles: Nor can they of the Church of
Rome answer our Saviors command, Do this; They do not what our Savior did,
they do not break bread; the bread they use, is broken for them by the Baker,
those little portions of bread or wafers being severed from one another by him
or her that makes them, before they come to the Priests hands, nay before they
come into the Oven, and are sit for eating. If they say they break i. e.
distribute; that indeed is sometime signified by breaking, and is implied
consequentially in that phrase or expression breaking of bread, and in S.
Paul's, the bread we break, for they did break it (as our Savior also) to the
end they might distribute it. But this will acknowledge the substance of Bread
in the distribution, i. e. after Consecration; and still the Argument from our
Saviors breaking bread is good; for he brake it to that end, to give and
distribute it.

In the next objection p. 200. which is also much of his own framing, he speaks
something of breaking, but uncertainly -- whether our Savior brak before those
words This is my body, or while our Savior was speaking them, or after they
were spoken, i. e. after Consecration; if he will fix on the last, as he seems
most inclined to do, there is enough said against it, from that senseless
supply they make by the Species and accidents of the bread, from that
expression of breaking bread, from S. 1 Cor. 11.
Paul's, the bread we break -- and further from that representation of Christ's
body broken on the Cross, intended in the breaking of the Sacramental element;
therefore Saint Paul, to this my body, adds, which is broken for you.

this -- when our Savior said this, What the word (this) denotes.
it must signify what he took and held in his hand, and so the proposition must
be This bread is my body: He answers pa. 206. by demanding, whether our Savior
when he turned Water into Wine, Joh. 2. could not truly have said: This is
Wine, the water remaining when the word this was pronounced, and changed, when
the whole proposition was spoken? But we reply, this is to change the Case,
which enquires de facto of the deed or being, to that which enquires de
possibili, of the possibility. The question is, whether the words This is Wine,
or this is my body: do of themselves imply such a change, there being nothing
else evidently showing us the change done or to be done? if they do, then is
there no certainty in speech, (as was shown above) no not in Indicative
propositions, as these are, and should be therefore most punctual and
determinate in their affirming or denying any thing.

As for the possibility or power of changing one substance into another we
doubt not of: but if that change be to be signified by the proposition this is
Wine, (the first substance Water, remaining when the word this is pronounced,
the proposition must have this sense to make it true, this water shall be
changed into wine, so is must be put for shall, which the word is cannot of it
self import: nor be that way intelligible without some declaration of the
change done, or about to be done. So the Argument above from the thing present
under the word this: though not good against all possibility of change (nor is
it intended against that) yet always good against the intelligibleness, or
determinate signification of such propositions, if intended to import a change,
without signifying otherwise by some clear evidence it is done or to be done:
so it was in that change Ioh. 2. but nothing to clear the change they would
have signified in This is my body. Another Difference between the change of
that Water into Wine, and the supposed change in the Sacrament, and therefore a
difference between this is wine spoken of the first, and this is my body,
affirmed of the other: because that Wine was made of the Water, the same matter
remaining: which they cannot, dare not say of Christ's body, that it is so made
of bread. Again, another difference; (I note these, because he so often makes use
of this instance, as adaequate to the change he supposes in the Sacrament)
Although the Water was turned into wine, yet not into the same wine which the
Governor of the feast had, or which was existent before: but here the bread is
by them said to be turned into not only flesh, and wine into blood, but into
Christ's flesh or body, and into Christ's blood, which were exislent before. So
that whereas he infers, so bold are Protestants in restraining the omnipotency
of God, to defend their own groundless fantasies, pa. 207. We may more justly
say, so bold are Romanists in obliging Gods omnipotency (without any
signification of his will) to work miracles, to make good their phansies, yea
such miracles as they can give no examples or instances for, nor any indication
in the story that he did, or would engage his omnipotency to work such a
miraculous chang.

His pretended Instances for the word (This) to denote a thing future.
wherein the word this speaks the thing not present but about to be, come not
home to the purpose; as This is my commandment, that ye love. -- This is a
circle, when but part of it drawn: and this is fire, speaking of flax kindled,
as those words are pronounced, p. 208, 209. The first instance is of words to
be spoken, as the subject of this, and do to any man's apprehension refer
necessarily to the future, or that which follows in speech: but the case is
quite different, when there is a visible substance as bread, taken and held up
while the pronoun demonstrative this is pronounced, and must in any man's
apprehension point it out. The other two instances are of successive Mutations,
and visible. Of which after begun, it is intelligible if said, this is a
Circle. For he that hears the words, and sees the thing knows what it means:
but the change or mutation they suppose made and signified by these words, this
is my body, is instantaneous and invisible, which is not begun when the words
are begun but accomplished in a moment when they are fully spoken: and cannot
have truth in proper speech till then: nor that truth be understood till the
supposed change become visible, or be expressly affirmed to be done. If they can
show this of their change they contend for by those words, then we shall
understand and believe it true, and then we wall admit the sense he gives of
the words, pa. 211. This which I am to give you, and which ye are presently to
eat, is my body, but till he can show us express declaration of such a change,
or evidence of sight for it; he must give us leave to think the sense Saint
Paul puts upon those words, This is my body, by saying, The bread (that is,
this bread) which we break is the Communion of my body far better and sitter to
rest on.

Ingenuity of Protestants in this point.
and good disposition of the Protestant, that acknowledging bread remaining,
yet believes it to be the body of Christ, because he has said, this is my body:
though he cannot comprehend how this may be: it is the profession of all true
Protestants. And there would be no question made of the Presence, if the
Romanists would be so ingenuous as to rest satisfied in it, and not so contend
about the Mode, their conceit of transubstantiation; as I noted at the
beginning of this discourse; and would have the Reader note diligently, that
notwithstanding the former objections for the remaining of Bread in substance:
yet are they not brought to exclude, or prove any thing against, the true
presence but the Romish conceited presence, of Christ's body.

Do this in remembrance of me; of which I must say, Remembrance of Christ made
in the Sacrament excludes not a real presence.
this argument is not to be pressed against, the true presence of Christ's body
and blood in the Sacrament, from the importance of the word remembrance which
is of things past, not present; but first, it more directy concludes against
their propitiatory sacrifice of the Mass, which they pretend to be the very
same with that sacrifice on the Cross: we say as some Fathers do, that the
Eucharist is a commemorative sacrifice, a showing a commemoration, an
application of that facrifice of our Saviors, therefore not the same.
Secondly, though by the importance of the word remembrance, it conclude not
against a true presence as I said; yet may it against their manner of presence,
by Transubstantiation; because that takes away the presence of substantial
bread, that is, of the Sacramental Element, which is the necessary subject upon
which passes what is done in the Sacrament for the showing of the Lords death,
and for the commemorating of his body broken, his blood shed upon the Cross;
which the very body and blood of Christ put in the place of the substantial
Elements, cannot supply: therefore he thinks himself concerned pa. 224, to 229.
to show how the same thing may in diverse respects be a remembrance of it self.
Therefore to omit his Cavilling or trifling, pa. 220, 221. that what our
Savior did could not then be a Remembrance, for that is of things past, and
Christ himself was present, and his passion was to come; To which we briefly
say, and he cannot deny it, that our Savior in his first institution did mean
and appoint this Sacrament for a Remembrance of Him, and therefore said, do
this in Remembrance of me: and for that first time it was enough to be the
showing or representation of his death, and for ever after both representation
and remembrance of it; but both then and after, the exhibition and
communication of his body and blood to all purposes of the Sacrament. The
Paschal Lamb, or blood of the Lamb, sprinkled on the door-posts was a
remembrance of the Angels passing over -- and for that called the Passover: and
for that purpose instituted, as appears Exodus 12. Yet prima vice, at that first
time, it was not in proper force of the Word, a Remembrance, for it was done
before the Angel passed over.

The same body not a Remembrance or Sacrament of it self.
see how he endeavors to show the same thing may be in diverse respects a
Remembrance of it self? viz. by doing some action bring to remembrance
something he had done himself: This is true, and so our Savior shall be seen
of them that pierced him, Zach. and therein shall be a remembrance of what was
done to him; but this nor any other instance brought can make it good in the
Sacrament: for here we affirm, nothing can be a Sacramental remembrance of it
self; because that confounds the essential parts of a Sacrament, making the
same thing the Sign, and the thing Sgnified, Visible corporeal, and invisible
incorporeal. The Apostle says plainly, So often as ye eat this bread -- ye show
the Lords death: therefore they are forced to say, and use such speeches as
this Author does pa. 211. lin. ult, the body of Christ made a Sacrament: and so
the same thing must be a Sacrament of it self; which comes in with the former
absurdity, a sacramental representation and remembrance of it self, and yet
altogether invisible. But it may be said the Actions in the Sacrament are
visible. True; yet this will not salve the matter, notwithstanding the
explication he makes pa. 227. which is but a handsome disguise. Hence, says
he, appears, that the very same body which was given, and that very blood that
was shed for us, remaining in its own proper substance (but after an invisible
manner) by reason of the visible actions -- puts us in remembrance of the same
body blood and person so many years ago, given, shed, crucified; nay but those
visible actions seen in the Sacrament, (seeing they pass not upon the body
which they fix under the species in place of the substantial bread, for that
body of Christ they grant is impassible,) do tell us the body cannot be by
reason of them a remembrance of it self; seeing also that body is invisible,
and those actions cannot appear to be terminated upon it, therefore it cannot
be made a Sacrament, or sacramental remembrance; for what is so must by the
senses instruct and mind us of the thing represented and not seen; so that
according to this Romish phansy, the species and nothing else must be the
sacrament, and sacramental remembrance, and in them must all those sacramental
actions be terminated; which absurdity shows the necessity of substantial Bread
remaining, even upon this account also, of sacramental representation and
remembrance; not excluding as I said a true presence of Christ's body and blood,
but the Romish mode of presence by transubstantiation, which takes away the
substantial element of the sacrament.

The Cup called the New Testament.
The Cup is called by our Savior the New Testament, for that it was a holy
sign of the New Testament, pa. 230. This is carelessly set down, but let us see
what he says to it; instead of giving a direct answer he first challenges any
Protestant to produce any clear text of Scripture, where that reason mentioned
in the objection is alleged; but if he had fully set down the objection, the
force of it (as we shall see presently) would have extorted this to be the
reason why it is called the New Testament; which must needs be a figurative
speech; and therefore implying it to be the sign, Sacrament, or seal of the
New Testament; confirmed in his blood; secondly, in stead of a direct answer,
he gives us a needless discourse of the signification of the New Testament, and
then answers, I deny that by New Testament is understood a sign of the New
Testament, but truly and really the New Testament it self, 233. this is a
careless mistake, for New Testament in the objection is taken for that which is
truly the New Testament it self: nor does it imply, that by New Testament is
understood the sign of the New Testament; but that the verb is which couples
this and the new Testament together, is put for significat, signifies, or is
the sign. Thirdly, from Exodus 24.8. where the Testament of God with the
Israelites was confirmed with blood, and the like saying used, This is the
blood of the testament which the Lord has made with you, it must be real
blood, not a sign or figure of it, which is here called the blood of the
Testament, for such a solemn Testament required no less, but rather more, then
that in Exodus, to be confirmed with true blood, pa. 235, 236. This is true,
but here is his failing, first that the true blood by which our Saviors
Testament was confirmed, and to which that in Exodus, and all other sprinklings
of blood under the Law referred, was the blood shed on the Cross, as the
Apostle plainly shows in the Epistle to the Hebr. whereas this Author refers it
to the blood in the Sacrament, which is not the confirmation of the Testament,
but by reference to the blood on the Cross. Secondly, he gives us no direct
sense of the proposition, this Cup is the new Testament in my blood: to exempt
it from that figurative manner of speech, which we contend our Savior used
throughout this Sacrament. He acknowledges it to be in the Canon of the Mass,
and they say it daily in saying the Mass: and could not but know, that the
necessity of a figurative speech to be admitted in that proposition, was the
intent and force of the former objection, yet gives us no account of it;
knowing that if a figure be admitted here, why not in this is my body? And if
the words were operative there for turning the bread into his body, why not
here for transubstantiating the Cup or that which was in it, into the New
Testament? If it be replied, that S^. ^^ke and St. Paul's words must be
interpreted by St. Matthews, this is my blood of the new Testament: first, it
is more probable those other were the words our Savior spoke, because of the
agreement of Saint Luke and St. Paul, and because St. Paul says, he delivered
what he received of the Lord, 1 Cor. 11.23. The Canon of the Mass also retains
the same words. Secondly, they cannot be reduced to Saint Matthews words
without a figure, for they must then sound thus, this Cup is my blood of the
new Testament: but says Mr. Spencer, our Savior never said, this cup is my
blood, no more then he said this bread is my body, pa. 238. And this in
abhorrence of the figurative speech, that must be admitted in saying this bread
is my body, and answerably in saying, this Cup is my blood: yet in the same
place he acknowledges our Savior said, this Cup is the New Testament, and is
willing to overlook the most apparent figurative speech in it, notwithstanding
that the force of the objection rested chiefly upon it, and provoked him to a
direct answer.

this, Disagreement of Romanists about the words of consecration; This is my
body.
in our Saviors saying this is my body 24.1. where note briefly, that
declining, the explication of this is for this shall become, or shall be
transubstantiated; for then says he, by this must be understood bread, yet
page 243. being to answer for one of their opinions that says by the word
this, is signified nothing present: he grants, by this is signified nothing
present precisely in that moment, when the word this was pronounced: but
present after consecration; what is this but to put the word is upon the
future, after Consecration? And what is that but shall be? And who ever heard
that the word is properly taken (as they will have it here) should not
precisely signify the present time or existence? Or who ever heard that the
pronoun this should not be demonstrative? Or signify nothing in that moment
present when our Savior held up bread, and said this? Nor is this disagreement
about the mode, as among the Protestants: for they agree about the subject and
predicate of this Proposition, that by this is meant bread, by body, the true
body of Christ, only differ about the manner, how it is made so, or how that
body and blood are present in the sacrament. But the Romanists cannot agree
what is the subject of the proposition, or what is meant by this, cannot agree
about the words of consecration: the more general opinion is the false one,
which places it in these words, This is my body, making them operative, to
their transubstantiation; whereas the Ancients placed the Consecration, in
oratione and invocatione, not so much in the pronouncing these words, as in
prayer and Invocation; and so our Saviors blessing and giving thanks belongs
to the Consecration, as well as his saying this is my body.

And Mr. Spencer however he would have this saying of our Saviors so clear for
Transubstantiation, knows that some Schoolmen and others of their Doctors have
spoken plainly, that the Scripture, and that saying of our Saviors in
particular does not infer Transubstantiation, without the definition of their
Church; and indeed the different opinions in the explaining of it, or drawing
it to that purpose speaks as much.

Called bread after Consecration.
Paul's calling it often bread after Consecration. -- 1 Cor. 11. -- to which Mr.
Spencer returns these pitiful answers. 1. He helps himsef of his old instance,
of the Water made Wine Jo. 2. and called Water after; for it is said v. 9.
tasted the water, that was made wine page 251. But the Text speaks also plainly
that it was not water, but made wine. 2. S. Paul says not it is common or
natural bread, Nor will the Protestants say so, therefore with them when S.
Paul calls it Bread before and after Consecration, though the name bread be the
same, yet the signification is not the same. So the Catholics may give, says
he, the same answer, that before Consecration, bread in Saint Paul is natural
bread, after supernatural, spiritual, divine bread. p. 252, 253. This is but a
slender disguise, which any eye that can distinguish substances from qualities,
may see through: for as we deny it is common or mere natural bread after
consecration, so we affirm it is substantial bread, bread to be eaten; So often
as ye eat this bread, 1 Cor. 11. and therefore although the Protestants allow
such a change in the bread, notwithstanding S. Paul calls it bread before and
after Consecration: yet will not the change which the Romanists make, consist
with S. Paul's calling it bread, for they take away the whole substance and
nature of bread, and leave nothing but the species or qualities of Bread; to
supply the uses of the Sacrament. And what if our Savior terms himself
bread, Jo. 6. which at first sight is a figurative speech: S. Paul cannot be so
answered, when he calls that which was truly bread, bread still: nor they
excused, who seek to help themselves by figures, when the Sacramental bread is
called bread, ( viz. what it is indeed) and allow no figure, when it is called
his body; viz. what it is in signification and exhibition, He concludes, It can
no more be gathered, from its being termed bread by S. Paul, that it is
natural, substantial bread, then it can be gathered from the Canon of our Mass,
that we believe it to be the substance of bread, because it is often called
Bread in the same Canon after Consecration, p. 252. There are many passages in
the Canon of your Mass, which did not alter with the times, and may confute
your novelties, and reprove your not believing according to that Canon,
speaking yet the Ancient language and belief; It cannot be gathered by the
Canon of your Mass (so far as is ancient) what ye do believe, but what ye ought.

A farther enforcement of the same.
If by the word bread often repeated, S. Paul should understand flesh, he would
have warned the people to believe it so, though the senses showed it bread: he
would not have joined himself to the report of the senses (against the
persuasion of faith) calling it always bread without any explication; He
answers here, by his former impertinency of the spiritual food of the soul
called bread; and Christ's flesh called bread: Io. 6. which first, was not a
joining with the report of our senses, but telling us what we must believe it
to be in effect: and so understand it was a figurative speech. And secondly,
this that S. Paul calls bread was substantial bread before consecration, and
his calling it still bread shows it continued so still: tells us we must
believe it to be so still, unless he had admonisht us of the change into flesh.
His retorting upon the Protestants is vain; If S. Paul by this word bread so
often repeated should understand a Sacrament or Mystery, as it is believed
among Christians; were he not to be blamed for holding the people in error:
seeing he knew that sense and reason, gives evidence that it is usual and
common bread, etc. p. 255. and in anger concluds, Protestants bring Arguments
fitter for Infidels then Christians. ibid. But there was no cause for him to be
so moved: seeing there is a great difference between our argument or Reasoning
and his, as much as between, this is not bread, and this is not common bread:
It is not true, that reason as he says, gives evidence, that it is common
bread; sense may, because it cannot discern between holy and common: but he
that can use his reason, as all that know any thing belonging to Sacraments or
Religion, knows also, by what he hears and sees said and done for the
consecrating or setting apart the elements for holy use, that it is not common
bread. The Apostle also says enough to take off that mistake or error, by
calling it this bread, and this Cup of the Lord, and threatening judgment unto
the unworthy receiver, as guilty of the Lords body, and because they discern
not the Lords body; which is enough to exclude all conceit of it, as of common
bread, though not to infer it is no more bread, but the very body, as he would
have it concluded from those expressions of the Apostle, p. 255. Nor does his
similitude come home. A subject (says he) cannot be said to be guilty of the
body and blood of the King, that receives not his signet with that reverence,
as becomes a subject, ibid. I say this comes not home, as any may see that
knows what a great difference there is between moral signs or tokens and
sacramental; for these are not only significant and representative, but
exhibitive, and communications of the thing signified, and in them offered:
they carry it along with them, and therefore he is guilty of the body and
blood, who receives this Sacrament unworthily.

fruit of the Vine mentioned in the Gospel: Their impertinent instances they
bring to parallel it.
It is familiar with Romish writers in answer to S. Paul's calling it bread
after consecration, to use the help of such speeches, Dust thou art, because
made of Dust; and the serpent called a Rod, because made of Aarons Rod, and the
wine called water, Jo. 2.9. because made of water: so the body of our Lord by
S. Paul called bread, because made of it: yet dare not stand to it, when we
reply: The former things are called so, because of the same matter remaining in
the thing made, which was in that, of which it is made; but not so in this
making of Christ's body, which was but once made, and that of the seed or blood
of the blessed Virgin: Mr. Spencer being put to speak to this point, goes
backward and forward: he acknowledges p. 266. by reason of the subject which
remains common to both (in philosophy called Materia prima, the first matter)
Adam was called Dust, and the Serpent a Rod; and acknowledges p. 269. that our
Saviors body cannot be said to be so made of bread; and therefore must
acknowledge those former usual instances to be impertinent. This is backward.

Now see how he strives forward to maintain the speech, made of bread. The body
of Christ succeeds to the substance of bread under the same Accidents, and so
issues from it as the day issues from the night, as from the term from which
it begins to be, as one may say ex nocte fit Dies, the day is made of the
night, so ex pane fit corpus Christi, Christ's body is made of bread, as it is
mysteriously in this Sacrament, and therefore might be called bread after
consecration, p. 269. Therefore it might be called -- Wherefore? because,
forsooth, it is made of it, as the day of the night; but he should have said as
the day is called night, because it succeeds end comes in place of it, as the
body of Christ, (according to their Tenet) does instead or place of the bread:
and he might have bethought himself whether ever any man called Day Night? or
whether this be not translocation or succession rather then Transubstantiation?
and whether for such a supposed translocation the body of Christ can be called
bread, as we see S. Paul often asserting bread after Consecration: He has some
streins of invention in the pages following: as this. That the flesh of Christ
at least in some part was made of bread -- he means by way of nourishment from
the bread our Savior did eat: but not knowing how to make use of this
impertinency in this question, he lets it fall.

complete reason of Catholics (says he) why S Paul calls the Sacrament bread
after the consecration, Their pretended Reason why S. Paul calls it Bread so
often.
is because the flesh of Christ into which the bread is changed, is put under
the species of bread, which gives occasion of giving it the same denomination
it had before, p. 272. What had before that denomination of bread? the species
or the flesh of Christ? neither surely: such careless expressions he every
where takes hold of, when they fall from his Adversary: and can spend whole
pages against them. But this complete reason was no reason to S. Paul, neither
did it give him any occasion of giving it still the same denomination of bread,
for then he had joined with the report of sense against faith; and had deceived
them, in bidding them eat that bread, if nothing but species of bread remained.
For albeit things set out to sight only may bear the names of the things they
are like: yet not when proposed for use, which requires the substance of the
things, as eating does; you may say of things painted, this is bread, these are
grapes: but if you say of them, take, and eat, this is bread, these are grapes,
you mock those that you invite to eat. Which shows also the impertinency of
Bellarmines instance (of the brazen serpent, bearing the denomination of
serpent from the outward likeness) to enforce this complete reason, for that
serpent was only for sight, to be looked on, not for stinging.

But this is all the reason the Romanists can give; and these poor species the
form, color, smell, appearance of bread, must help them at every turn; they
must stand for substance when there is occasion, must be the visible part or
sign of the Sacrament, must be broken, eaten nourish; what not?

I am the Vine, I am the Door, I need not follow him in examining the
differences he seeks out between them, and this is my body: but thus far they
be appliable to our purpose: that they were figurative speeches, yet was our
Savior truly so, that is, what a Door or Vine is in their kind, and uses,
such was our Savior spiritually indeed and in truth. So what the bread and
wine is to the corporal effects being eaten and drunk, that the body and blood
of our Savior taken by faith, is spiritually, Omnem essectum quem materialis
cibus and potus quoad vi. tam agunt corporalem, hoc idem quoad vitam
spiritualem, and hoc Sacramentum operatur. Council. Floren.
and to the spiritual effect, (it is the very expression of their Council of
Flerence,) and as the Sacramental Bread and Wine are really offered and given,
so is the body and blood of our Savior in the Sacrament really and to all the
purposes of the Sacrament, given and communicated to them that have faith to
receive it: for this the Sacramental bread after consecration is called (and
made to us) the body of Christ, or (as St. Paul expresses it) is the
communication of his body. Upon occasion of showing difference between Christ's
saying, my flesh is bread, and his saying, this is my body: he has something
which may seem in part to make reply to that which was presently delivered.
Bread (says he of the first saying) cannot signify true and material bread:
bu in the other, by my body is signified the real natural body of Christ, 281.
What does he infer? That by bread in the Protestant doctrine is signified real,
material bread, which cannot be his body, p. 282. We grant, that when our
Savior said, this is my body, he meant his true natural body, which was broken
and given for us, but why cannot it be said truly of real and material bread
after consecration this bread is my body? It cannot indeed be properly said so,
but may after the use of Sacramental speeches, as when said that rock was
Christ: by rock is meant the real and natural rock out of which the water
flowed, and by partaking thereof they were really made partakers of the
spiritual drink: much more in the Sacrament of the New Testament, the Bread may
be truly called the body of Christ, because in the due partaking thereof we are
made partakers not only of the spiritual effects of Christ's death, but also of
his very body and blood bringing along with it those spiritual effects and
graces: which is that St. Paul says the bread is the communion or
communication of the body of Christ; the manner we know not (as we said above
of the presence) but believe the communication of it to all the purposes of the
Sacrament.

that bread should be a Sacrament of his body cannot (says he) stand with the
Protestant doctrine: Bread how Sacrament of his body.
which in the little Catechism defines a Sacrament to be an outward visible
sign of an inward spiritual grace; but our Saviors body in the first
institution was as visible as the bread: and though after Ascension his body
became invisible by reason of the distance, yet that makes it not an inward
spiritual grace -- his conclusion is, therefore bread could not be the
Sacrament of his body, 283. Mr. Spencer surely thought he was dealing with
children that had newly learnt their Catechism: for see him presently afraid
this should be returned upon themselves, He knows first, that albeit our
Saviors body was in the first institution visible, and so it is still visible
in it self; and knows also that no men make more use of his invisibilitie in
the Sacrament, then the Romanists do, His body is broken, eaten, blood shed,
drunk in the Sacrament, invisibly, -- yea, all this really done (but invisibly)
when he was visible himself to the Apostles in the first institution, and
before his body was indeed broken, or his blood shed on the Cross. Thus can
they make all good by the virtue of this word invisible, yet will not allow
Protestants to make Christ's body and blood the inward spiritual part of the
Sacrament, because he was visible. Nay but though he be now invisible, yet is
not his body the inward spiritual grace: this is Mr. Spencers subtlety: but he
that makes the blood go along with the body, that who receives the one, has the
other too, might allow us here a concomitancy of Christ's body and the spiritual
grace, which as I said, goes always along with it: so that as in the general
definition of a Sacrament it is said, sign of an inward spiritual grace, so in
respect of this particular Sacrament it may be said sign of Christ's body and
blood, which is here by the outward visible part of the Sacrament represented,
conveyed with all the spiritual effects and graces.

Mr. Spencers several confessions of truth in this point of the Sacrament.
for it brings him presently to plain confession of truth; he did see that by
his former precious argument against the Protestants, any man might think (if
he were in earnest) it would follow, there is no Sacrament of the body and
blood of Christ: and therefore he subjoyns, pa. 283. line ult. yet we are not
constrained to acknowledge there is not a Sacrament: why? For i^ signifies that
heavenly and divine grace, which by virtue of it is given to nourish our souls,
which is truly inward and spiritual, this is well; but if the spiritual grace
be given by virtue of it, i. e. the Sacrament; does not the Sacrament give that
grace by virtue of Christ's body given in it? Yea, we hear him presently
acknowledging also that our Saviors body invisibly existent in this Sacrament
and nourishing our souls, may be truly called a spiritual grace, and inward
too, when it is Sacramentally received: very good all this. But is there no
sign of this body? Hear him also saying, that which sensibly appears and is
called Sacramentum tantum, the Sacrament only, is a Sacramental sign of our
Saviors body, p. 284. All this acknowledged to the defiance of his former
subtlety, and what could a Protestant desire more? Only when he said
nourishing our souls, he adds and our bodies, which I take to be a slip; for it
is not the doctrine of his Church to say, Christ's body nourishes our bodies.
And now in the name of God why should he not acknowledge the advantage of truth
to be on the Protestants side, for thus far we agree that there is divine grace
by virtue of the Sacrament given to nourish our souls; that, that which appears
in the Sacrament is the Sarramental sign of our Saviors body: that our
Saviors body is truly existent, or given in the Sacrament; that our Saviors
body nourishes our souls.

Transubstantiation a wrong to the Sacrament several ways.
That which sensibly appears (says he) and is called Sacramentum tantum: is
the Sacramental sign of our Saviors body; but what is that which appears, he
tells you presently, those shows and species, under which he will have Christ's
body to exist; but are these fit to bear the name of a Sacrament? Of the
Sacramental sign of a body? (What advantage would this have given to Marcion
in his conceit of our Saviors body, as fantastical, and in show and
appearance only?) Can these shows and appearances of bread serve to the uses of
the Sacrament, the corporal breaking, the eating, the nourishing? Whereas
Protestants retaining the substance of the Sacramental element, Bread, preserve
the outward part of the Sacrament, and all the uses of it: without which the
Sacrament is mairned, if not destroyed: preserve I say the outward part,
without prejudice to the inward, which is Christ's body and blood, for we hold
of it as above, existent, really given, and nourishing the soul; which is the
full purpose of the Sacrament as to the inward spiritual part. But 2. they
prejudice the inward spiritual part, by making it existent under those shows or
species, (as he says here) for how would this have confirmed Eutychians if it
had been really the doctrine of the Church then, who upon the mistake of the
Churches doctrine, as Theodoret in his Dialogues shows, made semblance for
their heresy, saying the humanity of Christ is swallowed up into the divinity,
shape and figure remaining as the Bread is in the Sacrament, shape only and
appearance remaining. Again, they bind our Saviors body so to these shows and
species of bread, that Christ's body and they make unum quid, but one thing, so
that Christ's body goes along with them wheresoever they go, or are cast; into
the mouths and stomachs of wicked men, and stays wheresoever the species are,
till putrefaction of the species (if they without the body of Bread be capable
of it) drive the body of Christ away. This and hundred prejudices and
inconveniences follow upon this unnecessary fancy of putting Christ's body
under the species, in the place of substantial bread: we, as was said, preserve
the Sacrament entire, acknowledging the very body and blood really given in the
Sacrament to every one that comes duly to receive; given I say to all the
purposes of the Sacrament.

What he says p. 285. The words of Institution This is my body, are properly
and literally to be understood, when there is nothing that constrains us to the
contrary: might pass for a truth, if he did not suppose there is nothing
constrains. All the former inconveniences, inconsistencies, with many more
tending to contradiction, do constrain to the contrary.

Sacramental speeches in the Old Test.
in calling the signs by the names of the things signified: as circumcision
called the Covenant; and such is the name Passover: He strangly phansies two
Covenants made with Abraham in that one chapter Genesis 17. the first in 2, 3, 4,
5. verses, the other verse 9. as if he understood not that in every Covenant,
there is a mutual stipulation, the promise on Gods part, the condition to be
performed on man's, to which he consents and engages. That first Covenant (which
he phansies) contained Gods promise to Abraham, and that which he required of
Abraham, was in general expressed in the first verse, viz. to walk before God
and be perfect: Now that which this Author calls the other Covenant, was but
the imposing of Circumcision, as the sign of that Covenant, made with Abraham
and his posterity, and a witness of their engagement to him: as it is plain
ver. 11. where it is called the token or sign of the Covenant. And if this
were a new Covenant, where are the promises of it? He confesses as much, when
he says, The second Covenant was a sign and seal of the first, only he
abusively calls that the second Covenant, which he should have called
Circumcision: for so S. Paul, whom he cites, says, he received the sign of
Circumcision, the seal of righteousness, Romans 4.12. And so his own instance he
brings p. 287. makes against him: for that promise of favor and Patronizing
one of inferior rank, is but part of their agreement; and that waiting on him
once a year, is the other part, the condition to be performed, as a
testification of his service and obligation.

To the objection of the Lamb called the Passover, Exodus 12. he answers: 1. The
Scripture does not expressly call the Lamb, the Passover. 2. He says by
Passover is meant the feast of the Passover kept to the Lord, as v. 11. of that
Chapter, pa. 289, 290. It is true the Feast was called the Passover, but so was
the Lamb, and that more chiefly and immediately: as v. 21. ye shall kill the
Passover, and elsewhere eat the Passover. So Mat. 26.17. eat the Passover, v.
29. they made ready the Passover, Mar. 14.12. killed the Passover: in all these
the Lamb is the Passover, and from the killing and eating that, the yearly
feast or celebration, is also by figure, called the Passover. And the Lamb
called Passover, by a figure, in reference to the Angels passing over the
houses of the Israelites.

Unto 1 Cor. 10.4. The Rock was Christ, he answers, the Apostle speaks not of
any Rock which was the sign of Christ, a visible material rock, but of a
spiritual rock: now Christ was that spiritual rock, truly, really, and so no
figure, pa. 294. Here to avoid one rock of a figurative speech in those words,
he falls upon two: for first, he must hereby acknowledge that all the
Israelites did eat really of Christ, and drink of him, as we under the gospel
do, if by that spiritual meat, and spiritual drink Christ be immediately meant;
but this the Romanists carefully avoid, answering the Israelites did eat the
same spiritual meat (Manna) and drank the same spiritual drink among
themselves, but not the same with us. The second rock he falls on is, that by
this his interpretation, he must contrary to the Apostle grant, they did all
(good and bad, worthy and unworthy) really and truly partake of Christ, who was
truly according to Mr. Spencer, this spiritual rock and drink. Whereas the
Apostle means they did all partake of Christ Sacramentally: Fathers also and
their own Commentators grant it spoken of the material rock; but because of the
sacramental relation, which that rock, and the water flowing from it to serve
the whole Congregation, had to Christ, and that which flowed from him, it is
called a spiritual rock, and by a figure called Christ.

Mr. Spencer Rule for understanding speeches in Scripture, figuratively or
literally examined.
that if we will bring any thing against them, it must be such a proposition,
that may possibly be verified in a proper sense, and yet must be understood
figuratively; whereas the Protestants produce propositions that cannot possibly
be understood in a real and proper sense, as this is my body may, pa. 299. But
may not Manna or Rock be by the omnipotency of God turned into flesh as well as
Bread? or the water that came out of the rock into blood, as well as wine may?
For that proposition; this is my body is so far from being connaturally to be
understood in a proper sense as he boldly affirms there, that it cannot
possibly be so understood without the engaging of omnipotency to make such a
change of the subject bread, and therefore they are still fain to fly to Gods
omnipotency to make this proper sense of theirs good: but why cannot
propositions, which possibly can be understood in a proper sense be rather
figuratively taken? Because (says he) the words of Scripture and also of other
Authors, must be understood properly when they can be understood so: or when
nothing compels to the contrary. This reason is good, but misapplied to this is
my body: for it is one thing to say can be so understood, another to say can
possibly be so understood; taking in all the ways of possibility and
omnipotency, without which that proposition, this is my body, cannot be
possibly understood in a proper sense; for many things, yea circumstances may
compel us to the contrary, and hinder us from taking it in a proper sense,
beside absolute impossibility: else should we multiply miracles in Scripture,
and be still offending against the rule of reason, that forbids us to conclude
a possibili ad esse, the thing to be so indeed, because it is possible to be
made so. The Scripture saying all flesh is grass, says or might say, of every
man, this is grass: and it is as possible for omnipotence to turn it into
grass, as the bread into Christ's body, must we therefore so understand it in a
real proper sense? So when God said of Adam thou art dust -- so when David said
of the water of Bethlem, this the blood of these men, 2 Samuel 23.17. Romanists
that say the wine is turned into Christ's blood, must say that water could be
turned into their blood, and therefore possibly verified in a proper sense; but
those about David understood the figurative sense of it.

Did nothing else compel us to the contrary, (that is, not to understand these
propositions in a proper sense) but the engaging of omnipotency to work so
miraculously to make it good, it were enough. For when he works so, he tells us
plainly of it, or at least gives us the evidence of sense for the change;
neither of which we have for understanding this is my body in the Romish proper
sense. Then to impose upon Scripture such a sense when the speech will bear
another more agreeable to the purpose of the place, and to impose upon
omnipotency a necessity of making it good, what is it but to tempt God? And
here we may mind him again of the other proposition, this cup is the new
Testament in my blood, which we found him above loath to speak to, but desire
him here to examine whether this Scripture can be taken in a literal proper
sense? He can not say it, many things compel to the contrary: then is it a
figurative speech, and that in the words of institution, as well as this is my
body.

The last objection is from Jo. 6. the Capernaites conceit of eating our
Saviors flesh, and his saying, the flesh profits nothing: some indeed will
apply this against the Romish doctrine: but I will not quarrel with him about
the force of it. The Protestant doctrine rests not upon this place of Scipture,
we say the true flesh of Christ profits where ever it is really given and
received, or eaten; and let the Romanists consider whether they must not say,
the flesh of Christ profits nothing, when they say the wicked really eat the
true flesh of Christ. It is plain by what our Savior says in that Chapter of
eating his flesh, that albeit the Sacramental eating of his flesh may profit
nothing, as in them that receive unworthily; yet is there no real eating of our
Saviors flesh, but what profits. St. Paul might say, He that eats that
bread unworthily, but could not say, he that eats Christ's flesh unworthily:
taking it not for the bare Sacramental eating, but for real participation of
his very flesh; which the Romanists allow unto the wicked. The cause of this
and many more and greater incongruities, is that gross kind of Real Presence,
which puts our Saviors body in stead of the substantial bread, fixing it under
those species or qualities of bread, making it unum quid (as we noted above)
one thing with them; and so carried whither soever they are, given to whom
soever, and received by whomsoever they are.

Scripture; Considerations of Transubstantiation, as to natural reason.
he tells us there are other drawn from Natural Reason, fitter for Heathens
then Christians, p. 306. If we do but speak the horrid inconveniences, and
indignities that the blessed and glorious body of our Savior is, or may be
exposed to by this gross way of presence or binding his body under and to the
species: they presently cry this is fitter to be spoken by Infidels then
Christians: we may not so much as utter the ill consequences of their belief
without note of infidelity. So if inquiring a Reason of this their belief: (and
not finding in Scripture any express witness of Gods will, nor any example of
the like conversion, but finding many things, that compel to the contrary, from
the reason of a body and of a Sacrament:) we profess that we cannot see how it
should be, and that we have no reason to make it an Article of our belief: then
are such arguments or questionings of it fitter for Heathens then Christians;
so unwilling is that Church to have any thing questioned or searched into, that
it propounds as Article of Faith. St. Chrysostom, speaking of that questioning
of the Resurrection, 1 Cor. 15.35. how are the dead raised, and with what body
do they come; says, (...): To be asking still how shall this be, is the part
of one that believes not; and it was well said, supposing the Article or thing
to be believed, clearly expressed in Scripture, as the Resurrection of the
dead, Incarnation, Birth of our Savior and the like: when God Almighty has
expressly declared these, then to ask how this shall be, sounds unbelief, its
more fit for a Heathen then Christian: and therefore we believing the Sacrament
is his body and blood, or as S. Paul, the communication of his body and blood,
and consequently his body and blood really present in the Sacrament, we do not
question nor define the Modus, how this is done; but challenge the boldness of
the Church of Rome, that has determined the Modus, by transubstantiation (that
is, by destroying one essential part of the Sacrament, the outward Element,
Bread and Wine) and would impose this upon the world, as an Article of Faith.

These arguments from Reason (as he calls them) he will undertake to answer,
and because he deals with such as profess themselves to be Christians, he will
endeavor it, by giving clear instances in some Article of Christian faith,
which they believe wherein they must solve the like difficulties, to those they
urge from natural Reason against this mystery, p. 306. This is fair, and will
be satisfactory, if he can make it good. But still we must remember, if he
could make it good, it evinces but the possibility of the thing, which is
needless in this point to contend much about, and does acknowledge a needless
multiplying of miracles and engaging of Gods omnipotency, where he has made no
express declaration of his will or evidence of the thing. The Arguments, as he
calls them, are propounded here by way of question, and he answers by other
questions; which binds him to see to it, that there be no disparity between the
reason of the one and of the other; or that the like difficulty (as he
undertook above) must be solved in that Instance he gives. But this is not
likely to be done, if we observe the doubts proceed upon our Saviors body
considered not only simply in it self, or nature of a body, but also as
concerned in this business, in the nature of a Sacrament; also if we observe
his way of proceeding, for he is fain still to serve himself of the capacity of
a spirit, as Soul, Angel, God himself, to show the possible conditions a Body
may be put under: or of the mystery of the hypostatical union, to show the like
supply of defects in nature here; now this at first sight presents a great
disparity between the things.

The first question enquires, how can Accidents (the species of bread and wine)
exist without a subject.

Accidents without a subject.
although we will not dispute it to the denying of Gods omnipotency in
sustaining Accidents without a Subject; yet may it be put to the prejudice of
Romish Transubstantiation many ways. First, because it implies a needless
multiplying of miracles in the Sacrament; Secondly, because it binds the body
and blood of Christ to and under those Accidents or Species, upon which many
inconveniences follow; Mr. Spencers answering this question by the humane
nature in Christ, which subsists without its proper personality, and receives
it from the divine nature, must suppose that Christ's body and blood in the
Eucharist does supply the defect of the proper subject of those species: Bell.
l. 4. de Euchar. c. 29. Sect. sed haec.
Bellarm. makes them and Christ's body Vnum quid as it were one and the same
thing, Valen disput. 6. in 3. Tho. punct. 1. Sect. 19. Christum and illa
accidentia in Eucharistia, vere, proprie, formaliter inter se uniri.
Greg. de Val. proves, Christ and those Accidents to be truly, properly,
formally united: From hence as I said many inconveniences follow, for what
happens to the species, must also to the body and blood of Christ. Thirdly, if
we consider this with reference to the Sacrament, we may well put the question,
how can Accidents of bread and wine be in the Sacrament without their proper
subject, how can they supply the purposes of the Sacrament (as to the outward
part of it) without the substances of bread and wine? or if the body and blood
of Christ under the species must supply the defect of their proper subject or
substances (as his answering by the personality of our Savior must imply) then
must the body and blood of Christ supply the place and property of the outward
part of the Sacrament which is most absurd: By this of the Personality of our
Savior he serves himself in answering the eight question, and the three last;
But the disparity is evident, for the personality of the divine nature may
supply the defect of it in the humane, by reason of the hypostatical union
which joins the humane nature to the divine: But the body and blood of Christ
can neither be united to the species of bread and wine in such a manner as to
make it supply the defect of their proper subject, neither is apt to supply the
properties of that subject or outward element of the Sacrament as we noted
above: yet does Mr. Spencer by his answer suppose the body and blood of our
Savior, to supply all -- and the Romish writers by that strict union, which
they suppose to be between his body and the Species, make it subject to many
inconveniences.

Same body in several places.
he returns this question as satisfactory, how can the Soul, or an Angel, or
God be at the same time in many places? But any one may see the disparity
between the properties and condition of a Body and of a Spirit and consequently
the unsatisfactoriness of his Answer. Nor is it true which he here must
suppose, that a Soul can be in several bodies distant one from other, or an
Angel in distant places at once: therefore they are forced to take in Gods
property of being present in many places: l 3. c 4. de Enchar. quomdo Deus est
in Loco.
Mr. Spencer learnt it of the Cardinal, affirming the body of Christ to be in
place as God is.

Penetration of Dimensions.
he answers by our Saviors body passing through the doors, and through his
mothers womb, both being shut. But its no where said they remained absolutely
shut, in 4. sent. did. in 44. qu. 6.
Durand shows how with more reason it may be said, our Savior came in, the
doors opening to him, unperceived by his Disciples; for it is not said (says
he) that he came in, per januas clausas but januis clausis, not through the
shut doors, but the doors being shut. And for his passage through his Mothers
womb it being shut, the Scripture puts him among the first born that opened the
womb, and though the Fathers often speak of the womb being shut, yet is it only
to deny such an opening of the womb as is injurious to her Virginity, and much
to this purpose Durand shows (in the place above cited) may be said of our
Saviors coming out of the womb, citing Saint Aug. Ambr. Greg.

If our Saviors flesh and blood be really in the Sacrament, Our Saviors body
exposed to indignities
then may Catts and Rats eat it: This objection is not carefully expressed, for
such inconveniences do not follow upon a Real presence, but such a Presence as
the Romanists fancy, which binds his body and blood to the species, and so
makes it liable to all the indignities which happen to them. But see how he
would answer it, by the like as he supposes. If the flesh and blood of Christ
(says he) were really in the Passion, then might dogs eat his blood that was
shed. As if it were alike what was done to his passible body (appointed then to
suffer) and done now to his glorious body: All the disgraces and indignities,
that were done or could happen unto him then, were agreeable to the work he
came about, viz. to redeem us by suffering: and whatever became of that
precious blood that was shed, it had notwithstanding its due effect for our
Redemption; but now to expose his glorious body to such indignities (as they do
by uniting it so to the species) does not beseem Christians.

If there were so many miracles as you must hold wrought in the Sacrament,
Multiplying of miracles need. lessy
Why are none of them seen? He answers by another question, If there be so many
miracles wrought in the incarnation of our Savior, why were none of them seen?
p. 309. But great disparity here: for albeit the miraculous Incarnation of our
Savior was secret and unseen in the working of it, yet seen and apparent
enough in the effect wrought. Again the nature of that mystery required it
should be secret in the working, but for our believing it, the word does
sufficiently attest it, and the thing or work wrought was sufficiently evident,
therefore S. Jo. says c. 1.14. The word was made flesh, and dwelt among us,
and we saw his glory, etc. Nothing like in the sacrament, notwithstanding that
the nature of sacraments, requires all be done to the sense for confirmation:
and as nothing appears of all the supposed miracles, so nor does the word of
God plainly attest any of them, so destitute is their way of Transubstantiation
of any just proof or evidence.

CHAP. VIII. Against Communion in one kind.
Rome, delivered in the Council of Trent, and here prefixed by Mr. Spencer,
carries its Condemnation in the forehead: The boldness of the Church of Rome in
this point.
acknowledging, that our Savior instituted, and administered in both kinds, and
that the use of both kinds was frequent (might have said Constant) in the
beginning of Christian Religion (might have said, for 1200. years after the
beginning of Christian Religion) yet is not ashamed to approve the contrary
practice: and to plead for it an authority in the Church, about the Sacraments,
to make a change Salva substantia, that is, the substance being preserved
entire; where again it speaks its own condemnation; for how can the substance
be preserved, when half of that which our Savior made the Sacrament is denied
to the people. He calls this (half Communion) the sequel of the former Article,
of Real presence: and acknowledges, that without the establishing of the one
the other cannot be defended, so p. 322, 323. We see then what goodly fruit the
Romish Real Presence has brought forth, to the great and just offense of
Christian people, in denying them the Cup: besides other goodly sequels of it,
as Adoration, and Circumgestation. It is not Real Presence truly granted (no
not such as the Romanists will acknowledge to be true) that gives a ground for
half Communion, or makes it defensible; for they grant as we see here p. 123.
the Lutherans convinced of this mystery, i. e. to believe a true Real Presence;
but cannot say they are convinced of this sequel, or that it follows, then may
the Communion be delivered in one kind, there being other Reasons from the
Institution of this Sacrament, and our Saviors purpose therein, which forbid
it; as we shall see by what follows.

Halse Communion against the Institution.
he answers: I. that the accidentary circumstances of the first institution are
to be distinguished from the substance and essence of the Sacrament; This is
always to be held, not the former, p. 324. This we admit; only note, he
reckons the giving it then to Priests only, among the accidentary circumstances
of the first institution; II. he answers: that the entire substance of the
Sacrament is under each kind; he means both body and blood are under each
kind; we shall see asterward how far that is true. But be it so, that both
body and blood are under each; yet is not that the whole substance of the
Sacrament, which stands in the outward part (Bread and Wine) as well as the
inward or spiritual part, the body and blood; nor is the Institution held to,
if the body and blood be given but in one kind. And notwithstanding that he
reckoned, the giving it at first to Priests only, among the Accidentary
circumstances of the Institution, here he tells us: All that can be gathered
from the bare words of Institution is, that it is to be consecrated and
received by Priests, (Mr. Spencer may say what he will; and yet add a greater
untruth) such as were the Apostles, who were then made Priests, p. 325. If then
made Priests, let him show us what words, what imposition of hands or other
Ceremonies were there for that purpose? Was our Savior then conferring orders,
or instituting the Eucharist? or could he with the same words, actions, and
ceremonies, institute and administer two several Sacraments? Do this, he said,
and that is all they can pretend to: but if by this the Disciples were made
Priests, then they doing what our Savior did, must also ordain others so often
as they administer the Eucharist: Now the whole importance of that precept (Do
this) concerns the whole company, Priest and people; as is plain by 1 Cor.
11.25, 26. And it is generally held by the Ancients, that the Disciples then
represented the whole Church, or company of faithful: and that they received
orders, or Priesthood after his resurrection, Jo. 20.22. Lastly, the Church of
Rome gives not the Sacrament in both kinds to Priests, when they are not
Conficientes, consecrators or administers of it, as the Disciples then were
not; but leaving this senseless assertion and novel device (of our Saviors
making them Priests when he said, do this) let us come to the main, viz. the
whole substance of the Sacrament under each kind.

He that receives under one kind (says Mr. Spencer) receives a true
Sacrament, Whether the whole substance of the Sacrament be in one kind.
p. 326. He that receives (may we say) according to the Romish Church in one
kind, he does not receive a true Sacrament, or not the true Sacrament, because
not the outward part truly and wholly as it was purposed and appointed at the
Institution; so that definition which he gives here, may pass for a complete
definition of a Sacrament in general, but is not completely used, when applied
only to one of the kinds or outward parts of this Sacrament; For there is (as
he noted p. 324.) something particular in this Sacrament, (not the particular
he there notes, that the whole substance may be received in each kind, but)
that it stands in two kinds, or signs or outward Elements; both which together
make the complete sign of the spiritual grace, signified and exhibited in this
Sacrament; each sign apart cannot represent and exhibit the whole spiritual
grace, of this Sacrament.

He acknowledges a different grace conferred here, A different grace conferred
in each kind.
one of spiritual meat, the other of spiritual drink: only he will have both in
each kind p. 327. Which is as much as to say; the effect of drink is shown
and exhibited by the meat we eat: and the effect of meat, by the drink we take:
so with equal absurdity to say, that the blood shed is shown by the blood in
the Veins of unshed (for so its given with the body under one kind) and that
the blood is drunk when we eat the flesh. For though it be true, that he who
receives Christ by faith, receives whole Christ, and by that mouth of faith
eats his flesh and drinks his blood, is really made partaker of his body given,
and his blood shed for him: thus without the Sacrament; and when we come to
receive him in the Sacrament, the same act of faith receiving him in one kind
(as under the bread) can and does at the same time receive also his blood;
Totum Christum, not Totum Christi.
or whole Christ: yet does he not receive his blood sacramentally, as blood
shed, and so not all of Christ, or Christ wholly. Thus by reason of the act of
faith, he that receives but in one kind out of necessity, may be assured that
he is not defrauded of the participation of Christ's blood shed; but he cannot
be so assured, that wilfully receives but in one kind: because though there is
a concomitancy of flesh and blood in Christ's body, as to the natural condition
of it, yet not a concomitancy of his flesh and bloodshed, as to the Sacramental
consideration of them, which therefore are set out in the Sacrament apart by
two several elements; Also because such a one being a Transgressor of our
Saviors Institution, and enemy to his own comfort, falls short of the benefit
thereof. Therefore the Church of England had cause to say (though not to the
purpose he would have it, p. 326.) in the distribution of the bread. The body
of our Lord -- preserve thy -- and then adding the Cup, to say there also,
preservethy -- and this conformably, as to our Saviors Institution, so to his
saying, Except ye eat -- and drink -- Jo, 6.53. and to the Apostle, in what he
received from the Lord, 1 Cor. 11.28.

if by a complete sign be meant a full and express representation of the two
particulars, The Romish Sacrifice wrong to Christ Sa. crament.
(the spiritual meat and spiritual drink, which he granted to be a different
grace) then under one kind there is not a complete sign of both. But it must
be proved (says he) that the substance of this sacrisice, requires they should
be always so fully represented in each particular communion of the people: why
needs it such proof if we look into the institution of this Sacrament? his
reason is, because the full representation under both kinds is exhibited unto
Lay Christians, by the consecration and communion of the Priest in the dreadful
sacrifice of the Mass, p. 327. But what have we to do here with their sacrifice
of Mass? or to enquire what is required to such a Sacrifice? We are treating of
the Communion or Sacrament, which our Savior instituted for all Christians and
to such purposes; and that cannot be complete except administered in both: no
more then their sacrifice can be complete, unless consecrated in both. For it
is senseless to think the sacrifice must be mutilate, unless the Priest
consecrate and receive it in both, and yet the Sacrament not mutilate, though
the people receive it but in one kind; and senseless to hold or call it (as he
does) a Communion, when the Priest receives it alone. But having turned the
Sacrament into such a Sacrifice, they take off the people from seeking the
benefit of Christ's blood shed in the Sacrament to seek it, and be content to
have it applied to them in their pretended sacrifice: where they are only
spectators. This however more profitable to the Priests, I am sure it is little
to the Peoples advantage.

But when this sacrifice, which they pretend to be real and properly
propitiatory, comes to be driven home, it interfeirs so injuriously and
unhandsomely with that true and only propitiatory sacrifice on the Cross, that
they are fain to take up, with making it the application of that sacrifice on
the Cross: which we say is the work and purpose of a Sacrament, viz. to apply a
sacrifice and make men from time to time partakers of that which was made or
offered but once; And such is the intent and purpose of this Sacrament to apply
that sacrifice of the Cross unto us and for this respect also it is always
requisite that in this Sacrament or Communion, there should be a full
representation and exhibition made in both kinds, not only of his body broken,
but of his blood shed also.

thrice dipping in baptism for a full expression of the Trinity, His
impertinent instance in Baptism.
whereas Protestants acknowledge once dipping sufficient, is far from
concluding one kind in this Sacrament to be a full expression of what is
signified, or a sufficient exhibition of what is to be received there: That
Ceremony of thrice dipping, or that purpose of representing thereby the mystery
of the Trinity, was not of our Saviors institution, but a practice taken up in
the Church, and not universal.

But he goes on, or rather urges again what he had said. If our Savior
instituted each species or kind apart, to confer saving grace, then he which
receives either kind devoutly, receives that grace for which he instituted it,
p. 329. But this is cunning through ambiguous expressions. For our Savior
instituted each apart, that is, several or one after the other, but not that
one therefore should be received without the other. Or if this apart, belongs
to confer, it is true that our Savior did institute each to confer (and he
that receives devoutly does in each receive) the grace for which he instituted
that kind or part: but does not receive the whole grace for which he instituted
the Sacrament. Also he that receives the one kind or part, devoutly in order
and with respect to the other, he receives the grace for which it was
instituted: but he cannot assure himself of receiving that grace who receives
the one exclusively to the other; for how shall he be partaker of Christ's
bloodshed in the Sacrament, or as it is represented, held out and exhibited in
the Sacrament, that will only receive that kind or part, which gives him the
body to eat, not that bloodshed to drink it?

p. 330. that the Priest is obliged to receive the Cup notwithstanding, that
according to the Romish Tenet, he had received a true Sacrament in the Host: He
answers by their being Priests, and by the reason of a sacrifice; upon which
double account, he will have the Priest obliged to both, not Lay people. This
appears vain by what was said above Number. II. and IIII.

So to the following objection, A complete refection intended in the Sacrament.
taken from the complete Refection by meat and drink: He answers as he said
above, that both the graces of spiritual meat and spiritual drink, or grace
sufficient to salvation, is conferred in each kind: and All that can be
gathered from this objection is only that our Savior in the first Institution
gave a most plentiful and abundant banquet, whereof each part was sufficient
to confer life, p. 332, 333. Now albeit in a plentiful feast many dishes might
be taken away; yet none can say it is either a plentiful or sufficient feast
and Refection: if drink be wholly denied. And considering what our Savior
purposed by this Sacrament (which he made sanguinis effusi, of his blood shed,
and that of his New Testament) it must needs be his intention that both should
always be received: nor finally does one confer that saving grace (as was said
above) if the other be wilfully neglected. His pretense from Joh. 6.57. He that
eats me shall live by me, to prove the sufficiency of receiving in one kind,
is inconsequent: for the verses before, 53, 54, 56. show one as needful as the
other; As when it is said, He that repents and believes shall be saved: both
are set down as necessary: and we may not conclude, because we meet sometimes
with one only mentioned, as Jo. 6. v. 47. He that believes has everlasting
life: therefore this without the other is sufficient. Faith (as above said) by
the same act of believing, eats his flesh and drinks his blood, extra
Sacramentum, out of the Sacrament; but if we come to do this in the Sacrament
(that is, by faith there to partake of his body and blood) the eating and
drinking must be distinct acts, according to the Sacramental way of
participation: for so his blood shed is not drunk in the eating of his flesh.

And therefore the people are deceived, while they are borne in hand, that by
receiving in one kind, they are not deprived of any grace necessary to
salvation. (as he p. 334.) For that Church as much as in it lies, does deprive
them of the benefit of Christ's blood shed in this Sacrament; and however it
please God to deal in mercy with the poor abused people: yet no man can assure
himself of receiving the grace of this Sacrament, that does wilfully neglect
and refuse to receive it, as our Savior instituted and appointed it. But see
how he would stop the peoples mouths in the close of this point, by telling
them, that albeit they want the extent of grace, which Priests have by
receiving in both kinds, yet they have sufficient: and that they are obliged to
have respect, not only to their own spiritual profit in the increase of grace
by this Sacrament: but also, to the reverence due unto it, and must be content
to want that increase, when it cannot be obtained but by some irreverence
offered to this divine Sacrament, p. 335. As if our Savior intending the
participation of his blood shed, and bidding all to drink thereof, could not or
did not foresee, what inconvenience would or might happen upon the observing of
what he appointed: and as if the greatest irreverence, were not disobedience:
and obedience to his will, the greatest Reverence. But the Reverence and honor
of the Priest is hereby provided for among them, and the people must be content
with a mutilate and incomplete Sacrament.

Drink ye all of this, All commanded to drink of the Cup.
p. 341. where he pitifully shuffles, running backward and forward to evade
the force of it. First he would have it no command: notwithstanding that the
speech is plainly imperative, as well as the other, Do this, in which they
place a strict command. His instances of like speeches will appear impertinent,
if compared with this: as Jo. 13.14. (...)
Ye ought to wash -- the speech is not imperative, but indicative, of a duty
taught them by that action or example of our Saviors washing their feet, viz.
the duty of humility: not binding them to that very action or expression by
washing, as this precept of drinking does, and needs must bind all who come to
receive, and when they come. Now that of Mat. 26.26. Take, though it does not
absolutely command the Mode, or manner of taking it in the hand (he aimed in
this instance at the Priests putting it into their mouths) yet does it
peremptorily command a taking which amounts to a receiving; this is the
substance or necessary requisite of the Sacrament, the other by hand or by
mouth immediately, is but of the mode or circumstance.

Again, being loath to have it a command: The words (says he) of themselves
cannot import a command, but may signify only a bare invitation: as when we say
to a Guest, sit down, eat, and drink of this or that, p. 334. But he should
have considered, that if they may signify only a bare invitation, then the one
as well as other, and both of them (the eating and drinkng) may be refused: and
so the Sacrament left free for every one to receive or not to receive it at
all, which below he will deny. Again, though it be but manners among men, to
leave a Guest at his liberty, and therefore such words imply a freedom left
them, do not impose a necessity, or duty, as this ordaining of this Sacrament
does: where it is our duty by drinking and eating, and doing so as at first was
done, to remember and show forth our Saviors death: and withal it is our
great and necessary concernment, to receive the benefit there offered. And yet
you use not the people so kindly as a man that makes a feast, does his guest:
for dare you thus invite the people, and give them the freedom to eat and
drink? does not the Priest notwithstanding those words of Invitation, eat and
drink up all himself, in the celebration of the Mass, the people looking on
only? Nay is not this Invitation come to a plain Interdict, a forbidding of the
people to receive the Cup? Drink ye all of this, says our Savior; ye shall
not drink of this, says the Church of Rome. I might add, is not this a
mocking of the people? nay is it not a mocking of Almighty God, when in a
prayer of the Canon of the Mass, it is said by the Priest (according to the
ancient practice) quotquot sumpserimus -- implying that others have received
with the Priest and in both kinds, whereas none do nor are suffered to do.

At length Mr. Spencer yields a command given in those words, Drink ye all of
this: but given to the Apostles only, and extendible to Bishops and Priests:
But why to them and no farther? here he seems to refer the meaning and Extent
of such Commands given without Limitation, to the practice and perpetual
tradition of the Church, p. 344, 345. We deny not, but that is a good direction
for understanding matters of practice; and in this point we affirm, and are
sure the practice and perpetual Tradition of the Church for above 12. hundred
years is against this Romish innovation: And we are sure, that Antiquity is
against them, as concerning the Capacity of those persons to whom the Sacrament
was first given, and who were then bidden all of them to drink; which must
therefore be extendible not only to Bishops and Priests, but to all faithful
Christians, who were then represented in those first persons.

Do this in remembrance of me, Do this, concerns allpresent.
he will have a strict command in those words, so far as concerns the Priest,
to bless, consecrate, offer, administer, 346. But its plain the Priest does not
as our Savior did, for he does not administer so often as he consecrates; and
when he does administer it is not in both kinds as our Savior did: Again if
the Priest be hereby bound to administer, is not the people consequently bound
to receive? He is not willing to grant it yet, but shall below; here he makes
instance in Priesthood and marriage, which they are bound to administer, when
justly required to do it, yet is no man bound to receive the one or the other,
347. It is still the hap of his Instances to be impertinent: for he himself
acknowledges a little below, the disparity between receiving of priesthood or
Marrioge, and the receiving of the Sacrament of the body and blood of our
Savior under both kinds; the disparity I say between them as to this point of
freedom: for first, though no man be bound to receive Priesthood or Marriage,
yet is neither the one or other ever conferred, but when some are to receive
them. Secondly, let these pass for the present as Sacraments: yet is it very
inconsequent, from the liberty in receiving these, which concern the particular
estates of men, to argue for like freedom in receiving that Sacrament, which
concerns the salvation of all Christians; or from the free choice of a
particular profession or state, to conclude an indifferency in the duty of our
general profession or calling, as we are Christians: the duties of which
profession, are incumbent on us in order to our salvation.

Again he replies; The obligation of that precept, upon particular persons.
That command may be answered by saying, It is a precept given to the Church in
general, that what our Savior here commands be done, p. 346. We have heard of
an implicit faith, but here is an implicit receiving; so it be done in the
Church, the command is performed; as if every Christian in particular, were not
concerned in the purpose of this Sacrament, or could live by another man's
eating and drinking. At length persuaded by S. Thomas his authority, (he would
not by S, Paul's alone) to apply the do this, both to the Host, and the Cup, and
to admit a precept in it for the Laity, to receive this Sacrament: he betakes
himself to the usual refuge; They satisfy the precept of eating and drinking if
they receive it in either, p. 148, 149. that is, they drink the Cup, if they
eat the Bread. His S. Thomas his Invention of concomitancy will not salve this,
nor can the Reader be satisfied with the fast and loose, this Author so often
plays in answering to the precept, Do this.

The order he speaks of, prescribed by holy Church, now ordaining both to be
received, now but one: and to some the Host to others the Calice only: does no
where appear, but in the late orders of the Romish Church. In the ancient
Church (though sometimes in cases of necessity, one part might be administered
privately) never were such Orders made: nor such practice used publicly,
solemnly, or when both could be administered.

To Joh. 6.53. Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink his blood:
he answers. It is a general command given to the generality of Christians, to
receive his body by way of eating, and his blood by way of drinking: and to
every particular Christian to concur to the execution of this command: not
that every one in particular is obliged to do both, but that some eating some
drinking, others doing both, each particular confers to the performance of the
Command, p. 351. Thus the body and blood shed, are with them received in either
kind by virtue of their concomitance, and the command of eating and drinking is
satisfied and performed by virtue of Concurrence, every person conferring to
the performance of it. This is Implicit receiving; so both be done among you it
is sufficient, when as our Savior lays both upon every particular person, and
so repeats it in the singular, He that eats -- and drinks, v. 54, 58. and
that in order to his having life in him; His instancing in the precept to teach
and baptize all Nations, Mat. 28. not binding each of the Apostles in
particular to teach and baptize the whole world, 352. has the fate of all his
instances, to be impertinent; for it runs upon the extent of the object only,
(the whole world) which employed an impossibility, not upon the exercise of the
whole duty or office, which did not admit a liberty of forbearing either act of
preaching or baptizing. For as the obligation in the Sacrament is to eating and
drinking, so there to a double act of their office, Teaching and Baptizing,
That Apostle that would set down with doing one of them only, should not do his
duty.

It is objected p. 356. If it be given so to the Church in general, then may
the command be satisfied and performed, so be it the Church provides certain
persons to receive, and exempt all the rest. In his answers to this, we may see
the giddiness of man's brain, when set against the apparent Truth of Gods word:
If we take the sense (says he) according to the common strein of Doctors,
every particular will be obliged by the words -- (except ye eat and --)
especially secing that S. 1 Cor 11.
Paul extends this matter of Communion to each particular. This is one Truth he
so much streined against above, notwithstanding those Doctors, and S. Paul:
that every particular man is obliged -- but how! and to what? to eat and drink
-- that's express both in 6. of Joh. and 1 Cor. 11. but disjunctively (as he
says elsewhere, p. 350.) that is, to eat or drink: Here Is the giddiness and
vanity of wilful error, -- to make alimitation or gloss clean contrary to the
text, for our Saviors words oblige to these acts conjunctively, eat -- and
drink -- thrice in Joh. 6. and the Apostle Saint Paul, thrice conjunctively eat
-- and drink 1 Cor. 11.

Secondly, in answer to the former objection, he grants it was not in the power
of the Apostles to exempt any of the Twelve from concurring to the conversion
of the Nations, p. 356. If he will have this pertinent, he should add; but it
was in their power to exempt some of the Twelve, from doing the whole duty, or
several acts enjoined by our Savior: that if one of them taught only, another
baptized only, and so all partially concurred to the performing our Saviors
command, it had been sufficient: He will not surely say this: yet dare defend
it in their Churches, exempting the people from the one part of duty enjoined
them by our Savior: He subjoyns, It is not in the Churches power to exempt any
one from this precept, by having it performed of other Christians appointed by
her Anthority, 357. Yet their Church takes power to exempt from one part
(drinking his bloodshed) which lies under the command and obligation, as well
as the other of eating.

Thirdly, he grants here another Truth, to the acknowledgment of his
Impertinency above: where he instanced in the freedom of receiving Priesthood
and Marriage, to imply a liberty of receiving, or not receiving the Cup, but
here he grants this Sacrament is not left free (as Marriage and Priesthood are)
without a divine Precept that every Christian sometimes receive it, p. 357.
This is fair, but see the obstinacy still and giddiness of wilful error: That
eating only is sufficient, because our Savior when he expresses himself in the
singular number attributes eternal life to it; He that cateth me shall live by
me, Joh. 6.57. Nay, that the words (ye eat -- and drink v. 53.) cannot include
a necessity of both kinds to every particular person, without contradiction to
this Text, so he, p. 358, 359. As if one should reason, If it be true that he
who is born of the spirit shall enter into the kingdom of heaven, then cannot
the Text Joh. 3.5. unless a man be born of water and spirit, include a
necessity of both, -- nor when the Scripture requires Repent and believe Mar.
1. that cannot include a necessity of both for the kingdom of heaven, without
contradiction to the Text Joh. 3. ult. where one only is mentioned, and life
attributed to it, He that believes in me has everlasting life.

Again, it may be said, that eating is sometimes mentioned alone in that
chapter, as answerable to the occasion of the discourse, Manna and bread from
heaven and as fit to set out the reception of faith, which at the same time
also drinks his blood shed: so it did till the Sacrament was instituted, and so
it still does, extra Sacramentum, out of the Sacrament, but if we apply this to
the receiving of Christ in the Sacrament, then drinking is as necessary, both
to answer the whole act of Faith, and the whole purpose of the Sacrament, in
participating his blood shed and receiving a full Refection: And therefore
though eating only be expressed in that v. 57. yet he could not but see that
our Savior when he spoke in the singular number, mentions and enjoins them
both, v. 34, 36.

His instancing in the command about the Passover, enjoining to kill, roast,
sprinkle and eat, but not binding every one to perform all, but some one thing,
some another, p. 361. proves as all his former impertinent; for the concernment
here is in the reception or partaking of the Sacrament (of the Passover by
eating, of the Eucharist by eating and drinking:) and I hope, he will not deny
but all and every one of the Israelites were bound to eat the Passover, and to
eat it as the Lord enjoined it, under pain of being cut off, Exodus 12. Indeed
if we take in all the actions to be done in and about the Sacrament of the
Eucharist, those that concern the consecration and administration, as well as
the reception of it: every one is not bound to perform all; but that which
concerns the Reception, belongs to all; not to do all that our Savior did, but
all that the Disciples then did, belongs to all to do; because they then
represented the whole company of the faithful.

He closes up this point and his whole discourse with some passion against
Protestants -- charging them with an unworthy and base esteem of the most
sacred body and blood of our Savior: not thinking that either of them (as they
are in this Sacrament) is fit to confer saving grace to such as devoutly
receive them -- p. 363. Thus where Argument and Reason is wanting, there
Passion must make it out; But as to the worth and power of our Saviors body
and blood, we acknowledge it See N^. 3. and 5.
above, and the fitness of either to confer sufficient grace, and how it does
when in case of necessity the one is devoutly received: but we question how
they that wilfully refuse one of them (the blood shed) can be said devoutly to
receive, or can expect that sufficient grace, which is given in the Sacrament
to them, that receive it according to our Saviors Institution. It is not any
derogating from the worth of our Saviors body and blood, but a due regard to
his Will and Command that causes us to stand upon receiving both: What he adds
runs still upon that Assertion (that there is not any express command given in
Scripture to all particular Christians to receive both, page 365.) which we
showed above to be false -- by our Saviors commands in his Institution of this
Sacrament; Drink ye all, and Do this; by what he severely denounced Joh. 6.53.
by what S. Paul delivers as received from our Savior; 1 Cor. 11. That which
this Author immediately subjoyns, and the custom of the Primitive, Ancient,
and Modern Church is evidently to the contrary: will appear to be far from
Truth, as to the Primitive and Ancient Church, when we come to the survey of
Antiquity in this point.

To conclude, I could wish that Mr. Spencer, who pretends he undertook this
work for no other end then to inform the misled spirits of this age, (as he
tells us in the close of his book) would have a conscionable regard to an open
and apparent Truth, which he contends against as in this, so other points of
Romish doctrine; and that he would think of reducing those misled spirits,
which he has drawn out of the way by such deceiving assertions as he has
delivered in this Treatise, and bent all his wits to render them plausible to
the Vulgar.

A Brief Survey of Antiquity, for the trial of the former points:
Whether they can, as held by the Church of Rome, pass for Catholic Doctrine.
SECT. I.
Introduction. VIncentius Lirinensis gives us a safe Rule for trial of Points
of faith and Catholic doctrine. Duplici modo munire fidem suam debet, Primo
divina legis authoritate, deinde Ecclesiae Cath. Traditione, cap. 1.
If any (says he) would continue safe and sound in a sound faith, he ought two
ways to fortify his belief: First, by the Authority of Gods word (or
Scripture,) then by the Tradition of the Catholic Church: bringing down from
age to age the known sense of that word. Then for the Tradition of the Church,
it must be universal, to prove it Catholic Doctrine: That is properly
Catholic which was received or believed, Quod semper and ubique creditum -- c.
3.
every where (through all the Churches) and always; (through every Age.)

According to this Rule we ought to direct the Trial, and may justly expect,
that the Church of Rome imposing these and many other points upon the World for
Catholic faith, should give us them clearly proved by this Rule; whereas we
find them in these points pitifully destitute of Scripture, which is the
first and main groundwork of faith. Yet because Scripture is Scripture, and by
all Christians received for the word of God, and challenges the first place in
the Rule of Faith: therefore they think themselves concerned to bring Scripture
for every point: such as their best wits have found out any way capable of
being wrested to their purpose: far from that clearness and force of proof
which those places of Scripture have, that hold out unto us matters of Faith.

SECT. I. Of worshipping Angels and Saints.
Romanists are of Scripture here, may appear, Romanists here destitute of
Scripture proof.
by what could be alleged by Mr. Spencer in defense of it, as we saw above
Cap. 1.) from the reverence given to the Angels by Lot and others; or to men
living, as to Elias and Elisha -- which proved impertinent, and fell short of
that worship which the Church of Rome allows and practices. It is also
confessed by some of them, Salmeron in 1 Timothy 2. disp. 8. Sect. postremo.
that this business of worshipping and Invocating Saints or Angels, is not
expressed in the New Testament, and reason given for it, because it would seem
hard to the Jews, and give occasion to the Gentiles to think new Gods put upon
them.

As little help have they from the Tradition of the Catholic Church, or
witness of Antiquity, which here runs with a full stream against them. And now
for the Trial, we will first speak to the General, Religious worship as
incompetent to a Creature, though most excellent: such as are Saints and
Angels; the particulars of this worship, by Invocation and Image Worship we
shall examine below.

Religion, The force of the word Religion.
whereby the Fathers did prove and conclude all Religious worship or service
due to God. The name of Religion (says Lactan. l. 4. Inst. c. 28. -- quod
hominem sibi Deus relegaverit.
Lactantius) is deduced from the bond of piety; because God has bound man to
himself; S. Aug. is copious to this purpose; who in one place deduces Religion
from another word but to the same effect: from religendo choosing God again,
whom we had lost, and serving him only, (Hunc eligentes vel potius religentes,
nam amiseramus negligentes etc. Civit. Dei l. 10. c. 4. Aug: de vera Relig. c.
55. Non est nobis Religio, etc.
Elsewhere, Our Religion stands not in the worship of the Dead (or Saints
departed) They are to be honored for imitation, not to be adored for Religions
sake, and so having denied the worship of other creatures, even Angels too, he
concluds, according to the force of the Word Religion given above by
Lactantius, Religet ergo Religio uni omnipotenti Deo.
Let therefore Religion bind us to Almighty God alone. And speaking of worship;
Aug. de Civ. Dei l. 10. c. 1.
Cultus (says he) the word worship if we say no more, agrees to many things;
but if we add to it the name of Religion, it distinguishes it from all other,
and speaks that worship which is due to God.

Godhead of our Savior: The Fathers argument against the Arrians.
and of his consubstantiality with the Father against the Arrian Heresy:
proving the Deity of the Son, by worship to be given unto him: according to the
Apostles argument, Heb. 1.6. worship him all the Angels: and challenging the
Arrians for allowing him to be worshipped and invocated, yet denying him to be
God; which might have been evaded by the Arrians if the Romish answer and
distinction had been known doctrine then; for they might according to that have
said, they allowed him to be religiously worshipped, not as God, but as the most
excellent Creature, and in high favor with God. Here Athanasius, Athan. 2.
orat. contr. Arr. (...).
charging the Arrian Heresy with this absurdity consequential to it, Now that
the worship of the Creature was done away, (viz. the Heathen worship taken away
by Constantine) again to worship and serve a Creature, and that which was made:
so they accounted Christ to be. Also in the same oration, he argues against
that saying of the Arrians, that our Savior began then to be worshipped, when
he was exalted of God; but more fully against this in his next oration: citing
that of the Apostle Heb. 1.6. Let all the Angels worship him, for a disproving
of that Arrian tenet, and a proof of our Saviors Deity, and he goes on there
to take away as it seems, the Arrian limitation of worship, (something like the
aforesaid evasion of the Romanists) That he was worshipped by the Angels as
higher then they in glory, Athan. 3. orat. contr. Arrian. (...).
exalted above them: This the Father denies: and adds; If he was adored as
higher in glory, then ought every inferior worship him that is so; but so it
ought not to be; for (says he) A creature does not worship a creature: citing
S. Peter and the Angel who refused worship, Act. 10. and Rev. 19. then
concludes, Therefore it belongs only to God to be worshipped. And this, says
he, the Angels know, (...).
who albeit excelling one another in glory, yet being all of them Creatures,
they are not in the number or rank of those that are to be worshipped, but of
those that do worship: The like argument from adoration he Athan. in libr. de
Trinitate, and ad Serapionem.
elsewhere uses, and so does Hilary in his books of the Trinity more then once;
so does S. Aug. use it to prove the Deity of the holy Ghost, in his first book
of the Trinity and sixth chapter. So Nazianzen. Nazen. orat. 37. de spiritu
sancto. (...) --
If the Holy Ghost is not to be worshipped, how does he deify or sanctify us in
baptism? but if he must be adored, then worshipped: if worshipped, how then is
he not God? for the one cleaves to or follows the other, as a Golden Chain.
Thus the Fathers generally proved the Deity of the Son and holy Ghost: because
to be worshipped.

Religious worship, The Fathers answer (to the Heathens) denying such worship.
is taken from the answers given to Heathens, who observing, that Christians
did acknowledge the ministry of Angels, and resort to the memories of the
Martyrs, objected to the Christians, that they held and worshipped Angels and
Martyrs, like as they themselves did their Demons and Heroes, that is, as
mediators between men and the Supreme God.

Origin had to do with Celsus upon this argument, Orig. l. 5. contra Celsum.
omnia Vota interpellationes, etc.
and acknowledges Angels to be ministering spirits, but all our Vows,
Interpellations -- put up to God the Lord of all -- by our high Priest -- then
shows that our applying to Angels, without our better knowing of them (that is,
their nature and offices) is not agreeable to reason: wherein he seems to
relate to the Apostles (...) Col. 2.18. an intruding or searching into those
things a man has not seen or known: as those worshipers of Angels did, who
could not see or know, that the Angels had any such place or office appointed
to them. But more below out of this place of Origin, when we come to the point
of Invocation. Elsewhere Celsus objecting that the worship or honor given to
those, Orig. l. 8. contr. Cel sum.
that the supreme God would have honored, was a thing acceptable to him, so is
their worshipping of Demons and Hero's; for an honoring of his subjects cannot
offend him; and that this was apparent in Kings and their subjects and
officers: and that it was seditious to say otherwise. This discourse of Celsus
is not much unlike what the Romanists plead for their worshipping and honoring
of Saints and Angels. But Origin by way of answer, Nostra ratio potior est,
adducens nos ad serviendum uni Deo per filium -- Quisquis habet Deum propitium
--
insinuates it is not so with God, as amongst men: and that our reason is more
forcible, inducing us to serve God only, by his Son -- and a little after says
he, God alone is to be worshipped, and prayed to by his Son -- and whosoever has
God propitious by his Son the Angel of the great Counsel, let him be content;
he cannot want the protection of Angels; and more to this purpose. So may we
say, Our Reason is more forcible, which induces us Protestants to refuse their
way of worship, and to serve God only by his son, our only high Priest and
mediator.

Now hear what St. Aug. says of this matter: he tells us from Apulcius and
other Platonicks what they held their Demons to be, Aug. de Civ. dei l 8. c.
22. -- Medios inter Deos and homines tanquam interpretes and internuncios qui
-- Ideoque cultum eorum a supernorum Deorum religione, non separant.
and what respect and worship they had for them. They held them spiritual or
airie substances, but denied them to be Gods: set in a middle condition or
place between Gods and men; as interpreters and messengers that may carry from
hence our petitions or prayers, and bring back from thence the helps and
supplies of the Gods: and therefore they do not separate the worship of these
from the religion of the supreme Gods; let the Romanists consider well what
they find like to this in their Angel-worship; how they do not separate the
worship of Saints and Angels from the religion and service of God, Mald. in
Mat. 5.34. Impitus error Lutheran: nullum nisi Deo religionis honorem trib.
is shown above, cap. 1. number. 5. and Maldonat could conclude it is a silly
error of the Lutherans and Calvinists, yielding no honor of religion but to
God only: It may (says he) to the creature in reference to God; and proves it
by that which our Savior there reproves; their swearing by Heaven.

St. Aug. in the same book above cited: speaks of their resorting to the
memories of Martyrs, Aug. de Civ. Dei l. 8. c. 27. Martyrs de functos non
habemus Deos.
and of that which was done there; and this in answer to the worship of Martyrs
objected by the Heathen. We hold not the dead Martyrs for our Gods; no more do
we, say the Romanists hold the Saints and Angels, when we worship them: and no
more did the heathen Platonicks hold their Demons and Heroes to be Gods, as
above said. So then the Romanists say nothing when they so excuse their
worship; and S. Augustine had said nothing if he had said no more to the
objection then this: we hold them not to be as Gods: therefore he goes on to
show, what honor they afford the Martyrs, and what the heathens falsely charged
them with, as by them given to the Martyrs, because done at their Tombs or
memories. -- But says he, Sed eorum Deum Colimus, and eorum memorias
honoramus. -- ad Dei honorem cultumque. -- apud eorum memori. as offeratur Deo
-- ad imitationem -- ex eorum memoriae renovatione --
we worship their God and honor their memories: then for what they did there;
that the Altar, over the body of the buried Martyr, was erected there for Gods
honor and worship: that the prayers and sacrifices there, were offered to God:
that they gave praise there to God for the victories of the Martyrs, and by
making a remembrance still of them, exhorted one another to imitation of the
Martyrs, God being prayed to for help and assistance.

To Faustus objecting, they had but made a change from many heathen deities to
their Martyrs. Aug. cont. Faust. l. 20. cap. 21. Non coli similib. votis.
He first denies, that they are worshipped with like vows and applications:
then how they worship or honor the Saints departed; we worship and honor
Martyrs, Eo cultu dilectionis et societatis quo in hac vita coluntur sancti
homines.
with that sort of worship, as we do holy men living, which he there calls, the
worship of good will and fellowship: and conformable to what he said above, he
adds here; what is offered there, is offered to God, but therefore offered at
the memories of Martyrs, that Ex ipsorunt locorum admonition^.
by the admonition or remembrance, which the very places may give us, a
stronger affection may arise to inflame our charity, both toward those, whom
we may imitate (that is the martyrs) and toward him, by whose assistance we
may be enabled to do it. Memorias Martyrum religiosa solennitate concelebr at.
ibid.
But there is something here that the Romanists take hold of, for he says in
the same place; Christian people by such religious solennity, celebrate or
honor the memories of Martyrs -- That religious solennity is all the Bell. de
Beat. Sanctor. c. 12.
Cardinal could oppose out of S. Aug. against the many places of the same
Father denying religious worship to the Saints. Whereas he might have seen,
that S. Aug. calls it religious solemnity, not for worship given to the Martyr,
but for the religious acts there performed to God. But it follows in the
Father, Et ad excitandam Imitationem, et ut meritis eorum consocietur, and
orationibus adjuvetur, Aug. ut supra.
both to the exciting of Imitation of the Martyrs, and that the Christian
people might come to a fellowship of their merits, and be helped by their
prayers -- the meaning of which is, that by imitating the Martyrs, they may
come to obtain what they have obtained, (which is the usual acception of merit
with the Ancients) or that by their merits, that is, by that favor they have
with God, and by their intercessions (which we acknowledge the Saints make, and
the Church below has benefit by) there might be help found, and received from
God. No more then this can be wrung out of this saying of S. August.
considering what he says so often against such worship, and invocation; as we
see in this sect. and shall below sect. II.

And unto Maximus the Grammarian, Aug. ep. 43. and 44. Bust a Martyrum stulte
frequentant -- Scias a Catholicis Christianis nullum coli mortuorum.
objecting that the Christians did foolishly frequent the tombs of their
Martyrs, neglecting the Ghosts of their Ancestors -- He Answers as he did in
his book, of true Religion above cited; know thou that none of the dead are
worshipped by Catholic Christians. And elsewhere speaking against Heathen
worship -- that they worshipped Devils -- They says he, Aug in ex pos. Ps. 69.
seek divine honor to be given them, but all good Angels will that God alone
be worshipped. So in his book of true Religion chap. 55. after he had said Our
Religion stands not in the Worshipping of the Dead, he adds, Quid st pie
vixerunt non quaerunt -- Sed illum a nobis coli volunt.
For if they lived holily, they seek not such honors, but would we should
worship him -- So in the same place, having said, our Religion stands not in
the Worship of Angels, he affirms of them; Hoc ipsos velle, ut unum cum ipsis
colamus Deum. Eusebius. Hist. l. 4 c. 15.
This they would have, that we with them worship one God.

When the Jews reproached the Christians, that they would leave their Christ
and worship Polycarp, because of the great affection they showed to that
Martyr; their Answer was as Eusebius relates it; that they (...).
would worship none else but Christ; As for his Disciples and Imitaters, they
(...).
Loved them worthily; which was the Cultus dilectionis, as St. Augustine styled
it above.

Unto Julian reproaching the Christians, that they worshipped miserable Men,
Cyr. l. 6. contra Julianum, (...).
(so he called the Martyrs) St. Cyril answers, We do not worship them with any
divine or Religious Worship: but with that of affection, observance and honor,
or as the word ((...)) implies an honor convenient and proper for them. And by
his following discourse it appears wherein that honor stood; viz. in a
Reverend respect they had to their, (...), Repositories, where their bones, or
remainder of their bodies was laid; and celebrating their praise and Virtues;
We (...) -- ibid. (...). ibid.
crown them, says he, with the greatest honors, as those that have fought
valiantly, and obtained the victory: he adds the example of the Grecians, who
every year celebrated the fame of those that valiantly fought against the
Persians. So this perpetual memory of the martyrs is afforded them as a reward
due to their fortitude.

Add to these what Epiphanius says, being put to express himself in this
point, Epiph. Haer. 74. (...).
upon the Heresy of the Collyridians, The Blessed Virgin (says he) is to be
Honored, but she is not given to us for worship: Amb. in To. 1. ver. 21. and
25. Relicto Domino conservos adorant -- quasi plus sit, quod Deo reservetur.
and afterward, Let Mary be had in honor, but let the Lord be worshipped. Also
it is observable what St. Ambrose says upon the Pretense of the Heathen
Worship, which he calls Miseram excusationem, a miserable excuse. Leaving the
Lord, they adore their fellow servants: and then their pretense, or excuse is;
that they reserve more (or an higher sort of worship) for God himself: wherein
we may read the Romish excuse. And what St. Honorem Dei Creaturae defer.
ibid. Aug. l. 10. c. 4. Multa de cultu Divino usurpata honoribus deferri
humanis, sive humilitate nimia, sive perniciosa adulatione, ita tamen ut i^s
quibus deferunruntur, homines habeantur: qui dicuntur colendi, and venerandi,
si an^em multum i^s additur, and adorandi.
Ambrose says there of their yielding the honor of God to the Creature: St.
August more larely unfolds the matter in his Book of the City of God: where
speaking of worship, and several sorts of it. Many things used in and belonging
to Divine worship, are yielded up to the honoring of men: whether out of too
much humility, or pernicious flattery: yet so, as they to whom such honors are
yielded, are still held to be men; (as Romanists say, they acknowledge them as
Creatures, do not worship them as Gods) who are said to be honored,
reverenced, and, when much is yielded to them, adored.

Lastly, St. Hierom being put to it by Vigilantius, Hier. ad Riparium; Nos non
dico Reliquias Martyrum -- sed nec Angelos, Archangelos -- colimus and adoramu^
-- Honoramus Reliquias Martyrum, ut cum cujus sunt Martyrs adoremus. Honoramus
servos, ut honor servorum redundet ad Dominum.
who found fault with the honor given to the Relics of Martyrs, and spoke
contemptuously of them: answers thus, We do not worship or adore the Relics
of Martyrs; no nor Angels, or Archangels: we honor their Relics, that we may
adore him whose Martyrs they are: We honor the servants, that the honor of
servants may redound to their Lord. Now it will not serve to say here, which is
the usual evasion of the Romanists; that St. Hierom denies them Divine honor;
for Vigilantius could not think such was given to them by the ancient
Christians.

What manner of honor allowed to the Saints.
and exclude the pretenses and limitations used by the Romanists: so do they
afford us true and allowable distinctions and limitations of Worship or Honor:
as of the Blessed Virgin, she is to be honored not adored, or to have
religious worship. So Epiph. above; So St. August. above, of the Martyrs: They
are to be honored not adored,; and that honoring of them to be for imitations
sake, not for Religion: and again, an honor of charity, not service or
subjection. Lastly, the worship or honor of love and fellowship, wherewith we
worship also holy men living, and that the honor of the Martyrs stands in
Celebrating their Victories, and praise, in giving God thanks for them, and in
propounding their examples for Imitation: These out of the Fathers above cited
especially out of St. Augustine.

To these we may add St. Greg. Nyssen. in his praise of the Martyr Theodorus:
speaking to the Martyr, he says, Nyss. Orat. de Theod. Martyr. -- (...) --
We hold this assembly for thee: but how, or to what purpose? to adore our
Common Lord, and make full commemoration of thy victorious combats. Bas Orat,
in 40 Mar^. (...).
So his brother St. Basil in that very Oration of the 40 Martyrs (wherein the
Romanists think they have a fit testimony for Invocation: we shall examine it
in the next Section) gives such reasons, why they celebrate the memory of
Martyrs. 1. Because the honor given to the best of our fellow servants, is the
sign and demonstration of our good will and respect toward our Common Lord.
Where we have two words, fellow servants, and Common Lord, that excludes the
Romish religious worship given to Saints and Angels, as we saw it, by those
words excluded in the Testimonies of St. Aug. (...). ibid.
above cited: 2 because that by remembering the virtue of the Martyr, we stir up
to imitation (does not say we stir up to invoke or worship them) Again to the
Martyrs praise and our imitation he says, (...). ibid.
Think and call the Martyr blessed, (where the Latin Translation has Venerare
Martyrem, which though it may be allowed in a good sense, yet was it to be
translated otherwise) and mark the end of such celebrating of the Martyrs
praise and virtue: That thou may so become a Martyr, in resolution and
preparation of mind, fitted, as it were, for it by often thinking and speaking
him happy.

Bell. l. 1. de beat. Sanct. c. 13.
Cardinal brings out of Antiquity for Religious worship of Saints and Angels.
In these, as also in those, which he alleges for the next point of Invocation,
Romanists unfaithful in their allegations out of Antiquity.
there is great cause to challenge his honesty or his diligence. For first,
these Testimonies for the most part are too general; They speak an honor given
to Saints and Angels, but short of that which the Church of Rome allows and
defends. Some of them speak honor done to holy Men living; and the rest may be
answered by that honor which was done to the Martyrs in frequenting their
Memories, keeping their Festivals, celebrating their Victories, Virtues and
Praises, or by that reverend respect had to their bones or Relics.

But secondly, we may question the Cardinals honesty in his very first
Testimony; where he brings in Justin Martyr with this pomp of words. Justin
speaking in the Name of all Christians, Bell. ibid. -- Loquens nomine omnium
Christianorum and fidem totius Ecclesiae explicans -- Illum, and Filium qui ab
ilto venit and docuit nos haec, and bonorum Angelorum exercitum, and Spiritum
propheti^um colimus and adoramus.
and delivering the faith of the whole Church, says, We worship and adore Him
(the Father) and the Son that came from Him, and taught us these things, and
the host of good Angels, also the Spirit of prophecy: so that Author usually
styles the Holy Ghost. Now what a strange sense (little less then blasphemy)
does the Cardinal put upon that ancient Father for the Advancing of
Angel-worship! as if the Host of good Angels were set here as one of the
parties to be worshipped, and that before the Holy Ghost; whereas the Bell. l.
10. de Christo.
Cardinal in his first Book (de Christo) did argue well, that the Holy Ghost
was not a Creature, because coupled with the Father and the Son. This indeed
was answerable to the usual argument made by the Sic Basil l. de Spir. Sancto,
c. 18, and 19.
Fathers for the Deity of the Holy Ghost; but here the Cardinal can couple the
Host of Angels with the Father and the Son as to be adored with them, -- (...).
Justin, in Apolog. 2.
and that before the Holy Ghost. He that looks into Justin, will easily
discern, that the Host of Angels there is coupled with these things, and both
relating to the word taught not to worship or adore; For he spoke immediately
before of the wicked Angels or Devils not to be worshipped, and as the Son
taught us these things, so likewise concerning the Host of good Angels.

Another place he has out of St. Aug. saying to Heathens that professed to
worship Angels, Aug. in Ps. 96. Vtinam velletis colere Angelos; ab ipsis
disceretis non illos colere, id est (adds the Cardinal) non ut Deos sed ut
Sanctos.
i.e. their Demons, I wish you would Worship Angels, for you would then learn
of them, not to worship them. Here the Cardinal adds his own words in the same
character, that is, not as Gods, but as holy. But St. Aug. did not intend
really to commend Angel-worship to them, but wishes they would instead of
their Demons, honor the good Angels, and of them they might learn true
worship, for he had said a little before, The good Angels would have God alone
to be worshipped.

Another Testimony he pretends from Eusebius, Eusebius. de praepar. Euang. l. 13.
c. 11. has it thus: (...) ( i. e. at their monuments) (...).
whom he makes to say, We approach their Monuments and make Vows unto them, by
whose intercession we profess our selves to be much helped. Thus the Cardinal
wilfully following the corrupt Translation of Trapezuntius; whereas Eusebius
says we make vows and prayers, not to Them, but there: i. e. at their
monuments, but to God, as the custom then was. And that which follows, by
whose intercession we profess -- is added in stead of, we honor their blessed
souls, for so it follows in Eusebius.

Lastly out of St. Chrysostom. he cites Adoremus tumulos -- Let us adore the
Martyrs monuments; whereas that Father says not so, but thus: Chrysostom. homil. de
Juvent. and Maxim. (...) -- (...) --
Let us visit, or often go thither, let us touch their Coffin or Chest, Embrace
their Relics. This is all the Adoration he speaks of. Then a little after he
shows the profit of it: That from the sight of the Saints Monuments, and
consideration of their rewards, we may gather much treasure. Thus has the
Cardinal acquitted himself in the Testimonies from Antiquity.

To conclude, Bell. de beat. Sanct. c. 13.
In his arrgument which he makes from the objections of Jews and Heathens, we
may challenge his want of Candor, in concluding, that it was the practice of
the Ancient Church, because their Enemies charged the Christians with such a
Worship. That which the Heathens observed in the practice or doctrine of
Christians was, (as we have seen above) their allowing of and depending on the
Ministry of Angels, their resort to Martyrs Tombs, their offering up prayers
there, their keeping the days of the Martyrs sufferings, their celebrating of
the Martyrs praise; Now it was a gross mistake in the Heathens, thence to
infer, the Christian Church did worship them, or did set Angels and Martyrs in
like place and office, as they did their Demons and Heroes; So is it a false
inference in the Romanists from the practice of Christians then, to conclude a
Romish Worship, and to make the mistaken allegation of the Heathen a pretense
for it; when the Fathers in answering their objection, so plainly discover the
mistake, and deny the Worship. There were some excesses, it is like, committed
at the Tombs of Martyrs, by some inconsiderat Christians, but not to be charged
upon the Church: as appears by St. Aug. his answer above, to Maximus the
Grammarian: A Catholicis Christianis -- None of the Dead are worshipped, by
Catholic Christians: what ever excesses were used by some, Aug. de Civ. Dei l.
8. c. 27. Sed non fieri a melioribus Christianis.
yet none of the Catholic Christians so worshipped: also by what he says of
feasting and banqueting used by some at the Tombs of Martyrs: These things are
not done by the better sort of Christians. I will only add what I meet with in
the History of the Council of Trent anno 1549. How the Archbishop of Mentz,
during the Interim, held a Synod; by which in the 45 Head of Doctrine, it was
determined according to St. Augustine; That the Saints were to be honored, but
with Civil worship, or honor of dilection and love, no otherwise then Holy Men
in this Life.

SECT. II. Of Invocation of Saints or Angels.
Romanists little is to be expected in this point: Pretense of Scripture.
yet because Scripture is Scripture, the written Word of God (as I said at
Sect. 1. in Introduct.
the beginning) it must and is pretended to, and many places alleged by them.
There is nothing express (says Salm. in 1 Timothy c. 2. disp. 7. Nihil hac de re
expressum habetur --
Salmeron) in the Old Testament, or Gospels, or Epistles of the Apostles,
touching this matter; but in the Apocalypse, where there was occasion of writing
the future success of the Church, it is expressed; The places he notes are chapter
5. 8. chapter 6. 10. chapter 8. 3. which we shall touch below; but hear what he says
in his next disputation: Non fuisse morem in V. T^^adeundi Sanctos
Intercessores, -- Erat etiam olim periculum Idololatriae. Salm. disp. 8. sect.
postremo.
It was not their manner in the Old Testament to use the Saints as
intercessors; the Reason; because they were not then glorified, and because of
old there was danger of Idolatry: Mark the danger of the Romish practices in
Religion and Worship. But was there not danger under the New Testament? he
acknowledges it, saying, it is not express but was left to Tradition, secretly
to be delivered, which he calls Tacitam Spiritus suggestionem. ibid.
the silent suggestion of the Spirit: but why! because Quia durum erat id
Judaeis praecipere, and Gentib. daretur occasio putandi multos sibi deos
exhibitos, pro --
it was hard to command such a thing to the Jews: and it was likely to give
occasion to the Gentiles of thinking that many Gods were put upon them, in
stead of the many Gods they had forsaken. And might not the same Reasons still
be good against Romish Invocation, and Image Worship, either to keep them out,
or cast them out of the Church; seeing they give such occasion of scandal to
Jews and Infidels throughout the Romish Communion?

The Cardinal is not so liberal with us, Bell. l. 1. de Beat Sanct. c. 19. Non
consuetum -- Nec ordinary cognoscere preces -- etc. 20 sect. sed dices.
for he would confine it to the Old Testament, acknowledging: It was not the
custom then to say Holy Abraham pray for us -- and his reasons are, because
they did not see God, and could not ordinarily (i. e. without special
Revelation) know the prayers of the living. Neither is the Cardinal so
ingenuous with us as was his fellow Salmeron, for albeit he gives reasons why
prayers were not made to them in the Old Testament: (which reasons were good
against their Invocation till our Saviors ascension) yet he brings places out
of the Old Testament for a seeming proof of it. Some of them indeed concern
Invocation of Angels, as that Genesis 48.16. and Job 5.1. to which we briefly
answered Chap. II. nu. 9.
above; And though the Cardinals reasons which exclude the Saints of the Old
Testament, do not conclude against the Angels which did see Gods face, and as
well hear and know what was said and done below on Earth, in the time of the
Old Testament, as after; yet Salmerons Reasons might prevail against invocation
of them, because of danger of Idolatry then, -- and it would have seemed
strange and hard to the Jews -- And albeit they had Cherubins in the picture,
yet not Angels in their worship -- Which is acknowledged by Azor: and Vasquez,
and that out of several Fathers clearing the Jewish Church from Worshipping of
Angels or Images; and something to this purpose was said Chap. III. nu. 10.
above.

Places of Scripture alleged for Invocation.
which are the only Texts that have any semblance or pretense for Invocating
Saints or Angels: they are mistaken as applied to that purpose.

That Text, Rev. 5.8. where the four living Creatures, and the 24 Elders are
set out as falling down before the Lamb, having harps and viols full of odours
(or incense) which are the prayers of the Saints. Here the Romanists that would
have these prayers of the Saints, to be meant of the prayers of men living,
offered up by the Saints in heaven, are mistaken: for the whole place is a
representation of the Church below offering up prayers to God by Christ (the
Lamb) and those Eucharistical or prayers of thanksgiving and praise chiefly,
for the Victories of the Lamb, and Redemption by Christ, as the next verse
specifies them. Thus Viega understands them of the Church below, and he follows
good Authors in it.

The next is Rev. 6.10. how long O Lord -- Here also is a great mistake of
Romanists making this a formal prayer of the Martyrs for revenge: which stands
not with that charity they have in so great a degree; and therefore this is but
a figurative or emblematical representation of their Souls lying under the
Altar and calling for revenge, only to show the certainty of that judgment and
vengeance, which God would in time bring upon the Heathen Persecutors for their
blood: as when Abels blood is said to cry for vengeance. And for the Argument
they make, If the Souls of Martyrs cry for Vengeance upon their Enemies,
therefore their charity much more prompts them to pray for Gods servants: It
fails first in the Antecedent; for they do not as we see make any formal prayer
for vengeance: and then it fails in the Inference, for it would only conclude
that they do pray for the Church Militant, which we grant; not that they offer
up prayers made to them, which is the point in question.

The third Text, Rev. 8.3. where Another Angel is said to stand by the Altar,
having a golden Censer, and much incense was given to him, that he might offer
it with the prayers of all Saints. A great mistake this and impious to make
this the office of any created Angel, for the very Text seems to imply that
this was a special Angel differing from the seven Angels, set out in the second
verse as ministering Spirits; and what one created Angel is sufficient for this,
to receive and offer up their prayers that are made by all the Saints or just
men on Earth? Therefore generally it is interpreted of Christ the great Angel
of the Counsel of God; as Viega, and other modern Writers, and herein they have
Ambrose, Haimo, Rupertus, and the Interlin^ary Gloss consenting: To whom I may
add what Irenaeus says, reflecting upon this place, and the other, cap. 5.8.
where speaking of the Church offering up all by Christ, applies to it that of
Malachi cap. 1.11. in every place Incense shall be offered -- then adds, Now
Iren. l. 4. c. 33. Incensa autem Joan. in Apocal. Orationes ait esse Sanctorum.
Tert. advers. Marcion. l. 4. c. 9. Per Jesum Christum Catholicum Patris
sacerdotem.
St. John in the Revel. says, that Incense or the sweet odours are the prayers
of the Saints. And Tertul. upon that of our Savior to the Leper cleansed: show
thy self to the Priest, and offer, Mat. 8.4. Infers, we must offer up all
our prayers and thanksgivings by Jesus Christ, the Catholic or universal
Priest of the Father. No Created Angel can be such a Catholic Priest, to offer
up the Prayers of all Saints.

Thus much for Scripture, to show how destitute they are of any real proof, and
therefore want the first and main ground of Catholic faith and doctrine, Sect.
1. in Introduct.
according to Vincentius his certain and safe Rule, at first mentioned. Now let
us make a brief Survey of Antiquity, and see what may be brought for or against
this Invocation of Saints and Angels allowed in the Roman Church.

Being forsaken of Scripture, they fly to some sayings of the Fathers, that
seem to allow and commend, the practice, then set on foot by some in the fourth
Century; higher they cannot go for the rise of it: and so fall short of the
second ground of Catholic doctrine, requiring it be delivered down from the
Apostles time, held and believed in all Ages, as Vincentius his Rule also tells
us. For clearing of this, We will lay down some Generals, which will evince
this doctrine and practice (though Ancient, yet indeed) New and not Catholic:
and so may render what they bring, weak and impertinent to prove the contrary.

The opinion of some of the Ancients touching the state of the Dead
inconsistent with Invocation.
that the Souls of the faithful, are not admitted into Heaven, or to the sight
of God till the Resurrection; being still in the like condition, as the
Romanists suppose the Fathers of the Old Testament to be in; and therefore not
in a condition to be invocated, or prayed to: but were prayed for, that God
would give them Lucem and refrigerium.
light and refreshment, as we find in ancient forms of prayer for the Dead.
Senensis, and other Romish Writers acknowledge this to be the opinion of many
Ancient Fathers: and therefore Invocation of Saints could not then be Catholic
belief or Doctrine; The Bell. de Beat. Sanctor. c. 1, 2, 3.
Cardinal well saw, how this was inconsistent with the ground of Invocation,
and therefore seeks to make the Contrary appear, viz. that the Souls of the
faithful do see God: But though many Fathers may be brought to the contrary,
especially after the many Miracles done at the Tombs of Martyrs in the fourth
Age, yet the general opinion of the more Ancient Fathers being as I said, it
plainly shows that Invocation of Saints could not be their belief or practice
-- Bellarmine seems to be troubled in shifting off two testimonies especially.
The one of John the 22. who though of later times yet a Pope, and so more cross
to their pretended ancient belief of Invocation; which sentence of the Pope
Bell. de Beat. Sanct. c. 2.
he seeks to elevate it as if the Pope held it doubtfully and recal'd it, but
elsewhere the Bell. de Pontifice Romano, l. 4. c. 14. -- cum Liberum esset --
Cardinal answers roundly to it, that Pope John thought so, when it was free to
think so, the Church having determined nothing therein: But if Invocation of
Saints departed had been a defined and determined doctrine of the Catholic
Church, then would it not have been free for any to hold them in a place, where
they could not be Invocated.

The other Testimony is of Irenaeus, Iren. l. 5. c. 31. Legem mortuorum
servevit --
one of the most ancient Fathers, most plainly asserting the former opinion,
and giving Reason for it, from our Saviors example, who did, says he, observe
the Law of the dead, that he might be the first born from the dead; and what
Law was that? Manifestum est, quia and discipulorum animae -- Bell. l. de
beatit. Sanctorum c. 4. sect. tertio -- Erat anima beatus. -- anima sunt in
paradiso beati.
that his soul should stay in the lower parts, unto his resurrection; or in an
invisible place, as he calls it in that chapter: It is manifest therefore that
the Souls of his disciples must stay in the invisible place till the
resurrection, and then adds, for no disciple is above his Master: Of all that
the Cardinal says, this only carries a show of Answer, That Christ before his
resurrection was beatified in Soul (so was he before his death by reason of the
hypostatical Union) In like manner the Saints, while they rest, as to their
bodies, in the Sepulcher, are blessed in soul and in Paradise. That they were
in a blessed condition, though out of heaven or the beatifical vision of God
was not doubted, but that Paradise which Bell. in reference to Luc. 23.43.
places them in, does not reach the highest heaven or sight of God, and so he
says nothing, as to their capacity of being invocated. So also, what he says
Bell. l. 1. de Beat. Sanctor. c. 6. -- fuisse tamen in Fara diso Coelesti
formaliter, i. e. fuisse Beatam and gloriosam --
afterward: That Christ's Soul, though it did not ascend into that corporeal
Heaven, before his resurrection, yet was it in the celestial Paradise
formally, i. e. it was blessed and glorious; Which if our Adversaries would
yield unto the Souls of the Saints, we would not be much solicitous for that
corporeal Heaven. We cannot yield, nor you neither, that the Souls of Saints,
if not in the highest heaven and that sight of God, could be glorified and
beatified as the Soul of our Savior was, only that they were blessed in Soul
though out of that heaven we yield; but that will do the Romanists no good as
to Invocation. And if our Saviors Soul was formally in Paradise before his
refurrection, because it was gloriosa and beata, glorious and beatified, then
was it so in Paradise before his death, whilst he conversed on earth, or was
on the Cross; for his Soul by reason of the Hypostatical Union, was always in
the Vision of God and beatified: and so the Cardinal still said nothing to the
purpose. But this is enough to our purpose, that many of the Ancients deny the
Saints departed, to have sight of God till the resurrection, or speak
doubtfully of their place and condition: which plainly evinces that Invocation
could not be a point then of belief or Catholic Doctrine.

This practice of Invocation took beginning but in the 4. Century.
That this Doctrine or practice cannot be made to appear before the fourth
Century: and therefore also not Catholic. This is proved first, because the
defenders of it can bring no Testimony for it beyond that Age. That which
Coccius cites out of Origin upon Job, and the Lamentations, is indeed not out
of Origin; for neither of those Comments are his; and what the Bell. de beat.
Sanctor. l. 1. c. 16.
Cardinal makes his first Testimony out of Dionysius his Hierarchy, fails two
ways; for that writing is of a much later date; and the place cited concerns
the prayers of the Living for the Dead, not to the Dead; as appears by the
purpose of the whole Chapter from whence the words are taken. The Cardinals
second Testimony is from Irenaeus, an ancient Father indeed: but what says he
for Invocation? He calls the Blessed Virgin Evae Advocatum, the Advocate of Eve:
and Bell. cries, Quid clarius? what more clear? If this imply any Intercession,
yet can it not prove Invocation: for how could Eve invocate the Blessed Virgin?
But this is a strong and high expression importing, not the Advocation of Words
or pleading, but of Deeds and acting: The Father sets the one Woman against the
other; the great Good that came by one, against the great Evil that was caused
by the other; Genesis 3.
as the Scripture sets the Woman's Seed against the Effect of the Woman's
transgression: the meaning of Irenaeus in calling the Blessed Virgin Eves
Advocat, is, that she was an Instrument or Means in bringing forth the Savior
of Mankind, the Only Mediator between God and Man. St. Ambr. de Obitu
Theodosii. Foeminam visitavit Christus in Maria. Visitata est Maria, ut Evam
liberaret.
Ambrose may explain that speech of Irenaeus, by what he says to like purpose
but more clearly; Christ, says he, visited the Woman in Mary: Mary was
visited, that she might free Eve.

What they have out of the True Origin, speaks only that the Saints do or may
pray for us, which cannot be denied; But as for Invocation, we shall presenly
see he declared against it. The Intercession of Saints departed for the living,
how far extendible.
Such Testimonies as imply the Saints interceeding or entreating for us, are
frequent among the Ancient Fathers, and not only in General, but in Particular
for those they knew here: both for their particular Persons, and for their
particular Necessities or Infirmities, known to them, before they went from
hence; for as they lose not their memory, so they increase their charity by
going to God. Thus Ignat. Ep. ad Trallens. Salutat vos spiritus mons non modo
nunc (...).
Ignatius, My spirit salutes you, not only now, but will also when I obtain (or
enjoy) God: So between Cornelius and Cyprian, it was agreed, that which of them
went first to God should remember the other. Cypr. epist. 57. Perseveret apud
Dominum nostra dilectio, pro fratribus and sororibus nostris apud misericordiam
patris non cesset Oration.
Let our love continue, when either of us shall be with the Lord, and let not
our prayer cease to solicit the mercy of the Father for our brothers and
sisters, left behind. So Chrysostom. in his Oration ad Illuminandos, to those
that were to be baptized: Remember me (says he) when that Kingdom receives you.

Such sayings as these, that avouch the Saints praying for them they knew, and
in general for all the Church, are often shuffled in by the Romanists, as good
proofs of Invocation, and sufficient to take the unwary, that discern not the
Paralogism or inconsequent Reasoning: From such intercession of the Saints
departed, to infer, they were (or ought to be) invocated by the Living.

That which they bring out of Athanasius as a Testimony of primer Antiquity for
invocating of the blessed Virgin, is taken out of the book De Sanctiss.
Deipara, Of the most holy Mother of God: Not written by that holy Father, but
by a much later and unlearned Author, and so rejected of Baronius with scorn;
But see the other Bell. de Script Eccles. tit. Athanasius.
Cardinals honesty or diligence, who having censured this very Book as
Suppositious and written after the sixth General Council, (300 years after
Athanasius his Time) yet can cite it as his.

Testimonies of Antiq. against Invocation.
because the Defenders of Invocation can bring no witness for it beyond the
middle of the fourth Age: Our second proof is from Testimonies excluding or
denying such Invocation. Irenaeus in his first Book speaks of Heretics that
had strange Phansies concerning Angels, attributing much unto them; in relation
to which he denies, Iren. l. 2. c. 25. Nec invocationibus Angelicis faciat
aliquid, nec incantationibus, sed pure and manifest orationes dirigens ad
Dominum qui fecit omnia, and nomen Domini Jesu Christi invocans --
that the Church did do any thing (he speaks of miraculous Cures done then) by
Invocation of Angels, nor by incantations, but purely and manifestly directing
prayers to the Lord that made all, and invocating the Name of our Lord Jesus
Christ. Fevardentius his Gloss here will not help, saying the Father means
Invocation of such evil spirits as the former Heretics used: for if the Church
had used, to the working of those cures, the Invocation of good Angels, the
same Father could not have condemned their invocations, and so absolutely
denied (without any mention or limitation of such use in the Church) all
Angelical Invocations; could not have bound up the prayers of the Church (as we
see here) to God the father through the Name of his Son. So afterward when
Cures were so frequently don at the Monuments of Martyrs, the first and regular
way was, as here, to direct their prayers to God through Christ; not using
Invocations of the Martyr; which was the abuse creeping in by degrees, as we
shall see below. Our next Testimony is from Origin, out of whom we cited some
passages Sect. 1. Number. 4. Orig. contra Celsum l. 5. Omnia Vota deprecationes,
and gratiarum actiones destinandae ad Deum -- per summum Pontificem --
above against Angel-worship; so is he very express against their Invocation.
Angelos invocare absque ipsorum cognitione --
Notwithstanding that the Angels are Ministering Spirits as he acknowledges, yet
all our vows, prayers, thanksgivings are to be directed unto God the Lord of
all, by our High Priest, greater then all Angels. And he gives several reasons
against Invocation of Angels; Because (says he) to invoke Angels without
knowing them (better then we do, as to their nature, condition, offices) is
little agreeable to reason. But, says he, if we had sufficient knowledge of
them and their condition, yet Hoc cohibebit ne quis preces ^udeat offerre nisi
soli Domino Deo, qui omnibus abunde suffi^it, per servatorem nostrum Dei fill
um. Angelos habet satis Propi^ios --
this will withhold any from daring to offer up prayers to any save God alone,
who abundantly is sufficient for all through our Lord Jesus Christ; and because
this will render the Angels sufficiently propitious to us, and willing to do
all things for us: if we (so far as humane nature permits) be well affected, as
they are to Gods service. Something like it is, that S. Aug. says of every
good Angel Aug de vera Religcap. 55.
In illo me exaudit, in illo me adjuvat. He hears me in him (i.e. in God when I
pray to God) in him he helps me.

To the like purpose does Origin reply again to Celsus, Origin. l 8. contrae
Celsum prope initium.
that prayers are to be offered up to God alone by his only begotten Son and
this exclusive to Angels, because opposed to Celsus pleading for their going to
God by their Demons: For our Savior Christ, says Origin, Qui ut pontifex ea^
deferat ad Deum.
as high Priest presents our prayers to God the Father. Again, Quisquis habet
Deum propitium propter magni consilii Angelum -- -- quae multitudo (Angelorum)
cum videt homines suam erga Deum pietatem imitantes, adjutat e^s contendentes
ad s^lutem, and Deum invocantes.
Whosoever, says he, has God propitious by the Angel of the great Counsel,
Jesus Christ, he may be content with that, and shall not want protection: for
the multitude (of Angels) seeing men imitating their piety toward God, helps
them, whilst they contend to salvation, calling upon God. This was the
wholesome doctrine of those times. And to the same tenor sounds that which
above was cited out of Tertul. saying we must offer up all by our Catholic, or
universal High Priest Jesus Christ, called so to the exclusion of all others.

Invocation of God alone asserted in that Age.
yet do we find the former doctrine, of God alone to be Invocated by Jesus
Christ, asserted often in the Fathers; A mbr. de obitu Theod. Tu tamen Domine
solus es invocandus.
St. Ambrose speaking with relation to the two young Sons of Theodosius, yet
thou O Lord art only to be invocated, that is, for a blessing and protection
upon them. And in Romans 1.21. (if those commentaries be his, or if of a later
writer, it is so much more to the prejudice of Invocation) He answers the
Heathens excuse for their coming to the Creator by the Creature, Ambr. in Romans
1.21. Per Commites perven^t^ur ad Regem quia ^o^no est, and nescit --
that they did it, as to Kings we come per Comites and Tribunos by their great
officers at Court: (the Romanists use the like reason or excuse,) We come
(says the Father) by such officers to the King, because he is a man, and
knows not all --. But God knows all men's conditions and merits, and we need
not use such an Intercessor to Him, but only a devout mind. Chrysostom. 4. hom. de
Paenit. In Deo nihil ^ale.
Chrysostom often to the like purpose denying the way of our coming to God, to be
like the manner of Kings Courts; In God, says he, there is no such thing:
Elsewhere he forbids us to bring in Angels, when we would have any thing
prosper, but with reference to the Apostles precept, Col. 3.17. Chrysostom Hom. 9.
in 3. Colos. (...).
do all in the name of the Lord Jesus; he bids, set that name before, and all
things will be happy and prosperous: and do not bring in Angels; and the
marginal note in the Paris Edition is; Angeli non adjungendi ad invocationem
Trinitatis: Angels are not to be joined, when we invocate God: Indeed it is
Athanasius his argument for the Deity of our Savior; because the Apostle joins
him in prayer with the Father, 1 These. 3.11. as above cited; Chap. 1. nu. 5.
and this makes Athansius interpret the Angel, which Jacob seemed to join with
God in Invocation (Genesis 48.16. Athan. in 4. contra Arrianos.
to be Christ; -- and by many examples he shows, none to be Invocated but God:
and speaking of David, He never invocated any save God himself: (...), ibid.
Now to answer here as Romanists would do, that the Saints were then out of
sight of God; or that none was to be invocated as God, but God himself: would
be first impertinent, because the Angels whom Athanasius expressly excludes from
being Invoked, did see the face of God then, as well as now, also because such
answer if it were proper by that limitation (as God) would render the Fathers
Argument invalid and impertinent, when he so often proves the Deity of our
Savior by Invocation, and so does other Fathers after him.

St. Hier. l. adversus Vigilant.
Hierom lived in the fourth age, after that practice began, but if it had been
the practice or doctrine of the Church, he would not have spared Vigilantius in
that point, as he does not in any, wherein he could have advantage against him.
Seeing therefore he only defends the Saints praying for us, which was the
Doctrine of the Church, has nothing in defense of our Invocating them, it is
evident this was no doctrine, nor to be accounted of as the practice of the
Church: yet is St. Hier. often cited as a witness for Invocation; because upon
other points he wrote against Vigilantius, who found fault with that beginning
practice of Invocation.

St. Aug. de Civit. Dei l. 22. c. 10. Nominari a Sacerdote, non invocari.
Aug. says expressly, of the Mantyrs, they are named in the daily Sacrifice,
they are not invocated. Indeed it was later by much ere Invocation of Saints
came into the public office; But St. August. being by the objections of
Enemies often put to it, punctually to set down what was done at the Monuments
of Martyrs, (as we saw Sect. 1. nu 4.
above) no where mentions Invocating of Them but of God.

But the Bell. I de Beat. Sanct. c. 17. sect. Quario Sanctum Augustinum, doeere
Sanctos Invocandos non ut Deos, sed ut qui a Deo impetrent, quod volunt.
Cardinal boldly, though untruly, tells his Reader, that St. Aug. teaches, the
Saints are not to be Invocated as Gods, but as those that can obtain of God,
what they will: and the places he notes are, De Civit. Dei. l. 8. c. ult. and
l. 22. c. 10. whereas St. Aug. in the first place speaks of no Invocation but
of God, and for the Martyrs he speaks only of our Imitating them. In the second
place he expressly denies they are Invocated, as we cited it hard above. Again
the Bell. l. de Beat. Sanct. c. 19 sect. ult. -- docere, quo^ in Sacrificio
ipso memoria srat Martyrum, and invocentur, ut pro nobis orent.
Cardinal says, St. August. teaches, that in the Sacrifice it self, there is
a remembrance made of the Martyrs, and that they are invocated, that they would
pray for us. The places he cites, are Tract. 84. in Jo. and Sermon. 17. de verbis
Apostoli. Now its strange that St. Aug. should so forget himself, as in one
place to say, they are named or remembered in the sacrifice, not invocated: and
in another to say (as the Cardinal imposes upon Him and the Reader) they are
invocated; In the first place St. Aug. says, We do not remember Martyrs there,
as we do others that rest in peace, -- Non -- ut pro iis oremus, sed magis ut
ipsi pro nobis orent, ut eorum vestigiis adhaereamus.
to pray for them, but rather that they pray for us, that we may follow their
steps. In the second place, thus; The Martyrs are recited at the Altar, not
that we should pray for them, For its an Injury to pray for a Martyr, Cujus nos
orationibus debemus commendare.
to whose prayers we ought to commend our selves. This is the most that fell
from St. Aug. yet this comes short of what Bell. will have him say, that they
are then Invocated at the Altar; for he had said expressly, they are not
invocated, and that we invocate God there, to enable us to imitate them, as
above in the two places out of his book de Civit. Dei. What then is this
commending our selves to their prayers? it cannot be direct Invocation, for
that he denies: but an invocating of God or begging of him, the benefit of
their prayers; as we shall see more below.

We have found the Cardinal very unfaithful hitherto in his Testimonies of
Antiquity: we will add two more; He cites Chrysostom. 5. Hom. in Matt. which is
plainly of the prayers of the living Saints. It speaks of the woman of Canaan
coming of her self to Christ without suing to any of the Disciples to entreat
for her; (...). Chrysostom.
And this (says he) I speak, not that we ought not to entreat or sue to the
Saints -- The other place is that which we noted above, how corruptly it was
cited by the Cardinal, for the Worship of Saints; afterward it is again
alleged by him for Vows made to Saints: it is out of Eusebius. de praepar.
Evang. l. 13. c. 11. where as we noted above, in stead of making vows and
prayers at the Monuments of Martyrs, the Interpreter has rendered it, making
Vows to them, that is, to the Martyrs; and this (in three times alleging this
Testimony) the Cardinal would not see.

Romish is, The Invocation begun in the fourth Age was not such as the Romish
is.
either for the manner or the use: that is, it was not formal and direct
Invocation, nor used in sacred offices till long after.

1. They were Wishes not formal Invocation: as Nyssen upon our Saviors,
Nyssen. de Oratione Dominica, orat. 2.
when ye pray, Luc. 11.2. distinguishes between (...), vowing, and (...)
praying by direct address and petition to God: so we in this discourse of
Invocation, must distinguish between (...) a vow or wish, and (...) a praying
to, or religious address to any by petition: So when they cried out in the
Council of Chalcedon, Oret pro nobis Flavianus, Let Flavianus pray for us: it
was a speaking of their judgment of Flavianus his being in bliss, and a wishing
of the benefit of his intercession. Thus we find in Theodorets History of the
Lives of many Fathers, such closures of most of them; I wish and desire, that
by their intercession I may obtain the divine help. Some think there are
additions and insertions made in this work; Theod. in Sanct. Patrum hist. Rogo
and quaeso ut ipsorum intercessione divinum consequer Auxilium.
but whether these be Theodorets words, or any others, they do speak the wish
of having the benefit and effect of the Saints prayers put up for the Church
below. But this is not Invocation.

2. In that practice, we meet with for the most part only Indirect Invocation;
that is, a praying to God himself directly, that he would vouchsafe the effect
of the Saints Intercession, or prayers they made in behalf of the Members of
the Church below, and give the benefit thereof unto them as he saw fit. This
still is not the Invocating of Saints, which we contend about; no more then
Moses can be said to have Invocated Abraham, Aug. l. 20. ^.21. contra Faustum.
Isaac, and Jacob, when he prayed to the Lord to remember them, in behalf of
that people, Exodus 32.13. To this sense speaks that passage of St. Aug. cited
sometimes by Romanists for Invocation and explained above Sect. 1. nu. 4.
Speaking of Christian people frequenting the Tombs of Martyrs with a Religious
solennity, that they may be stirred up to imitation of the Martyrs, come to a
fellowship of their merits, and be helped by their prayers; and this not by
invocating or praying to them; but by imitating of them, and praying to God
there, -- quo adjuvante possumu^ imitari. ibid.
for his aid to enable us to imitate them, and for his favor in affording us
the benfit of their prayers, this is not Invocation of the Saints, but of God:
and if St. Aug. had asserted a direct Invocation of the Martyrs themselves, he
had yielded up the Cause to Faustus; To the like sense is that which we noted
Hac Sect. nu. 5.
above of St. Aug. his saying Commendare nos orationi -- we ought to commend
our selves to the prayers of the Martyrs: not by direct Invocating of them, but
of God, as before, And to this purpose also that of Aug. elsewhere, Aug. de
cura pro mort. c. 4.
which at first hearing sounds harsh: Where enquiring what benefit accrews to a
man's friends to have their bodies laid near the Monuments of Martyrs; -- i^sdem
Sanctis illos tarquam Patronis suscept^s, apud D^minum adju^andos ^rand^
commendent.
He says he sees none unless this, that when they look upon the place where
their dear friends lie buried, they may be moved to commend them to those
Saints as Patrons, to find help with God, yea but he says, commend them by
praying; true, but to God not to the Saints or Martyrs themselves. To this
purpose of indirect invocation speaks that of Cyril in his Catech. cited also
by the Cardinal. When we offer the sacrifice we make mention of the Saints
(does not say we Invocate them) that God by their Intercession may receive our
prayers. Thus far it prevailed so as to have approbation; and the practice of
this Indirect Invocation (or praying to God at Martyrs Tombs, and begging for
their sakes) got strength by a common opinion of many, that when God was so
invocated or prayed to, then the Martyr was present, as some thought, or did
join his prayers with them, as most thought. This St. Aug. leaves as uncertain
in his Book, de Cura pro mortuis: c. 16. and something of doubt in his Book, de
vera Relig. c. 55. But there he concludes for certain of the good Angel in illo
me exaudit, adjuvat, he hears me in God, and helps me in God, that is, when I
pray, or by my praying to God, I have the Angels help; we may indeed say it
with comfort, as Origin did above in answering to Celsus. He that piously and
faithfully invocates God, is sure to have the Angels propitious, and the
benefit of their ministry; So is he sure to have the benefit of the Prayers,
which the Saints put up in behalf of the Church Militant.

I may add here that place of Basil often alleged by the Romanists, Basil. in
Orat. de 40. Martyr. prope finem.
but see how abused by the Cardinal: who thus alleges it, (Qui aliqua premitur
angustia ad hos confugiat; qui rursus laetatur hos oret.) He that is distressed
let him fly to these, again he that rejoices, let him pray to these. Where we
have a double corrupting of the Text; St. Basil says, -- (...). -- (...).
he does fly to these, the Cardinal says, let him fly to these; again the
Father says, he does run to these, the Cardinal says, let him pray to these;
The Father in this oration, at the beginning of it, gives Reasons, why they
celebrate the Days of Martyrs with such panegyricks: viz. to praise their
virtue, and propound them as examples for imitation, but says nothing of
Invocating them.

And concerning these 40 Martyrs he insinuates, that at Caesarea they had a
Church bearing their name; -- (...).
that there was help to be had by their joint prayers; there, says he, a
mother praying for her sons is heard, he does not say, praying to Them, but
there, i. e. at their Monument, (...).
and it follows immediately, let our prayers be made or joined with the Martyrs
-- upon supposal of their continual praying for the Church below.

3. By degrees it came to direct and downright Invocating of the Martyr; but
this not to be imputed to All, or to Most, but to the Excess of some private
men in their devotions and applications to the Martyr. It pleased God to work
many wonders at the Memories of the Martyrs for the honor and confirmation of
that faith, for which they dyed: and in those days, especially when the Roman
Empire was to be subdued to the faith and confirmed in it; wherefore it became
a custom to frequent those places and to offer up prayers there to God. And
some in begging relief of God, were easily led on to speak directly to the
Martyr, and desire his intercession; such was the rise of Invocation, the
excess of some particular men in addresses to the Martyr: And the frequency of
Miracles and Cures done at their Monuments, and upon those that applied there
to God Almighty, easily drew on the Vulgar sort to a downright application to
the Martyr, and caused some speeches to fall from eminent Fathers as allowing
and commending that New Devotion, out of their great Affection they bore to the
honor of the Martyrs, and their great desire of magnifying the glory of
Martyrdom, or suffering for the Faith; And such excess of speech we meet with
usually in the close of an homily or oration, when the reins are let loose to
Rhetorical excursion; whereas when they deliver themselves dogmatically, to lay
down any thing by way of Doctrine, they speak more safely, and in this very
point more conformably to the former Catholic Doctrine, of Invocating God
alone. This is plain in Chrysostom, to him that will but look, what and how he
delivers himself in the body of his Homily upon the Text of Scripture, and then
how he often lashes out in his Ethicon or Application at the end of it. Lib. 6.
Annot. 152.
Sixtus Senensis gives us a good caution to this purpose, and he gives it with
a Sape Monuimus, we have often admonished, that the words of the Fathers are
not always to be taken as they sound, for in their declamatory Orations and
Sermons they often speak, affectuum impetu and orationis cursu rapti, carried
on more violently by the force of affection, and the course of their Oration.

And therefore what falls from them in this kind, we should rather cover or
fairly interpret, then produce it as the Romanists do in this point, to make
argument of it for Invocation of Saints and Angels against the former Catholic
Doctrine delivered by the foregoing Fathers: and therefore also in the
preceding General I have endeavored to show, that some of the Fathers speeches
alleged by Romanists for direct Invocation of Saints, or Angels, do but indeed
mean the indirect, which makes the address or Prayer to God himself. There are
three other Testimonies out of the Fathers, Chrysostom. in 2 Cor. Hom. 26. (...).
which are much urged. One of Chrysostom, speaking of the Emperor at the
Monuments of Martyrs, Supplicating them that they would be his Patrons with
God: and he, that wears the Diadem, Supplicates the Tent-maker and the
Fisherman (Paul and Peter) as Patrons. This the Father Rhetorically sets forth,
to magnify the Faith of Christ, and to show that the greatest in this worlds
glory do need the benefit of the prayers of Saints: and so the word ((...))
signifies to need as well as to supplicate. Now whether the Emperor did by
direct Invocation supplicate them, or beg of God to have benefit by them is not
expressed; if he did the first it was an excess according to the New Devotion:
if the second, it was tolerable.

Another Testimony is cited out of St. Ambrose, in his Book De Viduis, Ambros.
de viduis Obsecrandi sunt Angeli, Obsecrandi Martyrs --
the Angels are to be entreated, the Martyrs are to be entreated. This may be
interpreted, to be the obsecration or Entreaty of Deeds rather then Words; for
there he teaches a widow (pleading she was w ak and without help) to make the
Apostles her friends and neighbors to procure her help, -- Si ipsis devotion
is societate and misericordiae muneribus appropinques.

-- Virtutis cognatio proximos facit.


as Peter and Andrew entreated our Savior to cure Peter's wifes mother: Now the
way to make them so to her, was to draw near to them in the fellowship or
likeness of piety and doing good; for it was not the relation of blood, but the
kindred of virtue, that makes the Martyrs our friends and neighbors -- Then a
little after; the Angels are to be entreated, for they are given to us for
ministration; and Martyrs to be entreated because we are in the body as they
have been -- The ministry of Angels -- and the remembrance the Martyrs have of
what they suffered in the body, is a good argument to assure us, that Angels
are ready to help, and Martyrs do pray for all those, that draw near to them in
virtue: but no argument for our Invocating them: such a Doctrine is as harsh
and streined as his reason which follows, that the Martyrs are fit to interceed
for our sins that washed their own sins in their own blood, which if not
heartily interpreted is directly contrary to Scripture, 1 Jo. 1.7. Rev. 1.5.
But St. Ambrose is thought to be but a young Christian, when he wrote that
book. Ambr. de Obitu Theodosii.
Afterward he could say, Thou O Lord only art to be Invocated.

The last is of Nazienzen: Nazien. Orat. 18. in Laudem Cypriani.
relating how Justina a virgin calling upon the blessed Virgin in distress was
helped: Nazienzen was deceived in that Book of Cyprians conversion (from whence
he had that story) for it is false and forged as to the conversion of Cyprian
the Martyr. But it may be said, whether the book be forged or no, and the story
of Justina true or false: yet Nazienzen approves the fact or practice. (...).
We answer that he tells us; she betook her self to God for help, and to Christ:
that she strengthened her self with the Examples of Susanna, Daniel, etc. then
follows, having considered these things, she also supplicated the Virgin Mary,
that she would help a Virgin now in danger: and so he leaves the story, neither
commendig this practice, nor reproving it.

We have seen what Testi moneys the Romanists allege out of the Fathers, and
how faithfully it is done, especially by the Cardinal. One Argument remains,
which all of them make from the success they found who applied themselves to
the Martyrs, whereby it is evident that God did approve the practice. But this
is a fallacious Argument, a non Causa: making their invocation of the Martyr to
be the Cause or motive of Gods hearing and granting success. It is certain in
History, that many were heard, who resorted to the monuments of Martyrs and
prayed to God there; yea many that prayed there to God with reference to the
Intercession, which the Martyr and all other Saints made for the Church below;
but if some were heard, that did directly invocate, or pray to the Martyr, (of
which Examples cannot certainly be given) we may say, God overlooked the
Excess, or the voluntaries of their mouth, as St. August. Aug. Confess. l. 9.
c. 13. Voluntaria oris mei.
called his Excesses or breakings out in his praying for his mother, whom he
believed to be in bliss: hoping that God would pardon the extravagance. And as
the same Father insinuates, God overlooked and pardoned the infirmities of the
Midwives not speaking altogether according to truth, Aug. Qu. 12 in Exodus --
non potuit ad laudem, sed ad Veniam pertinere.
and rewarded their good will, Exodus 1.20. Their untruth could not deserve
praise, might obtain pardon. So when the Romanists urge the miracles (which
Augustine sent hither by Greg. the first, is said to work) as Gods witness to
the Truth of all the Doctrines he brought from Rome; we say those Miracles
(supposing them to be wrought) were Gods witnesses to the Catholic Faith which
Austin preached, and planted here; not to all that he taught: God in mercy
overlooking those lesser errors and vanities, when he was pleased and saw it
fit to give testimony by those Miracles to the Faith of Christ. But this may
suffice for the former Argument. If therefore we be asked, why we do not
conform in this practice to the Ancient Church, it may be answered; Because we
see what the more Ancient Church held, and practiced: and we find by St. Aug.
conFaust. l. 20. c. 21. Alind est quod docemus, aliud quod sustinemusEt donec
emendemus to lerare compellimur.
Aug. that many things were done at the Martyrs Tombs, but not by the better
sort of Christians, as we noted above, Sect. 1. nu. 6. and that in his answer
to Faustus; about the worship or honor given to Martyrs, he concludes thus: It
is one thing that we teach, another thing which we bear with -- and we are
compelled to tolerate it, till we can amend it. Therefore, because we saw much
deflexion in the Romish practice from the Primitive Verity, when we had
opportunity and power to amend it (the thing St. Aug. desired) we did it, and
with good Reason: allowing in this point what may consist with Catholic
Doctrine; such we count the (...), the wish of having benefit by those prayers,
which the Saints above make for the members of the Church militant and
laboring below; yea such we may account the indirect Invocation, which begs of
God that benefit, or effect of those Prayers; but we cannot account the (...),
or direct Invocation, to consist with Catholic Doctrine, when it is made to
Saints, and that by way of Religious address, as the Church of Rome practices
it in her offices, which practice none of the Ancients knew.

SECT. III. Of Image Worship.
Romanists labor in this point to stand against Scripture which so forcibly
encounters them, Romanists altogether forsaken here, of Scripture and Antiquity.
we saw above, Chap. III. and there was answered what they bring from Ps. 99.5.
to worship his footstool, and the Images of the Cherubins upon the Ark; This is
the best and only plea they can make from Scripture: yet so weak and
ungrounded, that their own Authors give it over as impertinent, and raised upon
a false supposal, that the Jewish Church had any Images for worship: as
abovesaid Chapter 3. nu. 10. Now let us see how they strive to bear up against the
universal consent of Antiquity, which with a strong Current for 700 years runs
contrary unto them.

Our first evidence against this Imageworship. The first Evidence.
Had there been any such thing amongst Christians, those Ancient Apologists and
Defenders of Christian Religion against Heathens (Justin, Clemens, Tertullian,
Minutius, Lactantius, Arnobius, Eusebius) would have mentioned it, when they
give account of the worship used in their assemblies; Nay they could not have
declined it, when they set themselves to refute the Heathen Image Worship. And
therefore Tertul. Tert. Apol. c. 12. Igitur si statuas and imagines frigidas
mortuorum suorum simillimas non adoramus, quas milvi and araneae intelligunt,
nonne laudem --
in his Apologetick professes and defends their not worshipping of Images. If
therefore (says he) we do not worship Statues and cold Images, like indeed to
the Dead whom they represent: and which Birds and Spiders understand well
enough, it deserves praise rather then punishment. See how he not only denies
the worship, but vilifies them as unfit for worship, cold, and like the Dead,
and that the Birds understand them, and therefore fear not to dung upon them.
Minutius Faelix answering Cecilius a Heathen, that objected against the
Christians their having no Temples, no Images, gives reasons wherefore they had
not, or not used them in worship. Clemens Alexandr. as he denies the Jewish
Church had any Images to worship: saying Clem. strom. 5. (...),
Moses set no statue or figure in the Temple to be worshipped; so is he very
severe against Images among Christians, insomuch that he scarce allows the Art
of painting or of making Images: as we may see in his Protreptic. Origin had to
do with Celsus about worship and Invocation, and to answer, why the Christians
gave it not to Angels (whom they acknowledged to be ministering Spirits sent of
God) as they (the Heathen) gave it to their Demons: of which in the two former
Sections; But he was also put to satisfy Celsus, why the Christians did not
use Images: and for which he compares them to Scythians and Barbarians, that
had no Temples and Images, because they knew not what the Gods or Heroes were.
How does Origin answer? by saying as a Romanist would do, we only hate the
heathen Idols and decline them, but as for the Images of Christ and his Saints,
we have and worship them? No! They and we (answers Origin) have not the same
cause of declining these things; Origin contra Celsum l. 7. Non eandem
aversandi cau vam esse illis and nobis. -- Aliis rationibus moventur quam
Christiani and Judaei, quibus Religio est, fic Numen colere -- Sibi ab his
temperant propter illud Legis, Deuteronomy. 6. Exodus 20.
and again, Those barbarous Nations are moved to it by other reasons then
Christians and the Jews are, to whom it is horrid impiety, so to worship the
Deity. They keep themselves carefully from these, because of the Law. Deuteronomy. 6.
Thou shall fear the Lord thy God, and him shall thou serve, and that of Exodus
20. Thou shall not make to thy self a graven Image: And because Celsus had
said, Those Barbarians have not Temples, Altars, Images, by reason that they
know not what the Gods and Heroes are: Impossible est ut qui Deum novit
supplex fiat statuis. -- Nos ideo non honorare simulachra, quia quantum
possumus cavemus ne quo modo incidamus in istam Credulitatem --
therefore Origin subjoyns here; It is impossible that he who knows God should
be a worshipper of Statues. Again, We therefore do not honor Images, because
we take heed, as much as in us lies, least by any means we fall into the
Credulity of attributing to them, any thing of Divinity. In like manner
Minutius Felix and Arnobius were put to answer the Heathens, challenging the
Christians for having no Temples, Minut. in Octavio.
Altars, Images; for which Caecilius reproaches them, that they could not show
the God, they worship, and is answered, We believe our God, though we see him
not. Again he reproaches them with their poverty and afflictions, as if their
God could not help them, Cruces nec Colimus nec optamus. ibid.
The Cross is not to be worshipped by you, but born: and is answered, We neither
worship Crosses, nor desire them. And Man is the Image of God -- Arnobius
answers the like challenge -- and is so far from acknowledging that Christians
had Images, Arnob. l. 6. Contra Gentes.
or did worship their God by Images, (as he must needs have done, if they had
Images then) that he replies to the Heathen, that said, we worship the Gods by
Images; -- Scire Deum and rei alteri supplicare. Opem sperare a Numine, and ad
Effigicm nullius sensus dep^ecar^.
What, says he, can be more injurious, more reproachful to say they know God,
and yet worship another thing, to profess they hope for help from the Deity,
and yet turn to and supplicat the Image which has no sense? which speaks reason
against Imageworship in Heathens or Christians.

Lactantius amongst many sayings against this folly, Lactan. l. 2. c. 18.
Perversum est ut simulachrum homi nis a simulachro Dei colatur.
has this: It Is absurd, that the Image of man should be worshipped by the Image
of God. The Ancient Council of Eliberis in Spain decreed, That Pictures ought
not to be in the Church.

Epiphanius was very severe against Images; Epiph. Epist. ad Johan. Hierof.
Velum depictum, habens imeginem quast Christi vel sancti cujusdam.
as he showed both by Deed and Doctrine. At Anablatha, going into a Chapel to
pray, he finds a Veil hanging there, and having in it a picture, as of Christ,
or some other Saint; wherefore he cut it in pieces as a thing not to be
suffered in the Church against the Authority of Scripture, as he relates it
himself in his Epist. to John Bishop of Jerusalem, in whose Diocese that place
was. The Cardinal not liking the shifts that some of their writers make to
avoid the prejudice of this Authority: thought good to Bell. l. 2. de Imagine.
cap. 9. sect. ad quintum.
cut off that part of the Epistle as supposititious, and added to the rest by
an after hand; but this is sure, that St. Hierom, who was contemporary to
Epiphanius, and held correspondency and friendship with him, translated the
whole Epistle out of Greek into Latin: this part of it as well as the rest, and
accounted this to be Epiphanius his deed and Report; And this one thing is of
more weight then those many petty pretenses of Reasons, which the Cardinal
holds out for the proof of what he said. Now let us hear what Epiphanius says
doctrinally of Images. Epiph. de Collyridianis Har. 79.
Writing against the Collyridians, that worshipped the Virgin Mary calling her
the Queen of Heaven: he tells us the Original of Images, or rather of the honor
and worship they got in the world, that the Devil brought them in (...).
under pretense of Just, (that is, of giving famous men their due, by honoring
them after death) creeping into the minds of men, and (...).
consecrating or designing the mortal nature to divine honors, he set before
men's eyes humane likenesses and Images polished with great art: that seeing
they that are worshipped, were dead (and out of sight) their Images might
appear, and receive the honor and adoration. So that ancient Father.

St. Ambrose, Ambr. de obitu The odosii Regem adora vit, non lignum utique,
quia hic Gentilis est error, and vanitas Impiorum.
has this passage of Helena mother of Constantine when she had found the very
Cross of Christ. She worshipped the King (Christ) not the Wood. The Cardinal
replies, that St. Ambrose would have the Cross, not adored for it self, but for
Christ's sake: as if that Age of the the Church knew the new Romish
distinctions, or limitations, of giving worship to Crosses and Images, for
themselves, or for the Exemplars sake; but the Cardinal did advisedly in
cutting off what follows in that Father, for this is a Heathen Error and vanity
of the wicked, viz. to worship such things religiously; yet there he finds
something, which he thinks may favor the adoration of the Cross. -- Levavit
Crucem in capite Regum ut Crux Domini in Regibus adoretur, Ambr. ibid.
Helena (says Ambrose) did wisely in setting the Cross upon the head of Kings,
(for she had commended it to Constantine her son to set it upon his Crown) that
the Cross of our Lord might be adored in Kings. What? that material Cross,
placed on the Diadem of any King, be adored? So must the Cardinal suppose it:
or else he must grant that the Intent of Helena and the saying of St. Ambrose
upon it, was only to show, what esteem she had, and all others ought to have of
the Passion of Christ; Non insolentia haec, sed pietas cum desertur sacrae
Redemptioni.
and therefore it follows in St. Ambrose, This was not a strange or unseemly
thing, but Piety: seeing the honor is given to the sacred Redemption.

Hear now what St. Aug. Aug. de Morib. Ecclesiae, c. 34. S^pul^hrorum and
picturarum Adoratores -- Iurbas Imperitorum.
says in several places in his Book of the manners or Customs of the Church,
he notes some to be Worshipers of pictures and sepulchers: and puts them among
the companies of ignorant and indiscreet men; and says the Church owns not,
allows not such custom or practice. The Cardinal replies, Peradventure St.
Aug. Bell. de Imag. l. 2. cap. 16. Forte --
speaks of the Idols of the Gentiles, -- Peradventure of those that did
superstitiously; without all peradventure St. Aug. speaks not of Heathen Idols,
-- but of the irregular honor given by some to the Martyrs; and without any
peradventure, they did superstitiously worship and honor them, for that
necessarily follows upon Religious worship given to a Creature: and cannot be
declined in the Church of Rome. But after two peradventures the Cardinal is
resolved to say, St. Aug. was then newly converted when he wrote that Book, and
so Offensum quibusdam ritibus Ecclesiae.
offended with some customs of the Church (it seems the Cardinal took that
practice which St. Aug. blames, to have been a Custom or usage of the Church)
but after being better instructed, he could excuse them. But where did St
August. ever excuse such practice,, or show himself reconciled to
Image Worship? We do not find he recalled it in his Retractations: but we
find Aug. contra Adimant. c. 13. Velle videri se favere simulachris, ut
vesanae sectae Paganorum concilient benevol.
him blaming the Manichees in that they would seem to favor Images, for
gaining the good will of the Pagans to their mad sect. Aug. contra Acad. l. 1.
c. 1. Nihil omnino colendum esse, tot^^que abjiciendum quicquid oculis
cernitur, qui^quid ullus sensus attingit.
Again we find him in his first book against the Academicks, pronouncing in
general, Nothing is at all to be worshipped, but to be cast away, what ever is
seen with mortal eyes, and what ever any sense can reach: This Book indeed he
wrote when he was newly converted: but when he wrote his Retractations,
Retract. l. 1. c. 1. Est en^m sensus and Mentis.
he was an aged Christian; there he repeats this sentence, not retracting it,
but only explaining the word Sense, by saying he meant the senses of the body,
not of the mind.

Also we find the very same Father in his Book of true Religion, Aug. de vera
Relig. c. 55. Non est nobis Religio humanorum operum cultus, meliores enim sunt
i^si Artifices.
denying it and saying (as we saw above Sect 1.) Worship of Dead Men -- or of
Angels, is no part of our Religion -- So likewise denies he there, that the
worship of the works of men's hands is any part of Christian Religion, and adds
Reason for it, because the workmen themselves are better then their works,

We find him also upon occasion of the Heathen-worship asking this question:
Aug. in Ps 113. Quir adorat vel orat intu^^ simula^h um, qui non sic afficitur
^t ab eo se coe^^^rt pute^?
Who is he that adores or prays beholding an Image, and is not so affected as
to think he is heard by it? Where he not only condemns the practice, but shows
the danger of it in withdrawing the mind from that which is to be adored, and
prayed to. Nor is this so easily to be turned off as the Cardinal would do it,
by saying, St. Aug. speaks of Images with supposal of the Heathen error, as if
he should say, Bell l. 2. de Imag. c. 9. Loqui de simulachris supposito errore
Gentilium: quando quis putet simulachrum esse Deum, and accedit ut adoret --
when any thinking the Image to be God (as the Heathens did) comes to adore and
pray; As if there were no danger of withdrawing the mind so, but in them that
think the Image to be God; But all Heathens did not think so, as we shall see
below, and St. Aug. puts his question generally of all; and subjoyns the
example of those that could not think the Image to be the thing it represented;
but might see them different and distant one from the other at the same time,
as the Sun it self and the Image of it. Aug. ibid. Homines talibus
superstitionibus obligati, ad ipsum solemn plerumque dorsum ponentes, preces
fundunt statuae.
They (says he) that are engaged to such superstitions, do often turn their
backs to the Sun it self, and pour out their prayers to the statue or Image of
it: and then St. August. tells us the danger of it, which is common to Heathen
or Christians, Contra hunc affectum quo humana infirmitas facile capi potest,
cantat Scriptura -- Aug. ibid.
that will bind themselves to such superstition; Against this affection
(arising from the use of the Image) wherewith humane infirmity may be easily
taken, the Scripture cries out, telling them often, They are the works of men's
hands. And a little after upon the same Psalm, shows the danger that arises,
Valet in affectibus miserorum similis viven^^ forma Aug. ibid.
by reason of the similitude. The likeness, says he, which the Image has to
One living, much prevails upon the affections of silly miserable men. And thus
much out of St. Aug. against the worship of Images, and to show the danger of
using them in holy worship.

Let us hear what St. Gregory Bishop of Rome says: In his time (which was
about 600 years after Christ) they were gotten into Churches, for the
historical use that might be made of them, but not yet obtained any worship.
Serenus Bishop of Marscilles had caused some Images to be broken, because he
saw the people inclined to give them worship. Greg. Epist. l. 9. Ep 9.
Gregory Bishop of Rome, writes to him commending him, in that he forbad them
to be worshipped, but not praising him for breaking them. Bell. de Imag. l. 2. c.
16. -- Vsum superstitiosum quo Imagines coluntur ut Dii.
The Cardinal answers with their usual limitation of worship. That their Bishop
forbad only the superstitious use of worshipping Images as Gods: when as its
plain to him that reads the Epistle, he simply forbids the worship, by such
sayings, Adorare omnibus modis devita, by all ways possble avoid the adoring
of them; and all the use he allows of them is historical: as appears by many
passages in that Epistle, that speak that use the only reason of having and
retaining them; as for example. Aliud est adorare, aliud per Picturae historiam
quid sit adorandum addiscere. Greg ibid.
It is one thing (says he) to adore, another thing to learn by the history of
the Picture, what is to be adored. Again, They were not placed in the Church
(ad adorandum) for worship, but (ad instruendas solummodo --) only for
Instructing of the minds of the simple. After this he advises Serenus to call
his people together, and teach them, that nothing made with hands is to be
adored, because it is written Luc. 4. Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, Omne
M^nufactum non licet adorari, quia scriptum est, etc.
and him only shall thou serve; and then to tell them; Because thou did see
Pictures (which are for instruction of Ignorant people that they may learn the
history) to gain worship, Quia Picturas quae ad aedificationem -- ut histori^m
discerent, transisse in adora tionem videras -- Si ad hanc instructionem ad
quam factae sant, habere vultis -- Greg. ibid.
therefore thou did break them: but now if ye will have them for instruction,
for which they have been anciently made and used, ye may. Thus he, and what
more plain that the use of Images was only historical, not for worship?

That which the Cardinal brings (in the place above cited) as a proof of his
Answer, comes short still of the point in hand; He alleges out of Gregory's
Epist. to Secundinus, Greg. Ep. l. 7. Ep. 53. Scio quod Imaginem salvatoris non
ideo petis, ut quast Deum colas, sed ob recordationem filii Dei --
that desired of him the Image of our Savior; I know thou desire the Image,
not that thou may worship it, as God: but for remembrance of the Son of God.
Now that limitation (as God) is added, not as now its used in the Church of
Rome, to imply a Religious worship of inferior rank is to be given to the
Image: but because anciently they knew no difference between worshipping a
Creature, and worshipping it as God, that is, giving to it what belonged to God.
That which follows there in St. Nos quidem non quasi ante Divinitatem ante
illam prosternimur. Sed illum adoramus quem per imaginem -- ^ecordamur.
Gregory sounds a little harsher at first hearing, and speaks a declination
then beginning. And we truly (says he) lie prostrate before the Image of our
Savior, not as before a Divinity, but we adore him, whom by that Image we
remember as born, or suffering, or sitting in his throne: Supposing this
sentence to be Gregori^s, and not inserted (for there are some interpolations
and additions in these Epistles, as it is conceived) it speaks no worship given
to the Image, but that the use of it is only recordation, as in the former
sentence too: for to worship before or toward such a thing, as toward the Ark,
Temple, Altar, does not infer that thing is worshipped, or that it determines
the worship objectively, but only circumstantially; as Chap. III. nu. 15.
above; but when this is done before or toward an Image, though it may
possibly be done without giving any worship to the Image, yet scarcely without
scandal to others, hardly without danger to himself that does it, as appears by
what is said above, especially out of St. August. And truly if this prostration
was a custom in St. Gregory's time (though without fixing any worship on the
Image, as we see by what he said of the only use of Images for history and
recordation) we see in it a beginning of declination toward this Image
worship, which began to be asserted in the following Age.

Excuses made by the Hea. thens in defense of their Images from which our
second Evidence.
which we find recited and rejected by the Ancient Apologists and Writers for
the Christian faith: and thereby the sinews of Romish worship proportionably
upheld by such pretenses, cut in sunder. It is the usual answer of Romanists,
that they worship them not as Gods, or as having any divinity in them, as the
Council of Trent has it: and the Bell. l. 2 de Imag. c. 13.
Cardinal thinks himself much concerned, to show the Heathens did think them to
be, and worship them as Gods. All that he says from Scripture or Fathers for
it, can but speak of the grosser sort of Idolaters; but those that were Aug. in
Ps. 113.
purgatioris Religionis, of a more refined Religion, as they took themselves to
be, had that and other excuses. Origin. l. 7. contra Cel sum.
Its plain by what Celsus the Philosopher pleads, and for it cites Heraclitus,
who pronounced of them, that so offered their prayers to Images, ( viz. as to
Gods) that they did not know what the Gods or Heroes were. Also, Origin repeats
it as spoken by the Adversary: Who, Quis nisi totus fatuus hac Deos esse credit
--
but a fool, will think them to be Gods, and not rather Statues dedicated to
the Gods? Arnob l. 6. contra Gentes. Deos per simulachra veneramur.
And Arnobius brings them in replying, they did by Images worship the Gods,
Conc. Trid. Sess. 24. Non quod credatur inesse in iis aliqua Divinitas -- --
ita ut per Imagines -- Christum adoremus.
therefore held them not Gods. Compare with this what the Trent Council says.
-- Not that any Divinity is believed to be in them: and that by Images before
which we uncover, and lie down, we may worship Christ.

Lactantius also tells us what they used to reply, We fear not, Lactan l. 2.2.
Non timemus opera digitorum si. mulachra, sed cos --
(say they) the work of men's hands, these Images; but those we fear, to whose
Names they are consecrated. These men could not think them or worship them as
Gods -- and if they did not fear them, -- Vel quod fidu^ia in illis sit coll^.
canda. Council. Trid. ibid.
neither did they put their trust in them: which is another thing, that the
Council says in excuse of Imageworship -- Not that confidence or trust is to
be put in them: and we may see by Arnobius, (as above cited nu, 1.) Arnobius l.
6. contra Gentes.
that they could profess they hoped for help from the Deity: upon which he
infers it as a great absurdity and perverseness, ad effigiem -- to supplicate
to an Image that has no sense, if thou expectest help from, and trustest in
the Deity. This reason touches all Image Worship; and so does that which
Lactantius replies to their saying above -- If you fear not Images, Lact. l. 2.
c. 2. Cur ergo oculos ad Coelum non tollitis? quid simulachra volunt mortuorum,
and Absentium Monumenta! Et si absentium, non sunt colendi, si nec vident quae
facimus, nec audiunt qui precamur --
but those to whose Names they are dedicated: Why lift ye up not your Eyes to
Heaven? and what mean these Images of the Dead and Absent; for if absent they
are not to be worshipped; if they hear not what we pray nor see what we do. Let
Romanists consider whether this spoken to Heathens does not concern them.

To these I will but add two replies we meet with in St. August. repeated as
from the mouth of Heathens. I neither worship the very Image, Aug. in Ps. 113.
Nec si mulachrum colo -- Sed per effigiem -- Ejus rei signum intueor quam
Colere debeo.
nor a Devil, but in the Corporal representation I look upon the sign of that
thing, which I ought to worship. Aug. in Ps. 96. Non illum Lapidem, a^t
simulachrum colo quod est sine sensu, sed adoro quod video, and servio ei quem
non video.
And in another place, I do not worship that stone, or that Image which is
without sense, but I adore what I see, and serve him whom I do not see. Thus
could the Heathens plead and profefs, in excuse of their worshipping Images. The
Romanists had need study and give out some new pretenses. I will close this
point with the consideration of one chief Cause of Imageworship, that which
made it be so readily entertained, and so tenaciously held, as among the
Heathen, so proportionably in the Church of Rome, and that is satisfaction of
sense or sight: So in Arnobius by applying to their Statues, Arnob. l. 6.
contra Gentes P^asentiam quandam exhiberi --
they conceited an enjoyment of their Gods as present, by praying to their
Images, they did as it were talk with their Gods. And for this, they objected
to the Christians that Minutius Felix in Octavio. Deum suum nec ostendere
possum nec videre.
they could not show or see the God they worshipped. To this satisfaction of
sense in Religion, belongs that of Lactantius; Lact. l. 2. c. 7. Horum
pulchritudo perstringit oculos, nec ullam Religionem putant, ubicunque haec non
fulserint.
The beauty of these Images dazles the eyes, neither do they think there is any
Religion, where those do not shine and appear. Were not these words spoken by
so ancient a Father, one would think them spoken of the present Church of Rome.

The plea made for Image worship weak; and the pleaders unfaithful in their
Allegations.
that can be made by the Adversary for Imageworship. For that which they
pretend to bring from before the seventh Age or Century, is either out of
forged writings; or if out of true Authors, the words are perverted, or the
argument made from them inconsequent, as to the worship of Images. This will
appear if we examine the Collection which the Cardinal has made, or rather some
careless Scribe for him, but He too blameworthy, that would not better inquire
into them, or think that others would not.

First he makes a semblance of proof from St. Bell. l. 2. de Imaginib. c. 12.
sect. primo.
Hierom in his Epist. to Marcella, where he invites her to Bethlem: saying the
Tabernacle was venerable for the Cherubins -- But no such words in that
Epistle; Indeed in an Epistle of Paula and Eustochium to invite Marcella to
Bethlem, there is such a thing but not the words of Bellarmine: Venerabantur
Judai Sancia Sanctorum, quia ibi erant -- Nonne venerabilius tibi videtur
Sepulchrum Domini?
The Jews (say those Women) worshipped or reverenced the Holiest of Holies,
because there was the Chernbins, Ark, Aarons rod: and does not the Sepulcher of
the Lord seem to thee more venerable? So the sentence or words are not Hieroms,
but the Women's: nor are they their words neither as Bellarm. repeats them. But
let them go as he would have them, the argument for Image Worship is altogether
inconsequent, from that reverence the Jews gave toward the Temple or the Ark.

He subjoyns immediately, a Testimony out of St, Aug. who in his third Book de
Trin. c. 10. -- Loquens de quibusdam signis, quae venerationem tanqu^m
religiosa merentur, point pro exemplo serpentem aeneum: Bell. ubi supra.
Speaking of certain signs which deserve veneration as things pertaining to
religion, puts for example there the brazen Serpent. St. Aug. there gives other
examples as well as the brazen Serpent, as the Stone which Jacobs head lay
upon, when he had the Vision, Genesis 28. but because the brazen Serpent was an
Image, this must be mentioned, as also in the next testimony, though falsely
there, and impertinently here; for the brazen Serpent was not an Image of
Christ but a Type or Sign as St. Aug. has it, -- haec h^^ norem ut Religiosa
possunt habere. So St. Aug.
and upon that score there was an honor due to it, as to all other signs of
Gods institution: but when religious worship was given to it by burning of
Incense, (which is also done in the Romish worship before Images) it was broken
in pieces. To this the Cardi nal there Bell. nbi supra. Tam de Imaginibus
Cherubinorum, quam Serpentis aenei quod honorari debuerint, pate^ ex Regula
Augustini, signa divinitus instituta esse veneranda quia honor eorum ad
prorotypum transit. Fuisse autem illas Imagines Cherubin. and Serpen^is.
adds another place of St. Aug. and thus brings it in, As concerning the Images
of the Cherub. and of the brazen Serpent, that they are to be honored appears
by St Aug. in his third Book de doctr. Christiana, c. 9. where he says, Signs
appointed of God are venerable, because the honor of them redounds to the
Prototype; and they were the Images of the Cherubins and of the Serpent: having
thus repeated St. Aug words, as he saw fit, he makes his argument from thence:
If it was lawful to worship the Images of Angels, why not of the Saints? But
first this has a falfe ground, viz. that the Jews worshipped the Cherubins,
Chap. III. nu 10.
as above showed that they did not. Again, from the veneration or reverend
respect given to the holy signs instituted of God to infer Romish worship given
to Images, is inconsequent upon a double account, because such veneration is of
the weakest sort of honor, far short of the worship contended for; also because
there is great difference twixt holy signs instituted of God, and Images of
man's invention, and so from that looking toward or bowing toward the Temple
or Ark used by the Jews to infer Image Worship, is inconsequent and fails upon
the former respects, and also because a circumstantial determining of worship
given to God, this way rather then another, as toward the Ark or Temple, is
far different from the objective determining or receiving of the worship as an
Image does. But indeed, the Cardinal wrongs St. Aug. both in his words and
meaning. For St. Aug. does not there deliver a Rule, nor says as the Cardinal
sets it down, but only by the way says, Aug. de doctr. Christiana l. 3. c. 9
Qui veneratur utile signum divinitus Institutum: non hoc veneratur, sed illud
poti^s quo talia cuncta referenda.
He that reverenceth signs appointed of God (he means the Jewish Types before
Christ) does not reverence these but that to which all these had reference:
where this reverencing of such a sign, is so to regard it, as to understand it
in the spiritual meaning of it, as it is plain there by St. Aug. who has no
such thing, as the honor of the sign or Image redounding to the prototype,
nothing of the Images of the Cherubins or Serpent: as the Cardinal made him to
speak. The purpose and meaning also of the Father is far from giving any
countenance to Images, and its worthy our hearing. He showed in the chapters
before, how the Gentiles did serve under unprofitable signs, i. e. their
Statues and Images; Aug. de Doctr. Christana l. 3. c. 8. -- Aliqui little non
tanquam Deos venerabantur simulachra, sed tanquam signa Deorum interpretari
conantur.
for foam of them did not worship them as Gods, but did interpret or call them
the Signs of the Gods. (this may be added to the testimonies above, that
Heathens could say in excuse of their worship, that they did not hold their
Images which they worshipped to be Gods.) Then St. Aug. shows how the Jews
were under profitable signs instituted of God. Now the Gospel freed both: the
Gentiles by removing wholly those unprofitable signs, and bringing them to the
worship of the One God; -- ad unius Dei cultum.
but freed the Jews by bringing them to those things, of which they had before
but the signs. -- ad eas res quarum illa signa sunt, liberavit. Signorum
operatione gravi non sumus onerati, -- Sed pauca pro multis -- observatione
Castissima.
Then he shows we Christans, are not burdened with the heavy observance and
toil of such Signs or Ceremonies. But we have few for many -- and those most
chaste in their observance (whereas Images exposed to worship are every where
marked out as things tending to spiritual fornication) and these few Signs are
Baptism and the Lords Supper; none else are named by that Father. He should
have excepted Images as Signs, with the observance of which, the Church of Rome
heavily burdens her people; we shall see presently the Cardinal making him to
except them, where he intended no such matter.

But because those Signs, which St. Aug. did speak of, were instituted of God,
therefore the Cardinal thought himself bound to say as much for Images; else
would all be impertinent; and he says it boldly (in the same chapt. where he
repeats these places of St. Aug. again) Now that the Images of the Saints are
profitable signs instituted of God, Bell. de Imag. l. 2. c. 12. sect, August.
Quod antem Imagines Sanctorum finitutilia signa divinitus instituta patet ex --
appears by St. Aug. in his 2. Book of Christian doctrine, c. 25. How does it
appear? because speaking of Pictures and Statues, he says, Totum hoc genus
inter superflua hominum instituta numerandum: exceptis iis quae ob finem bonum,
suo loco and tempore proponuntur ab eo qui autoritatem habet. Sic Bell.
This whole kind may be numbered among the superfluous institutions of men:
those being excepted, which for a good end are in their due place and time
propounded by them that have Authority; as if St. Aug. were cautioning here for
images dedicated and set up by the Bishop for Worship; but here (as I said
above) the Cardinal makes the good Father except what he never intended: for
that exception is none of his, and its strange the Cardinal would be thus
abused by his Collector, or thus abuse his Reader. The purpose of St. Aug. in
the whole chap. is to-speak of the Signs instituted amongst men for civil use
of Society, The title of the chapter is Instituta humana.
Humane Institutions. To these Signs he first reduces the Actions and Gestures
of the Pantomimi or cunning players on the stage, by those Signs representing
any Person; Then he names Pictures and Statues as Signs by which things and
persons are signified; then follows; This whole kind (viz. Sic Aug. Totum hoc
ge nus inter superflua hominum instituta numerandum, nisi^cum interest, quid
eorum, and qua de causa, and ubi, and quando, and cujus autoritate --
of Action, and Pictures) may be numbered among the superfluous Institutions of
men, except when (the exception Bell. puts on him was clean another thing) it
concerns upon consideration of occasion, time, place, and the Authority
instituting or Commanding it, Such he presently names and calls, Convenient and
necessary Institutes, Commoda and necessaria instituta, quae in habitu and
cultu corporis --
which in Apparel or habit of body serve for discerning sexes, honors, or the
like; without which humane societies can hardly consist or be well held.

One place more the Cardinal adds; where because St. Aug. in the tenth Book of
his Confess. cap. 34. has these words -- in pictures transgressing moderate
and necessary use and pious signification: St. Aug. l. Confess. 10. c. 34. has
it thus: In vestibus, calceamentis, Vasts, and hujusmodi fabricationibus, in
Picturis -- and figmentis usum necessarium and moderatum; Et piam
significatione^ transgredientibus, addideruut homines ad illecebras oculorum.
from which words thus taken out of the midst of a sentence, and severed from
those that went before, and follow after, the Cardinal infers, Here St. August.
reprehends the Painters and shows that some Images are of necessary use, some
of pious signification: what boldness is this, thus still to abuse the Father
and the Reader? The Title of that Chapter is, the Allurements of the eyes,
(Oculorum illecebrae) and accordingly the Father complains, that men have added
much to the allurements of the eyes, in apparel, shoes, furniture, and such
kind of workmanships, also in pictures and such figments, all transgressing
the necessary, and moderate uses of pious signification. So that he no more
reprehends the Painters (as the Cardinal confines it) then the Shooe-makers, or
any other Artificers that serve to set out this Luxury and excess; But what is
that pious signification, which the Cardinal thinks proper to Images only? what
else but that moderation and sobriety which becomes those that profess
godliness, 1 Timothy 2.10. and is seen in apparel, ornaments, furniture, and many
things they use or have about them, as well as in Pictures. These places out of
that Father, I have the longer insisted on: partly to show how destitute the
Romanists are of proofs in this point, how unfaithful in pretending of them;
partly to lay open the profitable instruction which that Father delivers in
these places: nothing indeed to Imageworship, as the Cardinal would have it.

One more example of the Cardinals unfaithfulness. Bell. ibid. ex Ambr. Qui
coronat Imoginem Imperatoris, illum honorat cujus est Imago, qui contempserit
statuam Imperatoris, il le fecisse injuriam videtur, etc.
He alleges in the same chapt. the Testimony of St. Ambr. out of his 10. Sermon.
upon the 118. Psalm. He that Crowns the Emperors Image, honors him, whose
Image it is: he that contemns the Emperors Statue, seems to do him injury,
etc. Thus the Cardinal and no more: thinking every one would imagine, the
application of this concerned the Images of Christ and the Saints; that the
honor or contempt done to the Image would redound to the Prototype; but the
words before and after plainly show, that the Fathers intent there is to apply
it not to material, but living Images, poor men especially, to whom if any do
wrong, God takes it as done to himself, as if do good to them Christ takes it
as done to himself, as Mat. 25.40. and to stir them up to charity, Quot inter
Imagines Christi ambulamus? Ambr. ibid.
how many Images of Christ (says he) do we daily walk among? and so have
opportunity of doing good. But it is usual with the Romanists, where ever they
meet with this Instance of honor redounding to Emperors or Kings when done to
their Statues: or with that General saying, the honor done to the Image
redounds to the Prototype: they lay hold on it as an argument for Imageworship:
This they learn from their Nicone Council, which after the Seventh Age laid the
foundation of this Imageworship. There besides many misapplications of
Scripture and Fathers, this is one: And Athanasius, Basil, and Chrysostom.
ancient and learned Fathers pretended; who did indeed in proving the Son to be
worshipped with the Father, because he was his express Image, use that Instance
of honor done to the Emperors Image, and that General saying, of honor done
to the Image redounding to the Prototype: as most plainly appears in St. Basil.
Bas. de Spiritu Sanct. cap. 18.
Now what boldness is this to transfer to the worship of material Images, that
which the Fathers spoke of Christ the Image of the Father, because to the
illustrating of it, they took instance from the Civil worship?

One place more I must take notice of, which the Cardinal alleges, and truly
out of St. Bell. l. 2. de Imag. c. 12. Prostrata ante Crucem quasi pendentem
Dominum cerneret, adorabat.
Hierom concerning Paula. That lying prostrate before the Cross, as if she had
seen the Lord hanging there, she adored. We must consider Paula is here
visiting those very places at Jerusalem where our Savior suffered and was
buried: and if she was more then ordinarily affected and made such outward
expressions of it, as St. Hierom relates of her, it is not much to be marvelled
at: Ingressa sepulchrum -- osculabatur -- ore Lambebat -- Hieronym. in vita
Paulae.
Going into the Sepulcher she kissed the stone which the Angel had removed, and
licked the place where our Saviors body laid: So before the Cross she lay
prostrate, adoring the Lord that hung upon it: This may be done without giving
the Cross it self any Worship: as above noted, in the like place out of St.
Gregory: If Paula transported in affection, did exceed: she is not therein an
example to us: St. Hierom does not say she gave worship to the Cross, or that
it was her practice thus in her devotions to lie prostrate before the sign, but
only tells us how she was affected in those very places.

Complaints of the inconveniences of this Romish practice.
which even their own Authors complain of. Images at first brought in for
better remembrance of the History, and to teach ignorant people what they could
not read, after once they began to be worshipped, became ill Teachers of those
rude Scholars: who could not well distinguish what and how they worshipped:
Polydore speaking of it, complains thus: To such a madness is it come -- Many
of the Ruder and ignorant sort, Polyd de Invent. Rerum l. 6. c. 13. Eo insaniae
de ventum est -- Permulti rudiores -- stultitia stultitiam cumulantes -- Illi
qui talem proventum metunt.
so worship, that they trust in them more then in Christ, or the Saints
represented by them; And adding folly to folly, they offer gold and silver unto
the Images. And that they may be the better enticed to do it, They that reap
the profit by it (the cunning Priests) hang up some of those Gifts and
offerings to be seen. Cassand. in Artic. 21.
Cassander gives us many other complaints, made by Gerson, and Gabriel Biel --
of the poor simple people led on hereby to superstitious if not Idololatrical
misconceits and practices. But enough of this.

SECT. IV. Of Justification.
Romanists make a confused work of this doctrine.
It may in some measure appear, what a confused work the Romanists make of this
doctrine of Justification; and with what difference from St. Paul's meaning, and
from his way of handling it.

For first to settle the Justification of a Sinner upon inhaerent righteousness
they confound Justification and Sanctification. Decret. c. 7. Non est sola
remissio pecca^orum sed etiam Sanctificatio.
The Trent Decree says, It is not only Remission of Sins, but also
Sanctification. Justification indeed and Sanctification go together, yet are
they to be distinguished, as very different Acts and communications of divine
grace, the Apostle distinguished them expressly, saying, 1 Cor. 6.11. 1 Cor.
1.30.
but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified: and who is made unto us --
Righteousness, and Sanctification.

Secondly, Remission and delotion of sin.
They deny not, that Remission of Sin is Justification, but confound that
Remission, (which according to Scripture and Fathers, stands in the forgiveness
of the offense and punishment) with the actual deletion or expunging of the
stain and corruption of sin that is in us: which is another thing from
Remission and forgiveness: And when Scripture expresses Remission by blotting
out or deletion: as Isa. 43.25. Psalm. 51.9; it is the blotting our sins out of
Gods Book of remembrance, not out of the tables of our heart; It is as much, as
God will remember them no more, no more impute, or lay them to our charge. As
for the blotting or purging the stain and corruption of Sin out of the Soul:
though it be not done by Remission, but by another act of grace; yet we grant,
it is done with Remission in the justifying of a sinner; and inhaerent
Righteousness (by which that stain of sin is done out, and the dominion of sin
broken) is wrought in the Soul, together with the righteousness of
Justification.

Thirdly: The first and second Justification.
Having made a distinction of their Justification into First and Second: That
by inhaerent habitual Righteousness, This, by actual or continuance in
well-doing, they usually confound their first and second Justification, in the
proving or commending their doctrine of Justification by Works. And when they
are put to it, in plain terms to speak what they mean by Justification by
works; they restrain it to that which they call the second Justification; in
the explaining whereof the Council of Trent says nothing, which contraries the
Protestant Doctrine; saving that it calls that Justification, which is not so,
according either to Scripture or Fathers. Of this second and improper
Justification, we spoke Chap. IV. nu. 2 and 5.
above, and showed how it brings the Controversy of Justification by Works to
nothing, if indeed they would pretend to no more by their second Justification,
then their Council seems to make of it. So that we might spare farther labor
in calling them to show what proof they have for this doctrine of Justification
by works, in Scripture and Antiquity; And as for their first Justification, by
inhaerent habitual Righteousness, it is not concerned in this question of
Justification by Works: that Righteousness being Gods work, not ours at all, as
they do acknowledge; yet, because we were in the former Treatise (chap. 4.)
bound up by Mr. Spencers Replies to say only, what he gave occasion for, it
will not be amiss for a fuller clearing of that, wherein they and we do differ,
to enter a farther consideration, of Inhaerent Righteousness, of Faith and of
Works, as to this point of Justification. By which it will appear, They lay too
much upon the Inherent, and are too much afraid of an imputed Righteousness:
also that they give Faith too little in this business, and are needlessly
afraid of the Sola Fides, Faith only: Lastly that they speak too confusedly,
when they say and give out, Men are justified by Works.

inhaerent Righteousness: The question being, Of Iohaerent Righteousness, as to
Justification.
by what Righteousness we are Justified before God? We must in the first place
draw from them the acknowledgement of some Truths: Such as they indeed are
loath readily to profess and plainly to speak out, but such as are necessary
for understanding this Question, as to the two Terms in it, Justification and
Righteousness.

The first Truth is this, Justification sounds opposition to Condemnation.
That Justification speaks opposition to Condemnation, as Romans 8.33, 34. and
stands primarily in the acquitting of a sinner from the guilt of his sin
(offense, and punishment) the remission, or not imputing of his sin, the
reconciling of him to the favor of God; and according to this importance or
sense, the Apostle St. Paul continually speaks of it. The definition or
description which the Decret. c. 4. Justificationem Impii non esse aliud quam
translationem a statu filiorum Ad^ --
Trent Council gives of Justification is this: It is nothing else but a
Translation from the state of the Sons of Adam, into the Adoption of the sons
of God through Jesus Christ. Here is no mention of Remission of sins, but
elsewhere it is implied, they grant it, when they say, Decret. c. 7. Non est
sola peccatorum remissio, sed etiam sanctificatio. -- In ipsa Justificatione
una cum Remissione peccatorum, fidem, spem and charitatem accipientes.
Justification is not only Remission of Sins, but also Sanctification: and a
little after, In Justification we receive faith, hope and charity, together
with Remission of sins: Here it is employed that in Justification there is
remission of sins; but since the Jesuits prevailed, it is made subsequent to
the infused Righteousness which purges out the sin, and that with them is
Remission of sin, or Deletion of it: for these they confound, as above noted:
and are loath to express Remission of sin, as the Scripture does, by not
imputing of sin.

A Second Truth, Of the Grace of God taken for his Favor and Love.
which they are not so willing to profess, is, That by the Grace of God, to
which we find Justification and Salvation often ascribed, is meant the Favor,
Love, or good Will of God toward Man; I do not say, they deny such an
acception of Grace, for the Trent Council condemning those that say, Council.
Trid. can. 11.
the Grace by which we are justified, is only the Favor of God: does imply it
to be of the Grace and favor of God that we are Justified: and their Writers,
when put to it, will acknowledge Grace so taken; but decline so to interpret
the word Grace, where ever they can, holding out for it, the gift of grace
inhaerent in us.

A third Truth, Of Impuaed Righteousness.
they unwillingly profess and decline to speak of is: that there is an imputed
righteousness, or that Christ's righteousness is imputed to us for
justification. Their Council acknowledges, Decret. c. 7.
Christ the meritorious cause of Justification: which does closly imply this
Truth, viz. the application or imputation of his satisfaction or Merits to us
for Justification; and this imputation is mentioned, when in that C^non. 11.
Council they are Anathematized, that say: Men are justified by the only
imputation of Christ's righteousness. And we shall have occasion below to show
how the Cardinal admits of this Imputation; in one place, with a Non est
absurdum -- It is not absurd to say, Bell. l. 2. de Justific. c. 10.
Christ's righteousness and merits are imputed to us, as if we our selves had
satisfied; It seems we are but lightly concerned in this great Truth of the
Imputation of Christ's righteousness for justification: but deny it they cannot.

A fourth Truth is: Inhaerent Righteousness imperfect.
That inhaerent Righteousness is imperfect and weak both in the habit or first
infusion, and also in the working; This they would fain decline as prejudicial
to Justification by it: but they must and do acknowledge this Truth, as we
shall see below.

Indeed these Truths have not been so readily professed, since the Jesuits
prevailed: whose study seems not to be for Truth and Peace, but to set every
point of doctrine farther off from agreement. Yet notwithstanding a^l the
devices and endeavors of such dissemblers of Truth, and enemies of Peace; we
gain by the former Truths, this Evidence for clearing the Doctrine of
Justification of a Sinner: What Justifications is and wherein properly is
stands.
That it is a not-imputing of his sin, an absolving or acquitting him from his
sins and the condemnation due to them, a reconciling of him or receiving him
into Gods favor, an accepting of him in the beloved, through the imputation of
Christ's satisfaction and merits, apprehended by Faith. Also that albeit
Inhaerent Righteousness be at the same time given, by which the sinner is made
righteous also, and truly righteous according to that measure of righteousness:
yet is all the righteousness inhaerently in him too weak and imperfect for his
justification, (his appearing and standing in judgment) he needs the
righteousness of Christ to make a supply of what is wantting, and to cover what
is amiss.

Contaremus, a Cardinal of Rome, and a writer against Luther, was in this point
clearly Protestant, convinced of the former Truth and expressing it; as we
shall see by his words below rehearsed.

Of Inherent Right. Habitual and Actual.
with the doctrine of Inherent Righteousness: and what they bring from
Scripture or Fathers to make it seem Catholic.

Inherent Righteousness, they distinguish into Habitual, which is by infusion
of Grace, and Actual, which is acquired by Works; and here they are not agreed,
Bell. l. 2. de Justif. c. 15. An sit Habitualis an Actualis an utraque: De hac
re disputant Catholici Doctores: Sed convenient in eo omnes, ut sit in nobis
ver a justitia inhaerens, non autem Christi justitia imputata.
whether a sinner be made formally righteous by the Habitual, or by the Actual
righteousness, or by both together? for the Cardinal acknowledges their Doctors
dispute it, but, says he, all agree, that it is a true inhaerent righteousness
(by which we are made righteous formally) not the imputed righteousness of
Christ. How their Catholic Doctors agree in this we shall examine presently.
But first see, how the Cardinal declares. He professes in the same place, that
his judgment is for the Solam habitualem esse, per quam justi formaliter
s^mus. ibid.
Habitual as infused; and answers the places of Scripture which are alleged by
those that plead for the Actual also; where we may note, that the places of
Scripture, here alleged for the Actual righteousness against the solam
habitualem the habitual only, are the very same which they usually bring for
works, against solam fidem, Faith only: and the Answers which the Cardinal
returns to them, may serve us to exclude works from the true Justification. The
places and answers briefly are these.

Romans Bell. l. 2. de Justific. c. 16.
2.13. The doers of the Law shall be Justified: The Cardinal answers out of S.
Aug. They shall be adjudged or declared just, in the Divine Judgment; St. James
c. 2.24. By works a man is justified: The Cardinal answers out of the Council
of Trent, which interprets that place of the second justification, in as much
as by good and just works the increase of habitual justice is merited. Lastly,
1 Jo. 3.7. He that does righteousness is righteous: The Card. answers, the
Apostle does not speak what makes a man formally just, but that whereby a man
may be known to be just. By this it appears how the Cardinal removes the Actual
righteousness of Works, from that which they hold to be the first and true, and
proper Justification; much more are they removable from the formality of that
which we hold the true and proper Justification, according to the doctrine of
St. Paul.

all agree, Concessions of Romanists about Imputation.
(as the Cardinal boasted) upon the inhaerent righteousness; against the
imputed: First see what Vasquez and Bellarmine two great Defenders of inhaerent
Righteousness and the perfection of it, are forced to grant about the
Imputation of Christ's Righteousness. Vega had said (as Vasquez notes and
corrects him for it) Divine providence ordered it so, Vasq. in 1.2. Disput.
222. cap. 1.
that the Fathers used not the word of Imputation, lest they should seem to
give occasion to the Heretics of these days, for their Error of false
Imputation: He was not afraid it seems of the Apostles giving them occasion and
warrant for the Doctrine of Imputation. But Vasquez acknowledges the Fathers
did use that word, and other words aequivalent, as Communication and
Application. And he grants, Concedimus imputari nobis Merita and obedientiam
Christi -- acsi revera essent nostra -- ibid.
that the merits and obedience of Christ are imputed to us, as if indeed they
were ours: and he gives a good Reason: Because the merits of Christ are the
Merits of our Head. This is fair, and enough for our purpose, if he did not
pull back what he had given out; and restrain, what he had freely and truly
granted; Therefore he subjoyns, Dissentimus ab Haereticis in eo, ad quod merita
Christi existimamus nobis imputari. Dicimus imputari ratione Effectus, quo
pacto loquitur Council. Trid. etiam ad aliquem effectum imputari. ibid.
We differ from the Heretics in that, to which, or for which the Merits of
Christ are imputed: How is that? We say they are imputed, says he, by reason
of the Effect, as the Council of Trent speaks: also that they are imputed as to
some effect.

Now if we ask, to what effect? He tells us in the two next chapters, They are
imputed unto Justification, and unto life eternal: This is very true: But how
unto Justification? In regard of the dispositions, and in regard of the Form of
Justification: in as much as by or through the Merits of Christ grace
pravenient and adjuvant is given to dispose us to Justification, and Inhaerent
Righteousness given, formally to justify us. Thus he explains himself in the
second chapter: and as for remission of sins by the satisfaction of Christ
imputed, no mention of that: We must look for it in that purgation of sin which
he supposes to be made by Infused Righteousness; for they usually consound
Remission, and Deletion or purgation of sin, as above noted, nu. 1.

The Cardinal in his Concessions speaks a little clearer for Remission of our
sins by the Satisfaction and Merits of Christ imputed: reserving himself still
for his inhaerent Righteousness, and having nothing to keep him off from the
protestant Doctrine (which allows the being and necessity of Inhaerent
righteousness) but only the nicety of a Term Formaliter. For Bell. l. 2. de
Justific. c. 7. Si sol^m vellent imputari nobis Christi merita, quia nobis
donata sunt, and possumus ea Deo patri offerre pro pecca^is nostris, quoni^m
Christus suscrpit -- onus satisfaciendi pro nobis, recta esset little sententia.
speaking of Protestants: If they would (says he) have only Christ's merits
imputed to us, because they are given to us, and we may offer them to God the
Father for our sins, because he undertook the burden of satissying for us;
their doctrine were right and sound. But so to have Christ's righteousness
imputed to us, as if by it we were formally just: is repugnant to right reason
-- Well, we say the first which he cannot but approve: we do not say the other,
for that formally just or justified, is their expression not ours.

Again, Although by inhaerent Righteousness, says he, Bell. l. 2. de Justific.
c. 10. Etiamsi per justitiam inhaer -- tamen per eam non sa^isfacimus Deo pro
peccatis and poena aeterna -- Non absurdum, etc.
we are truly denominated, and made righteous: yet do we not by that satisfy
God, for our sins and eternal punishment -- therefore it is not absurd to say,
Christ's merits and righteousness is imputed to us, as if we our selves had
satisfied: so that it be not denied, there is besides an inhaerent
righteousness in us: we do not deny there is: but affirm they ascribe too much
unto it, and may observe how careful the Cardinal is for this inhaerent
Righteousness, but as for the imputed, a Non absurdum will serve that; It is no
absurdity to grant it.

There is one place more, where the Cardinal admits the Imputation of Christ's
Righteousness, and that the similitude of a garment (used by the Protestants)
may agree to it, in as much as Christ's satisfaction for our sins is applied to
us, Bell. de Justif. lib. 2. c. 11. Nobis donatur and applicatur, and nostra
reputatur.
and reputed ours. This is fair: but then he adds in behalf of the formality of
his inhaerent Righteousness: That one man should satisfy for another, is
reasonable: not that one should be formally just, because another is so. True,
a man cannot be therefore formally just, that is, inhaerently just, or as by an
inhaerent qualification; but why may he not be therefore (that is, for Christ's
satisfaction and righteousness imputed) accepted of God as just and righteous
in the notion of Justification? that is, one to whose charge nothing can be
laid, one reconciled, restored to favor, accepted to life eternal; And as Bell.
said, Christ's satisfaction is reputed ours, he means really: so why may not we
thereupon be also reputed really just and righteous, as to the notion or
importance of Justification? and if by that satisfaction and righteousness of
our Savior imputed we are acquitted in our Justification from our sins and
eternal death (as the Cardinal granted and so does their Trent Council) why
should not a sinner so acquitted be also accepted to eternal life, purchased
for us by that satisfaction and righteousness imputed? accepted, I say, to
eternal life, as to the first Right.

This may be inferred also from the words of that Council, when it tells us (as
we had it Number. 2.
above) what Justification is: A translation from the state of the Sons of
Adam, into the Adoption of the Sons of God through Jesus Christ. Which though
no good definition, yet implies there is in Justification a remission of sins
and the condemnation due to them; under which all men lie while they are in the
state of the Sons of Adam. Again it implies, such persons acquitted of their
sins, are received into favor, as sons by Adoption, and that gives Right in
the same moment to the heavenly inheritance. Lastly, that all this through
Jesus Christ; which implies the satisfaction and merits of Christ applied,
imputed.

Now albeit Inherent Righteousness be given, Other purposes of inhaerent
Righteousness, then that we should be justified by it.
in Justifying of a sinner (as often said before) yet it is not given for the
formalizing of Justification it self properly taken, but as consequential to
it, for qualifying the subject answerably to that which is received in
Justification; For there is Remission of sin as to the offense and
condemnation, therefore grace also put into the Soul for doing away by degrees
the stain and corruption, and for breaking the dominion of Sin. There is also
Adoption and receiving the person as a son of God, therefore Grace infused for
the New Birth, and as a Principle of New life and obedience; There is
acceptance and Right to eternal life or heavenly inheritance, therefore grace
and inherent Righteousness given for the fitting and preparing of the Person to
the pursuit, obtaining and enjoying of it. We see other purposes of Inhaerent
Righteousness given us, then that we should be Justified by it.

Furthermore, that the accepting of us as righteous in our Justification
follows immediately and is intrinsecally joined with Remission of sins, is
plain by the Apostle, To. 4.6, 7, 8. telling us who are those, blessed ones to
whom the Lord imputes righteousness: even Those, to whom he will not impute
sin. And the similitude of a Garment, or of Jacobs wearing his elder brothers
clothes to get the blessing and the birthright, (which the Cardinal granted
appliable to the imputation of Christ's righteousness to us) does imply more
then remission of sins: Even the accepting of their Persons, and receiving of
them as Sons unto the blessing. Also, that the Imputation of Christ's
righteousness should not be confined (as the Romanists would have it or delight
to express it) to the bare importance of satisfaction: they might think it
reasonable by that which they yield to the satisfactions of Saints appliable
and imputable to others; For when we urge (against that Treasure of their
Church, and the applying of it) that common judgment of the School, Meritum non
excedit Personam, Merit exceeds not the Person, Christ only excepted: They
distinguish and consider the good works and sufferings of the Saints, as
Satisfactory, and as Meritorious: and say as they are Meritorious, they exceed
not the Person, but as Satisfactory, they are imputable, appliable to others.
Which albeit said without ground or warrant, might keep them from restraining
thus the imputation of Christ's righteousness to the point of satisfaction, and
allow it to be not only as satisfactory in the Justification of a Sinner, but
as Meritorious also, to all effects and purposes, for completing the act of
Justification in the accepting of the Person as Righteous, to whom it is
imputed or applied.

We have seen what concessions are made of the Imputation of Christ's
Righteousness, by those that are most for the inhaerent, I mean the Jesuits:
and how they lay too much upon the inhaerent righteousness in the point of
Justification, when the Imputed would bear it better.

Vasquez (who has handled this doctrine of Inhaerent Righteousness most
copiously and diligently) acknowledges touching their dissenting Authors,
Romish writers dissenting in the point of Justification by Inhaerent
Righteousness.
to the great prejudice of this their supposed Catholic Doctrine.

First Vasq. in Thom. 1.2. disput. 205. c. 1.
he acknowledges of Durand and other Schoolmen, that they held We are pleasing
and accepted of God, before he infuseth Grace, or inhaerent Righteousness. And
that this gift of inhaerent Grace, or habitual righteousness does not
necessarily arise from that acceptance of God: but from the will of God
appointing, that every one who is to be brought to eternal life should have it.
This is that which we say; that albeit inherent grace or habitual
righteousness, does accompany and follow immediately upon Divine Acceptance,
yet it does not necessarily accompany or arise from it as to justification, but
for other purposes (as noted above) one whereof and the main one is here
mentioned, viz. the bringing, preparing, fitting us to eternal life: and is
there approved by Vasquez himself; But for the former part of their Sentence
that pronounces us pleasing unto God, and accepted of him unto Justification,
by the imputation of Christ's righteousness, antecedently to infusion of
habitual righteousness: Non parum favere Haereticis nostri tempori, Vasquez
disp. 205. c. 2.
He says, it does not a little favor the Heretics of our days. And in
another place, speaking of the Imputation of Christ's righteousness and merits,
which the Protestants assert in Justification: he says, Vasq. in 1.2. Tho.
disp. 222. c. 2. Hoc genus imputationis seu applicationis fateri debent
quotquot ex Catholicis asserunt Justitiam -- Similiter and illi qui censent
qualitatem nobis inhaerentem -- Non purgare nos a peccatis nisi accedente nova
voluntate and favore Dei condonantis peccata.
This kind of Imputation or application of Christ's Merits, all those
Catholics must acknowledge, that say, inhaerent righteousness renders us
acceptable to God, not by its own nature and worth, but through the acceptance
and favor of God -- In like manner all those must acknowledge it, that hold
the quality which is in us, to be true righteousness and sanctity, yet in its
own nature not able to purge us from our sins, without the superadding of a new
will and favor of God in pardoning sin. Of these he says; Will they nill
they, Velint nolint coguntur concedere novum imputationem meritorum Christi, ad
remittenda and condonanda peccata. ibid.
they are compelled to grant a new imputation of the Merits of Christ for the
remitting and pardoning of Sin. Why! the Jesuits allow the imputation or
Application of Christ's Merits to this effect, The Brief of the Jesuits
Doctrine of Justification.
that inhaerent grace or righteousness may be given us, and then the whole work
of Justification is done by it; by it we are rendered acceptable to God, by it
our sins done away or purged out (which with them is the Remission of
Justification) without a new imputation of Christ's merits. This is the brief of
the Jesuits doctrine of Justification.

Vasquez his acknowledgment newly recited; Imperfection of Inherent
Righteousness.
There are two sorts of their Catholics that do admit inhaerent righteousness
in some order to Justification; one in regard of rendering us acceptable to God,
but not of it self but through the favor of God and imputation of Christ's
Merits; The other sort in regard of doing away sin; which it cannot do
thoroughly, but still needs the imputation of Christ's Merits for pardon. Both
these acknowledge the Imperfection of Inhaerent Righteousness, and upon that
the necessity of Christ's righteousness imputed. Against both these Vasquez
Vasq. in 1.2. disp. 214. c. 3.5.
disputes as against Adversaries to their Inhaerent Righteousness.

And to these all those Schoolmen whom Vasquez complains of, to have conspired
in this opinion, Vasq. in 1.2. disp. 204. c. 1. In quam sententiam non pauci
Scholastici conspirarunt -- Nihil nobis inesse sive habitum, sive operationem
quod suapte natura possit Justificare animam, and eam a peccatis purgare --
That there is nothing in us, either habit or operation (i. e. either habitual
or actual righteousness) which of it self in its own nature, can justify the
soul and purge it from sin; but unto this it necessarily needs the favor of
God accepting it (viz. that righteousness which is in us) and pardoning or
remitting the sin. To those Schoolmen he adjoyns Victoria and Canus, as
agreeing with them. Also in the next chap. Vasquez begins thus: I cannot but
wonder at those ancient Schoolmen, Non p^ssum non mirari Antiquos Scholast.
quod tam abjecte de inharente justitia sense^int, ut veram ei --
that thought so abjectly of inhaerent righteousness, as to fear to ascribe
unto it the true reason of righteousness; But I much more wonder at our modern
Divines, that after the Definition of the Council of Trent, Multo magis
recentiores Theologos, quod post Concilii Trid. defin. tam exilem justitiam
inhaerentem Justis concesserint.
they should grant so weak and imperfect an inhaerent righteousness to just
persons: or to the Justifying of them. -- Veram rationem justitiae inhaerentis
de medio tollunt: quam Patres Tridentini pro viribus astruere -- Vasq. disp.
204. c. 2.
Both of these (says he) do take away the true reason and effect of inhaerent
righteousness, (that is, as to justification by it) which the Fathers of the
Council of Trent, did so much strive to assert and defend.

And yet more home in the next chapt. Otherwise (says he) I do not see,
Alioquin non video quomodo declinare possimus little sententiam, qui negant
justitia inhaerente tanquam forma fieri justificationem nostram. Vasq. ibid. c.
3.
how we can decline their Tenet, that deny our Justification to be made by
inhaerent righteousness as by the Form of it, that is, unless we assert the
contrary to that, which the forementioned Schoolmen and Divines asserted. So
that Bellarmine was out, when he said (as above noted) All their Doctors agreed
upon the inhaerent righteousness, against the imputed; Certainly he knew the
contrary, but Vasquez was more ingenuous in acknowledging it.

Pighius and Contarenus say as to this question between the inhaerent and
imputed righteousness. The acknowledgment of some late Romish Writers.
Pighius out of the saying of St. Paul, Act. 13.38, 39. concludes that
Justification stands in Remission of sins through Faith: Therefore, says he,
to be justified, Pigh. controversia secunda. Hoc ergo est justificari, peccata
nobis misericorditer remitti a Deo in Christo.
is this: to have our sins mercifully remitted of God in Christ. Again, from 2
Cor. 5.18, 19. he concludes: In illo igitur justificamur, non in nobis, non
nostra justitia, sed illius justitia, quae nobis imputatur. Non nostra sed Dei
justitia in Christo ibid.
In him therefore we are justified before God, not in our selves, not by our
own righteousness, but by his, which is imputed to us: and from 2 Cor. 5. v.
22. We made the righteousness of God in him; Pighius concludes, We are made the
righteousness of God in Christ Exclusively to all righteousness in our selves.
Also out of Romans 5. v. 18, 19. In Christi autem obedientia quod nostra
collocatur Justitia inde est, quod nobis illi incorporatis a^st nostra esset
accepta ea fertur, ita ut ea ipsa etiam nos justi habeamur. ibid.
By the righteousness of one -- by the obedience of one are many made
righteous: he gathers; Thence it is that our righteousness stands in Christ's
obedience, because for us, being incorporated into him, his obedience is
accepted, as if it were ours; so that by it we also may be accounted righteous;
and then adds the example of Jacob clothed with his elder brothers raiment to
obtain the blessing.

Contarenus in his Tract of Justification, gives us first his distinction of
Righteousness. Contar. de Justific. Justitiam inhaerentem -- Et non inhaer --
Sed donatam nobis cum Christo; Christi (inquam) justitiam and omne ejus meritum.
One, says he, is inhaerent in us, the other not inhaerent in us, but given us
with Christ, the righteousness of Christ and all his merit; and afterward he
calls it the Imputed righteousness, Ad utramque attingimus por fidem.
and says, we attain to both sorts of Righteousness by faith. Then he puts the
question, Upon which of these righteousnesses we ought to rely, or hold our
selves justified before God and accounted righteous? He concludes, Justitia
Christi nobis donata, non autem Sanctitate and gratia nobis inhaerente. ibid.
it must be upon the righteousness of Christ given us, not upon the Sanctity or
Grace inherent in us: and adds the Reason, Inchoata and imperfecta, quae tueri
nos non potest, quin in multis offendamus, and assidue peccemus --
because that which is in us is but inchoate and imperfect, which cannot keep
us from offending often, Idcirco in conspectu Dei non possumus ob hanc -- --
Est vera and perfecia justitia, quaeomnino placet oculis Dei, in qua nihil est
quod Deum offendit.
and sinning daily, and therefore have daily need to say, Forgive us our Debts;
therefore we cannot be accounted just in the sight of God, for this our
righteousness: but the righteousness of Christ given to us, is the only true
and perfect righteousness, which is altogether pleasing in the eyes of God, and
in which there is nothing that offends him. Unto this the same Author applies
Phil. 3.9. Not having mine own righteousness, but the Righteousness, which is
through Faith -- He gives us withal a good lesson; It is found by experience,
(says he) that holy men, -- quanto magis in sanclitate proficiunt, tanto minus
sibi placere, and tanto magis intelligunt se indigere Christo, and justitia
Christi sibi donata, ideoque se relinquunt and soli Christo incumbunt. Contar.
ibid.
the more they advance in Sanctity, the less are they pleasing to themselves,
and the more do they understand, how they stand in need of Christ and his
Righteousness given unto them; therefore they forsake themselves and rely upon
Christ only.

He answers also to some places of Scripture objected: as, that the Psalmist
says often, Judge me, O Lord according to my righteousness, and the Lord
rewarded me according to my righteousness -- for I have kept the ways of the
Lord -- Ps. 18.20, 21. If David had said and meant this so, -- it a ut putasset
se propterea justificatum esse coram Deo --
as to think himself therefore justified before God, he had spoken as
arrogantly as the Pharisee, Luc. -- Scd and essent mera mendacia.
18. Nay he had spoken mere lies -- All this was spoken in regard of his
Enemies, especially Saul and Absalom, of whom he had deserved well; and not in
regard of his righteousness before God. Also to that place of Deuteronomy. 6.25. It
shall be our righteousness, if we observe all these Commandments -- he answers;
Justitia nostra Legalis est custedire omni^, sed quia nullus servet omnia
praecepta Legis, ergo sub maledicto omnes, ideoque omnes indigemus Christo --
Our legal righteousness is to observe all -- but because there is none, that
keeps all the precepts of the Law, therefore all lie under the curse, (or
condemnation) and all stand in need of Christ and his righteousness. Thus that
Cardinal was convinced of the Truth of the Protestant Doctrine in this point or
question between imputed and inhaerent righteousness, acknowledging the
imperfection of the Inhaerent as to its effect of Justifying, and that the
imputed was to be relied on.

We might to these add, what the Colen Divines in their Antididagma, Antidida /
gma, Tit. Justific.
or book opposed to the reformation endeavored by Hermannus the Archbishop; do
acknowledge, speaking of the Causes of Justification: -- Nobis imputatur ad
justitiam, dum fide apprehenditur.
That the righteousness of Christ, as it is apprehended by Faith, is imputed to
us for righteousness -- and more to like purpose.

Hitherto we have shown by the foregoing witnesses, that this Romish Doctrine
of inhaerent Righteousness has not been Catholic, within that Church, not so
generally held among themselves, as they pretend.

Scripture and Antiquity to make it seem (according to Vincentius Rule)
Catholic. Romanists destiture of Scripture in this point.
And by this trial it will still appear less worthy of that name.

The Cardinal brings Bell. l. 2. de Justif. c. 3.
eight places of Scripture for justification by inhaerent righteousness. Which
might all be answered with this one exception: They may prove that there is an
inhaerent righteousness, but not that there is Justification by it. To instance
in the chief of them: His first place, is Romans 5.19. -- Made sinners really
inhaerently. We grant it true, and answerably made righteous by Christ, but
were we made sinners only so by Adams disobedience, were we not also made so by
imputation? the Cardinal himself acknowledges it, Bell. de A^ miss g^a l. 5. c.
17. sect. itaque.
and then are we not also made righteous by imputation of the second Adams
obedience? The Cardinal (as we saw Nu. 4.
above) in three places acknowledges the imputation of Christ's satisfaction and
merits for freeing us from the offense of sin and and the guilt of eternal
death: and therefore from that condemnation under which we are by the first
Adams disobedience. (...).
That condemnation the Apostle here verse. 18. sets against Justification; and
so in this Antithesis verse. 19. between made sixners. and made righteous must
first stand good in regard of Condemnation, and Justification taken properly --
then between the inhaerent depravation, and the inhaerent Righteousness: Take
what the Ancient Commentators here say is meant by made sinners. Chrysostom in locum
(...).
Chrysostom. and after him Occumenius and Theophylact to the like purpose --
expounds it, made subject to punishment, and condemned to death, that is the
first sense of made sinners, and unto that is Justification in the first and
proper sense opposed.

The Cardinals second Testimony is Romans Bell. quo supra.
3.24. Here he would find all the Causes of Justification, and in the word
Grace taken for inherent righteousness, he fixes the Formal Cause. Of Grace and
Gratis.
That it is taken for the gift of Grace inhaerent, and not for the favor of
God, he would prove by the word, gratis, freely, which was enough to set out
the favor of God and his love to Mankind. But the Cardinal here also is
impertinent and his argument inconsequent: For the word, (...), gratis, freely,
(...).
is not put here to set forth the true Cause of our Justification ( viz. (...).
Gods gracious favor) so much as to exclude the false Causes, viz. any cause,
desert, motive on man's part: Freely, that is, without any price paid by us,
without any Cause given by us, or any worth in us. Thus gratis is taken in
Scripture, and though it consequently implies the mere favor and love of God;
yet where grace is added, as here, it is taken in the first respect,
exclusively to any thing in us more then faith to believe that Grace and favor
of God toward man. Hear what Ambr. in To. 3. Gratis; quia nihil operantes nec
vicem reddentes sola fide justificati sunt dono Dei.
Ambrose on the place, Freely, says he, because working nothing, nor making
any returns to God, they are by faith alone justified through the gift of God:
also for the word Grace: Gratia Dei in Christo, quia voluntate Dei a Christo
redempti sumus. ibid.
By his grace, because we are redeemed by Christ by the will of God; that will
of God appointing and sending his Son for our redemption, as he there explains
it: and thereby expresses the favor and good will of God. Oecumenius also
interprets the word Freely, Oecum. in locum. (...).
exclusively -- Freely, that is, without any good deeds, and again, to bring
nothing with us but faith, and afterward, -- (...).
he shows by the Apostle all have sinned, and therefore freely justified, Aug
de verbis Apost. Sermon. 15. prorsus gratis; qui nihil invenis, unde salves,
multum invenis unde damnes.
bringing with them faith only. Add St. August. of this word gratis, God freely
gives, and freely saves, because he finds nothing, for which he may save,
finds much for which he may damn.

A third Testimony from Scripture the Cardinal pretends, Bell. ubi supra, Quo.
loco, ut exponunt Chrysostom. Ambr. Theoph. Apostolus docet in baptisino purgari
homines and Sanctificari: atque hoc ipsum est justificari.
is 1 Cor. 6.11. In which place, (as Chrysostom. Ambrose, Theophylact, expound
it) the Apostle teaches, that in Baptism men are purged and Sanctified; and
that this is to be justified; that all this is done in Baptism, is plain by the
Apostles words, but that to be sanctified is to be justified, the Apostle says
not, nor yet those Fathers; But the Cardinal has this Gift often to give us
Names, when their words will not serve his turn -- For Chrysostom, and Ambrose
have nothing to his purpose; Theophyl. indeed has a succinct expression, Theoph
in locum. (...).
in Justifying he Sanctified them; if he had said in sanctifying he justifies,
it had sounded something to the Cardinals purpose; but in saying justifieans
sanctificavit, he speaks that (which we often insinuated above) the
concomitancy of sanctification with, and the dependence of it upon
Justification.

The Cardinals next Testimony, is from Tit. 3.5, 7. where he would conclude
Regeneration to be Justification. The place is answerable to that above, 1 Cor.
6.11. and may be accordingly answered, that there is regeneration and
justification mentioned, and that they go together; but that Regeneration is
Justification is still the false assertion of the Gardinal, inconsequently
drawn from this, as from other places. He adds also Romans 8.29. and 1 Cor.
15.49. which do prove, especially the second place, our being made like to
Christ in sanctification and inhaerent righteousness: but what is this to
Justification by that Image or likeness? It was far from the Apostles intent to
say any thing in those places of Justification. Now whereas the Cardinal makes
this Argument, as Christ was righteous, so shall we, but he was not righteous
by imputation, therefore not we -- is fallacious, -- It follows affirmatively
not negatively: He was righteous by inhaerent righteousness, therefore we shall
be so; this is true. But he was not righteous by an imputed righteousness,
therefore not we; this follows not: for we are to be made righteous not in the
same manner every way, and reciprocally, but so as we are capable of, and stand
in need of being made righteous. But thus much may serve for the Cardinals
Testimonies from Scripture which we have found either to be impertinently
applied, or to speak against him: and therefore no marvel, that he could not
allege any Fathers so interpreting them, as he misapplies them to
Justification by inhaerent grace or righteousness.

Justification by inhaerent Grace not proved by the Fathers.
of which we may say: as we found in his allegations out of Scripture, that
they prove there is an inhaerent Grace or righteousness in us, not that we are
properly justified by it; Amongst all the Fathers Bell. l. 2. de Justif. cap. 8.
he cites, there appears but one Greek, and among his Latin Fathers St.
Augustine chiefly, a good witness indeed, if taken as he means, To the many
places alleged out of him, we may give this general answer; they either, only
prove there is inhaerent righteousness, or if they speak of Justification by
it, then is that word used according to the Latin Etymology: of making a man
just or righteous by a real inhaerent qualification: and that St. August. is so
much inclined to interpret the word Grace used in Scripture, of the gift of
grace inhaerent in us: and sometimes to say a man is justified ( i. e. made
righteous inherently by it) came to pass, by reason he had so much to do
against the Pelagians in asserting that grace given and inherent in us: for
they denied not the grace of God in the prime sense, as it speaks the favor
and love of God to Mankind: but made little or nothing of the other.

The chief and most considerable sentences cited by the Cardinal out of that
Father are these. Aug. Confess. l. 12. c. 15. Quantum distat inter lumen quod
illuminat, and quod illuminatur, tantum distat inter justitiam justificantem,
and justitiam, quae ex justificatione facta est.
As great a difference as there is between the light which does illuminate, and
the light which is illuminated, so great a difference is there, between that
righteousness which does justify (which surely is the Divine righteousness)
and that which arises from Justification; which is the inhaerent; for else to
take it as the Cardinal must for a comparison between the inhaerent and actual
righteousness, there is not such a difference between them. So this place
proves there is inhaerent grace or righteousness, as light communicated unto
us, does not prove a justification by it, but by the righteousness from whence
that inhaerent righteousness proceeds: and therefore speaks against the
Cardinal.

Another place alleged is this: Which Nature, Aug. l. 15. de Trinit. c. 8.
Quae natura, cum a suo conditore justificatur, a deformi forma formosam
transfertur informam.
when it is justified of the maker, is translated from a deformed form to a
beautiful form. Here the Cardinal thought so much noise of the word Form, would
be enough to speak the inhaerent righteousness to be the Form of
justification; whereas this only proves our renewing, transforming from the
Image of the first Adam; that is, that there is a new righteousness also put in
us, in our Justification, which we every where acknowledge; and is that which
Theoph. said above, Justificans Sanctificat, when he Justifies he Sanctifies.

Two other places he brings to prove the inhaerent to be our true
righteousness: which we grant, in its order and measure, but not to the
excluding of the imputed; from its due order and place. The Bell. l. 2. c. 8.
Cardinal tells us, that St. Aug. in his Book of Nature and Grace, chapter 38.
teaches, that charity infused into our hearts is our true righteousness: This
is the Cardinals Collection; he does not give us the very words of that Father;
we must therefore know that Book was written against the Pelagians; against
whom it was his usual work to assert the true grace of God given us, and that
all the good we have or do is from God, and that all the righteousness which is
in us, though true, yet imperfect; and this is the very purpose of that place:
He shows there, that Abel and many others in Scripture, were just, yet were not
without sin, -- and, Justi fuerunt, and sine peccato non fuerunt -- qua una
vere justus est, quicunque justus est: adhuc erat quo posset and deberet
augeri, quicquid^minus erat, ex vitio erat. Aug. de na. and gra. c. 38.
if in Abel the just, there was the Love of God, by which only every one is
just, that is just (that is, without which there is no true inhaerent or actual
righteousness) yet was it such, as might and ought to be increased, and
whatsoever was less (then it ought) was to be reckoned, as of vice, or faulty.
It is plain he did not mean the righteousness of Justification, or that those
just men were justified by that righteousness he there speaks of; which will
farther appear by the next place out of St. Aug. Aug. de Civ. Dei l. 19. c. 27.
Hic itaque in uno quoque Justitia est, siobedienti Deus homini, etc.
Book Of the City of God, the Cardinal draws this Testimony: Here therefore it
is righteousness in every one, that God should rule over man obeying him, the
mind over the body, and reason over vice. In this definition (says the Bell.
ubi supra.
Cardinal) the imputed righteousness of Christ has no place, but only
inhaerent righteousness: Definition of what? he could not say of Justification:
for that Father speaks not of it in that place, and so the Cardinal is
impertinent; But put the Case, that any were to give a Definition of
Justification, should the imputed righteousness of Christ have no place in it?
This is that they strive for, and think they allow it enough, if they grant
that by the merit of Christ's satisfaction and righteousness, we have grace and
righteousness given us, by which we are justified, and have our sins purged out
(which with them is Remission) and our persons made acceptable: we noted this
Nu. 4. ex Vasque.
above: and this is that which keeps the Gap from closing, which might be
reasonably made up, if they would give the Righteousness of Christ its due for
our Justification, as we are ready to give inhaerent grace and righteousness
its due: both for the Connection it has with our Justification, and for the
necessity of it to our sanctification. But to return, there is enough in that
chap. to show how little this serves to the Cardinals purpose. The whole place
speaks of Actual righteousness, and that is not for his purpose: and the two
first words (Here therefore) shows the dependence of this upon what went
before, and thereby the imperfection of our righteousness here in this life;
and that also is not to the Cardinals purpose. That which went before runs
thus: Our righteousness though it be true, Aug. de Civ. Dei. l. 19. c. 27.
Nostra justitia quamvis vera sit propter very boni finem, ad quem refertur,
tanta tamen est in hac vita, ut potius peccatorum remissione conste^, quam
perfectione virtutum. Testis est oration totius Civitatis Dei -- per omnia
membra sua clamat ad Deum, Dimitte nobis --
as to the end of that true good, to which it refers or tends, yet is it such
in this life, that it rather stands in the remission of sins, then in the
perfection of virtues: which shows the imperfeon, as I said, of any
righteousness in us, as needing continually in this life the mercy of God for
pardon, and therefore unable to Justify. As witness and proof of this St. Aug.
adds, the prayer of the whole City of God, so journing upon earth witnesses
this, for she cries in all her members unto God, Lord forgive us our Debts: and
gives a reason, from this mortal condition and corruptible body, -- quod
aggravat animam, non perfect ratio vitiis imperat; ideo -- necessaria est
justis talis oration.
which presses down the soul, so that Reason does not perfectly rule over
vice; therefore is such prayer necessary for just persons. The Cardinal replies
to the first part, that man's righteousness consists in both, that is, in the
forgiveness of sins, and the perfection of virtues, which is true of the
Righteousness St. Aug. speaks of, viz. the actual righteousness of man in this
life -- for such is the righteousness of just or justified men: of whom the
Father speaks here -- but they had another kind of righteousness by which they
are first justified. Sic orare justos, ac per hoc indigere indulgentia
ventalium delictorum. Bell. ubi supra.
To the latter part he replies, That just persons pray so (as St. Aug. said
they do) and by this show they need indulgence of their venial sins. But if
only need remission of such (which may so easily be satisfied for and done
away) St. Aug. had not said potius in remissione; rather in the remission of
sins: experience also tells us that just men commit greater sins, and need
indulgence or remission of them too: and see how heedlesly contrary the
Cardinal is to himself in so few lines; He had said, Man's righteousness stands
in both these, Remission of Sins, and Perfection of Virtue, and meant it of the
righteousness of Justification: in which he will grant the Remission of all
sins and of eternal death due to them: Here presently he restrains Remission to
the indulgence of Venial sins.

Justify, The word Justify sometimes improperly taken by the Fathers.
by making just or righteous as when he says: Who has made righteousness in
man, but he that justifies the ungodly? that is, of an ungodly man, by his
grace makes a just and righteous man: Aug. in Ps. Ps. 118. conc. 26. -- qui
justificat impium, i. e. per gratiam suam ex Impio facit Justum.
and to the like purpose he speaks upon Ps. 96. By such expressions St. Aug.
truly speaks the inhaerent righteousness given us of God: and when he calls this
Justifying a sinner, he uses the word Justify according to the Latin
origination and importance of it: for thereby a man is made truly righteous by
that grace received: righteous I say, for its measure and proportion: not to
exclude Justification by an imputed righteousness through faith, which is the
primer and more proper meaning of the word Justify. If therefore we find St.
August. acknowledge another Righteousness and Justification, differing from
that which he seems to ascribe to Inhaerent Righteousness: then have we our
intent and purpose, and the Cardinal is impertinent, in his allegations out of
St. Aug. as also in those other, which he pretends from other Fathers, which we
may let pass, as speaking but the being of Inhaerent righteousness: not
proving justification by it, Ambr. in Hexam. l. 6. c. 8. Justitia, unde
justificatio derivata est.
in any proper sense: as for example. St. Ambrose (who is one of those Fathers
cited by the Card.) speaks of it according to the Grammatical origination of
the word, Justice (says he) from whence Instification is derived.

Now for St. Aug. his allowing of the imputed righteousness and our
Justification by it. Aug. Enchir. cap. 41. Ipse ergo peecatum, ut nos justitia,
nec nostra sed Dei simus; nec in nobis, sed in ipso; sicut ipse peccatum, non
suum, sed nostrum, nec in se, sed in nobis constitutum.
See his Enchirid. where he thus explains that of the Apost. 2 Cor. 5. ult. He
therefore was made sin, that we might be righteousness; and that not ours, but
of God, and not in our selves but in him: even as he was Sin, not his own but
ours, and not in himself but in us. This admits none of their exceptions: as
that we are made righteous in him, because we have our righteousness by his
Merit, and the righteousness of God because we have it of his gift, and by the
infusion of his Grace. This is all they can say, and this though true of our
inhaerent righteousness, yet comes not home to the purpose of St Augustine, who
says plainly, As our Savior was made Sin, not in himself but in us -- and
manifestly acknowledges we are so also made righteousness in him, that is,
righteousness is imputed to us. See also how this is asserted by the Greek
Fathers,

Chrysostom. on that of the Apostle 1 Cor. 1.30. He does not say he has made us
wise, and just and holy, but he is made unto us wisdom, and righteousness, and
sanctification: which is as if he had said, He has given himself unto us.
(...).
And upon that of 2 Cor. 5. ult. Made him sin for us, the same Father thus:
(...) Chrysostom. in locum.
He suffered him to be condemned as a sinner. And here also he observes, as
above: The Apostle did not say we are made righteous, but righteousness, and
that of God, for it is the righteousness of God, when it is not of Works, (...)
--
but that we are justified by the Grace of God: and he gives this as a reason
of the need we have of such a righteousness: because there must be found no
blot or stain, -- (...).
so he observes, the Apostle said not, made him a sinner, but sin; for he named
not the habit (as if sin had been inhaerent in him) but the bare quality, (as
in the Abstract.) (...). Chrysostom. in locum.
Which shows that when he said righteousness, rather then righteous, there is
a righteousness made ours beside the (...) or inhaerent quality. With
Chrysostom agree Oecumenius and Theophylact, upon the places cited.

So St. Cyril. Glaphyr. 5. cap. ult.
Cyril sets out our Savior under the name of Iosedeck, which signifies the
righteousness of God, because we are justified in him through the mercy of God,
and unto this he applies that of Ierem. 23.6. The Lord our Righteousness.
Oecumenius upon Psalm. Oecum. in Phil 3. v. 9. (...).
3.9. not having my own righteousness but the righteousness which is of God by
faith: gives us a distinction of Righteousness not properly, or properly taken:
That is, our Righteousness, or the righteousness of Works. This is the
Righteousness which is by Grace, and the faith of Christ: And needful it is, in
this Question and the Testimonies of Fathers concerned in it, to hold to the
Justification properly taken.

To this imputed righteousness belongs that of the ancient Father Justin
Martyr. Justin ad Diogen. -- (...). -- (...).
What thing else can cover our sins, but his righteousness? and that which he
adds, to be justified in him only, Which is a stronger expression then to be
justifiedby him; and then he cries out, O sweet and happy exchange! wherein
that? because, as the Apostle, He made sin for us, we righteousness in him: or
as Justin subjoyns, because one man's righteousness justifies many unrighteous
men.

To this also belongs what Chrysostom. has -- who with reference to Isa. 43.26.
that thou may be justified: Chrysostom. homil. 3. de poenitenti^. Eximens poenae,
donat justitiam, facit enim peccatorem, (...).
thus expresses himself as to this point. Freeing us from punishment he gives
righteousness, for he makes a sinner to be alike (or in the like condition) to
him that had not sinned: which must needs be by not imputing sin and imputing
righteousness upon his faith and repentance.

This imputing of Righteousness to him that believes will also appear by the
Fathers using the expression of sola fide, by faith only: There is scarce any
Father but so expresses himself.

Faith only, and of Works, Of Sola Fides in this point of Justification.
as to that which Antiquity yields unto them in the business of our
Justification.

What this Faith is which justifies, was sufficiently debated Chap. IV. nu. 3,
4, 9.
above, and also why and in what respect Faith alone is said to justify: The
expression is exclusive; yet did not (as appeared above in the fourth chapter)
exclude the praeparatory workings of the soul, dispositive to Justification:
did not exclude Repentance and charity, but admitted them as conditions to
Remission: did not exclude inhaerent Righteousness, but only from being the
formal cause of Justification properly taken: else it was admitted as a
Concomitant and necessary qualification of the subject or person justified.
Lastly, it did not so exclude good works as if justifying faith could be
without them: but did infer them as necessary consequents, engaging the soul to
do them; and till so, it is not a believing to justification; and unless it
continue so doing, (that is still to engage the Soul to well doing or good
works) the state of Justification will not continue: I say, till Faith does so
engage the Soul, it is not a believing with the whole heart, not a Justifying
Faith. Chrysostom. in Phil. c. 3. v. 9. (...).
As St. Chrysostom (who often attributes the whole to Faith alone) requires it
should be a working Faith; as where he says, Faith ought not to be simply by
it self, or alone: and then shows how our willingness to suffer, (and in like
manner our well doing) is from faith: (...).
for our fellowship with him in sufferings is from faith, for he that believes
he shall reign with Christ will be willing to suffer.

I need not trouble the Reader here with the Particular sentences of the
Fathers, using that expression of Sola Fides, Faith only: The Cardinal has
recited many, Bell. de Justificat. l. 1. c. 25.
and undertakes to answer them. Well, he acknowledges the Testimonies, and for
his Answers they come to this, That Faith only, is set against the works of
Moses Law. It is true, that it is sometimes so: but we must not think that the
Apostle or Fathers denying Justification to be sought or had by the works of
the Law, do therefore admit our works under Grace to serve in the stead of the
other for our Justification; but do rather imply, that no men, Jew or Christian
can be justified by doing, what they are bound to do by the Law or
Commandment, under which they are, as Chap. IV. p. 102, 103.
above was shown more amply.

Another of the Cardinals Answers is; That faith only, excludes the outward
work only (as in the sentences there cited out of Origin and Chrysostom.) but not
Repentance and Charity. How it does not exclude Repentance and Charity we said
hard above; i. e. it admits them as Conditions of Remission, but not to that
condition or Causality rather, which the Church of Rome advances Charity to, in
the work of our Justification: which is not a little to the prejudice of the
imputed Righteousness, and of that singular act of Faith, for which its said,
we are Justified by faith only: But when the Cardinal tells us, those Fathers
said by faith only, because the outward work was wanting: not to exclude
Repentance and Charity: he should have told us, whether he meant charity in
habit only, or as sending forth its elicit Acts, and inwardly working -- I
suppose he will think it as great an absurdity to attribute Justification to a
bare, not working Habit, as to a bare and not working faith: which they falsely
reproach us with; and then he should have remembered, he made Habitual inherent
Righteousness the Formal Causs of Justification, excluding the Actual, that is,
charity as it is acting inwardly or outwardly; for this it must come to.

A third sort of Answer the Cardinal, and generally they of the Church of Rome
have, for Testimonies of Fathers which by Faith only exclude all righteousness
in our selves (and cannot be shuffled off by saying, they exclude thereby all
righteousness of Works before Grace, or done by power of our Free Will without
Grace) then to say, all righteousness in us is excluded and sometime denied, as
of our selves, because so we have none, but of the gift of God. This is in it
self a great Truth, but makes no apposite answer, to Faith only, which we have
not of our selves any more, then we have other Graces, and which is the gift of
God as much as they. When Chrysostom. says upon that of the Apostle Romans 5.2.
Chrysostom. in To. 5. (...).
we have by Faith access into this Grace, (of Justification, reconciliation and
peace with God) We brought nothing with us, but faith only: and when Oecumenius
upon Romans 3.24. Oecumen. in Romans 3. (...).
says likewise, bringing with us Faith only, to our Justification: it cannot
be answered, we brought nothing else of our selves, for neither did we bring
Faith of our selves, to our Justification; seeing therefore we do bring besides
Faith some things else, as above granted: they may have their place either as
preparatives and dispositions, to our Justification, or as requisite conditions
to the Remission that is in our Justification; or as fitting qualifications of
the subject or person justified; yet Faith we bring, as that which has a
singular property and efficacy for the receiving this great benefit of
Justification, for which it may be said Fide Sola, by Faith only. And this we
are taught to say, both by Fathers and Scripture, that so we may attribute the
more to Christ's merit and righteousness (which Faith apprehends) and the more
lessen, or take off from, any righteousness in our selves. We may shut up this
discourse with that saying of Theophylact, Which the Cardinal cites as objected
by the Protestants: Fides sola habet in se Iustificandi virtutem. ex Theo.
phyl. in Ep. ad Gal. cap. 3.
Faith only has the power in its self of Justifying: and cannot be answered as
the Cardinal would have it; Faith only is said to have that power, because
there is nothing can justify without Faith: for so there are other things
without which there can be no justification: but among all those things, or
Graces, Faith only can be said properly to Justify.

Justification by works, Not justification by Works in the prime sense.
it is in vain to put it to the trial of Antiquity: For as we may observe, the
Cardinal, though he concludes his 4. Book of Justification with this Question,
and pretends several places of Scripture, to prove good works do Justify: yet
has he nothing from Antiquity for it. Indeed the Fathers did not know the
Romish second Justification, to which the Romanists (when they are forced to
speak distinctly) do restrain their Justifying works; acknowledging all good
works follow Justification (in the first and proper sense) and that this second
Justification, is but increase in righteousness, (as Chap. IV. nu. 2.
above showed) We grant and so will the Fathers, Vide chapter IV. nu. 8.105, 106,
107.
that we are of duty to increase in righteousness, and that our often actings,
or doing good works, do augment the inhaerent Righteousness: and that the more
we do good works, the more Favor we have with God, the more acceptable are we
to Him: but there are two words we have cause to reject; Merit and
Justification. That good Works cause an increase of the habit, and do obtain
additional grace, we grant: but if they will stand upon the word Merit properly
taken, we shall see in the next Section: Our good works cannot properly merit.
Also we see no reason why this should be called Justification, to make a
confusion in this Doctrine of so great concernment, Man's Justification before
God, and to deceive people when they have the doctrine of Justification by
Works, barely delivered unto them. If the Romanists would allow what they ought
to the Application of Christ's merit and righteousness, and give Faith its due,
which apprehends that righteousness, and be content that inhaerent
Righteousness should hold its due place: there would be little cause of
Controversy in this great point of Christian Doctrine. I will conclude with
the Cardinals answer to a saying of holy Bernard upon the Canticles. Bern. in
Cantic. Christus nobis justitia, -- and in dulgentia Dei nostra justitia.
Christ is our righteousness because he justifies us from our sins: and, the
Indulgence of God is our righteousness. By Indulgence and Remission (says the
* Cardinal) he understands full and complete Justification, Bell. de Iustif. l.
2. c. 13. Nomine Indulgentiae. and Remissionis, intelligit plenam
Iustificationem, quoniam ut saepe diximus nunquam remittitur cul^a, quin simul
--
because (as we have often said) the sin is never remitted, but righteousness
is together with it insused. And so say we: But the righteousness, which Bernard
calls Indulgence, is not the Infused, but the righteousness of Justification;
for where sin is not imputed, there righteousness is imputed, as Nu. 4.
above shown out of Romans 4.6, 7. and this is indeed Divine Indulgence. But
still we acknowledge, that continuance in the state of Justification, is by
good Works, or continuance in well-doing.

SECT. V. Of Merit of good works.
Trent had desined, Explication of the Question and the Reason of Merit
properly taken.
Good works do truly merit eternal life: but did not tell us plainly, wherein
the Reason of Merit, truly so called, does stand; only it gives us certain
acknowledgements of Gods bounty, promise, and grace, which are so far from
being the grounds of Merit, as Mr. Spencer there calls them, that they do by
necessary consequence overthrow it. The Question therefore being about Merit
truly so called, it will be first necessary to see into that; for the clearing
of it will plainly show the impertinency of what they allege out of Scripture
or Fathers for their works truly Meritorious.

We spoke something to this purpose (in the V. Chap.) as Mr. Spencer gave
occasion; We may further observe, that They who hold up the Controversy (for
the moderate sort in the Church of Rome, do let it fall) use three Adverbials
which speak the meaning of that Vere merentur, or truly meritorious: and they
are simpliciter, proprie, ex condigno, simply, properly, and condignly
meritorious; as we see in their Bell. 5. de Iustif. c. 16. Vasq. in 1.2. Tho.
disp. 213. c. 4.
two great Champions for Merit.

The word, Simply, is always exclusive of that which is so or so, according to
some respect only; Now the respect here considerable and to be inquired into,
has regard to Gods promise, bounty, and acceptance, whereby good works (say
we) obtain so great a reward; The Asserters of Merit, will not say, that their
simply meritorious, does exclude the Promise, or all respect unto it: but lay
the Promise as a groundwork of their merit. The word Merit sounds two things.
The better to understand this mystery, we must consider, that the word (to
merit) sounds two things, obtaining, and deserving: the first stands by the
promise, but the second (which carries the reason of merit) stands by the worth
of the work. The Cardinal and his fellows must say, that if God had not made
the promise, and of his gracious bounty appointed such a reward, the best
service of man could not have obtained it, or brought him to eternal life: but
they will also say, that such service would by the worth of the work and labor
have deserved the reward. See to this purpose, what the Cardinal putting the
queston of works condignly meritorious, delivers: Bell. l. 5. de Justif. c
17. Meritoria ex condigno, ratione Pacti tantum, vel operis tantum, vel ratione
utr^usque.
This may, says he, be three ways varied or considered: that works be called
condignly meritorious, In regard of the Covenant or promise only; or in regard
of the work only, or in regard of both; -- Opus multo inferius mercede promissa.
In the first he supposes the work or service far inferior to the reward
promised: as if a hundred Crowns should be promised for one days labor in the
Vineyard, -- Opus revera aequale mercedi, -- -- Opus vere par mercedi.
In the second he supposes the work equal to the reward, but no covenant or
promise intervening; In the third he supposes the work truly equal to the
reward, set out in the Covenant or promise; and the example of this he makes
the penny given to the Laborers in the vineyard, Mat. 20. And this third way
he declares for, that Good Works are condignly meritorious in regard of both,
the promise and the work it self: Whereas it is plain, that the promise makes
but way for the Consecution, or obtaining of the reward, and is requisite to
make works meritorious only according to the first and less proper importance
of the word meriting for obtaining: but as for deserving of the reward,
(wherein the reason of Merit properly stands) that is laid upon the worth of
the work, which is supposed, as we see, to be truly equal to the Reward
promised.

Vasquez, usually more free and open then the Cardinal, plainly professes and
mamtains, Vasquez in Tho. 1.2. disp. 214. c. 5.
that good works without any promise, or divine acceptance are condignly
meritorious of eternal life, and have of themselves a value or worth equal to
it: For he saw that the pretense of the Covenant or promise, or divine
acceptance, was no ground, but a prejudice to the reason of Merit truly so
called: and therefore a little after sets himself to prove, Vesq. c. 8. --
nullo msd^ pertinere ad rationem meriti.
that the Covenant or promise does not at all belong to the reason of Merit;
and makes this his argument for the condign meriting of Good Works: Sin, says
he, deserves a punishment equal to it, without all Covenant or Commination --
therefore also the works of the Just do condignly merit the eternal Crown of
glory, Vasq. ibid. cap. 10. -- absque ullo pacto vel comminatione.
without all Covenant or promise, -- siqui them ho^ praetr^^ aequale est --
for this reward is equal to the worth of the work without the promise.

But this is thwarted by the Bull of Pius V. and Greg. XIII. two Popes
condemning certain Propositions, of which this is one. Vasq. ibid. cap. 13.^
Even as the evil of sin in its own nature deserves eternal death, so a good
work of its own nature deserves or merits eternal life. What else did Vasquez
say? but he strives to clear himself by pretending this difference between his
Assertion and the condemned Proposition: that the Author of those Propositions
held good works without Grace were so meritorious, which Vasquez does not: Now
whether Jesuits little regard what their Popes define in their Bulls, being
never destitute of an Evasion: or whether indeed it be the doctrine of the
Church of Rome, and the meaning of the Councils Vere merentur, (that good works
done in grace do as truly deserve; and are as condignly meritorious of eternal
life, as sins and evil deeds are of eternal death) I will not further inquire
into: but out of that which has been said, we may draw up the Question to this
Issue.

Cardinal and rejected by him (Good Works are condignly meritorious in regard
of the Covenant and Promise only) was indeed, The Issue of the Question.
if rightly interpreted, the true and ancient Doctrine of the Church, asserted
by the Fathers, and the former Writers of the Church of Rome, as may in part be
seen by those Authors whom the Cardinal and Vasquez have noted, and rejected.
We need not here be afraid of the words condignly meritorious: for being joined
with those words, (in regard of the Covenant and promise only,) they must have
such a sense as their consistence will allow: which is, by interpreting the
word meritorious according to the first importance of consecution or obtaining:
and the word condignly according to such a deserving or worthiness as stands by
divine acceptance, when we do the condition which the promise requires, in
such a sort as God will accept unto a rewarding; Even as in Scripture holy Men
are said to be just and perfect, through divine acceptance. So it comes to
this plain Truth: The good Works and Life of holy Men will be accepted of God
as good and faithful service, and certainly obtain eternal life. See Mat.
25.21. Well done, thou good etc.

In this sense the Augustan and Wittenburg Confessions did not abhor to use the
word meritorious; nor Brentius and Melanchthon, as Vasquez notes of them; and
in this sense we need not be afraid to admit it, and to say, that good works
do merit, that is, do obtain, or are rewarded with eternal life, through the
gracious acceptance, bounty, and promise of God; and one would think this were
enough for us, both to encourage us to do good, and to comfort and stay us in
the doing of it, and persevering in it, without standing upon any farther
title, or contesting with God that we have made him our Debtor, or that eternal
life is due to our works, for the worth of them. This is therefore that which
we deny, That good works do truly, and properly merit eternal life: Truly and
properly, I say, as deserving it upon the worth of the work; and good reason
have we to deny it: Finding all, they can bring from Scripture or Fathers, as I
hinted above, impertinent and inconsequent to the proving of Merit truly so
called; yea, it will appear that the more ancient writers of the Church of Rome
are against it, yea, they that asserted it, are forced sometimes by Truth it
self to yield so much, as may overthrow it.

Name of Merit; Scripture alleged for the Name Merit.
but it is only according to their Latin translation, not according to the
Original Greek: The one place is Eccles. 16.15. according to the merit of their
works, so their Edition; but the Original, (...).
is according to their works, as we find it often said in the Scriptures. But
Bellarm. -- reddere ficut opera merentur.
and Vasquez reply: what is it to render according to their works, but to
render to them as their works deserve or merit? to which we may say: Albeit
such expression, (as their works deserve) may be very well admitted, yet is
there much difference between Secundum opera, according to works, and as their
works deserve or merit, taking the word Merit in the Cardinals sense; for to
say according to their works, is but to speak the quality of them, that it
shall be well with those that do well, and on the contrary, evil to those that
do evil: it does not speak equality between the work and the reward. St.
Gregory speaks home to this purpose upon the 143. Greg. in 7. Psalmum
poenitential. v. 8. Si secund^un opera, quomodo misericordia aestimabitur? Sed
aliud est secundum opera reddere, aliud propter ipsa opera reddere. In eo enim
-- ipsa operum qualitas intelligiu^ --
Psalm. If it shall be rendered to every one, says he, according to their
works, how shall it be accounted mercy? but it is one thing to render according
to works, another to render it for the works themselves: for in that, where
it is said, according to their works, the very quality of the works is meant:
that they whose works appear good, shall have a glorious retribution.

Another place they allege for Merit, is Heb 13.16. which in their Latin
Edition has promeretur Deus, as bad Latin as Divinity. In the Original (...),
is well pleased, and so by Occumenius, the word is interpreted by (...), which
signifies as much as well pleased. Indeed the Ancient Latin Fathers did some
of them, especially St. Cyprian, (according to the ancient and innocent meaning
of the word Merit) use to say promereri Deum, i. e. to engage, or obtain of God
what he had promised; but we do not contend about Words or Phrases. Let us see
what they bring for the proof of the thing it self, Merit truly so called.

Reward, Their Scriptures to prove the thing. From Reward.
and compare it to the hire or pay of Laborers: We grant it is so often
called: but the Inference, therefore our works or labor does truly merit such
reward, is inconsequent; for the Apostle supposes there is a reward reckoned of
Grace, (...). Aug. in prafat. Ps. 31.
as there is of Debt Romans 4.4. Accordingly St Aug. (Merces nostra vocatur
Gratia --) Our Reward is called Grace, and if so, then is it freely given. And
St. Ambrose tells us in his Epistles there is Merces liberalitatis, the Reward
or Recompense of liberality: where bounty is seen on the one part rather then
desert on the other. Between man and man, there may be Merit, and Reward
according to debt, or justly due: not so between God and man; yet is Gods
rewarding set out by the other, to show the certainty of the recompense, and
that it shall be rendered according to their works; not that the similitude
stands good in all parts: for the duty of man to God is antecedent to all
covenant or promise, the ability man has to perform it is from Gods free grace,
the reward given is infinitely beyond all that man can do.

Secondly, Of Reward given in proportion to Works.
They allege all such Scriptures, as speak the reward given according to
works, therefore proportionably to the works; and what is that else but
according to Merit, when as in giving there is regard had to the worth or
dignity of the work? This Argument also is inconsequent: for admit that the
reward is given according to works, and in the giving it, there is regard had
to the dignity of them, yet does not this conclude them meritorious: as we saw
above, Nu. 3. Good works indeed may be different in worth and dignity: yet all
infinitely belwo the eternal reward: And in the reward there is the substance,
and degrees considerable: the essential beatitude or eternal life, and the
degrees of glory: All that are saved, have eternal life, not all the same
glory; The Penny was given to all Mat. 20.10. To this purpose St. Ambr. l. 7.
in Luc. 15. v. 17. -- aqualem mercedem Vita, non gloriae.
Ambrose, Thou hirest in Laborers at the eleventh hour, and do vouchsafe
them an equal reward: an equal reward of life, not of glory: The difference of
reward upon the difference of good works is in the degrees of glory: and if
some proportion be observed in this, yet nothing of Merit: where God does but
crown the greater gifts he bestowed here, with the greater glory there. If they
will plead proportion, our Savior tells them, Mat. 19.29.
an hundred fold is received: and that's no fit proportion, to ground Merit on;
If they plead reward given according to dignity of the works: St. Paul tells
them, Romans 8.18. (...).
The sufferings of this life, are not worthy to be compared with the glory --
excluding all proportion of worth between the sufferings and the glory.

Thirdly, Such places of Scripture, as speak works to be the cause or reason of
giving eternal life -- as Mat. 25.35. For -- ye have fed -- clothed -- Which
places (says the Cardinal) do witness eternal life so given, Bell. l. 5. de
Justif. cap. 3. -- ut ipsam rationem cur detur vita aterna, in operibus ponant.
that they put the very Reason, wherefore it is given, upon the works. Those
places do give a reason indeed, why such and such obtain eternal life -- but
not the very Reason, or the chief Reason; for there is a greater Reason; a
Reason, wherefore such works are rewarded with eternal life; and that destroys
the Merit of such works, though not the certainty of their obtaining; and that
is Gods gracious bounty and liberality appointing such a reward to such small
performances; and therefore is it said in the 34. verse, an Inheritance and
Kingdom prepared for them: and then dependently on that it is said Inherit the
Kingdom, for ye have done that which I required of you, in order to inheriting
the Kingdom; ye are such as they, for whom the Kingdom is prepared.

Fourthly, Reward in Justice, how?
Such places of Scripture as speak Gods Justice in giving the reward. 2 Thessalonians.
1.6. 2 Timothy 4.8. But this is still inconsequent as to the inferring of Works
meritorious: unless they can say, God renders the reward to good works,
according to Commutative justice, which gives one for one by equal proportion;
but such Justice is not found between God and Man; for man returns nothing to
God, which he can call his own, nothing but what he has received of God. As for
the destributive or remunerative justice, it is true that God may be said in
some sense to render the reward in justice; yet not for the merit of the works,
but out of the bounty of his liberality, and the faithfulness of his promise:
God was not bound in justice to prepare, appoint, or promise such a reward to
such works, but having appointed and promised it, it is just with him to render
accordingly. So the Apostle speaking of the Justifying of a sinner (which the
Romanists themselves say cannot be merited) uses the same word: that he might
be just, i. e. in keeping his promise to all that believe in Jesus. So when the
Fathers in their high language speak of Man making God his Debtor, they mean it
only in regard of his own promise, whereby he has freely bound himself. St.
August. Aug. in Psa. 83. Debitorem Dominus ipse se fecit, non accipiendo, sed
promittendo.
may answer for them all, The Lord, says he, made himself debtor, not by
receiving any thing, but by promising.

Lastly, Such places of Scripture, Worthy of the Reward, how?
as speak us worthy -- So Luc. 10.7. 2 Thessalonians. 1.5. Rev. 3.4. This argument as
the rest is inconsequent -- They are worthy, therefore their Works are
meritorious, or therefore they have the reward for the worth of their works:
whereas this worthiness arises by divine acceptance, by which they are
accounted worthy. Bernard may answer them once for all, Bern. de dedic. Eccl.
ser. 5. -- illius dignatione non nostra dignitate.
We are worthy, says he, by his dignation not by our own dignity: See also
above Chap. V. nu. 8, 9.

Their Testimonies out of Antiquity examined.
But we produce the Fathers witnessing for us against Merit, and giving reason
withal to overthrow it. The Greek Fathers have not any word that fully answers
the importance of the Latin word Merit; but the Romanists usually translate
(...) (which occurs frequently in these Fathers, especially Chrysostom, and
signifies no more then recte facta, Deeds rightly done or good works) Merita,
Merits. Such merits, that is, good works, we acknowledge the Fathers do allow:
and the Cardinal acknowledges that St. Aug. Bell. de gra. and lib. arbitr. l. 1.
c. 14. Meritum appellat quemlibet actum bonum, ratione cujus aliquid aliud
accipimus.
(in whose Books the word Merit is most frequently found) uses it, for every
good work, in regard of which we receive some other thing. Well then: we
acknowledge holy men full of such Merits or good Deeds, and that they shall
obtain, or be rewarded with, eternal life. And I dare say there is not any
Father that affirms more: as we may see by that Collection, Bell. l. 5. de
Justis. c. 4.
which the Cardinal has made.

He begins with the Greek Fathers: but produces their sayings only in Latin
and there he has (as I noted above) this gift, usually to choose the worst
translation; so when he makes Ignatius say, ut possim promereri Deum, whereas
the Greek word (...) signifies to obtain or enjoy God; although we need not be
afraid of the phrase (promereri Deum) which we shall see St. Cyprian often
using, in an innocent sense, according to the meaning of those ancient Times.
So the Cardinal makes Justin Martyr to say, victuros cum eo suis meritis, that
they shall live with him (God) by their merits: Justin. Apolog 2. (...).
whereas the Greek is, to be accounted worthy of his conversation, or of being
with him; In like manner, that St. Basil should say, speaking of the Forty
Martyrs; Basil. in orat. de 40. Martyr. (...). -- (...).
They have merited (promeriti sunt) crowns of glory; and what oration or speech
can sufficiently set forth or reach their Merits? where the same word is used,
they were accounted worthy, or did obtain such Crowns; and that which he
renders their Merits, is in the Greek their worthiness or virtue.

He cites Chrysostom, saying in his hom. on Lazarus: rendered, according to
their Merits: (...).
the Greek sounds according to their desert, and speaks of both wicked and
good, and is no more then what the Scripture often says, according to their
works, Dispunctio utriusque meriti. Tertul. in Apolog. c. 18.
and what Tertullian calls the discrimination or severing of both merits, of the
one to punishment, and of the other to reward; as we see set forth in Mat.
25.32. and in the different end of the rich glutton and of Lazarus, Luc. 16.25.
they were dealt with according to their different lives: and thus Clemens in
his Strom. does more then once use this (...), which is according to their
works, or desert: It speaks the difference of desert, in the one and the other,
does not speak the worth or proportion of the work to the reward of eternal
life: To this purpose it was spoken Nu. 3.
above upon their alleging Ecclus. 16. according to their Merits, for
according to their Works.

That which he alleges out of Irenaeus and some other Fathers, speaks only to
this purpose, that eternal life is acquired and obtained by good works: which
was the second thing we acknowledged to be asserted by the Ancients, and by us
admitted, as a Truth which makes nothing to condign Merit, truly so called.

The Latin Fathers cited by the Cardinal, Bell. l. 5. de Justific. c. 4.
albeit they have the word Merit more frequently, yet do they indeed speak no
more then the former. St. Cyprian we grant does often use the phrase (promereri
Deum) but according to the innocent meaning (as I said above) of those Times,
-- promeneri Deum.
for obtaining or procuring Gods Favor by doing that which is pleasing to him:
or for enjoying God or his presence in bliss and glory.

That which the Cardinal cites out of Greg. Mor. 4. c. 42. out of Celestines
Epist. and out of Bernard in Cantic. contributes no more to the Romish cause
then the word Merit, put for good Deeds, only Greg. implies there, that the
glory will be proportionably the greater, and answerable to the measure of good
Deeds, which we deny not; but we deny that this advancement of the reward and
increase of the glory, which does so much more set out the divine bounty and
free liberality, should be made an argument for condignity of man's merit, as
the Romanists do, and the Cardinal did, (above nu. 3) urging those Scriptures
for Merit, which speak the Reward given in proportion to the works. But that
which the Cardinal brings out of Celestine, (who was also Bishop of Rome, and
is here cited for the Names-sake of Merit) speaks indeed against them: So great
(says he) is the goodness of God toward all men, Tanta erga omnes homines est
bonitas Dei, ut nostra velit esse Merita, quae sunt ipsius dona, and pro his
quae largitus est, aeterna praemia sit donaturus. Celest. in Ep.
that he is pleased, they should be our Merits, which are his Gifts, and that
he will give us the eternal rewards, for those things which he had bestowed
freely upon us before, which destroys the very reason of their Merit properly
taken.

That which is cited out of Ambrose, de Offic. l. 1. c. 15. says no more, then
according to their works, whether they be good or bad: as above in the
Testimony drawn out of Chrysostom. The sayings of Hierome and Hilary, speak
but the second thing we acknowledged, viz, that good deeds will obtain or be so
rewarded. Indeed St. Aug. cited by the Cardinal here may seem to speak more
then the former. Aug. ep. 105. ad Sixtum. Sicut merito peccati, tanquam
stipendium redditur mors: ita merito justitiae tanquam stipendium, vita aeterna.
As unto the merit of sin, death is rendered as the stipend and wages, so is
life eternal rendered (as a stipend) to the merit of righteousness. Where the
stipend or wages is no more then Reward. This is clear by what he says in
relation to the Apostles saying Rom, 6. ult. A stipend is rendered as due for
the labor of the warfare, Aug. Enchirid. c. 107. Stipendium pro opere militiae
debitum redditur, non donatur: Id eo dixit stipendium pecsati mors; gratia vero
nisi gratis sit, gratia non est.
is not freely given: therefore the Apostle said, The wages of sin is death,
(and therefore eternal life cannot be thus called a stipend) but grace (or the
gift of God) except it be free, is not grace; and St. Aug. adds immediately as
consequent to it: Intelligendum est igitur, ipsa hominis bona merita esse Dei
munera: quibus cum vita aeterna redditur, quid nisi gratia pro gratia reddi.
tur? Aug. ibid.
Therefore we must understand, that the Merits (or good Deeds) of Man, are the
gifts of God: to which when aeternal life is given, what is there else given,
but grace for grace? And by this we may see, how St. Aug. meant, what he speaks
elsewhere upon that of Romans 6. ult. a saying that the Romanists still oppose to
the argument we make against Merit from the Text of the Apostle: St. Aug.
saying is this: Aug. de Gra. and lib. arb. c. 9. Cum posset dicere and recte
dicere, stipendium justitiae vita aeterna, maluit dicere --
The Apostle might have said, and said it truly, that the wages or stipend of
Righteousness is life eternal; he chose rather to say, the Gift of God -- He
might have said it in a true sense, (taking the word stipend as above, for a
reward or recompense) not in an equal or answerable sense to the other (the
wages or stipend, of sin is death) for then it would not have consisted with
the Truth of that, which the Apostle did say, but the gift of God is life
eternal; nor with the end and purpose, wherefore the Apostle did choose to say,
the gift, rather then the stipend; viz. to exclude all thought of merit of
condignity: as it follows there in St. Maluit dicere, Gratia Dei vita aeterna,
ut intelligeremus, non pro meritis nostris, Deum nos ad vitam aeternam, sed pro
sua miseratione perducere.
Aug. He chose rather to say, The gift of God is life eternal: that we might
understand, how God brings us to eternal life, not for our Merits, but for his
Mercy sake. There is scarce any of the Ancients, that has either commented on
that Text of the Apostle or occasionally fallen upon it, but observes the
apparent distinction which the Apostle purposely makes, in saying Death is the
wage or stipend of Sin -- but not saying so of life eternal.

There is another place cited out of St. August. that makes a great noise of
Justice in giving the reward: Aug. de not. and gra. c. 2. Non est injustus
Deus, ut Justos fraudet mercede justitiae.
God is not unjust (says he) that he should defraud, or disappoint, the just
of the reward of their justice, or righteousness. But upon what respect God is
said to be Just in rewarding: was shown Nu. 3.
above in answer to those places of Scripture, which spoke Gods Justice in that
particular. And the same answer may serve all those Testimonies which the
Cardinal or others bring out of the Fathers, saying in some loftiness of
Language that man by good deeds may make God his Debtor: The Wiseman in effect
said so, Prove. 19.17. and that proverbial way of speech may bear it. That
saying of St. Aug. (which in this Controversy of Merit, Truth has forced the
Cardinal thrice to mention) will clearly unfold how God becomes, and may be
called, Man's Debtor, and answer all plea of Merit, made from such speeches of
the Fathers. The Lord, says he, Aug. Ps. 83. Debitorem Dominus ipse se secit,
non accipiendo, sed promittendo.
makes himself a Debtor, and how is that? not by receiving from us, but
promising unto us. To this purpose it is what the same Father says elsewhere,
Aug. l. 1. Confess. c. 4.
O thou, that payest Debts, or renders what is due, yet owe nothing to any
man, (qui reddis debita, nulli debes) where (debita) debts, are (promissa) his
promises. And Aug. Sermon 16. de verb. Apost. -- read, quia accepisti; sed^edde,
quia promisisti.
elsewhere: We do not say to God, render because thou have received, but render
because thou have promised.

The Cardinal pretends he can easily answer all this, and replies thus: It is
said so by St. Bell. l. 5. de Justif. c. 18. sect. Sed facilis -- absolute, sed
solum ex promissione and dono suo; quod autem non ex sola promissione sed etiam
ex opere nostro Deus efficiatur Debtor, docet Aug. cum subjungit, -- read,
quod promisisti, quia fecimus, quod jussisti.
Aug. because God owes nothing to any man, absolutely, but only by his promise,
and his own bounty and gift; This is fair and true: but nothing to his
advantage, and therefore not many lines after, he sups it up again with the
same breath, saying; Nevertheless, that God is made our Debtor not only by his
promise, but by our work too: St. Aug. teaches, when he subjoyns; we may say
render what thou have promised, for we have done, what thou command. If this
may be said to God Almighty, yet with such caution, that it cannot (as bold as
it is) be a plea for Merit: for it must be said with respect to the bounty and
promise of God appointing such a reward for them, that do so and so; and with
acknowledgment of his Free Grace helping us to do so; wherefore it follows
immediately in St. Et hoc tu^fecisti, qui laborantes juvisti. Aug. Ser. 16. de
verbis Apost.
Aug. (which the Cardinal thought good to omit) and this thou have done, which
have helped those that labor, or strive to do well. If we take it not as said
in such a respect, St. Aug. himself will judge it a proud and presumptuous
saying; for so it is censured by him, Against the plea of Merit.
upon Ps. 142. verse. 2. Enter not into judgment -- where he brings in the
presumptuous justifiers of themselves, saying; Aug. in Ps. 142. Jejunavimus,
and non vidisti; fecimus quod jussisti, quare non reddis quod promisesti -- ut
accipias quod promisi, ego dediut faceres --
We have fasted and thou see not -- we have done, what thou have commanded,
why do thou not render what thou have promised? To such (says he) God will
answer, that thou may receive what I promised, I gave unto thee to do.
Finally the Prophet speaks to such proud ones, etc. If therefore man may so
plead, render what thou have promised, for we have done what thou have
commanded, it must be with such corrections; We have done what thou command,
what thou graciously do require of us, and accept as condition of obtaining
what thou have bountifully promised: We have done, but what was our duty
antecedently to thy gracious promise; done what thou might have required of
us without such reward: done what thou did help and enable us to do: and done
it but imperfectly, so that it needs thy merciful acceptance: and still we
need to say, Testimonies of Fathers a against Romish Merit.
Enter not into judgment with thy servants, O Lord.

Romish Merit. First we allege their sayings, whereby they plainly deny Merit,
or that we are worthy. And here we must observe (as to the sense of those
words, Those that deny Merit and Worthiness in us.
Merit, and Worthy, in this Controversy) a great difference between those
sayings of the Fathers, which barely affirm our Merits or Worthiness, and those
which deny the same: I say a great difference between the force of the one and of
the other; For when they affirm, they speak according to the remiss sense of
Merits, put for good works obtaining eternal life: and do mean such a
worthiness that consists by divine acceptance; but when they deny either, they
speak punctually to the exclusion of that worth and merit, which the Church of
Rome would establish in the Works themselves, Bern. de dedicat. eccl. ser. 5.
-- dignatione divina, non dignitate nostra -- Nec dignatio locum habet, ubi
fuerit prasumptio dignitatis.
as answerable to the reward; Thus Bernard, We are so by divine dignation, not
by our own worth ordignity: and a little after he says, Divine dignation has
no place, where there has been a presumption or conceit of self-dignity: Thus
when they are upon the negative, they speak punctually and distinctly of merit
and worth, as concerned in this Controversy. St. Basil speaks home, Basil in
Ps. 114. -- (...) --
Eternal rest, says he, remains for them that have striven lawfully in this
life; not rendered, according to Debt, unto their works: but given according to
the grace of a bountiful God. He speaks it with reverence to those words of the
Apostle, Henceforth a Crown is laid up for me, 2 Timothy 4. and a distinction
borrowed from the same Apostle, Romans 4.4. of grace, or of debt: and so cuts out
all the core of pretended Merit, which the Romanists would fix in the former
place of 2 Timothy 4. Bell. l. 5. de In^^^f. c. 6.
The Cardinal cites this Testimony of St. Basil, as objected by Protestants,
and shuffles pitifully in his replies to it: First leaving out the word ((...),
according to grace, he repeats the word (...), Debt in the second place: and
makes St. Basil speak thus, rendered not according to the Debt of their works,
but according to the debt of a bountiful God, meaning, it is not rendered
according to absolute debt or right: but according to the debt of Bounty. This
exception of absolute right or debt is one of their general answers; But the
Cardinal has this gift as to choose the worst translation, so to follow the
worst copy, for the Paris edition has (...), and the necessary consequence of
the words would infer it, beside the reserence it had plainly to Romans 4.4. from
whence it was borrowed: And the Cardinal might have bethought himself, what
good sense he could make of his repeating the word debt in the reddition,
saying, the debt of a bountiful God -- which surely cannot reasonably be said
by the Assertors of Merit. But to show, he could yet speak more against sense
and reason, Merita quae sunt homini a se, and suis viribus. Bell. ibid.
he adds a second reply: that St. Basil excludes only Merits, which man may
have from himself and his own strength. This is their other usual exception to
the Testimonies of Fathers denying Merit, that is say they, only such merits as
are pretended to before Grace, such as are of our selves and own strength; but
how impertinently is this replied here to St. Basil, who most plainly speaks of
their reward and works that have fought a good fight? Aug. in Ps 70. con. 2.
Coronabit dona sua, non m^rita tua.
St. Aug. we hear often denying Merit. When the reward, says he, shall come,
He will crown his own gifts, not thy Merits. And above we had him speaking to
Romans 6. ult. we are brought to eternal life, not for our merits, but through
his mercy: and elsewhere, Aug. Tract. 3. in Jo. Non pro merito quidem accipies
vitam aeternam, sed progratia.
Thou shall receive eternal life, not through thy Merits, but the Grace of God!
The two former places of Aug. the Cardinal sets down, and replies according to
their usual exception: that he speaks against Merits before or without Grace.
It is most true, that St. Aug. in his Controversy with the Pelagians does very
often speak against such Merits, and that all those sayings of the Father are
misapplied in this Controversy of Merit of good Works: but it is as true,
that he often calls good works Merits, (Merits after grace) and of those he
denies Merit in a proper sense, when he denies, not only the first grace to be
given for our Merits; but eternal life also, and says, that when the Lord
gives it, he crowns not our merits but his own gifts: i.e. our good works, not
upon the account of Merit, but of his free gift and bounty. That place which
the Cardinal brings out of St. Aug. to countenance his impertinent reply,
affords enough to confute it. What have thou (says that Father there) which
thou have not received? Aug. Ep. 105. ad Sixtum. Quid habes quod non accepisti?
quapropter, O homo, si accepturus es vitam aeternam, justitiae quidem
stipendium est, sed tibi gratiae est, cui gratiaest ipsa justitia.
(this indeed excludes all Merit before the first receiving of grace, but he
goes on to the receiving of life eternal) wherefore, O Man, if thou shall
receive eternal life, it is the stipend indeed or reward of righteousness,
(because righteousness or holiness of life is appointed as the condition of
obtaining it) but to thee it is grace (or the gift of God) to whom also
righteousness (or power of weldoing) is grace, and of the gift of God. And a
little after he adds, Nunc ergo de plenitudine ejus accepimus non solum
gratiam, qua just in laboribus usque ad finem vivimus; sed and gratiam pro hac
gratia, ut in requie postea sine fine vivamus. ibid.
Now therefore we receive of his sulness not only grace, by which we live
justly in our labors and endeavors to the end, but also grace for that grace,
that we may for ever hereafter live in rest. Here is excluded plainly, not only
Merit before grace, but afterward, and not only the first grace is here called
grace; but eternal life alfo is called grace, and Merit every where excluded,
because the righteousness, which carries the reward, is not of our selves but
of grace, and Gods free gift: as also the reward is of his free bounty and
promise. In like manner, when he says, Aug. Ep. 105. Cum Deus coronat merita
nostra, nihil aliud corona^ qud^^ muaera sua.
God crowns his own gifts, not our Merits, or as he says in the same Epistle,
God, when he crowns our Merits (our good Deeds) crowns nothing else but his own
gifts: in saying so, he plainly excludes Merit after grace, Merit I say
properly taken.

To the like places out of Prosper ( de vocat Gent. c. 17.) out of Greg. (on
the seventh penit. Psalm, above cited) and out of Bernard, ( de annunc. Sermon.
1.) all denying Merit: the Cardinal has nothing to oppose but his usual
impertinency, of Merits before, or without Grace; whereas they all speak of
giving (not the first grace, but) the reward of eternal life.

Testimonies affirming our continual need of mercy and indulgence.
That the best need mercy and forgiveness, and that our righteousness stands
chiefly in Gods mercifulness and indulgence; and therefore our need of mercy
excludes the plea of merit. St. Aug. upon Ps. 142. Enter not into judgment --
and answer me in thy Righteousness -- says thus: Aug. in Psalm. 142. In tua
justitia non in mea, ad me enim cum respicio nihil aliud meum quam peccatum
invenio.
In thy righteousness, not in mine: for when I look back upon my self, I find
nothing mine but sin. He that begs so cannot plead Merit. We had occasion in
the former Sect. to allege what St. Aug. in his 19. Book, de Civit. Dei,
speaks of the imperfection of our own righteousness in this life: the same is
forcible to exclude our plea of Merit. Such, says he there, Ang. de Civ. Dei.
l. 19. c 27. ut potius peccatorum remissione constet quam petfectione virtutum.
is our righteousness in this life, that it stands in the remission of sins
rather, then in the perfection of virtues. And in the same chapt. he shows,
such necessity incumbent on us in this mortal and bodily condition, that one
thing, -- ut a D^o petatur venia delictoum.
wherein man's righteousness stands, is to beg of God pardon of his offenses and
failings; and this, he says, the Lords Prayer witnesses, which teaches us
daily to beg, forgive. To this purpose that of Ambr. in Exhort. prope finem.
Vnde mihi tantum meriti, cui indulgentia pro Corona est?
St. Ambr. in his exhort. to Virginity. Whence have I so great merit, to whom
Indulgence is in stead of a Crown? and upon Ps. 118. in reference to those
words, thy tender mercies, and thy judgments, in the 156. Ambr. in Ps. 118.
contione 20. -- quis enim mostrum sine divina potest miseratione subsistere?
verse. The Lord (says he) tempers his judgment with mercy: for which of us can
subsist without the divine mercy and indulgence? And a little after concludes,
the process of divine Judgment is made, Non ergo secundum merita mostra, sed
misericordiam Dei --
not according to our Merits but Gods Mercy.

St. Hilary upon the beginning of the 31. Ps. (or as with us, the 32.) where
the Psalmist places righteousness in the forgiveness or not imputing of sin:
Hill. in Ps. 31. Opera justitiae non sufficient ad beati^ud. nisi misericordia
Dei -- non reputet vitia.
says thus, The works of righteousness will not be sufficient for a desert or
Merit (or obtaining) of that bliss, Greg. mor. 9. c. 14. -- ad vitam non ex
meritis, sed ex venia --
unless that the mercy of God -- do not impute our faults.

Greg. the great, says thus in his Comments on Job, If I grow up to the work
of virtue, I come to life, not by my merits, but by his pardon and indulgence:
To these sayings of Hilary and Gregory, the Cardinal answers, by their needing
of the remission of Venial sins: as if the several acknowledgments of these and
other Fathers, yea of the Ps. 143.2.
Psalmist too, did but imply, they complained only of some venial sins; and
stood in need only of mercy for them. Experience may sufficiently convince such
conceit of vanity and presumption. Bern. de Annunc. ser. 1.
Holy Bernard in one Sermon gives many reasons against the presumption of
Merits, and alleges the example of the Psalmist, Who (says he) is better
then the Prophet? (that is, could better plead merit and righteousness) yet he
held it necessary to say, Enter not into judgment with thy servant.

Testimonies affirming our Duty to the excluding of Merit.
is of such as speak our Duty in doing all we can: conformably to that of our
Savior Luc. 17.10. Say, unprofitable servants: we have done that which was our
duty to do. The Romanists think to elude this Scripture, by saying: Though we
be unprofitable to God, yet we may be profitable to our selves, gaining
everlasting life by our good works -- This is true, but its one thing to gain
or obtain so great profit, as eternal life by good works, another thing to
merit it by doing them: and if our being unprofitable to God will not overthrow
the Romish Merit, yet our duty to do all we can will do it. Indeed unto Merit
taken in the most strict sense according to absolute right and debt, it is
required that a man bring profit and advantage to the person, of whom he
challenges any thing by such Merit: but because the Romanists will say there is
not such Merit between God and Man, therefore the force of the Argument rests
upon the Duty -- which silences all plea of such Merit they contend for: Merit
truly so called.

St. Aug. thus, O the great goodness of God! Aug. Sermon. 3. de verb. Domini --
Cui cum pro condition reddere debeamus obsequia -- ut mancipia redemptori --
to whom though we ought by reason of our Creation to return all service and
obedience, as servants to our Lord, as bond-servants to our Redeemer: he makes
us promises of rewards as to friends.

Bernard in his Sermon of the fourfold Debt, shows (as the Bell. de Justific. l.
5. c. 14. sect. Tertia.
Cardinal acknowledges) that all our good works are so due to God, that he
might exact them, although he would give no reward: Bern. de quadrup. debito.
Creator tuus est, tu Creatura, tu servus, ille Dominus, ille Figulus ^u
figmen^um, Totum ergo quod es, illi debe^ --
He is thy Creator (says Bernard) thou his Creature: thou art a servant, He
thy Lord: He the Potter, thou his workmanship: therefore all that thou art,
thou owe to him, of whom thou have all.

Theophyl. says, Theophyl. in Luc. 17.9. (...).
A servant that does not his work, is worthy of stripes, but when he has done
his work, let him be content that he has escaped stripes: that is, if reward
come for so doing, let him account and receive it as of mere bounty; for it
follows in Theophyl. Therefore that servant ought not to exspect honor or
reward as necessarily following, or as due (as he might, if he truly merited)
for it is of his Lords liberality and bounty, to give him, yea rather frankly
to bestow any thing upon him; where we may observe he did not think it enough
to say ((...)) give him, but adds (...), freely bestow on him; the better to
express the undeserved bounty of God, so rewarding man for doing what was his
duty to do.

Bernard gives a good reason against our Meriting, Bern. de Annun. ser. 1.
because all our Merits are Gods gifts (that St Aug. said often) but he adds,
and for them man is a debtor to God. So far are Gods gifts of Grace from being
the ground of Merit (as the Romanists pretend) that they take from it by
increasing our Duty and Debt.

Testimonies affirming the Improportion of our works to the reward.
our sufferings or doings not to be compared with the Reward in any
proportionable measure: and herein they have the Apostle going before them.
Romans 8.18. 2 Cor. 4.17.

St. Ambrose thus; What can we do worthy of those Celestial rewards? Ambr. in
Ps. 118. conc. 20. Quid possumus praemiis dignum facere coelestibus?
which has so much the more force in it, if we consider what goes before, and
what follows after it. He had said before; God tempers his judgment with mercy,
and none of us can subsist without the divine indulgence: then immediately
after alleging that of the Apostle Romans 8.18. he concludes, Therefore the
execution of the heavenly decrees proceeds not according to our Merits but the
mercy of God. Something of this, we had above in the second rank of Arguments,
Nu. 6.

Greg. the first, upon the seventh penit. Psalm, having said, God renders
according to works, Greg. in Psalm. 142. Illi namque beatae vitae, in qua cum
Deo and de Deo vivitur, nullus labor aequari potest, nulla opera comparari,
presertim cum Apostolus --
not for our works (which saying was made use of above) he adds immediately as
a reason; For unto that blessed life, in which we live with God, and of God, no
labor can be equal, no endeavor or doings compared with it, especially seeing
the Apostle says, The sufferings of this life are not worthy -- Romans 8.18.

Anselm says, If a man should serve God most fervently for the space of a
thousand years, Amselm. de mensur. Crucis prope medium -- Non mereretur ex
condigno, dimidiam diem esse in regne coelorum.
he would not merit condignly to be half a day in the kingdom of heaven; so
great a disproportion did he conceive there was between our performances and
the heavenly reward.

Lastly, Bernard, on the Canticles: It may suffice for Merit to know, Bern. in
Cant. Sermon. 68. Sufficit ad meritum scire quod non sufficiant Merita.
that our Merits are not sufficient: for such a reward and bliss: besides many
other sayings he has in those Sermons to beat down Merit; as also in his
Sermons on the Annunciation (the place above cited Nu. 6.) where among other
Reasons that may be gathered, this from the improportion of our good works to
so great a glory is one.

The whole School agrees in this, that to merit is an act of justice; and
justice always requires an equality between the things, which are awarded one
for the other; as between the price, and the thing bought; between the offense
and the punishment, between the work and the reward; And though the Assertors
of merit as it stands between God and man, cannot find the Reason of Justice
either commutative or distributive properly between them: Dur. l. 2. did. 27.
qu. 2. nu. 6
yet Durand holds them to it, if they will have good works condignly
meritorious of eternal life in proper speech and sense, they must find such an
equality and proportion between Man's service and Gods reward, as Justice in a
proper sense requires. To make up some proportion between them, it was Aquinas
his invention, (and is held to by all the Assertors of Merit, for they have no
better defense then to say) Good works are proportionable to eternal life,
Quatenus a spiritu San cto fiunt.
in as much as they proceed, or are done by the Holy Ghost.

But this could not blind Durands eyes, Dur. quo supra nu. 8, 9.
who answers it with good reason. The force of that invention he thus puts by
way of objection or Doubt: The grace of Gods Spirit which we have, Etsi non
actu, est tamen aequalis ^n virtute -- Seminarium quoddam gloriae; Semen autem
in virtute est tota Arbor.
is equal to glory though not in act, yet in virtue: because it is a kind of
Seminary of glory; Now the Seed of a Tree, is in virtue the whole Tree; Which
was the reasoning of Mr. Spencer above in Chap. V. nu. 4. Durand answers first
to that of their proceeding from the Spirit of God: An Agent, says he, Agens
non perficit passum secundum seipsum sed secundum aliquid immissum --
does not perfect the patient according to it self or its own perfection, but
according to that which is put into or impressed, and formally exists in the
act or the power of the subject: that is, although the Holy Ghost be of
infinite perfection, yet the grace or gift infused or impressed is finite and
imperfect in it self: Indeed the Master of the School who did not distinguish
the gift of Charity from the Holy Ghost it self, (could he have made it good)
might have stood upon the extraordinary perfection of that Gift; But all that
followed him quitted that erroneous opinion: and the Assertors of Merit, not
able to defend that opinion, can as little defend the answerable proportion,
they say good works have to eternal life, because they proceed from the Holy
Ghost: Durand adds another reason to confute them; because the Holy Ghost Movet
ad actus, qui non sunt meritorii. ibid.
moves to acts which are not meritorious, as the prophesying of Balaam, and
Saul; So the many gifts which St. Paul speaks of 1 Cor. 12. were all from the
Holy Ghost; though such as the School calls Graces given gratis, Gratia gratis
datae.
or not to the purpose of justification or Merit: yet all proceeding from the
same Spirit.

truly so called. Concessions
The Council * of Trent thus: Eternal life is to be propounded to them that do
well, Sess. 6. c. 16. -- tanquam Gratia filiis misericorditer promissa, and
tanquam Merces ex ipsius Dei promissione fideliter reddenda --
both as a Grace mercifully promised through Jesus Christ to children, and as a
reward faithfully to be rendered through the promise of God to their good Works
and Merits. If they would hold here, there would be no further Controversy;
and if they will give cause still for exception, by adding for all this, that
good works do truly merit, yet is that decree of the Council enough to refute
it. -- tanquam Caput in membra, jugiter virtutem influit -- Semper antecedit
and comitatur and subsequitur --

-- Grata and meritoria -- and Vere promeruisse --


Moreover, in the same Chapter the Council affirms, Christ infuses virtue
continually into Persons justified, as the Head into the Members: which virtue
always precedes, and accompanies and follows their good works: and without
which they could not be acceptable to God. This is good: but inconsistent with
that which follows: and meritorious -- and that such do truly merit eternal
life -- for therefore those works (though acceptable to God) cannot be also
meritorious because they are so from his free grace.

The Cardinal, Bell. l. 5. de Just. c. 16, 17, 18.
that stoutly takes upon him to maintain (against so many honest Schoolmen and
Writers, (that went before him) That good works are Condignly and truly
meritorious, not only by reason of the promise of God, but by reason of their
own worth: and that God is made Debtor to us not only by his promise but by our
work: He I say, had before granted enough to overthrow such bold Assertions.
Bell. l. 5. de Justif. c. 12.
For he proves a man must be received into the state of Adoption before he can
Merit, and that is an Act of free Grace, also that life eternal is due to such
children as an Inheritance: which Title overthrows the other pretended Title of
Merit; For albeit Almighty God has freely prepared the heavenly inheritance,
yet he will have us do something for it; upon the doing whereof we may expect
and shall obtain what he has so freely prepared and faithfully promised:
without challenging it by the Title of Merit.

Furthermore, He tells us, Bell. c. 14.
the Doctor (whom Pius V. condemned, and of whom we spoke at the beginning of
this Sect.) -- meritoria ex sua natura --
held that good works were of themselves meritorious, so that a Convention or
free promise was not requisite for this, -- gratuita promissio ad hoc, ut ex
justitia debeatur --
that the reward of eternal life should be in justice due to good works. Now
albeit what this Doctor asserted, was most false, yet does it plainly follow
upon the Romish Doctrine of truly meritorious: which the Doctor saw plainly
must be deserted, or this must be maintained: he saw plainly, that if good
works were truly meritorious, they would be so whether there were promise made
or no (for as I noted above, The promise makes not for the merit of the work,
but for the consecution or obtaining of the reward) also he saw, that if
eternal life were by a gracious and free promise, it could not be due to the
work of Justice.

Lastly, the Cardinal in the same place acknowledges, Bell. l. 5. de Just. c.
14. sect. Tertia -- Omnes condition servi and Mancipia Dei -- -- operibus
nostris alioqui debitis --
We are all by our Creation servants, yea bond servants of God: and that there
cannot be justice between us and God: unless he had been pleased of himself by
a free Convention to appoint a reward to our works, which were otherwise due.
Due antecedently to all promise, due from our being and Creation: and if all
the justice that can be found 'twixt God Almighty and us men, be in regard of
his promise only, as indeed it is, it cannot be in regard of any obligation the
work it self casts upon God, to make him our Debtor, as the Cardinal above did
not fear to assert.

Truth, and the Conviction of Gods free and bountiful dealing with man, extorts
such Concessions from them, as do sufficiently contradict their bold
Assertions, and might put end to the Controversy, if some unjustifiable ends
did not still engage them.

SECT. VI. Of Purgatory.
What Purgatory is?
and that for Souls of just Persons, departed out of this life, is plain by the
Sess. 6. Can. 30.
Council of Trent: and by the Reason or ground of it according to the Romish
conceit; because it is for those, to whom the sin and the eternal punishment is
forgiven, but the temporal not fully satisfied by them here, and therefore must
be paid or born hereafter. This appeared above, chap. VI. nu. 1.5.6.

The Cardinal is bold to affirm, Bell. li. 1. de Purgat. c. 15.
that Purgatory is an Article of the Catholic faith, and may be proved all the
four ways, that points of Faith use to be proved by, viz. by express Testimony
of Scripture, with the Declaration of the Church; So is the Consubstantiality
of the Son with the Father proved; or by evident deduction from that which is
express in Scripture; So is the Article of two Wills in Christ proved, etc. and
so is Purgatory proved, says the Cardinal: and he boasts that he has so proved
it, by giving us many places of Scripture mistaken, as to that sense, and many
sayings of Fathers misapplied, as to that purpose; which will appear upon the
Trial following.

It will appear, that this Doctrine of Purgatory is not Catholic, but the
invention of later Times: taking Rise from that which St. Aug. hinted, as
probable, touching pains after death: and then having an Advancement by
fabulous reports of Visions and deluding apparitions in St. Gregory's time and
after; at last receiving a Definition and establishment in the Church of Rome.
And for the countenancing of it, They force many places of Scripture, and
whatever they find in the Fathers, concerning prayer for the Dead, or touching
a purging Fire; though spoken to other purpose: doing therein as those
Heretics of whom St. Hilary said that they drew Scripture to that, -- ad id
quod praesumpserunt credendum.
which they had of themselves presumed, or before conceived to be proposed and
held as matter of Belief.

For better proceeding: We will reduce all to these Heads. The Place or state
of Souls after death: The Prayers that were made for the Dead: The Remission of
sins after death. The pains or punishment after death. What the Romanists bring
from Scripture or Fathers touching any of these, we shall meet with. As for the
Texts of Scripture alleged by them, we may say this in General: They have no
consent of Fathers for such a sense as they would fasten upon the Texts they
cite in behalf of Purgatory.

Place or state of souls departed; Of the Place or state of Souls departed.
Scriptures alleged by the Romanists.
There are two Scriptures especially which they allege for such a place of
Souls, as they fancy Purgatory to be. The one is Zach. 9.11. I have sent
forth thy prisoners out of the Pit, where no water is: which text in the first
and immediate sense speaks the deliverance of that people out of the Babylonish
captivity: but is by many of the Ancients applied to our Saviors bringing
forth the Souls of the Fathers of the old Testament out of their Receptacle or
Limbus. And the Cardinal acknowledges, Bell. l. 1. de Purgat. c. 3. Non est aqua
Con^ solationis.
it has been usually taken in that sense, but thinks it as proper for
Purgatory, and the rather because in this there is not the Water of
consolation, as there was in the other; And this is to be noted here, because
we shall find the Cardinal below put to devise how prayers for the Dead, made
by the Ancient Church for those that rested in peace, Bell. l. 2. de Purgat. c.
4. -- admixtam cum cruciatibus incredibilem consolationem, propter certam spem
salutis.
could concern Souls in purgatory, that is in Torment, and cannot invent any
expedient for it, but by referring that rest and peace to the Comfort and
satisfaction they have there together with their Torment, by reason of their
hope, and assurance of coming out of those pains into eternal bliss. That which
the Cardinal, for proof of his interpreting that text of Zach. in behalf of
Purgatory, fastens upon St. August. is not that Fathers expression or
intention, but the Cardinals misapplication. St. August. in the places cited by
the Cardinal Epist. 49. ad Euod. and lib. 12. in Genes. c. 33. speaks of our
Saviors descending into Hell, and delivering some that were there; but i. e.
in Purgatorio, is the Cardinals addition.

The other Text is Mat. 5.25. where we read of a prison and a payment to be
made there, but what proof is there more then a strong fancy, that this must
signify Purgatory? The Cardinal indeed alleges some Fathers, using those
words of our Savior as a Commination against Sinners, but that they should
thereby intend a Romish Purgatory is still the Cardinals misapplication. One
and the chief of those Fathers cited by him, is St. Cyprian in his Epist. 52.
ad Antonian. where He plainly, as we shall see below, applies that of the
prison, and the paying of the utmost farthing, to the Severity of Ecclesiastic
Pennances and Satisfactions, under which the Lapsi, or those that fell in time
of persecution, were held. Now when the Fathers give any direct interpretation
of that place, they either restrain it to the literal, as it inforces concord
and agreement between man and man: or take it in the parabolical sense as
appliable to our agreement and reconciliation to God, for want or neglect of
which the prison of Hell and eternal sufferings there will follow. St.
Chrysostom and some others are content with the first way, Aug. 1. qu. ad
Dulcitium; and elsewhere.
St. Aug. and others apply it in the Parabolical sense: not to any place or
pains of Purgatory, but to Hell and the pains never ceasing. To this their own
Authors consent. Maldonat on the place expounds it of Hell and eternal
punishment; so Jansenius. and others. Jans. concord. c. 40.
Salmeron seems indifferent, first setting down that Interpretation of the
eternal punishment, and acknowledging Aquinas and others so to take it; but
thinking it appliable also to Purgatory, cites the very same Fathers, which we
said above, were cited by the Cardinal and misapplied as to this belief of
Purgatory.

The opinion of the Fathers incounstent with Purgatory.
between the Day of Death, and of the Resurrection: We shall find it
inconsistent with Romish Purgatory; as may appear by the Particulars following.

I. They held but two stares, places or Receptacles of Souls, the one of pain
and grief, the other of rest and bliss; There is scarce any Father, but
concludes this from the Parable or story of Dives and Lazarus, Luc. 16. the one
going to Hell, the other to Abraham's bosom. I need not cite the places, which
are obvious to every one that looks into their Writings.

II. They did not agree about the particular place of the Souls of Just
persons: which difference among the Ancients, shows plainly that this place of
Purgatory was not then known. Iren. l. 5. ^. 31.
St. Irenaeus and many that followed him, held they were all kept in a secret
Receptacle below or out of Heaven and sight of God till the resurrection; which
place was also called by them Hades, or an Invisible place; and sometimes
Abraham's bosom: This condition of Souls, Legem mortuorum servavit --
Irenaeus calls Legem mortuorum, the Law of the Dead: and says, as our Savior
observed it, not ascending to his Father till after his Resurrection, so must
all his Disciples: and gives this Reason for it, Because the disciple is not
greater then his Master. Of this common Receptacle of Souls till the
Resurrection speaks Lactantius in his 7. Book, and chap. 21. Tert. l. de Anima
c. 7. and cap 55. and contra Marc. l. 4. c. 34.
Also Tertullian in several places: only he seems to allow Martyrs this
prerogative to enter Heaven upon their death, as in his Book d^ Anima c. 55.
and in his Book of the Resurrection, c. 43. This was one opinion of the
Ancients, and held by many; But others conceived the Souls of Just persons were
admitted into Heavenly bliss and a sight of God: whom Irenaeus notes in the
first words of the chap. above cited: Quidam ex his qui recte putantur
credidisse, transgrediuntur ordinem promotionis Justorum.
Some (says he) of those, that are thought to believe aright, do transgress
the order or degr^^s of the promotion of the Just, viz. by admitting them (as
he conceived) too ha^^ily into Heaven: Of this Judgment was Cyprian and
generally the Fathers after him: as we shall see presently. Now as the former
opinion that kept Souls out of Heaven till the Resurrection could not stand
with the doctrine of Invocation (as we noted above in the II. Sect.) so this
diversity of judgment touching the place of Souls after death could not consist
with a belief of Purgatory.

III. Although the Ancients were not agreed upon the particular place, or
degree of bliss: yet all held the place and condition, in which they put the
Souls of Just persons, to be a place of rest and refreshment, and a blessed
condition. This is manifest; because they set it out by the place of Lazarus:
also because the Prayers which the Church anciently made for the Dead, were
still pro quiescentibus, for them that were at Rest, as we shall see below; And
St. Aug. (whom I specially name, because he first stumbled on a conceit tending
to Purgatory) does often speak of the secret Receptacle of good Souls as at
rest: sometimes with distinction from that place where they shall be after the
resurrection (as in his Confessions, l. 9. c. 3, and of the City of God, l. 12.
c. 9.) sometimes in opposition to that other receptacle or place of pain and
grief, as in his Enchirid. c. 107. and in his second quest. to Dulcitius. But
we shall have occasion below to show that St. Aug. was not at any certainty, as
to this point of Purgatory.

Souls of the Just go pres^ntly to bliss.
did suppose (and so expressed it) that they went thither presently after
Death, without any diversion to, or detention in any place of pain and torment.

The Author of the Questions in Justin Martyr thus: Quest. ad O^thod. ^5. (...).
After their going out of the body, there is presently made a difference
between the Souls of the just and the wicked: for they are both carried to
places worthy of them: What are those places? The Souls of the Just (says he)
into Paradise; but the wicked into the Regions of Hell. St. Cyprian in his Book
of Mortality, Cypr. l. de mortalitate. -- Possessio Paradisi -- in Patriam
regredi -- ad Christum ire -- and cum Christo inciper^ regnare.
giving comfort against the sickness that swept away many Christians, as well
as other, uses these Reasons: Because good Christians by death are put into
possession of Paradise: they do return into their own Country after their
peregrination in this life: they then go to Christ, begin to reign with Christ:
It is for him to fear death, that is not willing to go to Christ, and that
believes not, he shall then begin to reign with Christ. -- de turbinibus mundi
extracti --
And when the servants of God are drawn out of the storms of this world, they
gain the haven of and eternal mansion and security, ^^tranquillam quietem --
Justi vocantur ad refrigerium, i^justi ad supplicium.
and have an undisturbedrest; and at death, the Just are calle^ to a
refreshment, the unjust to punishment. All this to comfort Christians against
death by their present removal to a blessed condition: And none of these can be
said of them that go to Purgatory; for that is not to take possession of, or
enter into Paradise: that is not the Country which the faithful seek: not a
reigning with Christ: not the Mansion of Rest, or Port of eternal security, and
undisturbed quietness. And these several expressions of this Father may assure
us, that the place so much urged by the Romanist for a semblance of Purgatory,
must have another meaning, then that they would put upon it. Cypr. ^p. 52. ad
Antonian.
The place is this: It is one thing to stand (as a Penitent) for pardon,
another thing to come to glory: One thing to be cast into prison, Aliud est ad
veniam sta^ re --
and not come thence till the utmost farthing be paid, a not her thing
presently to receive the reward of their faith and virtue: -- pro peccatis
longo d^lore ^^uciatu^ emunderi, and purgari diu igne -- pendere in die judicii
ad sententiam Domini.
One thing to be cleansed by suffering a long grief for sins, and to be purged
a great while by fire, another thing to have all a man's sins purged away by the
passion of Martyrdom. One thing with suspense to expect the sentence of the
Lord in the day of judgment, another thing to be presently crowned of the Lord.
The objectors of this place, were they not so ready to fancy a Purgatory
meant, where ever they find mention made of a Prison, or last Farthing, or
Fire, might easily see those phrases and expressions to be used with reference
to the severity of Ecclesiastical satisfactions and penance, to which they
that fell (the Lapsi) either by Adultery, or renouncing through fear the
Christian Faith, were put to: The occasion upon which he spoke it, was an
objection made against the receiving of those, that fell in time of
persecution: that if such savor were shown them, and Ecclesiastical
discipline let loose, we should have no Confessors or Martyrs. He answers, Nam
and Maechis a nobis poenitentiae tempus conceditur, and pax datur, Non tamen,
ideirco virginitas in Ecclesia desicit.
We give peace to Adulterer's after their time of penance fulfilled: and yet
Virginity fails not in the Church, but flourishes: then follows that place as
affording reason for their receiving of penitents, from the severity they are
put to, and the great difference between their Condition, and the happiness of
those that have continued constant or proved Confessors and martyrs; And
therefore he expresses that severity, with which the Lapsi were handled, in a
reference to the Martyrs sufferings and privilege: That they stood long
desiring pardon; before they could be restored to former state: that they were
as Men held in prison, till they made full satisfaction; that they were put to
a great Torment, in the shame and grief of their penance, and the anxious
solicitude of obtaining what they desired: And lastly, as to the Sentence and
Judgment of the Lord, there is a great difference between them and the
Confessors, or other Just persons, who without suspense and such solicitude
expect the sensence of the Lord: for that, Pendere ad sententiam Domini, is
spoken either of the Time, while they are under Ecclesiastical Censures, during
which time they continue in great perplexity and suspense, as to the sentence
of the Lord, till they be reconciled to the Church: which often was deferred to
the time of their Death: or else it is spoken in relation to a more severe
scrutiny and examination, which they shall undergo at their appearing before
the Lord; and not have that ready admittance, which Confessors and other Just
persons that needed not their repentance shall find, being admitted without
delay readily, Sine cunctatione --
as St. Cyprian speaks of them, or without judgment to grace and favor, Sine
judicio ad gra^iam.
as Ambr. on the first Psalm. verse. 5. whereas the other shall be held under a
scrutiny, examination, an opening of their failing and denials: -- quis pudor
quae consusio?
what shame then and confusion of face (says St. Ambrose there) when all shall
be laid open, or when taken in that, which thou taughtest others should not do?
Thus sometimes some Fathers speak of those, that dye in a salvable condition,
through faith and repentance though late: as distinguishable from those that
died Martyrs, or having repented betimes, had lived long in a constant course
of Christian profession, and careful performance of righteousness. St. Ambrose
thus: Ambr. de bono Mortis c. 12.
When that day comes (the day of death) they go to their Redeemer, to the
bosom of Abraham: yet ibid. c. 10.
elsewhere he seems to defer it to the Resurrection, according to the first
opinion of the Ancients delivered above: Unless we take that going to Abraham's
bosom generally, for a state of blessed Rest: and be that where it will,
either below or in Heaven, yet their going thither presently upon death,
excludes Purgatory.

Dionysius in his Eccles. Dionys. Eccl. Hier. c. 7. part 3. (...).
Hierarchy speaking of those that dye in the Lord, transmits them presently to
a Christ-like Rest. Nazianzen in the death of his brother Caesarius toward the
end of his oracio^, says, Every good soul loosed of the body, Nazien in
Epitaphio (...). -- (...) --
goes presently to the state of bliss, which he there describes, such as he
believed ^^s brother was gone to. And which is to be noted, he brings in the
former Assertion thus: I believe the sayings of the wise, Every good soul being
loosed etc. and for the Purgatien, mark the Parenthesis he there puts in, (Eo
quod tenebras effundebat, purgato and deposito: vel quo verbo ca res appellanda
sit. Nazian. ibid.
(that which did cause darkness, being purged, and deposed) which must be by
death or separation from body: or by what word that thing is to be called, I
know not.

Chrysostom. Chrysostom. in Mat homil. 32. (...).
thus: This present life is subject to many sorrows and troubles, but no such
thing, says he, is spoken in Scripture, of the future: but there all grief
flies away; and Chrysostom. ad Philip. Sermon. 3. (...) --
elsewhere speaking of Sinners and Righteous, he says of these, being gone
from hence, they are with Christ face to face -- as the Apostle 2 Cor. 5.7.
says being absent from the body we are present with the Lord, Chrysostom. ad Hebr.
ser. 4.
And in another place, he asks: what mean the Lamps, and Hymns, and Prayers
(viz. at the Funeral of the Dead) but as signs of joy to tell us, The Lord has
crowned him: (...).
and has him with him. And in his 61. hom. in Joan. he says of the righteous
man dying, ((...)) he goes away with the Angels, alluding to Lazarus his Soul
carried by Angels into Abrams Bosom. All this and often thus he speaks of the
Just man, opposed to the Sinner that dies in his sins without Repentance: (for
he usually divides All men into these two sorts.) but such righteous Men the
Church of Rome sends to Purgatory. (...).


Epiphanius, Epiph. Haer. 39. (...).
in the Heresy of the Cathari, shows that after this life ended, the condition
is unalterable, the receptacles sealed up -- the Crowns given -- Not so, if
souls truly penitent go to purgatory for of such souls he speaks there against
the Novatians. Thus much of the Place of Souls.

Prayers for the Dead, infer not Purgatory.
that is, Prayer for the Dead, from which the Romanists would infer Purgatory.
And for Scripture proof they give us 2 Machab. 12.43, a fit foundation for such
an Article of Faith; the book of all the Apocryphals least considerable; which
will easily appear to him that lays together, what the Author himself says of
his own work, in his 2. chap. v. 23, 24, 26. and chap. 15.38, 39. Evidences
enough of a mere humane work, done by the labor of the brain not the
inspiration of the Holy Ghost. St. Aug. indeed sometimes calls these books
Canonical according to the large acception of the African Church: but being put
to answer an argument of the Donatist, grounded upon the Machab.
example of Razis, he much lessens the Authority of them: as not to be compared
with the books of the Law, and Psalms, Aug. contra Gauden l. 2. c 23. -- quibus
Dominus testimonium perhibet tanquam testibus suis. Luc. 24 44. -- recepta non
inutiliter, si sobrie legatur.
and the Prophets; to which (says he) our Lord gives testimony, as to his
Witnesses: But this writing of the Match. is received of the Church not
unprofitably if it be read soberly -- Gregory Bishop of Rome citing a place out
of these Books, Greg. Moral. l. 19. c. 13.
excuses it, because he did it out of Books not Canonical: in Moral. l. 19. c.
13.

Again; he that well considers the place, will easily distinguish between the
Fact of Judas, and the mistaken collection or misapplication of the writer of
that Book. Judas no doubt did piously: for he seeing their Sin or Sacrilege,
as the cause why they were slain: verse. 40. fell to his devotions; prayed and
sent a sin-offering to Jerusalem, v. 42.43. Not for the sin of them that died:
that is the mistake of this Writer; but upon occasion of their sin, to divert
the Wrath from the rest of his Army: as Joshua thought himself concerned, upon
the sin of Achan, Josh. 7.10. Also it is apparent that they died in their sin
(the things they had stolen being found about them) which argues both the
incogitancy of this writer (who verse. 45. supposes they died godly) and the
impertinency of the Romanists, who suppose them in Purgatory, whither they send
none that dye in their sins, but only justified persons.

They also urge 2 Timothy 1.18. for praying for the Dead: whereas that prayer for
Onesiphorus (supposing him dead at that time) has but reference to the Mercy,
which shall be imparted at the last day; to which also the prayers of the
Ancient Church do much refer, and make nothing for Purgatory. And therefore all
the Testimonies they bring out of the Ancient Fathers or Councils for praying
for the Dead are impertinent as to the proving of a Purgatory: there being
other Reasons for such praying; as we shall see. A wilful perverting it is of
that Ancient Practice, to draw it off (as the Church of Rome has done) from the
first intent and purpose, to fasten it upon their conceit of Purgatory pains.
We shall see this better by the trial following.

Other purposes of such Prayers.
give not this of Purgatory, (which had been most obvious and most fit to stop
the mouth of the Adversary, had it been the Doctrine of the Church) but other
Reasons they allege differing from, or inconsistent with Purgatory. This
appears by Epiphanius, who was put to it by Aerius questioning the prayers made
in the Church for the Dead: and by Dionysius in his Hierarchy, who puts himself
to answer the like Questions. In both of them it appears, that the intent of
the Church by those Prayers was mainly this: The instruction of the living and
the confirming of their Hope. See first what Epiphanius says.

He calls this practice a seemly preaching or publishing: Epiph. Har. 75. (...).
of what? of the happy estate and Rest of those that dye in Christ: whereby the
belief of the living was confirmed and their hope raised. What more profitable,
says he, then that the living should believe, -- (...) --
they that are departed are in being, and do live with the Lord. (...) --
And again, There is hope, says he, to them while they pray for their
Brethren, as now in their peregrination or absence: Insinuating that albeit
they are departed or gone from them, yet they shall meet again. Also to show
(...), that which is more perfect: which must refer to the state of the next
life: for, says he, while we are here in the world, we offend often. And
lastly, (...).
because all men do offend and slip in this life more or less, -- (...).
therefore we pray for all even for Patriarchs, etc. to separate Christ from
all other; for he being without sin altogether, is not to be prayed for, but to
be prayed unto, and worshipped These are all the Reasons he gives of their
praying for the Dead: which we see do respect and provide for the instruction
of the Living: and do not imply any such state of the Dead in pain and grief,
as Purgatory supposes, but the Contrary.

Now see we, what the Romanists endeavor to pick out of words; Because he
says, Prayer for the Dead is profitable, (...). Epiph. ibid.
although it cuts not off sins, all or wholly: they infer thence, therefore it
does cut off sin in part. We answer; As Epiphanius does not say that, so
neither could he mean it: For first, we must suppose he would not answer
impertinently to Aerius, who objected, (...) --
If the prayers of the living altogether profit the Dead, then let no man live
Godly, etc. Therefore Epiphanius his (...) must answer to Aerius his (...), and
must be understood of the sins of such persons as Aerius spoke of, such as had
no care of their lives, but left it to their living friends to pray for them
after death. Now if Epiphanius should mean, that prayer did in part cut off
such men's sins, then must he speak according to that merciful opinion, of
mitigating the pains of the Damned by the prayers of the Living; with which
conceit some of the Ancients were tainted: as we shall see below; but this
would be nothing to Purgatory. Secondly, if his meaning had been, (as the
Romanists would have it) that prayer for the Dead did not cut off such men's
sins: but that there was another sort of sinners, whose sins and punishment it
does in part cut off, ( viz such as have not fully satisfied here, but must do
it elsewhere) then would Epiphanius (had he known such Doctrine) have much
forgotten himself, and betrayed the Church in not stopping the mouth of the
Adversary therewith. To conclude; Epiphanius his answer to Aerius must come to
this: Albeit Prayer for the Dead does not (as you misconceive the intent of it)
cut off such men's sins, yet is it for other reasons profitable; for such as
were above recited.

Another thing they object out of Epiphanius his words: that he says, we pray
for sinners, and implore mercy of God for them; but such sinners, say they,
must be in Purgatory. Answ. Epiphanius does not say, we pray for sinners, (...).
but we make mention of the Just, and also of sinners: and of sinners, as
imploring the mercy of God. Again, let the word ((...)) stand, which some
queston as put for ((...)) looking unto or looking at the mercy of God; and let
it sound, as they would have it, an imploring of Gods mercy: and let it have
respect to the forgiveness of the Dead, which yet Epiphanius does not say, but
seems rather to direct it to the instruction of the living, to show, that
forasmuch as we offend all in this world (as above noted) we all need mercy: I
say let all these be granted, it would amount to no more then that which
Dionysius speaks of their praying for the Dead at his carrying forth to burial:
that all his sins committed through humane weakness may be forgiven him,
Dionys. Eccles. Hierar. c. 7. part tertia. (...) --
and he placed in light in the Region of the living, in Abraham's bosom. And now
see what this Author says of that praying for the Dead, suitable to Epiphanius
his account of it.

He there by way of objection puts the Ques^ion: -- (...). Dionys. ibid.
By what prayers of the Bishop or Priest can he (the Dead person) be
transferred into any other seat or state, then he deserves to be in? How
obvious had the Answer of Purgatory been here, had it been known doctrine then?
But nothing is said by him to that purpose: his Reasons (as Epiphan. above)
implying that the intent of such praying was mainly to give hope and
instruction to the living. First, he insinuates, In vain is the benefit of such
prayers expected by those who are careless of the precepts, i. e. who live not
well. Then, that the Bishop or priest in so praying, -- (...),
is the Interpreter or publisher of the Divine judgments: -- (...).
viz. in giving rewards according as men deserve -- and how that? -- (...).
the divine loving kindness in great goodness overlooks their infirmities or
spots and stains of sin contracted by humane weakness. Thus that prayer which
begs all his sins may be forgiven, is doctrine to the living, showing and
assuring them of Gods mercy to them that strive to live well, notwithstanding
through humane weakness they offend often, and cannot be free from all spots
and stains of Sin.

Then in relation as it seems, to the other part of the Prayer, which begged,
that he might be placed in light, etc. this Author adds. The Bishop or Priest
knows such good things are promised, and (...).
therefore prays, that they may come to pass, and be given to them, that have
lived well. Also, He knows that the good things promised will come to pass,
and therefore (...) --
as the Interpreter of Gods will. he shows they will surely be made good to
them that so live and die. This is the very sum of his Answer, which plainly
speaks comfort and instruction to the living. His conclusion is this: Wherefore
the Bishop or Minister prays for those things which are promised of God, and
(...).
are to be rendered and performed; in which (...) -- (...).
he declares both the good disposition of his own mind to God, and to those
that are present, the good things, which shall be to the Saints. So still the
end of those prayers was (as Epiphanius called it (...)) a preaching or
Instruction to the Living that were present.

Now these instructions for the living, and Indications of the will of God, and
their own good disposition, They gave out by way of prayer and wishing, rather
then by bare Assertion of the happy estate of them, that dye in Christ: because
this did not only speak such Truths, but did also witness their compliance of
desire, and signify their affection toward the Deceased, and show their
complacency and congratulation in and for the hapyy estate of the Deceased;
that mutual welwishing, which is between the Members of the same body, the
Church. It was more prompt, as to the expressing of their own affection; and
more profitable as they thought, for the Living, to speak by way of Prayer,
what the departed had, then by bare assertion.

If it be objected, (as it is sometimes by the defenders of Purgatory,) that
the like Prayers were made for the Dead, not only at the departure and Funeral,
but every year afterward; and therefore must suppose them in such a state, or
place wherein they wanted still forgiveness, and light: the things prayed for.
This infeference is inconsequent; for still there may be like intent in the
yearly using those Prayers, as was before expressed; the showing of their hope
of them that were Departed, the instruction of the Living. Bell. lib. 2. de
purgat. c. 5.
But the Cardinal also will furnish us with another Answer; for being put to
clear an objection arising from a prayer in their Mass for the Dead: which runs
thus (Deliver O Lord the Souls of all the faithful departed from the pains of
Hell, from the deep Lake, from the mouth of the Lion --) and seems not to agree
to Souls in purgatory, which they hold are delivered from Hell, and sure of
Heaven; He answers first, That albeit the Souls in Purgatory have received
their first sentence already in their particular Judgment: Etiamsi jam
acceperint primam sententiam in particulart judicio, eaque Sententia liberae
sunt a Gehenna: restat ^amen Generale, in quo secundam accepturi --
and by that sentence are delivered from Hell; yet there is a General Judgment
behind, in which they must receive a second sentence. It is a Truth inde^d and
Catholic Doctrine, that sentence for Mercy or Condemnation is passed both in
the first appearing of the Soul before God at death, and after at the
Resurrection or general Judgment, when the sentence is pronounced openly and
before all the World: and to these, the Prayers made at the Funeral and
afterward, may refer without supposing Purgatory: for this answer of the
Cardinal though he applies it to souls in Purgatory, will fit all faithful
Souls going immediately to bliss. Again, he answers. The Church uses the same
manner of speech (in praying yearly for the Dead) as if their Souls were then
going out of their bodies, or in their passage. So then prayers anciently made
for the Dead year by year, need not suppose their Sou^s were in Purgatory: for
such prayers may have (as the Cardi^al yields) ^o other meaning then they had
at the Obit or Funeral of such persons: which was to accompany them as it were
to Gods Tribunal, and to instruct the Living, by showing them, what they that
dye in Christ have, forgiveness, light, rest, joy.

Thus much for Epiphanius and Dionysius, who on set purpose give us an account
of this practice in the Church: by which we see, Their Prayers as they might be
Petitions for what the Departed were yet to receive, so were they C^lebrations
and Congratulations in regard of what they had received, and in both
instruction to the living for confirming their says and Hope as to the happy
state of those that die in Christ: And by this also is apparent, what was
intended by Offering the sacrifice of the Altar for the Dead, as they used to
speak: No more, then the remembering of them in their prayers there and then
offered up. But more to this purpose in the next point.

Again; The Prayers of the Church for the Dead must in all reason refer to such
a state of the Dead as was then known and taught: which as we saw above, was
inconsistent with Purgatory.

First, It was held by many, that the souls of the faithful were kept in a
secret Receptacle till the Resurrection: and it is probable that this opinion
being so ancient, gave the first beginning to these prayers for the Dead, the
most ancient forms of which begin with a Memento Domine, Remember them Lord,
because they held such souls not yet admitted to Gods presence: and did beg,
that God would give them Refreshment, Refrigerium.
because of that burning desire they have to the time of their Resurrection:
and Light, Lucem.
because they had not yet the heavenly light of the beatifical Vision: This is
that stay or expectation of the resurrection, Mora resurrectionis. Tertul.
which Tertullian speaks of sometimes.

Secondly, It was held by most (as above also was shown) that the Souls of
Just and godly persons, dying in Christ, went to bliss and heavenly happiness:
who at the last day should rise first, and receive their public and final
acquittance, and consummation. And certainly the Ancient Church, in her prayers
for the Dead, had special relation to the Day of Judgment and Resurrection,
finding how much it is referred to in Scripture. 2 Timothy 1.12.18. and cap. 4.8.
and elsewhere.

The Sacrifice of the Altar: or offering of the Eucharist.
which employed first, praise and thanksgiving for all that were departed in the
true Faith of Christ, Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, and all other,
that were at rest in Christ: (...) Quiescentibus in Christo.
This is that offering, pro dormitione, for the sleeping of such, which we meet
with in St. Cyprian, that God had taken such a one out of the worlds troubles,
and given him rest in Christ; Secondly, Supplication by virtue of that once
offered All-sufficient Sacrifice to beg all the mercies and good things
promised; Chrysostom. in fine Hom. 24. in Act.
That they and we may attain to the good things promised, says St. Chrysostom.
and so Dionysius spoke of the prayers made with respect to the good things
promised (as we saw above) such was a joyful resurrection, a final acquittance,
a Consummation in bliss: the mercy to be found in that day, 2 Timothy 1.18 and so
it was pro dormitione, for their sleeping too by way of supplication. For that
phrase of St. Cyprian, cannot imply prayer and supplication properly (for who
can be said properly to pray for the sleeping of such a one, when he is dead?)
but only in regard of the good things which he that sleeps in Christ, shall
receive at his awaking. In the Liturgy going under the the Name of St. James:
thus, Memento Domine omnium -- ab Abel justo -- facito eos requiescere etc.
Remember Lord all the faithful -- from Abel the Just -- Make them to rest in
the Region of the living, in the delights of Paradise, in thy Kingdom -- This
cannot suppose these souls to be in Purgatory, for the Romanists cannot suppose
Abel and the other Patriarchs to be in such a place. So in St. Mark's Liturgy,
for Apostles, Martyrs, Confessors, it is thus prayed: Give them, O Lord, Dona
iis requiem in regno tuo. Memento fa. mulorum -- qui dormi. unt in somn^ pacis.
rest in thy Kingdom; So in the ancient Canon of the Mass: Remember Lord thy
servants, which sleep in the rest of peace. Now as some of the Ancient prayers
mentioned Patriarchs, Apostles, Martyrs: so all of them were made for those
that were at rest in Christ, and could not imply them to be in Purgatory. Nor
is it here implied, that they wholly wanted these things that are prayed for,
but that they might fully and consummately receive and enjoy, what already they
had in part and in some measure.

The Reason of this remembering of the Faithful, Reason of remembering the Dead
in the offering of the Altar or Eucharist.
that are departed, is because all the Faithful Dead and Alive belong to the
same body: and do therefore wish and desire mutually the good, which each other
are capable of: they in bliss interceding for the Church below, and we below
glorifying God for their reception into bliss, and entreating for their
consummation, and the completing of Christ's Kingdom: and this most especially
in the participation of his body and blood; in which all the members of the
Church have their Interest, and by which they receive what they have or shall
have. St. August. speaking of the Kingdom of Christ above and below, says to
this purpose: Aug de Civit. Dei l. 20. c. 9. N^que enim animae Piorum mortuorum
separantur ab Ecclesia quae nunc est ^egnum Christi: Alioqui nec ad Altar D^i
sieret eorum memoria in communicatione corporis Christi.
For neither are the Souls of the godly (which are dead) separated from the
Church, which now is the Kingdom of Christ: Otherwise there would be no
remembrance made of them at the Altar of God in the communication of the body
of Christ.

Thirdly, it was a known Truth, held, and taught in the Church: that Souls
after departure from the body do appear before Gods tribunal and receive their
first and particular judgment: therefore prayers were made for Mercy and
Remission at or in reference to their passage thither: the Living as it were
accompanying them with their prayers, wishes, intercessions; Thus they prayed
at the Burial or carrying out of the Dead: and did it as we saw above, for the
reasons there mentioned, viz. the instruction of the living and confirming of
their hope, and demonstration of their affection, and the like: And upon the
like respects they yearly repeated the like prayers, as we hinted above, out of
the Cardinal, acknowledging as much.

That the Damned had benefit or ease by the Prayers of the Church, a private
opinion or misapplication.
That they which died in their sins without true faith and repentance might at
length be recovered out of their Pains, or at least have them mitigated. And to
these, the Prayers for the Dead, which begged forgiveness, ease or release were
(I do not say referred by the Church, but) applied or rather misapplied by
many. Origin gave occasion first to this Error; for he held that All should at
length come out of their Torments: and his Error was, as Vincentius notes, a
great temptation to the Church, by reason of the wit and parts of the Author,
Aug. Enchirid. cap. III. Frustra quamplurimi aeternam damnatorum poenam
miserantur affectu --
and St. Aug. tells us in several places that many were of this merciful
opinion. Very many, says he, do commiserate through humane affection, the
eternal sufferings of the damned, and do not believe it will be so, etc. Of
these also in other places, especially in his work Of the City of God: l. 21.
c. 17, 18, 19, 20. where he reckons five latitudes in the extent of that
Opinion, refuting them all.

Greg. Nyssen seems to be deeply tainted with that merciful opinion, and is
noted for it by the Greeks in their Apology against the Romish Purgatory made
and given out in the time of the Council of Florence: for that Nyssen in orat.
Deus omnia in ommbus. Idem in orat, le Mor. tu^s. page 1067. Mixtam clementi
sententiam --
Father seems plainly to assert the restoring of all men to salvation: and in
another place speaks of the purging of some, and their turning to God after
death, who were impure in their lives. And that place of St. Hierom upon Isa.
66. ult. which the Cardinal misapplies to Purgatory (for it plainly speaks of
wicked Christians) does show some tincture of that merciful opinion: Now it is
plain that Chrysosto^e applies the Prayers and oblations made for the Dead, to
such sinners; And I should choose rather to silence those errors and mistakes
of some ancient Fathers: did not the importunity of the Romanists force us to
show the misapplication of them to Purgatory: I shall insist therefore in some
passages of St. Chrysostom. Hom. 61. in Jo. Hom. 21. in Act. Sermon. 3. in
Philip.
The sinners he speaks of to be prayed for, are in several Homilies, toward
the End of them, thus set forth by him. One, says he, that daily offended God,
-- (...) --
One that lived every day to his own pleasure. One that died in his riches, and
never used them to the benesit of his soul. -- (...).
One that was ((...)) corrupted and lost: (...)
and of whom he says (Hom. 32. in Mat.) If God had seen he would have changed,
he would not have cut him off before his Repentance: Such as these the
Romanists will not say, that they go to Purgatory but to Hell; yet of these he
says, Let us mourn for such a one; but that avails not: Let us help him as we
can. How is that? (...).
by prayers and alms; -- (...)
those things must be done, which may bring some comfort and ease to him. To
this tenor he speaks in all the places above cited: but especially in Hom. 21.
upon the Acts: Shall we not try (says he of one that lived to himself and the
Devil) to rescue him from the dangers and evils he is encompassed with? --
(...).
for there is a way, if we will, to make his punishment lighter; and this by
making prayer for him, and almsdeeds, and these, says he, so much the more, --
(...).
as he was guilty of the more sins. And this he takes to be doctrine suitable to
the loving kindness of God toward man. (...).
And then a little after he adds, -- (...).
Though we be not virtuous our selves, yet let us get friends that will do this
for us, when we are gone. Then presently follows. -- (...).
Oblations are not in vain, nor Supplications, nor Almsdeeds. All these things
the Spirit has ordained, willing or commanding, that we should help one
another: Then he mentions the Offering of the Eucharist, -- (...).
and says; It is not the Minister simply (or only) that prays so for those
that are fallen asleep in Christ: It is not he only that sends forth that voice,
-- (...).
but the Spirit. He indeed holds the Offering or Sacrifice in his hands, etc.
And so goes on expressing the honor to be then remembered, and the power and
efficacy of Christ's death, then represented.

Where we may observe; that this saying of his, The Spirit has ordained all
these things (which the Romanists do much urge, as if their prayers and
offerings for souls in Purgatory were by an Ordinance of the Spirit) relates to
the help of one another by Prayers, Oblations and Almsdeeds: which in general
is true, so far as we are capable to be helped by them. But if it be
particularly applied to the helping of such sinners as before he had spoken of,
it makes nothing for the Romanists, for they will not allow that the Prayers
and Oblations of the Living do avail or help such as died in their sins; but if
it be applied to the Prayers and Offerings in the Eucharist, as he seems here
to intend it, it makes nothing still for them or against us; for we allow that
Ancient practice of remembering there, and praying as they did for those that
sleep in Christ. The intent and purpose of those prayers he expresses in the
close of his speech, that they and we, says he, -- (...) --
may obtain the good things promised, through the Grace and merciful loving
kindness of our Savior Christ.

A place parallel to the former he has in his third Hom. on the Epist. to the
Philip. where speaking of Prayers and Oblations, with respect to the Dead,
These things, Chrysostom. in Phil. hom. 3. (...).
says he, were not in vain ordained by the Apostles: that a remembrance be
made of those that are dead in the most reverend and holy Mysteries: For when
all the people stand, and the company of Priests with their hands stretched out
toward heaven, and the great sacrifice lies before them, how shall we not them
move and make God propitious, while we pray for them that are departed? Here
again the Romanists triumph, as if St. Chrysostom. made their praying for Souls
in purgatory an Ordinance of the Apostles: whereas he plainly restrains this
Ordinance of the Apostles, as above he did the Ordinance of the Spirit, to that
which the Church did in the Holy Eucharist; and that concerned only them, who
were at rest in Christ: Nothing of Souls in pains and torment is mentioned in
the Ancient Liturgies, or Prayers of the Church. As for this Fathers speaking
of prayer for such sinners, as he described in all the forementioned places,
such as were gone to endless pains, yet might receive as he thought, a little
case thereby: we must reckon it as a private opinion, and misapplication of
that practice of praying for the Dead. And indeed he seems to acknowledge so
much himself; for in his forementioned Hom. 61. in Jo. he faith, (...) --
in relation to those his exhortations for such prayers and offerings, These
things I speak not as one giving precept or setting a Law: but as one allowing,
and condescending to the affections and frailties of men.

The Romanists here reply: that St. Chrysostom. and others seem to urge Prayer
for All: because they knew not who died in the state of repentance: and so they
pray for all in the Church of Rome, yet hold those prayers appliable to, and
available for only those that dye in that state, and go to Purgatory pains.
This is a mere shift, for St. Chrysostom. does plainly suppose, that those
sinners he speaks of died in their sins, such, Chrysostom hom. 61. in lo. (...).
as if God had seen they would have changed, he would not have cut them off
before their repentance, as we had it above; such as he in another place speaks
thus of, of such a one there is no cause to rejoice, but only, because the
course of his wicked life is cut off: yet for such he exhorts to pray and
offer, and help him as they can. And indeed the reason of this extending the
benefit of Prayers to such sinners was not any supposal of Purgatory, but of
some mitigating and easing of those eternal pains, to which such sinners were
adjudged: and this in part according to that merciful opinion, and the motion
of humane affection, of which St. Aug. speaks in his Enchiridion, C. 111. as we
noted above; and to which affection St. Chrysostom. gives too much scope, as we
see in the forementioned passages of prayers and oblations for such sinners.
But as for Purgatory pains, which are supposed to begin at death, and to end
before the resurrection, he knew no such pains, as evidently appears by that
exact distribution of the several sorts of punishments, made by this Father and
cited below Nu. 11.

What we have said of some expressions of Chrysostom. applying prayer and relief
to such sinners as before were described, may be said of that place, which the
Romanists much urge out of St. Cyril. Mist. ^atech. 5. (...) --
Cyril, who tells us, they prayed simply for all: and accounted it a great help
to those souls, for which the prayer of the great and holy sacrifice was
offered: and the great power, which that prayer has to help, he sets out by
the similitude of a King entreated to pardon and call back one that is
banished; (...) --
According to the same manner (says he) we praying for sinners, render God
propitious. Now if it be after the same manner, then by the force of this
similitude it must be employed, that the prayers of the Church may obtain pardon
for sinners not reconciled to God before their death, for so the banished
person is supposed to be, not reconciled to his Prince: and then it sounds to
like purpose as those passages in Chrysostom did, and is but a private
application or misapplication of that Ancient practice: neither agreeable to
the intent of the Ancient Church, remembering in her prayers and offerings only
those, that were at rest in Christ, as by the Forms of those prayers may
appear: nor making any thing for Purgatory, which supposes the person
reconciled and justified before he comes there.

But if the Sinners (which Cyril here says are prayed for) be taken in a more
remiss sense, for such as the Romish Church sends to purgatory: then the
praying for them, comes to no more, then what we said above to Epiphanius and
Dionysius; that such prayer had reference to the passage of such souls, and
their appearing in judgment, not to their being in pains after death; For that
such persons must appear in judgment, the first and the last judgment, and
undergo a scrutiny or examination, and have as it were their hay and stubble
burnt up, was a Catholic Truth: but that persons reconciled to God, dying and
resting in Christ, should presently go to pain and torment was no doctrine of
the Church, and therefore the prayers of the Church could not refer unto such
persons. And we may observe that the undoubted Cyril (for those Mystagogical
Catechismes are thought to be composed by John B. Cyril. Catech. 15.
of Jerusalem) tells us that Christ, when he comes to judgment shall draw after
him a sloud of trying fire, (...).
which shall burn up all hay and stubble of their Actions. So that if such
sinners be prayed for, it must be with reference to the fire of trial and
examination, which they are to undergo in the day of Judgment, and according to
the true Cyril. Thus much for that practice of the Church praying for the Dead:
that it does not prove a belief of Purgatory, but was used upon other Reasons.

Forgiveness of sins after Death: Forgiveness of sins after death or in the
world to come.
out of which the Romanists would conclude a Purgatory. The Text of Scripture
is our Saviors speech Mat. 12.32. it shall not be forgiven him, neither in
this world, nor in the world to come. Here they are bound to make good three
things. 1. That the world to come, signifies the Time beginning at every man's
death. 2. That from our Saviors Negative, nor in the world to come, this
affirmative follows, therefore there are some sins shall be forgiven in the
World to come. 3. That if some sins shall be forgiven, then to them to whom
they shall be forgiven, there remains pain and torment to be suffered.

I. For the Time. Of the world to come.
The world to come is no where put for the Time between every man's death and
the Resurrection: for so it would be present to some and future to others; but
is every where seculum futurum, which is so to every one: whether it be taken
according to the Jewish acception, or the Christian. With the Jews, the world
to come, did sometimes signify, the Time of their exspected Messiah; and
indeed that place of Isa. 9.6. where the Messiah is called Pater futuri seculi
the father of the Age or world to come: to whom a generation shall be
accounted, Ps. 22.30. does accord thereunto. Now it was an opinion among the
Jews (as they that are acquainted with their Rabbis do tell us) that some sins
should then be forgiven, which could not before: and accordingly it was an
usual expression, by saying such a sin shall not be forgiven, no not in the
world to come, to show the Atrocity and flagitiousness of such a sin, which the
grace that the Messiah should bring, would not take away: and so our Savior
might speak this ad hominem, according to their common opinion and saying, to
express the hainousness of that sin or blasphemy against the Holy Ghost.

But take this Phrase according to the tenor of the New Testament which
supposes the Messiah come already, The world to come, every where signifies
that which begins at the Resurrection, or last day of this world. Then is fixed
the End of this world, Mat. 13.39.40. and cap. 28.20. and then begins the world
to come, Marc. 10.30. Luc. 18.30. Ephesians. 1.21. And so it must be taken by St.
Aug. in that place which the Romanists cite, as to their purpose, for the
forgiveness of sins not forgiven before: Aug. de Civit. Dei l. 21. c. 24. Neque
enim de qui busdam veraciter diceretur, non remittetur --
Otherwise, says he, it could not be truly said of some: it shall not be
forgiven neither in this world, nor in the world to come: for if we inquire of
him, when shall this be? -- facta resurrectione.
He tells us there, after the Resurrection is done. And so also Futurum seculum,
the world to come, is taken both by Greeks and Latins Council. Flor. Sess. 1. de
Purgatorio.
in their debate of this point.

II. Of the Forgiveness.
For their inference from our Saviors Negative, Not forgiven (says he) in the
world to come, therefore, say they, there are sins to be forgiven in the world
to come: The Cardinal acknowledges it does not follow according to the Rules of
Logic: Indeed such forgiveness, as they pretend in relation to Purgatory
cannot in any reason follow upon our Saviors speech. That there is a
forgiveness of sins after death cannot be denied, so long as we believe there
is a Judgment of God to come; for when that comes, and passes upon the Souls of
men, either privately at their death, or openly at the Last day, there is an
absolution of some, and a condemnation of others: a forgiving, and a not
forgiving in the world to come: whether we begin that Time at the day of Death,
or of Resurrection; but this forgiveness is nothing to Purgatory.

Again, This forgiveness or not forgiveness of sins in the world to come may
have regard to the forgiveness or retaining of sins by Man in the Ministry of
reconciliation in this life; so there is a loosing and binding on Earth, and a
loosing and binding in Heaven: in like manner a declaration of sins forgiven in
the Church in this life, and a declaration of sins forgiven or not forgiven in
the world to come For then it shall appear, that many sins forgiven by Man, (
Clave errante, through misapplication of the Keys) are not forgiven of God,
but shall receive sentence of condemnation; and many that have been unjustly
excommunicated and condemned here, shall be owned and absolved there. And so in
this respect it may be said truly, that whoever will continue obstinate, and
rebel against light, as they that here blasphemed against the Holy Ghost, must
not exspect to have his sin forgiven, either in this life by the Church, or in
the world to come, when God shall appear in judgment, and so it comes to what
St. Marc. says, Hier. in Mat. 5. Huic nullo tempore blasphemia remittetur.
he has never forgiveness: and what St. Hier. says upon the place; This
blasphemy shall never be forgiven him.

The Sins which the Romanists will have forgiven in the next life, Venial Sins.
are Venial or light sins. But why these forgiven in the next world when the
great sins are forgiven in this life (as they acknowledge) unto those justified
persons, whom they send to Purgatory? why should such small sins, which do not
cut off the state of justification, or put the person out of the favor of God,
be retained and called so so severe a reckoning, as is that of the Purgatory
Prison? It is true, that sanctified persons after their Justification, are
subject to the daily subreption of such lighter sins: but seeing, as St. Aug.
says often, we do for them daily confess and say, Forgive us our debts -- why
should not the general repentance and confession with which such Persons dye,
be available to the forgiveness of all such failings and secret sins, (that
cannot be remembered in particular) through the merit of Christ's perfect
obedience, apprehended by the faith of such justified persons?

And as for the stains of sinful corruption, The stain or remaining corrupting
of Sin.
yet remaining after forgiveness of the guilt and punishment: (the doing away
of which the Romanists call forgiveness) what need is there of a Fire to purge
them away? for it is not fire but the grace of God, likened unto fire, that can
work that effect upon the soul. And why may not final grace, as some call it,
do away the remaining corruption, at the parting of soul and body? They
acknowledge that grace infused does it in the first Justification: not only
taking away the guilt but the stain and corruption too; and why may it not do
so, in the last infusion or communication? They acknowledge also that the stain
of original Sin comes upon the Soul in a moment at the conjunction of it with
the body: and why may not the contracted stains and blots of sin, be by the
grace of God done away at the separation of soul and body? All this is far more
reasonable to say, then from our Saviors speech not forgiven, to infer, some
shall be then forgiven: and from that forgiveness, to conclude such a Purgation
of Souls as they imagine: More reasonable, I say; though not so prudential, it
may be, considering what is gained by it in the Romish Church. For hear what
the Cardinal says of that Inference of the affirmative (shall be forgiven)
from our Saviors Negative (shall not be forgiven) It does not follow, Bell. l.
1. de Purgat. c. 4. Non secundum Regulas Logicae, sed sequi secundum regulam
prudentiae, alioqui faceremus Dominum ineptissime locutum --
says he, according to the Rules of Logic (that is of Reason), but it follows
according to the Rules of Prudence: Else should we make our Lord speak
inconsiderately in saying, neither in this world nor in the world to come. For
their Prudence in drawing Purgatory out of so many pretended places of
Scripture besides the Rules of Logic or Reason, we envy it not; but it was
neither Prudeut nor seemly for the Cardinal to conclude, that unless such
Inference were good, our Savior had spoken inconsiderately, or (as his word
sounds) foolishly; whereas we saw above, our Savior might speak so in many
respects, without reference to any such Purgatory: In respect to the Age of the
Messiah, according to the opinion of the Jews; In respect to the General
judgment of God, and the sentence then to be passed: In respect to the
forgiveness of sins, and that loosing made on earth. Another respect we may
add, and say our Savior might speak so in regard of the punishment of the
world to come: which is the necessary consequent of not forgiven; shall not be
forgiven, i. e. shall be punished. So Ferus on the place; and Chrysostom. And
this will bring us to their Inference from these words which was the third
thing they were to make good: and it is directly contrary to that of St.
Chrysostom.

III. They infer Purgatory pains from the forgiveness, which they suppose to be
in the world to come: forgiven, i. e. punished. This is inconsequent and
inconsistent.

First, in regard of the Time, for the forgiveness of the world to come, is
that final open absolution or forgiveness at the Last day: but their Purgatory
forgiveness and punishment is secret and before that last day. But here they
seem to answer; that sins indeed are forgiven at the last day, but to them that
have first parsed the Purgatory fire; and for this an obscure place of St. Aug.
is alleged. Even as at the resurrection, there will not be wanting some, Aug.
de Civ. Dei, l. 21. c. 24. Sicut facta resurrectione non deerunt quibus post
poenas, quas patiuntur spiritus mortuorum impertiatur misericordia, ut in ignem
non mittantur aeternum; Neque enim de quibusdam veraciter directeur --
to whom, after the pains which the souls of the departed do suffer, mercy may
be imparted, so that they shall not be cast into eternal fire. For it would not
else be truly said of some: it shall not be forgiven, neither in this nor the
world to come. What these pains are, and when suffered, he speaks not; and in
the application of this Scripture he goes alone. Only he is plain for the Time
of this forgiveness or imparting of mercy; that it is at the resurrection. But
this will not stand with the Purgatory forgiveness nor with the profit to be
raised out of Papal Indulgences, by which Souls may be loosed out of Pains
every day, and sent to heavenly bliss before the resurrection.

Secondly, in regard of the Opposition between Forgiveness and punishment. The
former Inference, which from our Saviors Negative shall not be forgiven,
concluded, some sins shall be forgiven then, the Cardinal acknowledged not to
follow according to the Rules of Logic; but from their supposed forgiveness,
to infer punishment, is still more unreasonable. The Scripture sets,
reconciliation with God against paying the utmost farthing, Mat. 5.25. sets the
forgiving of the d^bt, against the paying of the debt, Mat. 18. 32. 34. The
Greeks after the Council of Florence set out their Apology concerning
Purgatory, in reference to what they had discoursed with the Latins there:
where we find this to be one point of difference between them: (...) --
What agreement, say they, is there between Remission and such purgation or
punishment? there is no need of both; and a little after they show that St.
Aug. was the first that conceited this middle kind of punishment after this
life in order to forgiveness of some sins; and the occasion that brought him
into that conceit they also declare, which we shall mention under the next Head.

Of Pains after Death. The Text of 1 Cor. 3.13. misapplied to the Purgatory
Fire.
We have already considered them in relation to Forgiveness of ^n: now more
specially of the Purgatory punishment, to which the Roma^^ists apply what they
meet with touching the purgation of fire. We will first examine that noted
place of Scripture so often misapplied by them to their purgatory Fire. It is 1
Cor. 3.13. the fire shall try every man's work, and verse. 15. He shall be saved
yet so as by fire.

The Cardinal acknowledges this to be one of the most difficult places, Bell. de
purg. l. 1. c. 5. Vnum ex difficillimis locum --
and that so St. Aug. thought of it; and consequently he should have
acknowledged it no fit place to ground an Article of Faith on: as affording no
more certainty of a purging fire after death, then such as St. -- non in
credibile: -- so sitan ita est. -- non redarguo.
Aug. does usually express in the several places, where he falls upon this Text,
such a thing is not incredible; It may be, it is so: and if any will take it
so, I do not reprove him.

Again, the Cardinal giving us the several opinions of the Ancients about the
meaning of Hay and Stubble there mentioned, he cannot find any before St.
Gregory that understood thereby Venial sins, and therefore all the Ancients
were far from conceiving any such purgatory couched in this place. Also in
giving us the several opinions of the Ancients touching this Fire: Bell. ibid.
Sect. Tertio quia --
He tells us all the Ancients seem by the day (mentioned ver. 13.) to understand
the day of the last judgment: and he gives four Reasons to prove it so: and
after their different opinions of the fire (there also mentioned) he concludes,
that cannot be the purgatory fire, because the fire in St. Paul, touches all,
Bell. ibid. onmes tangit -- at Ignis purgatorius non probat opera eorum.
even those that build gold and silver -- But the Purgatory fire does not prove
their works. -- Apostolum ^olqui de igne severt and justi judicii Dei qui non
est ignis purgans and affligens, sed probans and examin^ns.
It remains therefore that we say, the Apostle speaks of the fire of the severe
and just judgment of God, which is not a purging and afflicting fire, but a
proving and a trying fire: and for this he gives unanswerable reasons, and in
asserting this the Cardinal is sound and ingenuous. But what will become then
of his Purgatory fire? and wherefore is this Text urged for it? He finds it in
the 15. verse. shall be saved, yet so as by fire; This in the Cardinals
imagination is the purging fire: But what consent of Fathers for this
interpretation? He acknowledges that some of the Ancients do here also
understand the fire of Tribulation, some the fire of Conflagration, some the
eternal fire: as St. Chrysostom. and Theophylact, taking the word, ( (...).
saved) catachrestically, for an eternal abiding or living in the fire: All
these therefore are not for the Romish purgatory fire: As for those Fathers he
cites, they have another meaning; Cyprians words, Long purged with fire, --
purgari diu igne.
were above cleared to be spoken in relation to the severity of Ecclesiastical
censures and penances: in this Sect. nu. 3. That which he has out of St.
Ambrose speaks no more then, (what the Cardinal before had cited him for) the
fire of the severe judgment of God. -- cui jun emendato (not emendatorio) igne
opus non sit.
That which he brings out of St. Aug. upon Ps. 37. To whom there is no need of
the amending fire: is falsely cited; for it should be thus, To whom being
amended, there is no need of fire, that is, the fire of tribulation which God
uses in this life to that purpose, and of which St. August. often interprets
the fire here mentioned in this place. These are the three Fathers he alleges
here for his interpretation of this Text, altogether impertinently; and these
very Testimonies he cites again Bell. de Purg. l. 1. c. 10.
in his chapt. of proofs out of Fathers for the Purgatory Fire or punishment.
The like impertinency may be observed in all his other witnesses alleged
there, and misapplied by him. Testimonies o^ Fath^rs misap^lied, as as to the
Purgat^ry F^re


Ambrose upon ps. 36. is plainly spoken of the last day. That which the same
Father has upon Psalm. 1. verse. 5. of a fire, which they must endure between
the first and second resurrection, -- (...) magi quam Lu^em.
that loved darkness more then light, I know not well what to make of, sure I
am, it cannot fit their Purgatory Fire: For they that love darkness more then
light, are of the worst sort; and those the Church of Rome does not send to the
Purgatory, but Hell fire. In Hilar. upon Ps. 119. Gimel, the Cardinal meets
with mention of an unwearied or not ceasing fire: Ignis indefessus.
and misapplies it to his conceit of Purgatory: but is plainly meant of the
Fire at the last day. Hierom also upon the last words of Isa. their fire is not
quenched: is alleged by the Cardinal, but the Father expressly speaks there of
wicked Christians, for whom the unquenchable fire of Hell is prepared, and to
that fire, that place of the Prophet is applied in the Gospels. Basil upon Isa.
9.18. is cited; to which may be added what the same Father says upon Isa. 4.4.
In both places he has nothing appliable to the Romish Purgatory fire: (...).
but speaks of the Purgation or examination by the fire of the day of Judgment:
and shows in cap. 9.18. how our sins are like grass for the spreading increase
thereof, but by repentance and confession are dried and withered, and made like
Hay and Stubble fit for burning up, (which alludes to 1 Cor. 3.) -- (...).
Then shall sin so dried and withered be consumed by the purging fire: viz. by
the fire of the divine judgment before mentioned. The Greeks in the Council of
Florence do well interpret that devouring or consuming of the hay and stubble
by being made to vanish or disappear, (...).
as things burnt up do; And so shall such sins or errors (as are there compared
to hay and stubble) after they have passed the examination of divine Judgment
be done away and appear no more. St. Basil also upon the 19. verse of that
chapter, speaks of a punishing and afflicting fire: but what fire is that? the
fire, says he, that the Lord sent into the earth, Luc. 12.49. and that is the
fire of tribulation in this life: -- (...) -- (...).
Unto this punishing fire are our Terrene (sinful, carnal) affections delivered
up; for the benefit and amendment of the Soul.

Gregory Nyssen (in orat. pro mortuis) speaks of the Furnace of a purging fire,
and is cited by the Cardinal for the Romish purgatory, but plainly means the
fire at the last day, which (as the Father thought) should at length purge and
restore all men. And those other words (which the Cardinal cites out of the
same Orat.) -- Non potest nisi pur gatus fieri particeps.
Of it he cannot be made partaker unless first purged, do plainly speak of one,
that dyed impure and in his sins, yet may (as that Father thought) receive a
purgation after, when the Soul (parted from the body) sees a difference between
virtue and vice, and so turns to God: This speaks, what we noted Nu. 7.
above of this Father, that he was tainted with the stain of that merciful
opinion: derived down from Origin.

Nazianzen also (in Sancta Lumina) is cited by the Cardinal, but intends the
fire of the Damned, for it concerns the Novatians, that denied the baptism of
Tears, (or the reception of Penitents) and therefore were in danger, if they go
on, to be baptized with fire: So that Father threatens them there: and let the
Romanists judge whether obstinate Heretics, such as they were supposed to be,
are in danger of, and to be threatened with, the Purgatory or the eternal fire.

Negative, They knew not such a Fire.
that the Fathers did not know the Romish purgatory fire (which begins at Death
and goes out before the Resurrection, which afflicts and torments justified
Souls) is evident by their speaking of several sorts of fire, that of
tribulation in this life, that of the severe judgment of God at the last day,
that of Conflagration at the end of the world, that of eternal pain after, and
by their attributing a purgation to every of these; yet none of them mentioning
the Romish Purgatory. Besides places newly cited out of the Fathers, I find
Nazianzen, thus speaking of fire, in his 26. Orat. for Moderation in disputing:
(...).
The last fire, by which all our doings must be judged, and purged: which is
the fire of Gods judgment at the last day. And in his 40. Orat. in Baptism. he
thus distinguishes the several sorts of Fire. I know (says he) the purging
fire, viz. that which Christ came to send on earth, Luc. 12.49. the fire of
tribulation in this life: I know, says he, another fire, but it is a
punishing, not a purging fire, viz. the fire of the damned. Had he known
another sort of fire, that was both purging and punishing after death, as the
Romish Purgatory fire is conceived to be, he would have mentioned it: In his
Orat. de Pasch. (...).
he says, there is no purging after this life: and in his Orat. de plaga
Grandinis, after this life is a time of punishing, not purging. The Romanists
are ready to restrain such sayings of the Fathers, to such persons as were not
at all purged here, or did not in this life begin to purge themselves; but his
saying is general to all unto whom punishment or chastisement is due; and had
he known the Romish Purgatory after death, he would not have let those former
sayings slip from him, without some mention of it. Nicetas also that comments
upon him would have taken occasion to have spoken of it.

It was noted Nu. 8.
above that St. Chrysostom. upon that of Mat. 12. not forgiven in this --
expounds not forgiven, by shall be punished here and hereafter. In the same
place, he takes occasion to speak of punishment in this life, and in the next:
Some, says he, are punished here and hereafter, as the Sodomites: Some not
here, but hereafter, as the Rich glutton, Luc. 16. Some here, not hereafter, as
the incestuous Corinthian: Some neither here nor hereafter, as the Apostles and
such Disciples of Christ. He did not know any other sort or rank of men
punished, such as they are that go to be tormented in Purgatory; And lest it
should be objected, that the Apostles and such Disciples of Christ suffered
great persecution and affliction, and therefore were sore punished in this
life: He severs the notion of Punishment from their afflictions or Trials. For
speaking of the sufferings of Job, and such men, he tells us, -- (...) --.
they were not the sufferings of punishment, or inflicted on such men as
punishments, but belonged to the combat, and were for their exercise. So may
there be other ends of Gods sending Afflictives (after sin forgiven) then for
punishment: but of that Torment in Purgatory, no end or reason can be given,
besides punishment. We will conclude with St. Aug. the only Father that (for
the first 400 years) spoke any thing to the purpose of that Purgatory
punishment between Death and the Resurrection.

St. Augustines opinion touching Purgatory pains.
if we consider the prevalency and danger of that merciful opinion touching the
pains of the damned, which this Father observed and endeavored to work out of
men's minds. This opinion touching the end or mitigation of those pains, we
noted Nu. 7.
above. The danger of it the Greeks in their forementioned Apology, do well
note: saying, It was thought in the 5. Synod, to be a most cruel opinion, (...).
pernicious to the Church, and loosing the nerves and endeavors of the
virtuously disposed. St. Aug. saw this, and therefore often encounters it,
especially in his book of the City of God: but in his contending against it,
stumbled, as I said, upon this conceit; seeming out of his earnest desire of
working that dangerous merciful opinion out of the minds of Christians, to be
content there should be Temporary pains conceived to remain for some sort of
men between their death and Resurrection. And this also the Greeks, in the
aforesaid Apology, do observe in that Father: -- (...).
saying of the Latins in General, that to take away a greater evil (the
ceasing of the pains of Hell fire) they yielded to a less: (a kind of purging
fire) before the resurrection; and of St. August. they say, (...). -- (...).
that he willing and endeavoring to work that opinion out of men's minds,
admitted this third sort of punishment. This is evident to him that will
examine the several passages of St. August. one and twentieth Book of the City
of God: as where he seems to be content, that men should think favorably of
some mitigation in the pains of the damned, Aug. l 21 de Civ. De c. 24. --
noideo consir. ^^, quia no resisto.
so they would hold them eternal; for of that opinion of mitigation, he says;
I do not therefore confirm it, because I do not resist it; he had Aug. l. 21.
c. 16.
before suggested what he thought more probable, viz. Some Temporal pains
before the last day.

There is a place which the Romanists much urge in behalf of Purgatory; what
sense it bears is not very certain; but certainly it cannot be applied to
Purgatory. Speaking to those words, in the sweat of thy brows, Genesis 3.19. he
says, He that tills his field, ( i. e. orders his life carefully and
virtuously) it is not needful that he should suffer after this life: Aug. de
Genesi. contra Manich. l. 2. c. 20. Qui coluerit agrum suum, post hanc vitam
non est necesse ut patiatur; Qui non coluerit, sed Spinis eum opprimi
permiserit, habet in hac vita maledictionem, and post hanc vitam habebit vel
ignem purgationis, vel poenam aeternam.
but he that tils it not, but suffers it to be overgrown with thorns, he has in
this life a Curse, and after this life, he shall have either the fire of
purgation, or the eternal punishment. That he alludes here to Heb. 6.7. is very
apparent: that such as are sent to Purgatory cannot be intended here, is also
apparent; for these are careless and profane Christians, whose lives are
overgrown with vice, and are supposed to so continue till death, and are
therefore subject to cursing, and must be burnt with the eternal fire. And it
is probable, he puts in that fire of purgation, by way of concession only to
the merciful opinion: as if he had said, He that suffers his life to be so
overgrown -- must have his burning, either such as that opinion fancied, such
at least; or else eternal pains, which indeed is the Truth.

Now concerning these supposed pains or purging fire after death, St. Aug. uses
many expressions of uncertainty, Aug. de fide and operibus, (...) 16. De Civit.
Dei, l. 21. ^ 26. Enchirid. c. 69. Ad ^ulcitium qu. 1.
far from any stedfastness of belief. As when he says, If in that interval, Si
hoc temporis intervallo -- forsitan verum est -- non redarguo.
or space between death and resurrection, any will conceive such a fire, such
pains, It may be true, and I do not reprove or contend against it: Again, Some
such thing may be after this life -- and, Tale ali quid etiam post hanc vitam
fieri potest -- and utrum ita sit quaeri potest. Non est incredibile.

Talia quaedam judicia post hanc vitam -- non abhorret, quantum arbitror, a
ratione veritatis.


whether it be so, may be questioned, or inquired into: It is not incredible,
that it should be so. Again, that some such judgments or punishments follow
after this life, it does not in my opinion abhor from the reason of Truth. All
these the Cardinal recites by way of objection in his first Book de Purgat. c.
15. But what answer gives he? This, That St. Aug. -- dubitare solum de genere
peccati, quod punitur.
did only doubt of the kind or sort of sin, that was to be punished -- which
is altogether impertinent, as may at first sight appear to him, that looks into
the places cited: Therefore elsewhere he gives these Answers; That St. Aug.
doubted only of the quality of the pain or torment, Bell. l. Dubitat de poenae
qualitate, an idem sit ignis --

-- an animae urentur igne illo doloris de amiss^one temporalium --


whether it were the same fire in substance with that of Hell: also, that he
doubted, whether souls shall be scorched with that fire of grief, for the loss
of things temporal. -- But these exceptions or answers are also impertinent:
for his Tale aliquid, some such thing, and his Talia quaedam judicia, some such
punishments do not refer to any material fire, or fire properly taken, or to
such a fire as Hell fire: but to the fire of tribulation in this life, which he
every where speaks of, when he falls upon that place of 1 Cor. 3.13. and that
some such thing, that is afflictive, may be after this life, he thinks not
incredible; and that perhaps it is so. For let the Romanists conceive the pain
or Torment of purgatory to be of what condition or sort soever they please, it
will be answered by that tale aliquid, and talia quaedam judicia; and so will
imply that Fathers uncertainty in that his opinion of Purgatory pains after
death; So for that fire of grief upon loss of Temporals, which the Cardinal
will have St. Aug. doubt of: it is plain he could not mean that very kind of
grief when he said tale aliquid, some such thing, but any kind of grief or
vexation that should torment the soul as with a kind of fire. Whether there
were any such thing, any such grief or pain, that is it he put to the question,
and declared his opinion of it, that it was not incredible, but rather that he
held it probable: and that place in his Book de Civit. Dei, where he delivered
it positively, that there were such purging pains, can amount to no more then
an opinion he had entertained; which he delivers there the more peremptorily,
in opposition to that other opinion of the Ceasing of the pains of the damned.

To conclude, the Cardinal declares it as a thing Certain, Bell. de purg. l. 2.
c. 10. Certum, esse in Purgatori^ poenam ignis, sive proprie accipiatur sive
Meta^hori^e.
that there is in Purgatory the punishment of fire, whether taken properly or
Metaphorically: whether a real fire, such as of Hell, or such a pain, that as
fire, torments the souls of men: Now St. August. his tale aliquid -- of which
he doubted, was such a thing, such a fire or tormenting pain: and therefore St.
Aug. was uncertain of that, which the Church of Rome delivers as certain, and
as an Article of Faith.

SECT. VII. Of the Real Presence.
The question.
there was enough said above, Chap. VII. Nu. 1. That we deny not a Real
presence, but such a presence as they contend for, such as by a
transubstantiation of the Bread and Wine, sixes the body and blood of Christ
under the remaining species: the inconveniences of which are hinted above
chap. VII. Nu. 13, 16, 17. I will only add, to the farther clearing of this
state of the Question, what the Cardinal notes upon the word substantialiter in
the Trent Council, can. 1. sess. 13. It means, that Christ is in the Eucharist
after the same manner, Bell. l. 1. de Euchar. c. 2. Christum esse in Eucharistia
ad eum modum, quo erat substantia panis subsuis accidentibus --
that the substance of bread was under its accidents: this only excepted, that
those accidents were inhaerent in the substance of the Bread. So then, such a
manner of Presence is that which we deny.

The Scripture which they pretend, (This is my body) was examined Chap. 7.
above, and found to be best explained by that of the Apostle. 1 Cor. 10.16.
The bread which we break, is the communion or communication of the body of
Christ: which supposes the bread continuing in substance, and tells us how it is
(notwithstanding) the body of Christ.

Testimonies of Antiquity.
whether such a presence by way of Transubstantiation or fixing the body of
Christ under the species, in stead of the substance of the bread, was taught as
Catholic Doctrine. The Truth will quickly appear by the different condition
and force of those Testimonies which they and we bring from Antiquity, within
the compass of 600. years. Many sayings of the Fathers they allege, and want
not for number but weight. For if those sayings or sentences be examined, they
will be found not to speak properly and strictly to the point, but either fall
short of the change here intended, or shoot beyond all measure, by some
hyperbolical expressions: whereas we bring Testimonies of Fathers speaking
punctually of the nature and substance of the Elements according to the proper
and strict sense of those words: Also we bring real Arguments, necessarily
concluding (by that which the Fathers disputed against Heretics) that
Transubstantiation, or such a Presence, by putting the body of Christ in the
place of the substance of Bread, could not be the Doctrine of the Church. We
will reduce all to this Head: The remaining of the substance of Bread and Wine.

the body or flesh of Christ, Sayings of Fathers alleged by the Romanists.
after Consecration; as speaking nothing but what we say, and what we conceive
ought to be answered in the affirmative, if the question be put, Whether is
this the body of Christ: And it speaks no more then the Apostle 1 Cor. 10.16.
This bread is the communication of the body of Christ: And it is to be noted
that some of the sentences alleged by the Romanists, expressly make Bread the
subject of that affirmative proposition, saying, Panem esse corpus Christi,
that bread is the body of Christ, or the like: which kind of speech the
Romanists, themselves acknowledge improper and figurative. Also to omit all
those sentences, which barely say, the bread is changed: or transelemented, or
the like. For there are many kinds of change, and that only, which is
concerned in the Question, is the change of substance.

Secondly therefore, Those Testimonies only may seem to speak something to the
purpose, which say the Elements are changed in Nature: for this Cyprian,
Ambrose and Nyssen are alleged by Bell. de Euch. l. 3. c. 20.
the Cardinal. But the word Nature is of a large acception here: not expressing
the substance or essence of the thing, but the condition and special quality of
it, as we say; Things are of different Nature, some are common and profane,
some holy and divine: so the elements after consecration are changed in their
Nature, beginning then to be of holy use and divine virtue. On the contrary, we
allege Theodoret denying they are changed in Nature, taking the word strictly
for the substantial nature, as the dispute he there makes required he should
do: Theod. Dialog. 1. c. 8. (...).
changing, says he, not the Nature (of the Symbols or Elements) but adding
grace unto nature, by which grace or blessing of consecration they become of
holy use and divine virtue. Again he says, Theod. Dial. 2. (...).
The Symbols do not go out of their proper nature. And this he spoke in answer
to the Eutychian, objecting the change made in the Sacrament as a proof or
illustration of the change of the Humane Nature into the Divine, asserted by
those Heretics. In the place which the Cardinal alleged out of St. Cyprian,
in his Sermon de Caena: is subjoyned the similitude of the Humanity and
Divinity of Christ, united together: which very frequently is by the Fathers
applied to the business of the Sacrament. Omnipotentra Verbi carc. factus.
The Cardinal opposes, that St. Cyprian says there, The bread by the
omnipotence of the Word is made his flesh: Now what omnipotency is it, says
he, to make the Bread only signify his body? The Omnipotency, say we, is not
in making the Bread a bare sign of his body, as he would impose upon us, nor
yet in changing it substantially into the body of Christ, as he would have us
believe; but in making the bread his body (or communication of his body) and
yet to remain what it was, the same in substance: Ambr. de Sacram, l. 4. c. 4.
Vt sint, quae erant, and in aliud commutentur.
as St. Ambrose expresses it, That they be what they were, and yet turned into
another thing, viz. into the body and blood of Christ; and this he affirms to
be a greater work then that of Creation, which made things to be, which were
not. There is one place which the Cardinal cites out of St. Chrysostom de
Euchar. in Encaeniis. I could not find it, Number vides panem? number vinum? number
ficut reliqui cibi in secessum vadunt? absit! ne Cogites.
but thus it speaks as he reports it, Do thou see Bread? or Wine? do they go
as other meats into the draught? far be that from them! do not think so. Then
follows, for as Wax, if it be held to the fire, is assimulated to the fire (or
turned into a flame) and nothing of the substance remains. Sic and hic puta,
Mysteria consumi Corporis substantia.
So also think here, the Mysteries are consumed by the substance of the body.
Answ. It is familiar with that father, for better raising the thoughts from all
earthly considerations in this Sacrament, to use such manner of speeches:
Elsewhere he bids them, not to think they are now on Earth, but in Heaven, and
that they receive it from the hand of a Cherubim or Seraphim: So here, Do not
think thou see Bread and Wine, etc. and so think here the Mysteries are
consumed, as Wax turned into a flame; to show there is nothing of terrene or
bodily consideration, nothing for filling the belly, intended or left in the
use and purpose of this Sacrament: and so neither should there be any thing of
that concernment in our thoughts. Now as to the point, which the Romanists aim
at, the not remaining of the substance of Bread and Wine: We may say in strict
reasoning it would follow also, that the Species of Bread and Wine do not
remain, for he says, the Mysteries are consumed, and those according to the
Romish doctrine, are the Species after consecration. But in all Reason we ought
to have more regard to Fathers speaking punctually and properly in their
Commentaries, or disputes, then loosly and and at large in their Rhetorical
flourishes and persuasions, as St. Chrysostom. often does, and most especially on
this matter of the Sacrament. We shall therefore now add some Testimonies of
the Fathers speaking distinctly and properly to the point.

Testimonies for remaining of the substance of the Elements.
and were in their disputes bound to speak properly and to the point.

Irenaeus dealt against such as denied our Savior to be the Son of the God of
the Old Testament, or of the God that made and created all; against whom he
brings one argument from the Sacrament instituted by our Savior: saying, Our
sentence or doctrine is consonant to the Eucharist, Iren. l. 4. c. 34. Nostra
sententia est consonans Eucharistiae, and Eucharistia confirmat nostram
sententiam.
and the Eucharist confirms our Doctrine: Why? because Christ as the Son of
God, took of his Creatures Bread and Wine, to apply them to his own use and
purpose. So his making an Eucharist of those Creatures or fruits of the earth,
made against the vanity of that Heretical assertion: In like manner the
Eucharist, or that which Irenaeus says of it here, confirms our Doctrine
against the Romanists. For there he says. The Bread (after consecration) is
not now common bread, but an Eucharist, Panis non jam communis panis est, sed
Eucharistia ex duabus rebus constans, terrena and coelesti. Iren. ibid.
consisting of two things, the terrene and the Heavenly. If not common bread,
yet bread still: and if it consists of these two, then is bread still in it;
for else it could not consist of it. And this is according to the Cardinals own
reasoning, who intending by this place to prove a Real presence of Christ's body
and blood in the Sacrament, argues thus. Bell. de Euch. l. 2. c. 6. Nihil
constare dicitur ex eo, quod in ipso non est.
Irenaeus says, It consists of the Earthly and the Heavenly part, but nothing
can consist, says the Cardinal, of that which is not in it: not observing that
it equally proves the substantial presence of the Bread, for it consists of the
terrene as of the celestial. Now we can say the celestial part, the substance
of Christ's body and blood is given in the Sacrament; they dare not say it of
the substance of the Terrene part; but betake them to the species of bread and
wine: when as Irenaeus speaks of the substantial creatures and fruits of the
earth, and it concerned him to mean so; else those Heretics might have said
our Savior took those Creatures to destroy them, and leaves only the
appearance and species of those things, which the God of the Old Testament had
made.

Again, the Cardinal makes another argument from those words of Irenaeus, Our
bodies receiving the Eucharist, -- jam non sunt corruptibilia, spem
resurrectionis habentia. Iren. ibid.
are not now corruptible, as having the hope of a resurrection: wherein he
abuses that good Father, and himself. For thus he argues from that saying.
Corpora nostra reipsa fient immortalia, ergo panis terrenus reipsa fit corpus
Christi. Bell. ibid.
Our bodies shall be truly and indeed incorruptible, therefore the terrene
bread is truly indeed made the body of Christ. Whereas that Father speaks of
the present, Our bodies are not now corruptible, which the Cardinal turns into,
shall be incorruptible: because he could not say, they are now truly and indeed
incorruptible. So that according to this Father the Argument would stand thus:
As our bodies now are incorruptible, (not because they are so according to
nature and substance, but) in as much as they have the hope of a resurrection;
so the Bread is the body of Christ, (not because changed in nature and
substance, but) in as much as by the grace of consecration it is the communion
of his body.

Tertullian had to do with Marcion and such Heretics that denied Christ had a
true and solid body. And he proves the contrary by Bread the figure of his
body, Tertul. contra Marcion. lib. 4. c. 40. Non fuisset figura, nisi veritatis
esset corpus.
both in the Old Testament and in the Eucharist. Now, says he, it could not be
the figure of his body, if his body were not a true body; And if there be force
in this Reason, then should Marcion (supposing Transubstantiation) have great
advantage upon a fantastical figure, that had no substance of bread, but only
the Accidents and appearances: and upon such a fantastical mode of a Body, Si
proprereas panem sibi corpus sinxit, quia corporis carebat veritate -- Tert.
ibid.
as the Romish doctrine puts our Saviors body into. Also the words following:
If he took bread (as those Heretics said) to make it his body, because he
wanted a true body: then it would follow, that Bread was given and crucified
for us: These words (I say) do necessarily suppose the substance of Bread to
remain: for how could that be said, if the Bread also should want the truth of
a body; remaining only in show and appearance? which would much have confirmed
Marcion in his misbelief of the reality of Christ's body, of which there should
be so fantastical a figure or sign. This is so evident and convincing, that
Beatus Rhenanus in his Annotations, acknowledges Tertullian of this judgment,
That Bread is so the figure of Christ's body, that it still remains the same in
substance as it was before.

Add to this what he says elsewhere: Tertul. de anima c. 17. Sensus non falli
circa objecta, ne hinc aliquid procuretur Haereticis, de Christo phantasma
credentibus. Non est gustus Discipulorum Iudificatus --
The senses are not deceived in their own objects, lest thereby something of
advantage might be yielded to the Heretics, making but a phantasm of Christ.
The taste of the disciples was not deceived, when in the marriage of Cana they
drank wine made of Water, nor was the Feeling of Thomas abused, when he put his
finger in our Saviors side -- Nor are our senses (may we say) abused or
deceived, when they tell us, this is true bread, which is in the Sacrament.

Theodoret had to do with the Eutychian Heretics, that held our Saviors
humanity swallowed up in the Divine Nature: for which they made Argument from
the Sacrament; Theod. D^^ al. 2.
That even as the Symbols or Elements were after consecration changed into
another thing (for such was the common phrase of that Time, when speech was of
the Sacrament) so is the humane Nature or body of the Lord, after assumption
changed into the divine substance. This Argument had been unanswerable had
Transubstantiation been then the Doctrine of the Church; But Theodoret answers
him that makes this Argument; Thou art taken in thy own Net: for the Symbols do
not go out of their proper nature, -- (...).
but remain in there former substance, and figure and shape. That the words,
Nature, and Substance must be here taken properly, and not confounded (as in
the Romanists irrational answer they are) with the Accidents or Species of the
Bread and Wine, is clearly evinced both by the absurdity of putting Substance
for Accidents, and by the very reason of the Argument here made, which
supposes Nature and Substance properly taken on the Eutychian part, and so
must be meant in Theodorets Reply, to the plain exclusion of a Substantial
change.

The like demonstration is made by Gelasius in his In Biblioth. Patrum, To. 5.
part. 3.
Book of the two Natures of Christ, against Eutyches and Nestorius. Of which
Book the Bell. de Euch. l. 2. c. 27. Idem prorsus docet, quod Theodoretus, and
ad eandem rem confirmandam.
Cardinal acknowledges, that Gelasius taught the same with Theodoret, and for
confirming of the very same thing. It being familiar with the Catholic writers
of those Times, to use the instance of the Eucharist against the Eutychian
Heresy; which did necessarily infer the remaining of the substance of the
Elements, to show the remaining of the humane Nature of Christ after its
assumption. Nay before that Heresy appeared, some of the Ancients did make use
of the same Instance, arguing from the Union of the two Natures in Christ, to
show the Sacramental Union, as they that wrote against Eutyches did from the
Sacrament borrow a demonstration or illustration for the two Natures united in
our Savior Christ. Justin Martyr says thus, We take these not as common
bread, or common drink, Just. Apol. 2. ad Anton. -- (...) --
but even as Jesus Christ being made Flesh by the Word of God, had flesh and
blood for our salvation: -- (...) --
So we learn also, that the meat or food, (which by the prayer of his Word is
blessed and made an Eucharist, and by which our flesh and blood through the
change of it, are nourished) is the flesh and blood of the same incarned Jesus.
Here is Bread, though not common bread after consecration; and Bread remaining
in Substance, for it nourishes our bodies by a change into our flesh, and it
must answer to our Saviors flesh remaining in substance after the Incarnation:
notwithstanding that it is made the body of Christ, so far as the reason and
purpose of the Eucharist requires.

St. Cyprian or the Author of that Sermon de Coena: of the Lords Supper says,
Even as in the Person of Christ, Sicut in persona Christi Humanitas apparebat,
latebat Divinitas; ita sacro visibili divina se ineffabiliter infundit essentia.
the humanity appeared, and the Divinity laid hid: So does the divine essence
ineffably insinuate itself into the visible sacred Element. This place is cited
for a Real Presence, by the Cardinal: but he should have considered, it cannot
be such a Real Presence as will serve his turn. For the substantial presence of
the visible outward element is equally proved by this saying of the Father; and
a dangerous thing it is to make the bread and wine remain, as the Cardinal
does, in show and appearance only; which renders this instance of the Sacrament
held altogether useless against those Heretics, which held our Saviors body
or humanity was but such in appearance only, not substance.

Thus the Fathers that dealt with Heretics were bound to speak properly and
distinctly; and did so, as we have seen. We will add to these, First, Origin
speaking by way of distinction, Orig. in Mat. 15.17. Ille cibus
quisanctificatur per -- juxta id, quod habet Materiale, in Secessum mittitur.
and therefore exactly to the point. That food, says he, that is sanctified by
the Word of God and Prayer, according to the Material part of it, (there is his
distinction) goes into the belly and is sent into the draught. The Cardinal is
here driven to their poor shift, of interpreting the Material part of that
food, by the Visible Accidents of it.

Secondly, St. Ambrose his saying is remarkable, speaking of the Elements: That
they be what they were, Ambr. de Sacram. l. 4. c. 4. Vt sint quae erant, and in
aliud commutentur.
and yet be changed into another thing: that is, made the Body and Blood of the
Lord. The Cardinal makes two impertinent answers: First, that some read it, (
Vt quae erant, in aliud commutentur) that the things which were, be turned into
another thing; and this he approves as consonant to that, which St. Ambrose
speaks in his Book de Initiandis: Ambr. de Init. c. 9. Sermo qui potuit ex
nihil^ facere quod non erat, non potest ea quae sunt mutare in id, qued non
erant?
That Word, which could make of nothing that which was not (so in the Creation)
can it not change those things that were, into that which they were not? So in
the Sacrament. But the purpose of the Father in this place is different, from
what it was in the former: here he shows the possibility of this change in the
Sacrament, by that of the Creation: arguing a majori ad minus, from the greater
work to the less: it being a greater work to make a thing out of nothing, then
out of that which was; and so in that respect it was fitting to say, ea quae
sunt -- those things that are, be changed into what they were not. But in the
former place it was his purpose to show the greatness of this work or change in
the Sacrament above that of the Creation: for which it was necessary to say (ut
sint quae erant) that they be what they were: for though it be a greater work
to make a thing out of nothing, as Wine created, then to make it out of that
which was before, as Wine out of water, Joh. 2. yet is it a greater work then
that of Creation, to make or change things into another thing, and yet those
things to remain what they were: as in the Sacrament. Quanto magis est
operatorius -- ut sint quae erant --
How much more operative is that word (says he) that they be what they were,
and yet changed into another thing? The Cardinal therefore in his second
answer, retires to his old shift, saying that the outward Accidents remain what
they were. But he might have remembered that sint and erant are Verbs
Substantives, and when spoken of bodies (as here) simply and without the
adjection of qualities or Accidents attributed to them, must mean the
substantial being of such bodies. Or if the Cardinal had inquired, what are
changed into another thing, he would have found, those things that are, what
they were: but those things cannot be the outward Accidents of Bread and Wine,
for they are not changed into that other thing: i.e. the Body and Blood of
Christ. Or lastly, had he considered the purpose of St. Ambrose, he might
easily have observed it was necessary for him to say of the substances of Bread
and Wine, that they are what they were.

I might add many Testimonies out of St. Aug. which upon the consideration of
the nature of a Sacrament, and upon other Reasons and occasions, speak
punctually to the same purpose; that the visible signs or outward Elements
remain in their former substance, and yet are the body and blood of Christ, so
far as the reason and purpose of that Sacrament requires. But these which I
have alleged may suffice.

SECT. VIII. Of Communion in one kind.
IN the state of this Controversy, we find two points asserted by the
Romanists (as appears by what said above, Chapter VIII.)

I. That it may be so administered to the People, when it may be done otherwise:
or that the People may be forbidden to receive it otherwise.

II. That such a receiving is a complete Communion.

The Scriptures that concern this Controversy were examined above. And for the
Doctrine and Practice of the Catholic Church, we will only add some Generals,
which will clear the point on the Protestants side.

I. The confession of the Romish writers, granting the use of receiving in both
kinds, continued from our Saviors time many ages throughout the Church. As
may be seen in the Council of Constance, in Alphons. de Castro, Soto,
Costerius, Tolet.

II. In answering to the Testimonies of the Fathers (asserting Communion in
both kinds) we find the Cardinal (and so the rest of them) forced to
acknowledge the use and practice, Bell. de Euchar. l. 4. c. 26.
and content to say, Those Testimonies do not speak a Necessity it should be so.

Now that it should be so, where it can be so, necessarily follows upon our
Saviors precept, Drink ye all of this, (the Disciples, that did all drink,
representing then the whole company of the faithful, as the Fathers frequently
assert) and upon the force of his Institution, and Example, and the answerable
practice of the Catholic Church in the succeeding Ages; For if so, what Church
or Age following shall think it self at liberty to do otherwise?

III. In proving those false Assertions, but necessary for the Romanists to
hold, (viz. Bell. de Euchar. l. 4. c. 22. and 33.
That the whole Reason of the Sacrament is contained in one kind: and That
there is not greater profit received by communion in both kinds, then in one:)
we find the Cardinal cannot allege One Father, nor rise higher then Thomas
Aquinas.

IV. As they cannot bring one Sentence of any Ancient Father commending or
allowing their half Communion: so the Instances they give us for it, are
impertinent, and unconcluding: far from proving, the People may be held from
receiving in both: or made to believe they have a complete Communion in One.

A Collection of such Instances we find in the Bell. in defens. Apolog. contra
Regem Jacobum c. 13. and in l. 4. de Euch. c. 24.
Cardinal; The chief of them are these following. I. The breaking of Bread,
often mentioned in the Acts of the Apostles, and sometimes signifying the
Sacrament. What then? They gave it to the people in one kind only, because one
only is mentioned. If this be a good argument as to the administration, it will
be good also as to the Consecration: they consecrated it in one kind only,
because one only is mentioned. But if the Romanists count it Sacrilege (as
indeed it is) so to consecrate: they might think it Sacrilege also, wilfully
so to administer it. II. Intinct^.
The custom of giving the Bread dipped in the Wine for a whole Sacrament. What
then? therefore it is not necessary that both kinds should be given severally;
But by this expedient we see they thought it necessary to give both; Also this
was only used in some places, and it seems at first to be found out for
Communicating Infants and sick persons, that could not well swallow it dry. And
afterward this custom was rejected and forbidden. III. The carrying of one kind
to the sick, viz. Communio Aegrorum.
Bread only. But where both could, both were carried: it was necessity, if in
one; and better one then neither, and an incomplete Communion, Communio
Presanctificatorum.
then none at all. IV. The Communion of the preconsecrated Elements: when as
one day in the Passion Week, they used to receive in one kind. But this was
not from the beginning: 2. Not held a complete Communion: but a consuming of
the remainder os the preconsecrated Bread: the Wine being all consumed or made
an end of, the day before -- 3. From this usage to conclude a liberty of
abstinence from the Wine in celebration of the Sacrament is unreasonable: 4.
The Priest did that day receive but one kind: therefore it might be likewise
concluded: that it was (or may be) the practice of the Church, to have the
Priest, as well as the people, confined to receive in one kind. Microl. in
Biblioth. Patrum c. 19. de vitanda intinctione: Non est Authenticum, etc. -- ut
populus plene communicare possit.
I will only add, what Micrologus; says in his Ecclesiast. Observations, where
the Title of his 19. chapt. is Of avoiding Intinction: or giving the Host
dipped. It is not Authentic, faith he, which some do, giving it dipped, for
the completion of a Communion: and that the Wine or other Species is to be
given, (he means severed from the other) that the people may fully and
completely communicate. Also he there tells us, that Julius the first, (Bishop
of Rome) writing to certain Egyptian Bishops, forbids that usage, and enjoins,
that both kinds be received severally (Scorsum panem and scorsum Calicem.) And
that Gelasius (Bishop of Rome) puts them under censure of Excommunication, who
abstain from the Cup, having received the body of our Lord: and in the same
Decree, defines it Sacrilege to do so. This is also in Gratian. Decr. part. 3.
de Consecratione. And this enough to convince the boldness of the Romish
Church, in doing contrary to all this, and yet asserting her Doctrine and
Practice to be Catholic.

Deo Gloria.

THE END

