A Figure of the Heavens and Elements
EARTH

AER

EYER

1 The Moon could and moist Benevolent silver

2 Mercury such as he is joined with quick silver

3 Could and moist Benevolent copper

4 The son hott and dry Benevolent Gould

5 Mars hott and dry Malevolent Iron

6 Jupiter hott and moist Benevolent Tynne

7 Saturn could and dry Malevolent Lead

8 Aries * 2 Taurus * Gemini * 4 Cancer * 5 Leo * 6 virgo * 7 libra * scorp * 9
Sagita * 10 Capri * Aq*ar * 12 Piss *

9 The Christaline Heaven

10 The first moveable Heavene



A DESCRIPTION OF The whole World, WITH Some General Rules touching the use of
the GLOBE, Wherein Is contained the situation of several Countries.

Their particular and distinct governments, Religions, Arms, and degrees of
Honor used among them.

Very delightful to be read in so small a Volume.

By ROBERT FAGE, Esquire.

The earth is the Lords, and the fullness thereof, Psalm. 24. verse. 1. LONDON,
Printed by I. Owsley, and sold by Peter Stent, at the White-horse in
Guilt-spur-street, between Newgate and Pye-corner, 1658.

A DESRIPTION OF The whole world WITH Rules for the use of the Globes, and
understanding of Maps.
THe Heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament shows the work of
his hands,Psalm 19. 1. In the Creation of which and the whole earth, and sea,
and all things therein contained, of mere nothing within the compass of six
days; and in his wise and gracious ordering and guiding of all things, is
abundantly set forth his infinite and unutterable wisdom, power, greatness, and
goodness: His end herein is first and chiefly for his own glory, The Lord made
all things for himself, Prove. 16. 4. And secondly, men's happiness, unto whom
the dominion of all things was under God committed, Genesis 1. Psalm. 8. 6.

That men may come therefore to some understanding thereof, I shall first speak
of the Heavenly and of the Earthly Globes, and the several matters incident
thereunto. Then I shall also make a brief description of the four parts of the
earth, and the countries in each part, the several Religions professed in them;
with their varieties of trade and commodities therein, never yet set forth in a
Treatise of this nature.

The whole wo^ld therefore is divided into two parts, Ethereal, or Celestial,
and Elemental; Of which there are two Globes accordingly, the heavenly and the
earthly; Now a Globe is a proportionable representation of the heavens or of
the earth; the Ethereal, Celestial, or heavenly part does compass the
Terrestial o^ earthly, and contains the ten upper Spheres, or nearest unto
the earth, the Moon 2. Mercury 3. Venus 4. the Sun 5. Mars 6. Jupiter 7. Saturn
8. the starrie firmament 9. the Chrystalline heaven, having no stars at all,
10. the Primum Mobile, or first mover, containing all the rest within it, and
moving from the east to the west, carries about with it in violence all the
other Spheres. The rest of the Spheres have contrary motions, every one in his
kind, though far slower then the other, and the motions are contrary from the
west to the east; and so are carried about oftentimes by the first mover,
before they make one perfect revolution in themselves.

The Chrystaline or ninth sphere his motion is almost insensible, and is called
the trembling motion, pe^formed (according to the opinion of latter
Astronomers) in four thousand nine hundred years.

The eight sphere being the starry firmament, in seven thousand years, the
sphere of Saturn in thirty years, of Jupiter in twelve years, Mars in two
years, the Sun passes the Zodiac in three hundred sixty five days, Venus
ends her course in somewhat more then a year, Mercury holds equal pace with the
Sun, and the Moon co^rseth about the heavens once every eight and twenty days.

Thus much for the Celestial or heavenly part of the world, wherein I shall
need say nothing of the religion of Angels, and the spirits of just men made
perfect, seeing it is manifest enough to every one, that there they keep their
first esta^e; The religion also of the fallen Angels (who are held by many to
be thrust out of heaven, and to abide in the Air, whereupon Satan is called
the Prince of the air, Ephesians. 2. 2.) is so no^o^ious for enmity against God and
all manner of wickedness, that poor man is more sen^ient of ^orow, for their
tentations, then (...) with words to express their wickedness to the life.

The Elemental part of the world is fourfold, earth, water, air, fire, as may
be seen in that round figure of the frame of the heavens and elements one
within another; the inmost and middlemost circle containing earth and water
intermixed together; the next the three regions of the air; and immediately
above that Orb is the element of fire: all which you may eas^ly discern by
their seve^al names in their proper places. And (...) much (...) s^ffice to
have spoken of the Glob^ of (...) whole world.

I shall now peak first generally and briefly of the Globe of the whole earth*
and things incident thereunto^ th^n (...) parti^ularly of the (...), and every
remarkable co^n^y in each part, as I promised in the beginning.

The Globe of the earth therefore is defined to be a sphe^ic^l body
propo^tionably composed of ea^^h and water, the two parts thereof.

The parts of the earth are either real or imagin^ry.

The real parts are either Continents or Islands, A Continent is a great
quantity of Land not interlaced or separated by the sea, wherein many kingdoms
and p^incipalities are con^ained; as Europe, Asia, Africa and America.

An lsland, called in La^ine insula quasi in sale, is a part of the earth
environed ^ound with waters; as Britain, Iava, St. Laurence Isle, Bermoodes.

Now these again are sub-divided into a Peninsula, Isthmos, and a Promontory. A
peninsula is such a tract of land, which being almost encompassed round by
waters, is nevertheless joined to the firm land by some little Isthmus, as
Peloponesus, Taurica, Cymbrica and Pervana.

An Isthmus is a little narrow neck of land which joyneth any peninsula to the
continent; as the straits of Dariene in Peru, and Corinth in Greece.

A Promontory is some high mountain which shoots it self into the sea, the
utmost end of which is called a Cape: as that great Cape of good hope; and Cape
Verde in Africa, Cape Gomerie in Asia, and that of Saint Michaels mount in
Cornwall, the north Cape in Norway, and diverse others.

There are also other real parts of the earth, as mountains, valleys, fields,
plains, woods, and the like.

The other general part of the Globe is the water, divided into the Ocean.
Secondly, the Sea. Thirdly, the Straits. Fourthly, Creeks.

The Ocean is the general collection of all waters, which invironeth the whole
world on every side.

The sea is part of the Ocean, to which we cannot come, but through some
strait, as the Mediterranean sea, the Balti^k sea, and the like.

These two take their names either from the adjacent places, as the British
Ocean, the ^erman sea, the Atlantic sea, and the like: Or from the first
Discoverer, as the Magellanick sea, Forbushers Straits^, or from some
remarkable accident, as the Red sea from the red color of the ^ands, and the
like.

Thirdly, a strait is a part of the Ocean restrained within narrow bounds, and
opening a way to the sea, as the straits of Gibralter, Hellespont, Anian.

Fourthly, A creek is a crooked shore, thrusting forth as it were two arms, to
embrace and affectionately to hold the sea; as the Adriatic, Persian and
Corinthian creek. Hitherto belong Rivers, Brooks, and fountains engendered of
congealed air in the earths concavities, and seconded by sea-waters, creeping
through hidden crannies thereof.

Thus much of the real parts of the earth in general.

The compass of the whole earth is cast by our latest learned Geographers,
twenty one thousand six hundred English miles, which we thus compute. We see by
continued experience, that the Sun for every degree in the heavens, gains
sixty miles upon the earth toward his circuit round, and after three hundred
sixty degrees returns to the same point in respect of us as before it was.
Add the number of sixty so often, and you will find the account the same, and so
by proportion of the circumference to the Diameter, which is, tripla sesqui
septima. the same which twenty two has to seven.

We may count likewise the earths thickness to the center: The whole Diameter
by rule being less then a third part of the circuit. That in the proportion to
twenty one thousand six hundred, will be six thousand eight hundred seventy
two, half the number will reach the middle of the world, and that is, three
thousand four hundred thirty six, being considered with great exactness, as the
measure of such a great bulk as the earth is, can easily be taken and
comprehended.

Geographers attribute unto the earth five circles.

The first is the Equinoctial, when the Sun in his course is come thereunto;
about the eleventh of March and September, the day and the night are of equal
length through the whole earth. It is also termed the Equator, and by the
seafaring men the middle Line; because it divides the earth into two equal
parts, of which the one lies toward the north, the other toward the south.
And because it is in the midst between the two poles of the world, one in the
north, the other in the south. The second circle is called the Tropic of the
Crabb, because when the sun is come thither about the tenth of June, it
returns by little and little unto the Equator. And then unto them that dwell
on the northside of the Equator, is the day longest; and shortest to them that
dwell on the southside thereof. This circle is distinct from the Equinoctial
twenty three degrees, three minutes and an half, Northward.

The third is called the Tropic of Capricorn, because the sun being come
thereto on the eleventh of December, turns his course backward to the
Equator; and then contrariwise, to them who live on the north of the Equator is
the day shortest, and longest to them on the south thereof; it is distant from
the Equinoctial southward twenty three degrees, thirty one minutes and an half.

The fourth is called the Arctick circle; the fifth the Antartick; of which the
one is distant twenty three degrees, thirty one minutes and an half from the
no^th pole; the other just so many from the south pole. And are described by
the revolution of heaven from the Poles of the Zodiac, which is the sun.
Mercator the ancient Astronomer understood by the Arctick circle not only that
aforesaid, but also every circle whose half Diameter answers to the pole in
any place whatsoever, and contains, according to the Altitude of every
country, certain stars, which never set, but always are above the earth; so
that in all regions differing in Latitude, this circle is diverse, as also is
the Antarctick. Now the four lesser circles, the two Tropicks and Polar
circles, do fitly part the earth into five Zones, that is to say girdles,
because they compass like bands, the round Globe of the earth. The first of
these Zones lies under the Artick or north circle, and is called the cold
north Zone; the second lies under the Antartick or sourth circle is called the
cold south Zone; the third is situate in the middle between the two Tropicks
called the scorched Zone; the fourth lies under that which is between the
north circle and the Tropic of Cancer, and is called the temperate north Zone;
the fifth also is under that space which is between the Tropic of Capricorn,
and the south circle, and is called the temperate south Zone.

Now to understand rightly the situation of countries, their Longitude and
Latitude according to the mind of Geographers is to be known. The Latitude of
places which with the height of the pole is always one, beginning at the
Equinoctial, is taken two manner of ways; either toward the south, or toward
the north, unto the number ninety. The Longitude is returned from the Meridian
circle, and about the west Islands called Carva and Flores, beginning right at
the Equator easterly, and running forwards unto the number three hundred sixty.
As for example, London lies from the Equinoctial northward, fifty one decrees
and a half, which is the Latitude; and the Longitude thereof is twenty degrees
answering unto that degree of the Equinoctial, reckoning from the Meridian.

And now that I have briefly touched upon the Longitude and Latitude of
countries, and having often spoke of the Meridian and Horizon: I shall I hope
not unprofitably take time in a word or two, to tell you what each of them are.

The Meridian is a great circle rounding the earth from pole to pole. There are
many Meridians according to the diverse places in which a man lives. But the
chief and first Meridian passes through the islands Saint Michael and of the
Azores.

The Horizon is a great circle designing so great a space of the earth as a
quick sight can ken in an open field: the use of it is to discern the diverse
risings and settings of the stars.

I shall now speak a little of the Climates, and Parallels, and then I hope I
have done with things generally concerning the earth.

A climate is a space of the earth included within the space of two parallels.

The use of them is to show the difference of length and shortness of days
over all the world, as you may see in the midst of every climate, the number of
the longest day in the year, under that climate; the longest day in one climate
differing half an hour from the longest of another, so that there are twenty
four climates, consisting of forty eight parallels, ere the day come to be
twenty four hours of length, which is twelve hours longer then the
Equinoctial day is. Now under the Equinoctial line, and thirteen degrees, that
is, three parallels on either side thereof, the days exceed not the length of
twelve hours, but after in every clime increase the length of half an hour;
and when they come to forty eight parallels and twenty fo^r climates (as I said
before) the days being then twenty four hours long, their increase is then by
whole weeks and months, till in the twenty fourth clime about the pole, the
day is full half a year long; and it is thus between the Equator and the north
pole. So it is between the said Equator and the south pole: wherefore there are
two sorts of climes, that is, twenty four northern, and as many southern,
touching the names of which and other circumstances, I shall say nothing here,
but leave the readers to other more long discourses, thinking this enough in a
tract of this nature to have spoken of things generally concerning the whole
earth.

The whole earth is now divided into four parts. Europe. Asia. Africa. America.
Of each part, and their several regions, Empires, kingdoms, dominions,
Commonwealths, Titles of honors and laws, as briefly as I can, together also
with their sundry trade and commodities.

Europe, though the least of the three first parts of the world, nevertheless
excels all other parts in worthiness, power, renown, multitudes of
well-builded cities, and of people skilful in all kind of arts, also excelling
in virtue, and the knowledge of God, better then all the riches of the world.

Through the Grecian and Roman Empire in it, it has had once the dominion
over Asia and Africa. Mr. Heylin mentions in it fourteen mother tongues, which
I will not stand now to name.

It has plenty of grain, plants, fruits, coals, rivers, and fountains of
admirable virtue; it needs nothing but what may be well spared, as hot spices,
not so fit for our temper, precious jewels, the nourishers of vain and
soul-destroying pride, and wild beasts, which cause deserts where they breed;
yet of gold, silver, and other commodities it has a part: it is divided on the
east from Asia, partly by the rivers Duina, and Tunnis, and partly by the l^ke
called Meotis, now termed Mare de le Zabbacche, and pone Euxine, or Mare
Maggiore.

From Africa, it is severed by the midland sea; on the west and north side it
has the great Ocean; I shall follow Mr. Heylins method in the desciption of
the regions and countries thereof, beginning with first Italy, then going
secondly to the Alps, thirdly, France, fourthly Spain, fifthly Britain,
sixthly, Belgia, sevently, Germany, eighthly Denmark, ninethly, Swethland,
tenthly, Russia, eleventh Poland, twelfth, Hungary, thirteenth, Sclavonia,
fourteenth, Dacia, and the fifteenth Greece; speaking of the several islands,
as they relate to some or other of these greater countries.

Italy, the mother of all Latin learning stretches out easterly on Asia
between the Adriatic and Thuscan Seas, and borders toward the west upon
France, and toward the north on Germany, and is severed from those countries
by the river Varus, and the mountains called Alps, the rest being compassed
with the sea. It has had seven kinds of government, first Kings, second
Consuls, third Dictators, fourth Decemviri, fifth Tribunes, sixth Emperors,
seventh Popes. It flourished most in the time of Christ, and a little
afterward by means of the great and wide dominion of the mighty city of Rome,
which then reigned as Queen of the world, over many lands of Europe, Asia, and
Africa.

This land excels all the lands of Europe, in fruitfulness and pleasantness,
the inhabitants are witty, industrious and frugal, yet hot and lascivious. And
withal the men very jealous, and that taken to be not without cause. The
religion there now professed is the Popish Religion, unto which they are more
straightly kept by the Inquisition.

The chief wares which are carried out of Italy into other countries, are rice,
silks, velvets, sattins, taffaties, grogrems, rashes, stamels, bumbasins,
fustians, felts, serving for clokes, costly arras, gold and silver-thred,
alum, gals, Venetian drinking and looking-glasses. It contains at this day
the kingdoms of Naples, Sicily, and Sardinia, the lands and patrimony of the
Church so called* which the Pope possesses; the great Dukedoms of Urbin and
Tuscani, the Commonwealths of Venice, Genoa, and Luca, and the estates of
Lumbardy, being the Dukedoms of Millain, Mantua, Modena, Parma, Montferrat, and
the principality of Piemont; of all which I shall observe somewhat.

The Kingdom of Naples in Italy, is environed on all sides with the Adriatic,
Ionian and Tuscan seas, excepting where it joyneth on the west to the lands of
the Church, from which separated by a line drawn from the mouth of the river
Tronto or Druentus, falling into the Adriatic, to the spring head of Axofenus,
taking up all the east of Italy, one thousand four hundred sixty eight miles;
it has anciently been called the kingdom of both the Sicilies. The fertilest
place of all Italy, abounding in all things necessa^y for life, delight and
Physic. Hence are also brought the Neapolitan horses. It has had thirteen
Princes, twenty four Dukes, 25. Marquesses, ninety Earls, and nine hundred
Batons, not titular only, but men of great estates; It has had twenty six
Kings of several countries, beginning first with the Norman race, and now being
in the hand of Spain; the disease called now the French Pox, was first in all
Christendom found here. The Arms of this kingdom are Azure^seme of Fleur de
Lices, or a file of three Labels Gules.

Its revenue is two millions and an half of crowns, whereof twenty thousand are
the Popes his chief rent, and the rest so exhausted in maintaining Garrisons
upon the Natives, and a strong Navy against the Turks, that the King of Spain
receives not a fourth part thereof clearly; it has twenty Archbishops, and
one hundred twenty seven Bishops-Seas.

The kingdom of Sicilia in Italy is situate under the fourth climate; the
longest day being thirteen hours and an half; it shoots forth into the Sea with
three capes or Promontories.

The people are ingenious, eloquent and pleasant, but withal very inconstant
and full of talk; they invented Oratory, Pastoral Eclogues, hour-glasses, with
military Engines. The soil is incredibly fruitful in Wine, Oil, Honey, Minerals
of gold, silver, and alum; together with plenty of salt, and sugar; there are
also gems of Agats, and Emeralds; it yields also great store of the richest
silk, has most excellent and delicious fruits both for taste and color; with
abundance also of all sorts of grain. Here is the hill Aetna, which many have
taken to be hell, and ignorant Papists Purgatory, because of its sending forth
of flames of fire, which the brimstone there causes. It has many Cities.
Rivers, and Lakes, of which I cannot stand to treat.

There were eight Kings of Sicilia, six of the first whereof were called to
rule. In the year one thousand two hundred eighty one, the house of Arragon
governed it, and there has succeeded ten Kings; It is now united to the Crown
of Spain the revenue is eight hundred thousand, some say million of Ducats
disbursed again on the entertainment of the Viceroy and defense of the Island
the Arms are four Pallets, Gules sable, being those of Arragon between two
Flanches Argent, charged with as many Eagles Sabel beaked Gul^s.

It has had seven Princes, four Dukes, thi^teen Marquesses, fourteen Earls,
one Viscount, and forty eight Barons; the people are Papists, and have three
Archbishops, and nine Bishops.

The Island and kingdom of Sardinia in Italy, lies west from Scicilie from
the nearest point Cape Boy, or Cape Bara.

It is distant about two hundred miles, it is in lenghth one hundred eighty
miles, ninety in breadth, five hundred sixty in the circuit, and is situate
under the fourteenth climate, the longest day being fourteen hours; there is
neither Woolf nor Serpent, neither venomous or hurtful beast, but the fox
only, and a little creature like a spider, which will by no means endure the
sight of the Sun, excep^ (...) by violence: Some pools it has, very plentiful
of fish* but generally are destitute of River-water, that they are fai^ to keep
the rain which falls in winter for their use in summer; by means whereof, and
for that there is is no passage, for the Northern winds being obstructed by the
high mountains near Cap-Lugudori, the air is generally unhealthy, if not
pestilential. The soil is very fertile, but ill manured, well stored with all
sorts of cattle; the horses hereof ^ot, headstrong and hard to be broken, but
will last long: the bullocks naturally gentle, so that the countryman does as
familiarly ride them, as they do in Spain on Mules or Asses, here is also the
beast called Mufrones or Muscriones, found in Corsica also, but in no other
part of Europe, somewhat resembling a Stagg, but of so strong an hide, that it
is used by the Italians in stead of Armor, of the skin of which carried to
Cordova in Spain, and there dressed is made the right Cordovant leather; also
there is an herb whereof if one eat, it is said that he will dye with laughter;
the herb being of such a poisonous nature, that it causes the man to dye with
such a convulsion of sine^s, tha^ he seems to grinne or laugh at the time of
his death. The people are small of sta^^re, their complexion inclining unto
swarthiness, rude in manners, very slothful and rebellious, yet given to
hunting, their diet mean, their appa^^el in towns gorgeous, in villages base,
their religion papistically formal, little curious, their Clergy being counted
the most illiterate and ignorant in that part of the world called Chris^endome;
it (...) now in the hands of the king of Spain, (...) by a Vice Roy, who
resides at Calari^* and must of necessity be a Spa^^ard, under whom are (...)
Deputies, Governour^, (...) what profits arise here to the King of Spain, I
have no where found. The arms hereof are said to be Or a cross Gules betwixt
four Saracens heads Sable curled argent. There are also diverse small islands
belonging thereunto. And lastly it has three Archbishops and fifteen Bishops.

The lands of the Church, or the Popes Dominions in Italy, lie west of the
realm of Naples, extended north and south from the Adriatic to the Tuscan
Seas, bounded on the northeast with the river Trontus, on the south-east with
the Axofenus, by which two parted from that kingdom as on the northwest by the
rivers Poe and Frore; by which separated from the State of Venice: and on the
southwest by the river Piscio, by which it is divided from the modern Tuscany,
or the State of the Florentine. It is the middle of Italy, having in breadth
from one Sea unto another, above one hundred miles, and in length above three
hundred miles; the land exceeding fertile, abounding with multitudes of people,
seldom consumed with wars; they are good husbands for their ground, but no
tradesmen for Manufactures; there have been fifteen Exarches of Ravenna in
Romandiola; seventeen Dukes and Marquesses of Ferrara: the revenue whereof was
two hundred fifty thousand crowns yearly, but now it is not worth so much to
the Pope: there have been also six Dukes of Urbin, the revenues are one hundred
thousand crowns; but the chiefest glory they have, is of the city Rome,
sometime the Empress of the world: there are accounted to have passed in it
sixty five Bishops before it usurped the spiritual supremacy over Christendom;
Bonifacius the third in the year of Christ six hundred and six making the sixty
sixth Bishop, so ful^illing the mark of Antichrist, Rev. 13. 18. of the number
six hundred sixty six, which also the numeral letters make up in his arrogant
Title, Genera Lis VICar Ius DeI In terrIs.

The Bishops taking this Title in the year one thousand six hundred forty four,
had been one hundred seventy nine, and both added together, two hundred forty
four; and how many more they shall be, he only knows, who knows all
things; the ordinary temporal revenues of the Pope, are two millions of crowns,
but the extraordinary spiritual, twice as much. There were several orders of
monks installed at several times, called the orders of Saint Basil, Austin,
Jerome, Carmelites, Crouched Friars, Dominicans, Benedictines, Franciscans,
Jesuits, and Oratorians: And of women the Orders chiefly of Clare and Bridget,
which to name only, I think may suffice in a Treatise of this nature. The
Archbishops here are forty four, the Bishops fifty seven.

The Italian Provinces of the State of Venice, lie northward of the lands of
the Church from Romandiola to the Alps, bounded on the South with the Territory
of Ferrara and the rest of Romandiola on the west, with the Dukedom of Millain
on the north, with the main body of the Alps, and on the east with the
Adriatic sea and the river Arsia, by which its parted from Liburnia, a
Sclavonian province. It abounds with wise people and fruitful cities and
countries; their religion is popish, but not so absolutely slavish as the rest.
They b^ptize the Sea yearly, and their Duke marryeth it as often.

Their government is Aristocratical and popular; they have had near one hundred
Dukes of Venice; they have two principal orders of Knighthood, of Saint Mark
the Patron of the city, instituted one thousand three hundred thirty, and
renewed one thousand five hundred sixty two. They are to be of noble blood, at
least a Gentleman; their word or Motto is, Pax tibi Marce: the other is of the
glorious Virgin, instituted one thousand two hundred twenty two: their charge
is to defend Widows and Orphans, and to procure (as much as in them is) the
peace of Italy. The Arms of the order is a purple cross between certain stars;
the Habit a white Surcoat over a russet cloak, and seems to be religious as
well as military: there are in this Italian part of Venice, two Patriarchs, and
sixteen Bishops.

The Dukedom of Florence or the estate of the Great Duke of Tuscany, is
divided in the east from Saint Peter's Pat^imony by the river Pisca, on ^he west
from the Commonwealth of Genoa, by the river Macra, and the strong fort of
Sarezana, on the north from Romandiola, and Marca Anteritana by the Appeninne
hills: and on the southside, it is bounded with the Tuscan or Terrhenian seas:
It was a while a free State, having Princes of the house of Medici, but now it
is governed by the Duke of Florence, or great Duke of Tuscany, of the same
family. The length of this State is two hundred sixty mile, the breadth in some
places much inferior: the only order of Knighthood here is that of Saint
Stephen, in^^ituted one thousand five hundred sixty one. It is kept August 6.
yearly, and has all the privileges of them of Malta, upon condi^ion that
they of the order should make a vow of charity, of continual chasity and
obedience; they are to be nobly born, and in lawful wedlock, of (...) Romish
Church, and without note of infamy; their Robe is of white Chamlet, with a red
cross of their lefr side sowed upon their midday Garments, or their wearing
cloaks: the number is uncertain; the great Duke is the supreme Master of it,
the revenues are very great; besides the great Duke is a Merchant, and takes
Excise almost of every thing: the Arms are Or, five Tortecax, Gules, two two
and one and one in chief, Azure charged with three florwre-de-luces of the
first. Here are three Archbishops and twenty six Bishops.

The free State of Luca in Italy, lies betwixt the State of the great Duke,
and the Commonwealth of Genoa; they are a free, courteous, modest people of
good judgment and discreet, wisely preserving their liberty against the
strength of potent neighbors, they are industrious also, well seen in
Manufactures, especially in weaving cloth of gold and silk. The Dominions of it
are eighty miles, the revenue is eighty thousand crowns yearly; it can raise
for war fifteen thousand foot and three thousand horse; the government is mixed
of Aristocracy, and Democracie: the principal Magistrate, called Gone Falinere,
is changeable every second month, assisted by a certain and determinate number
of citizens, whom they change every sixth month also, during which time they
lie together in the palace or common hall; their Protector is also elective, of
some neighbor King or State; their religion is Popish; they have two Bishops,
only acknowledging the Archbishop of Florence for their Metropolitan.

The Commonwealth of Genoa in Italy lies west of Tuscany, from which it is
divided by the river Macra. They were anciently a large State, but have now
only Liguria and the isle of Corsica in their power; the men were good
warriors, Merchants, and given to usury, which they learned of the Jews. Mr.
Heylin reports, that it was the saying of a merry fellow, that in
Christendom there were neither Scholars enough, Gentlemen enough, nor Jews
enough: not Scholars enough, for then so many would not be double or
treble-beneficed; not Gentlemen enough, for then we should not have so many
Pesants turn gentlemen; nor lastly, Jews enough, for then so many Christians
would not turn Usurers.

The women here are privileged above all Italy having liberty to talk with
whom they will, and be courted by any that will both publicly and privately;
from hence and some other particulars, they have made this proverb of the State
of the country; Mountains without wood, Seas without fish, men without faith,
and women without shame. They have a Duke and eight more assistant with him,
all subject to the general counsel of four hundred men; the Duke and his eight
assistants hold but two years; Spain is their Protector, and they have one
Archbishop, fourteen Bishops.

The States of Lumbardy in Italy is bounded on the east with Romandiola, and
the State or Territory of Ferrara, on the west with that part of the Alps which
divides Italy from France, on the north (reckoning Marca Trevigiana within the
bounds thereof) with that part of the Alps which lies toward Germany; and on
the fo^th with the Apennine, which parts it from Liguria or the States of
Genoa: as Italy is the garden of Europe, so Lumbardy is the Garden of Italy for
the fruitfulness.

The Dukedom of Millain in Italy, has on the east the States of Mantua and
Parma, on the west Piemont, and some part of Switzerland one of the Provinces
of the Alps, on the north Marca Treuigana, and on the south the Apennine, which
parts it from Liguria Or the States of Genoa: It has had several Lords and
Dukes of Millain, accounted the chief Dukedom in Christendom, but now under
the Spaniards; the aunual rent worth eight hundred thousand Ducats; but
considering all charges, the Spaniard is taken to be out in keeping it. The
arms are Argent, a Serpent Azure crowned, Or, in his Gorge an infant Gules,
there are one Archbishop, six Bishops.

The Dukedom of Mantua in Italy, is bounded on the west with Millain, on the
east with Romandiola, on the north with Marca Triugiana* and on the south with
the Dukedom of Parma; the soil is reasonable good, and yields all sorts of
fruits, being well manured plentiful in corn, pastures and abundance of Vines,
but the inhabitants not so civil and well bred as the rest of Italy, childish
in their apparel, without manly gravity, in entertainment of friends and
exacting all they can from strangers; it is a free State, and has many Dukes
thereof, the chief order of Knighhood in these Dukedomes is of the blood of our
Lord Jesus Christ, instituted Ann. one thousand six hundred eight, it
consists of twenty Knights whereof the Mantuan Dukes are Sovereigns. The
collar has threads of gold, laid on with fire, and interwoven with these words,
Domine probasti.

To the collar are pendent two Angels supporting three drops of blood, and
circumscribed, Nihil ista triste recepto. It is accounted a great circuit, but
not worth above five hundred thousand Ducats: the arms are argent, a cross
Patee Gules between four Eagles sable membred of the second, under an Escuchion
in fise charged quarterly with Gules, a Lion Or and Or three bars sable: here
are one Archbishop, four Bishops.

I shall pass by the Dukedoms of Modena, Parma, and Mountferrat, as being all
three but small esttates of Italy, and having but four Bishops amongst them
all: the arms of Modena the same with the Dukedom of Ferrara, and the arms of
Mountferrat, Gules, a chief argent: thus much for Italy.

The principality of Piemont a part of the Alps, situate at the foot of the
Mount is bounded on the east with Millain and Mountferrat, on the west with
Savo^, on the north within the Switzers, and on the south it runs in a
narrow valley to the Mediterranian, having Mountferat on the one side Province
and a part of the Alps upon the other: it is very fertile compared with Savoy,
and Switzerlaad, but thought to be inferior to the rest of Italy: the Arms of
this principallity are Gules, a cross argent, charged with a Label of three
points Azure. It is now subject to the Dukedom of Savoy.

Savoy strictly and specially so called, is bounded on the East with
Wallisland, and part of Piemont on the west, with Daulphin and La Bress, on the
south with some parts of Daulphine only, and on the north with Switzerland and
the lake of Geneva. The country is altogether hilly and mountainous, very
healthful but not very fruitful: the common people are naturally very dull, but
the Gentry pleasant, ingenious, and civil: there have been near thirty Earls
and Dukes of Savoy: it is a very strong place with fortifications of nature;
the revenue ordinarily a million of crowns yearly. The only order of
Knighthood here is that of the Anunciado, ordained one thousand four hundred
and eight; their collar is of fifty links, to show the mysteries of the Virgin;
at the end is her portraiture with the history of the annunciation, instead of
a Motto these letters F. E. R. T. i. e. Fortitudo ejus Rhodum tenuit, are
engraven to every plate or link of the collar, each link being interwoven one
within another in form of a true lovers knot; the number of the Knights is
fourteen beside the Duke the Sovereign of the order; the solemnity held
annually on our Lady day: the Arms are G. a cross A. Geneva is a city of the
Dukedom of Savoy, now a free State, having cast off both the Pope and their
own Duke, and kept freely by their neighbors jealousy each of other touching
it; the religion is Calvinist Protestant, the government Presbyterial, the
language the worst French, the people industrious, and Merchants; their
situation, for neighbors advantageous thereunto.

Wallisland reaches from the mountain de Burken to the town of Saint Maurice,
where the hills do close and shut up the valley, which is so narrow in that
place, that a bridge laid from one hill to another (under which the river Rosue
does pass) is capable of no more then one Arch only, and that defended with a
Castle, and two strong gates; on other parts it is environed with a continual
wall of steep and horrid mountains, covered all the year long with a crust of
ice, not passable at all by armies, and not without much difficulty by single
passengers, so that no citadel can be made so strong by Art as this country is
by nature. The valley is very fruitful in Saffron, corn, wine, and most
delicate fruits, having medows and pleasant pastures. They have also a Fountain
of Salt, and many hot Bathes, and medicinal waters; they have cattle enough to
serve them; also a wild Buck, equal to a Stagg in bigness, footed like a Goat,
and horned like a fallow Deer, leaping with wonderful agility, and so not
easily caught, but in summer time, for then with the heat he is blind. The
people are courteous toward strangers, but very rough and churlish toward one
another: they are of the Romish religion, and subject to the Bishop of Sion.
The Deputies of the seven Resorts having not only voices with the Cantons in
his election but bein chosen they join with him also in the Diets for choosing
Magistrates, redressing grievances, and determining matters of the State.

Switzerland has on the east the Grisons, and some part of Tyrol in Germany,
on the west the mountain Jove and the lake of Geneva, which parts it from
Savoy, and Burgundy, on the north Suevia, another province also of the upper
Germany; and on the south Wallisland, and the Alps which borders on the
Dukedom of Millain. It is totally in a manner overgrown with craggy mountains,
but such as for the most part have grassy tops, and in their hollowness rich
medows and nourishing pastures, being two hundred forty miles in length, and
one hundred eighty in breadth: the inhabitants are rich, and rugged of
disposition like their land, good soldiers and mercenary almost to every one;
their religion mixed, some Papists, some Protestants, Zwinglians, yet they have
agreed to tolerate one another; their government popular.

The country of the Grizons is bounded on the east with the country of Tyrol,
with Switzerland on the north, with Suevia, and a part of the Switzers, on the
south with Lombardy, a very mountanous and barren land, the people now
Protestant, their government popular; in these Alpine parts there are two
Archbishops, thir^teen Bishops.

France has always been held the principal and worthiest kingdom of all
Christendom; it is bounded on the east with Germany, and southward with the
Mediteranian Sea, south-east with the Alps, and on the north with the British
Sea. It is very fruitful in all sorts of grain, and whatsoever is needful for
the maintenance of life, especially it has great abundance of wines, wherewith
many other lands are also served. It is divided into many great Dukedoms and
Provinces, has in it also diverse great, mighty and famous cities, the people
are heady; but ingenious and good warriors. The government is merely regal,
and at the pleasure of the Prince, of which it has had many great and powerful
ones: the religion of the Land is Popish, but there are many Protestants there,
who although they have been greatly persecuteed, yet sometimes their number
has indulged them in the exercise thereof: the chief orders of Knighthood yet
extant here are first of Saint Michael, instituted one thousand four hundred
and nine. It consisted first of thirty persons, but after, of three hundred:
the habit of the order a long cloak of white damask, down to the ground, with a
border interwoven with cocklsheells of gold, interlaced and furred with Ermins,
with a hood of Crimson Velvet, and a long tippet about their necks; they wear a
collar woven with Cockleshels: the word immensi tremor oceani; the picture of
Saint Michael Conquering the Devil was annexed to the collar, the seat thereof
anciently, Saint Michaels mount in Normandy, and the day Saint Michaels day.
Secondly of the holy Ghost, ordained one thousand five hundred seventy nine.
The order of Saint Michael is to be given to none but such as were first
dignified with this, whereunto none were to be admitted, but such as could
prove their nobility by three descents: their oath to maintain the Romish
Catholic religion, and prosecute all opponents to it: their robe a black
velvet mantle, pourtrayed with lillies and flumes of gold, the colar of
Flower-de-luces, and flowers of gold, with a Cross, and a Dove appendent to it:
The Arms of France are Azure three Flower-de-luces Or; it has seventeen
Archbishops, one hundred and eight Bishops, and one hundred thirty two
thousand Parishes.

The Pirenean Hills are only a bound between France and Spain, two potent
kingdoms; the whole length not reckoning in the windings and turnings, affirmed
to be eighty Spanish Leagues at three miles to a league: the people barbarous,
but of what religion my Author says not: It may be he esteemed them so
barbarous, that he thought they could live without any religion at all.

Spain is severed from France by the Pirenean Mountains, on all other sides it
is environed with the Sea, it contains at this day diverse kingdoms, one
Goths, two Navars, there have been forty one Kings: The arms are Gules a
carbuncle nowed, Or, the chief order of knighthood was of the Lilley, their
Blazon a pot of Lilies with the pourtraiture of the Virgin engraven upon it;
their duty to defend the faith, and daily to repeat certain Avemaries, thirdly
Biscay, and Empascon, has had nineteen Lords: their arms Argent, two wolves
sable, each of them in his mouth a lamb of the second: four, Leon and Oviedo,
has had thirty Kings; the arms are argent; a Lion passant crowned, Or; five,
Gallicia has had ten Kings: the arms Azure semee of Cressets fiched, a Chalice
crowned, Or, six, Corduba has had twenty Kings: the arms Or; a Lion Gules
armed and crowned; of the first a border, Azure charged with eight towers
argent: seven, Granado has had twenty Kings, the arms Or, a Pomgranate
slipped, Vert: eight, Murcia: nine, Toledo, has had eleven Morish Kings: ten,
Castile has had twenty Kings; the order of Mercy is his chief order here:
their arms are a cross argent, and four beads, Gules in a field, Or; their
habit white; the rule of their order that of Saint Augustine: their duty was to
redeem Christians taken by the Turks with such money as was bestowed upon them:
eleven, Portugal has had twenty one Kings: the principal orders of Knighthood
here, are first of Avis wearing a green cross: second, of Christ, instituted
one thousand three hundred twenty one, their robe is a black Cassock under a
white surcoat, wherewith a red cross stroked in the midst with a white line:
their duty to expel the Moors out of Boetica the next neighbor to Portugal:
the arms of this kingdom are argent on five Escouchins Azure, as many Befants
in Saltire, of the first pointed sable, within a border Gules, charged with
seven towers Or: eleven Majorca has had successively four Kings: twelve,
Aragon has had twenty Kings: the order of Knighthood is of Mintesa, their robe
a red cross upon their breast; the arms Or, four Pallets Gules: all these are
now united in one Monarchy of the King of Spain: Their religion Popish,
whereunto they are kept by the violence of the Inquisition. The land yields all
sorts of wines, oils, sugar, grain, metals, as gold and silver; it is fertile
enough for the inhabitants, whose ambitions for the most part are base, the
meanest proud, the best, superstitious and hypocrites, many of them lascivious,
yet good soldiers, by patience in enduring hunger, thirst, labor. The King is
not rich by reason of his great expenses to keep his dominions, in which he
has eleven Archbishops, fifty two Bishops.

England together with Scotland on the north part thereof, makes the greatest
Island of Europe, and the richest in the world, situated in a very temperate
soil and wholesome air, and exceeding fruitful in wheat and other grain, has
many pleasant rivers, plentifully stored with fish, excellent havens,
commodious and safe, mines of silver, lead, iron, espetially of fine tin;
innumerable flocks of sheep, bearing fine wool, of which is made cloth that
serves not only themselves, but is also transported into other parts: the chief
city is London, the inhabitants are brave warriers both at sea and land, and
many of them learned and witty: the orders of Knight-hoo^ are of Saint George,
or of the Garter; there are twenty six Knights of it, whereof the King of
England was the Sovereign: the Ensign is a blew Garter, buckled on the left
leg, on which these words are embroidered, Honi soit qui mal y pense; about
their necks they wear a blew riband, at the end of which hangs the image of
Saint George, upon whose day this order is for the most part celebrated.
Secondly of the Bath, instituted one thousand and nine. They used to be created
at the Coronation of Kings and Queens, and the installing of the Prince of
Wales. Their duty to defend true religion, Widows, Maids, Orphans, and to
maintain the Kings rights; the Knights thereof distinguished by a red riband,
which they wear ordinarily about their necks, to difference them from Knights
Bachelours, of whom they have in all places the precedence, unless they be also
the sons of noble men, to whom their birth gives it before all orders. Thirdly
of Baronets, an hereditary honor: the arms are Mars, three Lions passant
gardant Sol.

Scotland, environed with the sea, except on the south side where it bordereth
with England, is not so fruitful, yet has of all things enough to sustain it
self; the head-city is Edenborough. Scotland gives not many sorts of course
woollen cloth, wool, malt, hides, fish. The principal order of Knighthood
here, is that of Saint Andrew. The Knights did wear about their necks a collar
interlaced with thistles, with the picture of Saint Andrew appendant to it. The
Motto is, Nemo me impune lacessit.

Secondly of Nova Scotia, ordained by King James, one thousand six hundred
twenty two, hereditary; but the Knights thereof distinguished by a riband of
Orange Tawney: the arms of the kingdom are Sol, a Lion rampant, Mars within a
double Tressure counter-flowred.

Ireland is full of brooks, marshes, waters and woods, has good pasture, and
abundance of tame and wild beasts, but little grain: the inhabitants are rude
and wild people, yet through the conversation and government of the English are
daily more and more brought to civility; the air here is very temperate,
cooler in summer and warmer in winter then in England: the arms of Ireland are
Azure, and Harp Or stringed Argent.

The Isles belonging to great Britain are the Surlings or Scillies, Garnesey,
Iarsey, Wight, Anglesey, Man, Hebrides, Orcades, and many others. All which
three Kingdoms and Islands aforesaid, make up one Commonwealth under the
government of his now Highness OLIVER, Lord Protector. Their religion is
Calvinist Protestant, their government called Independent.

The Low Countries contain seventeen Provinces, the Dukedoms of Brabant,
Guelderland, Lymburge and Lisenburge, the countries of Flanders, Artois,
Henault, Holland, Zeland, Namen. Zukfen, the Marquisate of the holy Empire, the
Lord-ships of Freezland, Michlen, Ouserisen and Graving; all which are lands
above measure well tilled and inhabited, containing two hundred and eight
cities, fortified with walls and ditches, and about six thousand three hundred
villages, with parish Churches, besides the Castles, Forts, and Noble men's
houses, which are almost infinite in number. This land is watered with many
excellent rivers, as the Rhine, the Mose, the Mard, the Scheld, and others. It
has also many commodious Sea-Havens, abounding in ships, and very skilful and
expert Mariners and Pilots, as by their navigations may appear, whereby they
have compassed as it were the whole world. The inhabitants also are very
valiant and notable warriors as well by sea as by land, as their enemies
themselves will witness. They are excellently well skilled in all cunning and
handy-crafts. Many attribute unto them the invention of the Sea-compass, as
also the needle, and laudable art of printing of books: they send abroad into
other parts all sorts of linen and woollen cloth, Camerick, Pasementlace, of
gold, silver, and silk, Taffata, wrought Velvet, Grograms, Says, whole and
half Velvet baggs, silk laces, say, and linen.

All manner of twined thread, wrought silk, refined sugar, prepared buff, and Ox
hides, as also Spanish leather, pictures, books, cables, ropes, and other
ship-furniture, cards, pinns, and all kind of mercery, dried and salt fishes,
herring, butter, cheese, and biscuit; the people are of the reformed religion,
but Flanders and Artois, and they are Papists; they suffer any religion amongst
them: the principal order of Knighthood ordained by these Princes is that of
the Golden Fleece instituted one thousand four hundred thirty nine, ordained,
as some conceive, from Gideons fleece; their habit is a collar of gold
interlaced with iron seeming to strike fire out of a flint, or ex ferro flammam
being the word, at the end whereof hung the Toison'd at Or, or a fleece of
gold, the King of Spain may now make as many of them as he please. There are in
these parts three Archbishops, fifteen Bishops.

Germany is one of the greatest Provinces in Europe, (and is in the midst
thereof) bounded on the east with Hungary and Polonia, on the south with Italy
and Bolonia, on the west with France; and on the north with the north sea, and
with the sea called Mare Balticum. In the midst whereof lies Bohemia,
wherein stands Pragu^, where the Emperor commonly keeps his court: it is
adorned with magnificent towers, well fortified and furnished with such a
number of castles, and of villages, such abundance of people, and with such
politic government, that she may compare with any. The soil is fruitful both
in corn and wine, it has many navigable rivers, stored with plenty of fishes,
most excellent fountains and hot Bathes; Mines of gold, silver, tin, copper,
lead, and iron, it has very learned men, skilful in all sciences and mechanic
arts: the religion is here very diverse, for there being many free Provinces,
some are Papists, some Protestants, and of these again some Calvinists, some
Lutherans: There are six Archbishops, and thirty four Bishops.

Denmark and Norway are very great regions bordering southward upon Germany;
they extend toward the north to seventy one degrees and thirty minutes, and
north Latitude toward the east; they border upon Sweden, and on the west and
north-side they are environed with the sea, they at this time are under the
government of one King who is Lord of Seland. Greenland, Hitland, and Gothland,
these Kingdoms afford unto other lands oxen, barley, malt, stock fish, tallow,
sand, nuts, hides, goat skins, masts, deals, oaken boards, wood to burn,
pitch, tar, brimstone, and the like: their religion is the Lutherans.

The chief order of Knighthood in it is that of the Elephant, their Badge a
collar powdered with Elephants, towred supporting the Kings arms, and having at
the end the picture of the Virgin Mary. The arms of the Land are quarterly Or
three Lions pasant, Vert, crowned of the first for the Kingdom of Denmark, and
two Gules, a Lion rampant Or crowned and armed of the first in the Paws, a
Dansk hatchet; argent for the Kingdom of Norway; there are two Archbishops,
thirteen Bishops.

Sweden is a great and mighty kingdom, bordering on the east upon Muscovia, on
the south unto the Baltic Sea, and Denmark on the west unto Norway, and on the
north unto the Finmark and the Zurick Sea. The merchandises it sells are
copper, iron, lead, costly furs, buff, and ox hides, goat skins, tallow,
pitch, barley, malt, Hazel-nuts, and such like things: their religion is
Lutheran: the arms of the Kingdom Azure, three crowns, Or, has two
Archbishops, eight Bishops.

Russia is the last region toward the east in Europe, a good part of it is in
Asia, it is bounded on the north with the Frozen Sea, on the east with
Tartaria, on the west it borders upon Livonia, and on the realm of Sweden, and
on the south with the sea called Mare Caspium, the greatest part is extreme
cold, but for the help of the inhabitants nature has stored it with furs,
sables, white fox, martins, and other commodities, as cattle, corn, and fruit:
the whole region is subject to the Emperor of Russia, a wast tract, and as wild
a government.

The people are base, ignorant, contentious, and foolishly superstitious; after
the Greek Church, they deny the proceeding of the Holy Ghost, they bury their
dead upright, with many other ceremonies: Muscovia is the seat of the Empire.
The country affords very good flax, and hoop to make casks, and ropes, and
store of hides, as well of oxen as helks, much salt fish, and whales grease,
the arms are sable, a partel open of two leases and as many degrees, Or. Here
is one Patriarch, two Archbishops, eighteen Bishops.

Poland is bounded on the south with Moldavia, and Hungary, on the east with
Muscovia, and with the Tartaries, per O Coptiques, on the west with Germany,
and on the north with the Baltic Sea, the religion is partly with the Greek
Church, partly with the Roman, and so there are here of the Romish Church three
Archbishops, and nineteen Bishops, and of the Greek Church, two Archbishops;
and six Bishops: The arms are one Gem, and Eagle, an Ass argent crowned and
Nowed, Or, for the region of Polonia, and two Gules a Chevaleir armed Cap a pe
advancing his sword argent mounted upon a barbed courser of the second for the
Dukedom of Lituania: the commodities sent thence are Spruce or Dantz beer,
amber, wheat, rye, and other grain; honey, wax, hemp, flax, pitch and tarr: it
has also mines of copper and iron.

Hungary is bounded on the south with Bosnia and Croatia, on the west with
Germany, on the east with Moldavia and Valacha, and on the north with Polonia:
a great and mighty Kingdom, and exceeding fruitful, it has many navigable
rivers, wherein are multitude of fish.

The people are strong, and show their antiquity to be of the Scythians, by
their neglect of learning, and barbarous manners; their sons equally inherit
without privilege of Birthright; their daughters portion is only a new
attire. The German Emperor and the Turk share it between them; the commodities
that go from thence are diverse sorts of colors, wheat, beef, salt, wine, and
river-fish salted: the arms are bar wise of eight pieces, Gules and argent:
there are here two Archbishops, thirteen Bishops.

Sclavonia has on the south the Adriatic Sea, on the west part of Italy,
Greece on the south east, and Hungary on the north; part of it belongs to the
Turk, some to the Venetian estate, some to the Hungarians, and some to the
Austrians: the arms Argent, a Cardinals hat, the strings meeting in base Gules
perpendant and placed in a true loves knot; there are four Archbishops, twenty
six Bishops.

Greece, once a mother of learning and arts, now the den of the Turkish Empire
who has its abode at Constantinople: it is bounded on the west with the
Adriatic Sea, on the north with the mountain Hemus, on the south with the
Mediterranean Sea, and on the east Egypt, Hellespont Propontis. The
commodities brought from hence are gold, silver, coper, diverse colors, wines,
and velvets, Damask and Turkish Grogram; their religion has in it some
substantial error, as that they deny that the Holy Ghost proceeds from the
Father and the Son, they hold also baptism of fire to be necessary, yet they
resist the Authority of the Bishop of Rome.

And thus now have I finished Europe, the first part of the world.

The names of the greatest and most famous cities and Rivers in the world.
IN Italy the cities of Genoa, Milan, Venice, Florence, Rome, Bologne, and
Naples, the rivers most famous, are Arnus, Tiber, and Po.

The cities in France that are most famous, are Amiens, Rouen, Paris, Troyes,
Nantes, Orleans, D^ion, Lions, Bordeaux, Toulose, Marseilles, Gre^^ble,
Anverse: the rivers that are most remarkable, are the L^yre, the Garone, the
Rhone, the S^yne.

The cities in Spain that do most prefer themselves to observation, are Toledo,
Madrid, Leon, Pampelunc, Bilbo, Priede, Saint James of Compostella, Lisbone,
Fax, Siville, Grenade, Mursy, Sarragosa, Barcelona, and Valentia: the rivers
there most famous, are the Dower, the river of Tagus, the Gadian and the
Guadalguinur.

The cities in England that be most famous, are London, York, Bristol; the
rivers most famous, are the Thames, the Severn, the river of Humber, and the
Ou^^.

The cities in Scotland most famous are Edinborough, Sterlin, Aberdin, and
Saint Andrews, the most famous River is the River of Tay.

The most famous city in Ireland is Dublin, and the greatest River is the River
of Shannon.

The chiefest cities in the Netherlands belonging to the Catholics, are Metz,
Besancon, Chambery, Antwerp, the chief city belonging to the united States, is
Amsterdam; the two most famous Rivers are the River of Scheld, and the River
Mosa.

The most famous cities in Germany, are Strasborough, Colen, Munster,
Norimbergh, Ausburgh, Numick, Vienna, Prague, Dresda, Berlin, Stettin, and
Lubeck; the chiefest Rivers are the Rhine, the Weser, the Elbe, the Oder, and
the Danow: the most famous cities in Denmark are Coppenhague, and Trondon; the
chiefest River is the Wezer.

The chiefest cities in Swedeland are Calmar, Stockholme, Abo, and Riga, the
last whereof is in Livonia, but now in the possession of the King of Sweden;
the most famous River is the River of Torn.

The chiefest cities of Russia, are Mucow, Wolodimax, Saint Michael the
Archangel, Cazan and Astracan; the most famous Rivers are, the Dwine, the
Volga, the Don, or Tana.

The most famous cities in Poland are, Cracovia, Warsovia, Dantzick, Vilna,
Kion, Cameneca, and Smolensco, which is part of Muscovy, and now again in the
possession of the great Duke: the chiefest Rivers in Poland are the Vistula, or
Weisser, the Niemen, the Duna, or the Niester, and the Boristhenes.

The chiefest cities in Hungary, Transylvania, Valastia, Moldavia, and little
Tartary, are Buda, Presborough, Hermonstade, Tergoguis, Czuchan, or Sozow,
Craffa, and Burgos: the chiefest Rivers are the Drin, the River of Oxfeus, or
Alfeus, the River of Peneus, the Vardax, the Marize, and the Danubius.

The most famous cities in Dacia are Trieste and Pedena.

The most famous cities in Bohemia, are Cuttenbergh, Pilzen, Dommingraci, and
Budrozis.

The most famous cities at this time in Greece, Buda, Salonique, Andrianopolis,
Scutary, Durazzo, La Valone, L Armiro, Prevezza, Larta, Lepanto, Setines, or
Athens, Stines, or Thebes, Corinth, Patras, Misira, or Lacaedemonia, which are
all now in possession of the Turks.

The most famous cities in Bosnia, are Iuycza, Bagnalone, Fruansaray: in
Croatia, is the famous city of Wihitz.

The chiefest cities in Sclavonia, are Nona, Zara, Nonigrad, Tin^, Sebenico,
Saint Nicolo; Trau, Spalato, Salona, Almisse, Starigrad, Vesi^chio, Catara,
Buda, and Dolcigno.

The most famous city in Walachia is called Tergovis, and in Moldavia, Zaczow.

In the land of Sicily, there are the famous cities of Messina, and Palermo; in
the Island of Sardinia, the city of Calari; and in Corsica, the city Bastie.
The renowned cities in Romania, are Constantinople, and Adrianopolis.

Asia.
ASia is now the second part of the world, eparated from Europe by the floods
Tanais and Duina, and from Africa, by the narrow part of Lod le lakis.

Unto Egypt, it is bigger then Europe or Africa, and does far exceed them in
riches, as precious stones and spices: this region has been renowned by the
first and second Monarchs of the world: there man was created, placed in
Paradise, seduced by Satan, and redeemed by our Savior: In this part was done
most of the histories mentioned in the Old Testament; and many things also in
the New: the eminent persons that have the rule of Asia, are the Kings of
China, the King of Persia, the great Turk, and the Emperor of Russia.

Tartaria is bordered upon the north sea, eastward upon the Sea of China,
southward upon the Provinces of China, of India, with the flood Oxdo and the
Sea Mare Caspium, and toward the west with the flood Mare Steneum, and
Mor^ovia.

The Tartariaus are divided into certain commonalties ot colonies, one from
another, so they differ in manners and trade of life: they are men of a squa^e
stature, broad and gross faces, their eyes sink into their heads, and looking
somewhat a squint; they are strong of body, and hardy: they eat horses, and all
other beasts except hogs, howsoever they are slain.

China is bounded on the east by the east Sea; on the west with India, and
Bramus; and on the north it is divided from Tartaria with a wonderful wall four
hundred miles long, built between the mountains: it is divided into fifteen
Kingdoms or great Provinces, and having a peculiar Prince, but all yielding
obedience to their great King: it is reported that he may bring into the field
three hundred thousand foot, and two hundred thousand horsemen. The land is
fruitful of grain, and beasts wild and tame, wines, of precious stones, gold,
copper, iron, steel, and pearl, and good store of silk; also very great cities,
well peopled; Paquin is the royal city, of which things be written that be
incredible: the people are lively, witty, wondrous artists, they make wagons
that sail over the land as the ships do over the Sea: the art of Printing and
making of guns, is more ancient with them then with us: they have good laws
according to which they do live; but they want the knowledge of God, for they
are heathens, and worship the sun, moon, and stars, yea and the Devil himself
that he may not hurt them.

Iapan abounds so with gold, that it is reported that the Kings palace was
covered therewith in the time of Paulus Venetius.

India situated between Persia and the Tartars, Sinca, and the Indian Sea: all
writers account it the best and goodliest land in the world, for it (...)
almost the whole world with precious Jewels and pearls, medicinal drugs and
perfumes, that it may be called an earthly paradise, and it belongs to the
Spaniards.

Persia is a mighty rich land, governed by the Sophy, though he a Mahometist:
yet warreth against the Turk for the religion of Mahomet, (...) differences in
expounding the Alcora^^ out of Persia are brought the Bezor stone and other
precious stones, pearls of great value, and many ^^k-works.

N^tolia or Asia the less, wherein is that part of land fo^m^rly called Canaan,
by which lie the Arabians: this Asia is a good and fruitful country, and has
been eminent in the true religion; for therein were written the most part of
the New Testament. It is almost divided from Africa by the Red and
Mediterranean sea, and is now a part of the Turkish empire.

The chief Islands of Asia are Zellant, whose ground is always green, and the
trees laden with blossoms and fruits, as oranges, lemons; the cinnamon grows
here in whole woods, for it is the second rind of a tree, but being cut and
laid in the sun, becomes red: the tree in three years space receives his ^ind
again; besides many other beasts, here are a multitude of Elephants.

Sumatra yields besides other sorts of spices, abundandce of pepper, here are
also moneys of diverse metals, of which the inhabitants have learned to cast
good Ordinance; very great Elephants are found here, which being learned are
serviceable in war. The Rhinoceros, a deadly enemy to the Elephant, is found
here, for though he be less yet he warreth with him, having whet his horn on
the rock, he therewith seeks to rip up the Elephan^s belly. He is by many held
to be the true Unicorne: every part of him, especially his horn, being
sovereign against all poison.

Iava is very fruitful in several spices and Indian fruits, especially pepper.

Benda a second Island, but very famous, for herein only are several islands:
hereabout grow all the nutmegs and mace which are in great abundance sent into
all the world: the trees on which nutmegs grow, yield three times in the year
fruit, only in August and December, but the most and best in April.

The islands of the Mollucas, though but sand, yet are known all over the
world, by reason of the plenty of cloves which grow up here only are dispersed
over all the world, they are five in number, Ternate, Tidon, Matir, Mantrian
and Bachion. Victuals are here scant, for there grows neither rice nor any
other grain; it has no cattle but a few goats and hogs: they make their bread
of certain trees and roots. In these islands only are found the bird of
Paradise, which for the strangeness and fairness of feathers exceeds all the
birds in the world.

Thus much touching the second part of the world.

The chiefest Cities of Asia with the Rivers.
THe chiefest cities in Asia which belong unto the Turks, are in Anatolia,
Burse, Chioutai, Angoure, Trebisond, Sattalie: the Rivers there most famous are
the River of Alie, Jordan, Euphrates, and Tigris.

The most famous Cities in Syria are Aleppo, Tripoli, Damas, Said, and
Jerusalem.

The most famous Cities in Georgia are Mosul, Bagded, Balsora, Sanatopoli,
Stranu, Derbent: The most famous Rivers in Georgia are the Rivers of Fazze and
Arais.

The most famous Cities in Arabia, are Herac, Ava, Medina, and Mectra; the most
memorable River is the River of Cayban.

The chiefest Cities in Persia, are Tauris, Gorgian, Coysolma, Hispahan, Erat,
Sus, Schiras, and Ormutz: the chiefest Rivers are the Rivers of Tirditiri, and
Bendimur.

The chiefest cities of India, are Amedabur, Cambaia, Gouro, Diu, Bengala,
Pangab, or Lahor, Agra, Goa, Calicut, Visnagor, Pegn, Arracan, Malaca, Camboge,
and Facfo: the fairest Rivers in India are the River Indus, Ganges, and Mecon.

The most famous cities in China, are Paguin, Quin^ay, Caneun, Macao, Mancian,
and Nagaia ^^ordo: the greatest River is the River of Qui^am, or Iamsu Quiam.

The most famous cities in Tartary, are Za^aspe, Samarcanda, Thibet, Cambalu,
Tatur, or Tartar: the chiefest Rivers are the Tatar, the ^eniscoy, the Oby, the
Chezel, and the Albiamu.

The Isles in Asia in the Ocean are the isle of Iaphan, where are the cities of
Bungo, Meaco, and Sacay.

The Phillipine islands, in which are the cities of Lusor, Manille, and
Mindanao.

The Moluno Islands in which are the cities of Gililo, Mucasar, and Aquen.

Not far from thence is Sumatra and Iava, where are the cities of Candra, and
Columbo, near unto it is Bornro, Manur, and Male.

In the Mediterranean Sea, there are the islands of Cyprus, Rhodes, and
Scarpanto, in which are the famous cities of Nicosia, Formagusta, Rhodes, and
Scarpanto.

In the Archipelago there are the islands of Chios, and Metelin, which have
cities after their own names.

Africa.
AFrica, the third part of the world, is separated from Europe by the
Mediterranean sea, and from Asia by the Red Sea; she yields gold, balm,
ivory, ebony, sugar, ginger, dates, aloes, myrrh, feathers: also Madera, the
countries in Asia now follow.

Barbary is bounded by the Mediterranean Sea northward, on the east with Egypt,
on the south with the mount Atlas, and westward with the Altantick ocean: the
inhabitants are faithless, crafty in promising, and also in performing; they
are fraudulent, covetous, and beyond measure jealous of their wives: their
country yields olives, figs, dates, oranges, and a certain kind of goat, whose
hair makes a stuff as fine as silk.

Egypt has Idumea on the east, and the bay of Arabia; on the west Barbary,
Numidia, and part of Lybia, on the north the Mediterranean Sea, on the south
Ethiopia superior or the Abassin Empire. It contains in length five hundred
sixty two Italian miles, and in breadth one hundred sixty, situated under the
second and fifth climates, so that their longest day in summer is not above
thirteen hours and a half. The air is very hot and of^ensive, the soil is
fruitful, by the overflowing of Nilus, it has rich pastures wherein they feed
great store of camels, horses, asses, oxen, greater of growth then usually in
most places else: and by reason of the morishness of the country, they have
also great store of fouls, it is furnished with great plenty of metals, some
precious stones, good wines, and fruits, as lemons, oranges, pomgranates,
citrons, figs, cherries, and such as these, excellent both for taste and color:
here grow the Palm trees, which always grow in couples, the male and female,
both thrust forth cods full of seed, but the female always fruitful, and that
not except growing by the male, and having his seed mixed with hers: the pith
of these trees is an excellent sallade, better then an hartichoke, which in
taste it does much resemble; of the branches they make bedsteds, lattices, etc.
of the leaves, baskets, mats, fans, etc. of the outward husk of the cod,
cordage, of the inner brushes; the fruit it bears is best known by the name of
dates, which are in taste like figs: and finally it is said to yield whatsoever
is necessary to the life of man: it is the nature of this tree, though never so
ponderous a weight were put upon it, never to yield to the burden, but still to
resist the heaviness of it, and to endeavor to lift and raise it self the more
upwards; a fit emblem of the resurrection: the people are not black, but tawny
or olive-coloured; they weep and mourn over the bodies of their dead, daubed
over with dung, they hold it a great impiety to burn or bury them, but having
embalmed them they lay them in so me inner room: the men keep at home for the
household business, the women follow merchandise and affairs abroad; the men
carry burdens upon their heads, and the women upon their shoulders: a witty and
ingenious people, the first inventers of Geometry, Arithmetic, Physic,
Astronomy, Nec^omany, and Sorcery, yea they found out the very use of letters.
The Christians among them differ from all other Christians; first, using
circumcision with baptism. Secondly, conferring all orders under priesthood on
infants immediately after baptism, their parents, till they come to sixteen
years of age, performing what they promised in their behalf, to wit, chastity,
fasting on Wednesday and Friday, and the four Lents of the year. Thirdly,
reputing baptism not to be of any efficacy except ministered by a priest in the
open Church, in what extremity soever. Fourthly, and yet not baptising any
children till the fortieth day, though they die in the mean time. Fifthly,
giving the Lords Supper to infants as soon as christened. Sixthly, contracting
marriages in the second degree without dispensation. Seventhly, not observing
the Lords day, nor any Festivals, except in cities. Eighthly, reading the
Gospel writ by Nicodemus. They differ from the Papists in these things: first,
administering the Lords Supper in both kinds: secondly, with leavened bread:
thirdly, admitting neither extreme unction nor the Lords Supper to those that
are sick: fourthly, nor Purgarory not prayer for the dead: fifthly, not using
elevation in the act of administering: and sixthly, accounting the Roman Church
for he ^etical, and esteeming the Latins no better then the Jews.

Mount Atlas is a ridge of hills, of exceeding height, and of no small length,
it is above the clouds, and is always covered with snow in the midst of
summer, full of thick woods; and against Africa so fruitful, that it affords
excellent fruits of its natural growth, not planted, grafted, or inoculated
with the hand of man.

Lybia has mount Atlas on the north, by which it is parted from Barbary and
Asrenaca, on the east with Lybia, Marmarica interposed betwixt it and Egypt,
and part of Ethiopia superior, or the Abassine Empire, on the south with
Ethiopia inferior, and the land of Nigros, and on the west with the main
Atlantic Ocean; the country abounds with dates, the chief diet of the people,
which commonly rotteth out their teeth; their goats they feed with the stones,
wherewith they grow fat, and yield store of milk; the air is so ^ound, that it
cures the French Pox without any Physic; the inhabitants are a base and vile
people, thieves, murderers, treacherous, and ignorant of all things, feeding
most on dates, barley, and carrion, counting bread a diet for holidayes; their
garments of the coursest cloth, so short that they cover not half the body; the
richer sort wear a jacket of blew cotton, with great sleeves, they ride upon
camels without stirrup or saddle, a leather thrust through an hole made in the
nose of the camel, serves them for a bridle, and to save spurs, they use a
goade; their religion is Mahome^isme.

The land of Negros is bounded on the east with Ethiopia superior, on the west
with the Atlantic Ocean, on the north with Lybia Deserta, and the south with
the Ethiopick Ocean, and part of Ethiopia inferior: the country very hot by
reason of the situation under the torrid zone, yet very well inhabited, full of
people, and in some places always grass, well watered, specially where the
River Niger overfloweth, well stored with corn, cattle, and garden ware, well
wooded, having store of beasts wild and tame; they want fruit trees, they have
both gold and silver mines very pure; the inhabitants are of little wit, and
destitute of all arts and sciences, prone (...) luxury, and for the most part
Mahometans.

Ethiopia superior is bounded on the east with the Red Sea, and the Sinus
Barbaricus, on the west with Lybia inferior: the Realm of Nabia in the land of
Negros, and part of the Kingdom of Congo in the other Ethiopia, and on the
north with Egypt, and Lybia Marmarica, and on the south with the mountains of
the moon: it is in length a thousand five hundred miles; in breadth half as
much: the religion of the people is, they use to circumcise their children both
males and females. Secondly, they baptize the males at forty, and the females
80 days after circumcision. Thirdly, after the Lords Supper, they are not to
spit till sunset. Fourthly, they profess but one nature and one will in
Christ. Fifthly, they accept only the three first General Councels. Sixthly,
their Priests live by the labor of their own hands, for they allow them
nothing, nor permit them not to beg. Seventhly, they baptize themselves every
Epiphanie in lakes and ponds, because that day they suppose Christ to have been
baptized of John in Jordan. Eighthly, they eat not of those beasts which in the
old law are reckoned for unclean, and they keep the Jews Sabbtah equally solemn
with the Lords day. Tenthly, they minister the Lords Supper to infants
presently after baptism. Eleventhly, they reach the reasonable soul of man is
derived from the parents by seminal propagation. Twelfthly, that infants dying
unbaptized, are sanctified in the womb by virtue of the Lords Supper received
by the mother after her conception. And finally, they show a book of eight
volumes, writ as they say by the Apostles assembled at Jerusalem for that
purpose, the contents thereof they observe most solemnly, and they differ from
the Papists as the Christians in Egypt, they are under the government of Prester
John and the Turk.

I pass by Ethiopia inferior, the people being Pagans, and likewise I omit the
several Islands of Africa being but small, because I have been so large already.

The chiefest cities of Africa, with the names of the Rivers which are there
most famous.
IN Barbary which contains the Kingdoms of Fez, Morocco, Tremiser, Algeir,
Tunis, Tripoli and Barca, there are the famous cities of Morocco, Fez, Tanger,
Telensin, Oran, Algeir, Constantine, Tunis, Tripoli, and Barca.

The Rivers there most famous, are the Tensife, the Ommiraby, and the River of
Cebus, Mulvia, Rio Major, and the Magrida.

In Belledulgered which contains the Kingdoms of Suz, Daza, Sagelmosse,
Tegorarin, Bi^edulgerid, and the Desert of Barca: there are these famous
cities, Taradante, Dara, Segelmoss, Tegorarin, Zeb, Billedulgerid: the chiefest
Rivers are the River of Sur, the River of Darha, and the Ghir.

In Egypt are the famous cities of Sabod, Cairo, Alexandria, Rascha, or
Rosesta, Dumietta, Cosir, and Surs the renowned River is the River of Nilus.

In the desert of Zaara are these memorable cities, Zauhaga, Zuenzera, Targa,
Lemta, Berdoa, Gaoga and Borno.

In the country of the Negroes, are these remarkable cities, Gue, Eata,
Gueneha, Tombu, Agados, Cano, Cassena, Gangara, Tula, Catan, or Senega,
Guinala, Beria, Melli, Songo, Gago, Wuber* Zegzog, and Sanfara: the Rivers here
that are most famous, are Sernoga, Gambaea, and Rio Degrand.

In Gniomy a^e these famous towns, Serze-Lionne, or Cachieu, Saint George De la
Mine, and Benin.

In Nubia are these remarkable Cities, Gorham, Cusam, Nubia, Dancala, Iulac,
Bugiha, Canfila, and Da^ila.

In the upper Ethiopia which contains the Kingdoms of Barnegus, Tigremahon,
Amara, Damont, Cafatos, Innari, Gogame, Baga, Medri, Meroe, Ximenchi, and
Dambaea: there are these famous cities, Barone, Caxumo, Amara Damont, Cefates,
Narre, Goyame, and Adeghena: the Rivers which are here most memorable are the
Rivers of Zaire, and Quilmanci.

In that part which is called Zanguebar, are these remarkable cities, Dambea,
Mosambique, Quiloa, Monbaze, Melinda. On the side of Aian, are Brava, Magadaxo
Adea, Adel. On the side of Abex, Erocco, or Arquico, Suaquem, Biafra.

In the lower Ethiopia, which comprehends Congo, Caffrare, and Monomotepa,
are the famous cities of Banza Loanga. S. Salvador, Cabazze, or Dongo, Safula,
Simbaos, or Messapa, and Butua, and Tang, or Tete: the Rivers are Cuama,
Spiritu Sancto, and the River Dos Infantes.

In Africa are diverse islands, as Malta in the Mediterranean Seas, the chiefest
city whereof is Vallette: In the western Ocean, the Canaries, the Cape Verd,
and the Isle of Saint Thomas, the chiefest in the Canaries is called Saint
Iago, and in Saint Thomas, Panoasan.

In the Eastern Ocean there is the isle of Madagascar, or Saint Laurence, and
the isle of Zocotora, who has a city after her own name.

America.
AMerica, the fourth part of the world, has obtained this name from Americus
Vesputius, who in the year of Christ one thousand four hundred ninety seven,
did sail about it; but it was first of all discovered by Christopher Columbus,
five years before, who went out with the authority of Ferdinando King of
Castile, and called it the new West Indies, by reason of the likeness, where
they seem to return to the other Indies. It is divided into two parts, one is
called Mexicana and Peruana: the Spaniards and Hollanders possess a great part
thereof, which they have fortified very strongly: it is exceeding rich of gold
and silver, insomuch, that as the Historians witness, Attalalipa King of Peru,
being taken prisoner by the Spaniard, for his ransom did offer and promise to
fill his prison, being a place of twelve foot long and seventeen foot broad,
once full of gold, to such a height, as he standing upon the toes of his feet,
was able to reach with the points of his fingers stretched on high; or fill the
same twice as full of silver, if they had rather have that, unto the uppermost
roof of it: yea the Spaniards when they first entered into the country shod
their horses both with gold and silver, as Historians testify. Peruana is
divided now adays into three several parts, according to the situation of the
land, to wit, in plain land, in mountains, and in lands which are hilly grounds
without them. Out of these countries are brought over into Europe, gold,
silver, Beza, and other precious stones, salsaparilla, sugar in abundance,
Brasil wood, cotton, costly plumes, jackanapses, several sorts of curiously
feathered birds, and many more druggs, and merchandise; and thus much for the
fourth part of the world.

Magellanica, which some Geographers would have now the fifth part of the
world, is since found out to be a very little part, as consisting only of some
few Islands, and the southern side of the Magellanick Straits so called, by
Fredericus Magellanicus, who discovered it in the year one thousand five
hundred and twenty, writing moreover that there he had seen tall men about
nine, and ten foot high; and he saw many fires which the inhabitants had
kindled, doubtless by reason of the coldness of the weather, he named it the
land of fire, or smoky, whereby he presumed the more, that it must needs be a
very vast great country reaching east and westwards unto new Guinney, according
to which guessing it has hitherto been delineated by the maps of Geographers;
but since has there in stead thereof a large and wide Sea been found both by
Jacob Le Mair, who in the year one thousand six hundred sixteen, sailing about
the southern coast of these islands entered into the Indies, and by John Davis
in the year one thousand six hundred forty two, who sailing toward the north,
about one thousand 6 hundred forty further then Guinny discovered diverse lands,
and passing on the southside sailed about the east coast of new Guinny, and so
going on westward, he came to the Indies; whence we may certainly gather that
all the former descriptions and definitions of the Magellanick and unknown
lands, are but mere abuses and certain devised fables.

And thus now God enabling me, I have finished the description of the world,
and the four parts thereof: and leave my endeavors herein to the judgment of
the Reader.

The chiefest cities of America, with the names of the Rivers.
IN the Northern part of America are Greenland, East-land and Iceland, in which
are the towns of Bearford, and Scalbod.

In Canada or new France, are the towns of Quebec, and Port Royal, some degrees
more foutherly, are New Engand, the New Low Countries, Virginia, the isles of
Bermudes, and more southerly of them, the islands of Barbados, and Saint
Christophers: In Virginia are the towns of James: in New England the town of
Plimmouth: the Rivers in Caneda that be most famous, the River of Canada, or
Saint Laurence: the River of Chesseapeac, or Powatan, the Trinity, and the
River of May.

The cities in New-Mexico that are most remarkable, are the End, and the
Granada.

In Hispaniola is the city of Domingo, in Cuba the city called Hanana.

In the isle of Iamaira, the city called Sevilla^ In the Island of Boriquenrie,
Puerto, Rico: in Florida is Saint Augustino: In Mexico, or New-Spain are these
great cities, Mexico, Mechoa^an, or Wallodolid, Saint Estenan, Del Puerto, Los
Angeles, Antequera Dela Vetoria, Meroda, Guadalaida, Compostella, Saint
Sebastian, Saint Miguel, Gernada, and Zacateca.

There are also Saint Iago, De Guatimala, Guevetulan, Cinidid Real, Verapax,
Valadolid, or Commagaiva, Leoade Nicaragua, Cartago, La Conception, Portobello,
and Panama.

The Rivers here most famous, are Nort of New-Mexico, Spiritu Sancto, toward
the east, Spiritu Sancto toward the west; Econdido, Panuco, Barania, Zacatula,
and Desaguadero, de Nicaragua.

In Terna Firma, are the famous cities of Cartagena, Saint Martha, Saint Fe de
Bogatta, Na, Sa, de los Remedios, Veneznella, O Cori, Cordova, lannuena, O
Comana, Manoa, O el Dorado.

In Peru are these remarkable cities, Cali Popaian, Saint Francisco, de Quito,
Bacca, Saint Iuan de las, Selinas, Lima O los, Reyes, Cusco, Potosi, la Plata,
Sancta Cruz de la Sierra, Saint Iago, de Chili, and L' Imperiale.

The Rivers which are most famous in Terra Firma and in Peru, the River Grand,
O de Darien: the River Grand O de Sancta Martha, Paria, O Orinoque, Essequ^be,
and Desaguedero, de Peru.

In the south part of America, is Terra Magellanica, where is the city Del Rey
Felippe, there are the Magellan isles, and Terra del Foco.

In Brasile are these fourteen memorable cities, Para, Maranhan, Ciara,
Potenii, Paraiba, Tamaraca, Olinda, Seregippe Saint Salvador, Los Istcos, Porto
Seguro, Spiritu Sancto, Sancte Sebastian, Los Santos.

The Rivers in Brasile are Orelhane, or des Amazones, Maragnan, O de Mirari,
Tabacouru, the great River of Potengi, the River Zoyal.

In Ria de Plata are the cities of Saint Iago, del Festero, Cordova, de
Tucuman, L Assumcicon, Civided Real, O Ontiveros. The River here that is most
famous is called Paraguay.

A Catalogue of some Plates, Maps, Pictures, and Copy-books that are Printed
and sold by Peter Stent, dwelling at the Sign of the White-Horse in Gilt-spur
street, betwixt Newgate and Py-corner.
General Maps.
A Map of the World. A Map of England. A Map of Ireland. A Map of France.
England, Scotland, and Ireland in four sheets.
Maps of Shires.
Kent two sheets. Essex. Surrey. Hartfordshire. Norfolk. Susfolk.
Staffordshire. VVarwick-shire. VVorcester-shire. Leicestershire and Rutland in
one. Cheshire. Lancashire. Virginia.
Pictures of men in quarto.
His Highness the (...) Protector. Sir Thomas Overbury. Cardinal Wolsey. Sir.
Thomas Gresham. Duke of Buckingham. Prince and Princess of Orange. Prince
Rupert. Pr. Maurice. Earl of Salisbury. Mr. Brightman. Bishop Usher. Dr.
Eravius. Mr. Shelton. Genesis Lashley. L. Say. King Charles 2 d. of Scotland. Earl
of Pembrook. Earl of Manchester.
Great sheets.
Battle of Nazby 2 sheets with observations. Dunbar battle in 2 sheets. 4
Plates of Signs or Badges for Innes, or Taverns. 42. The Cities of London.
Gunpowder Treason, and 88. The Arms of the trades and Corporations of London
74. A Death. Jer^salem 2 sheets. Lord Genesis Ludlow on Horsback. X.
Commandments. X. Persecutions of Christians. Orpheus.
Copy Books.
Cokers copy book. Davis copy book. Billingsley in quarto. Billingsley in
octavo. One Published by P. S. 2d. by Lewis Hews. 2 d. called Hancocks 22.
Plates. And all other sorts of Copy books that are to be had in London.
Books for Draughts of Men, Birds, Beasts, Flowers, Fruits, Flies, Fishes, etc.
1 Book of J. Fullers Drawings, 15 plates. 1 Book of Draughts of Mr. Hollars
work and Mr. Vanderburghs, 18. plates. Flora 13. plates, Beasts, Birds, etc. 1
Book of Birds sitting on sp^igs, 16. plates. 1 Book of beasts 1 Book of
branches, 11 plates. 1 Book of Flowers 12 Plates for Cheez trenchers
Pictures in sheets of their Excellenci^s.
Robert E. of Essex. Tho. L. Fairfax. the Protector. Diverse Pictures of Mr.
Pain, Hollar, Faythorn, Pumbard, Gaywood, and other Artists works. And all
other sorts of Maps, Pictures, Copybooks, etc. that are usually sold in black
and white, and in Colors. Minerva and 7 liberal Arts.
FINIS.
A NEW MAPP OF THE WHOLE WORLD IN MANY PLACES AMENDED BY THE AVTHOR N:I:
PISCATOR AND augmented and enlarged by Io: Bleau Anno Dom: 1657
London printed and sold by Peter Stent at the white horse in guilt spurr
Street without Newgate.
map of the world


