THE FAERIE LEVELLER: OR, King CHARLES his Leveller descried and deciphered in
Queen ELIZABETH'S days.

By her Poet Laureat Edmond Spenser, in his unparaleld Poem, entitled,

A lively representation of our times.

Anagram:
Parliaments Army. Paritie mar's al men.


Printed just level anens the Saints Army: in the year of their Saintships
ungodly Revelling for a godly Levelling. 1648.

A necessary Preface opening the Allegory.
REader, thou art here presented with a resplendent Jewel, taken out of a full
Cabinet; but it not every ones purchase: besides, not of so special mark or
regard there, in so great an heap, as here being culled out by it self, and
set forth for present use: slight it not, because it is not the publishers own
invention: who does esteem the Spyders web any whit the better, for that it
is spunne out of her own Intralls? or like honey the worse, for that the
industrious Be gathers it from Flowers abroad? here is meat out of the Eater,
sweet honey to be found in the carcass of a slain Lion; do thou but with
Jonathan taste of it, and thou shall have thy sight cleared in some remarkable
matters, which before thou did not discern, or observe: thou have here
plainly discovered to public view, the mischievous condition, the malicious
diposition, the presumptuous enterprises, the tumultuous practices; in a word,
the dangerous doings of these pernicious Sectaries, the confounders of orders,
the movers of Sedition, the disturbers of Peace, the subverters of well-settled
States (if they be not timely met with and prevented by justice) lately risen
up and now raigneing amongst us, by the name of Levellers; they were discryed
long ago in Queen Elizabeth's days, and then graphically described by the
Prince of English Poets Edmund Spenser, whose verses then prophetical are now
become historical in our days, I have now revised, and newly published them
for the undeceiving of simple people, too apt to be induced into an high
conceit and overweening opinion of such Deceivers, and too ready to be seduced
by their specious pretenses of reducing all to a just equality, and restoring
all to their rights and liberty: whereas on the contrary their endeavor is
evident to take away every man's propriety, and to bring all under slavery to
themselves. The Book out of which this fragment is taken (called the Faery
Queen) is altogether Allegorical, and needs a little explanation: the drift
and intention of the Author in it, is to set forth a complete Gentleman,
accomplished with all virtues adorning a truly noble Person. The first Book
contains the Legend of Justice, the most universal virtue. In the second
(anto Arthegall the Champion of Justice, with the assistance of Talus his
Groom betokening execution of Law, having overcome all illegal arbitrary,
oppressive power; under the person of Pollente, a barbarous Saracen,
strengthened by his Daughter Munera importing bribes and taxes: He proceeds to
suppress the Giant Ring leader to the faction of Levellers, or applying all to
these times; I suppose I may briefly give you this key of the work.

Arthegall Prince of justice. King Charles. Talus his Executioner with his iron
stayle. The Kings forces, or Gregory. Pollente an oppressing Saracen. The
prevalent over awing Faction in the two Houses. Munera his assistant. The
intolerable Tax-raisers the Country Committees Sequestrators and Excize-men:
These must first be apprehended and brought to justice, ere the Army be
quelled. The Giant Leveller. Col. Oliver Cromwell, L. G. of the Sts. Army: the
Letters of whose name fall into this Anagram. Oliver Cromewell. Com' our vil'
Leveller.
On the constant report of whose death, take for an Epitaph that of the Poet.
-- Mors Sceptra ligonibus aquat. Death which the Scepter levells with the spade,
His fellow levellers Cromwell's Grave has made.
So I dismiss him with that of the Traitor Judas, Act 1.25. who by
transgression fell, that he might go to his own place. And his accomplices with
Thomas Sternehold, version of the 10. v. of the 3. Psalm. Destroy their false
conspiracies, that they may come to naught:
Subvert them in their heaps of sin, that have rebellion wrought.

Th^re f^lloweth a brief: introductory transition from the foregoing to the
ensuing part of the Canto.

THE FAERIE LEVELLER.
Arthegall with his Groom Talus
having Pollente quel'd:
And drowned his Daughter Munera,
they on their journey wel'd.
IN which they measured mickle weary way,
Till that at length nigh to the Sea they drew;
By which as they did travail on a day,
They saw before them far as they could view,
Full many people gathered in a crew,
Whose great assembly they did much admire;
For never there the like resort they knew:
So toward them they Coasted to enquire
What thing so many Nations met, did there desire.
There they beheld a mighty Giant stand
Upon a Rock, and holding forth on high
An huge great pair of Balance in his hand;
With which he boasted in his surquedry,
That all the world he would weigh equally;
If ought he had the same to counterpoys:
For want whereof he waighed vanity;
And filled his Balance full of idle toys:
Yet was admired much of Fools, Women, and Boys.
He said, that he would all the earth up take,
And all the Sea, divided each from either:
So would he of the fire one Balance make,
And one of The Air, without or wind, or weather:
Then would he Balance Heaven and Hell together,
And all that did within them all contain,
Of all whose weight he would not miss a feather;
And look what surplus did of each remain,
He would to his own part restore the same again.
For why, he said, they all unequal were,
And had encroached upon others share.
Like as the Sea (which plain he showed there)
Had worn the earth: so did the fire the Air:
So all the rest did others parts impair.
And so were Realms, and Nations run awry:
All which he undertook for to repair,
In sort as they were formed anciently:
And all things would reduce to equallity.
Therefore the vulgar did about him flock,
And cluster thick unto his leasings vain:
(Like foolish Flies about a honey crocke)
In hope by him great benefit to gain,
And uncontrolled freedom to obtain.
All which when Arthegall did see, and hear
How he misled the simple peoples train.
In'sdainefull wise he drew unto him near,
And thus unto him spoke without regard, or fear.
'Thou that presum'st to weigh the world anew;
'And all things to an equal to restore.
'Instead of right, me seems, great wrong do show,
'And far above thy forces pitch to fore;
'For ere thou limit what is less or more
'In every thing, thou ought first to know
'What was the poyse of every part of yore:
'And look then how much it does overflow,
'Or fail thereof, so much is more then just to trow.
'For at the first they all created were
'In goodly measure, by their makers might:
'And waighed out in Balances so nere,
'That not a dram was missing of their right.
'The Earth was in the middle Center pight,
'In which it does unmovable abide,
'Hem'd in with waters, like a wall in sight:
'And they with Air, that not a drop can slide:
'All which the Heavens contain, and in their courses guide.
'Such Heavenly justice does among them reign,
'That every one do know their certain bound,
'In which they do these many years remain;
'And amongst them all no change has yet been found:
'But if thou now should weigh them new in pound,
'We are not sure they would so long remain:
'All change is perilous, and all chance unfound:
'Therefore leave off to weigh them all again,
'Till we may be assured they shall their course retain.
'Thou foolish Else, said then the Giant wroth,
'Seest not how badly all things present be?
'And each estate quite out of order go'th?
'The Sea it self, do thou not plainly see,
'Encroach upon the Land there under thee?
'And The Earth it self how daily its increased
'By all that dying to it turned be?
'Were it not good that wrong were then surceast,
'Therefore I will throw down those mountains high,
'And make them level with the lowly plain:
'These towering rocks that reach unto the sky
'I will thrust down into the deepest maine;
'And as they were, them equalize again:
'Tyrants that make men subject to their Law,
'I will suppress that they no longer reign,
'And Lordings curb that Commons over-aw:
'And all the wealth of rich-men to the poor will draw.
'Of things unseene how can thou deem aright?
Then answered the righteous Arthegall.
'Sith thou misdeem'st so much of things in sight,
'What though the Sea with waves continual
'Doe eat the Earth? it is no more at all:
'Ne is the Earth the less, or loses ought:
'For whatsoever from one place does fall,
'Is with the tide unto another brought;
'For there is nothing lost that may be found, if sought.
'Likewise the Earth is not augmented more,
'By all that dienge into it do fade;
'For of the Earth they formed were of yore;
'However gay their blossom or their blade
'Doe flourish now, they into dust shall vade:
'What wrong then is it, if that when they dye,
'They turn to that whereof they first were made?
'All in the power of their great maker lie:
'All Creatures must obey the voice of the most high.
'They live, they dye, like as he does ordain:
'Ne ever any asks reason why?
'The hills do not the lowly Dales disdain.
'The Dales do not the lofty hills envy.
'He makes Kings to sit in Sovereignty.
'He makes Subjects to their power obey.
'He pulls down, he sets up on high.
'He gives to this, from that he takes away:
'For all we have is his; what he list do he may.
'What ever thing is done, by him is done:
'Ne any may his mighty will withstand.
'Ne any may his Sovereign power shun:
'Ne loose that he has bound with steadfast band:
'In vain therefore do thou now take in hand,
'To call to count, or weigh his works anew,
'Whose counsels depth thou can not understand,
'Sith of things Subject to thy daily view,
'Thou do not know their causes nor their courses dew.
'For take thy Balance, (if thou be so wise)
'And weigh the wind that under Heaven does blow;
'Or weigh the light that in the East does rise,
'Or weigh the thought that from man's mind does flow;
'But if the weight of these thou can not show,
'Waigh but one word which from thy lips does fall;
'For how can thou those greater secrets know?
'That do not know the least thing of them all:
'Ill can he rule the great, that cannot reach the small.
Therewith the Giant much abashed said,
That he of little things made reckoning light;
Yet the least word that ever could be laid
Within his Balance, he could weigh aright:
Which is, said he, more heavy than in weight,
The right or wrong? the false or else the true?
He answered that he would try it straight:
So he the words into his Balance threw;
But straight the winged words out of his Balance flew.
Wroth waxt he then, and said that words were light;
Ne would within his Balance well abide:
But he could justly weigh the wrong or right:
Well then said Arthegall let it be tried,
First in one Balance, set the true aside:
He did so first, and then the false he laid
In the other skale; but still it down did slide,
And by no mean could in the weight be stayed,
For by no means the false will with the true be waigh'd.
Now take the right likewise said Arthegall,
And counterpeise the same with so much wrong:
See first the right he put into one skale;
And then the Giant strove with puissance strong
To fill the other skale with so much wrong;
But all the wrongs that he therein could lay,
Might not it poise; yet did he labor long,
And swet, and chas't, and proved every way;
Yet all the wrongs could not a little right down lay.
Which when he saw he greatly grew in rage,
And almost would his Balances have broken:
But Arthegall him fairly 'gan assuage,
'And said, be not upon thy Balance wroken,
'For they do naught but right or wrong betoken:
'But in the mind the doom of right must be;
'And so likewise of words the which be spoken,
'The Ear must be the Balance to decree,
'And judge whether with truth or falsehood they agree.
'But set the truth, and set the right aside:
'(For they with wrong, or falsehood will not fare)
'And put two wrongs together to be tried,
'Or else two falses of each equal share:
'And then together do them both compare;
'For truth is one, and right is ever one.
So did he, and then plain it did appear*
Whether of them the greater were a^^one:
But right set in the midst of the Beam alone.
But he the right from thence did thrust away:
For it was not the right which he did seek;
But rather strove extremities to w^igh,
The One to diminish the other for to eeke;
For of the mean he greatly did missele^ke;
Whom-when so lewdly-minded Talus found,
Approaching nigh unto him cheek by cheek,
He shoulderd him from off the higher ground,
And down the Rock him throwing, in the Sea him drowned.
Like as a Ship which cruel tempest drives
Upon a Rock with horrible dismay:
Her shatterd Ribs in thousand p^eces rives,
And spoiling all her geares and goodly ray.
Does make herself misfortunes pitious prey:
So downe'the Cliffe the wretched Giant rumbled.
His batterd Balances in pieces lay,
His timbred bones all broken rudely rumbled:
So was the high aspiring with huge ruin humbled.
That when the people who had there about
Long waited, saw his sudden desolation;
They began to gather in tumuluous Rout,
And mutining to stir up civil Faction;
For certain loss of so great expectation:
For well they hoped to have got great good,
And wondrous riches by his innovation:
Therefore resolving to revenge his blood,
They rose in arms and all in battle order stood.
Which Lawless multitude him coming to
In warlike wise, when Arthegall did view,
He much was troubled, ne wist what to do,
For loath he was his noble hands t'embrew,
In the base blood of such a Rascal crew.
And otherwise if that he should retire,
He feared lest they with shame would him pursue:
Therefore he Talus to them sent t'enquire
The cause of their array, and truce for to desire.
But soon as they him nigh approaching spied,
They 'gan with all their weapons him assay,
And rudely stroke at him on every side:
Yet naught they could him hurt, ne ought dismay:
But when at them he with his Flayle 'gan lay.
He like a swarm of flies them overthrew:
Ne any of them durst come in his way,
But here and there before his presence flew,
And hid themselves in holes and Bushes from his view.
As when a Faulcon has with nimble flight
Flowne at a flush of Ducks fore-by the brook:
The trembling Foul dismayed with dreadful sight
Of Death the which them almost overtooke,
Do hide themselves from her astonying look,
Amongst the Flags, and covert round about:
When Talus saw they all the field forsook,
And none appeared of all that Rascal Rout:
To Arthegall he turned, and went with him throughout.
FINIS.

