AN APOLOGY For the PEOPLE called QVAKERS, And An APPEAL to the INHABITANTS OF
Norfolk and Suffolk, Or whom else it may Concern.

But this I confess unto thee, that after the way which they call Heresy, so
worship I the God of my Fathers, believing all things which are written in the
Law and the Prophets, Acts 24. 14.

London, Printed and Sold by T. Soul, in White-Hart-Court in Gracious-Street,
1699.

TO THE INHABITANTS OF Norfolk and Suffolk, And all to whom these may come.
SUffer me to Expostulate with you, on behalf of those abused People in your
Counties, that have of late been rendered Blasphemers, and to Apologize a
little for them; whom some among you have lately often Assembled and Consulted
together, how they might (by Subtilty and Misrepresentation) Incense you (and
by you, those in Authority) against this Innocent People, and your peaceable
Countrymen and Neighbors, that the Monster of Persecution might be again
raised and let loose on them to suppress them.

But consider, are there not many things in your Counties, Towns and City, more
needful to be suppressed than these Industrious and Well-meaning People, viz.
reigning Evils, yea, gross Vices, and abominable Oaths and Execrations, to the
Blaspheming the Name of God, and our Savior Jesus Christ; Swearing by his
Blood, and calling upon God to Damn their Souls; against which crying Sins many
wholesome Laws are made: Is there not more need that these Oaths, and all
ungodly Plays, and Bear-baitings, and Bull-baitings, and things that tends to
corrupt the Youth, defile the People, and to provoke God, should be presented,
and Application made to the Parliament, and Endeavors used, that they should
be suppressed, rather than your Neighbors, those sober and honest People among
you, called Quakers, whom you know are not such, but those that fear God, love
their Neighbor, and do good to all, and pray for their Enemies; and only for
their Religious Dissent from the Established Religion in this Nation, and
matter relating to the Worship of their God, have been great Sufferers in this
Land, and among you, especially in the City of Norwich, in whose Goals and
Dungeons they have lain like Men buried Alive, to the imparing their Healths,
and weakening them in Body and Estate, and to the Endangering their Lives, and
making their Wives Widows, and their Children Fatherless?

And now the Lord, by his Divine and Overruling Providence, Glorious and
Eternal Power, in tender Mercy and Compassion to his Suffering and Afflicted
People, has inclined the Heart of the King, and those in Authority, to Indulge
them in the free Exercise of their tender Consciences, in their Peaceable and
Religious Assemblies; for which they are truly Thankful unto God, and those in
Authority.

And whatever evil things have or may be suggested against them, by Men of
corrupt Minds, and evil Designs, who are of Cain's Nature, in Hammon's Pride,
of Ishmael's and Judah's Spirit, and of that Seed of Evildoers that shall
never be Renowned; and that do not consider what the Lord has said, and will
certainly perform, viz. I will punish the World for their Evil, and the Wicked
for Isa. 13. 11.
their Iniquity; and I will cause the Arrogance of the Proud to cease, and will
lay low the Hautiness of the Terrible. And the Destruction of the Transgressors
and Isa. 1. 28. to the end.
Sinners shall be together, and they that forsake the Lord shall be consumed.

But these People, for whom I Apologize and Appeal to you, however they are or
may be Rendered and Represented by Men of Evil Designs and Persecuting Spirits,
Have, Do, and and by the Lord's Assistance, are Resolved to continue Quiet in
the Land, and in their Christian Duty and Practice, of making Supplications, 1 Timothy 2. 1, 2, 3, 4.
Prayers, Intercessions, and giving of Thanks for all Men, for Kings, and for
all that are in Authority, that we may lead a quiet and peaceable Life, in all
Godliness and Honesty, for this is good and acceptable in the sight of God our
Savior; who will have all Men to be saved, and to come unto the Knowledge of
the Truth.

Notwithstanding some called Clergymen in your Counties have (as the Chief
Priests, Scribes and Elders in days past did our Blessed Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ) accounted his Followers, your Neighbors called Quakers, to be
Blasphemers and Deceivers, and have made them the Objects of their Wrath, and
what they cannot do, would incite you, and stir up others too, and as Herod and
Pontius Acts 4. 27.
Pilate, and the People gathered together against the holy Child Jesus, so one
or two Presbyterian Preachers now joined with the rest, and thereupon owned in
Print, Ministers of the Gospel, and notwithstanding the Difference that has
been between them, they are so far become Friends now, as to unite against this
poor People.

The Lord behold their Threatenings, and grant unto his Servants, that with all
boldness they may speak his Word.

But Charity obliges me to hope, it is but some, whose Interest and Enmity are
against these Christian and Dissenting Protestants, and who are so officiously
concerned, and have espoused the Cause of one who has broke the Bond of
Charity, and let in secret Enmity, which, as a Canker, has eat out what was
Good; so that he has Apostatized, and left those, I am persuaded, he once
enjoyed the presence of God amongst, and whose Power he has acknowledged was
with them, and by the Ministry of some of them was reached: But now like a
Flood, has he poured forth Lies against them; and by Forgeries, and gross
Misrepresentations, has and does seek to bespatter them, and to kindle Strife;
which, as Solomon said, is As Coals are to burning Coals, and Wood to Fire; so
is a Contentious Man to kindle Strife. Prove. 26. 21.


And those few Clergymen, in those Counties, that have espoused him, May well
be compared to him that passes by, and medleth with Strife belonging not to
him: Who is like one that takes a Dog by the Ears, and as a Madman who
casleth Fine-brands, Arrows and Death; Prove. 26. 17. 18.
so is that Man that deceives his Neighbor, and says, Am not I in Sport?

Be not therefore, in Love, I entreat you, of this Number, let not the lying
Stories, base Suggestions, or wicked Insinuations of any, or their false
Pretenses, be they what it will, prevail with you to join with such, or to
become of that Number, That speak evil of their Neighbors without Cause, or
that lay to their Psalm. 35. 11.
Charge things that they know not of.

But rather observe the Conversation, and Examine the Doctrines of those your
Neighbors, called Quakers, against whom this great Rage and Combination is;
and take not things upon Trust nor Report: Remember the Excellent Advice of
Wisdom, follow her Direction, take her Council, for she is worthy, who said,
Blame not before thou have examined the Matter, first understand, and then
Rebake.

Inspect their Conversations, and see if you can find that they are such, that
either Curse, Swear, Revile, Blaspheme or speak Evil of God, or Jesus Christ,
or if any of them Contemn Magistracy, as they are falsely charged: It Is hoped
their Patient Suffering and Peaceable Deportment, under all the various
Revolutions of Government, will sufficiently Evince the contrary; and their
Passive and Patient Suffering, wherein for Conscience sake they could not
Actively obey, may well demonstrate their Regard to Magistracy.

And although in some things they have seemed to differ from those of other
Persuasions, yet who can Convict them of Error in any Fundamental Doctrine of
the Christian Religion; or of their not holding that which is truly Essential
to Salvation, and agreeable to the holy Scriptures? Which holy Records (how
ever they have been Misrepresented, or falsely Accused, as Slighters and
Contemners of them) I do declare on their behalf, they have always had, and
still have, a high Esteem of, and true Value for them, above all other
Writings, or Books; and their frequent use of them, and pressing their Children
and Servants to the reading therein, may sufficiently Demonstrate to those that
know them, the Innocence of this abused People.

Be you therefore like the Noble Bereans, search the holy Scriptures, and you
may see their Writings and Doctrines are not contrary thereto, but may be
plainly proved thereby: For they desire not any farther to be Credited, or to
have what they Write or Preach received by any, but as its consonant thereto,
and answers that Holy Principle, and Divine Oracle, that the Great and All-wise
Creator of all things, has placed in every Man's Heart and Conscience.

Suspend therefore your Censure, and forbear your Complaints, till the Contrary
of these things are cleared to you, by sound Reason, and plain Scripture,
without any corrupt Meanings, false Glosses, or Interpretations.

And if they were a People mistaken in any Point, or were Clouded in their
Understandings; would it not (I beseech you consider) much more become those
that esteem themselves Learned Ministers of the Gospel, in Meekness to
Instruct, and by sound Doctrine to Convince them; rather than to call them, and
Charge every one of them to be Blasphemers, and make no Proof thereof.

It Is true the Quakers complied to meet them at West-Dereham, the 8th of
December, School. although there was not a Mutual Consent, of the things proposed,
in the Letters that passed between them, relating to the Conference, as those
that peruse the Letters may find, yet so Eager were these Men, and Resolute,
that in their last Letter to the Quakers, they tell them, Their Measures are
Fixed, and they may choose whether they will Meet them, upon the Terms resolved
upon or No: Yet the Quakers went, and in the presence of the People, requested
to have the Authors Names, Titles of Books, and Pages, they pretended to prove
their Charges out of; but instead of that, were Hallowed and Hissed at by some
of those Clergymen, as such of you, as were present, may well Remember.

And if these People must be accounted Blasphemers, if they disown not those
Books, or their Friends that Writ them, without seeing the Books, or what is in
them; how can they be either just to their Friends, or true to themselves; for
ought any Man to condemn another, without full Hearing and due Examination, or
would those Clergymen account it just, that any should charge them as the
highest of Criminals, and Condemn and Sentence them as such, for what some of
their Brethren have Writ in Books, which they never saw nor read, nor knew the
Contents of; or would they be so unjust to themselves, and false to their
Brethren, as to acknowledge them Guilty in such sort, and condemn them for
Writing that they themselves neither knew or never saw: If not, Why should the
Quakers, without seeing the Books and examining the Contents, be obliged to
condemn their Friends for Publishers of Blasphemy, or be esteemed Blasphemers.

Consider this I beseech you, and examine whether it agrees with Christ's
Doctrine, All things whatsoever ye would that Men should do unto you, do ye
even so to them; for this is the Law and the Prophets: Or whether there is any
ground to conclude, that the Chargers would ever have refused to have given the
Account desired by the Quakers, if they had been well assured, that by the
Express words of these Books, out of which they pretend to prove their Charge,
it would be clearly and evidently proved.

Let these things be duly considered, Oh ye Inhabitants of the Counties
aforesaid, or to whom this may come, and let Christian Moderation be exercised
toward your Peaceable Neighbors and Countrymen.

Remember the Anthem the Angels sounded when they published the Gospel, was,
Glory to God on High, on Earth Peace, and Good Will to Men.

And if we all endeavor to be found in the Practice of this, it will render us
more like to him that we all Profess, who said, By this shall all Men know that
ye are my Disciples, if ye have love one to another: John 13. 35.
It Is those that dwell therein that wear his Badge. For whosoever hates his
Brother, is a Murderer; and ye know that no Murderer, has Eternal Life
abiding in 1 John 3. 15.
him, for Envy slays the silly One, and Hatred is the Badge of a Persecutor,
and renders People too like Job 5. 2.
him, that first Envied and was Wrathful, and then Murdered his Brother,
because the Lord had regard to his Sacrifice: Yet the Lord said to Cain, If
thou do well, shall thou not be accepted? And if thou Genesis 4. 7.
do not well, Sin lies at the Door. And while Sin lies there, it is a Bar to
keep Man from Acceptance with God, although he may Sacrifice and Offer, he will
fall short of his Duty whilst that is loved and lived in. But he that Envies
not, but Loves his Neighbor Mat. 22. 38. 39. Lev. 19. 18. Romans 13. 9. Gal. 5.
14. James 2. 8.
as himself, keeps the great Commandment of him that in all things we ought to
hear; and it is those that abide in his Love that knows of his Doctrine.

Therefore, Oh ye Inhabitants aforesaid, and all People of what Degree, Rank or
Quality foever, let a serious Consideration, which is an Effect of true Wisdom,
and a due Examination, which all Wise Men ought to use, be had and made by you,
before you Exclaim against a People ye know no Evil by; be not hurried into a
Misapprehension of this Peoples Doctrines by Men filled with prejudice, and
whose Interest prompts them in General to Lurk, in which lies Deceit, and
therein under pretense of Mischief, Threatening Danger, Venomous Doctrines,
Blasphemous Books, and Pernicious Principles, tending to subvert the
Fundamentals of Christianity, do but endeavor to draw you into the like Enmity
with them: Let your Experience now, which you have had of this People, under
the various Revolutions of Government in this Nation, for above Forty Years,
speak for them, whether they have not been of those that are quiet in the Land;
but these things which are false and slanderous Stories suggested without
Ground or Proof, are like Demetrius's Exclamations against Paul, saying,
Moreover ye See and Hear that Acts 19.
not alone at Ephesus, but almost throughout all Asia, this Paul has persuaded
and turned away much People: But Demetrius was so Ingenuous then, as to confess
it was That Craft by which he and his Brethren got their Wealth, that was in
Danger, and plainly intimated that was the Cause of his Wrath; And when they
heard those things they were full of Wrath.

But Remember the Town-Clerks Advice, when this Vproar was, he said, Ye ought
to be Quiet, and to do nothing Rashly, for these Men are neither Robbers of
Churches, nor Blasphemers of your Goddess.

Wherefore if Demetrius, etc. has matter against any Man, the Law is open.

And Oh my Friends! to you I appeal, whether ever ye knew, or did observe, the
Demetrius's of our Age present any Man, or prosecute him at Law, or Incense or
Stir up the Magistrates, and endeavor by Petition to Incense the Government
against him, whilst he lived in Pride, Gluttony, Drunkenness or any Excess of
Riot. But this has often been seen, that when those, or any have turned from
their Evil Ways, become Conscientious, and could not pay their Tithes, or
comply with some other things that are acknowledged but Outward and Visible
Signs, of an Inward and Spiritual Grace. Then, Oh then! how have these been
prosecuted, if but for a few Farthings, a few Pence and Shillings; the Justices
and Officers troubled, the Courts and Lawyers employed, and Money spent, Revenge
vented, and Havoc and Spoil made, Two, Three or Four times more taken then
demanded: And yet these Suffering People are exclaimed against as Men of
Pernicious Principles, the great Growth and daily Increase of whom, threatens
the Nation with Mischiefs and Dangers.

And although the Law is open to Punish Romish Emissaries; yet these
Petitioners cannot be content to take that way, but would falsely insinuate,
there were such among the Teachers of the said People.

And yet are not many of these Clergymen in Romish Practices, viz. Bowing to
the Alter, and to the East, and having Godfathers and Godmothers, as they
call them, and Signing Children with the Sign of the Cross, and their Surplace,
and their Absolution, in which the Minister is to say, I absolve thee from all
thy Sins; are not these things Romish, see the Mass Book? And also their
Prosecuting for Mortuaries and Smoak-Penny, etc.

Oh! consider all People, to whom this may come, and know assuredly this, that
the Great and Everlasting God, who has measured the Waters in the hallow of
his Hand, and meted out the Heaven with a Span, and comprehended the Dust of
the Earth in a measure, Isa. 40. 12.
and weighed the Mountains in Scales, and the Hills in a Balance? He sees and
beholds these things; for the Lord is a God of Knowledge, and by him Actions
are 1 Samuel 2. 3.
weighed; and he marks the ways of the Children of Men, and records their
doings, as with a Pen of Iron, and Point of a Diamond, in the Books that shall
be opened, when the Dead, both small and great shall stand before God, and him
that John see sat on a great Rev. 20.
white Throne, from whose Face the Earth and the Heaven fled away, and there
was found no more place for them that went on the breadth of the Earth, and
compassed the Camp of the Saints about, and the Beloved City; and Fire came
down from God out of Heaven, and devoured them: And the Devil that deceived
them, was cast into the Lake of Fire and Brimstone, where the Beast and the
false Prophet are, and shall be tormented Day and Night for evermore. And
therefore let all consider their Ways, and amend their Doings, for Time here is
short, and our Moments uncertain; but sure it is, that God will bring every
Work to Judgment, with every secret thing; and there are none can appear before
him with boldness, nor give their Account with joy, that take pleasure in
Unrighteousness, and die in their Sins, such can never go where Christ is, as
he said. John 1. 21.
Therefore in Bowels of tender Love, and in Good Will to your never dying
Souls, I tenderly beseech you, Turn to the Lord, and from the Evil of your
Doings, and put away the Violence that is in your Hearts; and against this
Innocent People entertain no Prejudice, neither hearken to the lying Stories,
and false Suggestions of Men, whose Fruits and Works declares, they neither
follow the Doctrine, and blessed Ensample of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ,
who taught not as the Scribes and Pharisees, but as one having Authority, and
who enforced his Doctrine by his Ensample, and said, Learn of me, I am meek and
lowly Mat. 11. 29.
in Heart; He was full of Love, and was moved with Mark 6. 34.
Compassion on the ignorant, and them that are out of the way; and come not to
destroy, but to save; and by Luke 9. 5, 6.
him Grace and Truth is come, and it appears to all, and his Light shines in
all, and his Spirit strives with the John 1. 17. Titus 2. 13. John 1. 9.
Children of Men; it is he shows Man what is good, and what the Lord requires at
your Hands; it is he, that Micah 6. 8.
by his Spirit Convinces of Sin, and reproves for it in John 16. 8.
the secret of Men's Hearts; it is he that is the great Wisdom of God, that calls
to the Simple Ones, saying, How long ye Simple Ones will ye love Simplicity,
and ye Prove. 1. 22.
Scorners delight in their Scorning, and Fools hate Knowledge? Turn ye at my
Reproof: Behold I will pour out of my Spirit unto you, and make known my Words
unto you: Oh! It Is this, and the Grace that Comes by him, that appears to all,
and would teach all, if they would come to him, believe in him, and learn of
him, to deny all that which is the cause of God's Wrath, and would teach them
to live Soberly, and Righteously, and Godly. Titus 2. 13.


Therefore, while ye have Time, prize your Time, and the Day of your tender
Visitation, which God, through Christ, is affording to you, that the things
that belong to your Peace you may come to know, before they are hid from your
Eyes; these things will be of profit to you, and your so doing will bespeak you
Christians indeed; for if you bear that Name, and are not guided and led by
Christ's Spirit, Romans 8. 9. 14.
you will be found none of his, nor Sons of God, profess what you will, if you
remain Workers of Iniquity Christ will profess, he knows ye not, and will bid
you depart from him into Everlasting Fire, prepared for the Devil Mat. 7. 23.
Mat. 25. 41.
and his Angels. And therefore, if you would be of that Number which he will
say unto, Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you
from Mat. 25. 34.
the Foundation of the World; then you must be Righteous, and that you cannot
be, unless ye do Righteousness; for, said the Apostle, He that does
Righteousness, is Righteous, even as he is Righteous: He that 1 John 3. 7, 8.
commits Sin is of the Devil. And none can do Righteousness but those that
learn of his Grace, that teached to deny all Unrighteousness, and are guided by
his Spirit, which he promised should guide into all John 16. 13.
Truth. And walk in the Light, as he is in the Light, 1 John 1. 7.
where the Blood of Jesus Christ is known to cleanse from all Sin. And this is
the Doctrine the Holy Scriptures, and this People teach, against whom this
great Rage is.

And if you would come to that Spirit the holy Pen men were moved to write the
holy Scriptures by, and in and by that Compare the Doctrines of these People,
and their Practice, and the Practice of those Men that preach against this
People, and their Doctrines, and that charge them with Error, Blasphemy, and
Pernicious Principles, you would quickly find whose Quodrat most with them, and
are most agreeable to the true Prophets and Ministers of Jesus Christ.
Therefore remember the Excellent Counsel of the wise and learned Apostle Paul,
Prove all things, and 1 These. 5. 21.
hold fast that which is good; you may remember it was said of the Christians,
that they were a Sect every Acts 28. 22.
where spoken against: And yet the true Ministers in all things approved
themselves as the Ministers of God, 2 Cor. 6. 4 to 9.
in much Patience, in Afflictions, in Necessities, in Stripes, in
Imprisonments, in Tumults, in Labor, in Watchings, in Fastings, by Pureness,
by Knowledge, by Long-Suffering, by Kindness, by the Holy Ghost, by Love
unfeigned, by the Word of Truth, and by the Power of God, by the Armor of
Righteousness on the right Hand and on the left, by Honor and Dishonor, by
evil Report and good Report, as deceivers, yet true.

Observe, they were not impatient, they did not Afflict, they had not great
Revenues, nor large Benefices, or forced Maintenance, they did not Stripe and
Imprison, nor cause Tumults, by incensing the People against their Peaceable
Neighbors; they were not idle, nor exercised in Feastings, received not the
Honor nor high Title, did not Lord it over God's Heritage, but by Pureness,
Knowledge, Long-Suffering, Kindness, and the Holy Ghost, Love unfeigned, and by
the Word of Truth, etc. approved themselves the Ministers of Christ; they were
not defiled, ignorant, hasty, angry or hateful: Consider these things
seriously, and let all endeavor to amend what is amiss in themselves, and
rather mend faults where they are, than suggest faults where they are not; let
every Man be fully persuaded in his own Mind, and so let him act; and hate
nothing but the Devil and Sin, but love God, and one another. So having in Love
and Plainness discharged my Spirit of what, as a concern, remained upon me, in
the Love of him that has loved and died for us all, I Conclude and Remain

Your sincere Friend, and hearty Well-wisher to the People called Quakers, and
all Men. J. F.

FINIS.

