A SECOND SPEECH OF THE HONORABLE NATHANAEL FIENNES, (second Son to the Right
Honorable the LORD SAY) in the Commons House of PARLIAMENT.

Touching the Subjects Liberty against the late Canons, and the New Oath.

Printed by a perfect Copy, 1641.

A SECOND SPEECH OF THE HONORABLE NATHANAEL FJENNES (second Son to the Right
Honorable the Lord SAY) touching the Subjects Liberty against the late Canons
and the New Oath.
Mr. Speaker,
NOW that we are about to brand these Canons in respect of the matter
contained in them, it is the proper time to open the foulness thereof: and
though much of this has been anticipated in the general debate, yet if any
thing has been omitted, or if any thing may be farther cleared in that kind,
it is for the service of the House, that it should now be done.

Sir, I conceive these Canons do contain sundry matters, which are not only
contrary to the Laws of this Land, but also destructive of the very principal
and fundamental Laws of this Kingdom. J shall begin with the first Canon,
wherein the framers of these Canons have assumed unto themselves a
Parliamentary power, and that too in a very high degree, for they have taken
upon them to define what is the power of the King, what the liberty of the
Subjects, and what propriety he has in his goods. If this be not proper to a
Parliament* J know not what is. Nay it is the highest matter that can fall
under the consideration of a Parliament, and such a point as wherein they would
have walked with more tenderness and circumspection, then these bold Divines
have done. And surely as this was an act of such presumption as no age can
parallel: so is it of such dangerous consequence as nothing can be more. For
they do not only take upon them to determine matters of this nature, but also
under great penalties, forbid all Parsons, Vicars, Curats, Readers in Divinity
etc. To speak any other ways of them then as they had defined, by which
Means having seized upon all the Conduits, whereby knowledge is conveyed unto
the people, how easy would it be for them in time, to undermine the Kings
prerogative, and to suppress the Subjects liberty, or both.

And now (Sir) I beseech you to consider how they have defined this high and
great point: they have dealt with us in matter of Divinity, as the Judges had
done before in matter of Law: they first took upon them to determine a matter
that belonged not to their Judicature, but only to the Parliament, and after
by their judgment they overthrew our propriety, and just so have these Divines
dealt with us: they tell us that Kings are an Ordinance of God, of Divine
Right, and founded in the Prime Laws of Nature, from whence it will follow
that all other forms of government, as Aristocracies, and Democracies, are
wicked forms of Government contrary to the Ordinance of God, and the Prime
Laws of nature, which is such new Divinity as I never read in any Book, but
in this new Book of Canons.

Mr. Speaker, We all know that Kings, and States, and Judges, and all
Magistrates are the Ordinances of God, but (Sir) give me leave to say they were
the Ordinances of men, before they were the Ordinances of God. J know I am upon
a great and high point, but J speak by as great and as high a warrant, if
Saint Peter's chair cannot err (as Saint Peter's Epistles cannot) thus he
teaches us, Submit your selves to every Ordinance of man for the Lords sake,
whether it be to the King as supreme, or to the Governor, as to him that is
sent by him etc.

(Sir) it is worthy noting, that they are Ordinances of men, but that they are
to be submitted unto for the Lords sake, and truly their power is as just, and
their subjects allegiance as due unto them, though we suppose them to be first
ordinances of men, and then confirmed, and established by Gods Ordinance, as if
we suppose them to be immediate ordinances of God, and so received by men. But
there was somewhat in it, that these Divines aimed at, I suppose it was this.
If Kings were of Divine Right, as the Office of a Pastor, in the Church, or
founded in the prime Laws of Nature, as the power of a Father in a Family;
then it would certainly follow, that they should receave the fashion and manner
of their government, only from the Prescript of Gods Word, or of the Laws of
Nature, and consequently, if there be no text neither of the Old nor New
Testament, nor yet any Law of nature, that Kings may not make Laws without
Parliaments, they may make Laws without Parliaments, and if neither in the
Scripture, nor in the Law of Nature, Kings be forbidden to lay taxes or any
kind of impositions upon their people without consent in Parliament, they may
do it out of Parliament: and that this was their meaning, they express it
after in plain terms, for they say that Subsidies and taxes, and all manner
of aids are due unto Kings by the Law of God, and of nature. (Sir) if they be
due by the Law of God and of nature, they are due, though there be no act of
Parliament for them, nay (Sir) if they be due by such a right, a hundred acts
of Parliaments cannot take them away, or make them undue. And (Sir) that they
meant it of Subsidies and aides taken, without consent in Parliament, is
clearly that addition, that they subjoyne unto it, that this does not take
away from the Subject the propriety he has in his goods, for had they spoken
of Subsidies and aides given by consent in Parliament, this would have been a
very ridiculous addition, for who ever made any question, whether the giving
Subsidies in Parliament did take away from the Subject the propriety he has
in his goods, when as it does evidently imply they have a propriety in their
goods? for they could not give unless they had something to give: but because
that was alleged as a chief reason against ship money, and other such
illegal payments levied upon the people, without their consent in Parliament,
that it did deprive them of their right of propriety which they have in their
goods, these Divines would seem to make some answer thereunto, but in truth
their answer is nothing else but the bare ass^rtion of a contradiction, and it
is an easy thing to say a contradiction, but impossible to reconcile it; for
certainly if it be a true rule (as it is most true) ^uod meum est sine consensu
meo, non potest fieri alienum; to take my goods without my consent must needs
destroy my propriety. Another thing in this first Canon, wherein they have
assumed unto themselves a Parliamentary power, is in that they take upon them
to define what is Treason, besides what is determined in the statute of
Treasons. They say, to set up any coactive independent power is treasonable
both against God and the King, the question is not whether it be true they say
or not, but whether they have power to say what is Treason, and what not? But
now (Sir) that I am upon this point, J would gladly know what kind of power
that is, which is exercised by Archbishops, Bishops, Deanes, Archdeacons,
etc. Coactive certainly it is, all the Kingdom feels the lash thereof, and it
must needs be independent, if it be jure Divino, as they hold it, for they
do not mean by an independent power, such a power as does not depend on GOD.
Besides if their power be dependent, of whom is it dependent? not of the King,
for the Law acknowledges no way whereby Ecclesiastical jurisdiction can be
derived from his Majesty, but by his commission under the great Seal, which as
I am informed, they have not: I speak not of the High Commission, but of that
jurisdiction which they exercise in their Archiepiscopall, Episcopal,
Archidiaconall Courts, etc. and therefore if their own sentence be just, we
know what they are, and what they have pronounced against themselves. But (Sir)
it were worth knowing what they aimed at in that independent, coactive power,
which they term popular. J will not take upon me to unfold their meaning; but
we know Doct. Beale had a hand in the making of these Canons, and if we apply
his Paraphrase to the text, it may give us some cleerenesse. J remember amongst
other notes of his this was one, that we did acknowledge the Kings Supremacy,
but would join unto him an assistant (viz.) the people, meaning this House,
which being the representative body of the COMMONS of England, and claiming, as
it is so, a share in the Legislative power, Doct: Beale calls this a joining
of an assistant to the King, in whom soly he places the power of making Laws,
and that it is but of grace, that he assumeth either the Lords, or Commons for
the making of Laws with him. Now (Sir) the Legislative power is the greatest
power, and therefore coactive, and it is the highest power, and therefore
independent, and if every Estate for the proportion it has therein, should not
have such a power, it should not have it of right, as founded in the Fabric
and frame, of the policy and government, but of Grace, or by Commission, as
Doctor Beale affirms. J have done with the first Canon, only J shall add
this, that considering the Principles and positions that are laid down
therein, and comparing them with a clause toward the end of the Canon, that in
no case imaginable it is lawful for Subjects to defend themselves, we may
judge how far forth these Canons were to prepare men's minds for the force
that was to follow after; if the accusation against my Lord of Strafford be
laid aright. For the matter it self, I hope there will never be any need to
dispute that question, and J do believe they had as little need, to have
published that position, had it not been upon design. As for the second
Canon, therein also they have assumed to themselves a Parliamentary power, in
taking upon them, to appoint Holidayes, whereas the Statute says in express
words, that such days shall be only kept as Holy days as are named in the
Statute, and no other, and therefore though the thing may be bonum, yet it was
not done been, because not ordained by Parliament, notwithstanding what has
been alleged to the contrary: it seems to me to be the appoynting of an
Holy day, to set a time a part for Divine Service, and to force men under
penalties to leave their labors, and business, and to be present at it. And
of the same nature is that other clause, in the same Canon, wherein they take
upon them without Parliament, to lay a charge upon the people, enjoining two
Books at least for that day, to be bought at the charge of the Parish, for by
the same right, that they may lay a penny on the Parish without Parliament,
they may lay a pound or any greater Sum.

As to the third Canon, I shall pass it over, only the observation that my
neighbor of the long Robe made upon it, seems unto me so good as that it is
worth the repeating, that whereas in the Canon against Sectaries there is an
especial proviso, that it shall not derogate from any Statute, or Law made
against them (as if their Canons had any power to disanull an act of
Parliament) there is no such Proviso in this Canon against Papists, from whence
it may be probably conjectured, that they might have drawn some color of
exemption, from the penal Laws established against them from this Canon,,
because it might seem hard that they should be doubly punished for the same
thing, as we know in the point of absence from the Church; the Law provideth,
that if any man be first punished by the ordinary, he shall not be punished
again by the Justices.

For the fourth Canon against Socinianisme, therein also these Canon-makers
have assumed to themselves, a Parliamentary power, in determining an Heresy
not determined by Law, which is expressly reserved to the determination of a
Parliament. It is true, they say it is a complication of many heresies,
condemned in the four first Conncills, but they do not say what those
Heresies are, and it is not possible that Socinianisme should be formally
condemned in those Councills, for it is sprang up but of late; Therefore they
have taken upon them, to determine and damn a Heresy, and that so generally,
as that it may be of very dangerous consequence, for condemning Socinianisme
for an heresy, and not declaring what is Socinianisme, it is left in their
breasts whom they will judge, and call a Socinian. I would not have any thing
that I have said to be interpreted, as if J had spoken it in favor of
Socianisme, which (if it be such as J apprehend it to be) is indeed a most vile
and damnable heresy, and therefore the framers of these Canons, are the more
to blame in the next Canon against Sectaries, wherein besides that in the
pre-Preamble thereof, they lay it down for a certain ground, which the holy
Synod knew full well, that other Sects (which they extend not only to
Brownists, and Separatists, but also to all persons, that for the space of a
month, do absent themselves without a reasonable cause, from their own
Parish Churches) do equally endeavor the Subversion of the Discipline, and
Doctrine of the Church of England with the Papists, although the worst of them
do not bear any proportion, in that respect to the Papists, J say besides
that they make them equal in crime, and punishment to the Papists,
notwithstanding the great disproportion of their Tenants, there is an other
passage in this Canon relative to that against Socinianisme, which I shall
especially offer to your consideration, and that is this. If a Gentleman
coming from beyond Seas should happen to bring over with him a Book, contrary
to the Discipline of the Church of England, or should give such a Book to his
friend, nay if any man should abett, or maintain an opinion contrary
thereunto, though it were but in Parliament, if he thought it fit to be
altered, by this Canon he is excommunicate ipso facto, and lies under the
same consideration, and is liable to the same punishment; as if he had
maintained an opinion against the Deity of CHRIST, and of the Holy Ghost, and
of our Justification by the satisfaction of Christ.

(Sir) if in things that are in their own Nature indifferent, if in things
disputable, it shall be as heinous to abett or maintain an opinion, as in the
most horrible and monstrous heresies, that can be imagined, what liberty is
left to us as Christians? What liberty is left to us as men? I proceed to the
sixth Canon, wherein these Canonists have assumed to themselves a Parliamentary
power, and that in a very high degree, in that they have taken upon them to
impose new Oaths, upon the Kings Subjects. (Sir) under favor, of what has
been alleged to the contrary, to impose an Oath, if it be not an higher
power, then to make a Law, it is a power of making a Law of a most high Nature,
and of higher and farther consequence then any other Law, and I should much
rather choose that the convocation should have a power to make Laws, to bind my
person and my estate, then that they should have a power to make Oaths to bind
my conscience: a Law binds me no longer then till another Law be made to alter
it, but my Oath binds me as long as I live. Again, a Law binds me either
to obedience, or to undergo the penalty inflicted by the Law, but my Oath
binds me absolutely to obedience. And lastly, a Law binds me no longer then I
am in the Land, or at the farthest no longer then I am a Member of the State;
wherein and whereby the Law is made, but my Oath once being taken, does bind
me in all places, and in all conditions so long as I live. Thus much J thought
good to speak concerning the power of imposing new Oaths: as to the matter of
this new Oath, it is wholly illegal. It is aginst the Law of this Land, it is
against the Law and Light of Nature, it is against the Law of GOD, it is
against the Laws of this KINGDOM; And that, no obscure Laws, nor concerning
any mean, or petty matters. It is against the Law of the Kings Supremacy, in
that it makes Archbishops, Bishops, Deanes, Archdeacons, etc. to be jure
Divino, whereas the Law of this Land has annexed to the Imperial Crown of
this Realm, not only all Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, but also all
Superiority, over the Ecclesiastical State, and it is to be derived from him
by Commission under the great Seal, and consequently it is Jure humano.
Again, it is against the Oath of Supremacy, established by Law point blanck,
for therein I am sworn not only to consent unto, but also to assist, and to
the uttermost of my power, to defend all Jurisdictions, pre-eminence, etc.
annexed to the Imperial Crown of this Realm, of which this is one (and that
which immediately precedeth this Oath in the Statute, and whereunto it does
especially relate) That his Majesty may exercise any Jurisdictions, or
Ecclesiastical government by his Commission under the great Seal directed to
such persons, as he shall think meet, so that if he shall think other
persons more meet, then Arch-bishoos, Bishops, etc. I am sworn in the Oath of
Supremacy not only to assent thereunto, but to assist, and to the uttermost
of my power to defend such an appointment of his Majesty, and in this new Oath
J shall swear never to consent unto such an alteration. In the like manner it
is against the Law, and Light of Nature, that a man should swear to answer,
(etc.) to he knows not what. It is against the Law and light of Nature, that a
man should swear never to consent, to alter a thing, that in its own nature
is alterable, and may prove inconvenient, and fit to be altered. Lastly, it is
against the Law of God: for whereas there are three rules prescribed to him
that will swear aright, that he swear in Judgment, in Truth, and
righteousness: he that shall take this new Oath, must needs break all these
three Rules. He can not swear in judgment, because this Oath is so full of
ambiguities, that he can not tell what he swears unto; not to speak of the
unextricable ambiguity of the etc. There is scarce one word that is not
ambiguous in the principal parts of the Oath, as First. What is meant by the
Church of England, whether all the Christians in England, or whether the
Clergy only, or only the Archbishops, Bishops, Deanes, etc. or whether the
Convocation, or what? In like manner it is as doubtful what is meant by the
Discipline, and what by the Doctrine of the Church of England, for what some
call superstitious Jnnovations, if others affirm to be consonant to the
Primitive, and that the purest Reformation in the time of Edward the 6. and in
the beginning of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, and so for the Doctrine of the
Church of England, if all the Positions that of later years have been
challenged by some of our Divines to be Arminian and Popish, and contrary to
the Articles of our Religion, and which on the other side have been asserted
and maintained as consonant to the Doctrine of our Church, and if the Articles
of Religion were gathered together, they might make a pretty volume, nay Sancta
Clara will maintain it in despite of the Puritanes, that the Doctrine of the
Church of Rome, is the Doctrine of the Church of England. Truly it were very
fit that we knew, what were the Doctrine and Discipline of the Church of
England before we swear to it, and then (Sir) give me leave to say, that J
should be very loath to swear to the Discipline, or to the Doctrine and
Tenants of the purest Church in the World, as they are collected by them,
farther then they agree with the Holy Scriptures. Lastly, it is as doubtful
what is meant, by the Doctrine and Discipline established, and what by altering
and consenting to alter, whether that is accounted, or established, which is
established by act of Parliament, or wheter that also that is established, by
Canons, Injunctions, etc. and whether it shall not extend to that which is
published by our Divines with the allowance of authority, and so for consenting
to alter whether it be only meant that a man shall not be active in altering,
or whether it extend to any consent, and so that a man shall not submit to it,
nor accept of it, being altered by the State. More ambiguities might be shown,
but these are enough to make it clear, that he that shall take this Oath
cannot swear in judgment. Nor can he swear in truth, for it is full of
untruthes. It is not true that Discpline is necessary to Salvation. It is not
true, that Archbishops, Bishops, Deanes, Archdeacons, etc. are jure Divino,
as they must needs be, if the Lawmakers ought of right to establish them, as
they are established: for the Lawmakers are not bound as of right, to frame
their Laws to any other then the Laws of God alone. Now whether Bishops be
Jure Divino, we know it is a dispute amongst the Papists, and never did any
Protestant hold it till of late years, but that Archbishops, Deanes,
Archdeacons, etc. should be jure Divino, I do not know that ever any
Christian held it before and yet he that takes this Oath must swear it.
Lastly as he that takes this Oath cannot swear in judgment nor in truth, so
neither can he swear in righteousness, for it is full of unrighteousness,
being indeed, as has been well opened, a Covenant in effect against the King
and Kingdom; for if the whole State should find it necessary, to alter the
Government by Archbishops, Bishops, etc. a great part of the Kingdom,
especially of the Gentry (for not only the Clergy, but all that take degrees
in the Universities are bound to take it) will be preingaged not to consent to
it, or admit of it. Again it is a great wrong to those that shall be
Parliament Men, that their freedom shall be taken away being bound up by an
Oath, not to consent to the altering of a thing, which it may be fit and
proper for a Parliament to alter. And suppose that for the present it be no
hinderance to the service of God, nor yet burdensome, to the King, and
Kingdom, yet if it should prove so hereafter* for a man to be bound by an
Oath never to consent to alter it, may be a great wrong to God in his service,
and to the King and Kingdom in their peace and welfare, and therefore this
Oath cannot be taken in righteousness. For the other Oath de parendo juri
Ecclesiae, and stando mandatis Ecclesiae, though it make less noise then the
other, yet it is not of less dangerous consequence. If I remember well the
Story, this was the Oath that the Pope made King John to take, and when he had
sworn stare mandatis Ecclesiae, the Pope commanded him to resign his Kingdom
to him, and truly be he Gentleman or Nobleman, or what ever else when he
has once put his neck into this nouse, his Ghostly Fathers may drag him
whither they will, for they have the quantity and the quality of the penance in
their own breast, and if they shall enjoyne him to give any sum toward the
building of a Church, or the adorning of a Chapel, he must pay it, or if they
should enjoyne him any servile or base action (as there are not wanting
examples of that kind in the time of Popery) they are sworn stare mandatis
Ecclesiae, and so cannot recede, but must perform it. Nay I dare not warrant
any man from the rods of Henry the second, or of Raymond of Tholouze; what has
been done may be done, J am sure the power is the same. And that other Oath
also (though more usual in practice, and more confirmed by th^se new Canons)
which is administered to Churchwardens, would be looked into. For it is hardly
possible for them that take it not to be for sworn, being they swear to so
many particulars, that they cannot mind, and to some that they cannot
understand, as how many Churchwardens are there in England, that understand
what Socinianisme is, in case they be sworn, to present the offenders against
that Canon, which concerns that matter. I shall only add a word or two
concerning two Canons more, which seem to be Canons of Reformation. The first
is, concerning excommunication, to be pronounced only by a Divine, wherein it
is alleged for the framers of these Canons, that if they have not more Law on
their sides, yet they may seem to have more reason. For my part, as in all
other things, I think they have so mended the matter, that they have made it
far worse, for before that which was found fault with was this, that a
Layman did that which the grave Divine should have done, and now the grave
Divine must do what ever the Layman would have done, for the cogniscance of
the cause, and the power of judicature is wholly in the Layman, only the grave
Divine is to be his Servant, to execute his Sentences, and has such a kind of
managing the spiritual sword allowed only unto him, as the Papists in some
cases were wont to afford unto the civil Magistrate, in respect of the
Temporal sword, for as if the Civil sword by an implicit Faith had been
pinned, to the Lawn-sleeves, they condemned men of Heresy, and then delivered
them over to the Secular power; but what to do? Not to have any cognizance of
the cause, nor to exercise any power of judicature, but only to be their
executioners, and to burn the Heretic whom they had condemned, and so they
judged men excommunicate, and then the civil power was to send out writtes de
Excommunicato ^apiendo against them, but one said well, that the sword without
cognizance of the cause, and judgment, was like Polyphemus without his eye, it
became violence and fury. But being accompanied with the eye of judgment, it
is equity and justice: and surely where the spiritual or civil governor is
called upon to strike, he must be allowed to see and judge whom and wherefore
he strikes, otherwise he will be able to give but an ill account to God, of
the managing of the sword, wherewith he is instructed. The other Canon is the
last Canon against vexatious citations, wherein they seem to have some sense
of the great grievances that poor people lie under, by occasion of vexatious
citations, and molestations in Ecclesiastical Courts, and I verily believe
that there is not a greater oppression in the whole Kingdom upon the poorer
sort of people, then that which proceeds out of these Courts. But now (Sir)
Let us see what provision they have made against it by this Canon. They say
because great grievances may fall upon people by citations upon pretense only,
of the breach of that Law without any presentment, or any other just ground,
that no citations, grounded only as aforesaid, shall issue out, except it be
under the hand and Seal of the Chancellor, Commissary, Archdeacon, or other
competent Judge, so that (if there be any sense in these words) though there
be no presentment at all, nor any other just ground, yet a citation may issue
out, so it be under the hand and Seal of the Chancellor, Commissary, or other
competent Judge, and the party shall not be discharged without paying his fees,
nor have any relief by this Canon. But suppose the citation be not under the
hand and Seal of any competent Judge, and that there was neither presentment
nor any just ground for it shall he then be dismissed without paying any fees?
No, unless first contrary to the law of nature, there being no presentment nor
just ground of accusation against him, he shall by his oath purge himself of
pretended breaches of Law, and then too he shall only have the fees of the
Court remitted, but shall have no satisfaction for his troublesome and
chargeable journey, and for the loss of his time, and being drawn away from
his aff^ires. Nay lest they should seem to have been too liberal of their
favor, they add a Proviso in the close of the Canon, that this grace of
theirs shall not extend to any grievous crime, as Schism, Incontinency,
misbehaviour in the Church, or obstinate inconformity. And what do they call
misbehaviour in the Church? If a man do not kneel at the Confession, or have
his hat on, when the Lessons are reading. In like manuer what do they call
obstinate inconformity? If a man will not think what they would have him
think, if a man will not say what they would have him say, if a man will not
swear what they would have him swear, if a man will not read what they would
have him read, if a man will not preach what they would have him preach, if a
man will not pray what they would have him pray, In short, if a man will not
do what ever they would have him do, then he is an inconformist, and after
that they have duly admonished him, primo, secundo, tertio, all in one breath,
then he is contumacious, then he is an obstinate Jnconformist.

Now (Sir) my humble motion is, that in consideration of all the premises, and
what besides has been well laid open by others; we should proceed to damme
these Canons, not only as contrary to the Laws of the Land, but also as
containing sundry matters, destructive of the rights of Parliaments, and of the
fundamental and other principal Laws of this Kingdom, and otherwise of very
dangerous consequence.

FINIS.

