August. 19. 1643.
Ordered by the Commons in Parliament assembled, That this Ordinance be
forthwith printed and published.

H. Elsynge Cler. Parl. D. Com.

COLONEL FIENNES LETTER TO MY LORD GENERAL, CONCERNING BRISTOL.

This is licenced and entered according to Order.

LONDON, Printed by T. P. and M. S. for Thomas Underhill. 1643.

COLONEL FYNES Letter to my Lord General, concerning BRISTOLL.
May it please your Excellency.
SInce the surrender of Bristoll (of which I desire to give an account before a
Council of War) I could not get any means to send to your Excellency; and I
would not have written at this time, but have my self waited upon your
Excellency, but that I find it necessary for me to stay here a day or two, to
clear my self of such aspersions as are most unworthily laid upon me in this
City, when I kept the Town so far beyond the enemies expectation, that they
began to believe we had gotten some fresh forces into the City, and held a
solemn counsel of war (the results whereof I have, being found in Colonel
Burkes pocket, whom we slew amongst diverse other Colonels and Officers of
quality) whether they should proceed to fall upon the town by way of assault,
or by way of approach. My Lord, I held that large Town with a handful of men
against a greater Army then ever yet the King had together, four days, being
continually almost assaulted both by day and by night, and stormed by them in
eight or nine places together, in so furious manner, as the like was never yet
done in England, and the loss that they have received, does testify as much:
For there are near a thousand of them slain and maimed, besides a great many
of their chief Officers, amongst the rest, Coll- Lunsford, Coll. Buck, Coll.
Trevanian, Sir Nicholas Slaning, and diverse others, and yet we lost not above
eight men in service, and none of quality. The enemy was provided with all
sorts of Fireworks, as Grenades, Fire-pikes and the like, and with Waines full
of Faggots, and broad Scaling Ladders, whereon four or six might climb up on a
breast, and they made use of all those in a most desperate way, driving their
wains of faggots into the ditches, and climbing up with their Fire pikes and
grenades in their hands, to the very portalls of our great Ordnance, yet they
were beaten back in 8 or 9 places together, and entered only in one place where
the works were not perfected, there being no ditch as yet made, nor any
foot-bank within side the breastworks; notwithstanding all this, and that they
had entered the suburbs, and drawn the whole body of their foot to that place,
yet our Soldiers sallied out both Horse and Foot upon them, as they lay in the
suburbs, and beat them back from street to street an hour and half together;
but being overlaid with fresh companies, one seconding another, wherein we were
not able to answer them, though they beat the enemy back most courageously at
the first; insomuch that many of them ran away, threw down their Arms, and
cried for quarter, yet being long overborn with fresh men which the enemy still
drew down upon them, they were forced to retreat into the town; and then and
not till then, the Soldiers began to be disheartened, and whether out of
weariness, or being discouraged, having been 5 days and nights together
constantly upon duty, and in fight without any relief (for we could make no
reserves) they began to slink away from their Colors and Guards, and get into
houses, do what their Officers could, so that of 14. Companies, I could not
make 120 men, although I proclaimed that all those that were upon the Guards,
should repair to their Guards; and those that were not, should repair to the
Marsh, and that there they should receive both money and victuals, but I could
not get them to their Colors or Guards, although the enemy lay ready on the
other side of the Key (which at low water, which then it began to be, may be
waded over) to fall over into the Town, and no doubt in that condition that our
guards were then in, both upon the Key, and in the Marsh, they might in less
then half an hour, have fallen into the Town by force, and used their
pleasures both upon the Soldiers and upon the Citizens. Finding our selves in
this condition, I called a council of war, at which also Sir John Horner,
Mr. Stevens, and other Gentlemen of the Country, were present, I proposed to
them our condition, and besides laid open to them, what store we had of
Ammunition, that we had not of powder above 25 French barrels; and of match for
above a days space; that the Castle it self, the works not being finished,
was not tenable above a day or two, for that the maine wall would be battered
in two several places, and that we had no expectation of relief against such
a potent Army wherewith we were besieged, in one, two or three works. At the
same instant, Mr. Major, and the Sheriffs did earnestly entreat us, that
seeing we could not keep the place, we would not ruin so famous a City to no
purpose, nor expose so many men's persons and estates to violence and
plundering. Upon all these considerations, it was unanimously resolved, that we
should entertain a treaty with the enemy; and that if we could have reasonable
conditions, that it were far better to save so many Commanders and Soldiers
both of Horse and Foot, and so many honest men's persons and estates, as well of
our friends in the City, as of Gentlemen and others that came out of the
countries adjacent, then to expose them all to destruction by attempting in a
furious and mad way to defend the town or Castle for two or three days (if we
could have held it so long) without any hope of holding them any longer, for I
will put it upon that issue, and without any hope or expectation of any relief
within that time, or a longer time after. Upon the treaty all things almost
which we demanded, we obtained, excepting the Arms of the common Soldiers, and
our Colors, which being points of honor, I was resolved to have insisted
upon, and so we brake off for a while. But upon the earnest suit of the Major
and Citizens, and others, called together my Officers, and fell into a serious
debate concerning it. And when I was very resolute not to quit the point, very
many of my Captains came in and told us, that they could not get six of their
Companies together, and that they ran away apace to the enemy over the Key, it
being now low water; whereby they not only showed to the enemy, that our men
were disheartened, and that they should have found but slender opposition; but
also they showed them the way how they might readily fall over into the Town,
so soon as the treaty should break off, which undoubtedly they had done, and
given us little leave to retreat into the Castle, or any where else, I must
confess this Castle the balance in my thoughts, that caused me to yield to
that Article, which otherwise I would never have done, supposing that we should
quickly find Arms again, preserving the hoses and men of my Regiment of horse
and foot (which had conditions been kept with me, I had preserved.) I have
given your Excellence a true account of the carriage of this unhappy business,
and of the causes of the surrendering of that City and Castle, together with
the conditions whereupon they were yielded up. All which being considered and
proved, as it shall, by many witnesses, against whom there can be no exception,
I hope I shall not only stand clear in your Lordships eyes, and the eyes of all
the world, but that it shall be acknowledged, that I have done most faithful
service to those by whom I have been entrusted; and that in truth (which every
indifferent man sees) the unhappy disaster which befell Sir William Wallers
Army, did necessarily involve the fate of Bristol, both because I had
unfurnished the City with men and Ammuuition, to supply that Army: and it was
necessary for me so to do, because the City was never put into a condition to
subsist of it self against a Royal Army, although I was not wanting to
represent the importance of the place, and the means how it might be defended
in certain propositions which I long since sent to your Lordship, and which
were by your Excellency earnestly recommended to the Committee, but they were
not brought to any effect. What my care and pains has been to preserve that
City, having the whole burden thereof for the providing of Men, Arms,
Ammunition, and all sorts of provision cast upon me, having armed 3000 foot,
and 300 horse, and paid constantly 2000 foot and a Regiment of Horse, for four
or five months together, without ever having above 4000 pounds from the
Parliament, and 1700l. of the custom moneys: What has been my toil and
labor to get moneys for these uses, without troubling the Parliament, how
little advantage I have made for my self, how ready I have been to furnish Sir
W. Waller with Men, Arms, Ammunition, Money, and all sorts of provision, (that
I may say nothing of the hundreds of his maimed Soldiers that have been cast
upon my care and charge) I leave to my greatest enemies to speak the truth: for
I know there cannot be found in the world so great malice as to deny it; and I
appeal to him that knows all things, to judge between me and those that expect
a greater tale of brick from me, and will not afford me straw wherewithal to
make it; and I shall appeal to your Lordship, and all indifferent men, whether
more could have been done by me, when as after the defeat of Sir W. Wallers
Army, I had left only 700 men to defend that City against two such Armies as
came aginst it, nor so much as one penny of money to raise more men, provide
Arms, or pay those men I had already; yet God enabled me in five days, to
raise and Arm 1000 men more, and with those 1700 men, and that Ammunition I had
left, I made that defense that I have done, of which I am sure I shall never
have cause to be ashamed of, nor do I believe that your Lordship will be
ashamed to own me still, as

Your Excellencies most humble Servant, NATH. FIENNES.
We whose names are underwritten, do know the narrative part of this letter to
be true according as it is here set down.

John Horner, John Fiennes, John Clifton, Gabriel Homes, Tho. Raulins, Henry
Archbould. John Birch, Edward Tyson, Robert Johnston Chr. Stokes, Robert
Bagnall.




FINIS.
MERCVRIVS AVLICVS, Communicating the Intelligence and affairs of the Court,
to the rest of the KINGDOM.
The two and thirtieth Week.
SUNDAY. August* 6.
YOu heard last week of the affrights and terrors which the prevailing
faction in the pretended Houses were fallen into, by reason of the sad
condition of their affairs in most parts abroad; and shall now hear of the
confusions and distractions they are in at home: the Upper House bandying
against the Lower, the Lower at a rupture amongst themselves, and the Army in
as great distemper as both the Houses. For it was certified this day (and had
been rumoured two or three days before) that the Lords had ordered that the
Earl of Portland and the Lord Conway should be bayled (whom formerly they had
committed upon a general impeachment from the House of Commons*) And though it
was much pressed by Master Strode* that There would be no sitting for them, if
those Lords were released and restored to the freedom of their Votes again*
yet the Order stood, and the two Lords were bayled accordingly: four of the
Peers which heretofore had dearly cherished the proceedings of that House,
being bound for them; which added much unto the heat and fury of their
discontent. As also that two Bills being sent up to the Lords, the one for
levying the estates of all whom they style Malignants, according to the newly
enlarged Ordinance for Sequestrations; the other for the continuance of the
weekly Assessements, were both rejected by that House. Which moved Master
Martyn to propose, as he had done before on the like occasions, that they would
pass them of themselves without the Lords, whose suffrage and consent he
conceived as unnecessary as the Kings in things pertaining to the Commons: but
wiser heads thought fitter to pass by the motion, they being now in no
condition for so great a breach.

As for the Lower House it was also signified, that on the rising of the House
on Saturday July 29. Master Pym moved that they would hear some Propositions
from the Earl of Essex: but the House having all that day attended the leisure
of the Close Committee without doing any thing, would not be persuaded, but
rose immediately; to the great disgust of that Committee, who formerly had
been looked upon with more observance. But this was but the beginning of a
greater storm. For at the next meeting it was moved that the Close Committee
should be dissolved, many considerable men inveighing bitterly against it, as
the cause of all those miseries which afflict this Kingdom. And when that
could not be effected; it was proposed and carried at the last by the major
part, that a Committee should be nominated to take an account of the Close
Committee, and of all others which were trusted with receipts or disbursements
of money; and that none of the Close Committee, nor any which had fingered any
of the public moneys was to have a voice in it: it being affirmed in the
House, that great sums of money had been drawn from the City and Country
(to the sum of three millions at the least, as was before alleged) whereof
although the Earl of Essex had not received 300000l, Waller and Fairefax both
not above 30000l, yet the Armies were continually in want of pay. And though
Strode and others of the Close Committee did oppose it openly, saying, it
called that power in question which had been given them by the House; and used
all cunning Artifices, and underhand devices not to have it pass; yet it was
carried in the end* the Lords concurring also in it, and nominating a Committee
of their House to the same intent. Which has begot such true fears and
jealousies* and raised such a distrust of one another, that it is thought the
Houses will be too hot for some potent Members, who heretofore did govern the
affairs of both, and were as uncontrollable amongst them there, as ever were
the Tribunes in the State of Rome.

Last of all for the Armies, it was thus advertised that the Earl of Essex
finding himself abused in Pictures, censured in Pulpits, dishonored in the
table-talke of the common people, and a design on foot of raising a new Army,
under the conduct of Sir William Waller, which would soon put an end unto his
authority, made complaint of it to the Lords, by them to be communicated to the
other House: requiring that his Army be forthwith paid, and furnished with
clothes and all other necessaries, his broken and diseased Forces presently
recruited, reparation to be given him in point of honor, for all the calumnies
and scandals which falsely (as he says) have been laid upon him, that Waller
be called to an account for the loss of his Forces in the West; and finally,
that no Commission may be issued out to any one to have the charge and conduct
of any Forces, but by his authority. Which bold demands, though very unwelcome
to the Citie-faction in the Lower House, who had resolved otherwise amongst
themselves; yet the Lords ordered for their parts (referring the payment and
clothing of the Soldiers to the care of the Commons) that his Army should be
first recruited before any other Forces raised, that he and his Army should
have reparation by a Declaration of both Houses, for all the scandals vented
against them, that the miscarriage of the business in the West should be
examined, and the blame laid on those whom it did belong to; and finally, that
whosoever was appointed to any charge or command, should take his Commission
from his Excellency only, and depend on him; and that he should have power to
call back such Commissions, as he saw occasion. And it is further certified,
that though these Votes may give content unto the General, which was the
matter most intended, yet do they yet much displease the faction in the House
of Commons, and infinitely distaste the Citizens, who are resolved to raise
neither men nor money, if Waller may not have ordering and disposing of them,
and this they sticking not to say openly as they walk the Streets. And on the
other side, Waller, and those who have before served under him are so enraged
by these Votes, that an implacable and deadly feud is very like to grow amongst
them, so as there is some hope when these plundering thieves once fall out,
true men will come the sooner to their goods.

MONDAY. Aug. 7.
We have been long in the intelligence of the former day, but shall be breifer
in the next; the most of which comes from London also. For it was certified
from thence, that they were more disanimated at the loss of Bristol (when
first the news was suffered to be known amongst them) then at all their
former losses in the North and West; and that as soon as the news came unto
the Houses, the prevalent faction there gave Exeter for as good as lost,
especially since the Earl of Warwick was come thence with his fleet, and had
done nothing toward the releife of it, but added much unto their desperate
condition by being so shamefully repulsed. And it was also certified that they
had other fears which did more afflict them, upon the sight of certain
letters from the Major of Plimmouth to the Earl of Warwick, in which was
signified that Sir Alexander Carew, and Master Thomas Arundell their Governors
of the Fort and Island of Plimmouth, were suspected to incline unto the King:
which did so startle them, that presently they caused letters to be sent unto
them, commanding them as Members of the House of Commons to return to
Westminster, to do their service to the House. But it was thought the
Gentlemen had heard too much of Hotham, to put themselves into their hands, who
show so little favor unto those that deserved best of them in their present
Rebellion.

It was also certified from Bristol that for a speedier ending of the siege of
Exeter, and the total reducing of the West under His Majesty's command, (that
so his Armies might unite for some other service) Prince Maurice with the
Cornish forces and some troops of horse, with many gallant Gentlemen who would
needs attend him in the Action, was gone toward Devonshire; whose going
thither, as it was generally conceived, would quickly put an end to that
business. As also that for the settling of the affairs of Bristol, His Majesty
had made that noble and deserving Gentleman Sir Ralph Hopton Governor of the
town and Castle; and under him, that valiant Colon. VVashington Lieutenant
Governor of the Castle, to the general content of all men.

It was also signified from London, that this last week has been a terrible
week of news to that falling faction. For besides the deadly news from
Bristol (the loss whereof does more astonish them then all the rest of their
misfortunes in the North and West) and that they have given Exeter for as good
as lost: they have been miserably vexed with Letters from Gloucester,
Coventry, and Warwick, complaining of their several wants, but specially of
the backwardness of the people to make good those places, or contribute to the
work, as formerly, since this change of things; and plainly signifying, that
unless speedy supplies be sent of Men, Arms, and Money, (neither of which the
pretended Houses can afford them at the present time) they are not able to hold
out against His Majesty's Forces, but of necessity must give up those Towns on
the first assault.

TUESDAY. August 8.
It was advertised this day that the prevailing party in the House of Commons
had refused to concur to many of the Votes, which had been passed by the
Lords in favor of the Earl of Essex; which breeds ill blood, not only
betwixt them and the Lords, but betwixt the Soldierie and them: and that
considering that no Commission must be granted but by and from the Earl of
Essex, the Independent Army which was so much talked of, is come to nothing;
insomuch that Sir William Waller has not yet listed above 600 of the 20000
which the City promised him. And it is further certified that the town is very
much divided about the business of Bristol, some imputing the loss of it to
Fines, and some to Waller, according as they stand affected to either party:
and that the disputation grew to so great an height between Sir William and my
Lord Say, (who you must think would not allow his son to be a Coward, though
he can cherish him in a murder) that the lie passed between them. As also,
that Sir William Waller begins to be discontented with his friends the
Citizens, who so much admired him being absent, and promised him such mighty
matters, if he would honor them with his presence. For whereas on the first of
this present August, he went into the new Artillery yard to list those
multitudes of men which had long expected him; the appearance was so thin and
small, that he was very much ashamed of the disappointment. And when the new
Committee nominated in the City Petition, told him that was no place to do
the feat in, but they would go presently to Haberdashers Hall, and appoint
Commanders to receive them; and then he should see with what alacrity the
people would come in unto him: that on the other side did as much offend him,
to see he should not have the nominating of his own Commanders. So that, for
ought we can perceive by the preparations, the Conqueror is like to add
little to his Western victories by the City Army.

It was advertised also that some of the more peaceable Lords (to say no worse)
taking advantage of the slow success which Waller found in raising his Army,
and of their losses in the West, proposed the renewing of the Treaty; desiring
that such Propositions might be sent His Majesty, as they might reasonably
hope would be hearkened to. Which being agreed on by the rest, and a Committee
named for the Propositions, they drew them to some certain heads, such as
might give some little show of satisfaction to His Majesty, but more security
unto themselves, and a free pardon to all those who have been either
Instruments or Authors of this Rebellion. And yet this pleased not my Lord Say,
who by chance was absent, and therefore when he came next into the House, he
labored very earnestly to have them altered, and prevailed in it at the last.
Insomuch, that whereas it was first agreed on, that the Ships, Forts, Towns,
Magazines, and Revenues should be delivered to the King, without any condition;
and if the Parliament should be adjourned to some other place, being the only
points in which there was any show of satisfaction to His sacred Majesty; he
obtained to have both of them altered, and put into such general terms as
might best suite unto the humor of his friends in the other House. But being
the business stayed not here, but brake out into greater and more public
heats; you shall hear more of it after a day or two.

WEDNESDAY. Aug. 9.
It was advertised this day that the Castle and Isle of Portland (whereof St
Edw. Sydenham Knight Marshal was and is Governor) were reduced again under his
Majesty's command, which had been taken by the Rebels about March last. The
manner how it was regained is reported thus. A Gentleman well known unto the
Rebels which had the guard of the Castle, and used to be much there for his
own safety and preservation in these dangerous times, came to the noble Earl
of Carnarvon, and gave him very good assurance that if he would trust him with
60 of his men he would forthwith make him Master of the Isle and Castle: the
Earl considering that the Castle and Isle were richly worth the adventuring of
60 muskets, having taken so many arms at Dorchester, condescended he should
have them: which being obtained the Gentleman furnished them with Parliament
colors, and making toward the Castle with so confused a speed as if he fled
from an Enemy, called upon the guards and told them he had brought some
Parliament forces to make good the place; but that they were pursued so closely
by the Earl of Carnarvon; that if they had not speedy entrance they should all
be lost. This was no sooner heard by the credulous Rebels, but all the have was
made that could be to set open the Ports: at which His Majesty's Soldiers
entered, and seizing on the guards, who looked not for such unwelcome visitants*
made themselves masters of it without further trouble. A place of very great
importance, as having the command of the haven and Town of Weymouth, against
which it lies, and as the case then stood, of most infinite wealth, all the
rich household stuff and Treasure which had been taken by the Rebels out of
Wardour Castle with a great deal more of goods plate and money, being stored
up there.

It was also certified from those parts, that Poole Melcombe, and Weymouth
which were in treaty with the Earl of Carnarvon (as you heard the last week)
upon the yielding up of Dorchester, have since submitted to His Majesty: so
that all Dorsetshire is totally reduced again to its old obedience; which
cannot but very much conduce to the dispatch of the work at Exeter, and
consequently to the absolute and final settling of all the West. And it was
also signified, that a ship of His Majesty's Navy called the Charles, being the
ship of the second rank, had left the Earl of Warwick, and was come to
Folmouth, according to His Majesty's Proclamation of the 7 of July. Nor is it
(in my mind) without some good Omen, that the first ship of strength and
burden, which did obey that invitation should be the CHARLES.

THURSDAY. August. 10.
It was advertised this day that the Lord Capell with his forces appeared
before the Walls of Namptwich, in hope to find them in a disposition of
returning to his Majesty's service; considering how His Majesty's affairs had
thrived and prospered, not only in raising the siege of Chester, but in
clearing of the North and West from the power of the Rebels. But finding them
continue in their wonted obstinacy, he fell off again, and retreated safely to
his own quarters, with the loss of sixteen only of his men. And on the other
side to make amends for the defailement of this hope (for it was no more) we
had intelligence this day, that the Lord Willoughby of Parham being gone from
Gainsburgh, on his redelivery of that town, had recovered Lincoln. But seeing
an impossibility that either Cromwell should time enough recruit his beaten and
distracted forces, or that he could receive any seasonable supplies from
London; on the first news that the Earl of Newcastle was coming toward him,
he forsook the place, and made what have he could to Boston: leaving the City
and Close of Lincoln, which he had nested in so long, to be the next example
(as we have had very many lately) of Gods great mercy to His sacred Majesty.

It was also signified this day, that the heates in London (according to the
season) do still increase; and that the discontents which have late been
growing between the remaining party in the two Houses, are at the last
improved to a sedition, if not unto a Civil War amongst themselves. For
howsoever the Lord Say had so far altered the Propositions, intended by some
peaceable Lords to be presented to His Majesty, as to make them of a better
relish to the Lower House: yet when they came into that House, they were very
eagerly opposed, and the House continued sitting until nine at night; in hope
such men as durst declare themselves to be well-affected, would be wearied with
their long debates; and they of the malignant faction, might there carry
matters upon that advantage as they had done formerly. But finding that they
sat it out, and carried it for the Propositions by the major part; they had no
other way to effect the business, then to return again to their former
practices, and bring down their City Club-men to awe the Members of both
Houses, and repeal those Votes. And so accordingly they did. For the next day,
being Sunday last, they had so fashioned and prepared their party in the City
of London, that printed Bills were set up on the Church doors, (and somewhat
you must think was done in the Pulpits too) a copy whereof we here offer you.

All such as desire there may be a general raising of the people against those
Irish Rebels, and blood thirsty Papists now in Arms, (fully purposing to
destroy us, our Religion. Laws and Liberties) are desired to meet at
Westminster Hall, to morrow morning by nine of the clock, being the seventh
day of this instant August* to move the Parliament that this may be put in
speedy execution.

Twenty thousand Irish Rebels are appointed to come over against us.

According to which intimation, the Rabble came in such multitudes, and with so
great clamor, that such of the Lords and Commons who had favored the
Propositions, were forced to take boat and make have toward Kingston, where
the Earl of Essex then lay with that part of his Forces, which Gods hand and
the Kings sword had left alive: conceiving that the declaring of themselves in
favor of him (of which you heard at full before) had been sufficient to
oblige him fast unto their party. But contrary to their hopes and expectation
they found him so resolved for the other side, as they were feign to dispose
otherwise of themselves. And it is said, that, notwithstanding those
indignities which have been offered to him by the City faction, he is so much
inclined that way, that upon notice sent unto him, that the women had made an
uproare in demand of peace, he sent some Troops of Horse amongst them, and
killed three of them: for which (and some other former courtesies) that sex
will ever honor him and his posterity.

On Wednesday last a partee of Horse (about fifty) were sent out from Banbury
toward Towceter (commanded by Captain James Chamberlain) twenty of this
number divided and went toward Northampton; the other thirty within less then
a mile of Towceter met with the Rebels Forces, in number about one hundred and
twenty, commanded by Captain Lawson, which though they had so great advantage
in number, yet Captain Chamberlain very valiantly charged through them with
part of his men, (his Rere falling off from him) and with that small strength
maintained a sharp fight with them above half an hour, wherein he received
many wounds, and at last was shot dead through the head, and one of his men
also. Of the Rebels there are at least 20 sore wounded, as by intelligence from
Northampton (where they are) is certified, and five were carried away behind
them dead from the place. one left on the ground, and Captain Lawson himself
wounded. This gentleman was the youngest brother to Sir Thomas Chamberlain now
high Shriffe of this County, and was in most of the principal Fights, at
Worcester, Keynion, Brainsford, etc. where his valor was eminently manifested,
and by this last action wherein he lost his life, has added further to the
honor of that worthy and loyal Family.

FRIDAY. August* 11.
This day we were certified by Letters from York, that about four hundred of
the Rebels of Lancashire came stealing into Yorkshire, hoping to have surprised
some of His Majesty's horse quarters about Halifax; which being timely
perceived by Sir Francis Mackworth, he fell upon them and routed them, killed
above forty in the place, and took fifty, the rest (as they were taught) ran
away, and escaped by the advantage of the place.

At Coventry they pull down many houses of the Suburbs, and tell the people
that the Kings Army is marching toward them with twenty pieces of Ordnance,
and they had some reason* for this day we received an express that his Majesty
yesterday sat down before Gloucester, and sent in a most Gracious Summons to
the City, in these very words, Out of our tender Compassion to Our City of
Gloucester, and that it may not receive Prejudice by Our Army, which We cannot
prevent, if We be compelled to assault it, We are personally come before it to
require the same, and are graciously pleased to let all the Inhabitants of, and
all other Persons within that City, as well Soldiers as others, know, That if
they shall immediately submit themselves, and deliver this our City to Us, we
are contented freely and absolutely to pardon every one of them without
exception; And do assure them in the word of a KING, that they nor any of them
shall receive the least Damage or Prejudice by our Army in their Persons, or
Estates; But that we will appoint such a Governor, and a moderate Garrison to
reside there, as shall be both for the ease and security of that City and that
whole County. But if they shall neglect this Profer of Grace and Favor, and
compel Us by the Power of Our Army to reduce that place (which by the help of
God We doubt not We shall be easily and shortly able to do) they must thank
themselves for all the Calamities and Miseries must befall them. To this
Message We expect a clear and positive Answer within two hours after the
publishing hereof* And by these presents do give leave to any Persons safely
to repair to* and return from Us whom that City shall desire to employ unto
Us in that business. And do require all the Officers and Soldiers of Our
Army* quietly to suffer them to pass accordingly. But this Rebellious City
answered, that they would obey His Majesty's commands as they were signified by
the two Houses of Parliament. And now let the world judge if His Majesty could
have sent a more Gracious Message to His most Loyal Subjects, and whether
these desperate Rebels deserve any mercy, who after so many offers do still
refuse a pardon. But since their returning this Rebellious Answer, they have
set their own Suburbs on fire, which surely is not to keep the City either
for the KING or Parliament. Yet His Majesty's Forces quenched the fire, and in
spite of the Rebels, entered the Suburbs where still they are, and have
already raised Mounts, and dug trenches so near the City wall, that I dare
promise you (God willing) a very speedy account of the siege of Gloucester.

SATURDAY. August 12.
This day news was brought to Town of Sir William Waller's extraordinary
progress in raising the great Army intended for him. You heard before how the
good women flocked to Westminster on Tuesday last, to cry out for peace; three
of the which were killed directly in the place, and thirteen or fourteen more
most shrewdly wounded. And the next day, to show the men were better studied in
the point then so, came down some 5 or 6000 of the usual hacksters, which had
been always ready for such purposes at a minutes warning; and they cried No
peace. And being told by some who were appointed to return the Answer, that
they who were for the continuance of the War, (as every one of them seemed to
be) should go to Haberdashers Hall, and there list themselves under the
conduct and command of Sir William Waller: it wrought so much upon the courage
of those gallant spirits, (Reader, thou can not choose but wonder at such
monstrous forwardness) that of 5000 men which would have no peace, no fewer
then fifteen sturdy fellows (in words at length and not in figures) listed
their names upon the Roll to pursue the War. And some of those perhaps may
see Gloucester one day.

It was advertised this day also, that 200 of the Rebels by the appointment of
Sir William Brereton, have laid siege to Eccleshall Castle in Staffordshire,
(an house belonging to the Lord Bishop of Coventry and Lichfield;) the greatest
part of those who are shut up in it, being Ladies and Gentlewomen of that
County, who purposely came thither to secure themselves in these times of
danger. And that they are so gallantly resolved upon it, that though their
victuals do begin to fail already, they mean to stand upon their guard and
defend the place (in hope His Majesty will relieve them e're it come to that)
as long as they have horse flesh, water, and old leather left to preserve
nature. Which as it shows the bravery and courage of those noble Ladies, so is
it an infallible argument of the incivility and rudeness of those barbarous
Rebels (who regard neither sex nor quality of persons) from whom the best that
can be looked for, is more unsufferable then the miseries of war and famine.

This day there came to Town from London, the Earl of Lindsey* Lord Great
Chamberlain of England, and Sir George Radcliffe; the first took Prisoner at
Edgehill, the second made a Prisoner by appointment of the House of Commons at
the beginning of this Parliament: but by what means and accident they are at
liberty, is not yet made known to me.

But because the Rebels are now so far vanquished, that they despair of
their designs, they resolve (like bloody cowards) to make use of all base
advantages, for which end they are now beginning to ship away beyond sea such
of His Majesty's good Subjects as are in their custody; and we were this day
informed, that Mudford alias Murford (that infamous Brownisticall Governor of
Southampton) has this week taken a learned ingenuous Gentleman one Mr Jones
of Lincolnes Inn, and others out of Prison, and sent them by sea to
New England, or some such other place as the Devil and they think fittest for
their punishment, making the said Master Jones to pass through the streets by
his own door, but would not suffer him to take leave, or speak with his
Wife, or any other friend or Kinsman to furnish him with linen and other
necessaries for this unexpected voyage; and that yesterday their brother Rebels
at London conveyed Colonel Goring* Sir George Sands, Sir John Goodrick and
other gentlemen (three or four Coaches full) to the water side on shipboard,
there to lie under hatches like slaves of Argiers, exspecting every hour how
this barbarous bloody faction will dispose of them. Nor is this strange if you
consider their devotion, for this aforesaid Mudford sent up his Levite into the
pulpit at Southampton, to move the people to take the New Covenant, who (like a
Priest of their Religion) fell on cursing (praying they call it) in these very
words Bless the King, O Lord, mollify his hard heart which delights in
blood, open his eyes that he may see that the blood of thy Saints is dear in
thy sight; He is fallen from faith in thee, and become an enemy to thy Church:
Is it not He that has sinned and done evil indeed? but as for these sheep,
what have they done? Let thine hand, we pray thee O Lord our God, be on Him and
on His Fathers house, but not on thy people that they should be plagued. And
(to let you see both Priest and people are of the same profession) Saint-barbe
himself after he had taken the Covenant said aloud before many witnesses, that
he had rather see the Kingdom in a flame, then that the King should prevail
against this cause they have undertaken. This is pure Protestant Religion, such
as their brother Judas scarce finds among the damned. And it was also
signified by Letters from Winchester, that this aforesaid Murford in pursuance
of his former threats to the Prentises of South-hampton (whereof you heard last
week) for refusing to take the rebellious new Covenant, sent one Thornborough,
Riggs, and diverse others to Portsmouth, where they are lodged in such a
dungeon, as they are not able to stand upright, but are forced to do their
necessary acts of nature in the same place where the poor men must make their
lodging: And yet the Newes-men at London have the impudence to tell us in
print, that no body has been punished for refusing their Covenant. And in the
same Letters it is advertised that the Mayor of Southampton (a very ancient
man) is so over awed by this Murford, that being lately come from the two
Houses (whose prisoner he has been these eleven weeks for his loyalty to his
Sovereign) he must not now be suffered to go out of the Town gates* but
every common Soldier by Murfords command forces him back again; in such
contempt is the Kings Lieutenant amongst this faction; and all this out of
Whitehead of Portsmouth his malice to the Mayor, because he would not deliver
the keys of the Town to him when he demanded them for the two Houses; the
good old Mayor (being a Jer^y man) answering him, Me no hang for you Master
Whitehead, you hang for your self.

This day also we received a copy of Isaac Pennington's Petition against
peace, (though molded and penned by John Pym himself) desiring the House of
Commons, or rather commanding them to persist in this war (though they perish
in the work;) and tendering a form of an Ordinance to press and force every
man rich and poor (excepting some few) to take Arms for this cause, or pay
ten pounds a piece; which accordingly was voted, and the Petitioners had
thanks returned them from the House.

This day we saw a printed Ordinance from the two pretended Houses, for the
speedy raising and levying of a weekly contribution toward the maintenance of
their Army, to be paid by the several Counties and Cities of this Kingdom for
two months together: as for example, the City of Chester is to pay weekly
unto the two Houses 62l. The County of Cornwall 625l. The City of York 62l.
The County of Salop 375l. The City of Lichfield 5l. Bristol 55l. Worcester
16l. The County of Worcester 500l. Oxford 400l. If the worthy Members will come
to these places, the money lies ready for them.

The Earl of Northampton this week intercepted diverse Letters from London,
wherein we see such pretty devices as the Brethren use to cheat one another;
One writes, That 3000 Cavaleirs were slain at the taking of Bristol. Another,
That Waller will be 30000 Horse, and 20000 Foot. Another, Th^^ Waller is 8000
strong already. Another, That 20000 Scot^ are come as far as Barwicke. Another,
That the Scots will not come, because the Citizens have no money. Another, That
all is lost except spiritual comfort. Another, That the Earl of Essex would
have all their Soldiers leave their Garrisons, and come away with their Arms,
lest they be all taken by the King. Another, That Gloucester cannot be
relieved. Another, That the rotten Lords (a pretty-pretty epithete) would now
have Peace. Another, That now they must no longer trust in the Parliament.
Another, That the loss of Bristol has discovered many false hearts, who only
had creature-confidence. Another, That to vote for peace now, was like the plot
of the Trojan horse, and like Saul, to fly in distress to the Witch of Endor;
with a world more of such excellent expressions, as do trouble me to want
paper for them.

And the Printed Newes-men are this week turned Preachers, urging Scripture
(in place of News) against fainting in tribulation, yet ever and anon
sprinkling a lie: as 1. That the Lord Digby has one Troop of Spanish Papists:
(My Lord thanks you for raising a new Troop for him; but he thinks you
mean the Walloones at Fulham, allowed to have Mass by the Close Committee. 2.
That the Lord Willoughby of Parham's Soldiers marched out of Gainsborough with
all their Arms: (You were cudgelled for this the last week, and yet you are
at it again.) 3. That the King commands to kill men for fearing God, (for
laboring to murder him in the fear of God; fear God, obey the Parliament.)
4. That Sir William Waller has many thousands of men: (yes, at Round-way
Down.) 5. That those men are most of them good lusty Butchers (to knock down
the Ox at Kingston.) 6. That Sir William went in triumph to Butchers Hall
near Newgate: (he went himself now, but next time he shall be brought to
Newgate.) Lastly, That the Close Committee had news that Dorchester, Weymouth,
and Lincoln, were delivered up to the Kings Forces, and yet were not
disheartened at it: I think it would please them to see one another hanged;
which God for his mercies sake, etc.

FINIS.

