THE RESOLVING OF CONSCIENCE, Upon this Question, Whether upon such a
Supposition or Case, as is now usually made (The King will not discharge his
trust but is bent or seduced to subvert Religion, Laws, and Liberties) Subjects
may take Arms and resist? and Whether that Case be now?

RESOLVED,

I. That no Conscience upon such a Supposition or Case can find a safe and
clear ground for such resistance. II. That no Man in Conscience can be truly
persuaded, that the resistance now made is such, as they themselves pretend to,
that plead for it in such a case. III. That no Man in Conscience can be truly
persuaded that such a case is now, that is, that the King will not discharge
His trust, but is bent to subvert, etc.
Whence it follows. That the resistance now made against the higher Power is
unwarrantable, and according to the Apostle Damnable, Rem. 13. Also that the
shedding of bound in the pursuit of this resistance is Murder.

By H. FERN, D. D. etc.

Woe unto them that call evil good, and gool evil, that put Darkness for
Light and Light for Darknessae, Isa. 5. 20. O my Soul come not thou into their
secret, Genesis 49. 6. Printed at York by Stephen Bulkley, 1642.

To all Misse-led People in this Land.
HE that in these times will speak any thing to the People in behalf of the
King, is likely to do it upon disadvantage, and be heard with prejudice: but
they that would be profitably informed by what they hear, must lend an equal
Ear to what is spoken; which I hope you will do, being such, for the most
part, as profess to make a conscience of your ways, I desire therefore of you
(into whose hands this Treatise shall come) that you would receive it with mind
and affection, answerable to that wherewith it is offered to you, free from
partiality and private respects; that you would consider Cases of Conscience
are written out of Conscience: And were a distressed Prince a fit object for
flattery, or this kind of instruction capable of such language, yet is this a
time for every man to inform and speak his Conscience; and as many of you as
shall read me in this book, will, I hope, conceive, I had no other purpose in
the publishing of it, then to give testimony to the truth for the directing of
your Consciences and the discharge of mine own. I have therefore written it
plainly without affectation of curiosity, having a respect only to your
profit; the Learned through the Land are sufficiently persawded, and I may
asure you all Ages have asserted this truth, out of which I could have drawn a
cloud of witnesses and presented them to your sight, but thought it more
expedient for your direction, to show you the clear light of Divine Scripture
and rectified Reason, the only rules of Conscience; and if by these you shall
be brought to see the crookedness of the New Doctrine of these times, and the
uneven dangerous windings of this way of resistance, I have gained the end of
my desires, and you have not lost by it.

One thing I must note as strange, that to discourse upon this argument
shouldbe thought (as it is by many) a work altogether beyond the profession of
the Divine. Indeed popular Statesmen have always held it very impolitick and
unreasonable, that Subjects should not in dangers imminent have means to save
themselves by a Power of resistance, and accordingly framed their principles
and grounds of State as unquestionable. We examine not the power or wisdom of
Lawmakers, but when we receive their Law, Declaration, or Command, and know it
in terminis, understand it in the sense it be its, certainly it belongs to the
Divine to consider whether it be against Gods Law, and accordingly to instruct
his people. If it be agreed upon as a thing known in this State, that the King
is the higher Power according to St. Paul, the Supreme according to St. Peter,
the Father of the Commonwealth according to the fifth Commandment, surely it
belong to the Divine to urge obedience, honor, and subjection according to
those place, and reprove resistance forbidden there: Which obedience we
acknowledge to be limited and circumscribed by the established Laws of the
Land, and accordingly to be yielded or denied to the higher Power, if those
Laws be not repugnant to the Law of God: And for Resistance, as we have not yet
heard of any Law of the Land that commands or warrants it, so we know that were
there any Law or Ordinance made to enjoin it, such would not bind, being
against the Apostles express prohibition, backed with arguments drawn from the
very reason of Government, as shall be shown in this following Treatise.

Be they who they will that present you with imminent dangers, and work upon
your fears, that tell you of Fundamental Laws, and give you rules of policy
to captivate your reason; when all that is done, it is the Divine that must
settle the Conscience, which will not be quiet, if in yiedling obedience to any
Law or Ordinance, it comes to a suspicion, that such an Ordinance of man
entrencheth upon the word of God.

Let me tell you (for I suppose you follow this way in the simplicity of your
hearts) how you are wrought upon by them that mis-leade you. You are dealt with
according to your general desire of the continuance of true Religion and the
Subjects Liberty, not according to the particular grounds of safety, which
conscience does require: You are told, the Gospel and your Liberties, and all
you have, are in most imminent danger, and without taking Arms for the defense,
irrecoverably lost; and that this is lawful by the Fundamentals of this
Kingdom: You must take all this upon trust, without an express and particular
warrant, to rule and secure your Conscience against the express words of the
Apostle forbidding resistance, Romans 13.

You profess your selves enemies to Popery, and good reason for it, but why
should you therefore be enemies to your King that declares against it too. I
would you could observe how, under pretense of keeping out Popery, you are led
in this way of r^sistance by the like steps that brought Popery in. For examine
your hearts and try if the name of Parliament (which is of honorable esteem
with all) be not raised to the like excess of credit with you, as the name of
the Church is with the Papists; if you have not within you a silent thought of
infallibility in that great Council, and so with an implicit faith are ready to
receive and maintain what ever is concluded there; if you be not drawn to
believe your Prince is minded to overthrow Religion, and upon such a supposall
or belief (according to the very method of Jesuitical practices) to take up
Arms against him.

If you do not rest satisfied with your general intention of a good end, that
is, the defense of Religion, not examining the means, you now use, to compass
that end; like those that for the advancing of the Catholic cause, as they
call it, attempt any thing however unjust, even to the destruction of Kings,
that are set over them; this blindness is Popish, and practice Jesuiticall.
Lastly, examine your hearts, if you be not confirmed in your way by the number
of your Professor, like as they are by the Universality of their Church,
resting upon the person of men, not trying the Cause it self by the touchstone
of divine Scripture and rectified Reason. I know it prevails with many
thousands of you, because you see, as you think, and use to say, All good
people that have sense of Religion, and Conscience of their ways, do go along
with you, and you cannot believe that God would suffer them to be so generally
deluded; let me tell you, you do hereby very uncharitably conclude upon all
those that run not with you to the like excess, and I may say without breach
of Charity, they that appear with you in the Cause, would not all be found
such, as you conceive them to be, if they were examined by the true marks of
Christian profession, that is, by the true doctrine of faith, by their
charity, honesty, obedience, meekness of Spirit, and the like; without which
your Religion is vain, whatever your exercises, or performances of duties be;
the Pharisees righteousness will exceed yours, and his frequency and length of
prayer will be as sure a mark as yours; nay the Anabaptist, at this day will
outdo you in any of your forms of godliness. I do not speak this against the
frequent and sincere performance of holy duties: God forbid I should. Nor do I
speak it of you all: I know there are many good and Conscientious men that go
your way in the simplicity of their hearts, as those did that followed
Absalom; whom the just God suffers hitherto to be deceived, that even by their
example this power of Resistance may gather strength to the just punishment of
this sinful land, and that they themselves when their eyes shall be opened
(which, I hope, will be ere long) may see their own weakness, and be so much
more humbled for it.

In the mean time you are according to the blindness of a Popish way in all
the former respects, carried on against all rule of Conscience; for you have
neither certain knowledge of your Princes heart, to resolve for resistance upon
a supposall of such intentions in him; nor have you any certain rule to warrant
the lawfulness of resisting upon such supposall, and to secure you against the
Apostles prohibition, and damnation laid upon it; nor have you any judgment of
Charity, in concluding such intentions in your Prince against His deepest
Protestations made in such times of His distress, and without that, all is
nothing, though you lay down, as you think, your life for Religion. 1. Cor. 13.
How much safer would it be for you to be guided by the sure Rules of
Conscience, and (if it should please God to bring upon you what you fear) to
suffer unjustly, then in the unwarrantable prevention of it to do unjustly.

To this purpose shall you have this Treatise speaking to you for the direction
of your Consciences. If you think it strikes too boldly upon any thing
concerning the Parliament, I desire yours and their favorable interpretation,
fain would I silence every thought and word that may seem to reflect upon that
high Court; but what is necessary, I must speak for truth and conscience sake,
from which neither King nor Parliament should make us swerve. We are taught
that Kings must not be flattered; and the people ought to learn, that
Parliamens must not be Idolized: that has been often charged as a fault upon
the Clergy, and This I fear is that sin of the People, which, together with
the licentiousness indulged back again to them, has moved God to blow upon
that wished for fruit we might have reaped by this so desired a Parliament. For
when I see Man is more sensible of every breach of his own rights and
privileges, then of those unparalled breaches so frequently made upon Gods
public Worship, I cannot but think the Lord will require it of this Land; and
when I see right and just subverted, property and liberty exposed to the will
and power of every one that is pleased to conceive his Neighbor a Malignant,
and able to make him so by commanding his. Goods and Person, I cannot but
complain with the Psalmist, The foundations of the Earth are out of course;
Psalm. 82,
and appeal to Heaven, Arise O God, judge thou the Earth. And I trust, that
albeit this Spirit of seduction may prevail a while, and this way of
resistance prosper, for the great, but just punishment of this sinful Land,
the Lord will look down from Heaven, and make Truth and Peace again to
flourish out of the Earth, will look upon the Face of His Anointed, and by this
Affliction, as by a loving correction make him great. Ps. 18. 35.
Great to the maintenance of Gods true Religion, and to the restoring of the
Peace and prosperity of this Kingdom; And, Let all the People say, Amen.

The Contents.
Sect. I. THe explication of the Question, and general Resolution of it. Sect.
II. The Principle or Ground on which they go for Resistance examined by
Scripture. Their chief Examples, (to which should have been added Libnah's
revolt, answered now in the last Sect.) Scriptures against them, especially
that of the 13. to the Romans urged and cleared: where showed, The King is that
higher Power. That all are forbidden to resist, even the Senate, which by the
fundamentalls of that State might challenge as much as our great Council can.
That prohibition concerns all times; and was good, not only in that State,
because they were absolute Monarchs, but in all States because of the
preservation of Order which should be in all, and was good not only against
the Christians, because their Religion was enected against by Law, but also
against the Senate and People, though they were enslaved. Sect. III. Their
principle examined by reason. Of Fundamentalls, their groundwork according to
the pleaders for resistance, is the original of Power from the People, and
their re-assuming it, when the Prince will not discharge his trust. The Power
it self, (distinguished from the designing of the Person, and the
Qualification of it in several forms of Government) is from God as an
ordinance or constitution under that providence whereby God rules the whole
World, Creatures reasonable as well as unreasonable. Sect. IV. That Power
cannot be forfeited to the People or reassumed by them. They cannot prove it by
virtue of the first election, or by any capitulations or covenant, or the Oath
between Prince and People. Sect. V. Nor can it be proved by that necessity of
means of safety which should be in every State to provide for it self: but
greater dangers and inconveniences would follow by such means of safety as are
pretended to by resuming the Power. Sect. VI. The Examination of the Resistance
now made. Where shown, that it is not so much as they themselves pretend to,
who plead for it; either for the general and unanimous consent of the
Kingdom; for it was not so agreed upon: or for the defensive way of it;
because the King is upon the defensive, For He was not first in Arms, and the
Contentiom must needs appear to be for something the King has right to hold,
or is bound by oath to maintain. Also because to any Man's Conscience it will
appear to he an oppugnation, rather then a resistance or mere defense. Sect.
VII. The case is not in being. No Conscience can conclude the King to be, what
they would have him supposed: because the jealousies are groundless. The King
has done sufficient to clear them, by Promises, Protestations, acts of Grace.
And Conscience if it hold the rule of Charity, will not against all those
conclude contrary intentions in him, upon them to ground resistance; but will,
if it will not not be partial, judge the King has offered such reasonable
means of security to this State as ought to have been apprehended, rather
then this Kingdom embroyled in a Civil war, and Ireland neglected. Lastly, a
Conscience that concludes for resistance, wants the persuasion of faith, and
the judgment of charity in an high measure, and cannot appear safely at Gods
tribunal.
The Resolving of Conscience, Touching the unlawfulness of the War and
Resistance now made against the KING.
LAmentable are the distractions of this Kingdom, and the more, because they
gather strength from the name and authority of (that, which as it is of high
esteem with all, so should it be a remedy to all these our distempers) a
Parliament: and from the pretended defense of those things that are most dear
unto us, Religion, Liberties, Laws. Whereupon so many good people, that have
come to a sense of Religion and godliness, are miserably carried away by a
strange implicit faith to believe, that whatsoever is said or done in the name
of a Parliament, and in the pretended defense of Religion, Liberties, Laws, to
be infallibly true, and altogether just.

But he that will consider, men are men, and would seek a surer rule for his
Conscience then the Traditions or Ordinances of men taken hand over head, shall
upon reasonable examinations find upon what plausible, but groundless
principles, upon what fair but deceiving pretenses, upon what grievous but
causeless imputations laid upon Majesty it self, poor people are drawn into
Arms against the duty and allegiance they owe to their Prince by the Laws of
God and man. For directing the Conscience in such an examination this ensuing
Discourse is framed, as briefly and plainly as the matter will permit.

SECT. I
COnscience in resolving upon a question, first lays down the Proposition or
Principle or Ground, on which it goes; then it assumes or applies to the
present case; then it concludes and resolves: as in this question,
affirmatively for Resistance, thus, Subjects in such a case may arm and resist:
But that case is now come: Therefore now they may and do justly resist.

Or negatively against Resistance, either by denying the Principle: Subjects
may not in such a Case arm and resist, therefore now they do not justly resist.
Or by admitting the Principle and denying the Case, Subjects in such a case may
arm and resist. But that case is not now. Therefore now they do not justly arm
and resist.

What it is that Conscience is here to admit or deny, and how it ought to
conclude and resolve, this ensuing Treatise will discover: which that it may
more clearly appear, we will premise.

First, That in the Proposition or Principle by the word Resistance is meant,
not a denying of obedience to the Princes command, but a rising in arms, a
forcible resistance; this though clear enough in the question, yet I thought
fit to insinuate, to take off that false imputation laid upon the Divines of
this Kingdom, and, upon all those that appear for the King in this cause,
that they endeavor to defend an absolute power in him, and to raise him to an
Arbitrary way of government; This we are as much against on his part, as
against Resistance on the subjects part. For we may and ought to deny obedience
to such commands of the Prince, as are unlawful by the Law of God, yea, by the
established Laws of the Land: For in these we have his will and consent given
upon good advice, and to obey him against the Laws were to obey him against
himself, his sudden will against his deliberate will; but a far other matter
it is to resist by power of arms, as is in the question employed, and as we see
at this day to our astonishment, first the power of arms taken from the Prince
by setting up the Militia, then that power used against him by an army in the
field.

Secondly, we must consider, that they which plead for Resistance in such a
case as is supposed, do grant it must be concluded upon, Omnibus ordinibus
regni consentientibus, that is, with the general and unanimous consent of the
Members of the two Houses, the representative body of the whole Kingdom: also
they yield it must be only Legitima desensio, a mere defensive resistance; and
this also Conscience must take notice of.

Thirdly, it is considerable, that in the supposition or case it is likewise
granted by them, that the Prince must first be so and so disposed, and bent to
overthrow Religion, Liberties, Laws, and will not discharge his trust for the
maintaining of them, before such a Resistance can be pretented to. And although
the question is, and must be so put now, as that it seems to straiten the Case,
and make it depend upon the supposall of the people; yet it so much the more
enlarges the falshod of the Principle, for it plainly speaks thus; If subjects
believe or verily suppose their Prince will change Religion they may rise in
arms; whereas all that have pleaded for Resistance in case of Religion, did
suppose another Religion enjoined upon the subject first. We will therefore
endeavor to clear all for the resolving of Conscience in these three
generals.

I. That no Conscience upon such a case as is supposed can find clear ground to
rest upon for such resistance as is pretended to, but according to the rules of
Conscience What is not of faith is sin: and, In doubtful things the safer
way is to be chosen; Conscience it will find cause to forbear and to suffer,
rather then resist; doubtful, I say, not that a Conscience truly informed will
not clearly see the unlawfulness of this Resistance, but because no conscience
can be truly persuaded of the lawfulness of it, and so that Conscience that
resolves for it, must needs run doubtingly or blindly upon the work.

II. That the resistance now used and made against the Prince is not such as
they pretend to, either for that general and unanimous consent that should
precede it, or that defensive way that should accompany it, according to their
own grants that plead for it, and therefore Conscience cannot admit such a
resistance as is made now adays.

III. If Conscience could be persuaded, that it is lawful in such a case to
resist, and that this rising in arms is such a resistance as they say may in
such a case be pretended to, yet can it never (if it be willing to know any
thing) be truly persuaded that such a case is now come, that i^, That the King
refuse to discharge his trust, is bent to overthrow Religion, etc, and
therefore Conscience cannot but resolve this opposition and Resistance to be
unlawful, unwarrantable, and (according to the Apostle) damnable; and that
people, running into arm without sufficient warrant, commit murder if they shed
blood in the pursuit of this Resistance, and perish in their own sin, if die
in the cause.

SECT. II.
FIrst then, that the Principle is untrue upon which they go that resist, and
that Conscience cannot find clear ground to rest upon for making resistance:
for it hears the Apostle expressly say, Whosoever resist shall receive to
themselves damnation, Romans 13. 2.
and it cannot find any limitation in Scripture that will excuse the Resistance
of these days.

The exception or limitation that is made, is taken from the Persons resisting,
and the Causes of resistance, thus, They that are Private persons and do resist
upon any cause receive damnation, but the States or representative body of the
whole people may resist upon such or such causes.

But how will this satisfy Conscience, when every distinction or limitation
made upon any place of Sripture, must have its ground in Scrpture; this has
only some examples in Scripture that come not home to the cause, and some
appearances of Reason; which are easily refuted by clearer Scripture and Reason.

The examples alleged are, I. The peoples rescuing of Jonathan out of the
hands of Saul. 1 Samuel 14.
Answ. Here the people drew not into arms of themselves, but being their at
Saul's command, did by a loving violence and importunity hinder the execution
of a particular and passionate unlawful command.

II. David's resisting of Saul. Answ. 1. David's guard that he had about him was
only to secure his person against the cutthroats of Saul, if sent to take
away his life. 2. It was a mere defense without all violence offered to Saul;
therefore he still gave place as Saul pursued, and did no act of hostility to
him or any of his Army when they were in his power, 1. Sam. 26. But thirdly,
because they gather out of the 1. Sam. 23. 12. that David would have defended
Keilah against Saul, if the inhabitants would have been faithful to him, We
say that is only an uncertain supposition, not fit to ground Conscience in this
great point of resistance; also to this and all other David's demeanours, in his
standing out against Saul, we say his example was extraordinary; for he was
anointed and designed by the Lord to succeed Saul, and therefore he might use
an extraordinary way of safeguarding his Person.

These are the chief examples. They make use also of the high Priests resisting
the King in the temple, 2. Chron. 26.
and Elisha's shutting the door against the Kings Messenger that came to take
away his head; and the like; which speak not so much as the two former, having
no appearance of such resistance as is employed in the question.

(...) we answer. 1. That of the high Priest is more pertinently applied to the
Popes power of excommunicating and deposing Kings, then to this power of
resisting now used; but truly to neither. For he did no more then what every
Minister may and ought to do if a King should attempt the administration of the
Sacrament; that is, to reprove him, to keep the Elements from him. Ambrose
Bishop of Milan withstood the Emperor at the entrance of Gods house, not by
Excommunication, much less by force of Arms, but by letting him understand he
was not fit for that place, there to be made partaker of the holy things, till
he had repented of that outrage and bloodshed at Thessalonica. Upon which the
Emperor withdrew.

The Priests here are said to thrust him out of the Temple, but we must note
Gods hand was first upon him smiting him with leprosy, and by that discharging
him of the Kingdom also. It is added in the Text, yea himself also hasted to
go out. But enough of this

2. Elisha's example speaks very little. But let us thence take occasion to
say, That Personal defense is lawful against the sudden and illegal assaults
of such Messengers; yea of the Prince himself thus far, toward his blow, to
hold his hands, and the like: nor to endanger his person, not to return blows,
no; for though it be natural to defend a man's self, yet the whole
Commonwealth is concerned in his person, as we see in the Commonwealth of the
creatures, one particular nature will defend it self against another, but
yield to the universal.

If this be drawn from Personal defense to the Public ^ the Argument thus; If
the body natural then the body politic may defend it self, if a private
person much more the whole State may; and they do but shut the way up against
the King that comes to destroy his Parliament, and take away their heads.

We answ: As the natural body defends it self against an outward force, but
strives not by a schism or contention within it self; so may the body
politic against an outward power, but not as now by one part of it set against
the Head and another part of the same body; for that tends to the dissolution
of the whole. Again: Personal defense may be without all offense, and does not
strike at the order and power that is over us, as general resistance by Arms
does, which cannot be without many unjust violences, and does immediately
strike at that order which is the life of a Commonwealth. And this makes a
large difference twixt Elisha's shutting the door against this Messenger, and
their shutting up the way against the King by armed men; nor can they conclude
upon such an intention in the Kings heart without the spirit of Elisha. He
professes he intends no violence to his Parliament nor has be taken away the
head of any of theirs that have fallen into his power, nor does desire any
other punishment inflicted upon any that do oppose him, then what a Legal
trial shall adjudge them to, which no good Subject ought to decline.

Now let us see how Scripture excludes this, and all other exceptions, giving
no allowance to resistance, in regard of Persons or Causes, or other pretenses,
and this not only by Examples, but by Precept, Conclusions, Resolutions, which
are more safe.

First, we have the two hundred and fifty Princes of the Congregation,
gathering the people against Moses and Aaron, Numb. 16. 3. and perishing in
their sin. If it be replied, the Persons indeed were public, but there was
no cause for it; Moses and Aaron did not deserve it. I answer, but the other
supposed, they did, and that is now enough, it seems, to make people not only
say to their Prince, You take too much upon you, but therefore to rise in arms
also, which I hope will appear to be without cause too in the end of this
Treatise.

Secondly, see for the cause of Resistance, 1. Sam. 8. 11. there the people are
let to understand how they should be oppressed under Kings, yet all that
violence and injustice that should be done unto them is no just cause of
resistance, for they have no remedy left them but crying to the Lord, v. 18.

Thirdly, we have not only Example, but Resolution and Conclusion our of
Scripture, The people might not be gathered together either for Civil
assemblies, or for war, but by his command that had the power of the Trumpet,
that is, the supreme as Moses was, Numb. 10.

Also when David had Saul and his army in his power, he resolves the matter
thus, Who can stretch out his hand against the Lords anointed and be
guiltless, 1. Sam. 26, 9. If replied, now they intend not hurt to the Kings
person; yet might nor they as well have hurt his person in the day of battle,
as any of them that were swept away from about him by the fury of the
Ordinance, which puts no difference 'twixt Kings and common soldiers?

This also I must observe concerning this point of Resistance, out of the Old
Testament (for from thence have they all their seeming instances) That it is a
mavelous thing, that among so many Prophets reprehending the Kings of Israel
and Judah for Idolatry, cruelty, oppression, none should call upon the Elders
of the people for this duty of Resistance.

But lastly, that place of the Apostle, Romans 13. at first mentioned, does above
all give us a clear resolution upon the point, which now I shall free from all
exceptions.

First, I may suppose, that the King is the Supreme, as S. Peter calls him; or
the higher power, as S. Paul here, though it be by some now put to the
question, as one absurdity commonly begets another to defend it; but I prove
it. S. Peter's distinction comprehends all that are in authority, The King as
supreme, and those that are sent by him, 1. Pet. 2. 12, in which latter rank
are the two Houses of Parliament, being sent by him, or sent for by him, and by
his Writ sitting there. Also by the Oath of Supremacy it is acknowledged, That
there is no power above him without or within this Realm; and that he is in all
Causes and over all Persons Supreme. Also acknowledged by the Petitions of the
two Houses addressed unto his Majesty, wherein they style themselves His
loyal Subjects. But enough of this.

Secondly, in the text of the Apostle, All persons under the higher Power are
expressly forbidden to resist. For whosoever, in the second verse, must be as
large as the every soul in the first, and the resistance forbidden here
concerns all, upon whom the subjection is enjoined there, or else we could not
m^ke these Universals good against the Papists, exempting the Pope and Clergy
from the subjection.

Thirdly, in those days there was a standing and continual great Senate,
which not long before had the supreme power in the Roman State, and might
challenge more by the Fundamentalls of that State, then our great Counsel (I
think) will, or can. But now the Emperor being Supreme, as S. Peter calls him;
or the higher power, as S. Paul here, there is no power of resistance left to
any that are under him, by the Apostle. This for the persons that should
resist, all are forbidden. Now consider the Cause.

Fourthly, was there ever more cause of resistance then in those days? were
not the Kings then not only conceived to be inclined so and so, but even
actually were enemies to Religion, had overthrown Laws and Liberties? and
therefore if any should from the Apostles reasons that he gives against
Resistance in the 3, 4, 5, verses, (For rulers are not a terror to good works
but evil, and he is the minister of God to thee for good) reply, That Rulers so
long as they are not a terror to the good, but minister for our good, are not
to be resisted: the consideration of those times leaves no place for such
exception, because the Powers then (which the Apostle forbids to resist) were
nothing so, but subverters of that which was good and just.

If it be replied, that prohibition was temporary and fit for those times, as
it is said by some. I answer, 1. This is a new exception never heard of (I
think) but in these times. 2. It is groundless, and against the Text, for the
reasons of the prohibition in the 3, 4, 5, 6, verses, are perpetual, from that
order, that good, for which the Powers are ordained of God, which will be of
force as long as there is government, and will always be reasons against
resistance; because resistance (though it be made against abused Powers as then
they were) does tend to the dissolution of that order, for which the power it
self is set up of God By which also that other distinction of theirs is made
void, when as they reply, as they think, acutely, That they resist not the
power, but the abuse of the power

It is also answered by some, that the Emperors then were absolute Monarchs,
and therefore not to be resisted. I answer: They did indeed rule absolutely and
arbitrarily, which should have according to the principles of these days been
a stronger motive to resist. But how did they make themselves of Subjects such
absolute Monarchs; was it not by force and change of the government, and was
not the right of the people and Senate (according to the Principles of these
days) good against them with as much or more reason, then the right of the
people of this Land is against the succession of this Crown descending by three
Conquests? And this I speak not to win an Arbitrary power or such as
Conquerours use, unto this Crown, but only to show that resistance can be no
more made against the Kings of England, then it could against those Emperors.
Nay, with less reason against them, then these.

Lastly, it is replied, That Christian Religion was then enacted against by
Law; but the Religion contended for is established by Law. I answer: But is the
Religion established denied to any that now fight for it? Shall the Apostles
prohibition be good against Christians in the behalf of actual Tyrants
persecuting that Religion, and not against Subjects freely enjoying the
Religion established? Or may Protestants upon a jealousy resist a Protestant
King professing the same Religion, and promising to conserve it entire to them?

2. The prohibition does not only concern Christians, but all the people under
those Emperors, and not only Religion was persecuted, but Liberties also
lost, the people and Senate were enslaved by Edicts, and Laws then enforced
upon them, and they (according to the principles of these days) might resist,
notwithstanding the Apostles prohibition, and the Laws then forced upon them;
or else the State, as they usually say, had not means to provide for its
safety. Thus one fancy of theirs thwarts another, because both are
groundless. But more anon of those means of safety they suppose to be in
every State, by the power of Resistance.

Hitherto of Scripture, which is most powerful against Resistance, in the
prohibition and the reasons of it, by which Conscience will clearly see, it can
have no warrant from Scripture for Resistance. Now let us try what Reason can
enforce.

SECT. III.
For proving this power of resistance, there is much speech used about the
Fundamentalls of this government, which because they lie low and unseen by
vulgar eyes, being not written Laws, the people are easily made to believe they
are such as they (that have power to build new Laws) upon them) say they are.
And indeed none so fit to judge of them as they: Yet this we know, and every
one that can use his reason knows, that the Fundamentalls must needs be such as
will bear the settled government of this Land, such as are not contradictory to
the written established Laws: but both the government we see used in this Land,
and the written Laws which we read, must have a correspondency and anology of
reason to these Fundamentalls, and these to them.

Well then, they that plead for Power of resistance in the people, lay the
first groundwork of their Fundamentalls thus: Power is originally in and from
the people, and if when by election they have entrusted a Prince with the
Power, he will not discharge his trust, then it falls to the people; or, as in
this Kingdom to the two Houses of Parliament (the representative body of the
people) to see to it; they may reassume the power.

This is the bottom of their Fundamentalls as they are now discovered to the
people. But here we may take notice by the way, that however the Fundamentalls
of this Government are much talked of, this is according to them the
Fundamental in all Kingdoms and Governments; for they say power was every
where from the people at first, and so this will serve no more for the power of
resistance in England, then in France, or Turkey: but if this must be a
Fundamental, it is such an one as upon it this Government cannot be built, but
Confusion and Anarchy may readily be raised; as shall appear by the clearing
of these two particulars, Whether the Power be so originally and chiefly from
the people as they would have it; then Whether they may upon such cause,
reassume that power.

First, of the original of power, which they will have so from the People,
that it shall be from God only by a kind of permissive approbation as we may
see by the Observator, and all other that plead for this power of resistance.
We must here distinguish what the Writers of the other side seem to confound,
to wit, the Power it self, (which is a sufficiency of authority for command
and coercion in the governing of a People) from the designing of the Person to
bear that power, and the qualification o^ that power according to the diverse
ways of executing it in several forms of government and then we grant that
the designing of the person is sometimes from the People by choice, and that
the power of the Prince receiving qualification by joint consent of himself and
the people, is limited by the Laws made with such consent; but the power it
self is of God originally and chiefly: which we prove by Scripture and Reason.

First, by such places of Scripture as plainly show an ordaining and
appointing, rather then a permission or approbation.

1. The Apostle speaks it expressly, The powers are of God, Romans 13. 1. and
the Ordinance of God, verse. 2. S. Peter indeed says, every ordinance of Man,
1. Epist. 2. but of man there, and of God here is much differing; there it is
'anthr^^pine, of Man, subjective, that is, every ordinance or power set up
amongst men; but here it is 'apo theou, of God, causaliter, that is, from him,
his ordinance; and if in that 'anthr^^pine there be employed any creation or
causality, or invention of man, it respects the qualification of the power
according to the forms of several governments and offices in them, which are
from the invention of man; it does not make the power it self the creation of
man, which is the constitution and ordinance of God; and men are not only
naturally bent to society, but also are bound as they are reasonable creatures,
to set up and live under government as under an order of that providence by
which the World is governed.

II. He is called the Minister of God, v. 4. but if so from the People and no
otherwise from God then they would have him, he should be Minister Populi
rather; he is indeed their Minister for their good, which makes the People to
be the end of this governing power, not the fountain and original of it:
therefore the necessity of subjection urged in the fifth verse, has a double
ground, The ordinance of God, whose ministers Rulers are, there is the fountain
and original of Power to govern; then the Peoples good, upon which Rulers
ought to attend, that is an end of the Governing Power.

III. To the same purpose speak those other places, By me Kings reign: and I
have said ye are Gods, Psalm. 82. in relation to which our Savior says, Joh.
10. They are called Gods to whom the word of God came, that dixi, that word is
the command, the issuing out as it were the commission for the setting up of a
governing power among the people.

These places cannot be satisfied with that poor part, they on the other side
leave to God in the setting up of power for the governing of men, that is, to
approve it when the People has created or invented it. Indeed if we consider
the qualification of this governing power, and the manner of executing it
according to the several forms of government, we granted it before to be the
invention of man, and when such a qualification or form is orderly agreed upon,
we say it has Gods permissive approbation

And therefore the imputation is causeless which the Pleaders on the other
side do heedelessely and ignorantly lay upon us Divines; as if we cried up
Monarchy, and that only government to be jure divino. For although Monarchy
has this excellency, that the Government God set up over his people in the
person of Moses, the Judges, and the Kings, was Monarchical, yet we confess
that neither that, nor Aristocracy, or any other form is jure divino; but we
say the power it self, or that sufficiency of Authority to govern, which is in
Monarchy or Aristocracy, abstractly considered from the qualifications of
either form, is an efflux or constitution subordinate to that providence, an
ordinance of that Dixi, that silent Word by which the world was at first made,
and is still governed under God.

Secondly, as this appears by the former places of Scripture, so it is also
suitable to Reason: Because God does govern all creatures, Reasonable as well
as Unreasonable, the inferior or lower world he governs by the heavens or
superior bodies, according to those influences and powers he has put into
them; and the reasonable creatures, Men, he governs too by others set up in his
stead over them; for which they are called Gods, because in his stead over the
people: and the powers are said to pe 'apo theou tetagmenai Romans 13. 1. not
only 'apo theou, from God; but also as orders ranked under him too, subordinate
to that providence by which all creatures are governed.

These his Ministers he sometimes designed immediately by himself, as Moses,
the Judges, Saul, David, etc. Now he designs his Vicegerents on earth
mediately, as by election of the people, by succession or inheritance, by
conquest, etc. To conclude, the Power it self of Government is of God, however
the person be designed, or that Power qualified according to the several forms
of government by those Laws that are established, or those grants that are
procured for the peoples security. Thus much of the original of Power.

SECT. IV.
NOw we come to the Forfeiture, as I may call it, of this Power. If the Prince,
say they, will not discharge his trust, then it falls to the people or the two
Houses (the representative body of the people) to see to it, and reassume that
Power, and thereby to resist. This they conceive to follow upon the derivation
of Power from the people by virtue of election and upon the stipulation or
covenant of the Prince with the people, as also to be necessary in regard of
those means of safety, which every State should have within it self. We will
examine them in order, and shall find the Arguments inconsequent.

Concerning the derivation of Power we answer? First, if it be not from the
people, as they will have it, and as before it was cleared, then can there be
no reassuming of this Power by the People; that is plain by their own argument.

Secondly, if the people should give the power so absolutely as they would have
it, leaving nothing to God in it but approbation, yet could they not therefore
have right to take that power away. For many things which are altogether in our
disposing before we part with them, are not afterward in our power to recall;
especially such in which their redounds to God an interest by the donation, as
in things devoted, though afterward they come to be abused. So although it
were, as they would have it, that they give the power and God approves; yet
because the Lords hand also and his oil is upon the person elected to the
Crown, and then he is the Lords anointed and the Minister of God, those hands
of the people which were used in lifting him up to the Crown, may not again be
lifted up against him, either to take the Crown from his head, or the sword out
of his hand. This will not a true-informed Conscience date to do.

Thirdly, How shall the Conscience be satisfied that this their argument,
grounded upon election and the derivation of power from the people can have
place in this Kingdom, when as the Crown not only descends by inheritance,
but also has so often been settled by Conquest in the lines of Saxons, Danes,
and Normans? In answer to this they look beyond all these, and say, the right
is still good to the people by reason of their first election. I answer: So
then that first election must be supposed here, and supposed good against all
other titles, or else this power of resistance falls to the ground. It is
probable indeed that Kings at first were by choice here as elsewhere; but can
Conscience rest upon such remote probabilities for resistance, or think that
first election will give it power against Princes that do not claim by it. We
tell them the Roman Emperors were not to be resisted, Romans 13. 2. They reply,
as we had it above, that they were absolute Monarchs. But how came they of
Subjects to be absolute Monarchs? was it any otherwise then by force and arms?
the way that the Saxons, Danes, and Normans made themselves Masters of this
people, and was not the right of the people as good against them for the power
of resistance, by virtue of the first election, as well as of the people of
this Land, against their Kings after so many Conquests? This I speak not, as if
the Kings of this Land might rule as Conquerors: God forbid. But to show this
slender plea of the first election can no more take place against the Kings of
this Land, then it could against the Roman Monarchs, especially according to
their argument, that hold all power originally from the people, and that (as we
observed above) to be the Fundamental of all government. Therefore whether
Kings were in this Land at first by election or no; we acknowledge what belongs
to the duty of a Prince in doing justice and equity: what Grants also, Laws,
Privileges have since those Conquests been procured, or restored to the
people: unto all those the King is bound. But yet not bound under forfeiture of
his power to the people: which now comes to be examined in that capitulation or
covenant he is said to enter with the people.

In the next place therefore: That Capitulation or Covenant, and the Oath which
the Prince takes to confirm what he promises, are so alleged, as if the
breach or nonperformance on the Princes part were a forfeiture of his power.
But we answer, The words capitulation or covenant are now much used to make Men
believe the Kings admittance to the Crown is altogether conditional, as in the
merely elective Kingdoms of Polonia, Swedeland, etc. whereas our King is King
before he comes to the Coronation, which is sooner or later at his pleasure,
but always to be in due time, in regard of that security His People receive by
his taking the oath, and he again mutually from them, in which performance
there is something like a covenant, all but the forfeiture. The King there
promises and binds himself by oath to performance. Could they in this covenant
show us such an agreement between the King and his People, that in case he will
not discharge His trust, then it shall be lawful for the States of the
Kingdom by Arms to resist, and provide for the safety thereof, it were
something.

If it be said, that so much is employed in the first election. We answer: We
examined that slender plea of the first election above, as it was thought to be
a derivation of power. Now as it is thought to have a covenant in it: we say,
That usually in all Empires the higher we arise, the freer we find the Kings,
and still downwards the People have gained upon them: for at first when the
People chose their Rulers, they did as Justine in the beginning of his History
observes, resign themselves to be governed by such, of whose prudence and
moderation they had experience; and then, Arbitria Principum pro legibus erant,
the will and discretion of the Prince was Law unto the People; but Men were Men
though in Gods place, and therefore for the restraint of that Power, with
consent of the Prince, such Laws have been still procured by the People as
might make for their security.

Now from a promise the King makes for doing Justice (the duty of every Prince)
for the continuing those Privileges, immunities, that have been granted or
restored to the People, and for the observing of those Laws that have been
established with the Princes consent, and from that oath (by which for the
greater security of the People he binds himself to the performance of the
premises) to infer a great obligation lies upon him, is right: but to gather
thence a forfeiture of his power upon the not performance, is a plain but
dangerous inconsequent Argument.

And though such Argument may seem to have some force in States merely elective
and pactionall, yet can it never be made to appear to any indifferent
understanding, that the like must obtain in this Kingdom. And to this purpose
Phil. Pareus excuses what his Father had written more harshly upon the 13. to
the Romans, in the point of Resistance, that it was to be understood of
elective and pactionall government, not to the prejudice of England, or such
Monarchies. For where the King, as it is said, never dies, where he is King
before oath or coronation, where he is not admitted upon any such capitulation
as gives any power to the People, or their representative body, as is pretended
to: Nay, where that body cannot meet but by the will of the Prince, and is
dissoluble at his pleasure; that there, in such a State, such a power should be
pretended to, and used against the Prince as at this day, and that according to
the fundamentalls of such a State, can never appear reasonable to any
indifferent judgment, much less satisfy Conscience in the resistance that is
now made by such a pretended power.

What then shall we say? Is the King not bound to perform? Yes, by all means.
Or has he not a limited power according to the Laws? Yes. What then if he
will take to himself more power, or not perform what he is bound to? Suppose
that; (though thanks be to God we are not come to that.) Then may the Subjects
use all fair means as are fit to use, cries to God, petitions to the Prince,
denials of obedience to his unlawful commands, denials of subsidy, aid, etc.
But are they left without all means to compel by force and resistance? This
however it may at first sight seem unreasonable to the people and very
impolitick to the Statesman, yet has Scripture forbidden it, as before was
plainly showed, and so does Reason too, as will apeare in the examination of
their last proof they make for re-assuming this power and resisting, from that
necessity of means of safety, which every State is to have within it self: Of
which now.

SECT. V.
IN the last place it is thus reasoned, Were it not so that the two Houses
might take and use this power, the State should not have means to provide for
its own safety, when the King shall please to desert His Parliament, deny His
consent to their Bills, abuse His power, etc. So they.

When right and Just will not defend a thing, then Necessity is usually
pleaded; as if, because Salus Populi in a good sense is Suprema Lex, every
thing must be honest which is Spartae Vtile, imagined to conduce to the
proposed end. We answer therefore;

First, They have many weapons sharpened for this resistance at the Philistines
forge, arguments borrowed from the Roman schools, among them this is one, the
very reason that is made for the Popes power of curbing or deposing Kings in
case of Heresy. For if there be not that power in the Church, say they, then
in case the Civil Magistrate will not discharge his trust, the Church has not
means for the maintenance of the Catholic faith and its own safety. Well, as
we reply to them, the Church has means of preserving the faith, such as God
has appointed, though not that of one Visible head, which though at first
seems plausible, for preserving the Unity of faith, yet has experience shown
it to be indeed the means to bring much mischief upon the Church: So to the
other we say, The State has means of preservation such as the Law has
prescibed, though not such as are here pretented to in this power of
resistance; which though seemingly plausible, yet true Reason will conclude
them dangerous, and at this day, God knows, we see it. Of this in the fourth
answer more particularly.

Secondly, If every State has such means to provide for its safety, What means
of safety had the Christian Religion under the Roman Emperors in and after
the Apostles times? or the people then enslaved, what means had they for their
Liberties? had they this of resistance? Tertullian, in his Apol. says, the
Christians had number and force sufficient to withstand, but they had no
warrant; and the Apostle expressly forbids them and all other under the higher
power, to resist.

If it be replied, as it was above touched, That things being so enacted by
Law, it was not lawful for them to resist. I answer: But it is known that not
only those Edicts which concerned Christian Religion, but also all other that
proceeded from those Emperors and enslaved the people, were merely arbitrary
and enforced upon the Senate, and that the Senate did not discharge their trust
in consenting to them, and therefore according to the former position the
people might resist, notwithstanding the Apostles prohibition, or else no means
of safety left in that State.

So would it be in this State, if at any time a King that would rule
arbitrarily, as those Emperors did, should by some means or other work out of
the two Houses the better affected, and by the Consent of the Major part of
them that remain, compass his desires; might the people then resist? The
Apostle forbids it to them as well as to the Romans in such a case: if so,
where are these means of safety by this power of resistance? Or are these means
of safety extinct in the Consent of the Senate or the two Houses? No, the
people will tell them they discharge not their trust, they chose them not to
betray them, enslave them; but according to the principles now taught them,
they might lay hold upon this power of resistance; for their representative
body claims it by them.

Thirdly we answer, We cannot expect absolute means of safety and security in
a State, but such as are reasonable; and such are provided, especially in the
fundamentalls of this Government, by that excellent temper of the three estates
in Parliament there being a power of denying in each of them, and no power of
enacting in one or two of them without the third; which as it is for the
security of the Commonwealth (for what might follow if the King and Lords
without the Commons, or these and the Lords without the King, might determine,
the evils of these days do show) so is this power of denying, for the
security of each State against other, of the Commons against the King and
Lords, of the Lords against them: and must the King trust only, and not be
trusted? Must not he also have his security against the other, which he cannot
have but by Power of denying? This is that Temper of the three Estates in
Parliament, the due observing whereof, in the moderate use of this power of
denying, is the reasonable means of this States safety: but now not only the
name of Parliament, which implies the three Estates, is restrained usually to
the two Houses, but also that Temper is dissolved. I need not speak it, the
distractions and convulsions of the whole Commonwealth, as the distempers in a
natural body, do sufficiently show such a dissolution, and what is the cause of
it.

If it be replied, as it is, for the reasonableness of these means of safety
through that Power of resisttence and the final trust reposed in the
representative body of the people, That many see more then one and more safety
in the judgment of many then of one. Answ. True. But 1. Conscience might here
demand for its satisfaction, Why should an hundred in the House of Commons see
more then three hundred; or twenty in the Lords House, more then sixty that are
of indiffereent judgment and withdrawn;

2. Reason does suppose, That the Prince, though one, sees with the eyes of
many, yea with their eyes who are of different judgment from him, for which
his. Houses of Parliament are his great Council to present to his eyes the
differences of things with the reasons of them; and albeit he sometimes
dissents from the Major or Prevailing part, because he is convinced in his own
judgment they seek themselves nor his or the Public good, or for other
reasons that may persuade him against their Vote, yet have all times thought
good to have Kings, and to reduce the judgment of many unto one. The
Government which God made choice of to set up among his people was Monarchical
still; first in Moses, then in the Judges, then in the Kings; yea generally all
Authors yield, and experience has taught it, That Monarchy is a better
government then Aristocracy, because the Tyranny and Miscarriage of one,
sometime happening in a Monarchy is nothing so dangerous as Oligarchy, Faction,
and Division usually incident to Aristocracy or the Government by many equals.
Again, as all times have thought it reasonable to have Monarchy, which settles
the chief power and final judgment in One; so will there be always
sufficient reason to withhold the King from a wilful denial of his Consent to
the free and unanimous Vote of his Houses: he cannot but see there will always
be some necessary good accrewing to him by his Parliament, that will keep him
in all reason from doing so: and no cases can be put or inconveniences feared
upon his Power of denying, but greater and more eminent will appear upon his
not having it, as has been insinuated, and now do follow.

Fourthly therefore and lastly we answer. Such power of resistance would be no
fit means of safety to a State, but prove a remedy worse then the disease. This
is very plain by the drift of the Apostles reason which he gave against
resistance, in the 3, 4, 5, 6. v. of the 13. to the Romans in which we may
consider, that, although the Powers then were altogether unjust, tyrannical,
subverters of true Religion, nothing answerable to the end for which the
Governing Power is ordained, yet does the Apostle draw his reasons against the
resisting of them, from that good, that justice, that order for which God has
set up the higher Powers; to insinuate, that the resisting of the higher
Powers, even when they are so, does tend to the overthrow of that order which
is the life of a Commonwealth; and this not only because there is still order
under tyranny, but chiefly because, if it were good and lawful to resist the
power, when abused, it would open a way to the people upon the like pretenses
to resist and overthrow even Powers duly administered for the executing of
wrath upon them that do evil.

I enter this dicourse, not to cast the least blemish upon Parliaments (which
are an only remedy for distempers of the Kingdom) not to reflect upon the
intentions of those that are yet resident in that high Court, (unto God the
judge of all, they stand or fall) not to raise jealousies, but to settle
Conscience, and in the way of reasoning to show according to the Apostles
reasons what dangers and evils may ensue upon this power of resistance.

For first of all, This power of resistance, if admitted and pursued may
proceed to a change of Government, the Principles that now are gone upon, and
have carried it so far as we see at this day, may also lead it on to that
greatest of evils: And I have heard and seen it defended by the example of the
Low Countries; how they excuse it thoroughly, I examine not, but this I am sure
they can say, That their Prince, succeeding in the right of the Duke of
Burgundy was admitted upon other conditions then the Kings of England are:
also that a contrary religion was enforced upon them by a terrible Inquisition,
whereas they that do resist the higher. Powers here, do freely enjoy their
religion, and have the Princes promise and protestation for it.

Secondly, This Power of resistance when used, and pursued, is accompanied with
the evils of Civil war: Former times show it, and how little was gained by it
beside the expense of blood; as when all was referred to the rule and disposing
of the 12 Peers, how long lasted it? what security had the State by it? and at
this day we feel and groan under the evils brought upon us through this power
of resistance, the Law silenced, the Property and Liberty of the subject every
where invaded; and the Lord knows when or how we shall be restored to them, or
better secured in them by this way

Thirdly, We see the danger, (if as it is now said, for the justifying of this
power of resistance, The King will not discharge his trust, and therefore it
falls to the representative body of the people to see to it, so) the People
being discontented, and having gotten power shall say, The Members of the two
Houses do not discharge the trust committed to them, they do not that for which
they were chosen and sent for, then may the multitude by this rule and
principle now taught them, take the Power to themselves, it being claimed by
them, and say to them as Numb. 16. Ye take too much upon you, or as Cade, and
Tylar, boast themselves Reformers of the Commonwealth, overthrow King and
Parliament, fill all with rapine and confusion, draw all to a Folkmoot, and
make every Shire a several Government.

These are Dangers and Evils not conceived in the fancy, but such as reason
tells us may follow, and experience has often, and this day does show us, do
arise upon this Power of resistance, and for the preventing of which, the
Apostle gave his reasons against resisting even of abused powers, as we heard
above.

Lastly therefore, Seeing some must be trusted in every State, it is reason the
highest and final trust should be in the higher or supreme Power, with whom
next to himself God has entrusted the whole Kingdom, all other that have power
and trust, having it under him as sent by him; Good reason I say that the
supreme Power (which is worth 10000 of the Subjects) should have the best
security on its side, for as much as Order, the life of a Commonwealth, is so
best preserved, and not so endangered by Tyranny as by factions, division,
tumults, power of resistance on the Subjects part, and this is according to the
drift of the Apostles reasons against resistance, as before they were laid down.

Well, now unto all that has hitherto been said from Scripture and Reason, let
Conscience add the oath of Supremacy and Allegiance, also the late
Protestation, and consider what duty lies upon every subject by the former to
defend the Kings person and Right against what Power soever, and how by the
latter he has protested and undertaken before Almighty God in the first place
to defend the same; and then what can Conscience conclude from the Premises?
that the Prince has his Power for the good of his people? true, but that Power
cannot be prevalent for the good and protection of his people unless it be
preferved to him entire, unless he has the Power of Denial, and the chief
command of Arms; or that the Prince has a limited Power, according to the Laws
established? true, but if Conscience be persuaded he does not hold himself
within those bounds so fixed, can it be persuaded also that the people may
reassume that Power they never had? or take that sword out of his hand that God
has put into it? No, Conscience will look at that Power as the Ordinance of
God, and the abuse of that Power as a judgment and scourge of God upon the
people, and will use not Arms to resist the Ordinance under pretense of
resisting the abuse, but cries and prayers to God, petitions to the Prince,
denialls of obedience to his unjust commands, denialls of subsides, aids, and
all fair means that are fit for Subjects to use, and when done all, if not
succeed, will rather suffer then resist: so would a truly informed Conscience
resolve, were the Prince indeed what he is supposed to be, and did he do indeed
as the people are made to fear and believe he will do.

Hitherto we have been in the examination of the Principle upon which they go
that plead for resistance, and we have found both Scripture and Reason speak
plainly against the resisting even of abused Powers, professed enemies to
Religion, actual subverters of the Peoples Liberties, how much more against
the resisting of a Prince that professes the same Religion which we freely
enjoy, promises the maintaining of that and our Liberties, only upon a
supposall He will not stand to His word, will overthrow all.

This however it may seem less reasonable to the Statist in the way of
Policy, permitting as little as he can to the goodness of the Prince, or the
providence of God for the safety of the State; yet ought it to satisfy a
Christian in the way of Conscience, which when it comes to a desire of being
safe, will not rest till it have a sure ground, which here it has against
resistance laid down by Scripture and Reasons even the Apostles reasons so
powerful against resistance.

The sum of all is this; Conscience hears the Apostle expressly forbid all
under the higher Power to resist, finds no other clear Scripture to limit it,
finds that the limitations given will not consist with it, for the reasons of
them (that are drawn from the election of the People, and the Covenant supposed
therein, from the necessity of means of safety in every State to provide for it
self) were as strong in the Roman State as any; nay, are supposed by those
that urge them, to be the fundamentals of every State; and so resistance is
forbidden as well here, as there in the Roman State, which is also cleared by
the Apostles reasons, showing the Power of resistance cannot be the mean of
safety, but strikes at Order and Power it self, though made against tyrannical
and abused Powers, as before often insinuated. Therefore Conscience will not
dare to go against the Apostles express prohibition, lest it fall into the
judgment denounced by him.

But if there shall be any Conscience as strongly carried away with the name of
a Parliament, as the Papists are with the name of the Church, and thinking
Religion may be defended any way, and that upon supposall that their Prince is
minded to change it, (which is another humor of Popery) will not be persuaded
that the resistance made upon the present supposall is unlawful, against Gods
Word, and reason; I am sure such a Conscience cannot be truly persuaded it is
lawful, but must want that clear ground it ought to have, especially in a
matter so expressly against the Apostle, and of such high concernment as
damnation; must needs run blindly, and headlong by a strange implicit Faith
upon so great a hazard.

SECT. VI.
NOw we come to the Application of their principle to the present, where we
must enquire according to the second and third Generals, whether the
resistance now made be such as is pretended to by them in such a case as they
supposed, and then whether Conscience can be truly persuaded the King is such
and so minded as in the case He is supposed to be.

The chief considerations of these two Generals, are matters of fact; The
principle was examined by Scripture and Reason, these admit the Judgment of
sense, and are cleared by what we hear and see; which Judgment of sense is
not so easily captivated by an implicit Faith as that of Reason is; insomuch as
Conscience here cannot be so blinded but it may see, that (were the principal
good on which they rest, yet) this resistance which they make, is not such as
they pretend to, and that this King, whom they resist; is not such as in the
case they supposed him to be, not such as ought to be resisted according to
their own grants.

The second general was, That the Resistance now made is not such as is
pretended to by them that plead for it, and therefore Conscience cannot be
truly persuaded it may lawfully bear part in it, or assist them that in the
pursuit of it pretend one thing and do another.

It was premised at the beginning that such a resistance should be omnibus
ordinibus regni consentientibus; agreed upon and undertaken by the general and
unanimous consent of the whole State, and that it should be only Legitima
defensio, a mere defensive resistance; and these laid down, not that I admit
resistance however conditioned (for all that I have said before does altogether
condemn it) but according to their own grants that plead for it: To this
purpose it is that they say the King is Vniversis minor, less then the whole
State, and every body naturally defends it self. Therefore if a contention be
between the Plead and the Body, it must in all reason be the whole Body that is
set against it; and if there be such an appearing against the supreme Power, as
tends to resistance, the consent and judgment of the whole Kingdom must be
against him, or else every prevailing faction might endanger the State by
causing such changes and evils as now it is threatened with: This is the reason
of this unreasonable power of resistance in the people.

Well then how shall Conscience he persuaded that this resistance was agreed
upon by an unanimous and free consent of the States assembled in the two
Houses, such as in this case may be called the judgment of the whole kingdom?

He that knows how the Militia (in which this resistance chiefly began) was
brought in, with what opposition, especially in the Lords house, and by what
number there at length was voted; also how the like proceedings of resistance,
that have been voted since, are declared against; by a greater number of each
House then do remain in either, such as have been cast out or withdrawn
themselves upon dislike of these proceedings: can he, I say, that knows this
(and who knows it not, that has eyes and ears?) be in Conscience persuaded,
that this is such an unanimous, free, and general consent, the judgment of
the whole kingdom?

For though a Vote passed by a few upon the place has the power and condition
of a Vote for the formality of Law, yet, if the question be, Was this passed in
full assemblies; Was it freely and generally carried; Did they all unanimously
as one man consent unto it? Conscience cannot be convinced there is such
efficacy in the place, as to make a few, the whole; or their agreement to be
that judgment: of the whole kingdom, that unanimous consent, which must be in
the case of resistance, by their acknowledgement that plead for it. For were it
in this case to be held for the judgment of the whole, which is passed by a
few, then would the State be unreasonably exposed to that danger (above
mentioned) which every prevailing faction might bring upon it under the
pretense of the judgment of the whole kingdom.

Again, is Conscience cannot be truly persuaded that this resistance is agreed
upon with such a general and unanimous consent, as they themselves pretend to,
which plead for this resistance, so can it not be truly persuaded that this
resistance is such for the mere defensive way of it, as it ought to be
according to their grants and pretenses that appear for it.

Conscience here will see how to resolve, upon the trial of these two
particulars, Whether the King or they be upon the defensive part? then, Whether
the managing of this war or resistance on their parts, be so void of hostile
acts, as the defensive way, which they pretend to, ought to be?

Conscience will discern whether part is upon the defensive, by inquiring,
First, Who were first in Arms? He that can number the succession of weeks and
months in his Almanac may decide this. He shall find that armed men were
thrust into Hull, the Kings Arms seized against his will, the Militia set up,
and by that the Kings Subjects drawn into Arms before the King had any thing to
oppose but Proclamations: that subscriptions for Plate, Money, Horse; that
listing of soldiers for the field, and appointing of Officer of the Army were
begun upon their part, before His Majesty did the like. Now resistance does in
the word it self and in their pretense presuppose a power and force first made
against them, where as it is plain, they were still upon the preventing and
forehand with the Kin^, still showed him example for what he has done since in
the way of War: yet must the people believe he raises the War, and they are
upon defense; But Conscience will not be so forced.

Secondly, by inquiring what is the c^^se of these Arms? What do they contend
for? And though it be clear, that if Subjects be first in A^^s they cannot be
upon the defensive, yet the consideration of the cause will more apparently
convince it, when Conscience shall see it is not for what is pretended, but for
something the King has right to deny, that this resistance is made. The
preservation of Religion and Liberties is pretended, but can it be for either?
The King denies them not: Their Religon they freely enjoy; and was it ever
known that Subjects should rise in Arms against their Prince for a Religion
which he promises to maintain? Or does Religion stand in need of a defense,
which it self condemns, a defense which would be a perpetual scandal to it?
If therefore Religion be the pretense, but no cause of War, then is the War
raised on their part, the King is upon the defensive. Or can it be for ancient
Rights and undoubted Privileges that they contend? The King denies them not,
promises all security so he may enjoy his own, and God sorbid that either He
or they should suffer in their just Rights. But would any man ever have
defended the revolt of the ten Tribes, if Rehoboam had promised to conserve
their Liberties? What shall we then think of this geneall Revolt from
Allegiance that has possessed well-near ten Tribes of twelve? They suppose he
will not make good his promises, and therefore they will make all sure, seize
his Arms and Forts, strip him of all, and if begin to stir for his own Right
and Dignity, then the people must be made to believe he makes war against his
Parliament, intends to destroy their Liberties. But can any man in Conscience
think his Majesty since the beginning of this breach was ever in such a
Condition of strength as might threaten the Liberty of the Subject, or destroy
Parliaments, when as it was long ere he could with much ado attain to any
reasonable means of subsistence, or to such a strength whereby he might seem to
be able to defend himself?

To speak the truth, Religion and Liberties can be no other then the pretenses
of this War, the King has fortified them so with many Acts of Grace passed
this Parliament, that they cannot be in that danger which is pretended for the
raising of this War. It must be something that his Majesty does indeed deny
for which the contention is raised: That we shall find to be His Power of Arms,
and ordering the Militia of the Kingdom, His Power of denying in Parliament,
His disposing of the offices of State, and such like; Also the Government of
the Church and the Revenue of it. In the three former he challenges his right,
as his Predecessors had; the other he is bound by Oath to maintain as by Law
they are established. Well, if these be attempted, and his Majesty will not be
forced from them, cannot yield them up, but it comes to Arms, then will
Conscience easily be convinced the King is upon the defensive, for the
maintaining of what he justly holds his right, or is bound by Oath to defend.

And if we hearken to the peoples voice, for that commonly speaks the mind of
their leaders, we shall hear them usually call this War as they did that with
the Scots, The Bishops War. His Majesty has indeed always declared against
the altering of the Government of the Church by Bishops, being such as it
always had since the first receiving of the Christian Faith in this land, and
of all other Governments simply the best, if reformed from abuses and
corruptions that have grown upon it, to the purging out of which His Majesty is
always ready to agree. But be it the Bishops War (though the abolishing of
that Government be but one of the many inconveniences which this Power of
resistance does threaten this Land with, and which the King has reason by Power
of Arms to divert) whether is it so just in Subjects by Arms to force a change
of Government which was always in the Church, and by Law established, as it is
in the King to defend the same as he is bound by Oath? it is clear which of the
two are upon the defensive.

The second particular by which the defensive way of this resistance is to be
examined, was the managing of this War on their parts, whether so void of
acts of Hostility as that defensive way should be which they pretend to. David's
resistance made against. Saul is frequently alleged by them, which example,
though it will not countenance their cause (as was showed before) yet might it
tell them their demeanor should be answerable. He offered no act of violence to
Saul, but still gave place and withdrew from him: the Spear indeed and the
Cruse David took away from the Kings head, but it was only to show Abners
neglect, who had the Command of Saul's Militia, and to testify his own
integrity, therefore he restored them before they were demanded, 1 Samuel 26.

But now the Kings Spear and his Cruse, his Ammunition, and His necessary
Provisions are taken away, intercepted, not restored, though often demanded,
used against Him with all advantage; nay he is stripped of the very Power and
Command of Arms, His Officers and Ministers thrust out, and other substituted,
and by them His People drawn into Arms against Him.

Also by these that are in resistance against the King, His Loyal and
Peaceable Subjects are assaulted, despoiled of their Arms, Goods, Estates;
their Persons Imprisoned, because they would according to their Allegiance
assist Him in this extremity, or would not, contrary to their Conscience, join
with them against Him. What Conscience that will not follow this way with a
stupid implicit faith can be persuaded that this War is the defense of the
Subjects Liberties, and not rather an oppugnation of them? or that it is a mere
resistance or withstanding of a force first made against them, and not rather a
violent illation or bringing in of force upon those that were disposed to
Peace. Therefore no Conscience that has a sense of Religion, or of that which
is just and right between Man and Man, can bear a part in this resistance, for
fear of that sentence of damnation which the Apostle has laid upon it.

SECT. VII.
BUt in the last place, if Conscience could be persuaded, that it is lawful
upon such a case, as they make, to take Arms and resist, and that this rising
in Arms is such a defensive resistance, as in such a case they seem to pretend
to, yet how will it be persuaded that the Case is now, that is, That the King
is such as the people must be made to believe he is, unles it will as
desperately offend against the rule of Charity, in so concluding upon the
King, as it does against the rule of Faith and Persuasion, in admitting so
uugrounded a principle as is now rested on for resistance: so that such a
Conscience shall have in its persuasion neither certainty of Rule; for the
principle it goes on is false; nor certainty of the Case, for it knows not the
heart of the King, to conclude for resistance upon supposals of his intentions,
and in its judgment it will be altogether void of Charity.

Indeed it concerns all such as will resist upon the principles now taught to
render their Prince odious to his people under the hateful notions of Tyrant,
Subverter of Religion, and Laws, a Person not to be trusted, or at least as one
seduced to such evil designs, by wicked Counsel. But what? Has this King
forbid the exercise of the Religion established or left off to profess it
himself? has he disclaimed his trust, or not upon all occasions promised
justice and liberty to his Subjects?

Yea! but they have cause to fear Popery will prevail, and that he will not
stand to his promises. It seems thy are men that would be loath to suffer for
their Religion, they are so ready to fly to Arms to secure themselves; But
shall subjects rise in Arms against their Prince upon such remote fears and
jealousies as these will appear to be? When can such be wanting in turbulent
minds? When shall the Prince be assured of safety? This was the way that David
himself was shaken out of his Throne, and driven from Jerusalem by Absalom:
This cunning Rebel steals away their hearts by raising jealousies in them, and
an evil opinion of David's government, 2. Sam. 15. 3. Some ground it seems, he
had for his treacherous plea, through the negligence of those that were under
David; but it was his villainy to make use of it to the alienating of the
People from their King. Accordingly let us now consider what slender grounds
our People have for their fears and jealousies, then what security they have
and mightt have against them, that it may appear how causeless those
jealousies are in themselves, how unjust causes of this resistance.

If we examine the fears and jealousies that have possessed the People, we
shall find them to be raised upon these or the like grounds. Reports of
Foreign Power to be brought in, The Queens Religion, The resort of Papists to
His Majesty, His intercepting of means sent for the relief of Ireland, from
whence the People by their good teachers are made to believe, that He means to
enslave this People, reestablish Popery, and does comply with the Rebels.

In answer to all, which I needed not to say more then what Michael the
Arch-Angell to the Devil that arch-accuser; The Lord rebuke thee, Jude 9. but
in particular; For such reports of invasion from abroad, as were, before the
setting up of the Militia, given out to keep the people amused, the easier to
draw them into a Posture of Defense as was pretended, all such are discovered
by time to have been vain; if there be now any foreign aid, toward the King
(as all Christian Kings cannot but think themselves concerned in the cause) it
will be as just for him to use them against subjects now in Arms, as it was
unjust in the Barons to call in the French against their natural King. K. John.


For the Queens Majesty; Her Religion is no new cause, if it be a sufficient
cause of Jealousy to them, they have had it from her first entrance; I would
to God it were otherwise with her, that it would please the Lord to open her
eyes that she may see the truth and light of the Protestant Religion: only
this I must say, this is not the way to draw her to it, if she look at it in
the doctrines and practices of these times she is not like to fall in love with
it.

For the resort of Papists, and the Kings entertaining them; He has often
declared what caution he desired to use therein, till necessity has driven
him to admit of some few into his Army, which also he answered lately. Let me
add this concerning the justness of it, If he has entertained any into this
service, he may justly make use of them. We see what manner of men were
gathered to David in his distress, 1. Sam. 22. 2. and how false Ziba bringing
provision to the King when he fled from Absalom, was entertained and rewarded,
insomuch that the King (when afterward he knew how Ziba had abused him to gain
his own ends) would not reverse the sentence pronounced in his favor; If
therefore in this distress after much forbearance our King has admitted the
help of some Recusants, it cannot be alleged as a cause of the resistance now
made against him, but that resistance was a cause of it; and if the Papist will
show himself a good subject, it is just and reasonable that the King when he is
put to it, may admit of his help, and the more shame it is for them that
profess the Protestant Religion to force him to it; a scandal that would not
easily be wiped off from our Religion, were it to stand or fall, by the
doctrines of this giddie Age.

Lastly, His Majesty has written enough for the clearing himself from those
false and odious imputations laid upon him in relation to the Irish business.
I have only thus much to say, concerning any thing intended for the relief of
Ireland; It was great pity they should want it there, but it is more
pitiful, the King should be forced to make use of it here.

It is not long since our neighbor Nation brought an Army into the Northern
parts of this kingdom to the great detriment of the inhabitants there, and it
was excused by invincible necessity, which drove them hither. The necessity
his Majesty was driven to is sufficiently known, and might excuse him, in
taking his own where he meets with it, and drawing it from his service abroad
to that which more nearly concerned him at home. And when his Arms, Moneys, and
Provisions are seized on wherever they be found intended for him, and employed
against him in a War, the Lord knows how unnecessary; shall it not be lawful
for him to take some part of them where he finds it for his necessary defense?

Indeed the distress of Ireland by the help of wicked Pamphlets has been used
as a great engine to weaken the Kings reputation with his people; but upon
whose account the heavy reckoning of that neglected Cause will be laid,
together with the disturbance of this kingdom, any man in Conscience may
easily discern, that sees what sufficient and reasonable means might have been
had for the security of Religion and Liberties, and for the redress of all
just greivances before this time. Which is the next thing considerable: What
his Majesty has done and proffered to exempt these scruples of fears and
jealousies out of his peoples minds

For Religion, if it be a new Frame they contend for, I must acknowledge he
declares against all such; but if they desire the continuance of that true
Protestant Religion, which has been professed without interruption from the
beginning of the Queens days, and established by the Laws of this Land, that
he undertakes to maintain, that he has protested in the head of his Army to
defend. For matter of Church Government and discipline he has offered any just
reformation, even with a respect to tender consciences in point of Ceremony,
has often called his two Houses to the work in drawing up the grievances to
some head. For privileges of Parliaments and liberty of Subjects he has
given them the like promises with the deepest Protestations; and by an
excellent moderation, amidst the pressures and necessities of War, has shown
what respect he has to the property and liberty of the Subject. Lastly, For
his choice of Officers of State, he has promised to admit any just exception,
and thereupon to relinquish the person; and as an assurance of all this, has
so far condescended as to take away Star Chamber, High Commission, Bishops
votes, etc. and to grant the Continuance of this Parliament, and the constant
return of a Trieniall; And now after all these promises and protestations, and
so many real expressions of Grace, can any man in conscience think there was
yet place left for Propositions of such necessary concernment, that except they
be granted this Kingdom must be imbroyled in a Civil war, and the releif of
Ireland neglected? I speak not this to cast any blemish upon the wisdom of the
great Council, or upon their desires and endeavors to gain a greater security
to the Public: but I would to God, the King were once thought worthy to be
trusted a little, and that the Consciences of his Subjects were more respected,
which cannot so easily be commanded into a resistance, being very tender in the
points of damnation, and taught out of Gods Word not to raise so much as an
evil thought against the King, much less to lift up an armed hand. Eccles. 10.


Every man's Conscience now is solicited to adhere either to the King in this
great cause, or to join with Subjects in making resistance: To draw it from
Allegiance, tongues are set on fire of hell, which blast his Majesty's Actions
and Declarations; and books written by hellish spirits, enemies to peace and
quietness, are suffered to issue forth into every corner of the land to
possess the people, That his promises are but words, his acts of Grace were
forced, he will not stand to them: It seems then he must by force of Arms be
compelled to be willing. But let us see whether a Conscience that destres to be
safe can be so persuaded in judging the actions and intentions of him (to whom
it owes the highest duty under God) as first to conclude He intends not as He
promises, and thereupon to resolve for resistance? No, it will direct it self
by the rule of Charity, which is, not rashly to conclude upon the Heart which
it knows not, or to think any evil; and if the difference be betwixt two, as
in this cause, it will hold the rule of indifferency, impartially to consider
the actions of both.

Conscience therefore that it may be informed of His Majesty's intentions, will
it look upon him at such a distance as London, and read him only in those
horrid relations that issue thence, and conceive of Him as they report Him to
the People? or will it consider some failings that necessity has enforced, or
other accidental occurrences have occasioned, and from these conclude
intentions in Him, contrary to all His Promises and Protestations? This would
be too partial, too uncharitable: Conscience ought always to be tender in
judging upon other Men's intentions, especially those of the Prince, and those
to be concluded as evil, and to be made a ground for resistance, which runs
the hazard of Damnation.

In the 2. Chron. c. 21. 10. Libnah is said to revolt from the King of Judah
because he had forsaken the Lord; a Text that is objected to us, and should
have been answered in the first part: but it is impertinent as all the rest
are, for it neither proves the principle, That it is lawful for the People to
revolt when the King forsakes Religion, but shows that such revolt is a
punishment from God upon such a King, though a sin in the people: Nor does it
come home to the Case: for there the King had forsaken: here is only supposall
that he will, and that groundless and unconscionable too.

For as there was enough in David to clear those jealousies upon which that
rebellion of the People following Absalom was grounded, so is there on the
Kings part, to direct Conscience against this desperate uncharitable judgment,
if it look at those many Acts of Grace as new additions to that security, by
which this State have s so long stood, and from them conclude, He would not in a
fair way deny any thing reasonable: If it consider those many promises
strengthened with the deepest Protestations, enforced with desires of success
from God according to His just intentions; and all these, as proceeding from a
King, under such affliction, in such danger, after such success and experience
of Gods protection, approving thereby the reality and sincerity of his heart:
What Conscience can here conclude contrary intentions in him, and not think it
blasphemeth God and the King?

Furthermore, as Conscience will not be uncharitable when it judges upon the
intentions of another man's heart, so neither will it be partial when it
judges between two, unto which of them it should incline: and therefore he
that is abused to believe amiss of his King, and solicited to enter this way
of resistance, is highly concerned first to consider, Whether they also that
are the main directors of it, and to whom he would adhere, to discharge their
trust they are called to, I say such an one, unless he will resign up his
faith to men, and receive their, dictates as the immediate rule of his
Conscience, must consider whether all be just and honest that is done in that
way? Whether to divest the King of the Power of Arms and to use them against
him, be to defend his Person, Rights, and Dignity? Whether the forcing of the
Subjects property, to the advancing of this resistance, and the imprisoning of
their persons for denial, be the maintaining of the Right and Liberty of the
Subject? Whether the suffering of so many Sects to vent their Doctrines with
such liberty, and to commit unsufferable outrages upon the public worship of
God, with such licentiousness, be a defending of Religion and the established
worship of this Church? All these duties every Subject respectively is bound to
discharge, and the neglect of them his Majesty has chiefly charged upon those
that he conceives the chief Directors and Actours in this resistance made
against him, and every man in Conscience ought seriously to consider it

The necessity of the Commonwealth is pretended to defend the not-defending of
the premises; when as no necessity may excuse any failings on the Kings part,
as if his promises, by which he stands obliged to his Subjects, did not suppose
they for their parts also should perform: I know not how some particular men
may be engaged and contract a necessity of resisting, or seeking safety by
Arms; but I am persuaded, no man in Conscience can think it a necessity of the
Commonwealth to have all confounded, or of a Christian to run the hazard of
damnation by resisting. My Conscience tells me, and Qwill theirs one day tell
them, how much they have to answer for not improving that grace and
willingness, they had experience of in His Majesty, and might still have found
in him, to the speedy and happy Reformation of this Church and State* I pray
God to give them Consciences truly enlightened, and bowels truly compassionate,
that they may speedily and feelingly be sensible of the miseries this Land
groans under, and faithfully examine how far they are answerable for them, by
rejecting such reasonable means of security, as they might have (...) for the
safety of this State. Amen.

And now if there be any one that will run the hazard of this resistance, I
desire he would first set his Conscience before the Tribunal of God, where it
must appear, and consider whether it will excuse him there, when he has shed
the blood of others, and expended his own, to say, I verily supposed and
believed my Prince would change Religion, overthrow our Liberties. I must tell
him it will not be safe for him to present such a Conscience at that Bar, a
Conscience that wanted the rule of Faith to warrant and persuade the
lawfulness of resistance upon such a supposall, a Conscience that wanted the
certainty of persuasion that the Princes Heart (which God only knows) was so
inclined, a Conscience that wanted the Judgment of Charity, in concluding such
intentions in the King, notwithstanding all His Promises and deepest
Protestations made in the time of His trouble, without which Charity all is
nothing though he lays down (as he thinks) his Life for Religion. Such a
Conscience I must needs conclude sinful, and liable to that which the Apostle
threatens unto Resistance, Damnation.

FINIS.

