A Few Words TO Nath. Coleman's LATE EPISTLE, DIRECTED To be Read in the
Assemblies of Gods People.

Showing the Falseness and Unsoundness of his Doctrines therein contained.

Presented unto the View and Perusal of him, and them that are the Encouragers
and Spreaders thereof, or any others, to whose hands they have come, with a
Copy of his own Condemnation, etc.

Unto which is added, An Answer to T. Crisp's sixth Part of Babels Builders.

1 Cor. 11.19. For there must be Heresies, among you, that they which are
approved may be made manifest among you.

John 1.4. Beloved believe not every Spirit, but try the Spirits whether they
be of God; because many false Prophets are gone out into the World.

The INTRODUCTION.
IT is a certain truth and experience daily shows that the troubles of the
righteous are many and the exercises great and various, that from the birth of
the flesh, stock of Ishmael and the Generation of envious and persecuting Cain,
they meet with all as cruel mockings, reproaches, afflictions, Spoil of Goods,
yea moreover of Bonds and Imprisonments, though blessed be the Lord God through
the assistance of his powerful and eternal Spirit, they are daily strengthened
and enabled cheerfully to endure, and go through the same, knowing in
themselves that they have in heaven a better and more endurable substance, and
they firmly believe that these light afflictions (for so they are
comparatively) which is but for a moment works for them a more exceeding and
eternal weight of Glory, while we look not at the things which are seen, but at
the things which are not seen for the things which are seen are temporal, but
the things which are not seen, are Eternal. And the People and children of God
in this our day and Age, have not been, neither are only exercised on this wise
but as the Primitive Christians were with false Brethren and teachers, and
their corrupt Doctrine, which they endeavor both publicly and privately to
bring in, whose pernicious ways some have followed, by reason of whom the way
of truth has been evil spoken of, but their Judgment does not linger, neither
does their damnation slumber. And let none think these things strange for this
day is that fulfilled among us which the Apostles writ, to the Primitive
believers, viz. Also of your own selves shall men arise speaking perverse
things to draw away disciples after them, therefore watch in the holy light for
what is reproveable is first made manifest thereby, and as every one keeps
thereto and walks therein, they will not by the feigned words of any, be made
merchandise of, but will know, feel and witness to their comfortable fellowship
with God and one another, which is the very thing this evil Spirit that has
entered the corrupt teachers that from our selves have risen (who bring upon
themselves swift destruction) seeks with feigned pretense to the light and
Spirit of God, to draw people from t. The which in some measure the following
lines will show, and in love are writ for that end. And to detect the false
Doctrine of one of these corrupt teachers, that in our age has risen, who may
be truly said to be as A well without water, and a cloud without rain, carried
with every tempest, to whom the mist of darkness I reserved forever. Except
unfeigned repentance is known.

Here follows A Copy of a Letter sent to N. C. in which the following answer
was enclosed.

Nathaniel Coleman.
THe enclosed is sent thee to peruse, that thou may see the confusion and
false Doctrine thou have published in thy Epistle, etc. in public print under
the pretense of a motion from God, and it is my intent to publish the Enclosed,
except thou will condemn the false Doctrins in thy said Epistle, and the Spirit
by which thou was led to write and publish them as publicly as they are made,
and call the said Epistles in. I have as yet omitted in the enclosed one thing
(among the rest) which is in p. 3 where there speaking of the Lord gathering
his people from off all the barren mountains and desolate bills of Imaginations
(thou in Parenthesis says (wherein they have been acting for him) now herein
is manifest a great error and notorious false Doctrine, such that the blind
Priest of the nation can scarce excced in blindness, darkness, and Ignorance.
And Nathaniel, if in any place I have either mistook, misquoted, or
misrepresented thy words otherwise then the sense will bear, I desire thee to
manifest it, though I can and do truly say I knew not in the least tittle that
I have so done, and let me have an answer from thee in 1 or 2 Weeks time,
otherwise I intend to publish it as aforesaid, and if I hear not from thee I
may add the aforesaid false Doctrine to the rest, with some things more, for
ought I at present know; so with the words of the Spirit unto the Church of
Laodicea I at present may conclude, desiring thee to make a right application
thereof, i.e. because thou say I am rich and increased with goods, and have
need of nothing, and know not that thou art wretched and miserable, and poor,
and blind, and naked, I council thee to buy of me, gold tried in the fire, that
thou may be rich, and white raiment that thou may be clothed, and that the
shame of thy nakedness, do not appear, and anoint thy eyes with eye Salve that
thou may sec. Rev. 3.17.18.

Thy Friend that truly wishes thee godly Sorrow, and unfeigned repentancce
unto the acknowledgment and amendment of thy faults. I. Field.


N. C. I have seen and perused an Epistle unto which thy name is subscribed,
which thou begins with this prescription, viz. To be read in the Assemblies of
Gods People. Note, but who N. C. do thou account so, and by what name or
denomination, are they distinguished from others.
This is thy order and prescription, yet in Postscript p. 6. thou say, they
that sow to the orders of other men's prescribing shall reap a crop of
corruption: And what Nathaniel must they reap that sow to thy orders and
prescription, must not they reap a crop of corruption? I am satisfied if they
sow to that Spirit that thou wast led and acted by, wilfully to oppose Gods
heavenly power in G. F. (who thou confessest God has raised up to bean Elder,
etc.) See thy own condemnation -- p.
They, yea all they, if repent not, will certainly reap a crop of corruption,
or if they Sow to thy orders or prescriptions that proceed from that Spirit
that lead thee to oppose Gods heavenly power, though thou may thou art moved
of God, etc.) they will reap (...) better; for Rabshekah pretended, (...)
Impudently, falsely and Impiously said, the Lord said unto me, Go up.. But now
to thy Epistle which thou begins, viz. To all the flock of God that are
scattered abroad, I am moved of the Lord God to write, to warn them in his
name. Here thou speaks as great words, and pretends unto as high a Commission
as Rabshckah did: And in this first p. thou do not only warn but counsel
also, in the fear of the Lord God (as thou say) to follow his requirings in
every one, that (say thou) by it you may be taught to do his will in all
things you undertake, etc. For (say thou) ye are the Garden of God, and his
Husbandry, the sheep of his fold, and flock of his Pasture, which he is
feeding, with the bread of knowledge, etc. -- therefore follow yea him in all
his requirings, etc. -- that you may have right unto the tree of Life, which is
in the midst of the Garden of God. And may enter through the Gates into the
City of our God, etc. and in p. 3. thou say Sion is the City of their
Solemnity where Salvation is known for walls and bulworks, etc. -- and yet in
p. 4. Thou exhorts or councels, the flock of God (to whom thou pretends a
motion from God to write) to believe in the light, that they may be the
Children of it; come Not. C Let Us expostulate this matter, are them that are
the Children of God, his Husbandry, the sheep of his fold and flock of his
Pasture, etc. Still in the unbelief, and darkness? (which is the way of the
wicked) that thou exhorts them, to believe in the light, that they May be the
Children of it. What Doctrine is here? (as applied unto the flock of God and
Citizens of Sion) the City of the Saints Solemnity where salvation is known
for walls and Bulworks; and yet these thou say thou art moved of God to warn
and council, etc. And exhorts them to believe in the light, that they may be
the Children of it; what Not. Are the flock and Garden of God Citizens of Sion,
who have salvation for walls and Bullworks, Children of darkness? that thou
pretends a motion from God to exhort them to believe in the light that they may
be the Children of it? [mark] the words may be clearly Imply they are not yet,
tho in contradiction hereunto thou in the same page says, God has called them
out of darkness into his marbelous light, and also tells them of returning unto
Sion, with the redeemed, with Songs and everlasting Joy upon their heads, and
here say thou sorrow and mourning flees away, which was in the night when
We were in darkness; then it seems these are in the light, and their Sorrow
and mourning which was in the night is fled away, and thoy returning unto Sion,
with Songs of everlasting Joy upon their heads, and are partakers of Gods
Salvation, and children of the light, yea such, that do already, not only
believe in Christ the light, but also walk in it (as all the Nations of them
that are saved shall) and so are the Children of it; yet after all this thou
exhorts them (who thou tellest are come to the high States aforesaid to believe
in the light that they may be the Children of it; Oh what confusion is here.
But to proceed thou say to the flock of Gods Pasture, etc. that God is
feeding them with the bread of knowledge, prithee N. C. let us have And not out
of Will Regers book, for that will not pass with the Children of light.
Scripture to prove this new doctrine by, that God is feeding his flock (or
People) with the bread of knowledge, Christ who is the shepherd of his flock,
says, I am the bread of life; he that comes unto me, shall never hunger, and
he that believes me shall never thirst. Also Gods command unto Adam was, that
he should not cat of the tree of knowledge, therefore let us have express
Scripture as F. Bugg says, to prove that God is feeding his People with the
bread of knowledge, etc. Again thou go on as aforesaid, and exhorts the
People, whom thou say are Gods flock and Garden to follow him, etc. that they
may have right, to the tree of life, which is in the midst of the Garden of God
etc. What Not. are not they that are the flock of his Pasture entered through
the gates into the City of our God, and yet p. 3. thou say Sion is the City
of our solemnity, where Salvation is known for walls, etc. then furely they are
in it that truly so know it. And further, if Gods People are his Garden, and
the tree of life be in the midst of the Garden, certainly they have a right
thereto that have gotten within the gates. Oh Not. art not thou a weak man to
meddle with such things, which it appears thou do not understand, and is it
not past doubt? yea surely it is, that thou did not wait low in the counsel
of the Lord God for wisdom, when thou writ this Epistle and Postscript. And
therefore is it, so confused, and void of true wisdom, but without all doubt,
thou wast in the same Spirit thou was led by to oppose Gods heavenly power in
G. F. when he was advising Friends to have women's meetings (as thou have
confessed) And in that Spirit have thou writ this Epistle and Postscript. And
therefore I do advise thee to do as thou say, thou then did, viz. confess
thy Errors (call in thy Epistle) and truly humble thy self before the Lord and
seek him with tears, for certainly thou have now as great reason, as then thou
had, least as thou say, the lord cut thee off in his fury, for there is
none can deliver out of his hand. And if thy doctrine in the 3. p. be true, sure
thy state is bad, for there speaking of the fear of God, and hell fire, (thou
adds) where the worm never dies, nor the fire of Gods Indignation, never goes
out, but remains for ever upon the minds of them that disobey the truth, which
is the Earnest of their everlasting misery, that is their portion for ever.
What no place for repentance, nor no other provision if any should be prevailed
upon, to disobey the truth, through the subtle workings of him that lies in
wait to deceive, and for want of watching in, and keeping to the light, is
there no way for their Restoration, must the fire of Gods Indignation remain
for ever upon their minds, must that be ^^^ earnest and portion for ever, will
not patient submitting unto his Righteous Judgments and correcting hand obtain
no relief from him who delights in mercy, neither that Faith that he is the
Author of, by which not only the mouths of Lions, has been stopped, but the
violence of fire quenched, procure no relief? What Scripture have thou to prove
this new Doctrine by? Oh N. C. Consider of thy unscriptural and unsound Doctrine
which thou have delivered under pretense of a motion from God, etc. And repent
for thy taking his name in vain, and no more entitle, (the Immaginations of thy
heart and brain) with or to the motion or Counsel of God, neither say, he
requires these things at thy hands, nor lays them upon thee, though in p. 2.
thou say. These things lay upon me from God etc. And thou writes thus. My
glory (says the Lord God will not I give unto another, but will put a hook
into the Nostrils of all that go from him. etc, into any Imaginations, etc. And
in the same page thou say as you act for him (i. e. God) you will reach Gods
witness in all Consciences. Now I do declare thy Epistle, and Doctrine therein
does not reach, (nor answer to Gods witness in my Conscience, nor in his
faithsul Peoples; But contrary wise, I testify that the witness (or Spirit of
the pure unchangeable God in me) I do find to raise a Testimony in my heart
against not only thy Epistle and Doctrine therein but the Spirit, by which thou
wast led to write it, not to be of God; but the same that in many Ages under
the pretense and mask of truth, and with some of the words of it would draw
People from the Truth and True foundation Christ Jesus, and the order of his
Gospel of peace, life and Salvation, into ranting Airy notions, vain
Imaginations and confusion. And consider how thou, (N. C.) have said that God
will put a hook into the Nostrils of any that go from him into any
Imaginations, etc. Oh N. C. that there might be (if it be the will of God) an
Eye opened in thee, and kept open by the power of the Lord whereby thou
might see what Imaginations thou have run into, and new Doctrines thou under
pretense of a motion from God (which greatly aggravates thy crime) has brought
forth and published to the world, some of which I have in brief hinted at, and
may give thee a hint of more. 2. Thou say speaking to thy dear friends and
Brethren, This is to put you in mind, how graciously God has dealt, and is
dealing with his People, etc. -- In leading them out of Egypts land, etc. --
That in this our Journey none may be drawn out, from the Guideance of God's
good Spirit within them, to join to any form of likeness or appearance though
never so beautiful but as you are led by the Pillar of the Cloud by day, and
the Pillar of fire by night, which shines in all your hearts and Consciences,
etc. Come Not. Let me have Scripture to prove, that that Pillar of the Cloud by
day, and that Pillar of fire by night (which went before old Israel) shines in
all Gods peoples hearts and Consciences, in this day of the Lords inward and
spiritual appearance, in the hearts and Consciences of his People, by his
divine light, holy Spirit and grace in his new Covenant; for, was not that day
and night there spoken of outward; and that Pillar, and cloud which old Israel
saw visible unto the outward eye: but if thou meanest that the light or Spirit
of Christ, is that Pillar of Clond by Day, and Pillnr of fire by night, which
shines in all his Peoples hearts; let us have a Scripture to prove this new
Doctrine. Again, in postscript, p. 6. thou speaking of the knowledge of God,
says, for want of that the People perished in all generations. -- Now I will
grant that this complaint, was made by the Lord through his Prophet i.e. my
People are destroyed for lack of knowledge; but it was under that dispensation,
wherein the Priests lips should keep the Peoples knowledge, and when the Priests
had rejected knowledge and forgot the law of God; see Hos. 4.6, etc. But I
desire thee to consider whether many in our day and generation, have and do not
perish, not for want of knowledge, but for want of obedience to what they did
know; for does not God by his divine light, Spirit and grace, which he
enlightens all with, which he pours upon all, and appears to all, ( and not by
that Pillar old Israel followed, and beheld with their visible eyes) so far
shine into all men's hearts as to show them what is good, and what he requires
at their hands? And if so (as I suppose thou will not deny) what think thou
if these men (that have this knowledge given them of God, and yet for want of
doing good and what the Lord requires at their hands) should perish will it be
for want of knowledge, or want of obedience? Oh! N. C. Consider whilst thou have
time, what god moved thee to publish this Doctrine; surely, it was the god of
this world, the Prince of the power of the Air, the Spirit that works in the
hearts of the Children of disobedience, that moved led and guided thee to write
these Airy imaginations and fals^ Doctrines, and deludedly to father them upon
God, and not the Spirit of the pure God, therefore repent of them call them in,
and condemn that Spirit now (as formerly) and that Spirit that has led thee to
write and publish them, lest thy own Sentence, p. 6. of perishing from the
knowledge of God become thy portion, for thou certainly have gone into the
practice or performance of that which by the guidance of his Spirit thou wast
not led into, in publishing these unsound or false Doctrines in the name of
God, etc. And I further observe in thy 6. p. thou say, they that sow to the
flesh, or orders of other men's prescribing, shall certainly reap a crop of
Corruption. This thou writes unto the flock of God. And what meanest thou by
other men's prescribing? do mean; they may sow to the flesh, or orders of
their own, or own men's prescribing, and not to other men's? explain this also
let us know what those men's orders are that some among the flock of God, which
(as thou say,) have turned from the truth and way of the Lord, and committed
abomination in following.

Come let us have a Catalogue of these men's orders, and let us know whether any
of the flock of God gave them forth, for here has been a great cry and noise
against orders, (Comely orders) modes, forms, ceremonies, times of prayer,
without distinction, outward gatherings, Church Fellowship, external
membership, witness a book called, bright shining light, by Phil. Ang. before
thine came public by loose ranting Spirits, such who dwell in the land of
darkness, that is without any order, Job. 10.22. And I would have thee examine
whether thou art an inhabitant in that land, and under the rule and government
of him that is Prince of darkness; or under Christ's government of the increase
of whose government and peace the Prophet said, There shall be no end, upon the
throne of David, and upon his kingdom, to order it, and to establish it, with
judgment, and with justice from henceforth, even for ever. The zeal of the Lord
of Hosts will perform this. And the Apostle said, God was the God of order, and
not of confusion in all the Churches of the Saints. And he gave order to the
Churches, see, Cor. 16.1. he also rejoiced in their order that truth had led
them into) saying to the Saints at Coloss, for though I be absent in the flesh,
yet I am with you in the spirit joying, and beholding your order, and
stedfastness of your faith in Christ. Also in 1. Cor. 11. and last he tells the
Believers, after he had reprehended them for several disorders, that the rest
will I set in order when I come, by which it appears that Paul that man of God
was for order, and left Titus in Crete to set in order the things that were
wanting among the believers. And what do think, N. C. that those things, that
were set in order amongst the believers by this man of God, was a seed of
Corruption, sown by him, and a crop of corruption reaped by them? if thou so
believe thou art to be pitied for thy ignorance. And I query whether thou
believe, by the same Spirit of God some among the Children of light in our
Age, have not been made instrumental to set in order some things, that were
wanting among the believers in the light of Christ within; yea or nay. And come
N C. let me, and all whose hands thy Epistle has come to, know, what orders
these are, that have proved so satal as to the flock of God, and who they are
that have followed them as aforesaid, also who made these orders, that so
knowing both, the makers and the orders, we may be capable to judge; for to cry
against Orders, Orders, Orders, and not tell what Orders is, but like men's
beating the Air, strikeing at their shaddows, or quarelling with their own
imaginations, or like the clamorous woman, that pulls down her house with her
hands. So having hinted at some of thy new Doctrines, etc. and given thee the
judgment of Truth, both upon thy Epistle and Postscript, (and the spirit thou
writ them in) I shall at present conclude, and in plainness tell thee, that
they surely were thy true friends, in the judgment of Truth, that stopped thy
Epistle from coming out sooner, though thou defirest the Lord may not lay it to
their charge, for it is come soon enough, to manifest, thy weakness if not
wickedness (to deliver such things in the name of the Lord, and expose them in
public, and direct them to the flock of God, and to be read in the Assemblies
of Gods People;) but blessed be God; who has given that good understanding
unto his People, that live in his holy fear, that they try Spirits and not
receive, nor have unity with, nor suffer (except imposed upon,) the reading of
those things in their Meetings, that proceed not from that Spirit and power, in
which their unity and fellowship stands, tho to their grief and exercise they
too often have (in their Meetings) the forced Testimonies or speeches of some
such as N. C. imposed upon them that they have not unity with, who are unruly
and vain talkers, whose mouths, I believe, the Lord in his due time will stop.

I am thy Friend that have showed, or endeavourjd to show thee thy mistake and
errors, that thou may not go on in the fault which thou art overtaken in, in
falsely pre^ending a motion from God; therefore hear what John Pennyman says in
his book of Letters Printed in, 1680. viz. That it is the greatest blasphemy or
forgery under heaven, to say things in the name of the Lord, or that they are
moved of the Lord, to speak or do, and are not. Tho he can, like thee, cry
against order and forms, yea the very form of sound words (which the Apostle
exhorted to) (i. e) thee and thou in the aforsaid book in his letter to G. F.
says, Away with your set form of words, of thee and thou; tho (to manifest that
he allows himself in that he condemns in others) he uses them in the said
Letter to G. F. about 20. times. This I have hinted at, to show the confusion
of him that has cried against orders, as T. Crisp, thee, and many others have,
as also that thou might read his sentence against such as speak things in
the name of the Lord and as moved by him and are not,

John Field. Jun.

POSTSCRIPT.
THere is one passage or two more, that I may take a little notice of as p. 2.
N. C. faith, The kingdom of God comes not in outward observations, but is felt
and known within, therefore all gather in from that, that would draw out the
mind from God, to observe days, or times, or months, or years, concerning any
matter or business, but as you are inwardly drawn or required by the Truth in
your own particulars.

What then may the flock and People of God, (to whom thou say thou art moved
of God to write) have their minds by the Truth in their own particulars,
inwardly drawn from God to observe Days, Times, Months, and years, etc. What
strange, confused, Babylonish ranting Doctrine is here delivered (or aserted)
that the Truth (of which there is no lie, and and in which here is no
contradiction) may draw God's People's minds of from him who is the God of
Truth. Oh the Lord if it be his will, open thy eyes that thou may see thy
gross error, and give thee a heart to repent of the same before it is too late.
And now from hence also observe, he counsels or warns the flock of God all
togather in from that that would draw out the mind from God, to observe ^^^s,
or times, or months, or years, concerning any matter oribusiness; but as you
are inwardly drawn or required by the Truth, in your own particulars, by which
he plainly grants, that the flock of God may be drawn or required by the truth
in their own particulars, to observe days, or times, or months, or years. Now
let N. C. show what those days, times, months, and years are, that he would not
have them observe; also what days, times, months, and years, they may be
required by the Truth in their own particulars to observe, for his Brother F.
Bugg in his ungodly Book, makes a great cry, and calling for express scripture
for meeting once amonth, at the tenth hour of the day, etc. Again in p. 4.
speaking to thy dear Friends and Brethren, etc. That God (say thou) has
visited with a high hand, etc. that in this your Journey, none may be drawn out
from the guidance of Gods good Spirit within them, to join to any form or
likeness, or appearance. although never so beautiful, but as you are led by the
Pillar of the Cloud by day, and the Pillar of fire by night -- which guides
the footsteps of the flock of his Companions out of all transgression and
Rebellion, etc. Come let us examine this new Doctrine and see whether this man,
while he would seem to be knowing and wise, is not become a fool and a novice,
thus to preach up the Pillar of the Cloud, etc. To lead out of all
transgression, (which is the work of Christ in this Gospel day, And pretend a
motion from God, to warn and counsel his flock that none be drawn out from the
guidance of God's good Spirit within them, to join to any form or likeness or
appearance. Oh! Not. I think thou have too much followed this counsel of not
joining unto any form, that thou have not kept the form of some words which the
Apostle (that was truly moved of God) exhorted to, but thou pre tends a motion
from God to warn and council Gods flock not to join to any form, which though
the Apostle exhorted to turn from them that had the form of Godliness, and not
the power, yet I never read he exhorted the saints or flock of God not to join
to any form, but contrary wise he thanked (that the Romans) had obeyed from the
heart that form of Doctrine delivered unto them; see Romans 6.17. And observe
after thou have exhorted or councel'd the flock of God not to be drawn from the
guidance of God's good Spirit within them, to join to any form likeness or
appearance, etc. thou comes with a but as you are led by the Pillar of fire by
night, and the Pillar of a cloud by day. What then may they by this Pillar be
drawn from the guidance of Gods good spirit within them into a form likeness
and appearance; pray was not the Pillar of fire an appearance? and does
appearance draw into appearance? What new strange confused Doctrine is here, to
drop from the pen of one moved of God to warn and counsel his flock, (as he
says) but the confusion thereof shows it is not of God, for he is not the
Author of confusion. And thou seems to make the Spirit of God, and the Pillar
of fire by night, etc. two different things where thou counsels or exhorts,
saying that none may be drawn out from the Guidance of Gods good Spirit with in
them, to join to any form, likeness or appearance; [mark] but as you are led by
the Pillar of a Cloud by day, and the Pillar of fire by night. Not. Do thou
believe that this Pillar of fire by night does or will lead from the Spirit of
God within, into forms, likeness and appearances; if thou so believe, how
dare thou so commend this to the flock of God for a leader and guide is not
this like preaching another Gospel? then that which the Apostles preached, for
if it lead from the Spirit of God within into forms, etc. sure those forms
likenesses or appearances cannot be good: but why do thou direct or council
the precious Sons (or Citizens) of Sion, who are comparable to fine God, to
follow the Pillar of fire by night, for the Apostle Paul said unto the Saints
in light. Yea are all Children of the light, and of the day; ye are not of the
night nor of darkness. And John said unto such, the darkness is past, and the
true light now shines, and were not the Saint in light translated out of the
kingdom of darkness, into the kingdom of his dear Son; and we do not read of a
Pillar of fire by night in this Kingdom: for out of Sion the perfection of
beauty God does shine; and Christ reigns, in new Jerusalem where there is no
night, but the glory of God did lighten it, and the lamb is the light thereof,
and the gates stand open by day, and there is no night; see Rev. 21.23.24.
Therefore consider Not. whether herein, thou have not darkened counsel by
uttering words without divine knowledge, (tho thou pretends thou wast moved of
God to counsel his flock,) and also say, God is feeding his People with the
bread of knowledge. But if thee means by this Pillar of fire, etc. The Spirit
of God or light of Christ, (because thou say, it shines in all their hearts,
etc. and guides out af all transgression,) then thy doctrine is thus. That the
flock of God must not be drawn from the guidance of God's good Spirit within,
etc. But as they are led by his good Spirit within (or the light that shines in
all their Consciences) what is this but Ranterism, or Blasphemy, to render the
Spirit to contradict the Spirit. And yet this is (the more the pity) the
absurdity confusion and Ranterism, that Spirit that has entered and beguiled
N. C. (and too to many) leads into, tho they pretend unto and highly preach up
in words, the light and Spirit of God, yet they are as certainly (in a great
measure) gone out of the unity and fellowship thereof, and from the guidance of
the same, as them that run and God never sent them, and in the Spirit they are
now in, can no more profit the People, then those in that day did. The Lord God
Almighty, who has opened the ear in his People that can truly try words as the
pallat tastes meat, keep it open and grant, that they may never lend an ear
unto any but the true Shepherds voice, that the sheep of his fold, and flock of
his Pasture them may be, and know Jesus to put them forth (of all that is
contrary unto his mind and Testimony) and give unto them Eternal life, that in
life and peace, and the word of God's patience, they may possess their souls,
and not regard them that may seem to be somewhat; but add nothing, unto the
refreshing of them that are truly born of God. And such like, there were in the
Apostles days, who were vain talkers and puffed up in their minds, concerning
whom the Apostle said, he would not know the Speech of them but the power; but
some that cannot truly discern between things that differ, may be liable, if
they keep not their minds unto the Lord, and live in his fear) to be beguiled
by the feigned words, and fine speeches of them that are out of the unity and
life of Truth, and in a Spirit that would cause the offense of the cross to
cease, and give liberty under the profession of the truth, to pay Tithes, Marry
by a Priest, say you to a single person, cry against forms, yet run into and
plead for swearing and the form thereof, as one of T. Crisps's. company lately
has, by which it is clearly manifest what Spirit they are guided by, brings
forth and leads into, and yet these will plead for the Christian Quaker, and
falsely pretend unto the Truth as it was in the beginning.

I. F.

The Copy of N. C's. Condemnation.
I N. C. The last summer hearing that George Fox through diverse Countys had
encouraged the setting up of Women's Meetings, and that he intended to come into
Wiltshire, and not having a clear understanding in the work of Restoration in
which Women are meet helps to the men, did secretly desire of the Lord that he
would show me whether the thing was well pleasing to him, but I not waiting low
in the Counsel of the Lord God for wisdom to do his will, being at a Meeting at
Shattenford where George Fox was intending to advise the setting up a
Womans-Meeting in this County; being sent for before the Meeting, did with some
other Friends, reason with G. F. and opposed him very much, showing, as I
thought, by the Scripture that the man was the lord, and the woman was to be
subject to him, but he showed that in Christ, the male and female are all one,
and that they are meet helps, in the Restoration. After the Meeting, many
Friends being called together, we did openly oppose him, although he often warned
me to take heed, yet I wilfully oppose him until the fire of the Lord did burn
within me, and I saw the Angel of the Lord, with his sword drawn in his hand,
ready to cut me off. At which I was afraid, and durst not depart before I did
confess my error before Friends, because I had opposed God's heavenly power,
in him who raised him up, to be an Elder amongst us, for which transgression, I
did truly humble my self before the Lord, and sought him with tears, whose
power reached unto me, which caused me to cry out in secret, Lord, what is man
that thou should be mindful of him; or the son of man, that thou should
thus visit him inthy love, and in tender mercy. Now Friends the Lord having
restored me again unto his truth, in which I feel a daily increase of peace,
and life from him, for which I do from the bottom of my heart render living
praises and thanksgiving to him, who is God over all, worthy to be feared and
magnified for ever.

This is writ as a warning to all friends, that they may not oppose the Lords
heavenly power, nor endeavor to stop his work which he is carrying on against
all opposers; lest the Lord cut you off in his sury; for there is none that can
deliver out of his hand

This is a true Copy, and has been proved by the original of his own hand
writing, and may serve to show that he is one of them men that are given to
change, and that proves the Apostle James saying true, that the double minded
man is unstable in all his ways, therefore let him take the good Counsel of the
said Apostle, 4 Cap. 8 9, 10, etc. Cleanse your hands ye sinners, and purify
your heart ye double minded, be afflicted and mourn, and weep; let your
laughter be turned into mourning, and your joy into heaviness: humble your
selves in the sight of the Lord, and he shall lift you up.

Thomas Crisp the Author of the sixth Part of Babel Builders, etc. Proved a
Babbler, and a foolish feeble Contender for the Book falsely styled, The
Christian Quaker.
How forcible are right words! but what does your arguing reprove?

Job 6.25. Surely the Serpent will bite without Enchantment, and a Babbler is no
better; the beginning of the words of his Mouth is foollishness: and the end of
his talk is mischievous madness,

Eccles. 10.11, 13.
IN his first Page, line 2. he speaks of my Rapsadoe, I suppose he means
Rapsody or Rhapsody (which is a fit name for his Babels) signifying a confused
Collection; and what else can any expect of a Babel-Builder but confusion. But
I find the man's offended because I said in my reply, unto his 5 Babel. p. 5. I
question whether all the paper I have writ will hold them all? viz. his lies,
Slanders, Nicknames, etc. To which T. C. Replied, It must be a great many to
stuff two Sheets and a half. Answer, a great many no doubt they are, (and them
that read and rightly understand thy Babels, may see it, but I had not when in
the 5 p. writ two Sheets and a half) therefore think not to excuse thy self for
writing untruths by falsely saying. It Is my fault, for it is he, viz. The Devil
that is out, of the truth, and in whom there is no truth, that leads thee, and
all them that write and speak untruths (or lies) so to do, of which my desire
is thou may heartily repent. But thou say in thy I p. Over and over I find
none (i. e.) Lies proved against me) which makes me think of the Proverb, (Who
is more blind then they that will not see) only I. F. says, I tell thee, or I
deny, or I affirm, and sometimes by queries are not, etc. Answer Thomas. w'ont
this serve for proofs? if not, why did not thou produce stronger against me
and Friends? for thou conceitedly say, I have proved, I say, I deny, above
twenty times in thy last Sheet, (as if thou thought to be heard for thy much
Babbling) and then foolishly quotes thy own confused Babels, etc. for thy
authority, see thy 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, pages, but if thy Say-so's be no proof,
as indeed it is not, then thy work is yet to do, thy proofs to make, and thy
labor in 6 Babels and all thy babbling in vain. But perhaps thou may answer
as in thy 5 Babel p. 13. But in case I had so said, it does not follow I must
so do. No Tho. Informers against Christian Preachers little regard what they
say. And though thou say, I have proved, etc. It does not follow thou have so
done, therefore hear what Solomon said, Answer a fool according to his folly,
lest he be wise in his own conceit. And that thy pretended proofs may be
manifest to be but mere thinkso's and sayso's take one sample of them as
follows, in the 13 p. of my reply unto thy 5 Babel, I quoted these words of
thine, viz. But one reason why I paid that so often montioned as Tithes, was as
a witness, that I was not taught my fear, by the precept of G. F. etc. Nor
receive his traditions for Doctrines, and that I had not sacrificed all my
faith, conscience and judgment to his orders, your Idol to Worship, that as too
many both small and great do. But as a Testimony against your imposition, etc.
Thus far T. C. to which I replied he takes no notice, that I called upon him
(and now do again) to prove any of the many both small and great, that so do,
to which in 6 Babel, 8 p. T. C. says, I. F. says of me, page. 13. He takes no
notice that I called upon him, to prove any of the many; but that is false, for
in, p. 11. I say thus, that he bid me prove any, etc. I say (says T. C.) I
think himself and R. R. have so done -- and these be too many. And then he
adds, now how dare thou affirm such an untruth as to say I take no notice, of
that? when as I particularly answer to both any and many. Thus far T. C. Answer
observe first, how T. C. proves that any of the many, etc. Do sarcafice all
their Faith, Conscience and judgment to G. F's orders, their Idol to worship?
Why how does he prove it? How thus he says (in 5 Babel. p. 11. and in his 6
Babel. p. 8.) I think himself, and R. R have so done. Pray mind his pre tended
proof is but a mere and base thinkso. 2. Let the Reader in truth Judge where
and in whom the falsity and untruth is that T. C. queries how J. F. dare
affirm. And 3. What validity his pretended proofs are of, (that he braggs so
much of.) And he seems by his saying how dare J F. etc. to make as if it were
some heinous crime, to say T. C. think'so is no proof, of his wicked false
lying and slanderous charge aforesaid against too many both small and great,
Sacraficing all their faith, Conscience and judgment to G. F's. orders (which
note, though greatly cried against, we could never get a Copy of those he
scoffinglycalls G.F's orders, tho we have often called for them) so by this his
false charge and thinkso he in his great folly and enmity does render me and R.
R. with an and cetera, void of all Faith Conscience and Judgment. And this I
have instanced as a sample of his proofs as aforesaid, of which he so often
conceitedly says I have proved, when indeed upon examination it appears but
such an one ( T. C. Words) as T. C's bare empty, mistaken thinkso; I might give
more instances, but this is enough. And as for his lying, Take this one proof
for brevity sake, to wit his inserting under his hand in public print, that G.
F. Will not admit, that any have the least measure of the Spirit, that submit
not unto his Laws, as he scornfully calls them; see the 10 page, and 4, Babel.
(this needs no comments) and I might spend so much time and paper to give a
Catalogue of thy lies, falsehoods, and flanders and nicknames, which are not a
few; but thou have not cleared thy self of them I have already charged upon
thee, notwithstanding thy pretenses, therefore let thy own wickedness correct
thee, for the day is come and coming in which thy folly is and shall be
manifest, etc. for in the light thou art seen to be of the number of them men
of corrupt minds, that resist the truth (who said the Apostles concerning the
Faith are reprobates. And now take some, (and but some) of the many names thou
call'stime and R. R. G. W. etc. which are as follows, and may serve to
manifest what Spirit thou art of; Mercinary Reformado, Itiss; --, Cheat,
Drudge, Arrogant Prater, proud Boaster, Inquisitor to the Bull and Mouth,
Inquisition Officer, Black-fryer-like fellow, like a lazy begging friar, false
accuser, wicked Liars, he (i. e.) J. F. May have an eye to an Apparitors or
Informers place, of the Synagogue of Satan, such that Paul fought with at
Ephesus, that abominable R. Richardson, Swinish belly, like vermin. And page
11, he has the term Pick pocket, again that abominable and arrogant G. W. For
that is the manner of some Billingsgate. And concerning me such is thy enmity,
that in 13. p. 5 Babel. thou say thou cannot defame me, but know he that
hides hatred with lying lips, and he that utters a slander, is a fool. And
if this was as true (as it is notoriously false) that I am so bad, as I cannot
be defamed, why did not thou make proof thereof, and show who I had wronged,
overreached, or cheated, for I called upon thee in my last or to show who I had
cheated, etc. As aforesaid, or ever had any thing of, directly or indirectly,
but what I came honestly by or labored for, and Not by begging or cheating,
Gifts, or Rewards. And I then proffered for every SUCH Farthing that thou
could (or can) prove, to give two. Alas! Thomas, tho thou may account
me poor or such an inconsiderable person as thou say, thou art almost
ashamed to take notice of, (and indeed might be quite ashamed so to be lie and
abuse me as thou have,) Yet I never, like thee, turned Informer against a
Preacher, and told where he inhabited, and spread this Information as thou
did (or cause to be done) the 14 of the 5 month, 1682. unto many People at
Bull and Mouth, etc. Therefore Oh! Tho. Repent (if thou can find a place) of
thy wickedness, lies, slanders, and hard speeches against the Servants of the
Lord, leave of being an Informer, and remember that Judas who informed against
and betrayed his Master, tho he got thirty pieces of Silver thereby, yet he
hanged himself. And Solomon said true, A wicked doer gives heed to false lips,
and a liar to a naughty tongue, Pro 17.4. And Rich and proud Haman, who
Informed against poor Mordecai (who it is like was as inconsiderable in his eye
as I am in thine) was hanged on the same Gallows he prepared for poor Mordecai,
for whosoever mocketh the poor reproacheth his maker, and he that is glad at
calamities, shall not be unpunished, Pro, 17, 5, And know the Lord is
fulfilling his saying by Isaiah the Prophet, 13. Cap. 11. I will punish the
world for their evil, and the wicked for their iniquity, and I will cause the
Artogancy of the proud to cease, and I will lay low the haughtiness of the
terrible. Therefore I say again, repent (if thou can find a place) of all
thy lies, slanders, defamations, and thy envious foolish, and Impertinent
scribbling, against the Lord and his faithful People, for the Lord will utterly
destroy the tongue of the Egyptian Sea, and every tongue that rises up in
judgment against him (in his faithful People) will he condemn, for the
destruction of the transgressors and of the sinners shall be together, and they
that forsake the Lord shall be consumed. And no Weapon formed against his
heritage and servants shall prosper, for the Lord has now exalted, and is more
and more exaltting him (in his People) that shall judge with righteousness,
reprove with equity, and with the breath of his lips shall slay the wicked,
whether Apostate, Innovator, Persecutor, or Informer, etc. And Thomas thou
seem to be offended at the sober and Christian Women-meetings and scoffingly
calls them G. F's. But as to them thy confusion and contradiction concerning
them is clearly manifested in Robert Sandilands Righteous judgments placed,
etc. Cap. 10. p. 100. to which I refer thee, and as for thee and the rest of
thy mind and companys talking against them in the words of good women, I thus
advise and counsel you. Talk no more so exceeding proudly, let not arrogance
proceed out of your mouth for the Lord is a God of knowledge, and by him
actions are weighed. And of thee, Oh Thomas, it may be said thou art weighed in
a balance, and found wanting of true Charity and Christianity, notwithstanding
thy great pretenses thereto. I have spent more time and paper then I intended
to have done, in answer to thy envious, foolish, impertinent, Babels or babbles
and with the words of the wiseman shall conclude; Be not a witness against thy
Neighbor without cause. And deceive not with thy lips, for there shall be no
reward to the Evilman, and the candle of the wicked shall be put out, for their
hearts studieth destruction, and their lips talk of michief. Prove. 24.2

J.F.

IN the 6 part of T. C's. Babels, I take notice of that wherein I am notably
noted, his two transcendent Epitheres to me [abominable, learn'd] By the rule
of proportion of words ending in -- able, taking [abominable] in an active
signification; as [penetrable] able to pierce, as well as to be pierced. So
first, by the way I am able to pierce through his abominably learned Rapsadoe
of lies, as having 4 errors in 8 Letters, which as a strong word he sets as a
Baricado in the front, the first save one of his strong lines, tripling it in
his first page; showing his emulation or envy to others learning; and his
aspiring to his Masters, Rogers and Bugg's learning. The learned Bishop
Hooper's learned translators, (misrendring his first word) and the learned
vindicators of the controverted point. Deuteronomy. 12.1.
De Christiana liberate, wherein they show themselves to be so unlearned. And
also by the grace of God, I am made able to abominate Idols, their monuments
and maintenance, which he accounts as an abomination in me as accounting Tithes
the Popes Yoke. J Sell. den. History of Tithes.
Though Alchuin our Countryman the learned founder of Paris University,
Schoolmaster to the Emperor Charles the great, the great advancer of the Pope,
and the maker of the first Law for his Tithes, dissuaded the Emperor from
laying the Yoke of Tithes on the Saxons. J. Seldom History of Tithes; there he
may read them called a Yoke. So having answered a fool according to his folly
to low his conceit; I need not trouble the Reader any further with it

Richard Richardson.

THE END.

