A Christian-Testimony Born by some of the PEOPLE of GOD In (...) QUAKERS IN
LONDON: (...) (...) their Patient suffering the Taking Away of their Goods for
Non-Payment of Tithes to the Parish Priests.

(...) Apostle says, I have coveted no man's Silver, Gold or Apparel: Ye your
selves know, that these Hands have ^^^inistred to my ^^^essities, and to them
that were with (...), Acts 20.3^.34. (...), What is my Reward then? verily that
when I Preach the Gospel, I may make the Gospel of Christ Without (...), that I
abuse not my Power in the Gospel; for though I be free from all men, yet have I
made my self ^ervant to all, that I might gain the more, 1 Cor. 9.18, 19.
LONDON, Printed by Andrew Soul, 1681/2.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER
Friendly Reader;
THE following matter being an Account of the distraining and taking away of
the Goods of some of us, the People called Quakers in the City of London,
because we refused to pay unto the Parish Priests Tithes or certain Sums of
money, in Law called Tithes; We, the said People, shall in Christian Tenderness
and Plainness render some Christian Reasons why we cannot pay or give Tithes to
the Parish Priests or Ministers.

First, We are not Unbelieving Jews, but Real Christians, therefore we cannot
give or pay them Tithes. God commanded Tithes to be paid under the Dispensation
of the Law, which came by Moses, and those Tithes were ordained for the Relief
of the Widows, Fatherless and Strangers, as well as for the Priests. This
command for paying and receiving Tithes, as aforesaid, continued in force
amongst the Jews, till our Lord Jesus Christ came in the Flesh, and had offered
himself up through the Eternal Spirit; who by his one Offering put an End to
the Priesthood of Aaron and Levi, together with their Temple and Tithes, and
all the rest of the Shadowy Offerings and Services: And as the Apostle said,
God disannulled this Commandment for the Weakness and Unprofitableness thereof;
for the Law made nothing Perfect, etc. For such an High Priest becomes us, who
is Holy, Harmless, separate from Sinners, etc. see Heb. 7.18, 19, 26. And
again, The Priesthood being changed, there is made of necessity a change of the
Law, Verse. 12. So Christ by his One Offering has Ended this Dispensation of
Tything above Sixteen Hundred Years since. But when this Command was in Force,
it was only to the Natural Jews, and therefore no Concern of ours, who are by
Nature Gentiles.

Secondly, Christ, who ended this Jewish Dispensation of Tything, did not set
up Tithes again in the Gospel Dispensation, either among Jews or Gentiles, for
the Maintenance of his Ministers, (nor for any other use) but contrary-wise
commanded his Ministers, saying, Freely ye have received, Freely give, etc. and
whosoever shall not hear you, nor receive your Words, when you depart out of
that House or City, shake off the Dust of your Feet, Mat. 10.7, 14. Again, But
into whatsoever City ye enter, and they receive you, eat such things as are set
before you, etc. But into whatsoever City you enter, and they receive you not,
go your ways out into the Streets of the same, and say, Even the very Dust of
your City, which cleaves to us, we do wipe off against you, Luke 10.8, 10, 11.
Thus it plainly appears, that Christ's Command was and is, to preach or
minister Freely, as they then had, and such now have, received Freely; and
those who are truly his Ministers, do keep this his Command; and such have
Power in Christ to eat such as is set before them, by those who do receive
them; but not to take Tithes or Sums of Money, for preaching, from those who do
not receive, believe nor own their Testimony, nor Sue them at Law, to take away
or Spoil their Goods, because they refuse to pay them. This Practice of the
aforesaid Priests is contrary to both Law and Gospel. For when the Jews broke
the Law of God, in not bringing Tithes into his Storehouse, we do not read,
nor believe, that God did empower Magistrates to give Warrants to the Priests,
under the Law, to distrain or take away their Goods for the same, nor to take
Double or Treble the Value of the Tithes then Due; nor to Imprison and Oppress
the Bodies of such Offenders; neither was it then said, that such Offenders did
Rob the Priests, but that they Robbed God; neither were the Priests or
Magistrates to punish them for this Robbery; but the Power of punishing of
these, the great God reserved in himself, and he Blasted or Cursed the Fruits
of the Earth, as a Punishment for their Rebellion, etc. see Mal. 3. Deuteronomy.
28.38, 39, 40.

Objection; Some perhaps may object from the Apostles words, on the behalf of
the aforesaid Priests of London, and say, Who goes a Warfare any time at his
own Charge? Who planteth a Vineyard, and eats not of the Fruit thereof? Who
feeds a Flock, and eats not of the Milk of the Flock? If we sow unto you
Spiritual Things, is it a great matter if we shall reap of your Carnal Things?

Ans. What the Apostle says in this Case we own; but this is not the Case
betwixt us and the Priests aforesaid; for, First, Those Priests do not go to
War for us, but against us; therefore we ought not to bear the Charge of this
their Evil War.

Secondly, They have not planted us a Vineyard or Church unto God; but we being
planted of God, they have labored, and do labor to scatter us by their
Cruelties and Oppression, therefore they ought not to have a Reward from us,
for whom they do not work.

Thirdly, They do not feed us, who are the Flock of God; but on the contrary,
their Works against us have been, and are, to seek to weaken, starve and
scatter us from tht Fold of our great Shepherd Christ Jesus: But Glory to God,
through him, he keeps us, who is stronger then them all, by whom we are
gathered, perserved, fed and brought to Peace and Rest in him

Fourthly, These Priests have not sown, nor do sow unto us Spiritual Things,
but on the contrary; the Fruits of the Flesh, which is Covetousness, etc. they
have sown in a plentious manner, to our great Wrong and Injury; therefore we
cannot own them as Ministers of Christ, nor consent to give our Substance to
maintain them as such; but we have true Love to them, and all men, and we could
feed them as our Enemies, if we knew they had need thereof, though we cannot
feed them as the Ministers of Christ, we not believing them to be such; and
that which the more confirms us in our Belief, that they are not such, is,
their being found in direct Opposition to the Command of Christ, who says,
Freely ye have Received, Freely Give; and contrary to the Doctrine and Example
of the Ministers of Christ, both in their Maintenance and Conversation.

Again, the Apostle Peter writ unto the Elders of the Church of Christ, saying,
The Elders which are among you, I exhort, who am also an Elder, and Witness of
the Suffering of Christ, and also a Partaker of the Glory that shall be
revealed; Feed the Flock of God, which is among you, taking the Oversight
thereof, not by Constraint, but Willingly; Not for filthy Lucre, but of a Ready
Mind; Neither as being Lords over God's Heritage, but being Ensamples to the
Flock; see 1 Pet. 5.1, 2, 3.

First, Observe, the Apostle Peter, and the rest of the Elders of the Church of
Christ were made SUCH by Christ himself, who endued them with Power from on
High, for the great Work of the Ministry; and by the same means are all the
Elders of the Church of Christ made at this Day.

Secondly, The true Ministers and Elders of the Church of Christ do take the
Oversight thereof not by Constraint, but Willingly: God makes them willing to
preach Freely, according to Christ's Command; they do not take the oversight
of the Flock for filthy Lucre, but of a ready Mind. Note, The word Lucre
signifies Gain; and filthy Lucre is Gain ill gotten: Now that Gain that is
gotten in breaking the Command of Christ is not well, but ill gotten; and such
is that Gain of the Persons beforementioned, which is gotten as aforesaid.

Thirdly, The true Elders and Ministers of Christ neither were nor are, Lords
over God's Heritage, but good Ensamples to the Flock; and because the Persons
beforementioned do not abide in the Doctrine of Christ, neither follow the
Doctrine or Example of his holy Apostles and Elders in their Call, Ministry,
Maintenance and Conversation, therefore we cannot esteem them the true
Ministers and Elders set up by Christ; and therefore we cannot give them of our
outward Substance to uphold them as such. The Apostle Paul says, There were
many in his day, who taught that which they ought not for filthy Lucres sake;
see Tit. 1.11. And we have just cause to say there are many such in our day;
but the Lord is discovering them daily more and more, and he will bring these
their Evil Works to an End, in his appointed Season, which hastens on apace;
and in the mean time we are cheerfully given up to suffer whatever the Lord
permits our Adversaries to inflict upon us for the Exercise of our tender
Consciences to him.

These are some of the many Reasons that might be given, why we refuse, and
cannot for good Conscience Sake Pay Tithe; but as we have, so we must continue
bearing our Christian-Testimony (in the Spirit of Christ) against paying of
them, as being contrary to the Doctrine and Practice of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ, and his blessed Apostles.

An Account of Goods taken from the Peaceable People of God called QUAKERS, in
the New-buildings in the City of London, for Tithes, demanded by the Priests in
part of the Years 1680, and 81. by virtue of Warrants granted by Patient Ward,
then Mayor.
The 11th of the 11th Month, called January.
TAken from George Bradford, Glasier in Bush-Lane, in the Parish of Swithings
in London, for 16 s. demanded for two years Tithes for Richard Owen, Priest of
the said Parish, viz. a Pull-up-Jack, and three Pewter Dishes, the weight of
the Pewter, and the Names of the Constable and Collector not known.

Note, The said George Bradford being now summoned before the Mayor by the
aforesaid Priest, complained, that the last time he had distrained from him (
for but 1 l. 16 s. demanded) Goods to the value of Six or Seven Pound, and had
but 20 s. returned; which the Mayor was pleased to declare, Was contrary to
Law, and that he would not suffer it; which is judged might be the occasion of
their being (contrary to their wonted Practice) something Moderate now.

The 7th of the 5th Month, called July, 1681.
Taken from John Osgood of White-Heart Court in Lumbard-street, Linen Draper,
for 33 s. 4 d. demanded for Tithes for Dr Archer (so called) Priest of
Alhallows Lumbard-street, by the said Doctor's man, Sixty Else of Linen,
valued at 9 d. per Ell, and comes to 2 l. 5 s.

l. s. d. Returned 0 10 4 Detained 1 14 8 Demanded for Tithes 1 13 4 Taken no
more over than 0 01 4

The Priests Account to Richard Whitpaine, July 6. 1681.
Goods distrained of Richard Whitpaine, by virtue of my Lord Mayors Warrant,
for one Year and Quarters Tithes, due at Lady Day last past to Doctor Elkanas
Downs, Rector of the Parish of St. Leonard Eastcheap; and the said House is
rated at 1 l. 2 s. per annum, the whole Tithes amount to 1 l. 7 s. 6 d.

l. s. d. (viz.) Eighty Six Pound of Pewter at 7 d. per Pound 02 10 02 The
Doctor's Tithes is 01 07 06 The Charges 00 12 04 01 19 10 The Goods were
appraised at 02 10 02 The Overplus is 00 10 04

An account of what Pewter it was that was distrained from Richard Whitpaine,
viz. Eight large Pewter Dishes, four lesser, sixteen large Plates, and two
Basins, which if it were to be bought, would cost him about four Pounds.

Note, The 10 s. Overplus was flung into the House of the said Richard
Whitpaine, sealed up in a Paper, he having before then refused to receive it.

The 20th day of September, 1681.
Taken from John Beckley of the Liberty of Martins le Grand in London,
Perfumer, for 7 s. demanded for one Years Tithes, for Samuel Freeman Priest of
the Parish called Anne and Agnes, three Pewter Dishes, weight 9 l. 6 ouz. at 7
d. per Pound, is 5 s. 7 d. and five Brass Candlesticks valued at 5 s.

s. d. In all 10 7 Demanded 07 0 Taken more than demanded 03 7 And no Returns
made.

This Distress was made by Francis Brown, one of the Mayors Officers, and Henry
Wyett, Constable of the aforesaid Liberty.

Ditto Diem.
Taken from Richard Townsend of Martins le Grand, aforesaid, by the aforesaid
Officer and Constable, for 15 s. demanded for the aforesaid Priest, five large
Fishing-Rods, valued at 1 l. 5 s.

Demanded 0 15 0 Taken more than demanded 0 10 0 And no Returns made.

The 7th Month, 1681.
Taken from William Crouch of the Parish called Bennet Grace-Church, by John
Jesse of Ball-Alley in Lumbard-street, for 3 l. 18 s. demanded for one year and
half Tithes, for Henry Halsteed, Priest of the aforesaid Parish, and for a
pretended Arrears 11 s. 2 d. and Charges 7 s. 4 d. Goods to the value of 4 l.
14 s.

l. s. d. Demanded 3 18 0 Pretended Arrears 0 11 2 Charges. 0 07 0 4 16 2 So
that according to their pretended Dues, Arrears and Charges, they have taken
less then what they make it come to by 0 02 2

The Priests Bill to William Baker is as follows.
October 18. 1681.
Eight Muffs distrained for Ministers Tithes, and they were praised at one
Pound twelve Shillings, and sold for one Pound twelve Shillings.

l. s. d. Due for a Year and half Tithes, ending at Christmas, 1680. at 15 s.
per Year, comes to 1 02 6 For Affedavid 0 00 4 For a Summons 0 01 0 For
Distress 0 02 6 For the Warrant 0 03 0 For Portridge 0 00 6 Spent at Praising
and Distraining 0 02 0 Comes to 1 11 10 Returned 0 0 2

Taken by Thomas Hewit, Officer, for Priest Hodshis, which Goods were bought of
the Officer by a Neighbor, and returned to me again, and the Money he paid
stopped out of Money be owed to me, without any order, and wholly contrary to
my mind.

The 28th of the 8th Month, 1681.
Taken from John Tyso, Shoemaker, of the Parish called Anne and Agnes, for 2 l.
16 s. 10 d. demanded for three years and a quarter Tithes, for S. mu^l Freeman
Priest, by Francis Brown Officer, and a Constable that refused to tell his
Name, forty pair of men's Shoes, valued at 7 l.

Demanded 2 16 10 Returned eleaven pair of Shoes, valued at 1 14 10 Demanded
and Returned 4 11 8 Taken and detained more than demanded or returned 2 08 3

Here follows an Account of some Distresses that were omitted in the former
Impressions that were printed upon this account.
The 6th of the first Month, called March, 167^/^.
TAken from Willi^^ Phillips by virtue of a Warrant granted by James Edwards,
then Mayor, unto David Barton, called Roctor of the Parish called Margaret
New-Fishstreet, thirty six Gallons of Brandy, worth 3 s. 8 d. per Gallon, which
comes to 6 l. 12 s. for 3 l. 17 s. demanded for Tithes for the aforesaid
Priest, by John Jesse of Ball-Alley in Lumbard-street.

Their Account is as follows.
Thirty six Gallons of Brandy, appraised at 3 s. per Gallons, comes to 5 08 00
Tithes 3 17 00 Charges 0 17 11 In all 4 14 1^ No Returns.

Note, That there rests in their hands, according to their own account, 13 s. 2
^b. Besides the 1 l. 4 s. the Brandy was under praised at, which would make 1
l. 17 s. 2 ^b.

The 14th day of the same Month.
Taken from Richard Cripps of the aforesaid Parish, for the aforesaid Priest,
by Warrant from the aforesaid Mayor, and by the aforesaid John Jesse, for 3 l.
2 s. 3 d. demanded for Tithes, 50 couple of Fish, valued at 4 l. 16 s. 8 d.

l. s. d. Taken 4 16 08 Demanded for Tithes 3 02 03 For Charges 1 00 06 Demands
and Charges 4 02 09 No Returns. So that there rests in their hands 0 13 11

Notwithstanding, the Priest claims 16 s. 1 d. to be still due to him; by which
it may be concluded, that except he has above or near 20 s. more than his
Tithes and Charges come to (as in the foregoing case of the Brandy) he is not
contented. But its hoped, that this, with their other Practices, will tend to
the opening that Eye in our neighbor and fellow Citizens, by which they may
clearly see (notwithstanding their Pretenses of being Gospel Ministers) that
they are neither in the Spirit nor Practice of the primitive Ministers, which
took the Oversight of the Flock of God, Not by Constraint, but Willingly; not
for filthy Lucre, but of a Ready Mind; neither as being Lords over Gods
Heritage, but being Ensamples to the Flock.

The 12th of the 9th Month, 1679.
Taken from William Crouch of the Parish called Bennet Grace-Church, by virtue
of a Warrant granted by Robret Clayton, then Mayor, unto Henry Halsteed, Priest
of the aforesaid Parish, for one year and a half Tithes, reckoned at 3 l. 18 s
(by John Jesse of Ball-Alley in Lumbard-street) the Goods following.

A piece of Say that cost 1 18 6 But appraised by them at 1 05 0 In Ticking 61
yards at 14 d. per yard, comes to 3 11 2 Which makes at the lowest rate 4 16 2
Demanded for Tithes 3 18 0 Account for Charges 0 15 0 4 13 0 Taken more then
the Charges and Demands 0 03 2 And no Returns.

Yet did the Officer the next time make OATH, That there was 11 s. 2 d. still
due. But I desire, that God may give him a Heart to repent of this his Evil,
lest that Lake (which all Swearers, as well as Liars must have their part in)
which burns with Fire and Brimstone, which is the second Death, be his
Portion.

The 22d of the 4th Month, 1680.
Taken from William Baker, by Warrant from Robert Clayton, Mayor, by John Jesse
and Edmond Bowley, Clerk of the Parish, together with a Constable and a Porter,
for 2 l. 5 s. demanded for Dr Aston (so called) for twelve Quarters Tithes,
ending the 25th of the 1st Month, 1677. for which they seized from the
aforesaid William Baker 126 black Coney-Skins, which the the Appraisers valued
at 3 l. 3 s. A Note of the Charge as follows: To the Priest for Tithes 2 l.
05 s. 00 d. To Charge, Expense and Appraisment 0 14 10

Which Goods, after they had remained in the said Clerks ^^^ds above a year,
the said Dr Aston did deny the taking of them by his order, and ordered they
should be delivered back to ^e, which was accordingly done, without demanding
any thing (...) Charges.

Note, This account we thought meet to Print, being willing to give all ^^n
their Due, as well in speaking in the commendation of their Moderation, where
it appears, as to manifest their Oppression, when they take Goods to double the
Demand, and sell them at under Rates, and bring a large Account of Charges,
delighting more to speak of their Moderation than their Oppression.

THE END.
BOOKS Printed and Sold by Andrew So^le (...) Shop in Devonshire-Buildings,
without Bishops-gate, viz.
The Great Case of Tithes, by Francis (...) Price 6 d. Tithes ^^ded by Christ,
by William (...) Price 6 d. The Foundation of Tithes Shaken, by (...) Elwood.
Price bound 3 s. A Testimony against Tything among (...) by Richard Richardson.
Price 10 d. A Treatise of Oaths, containing several (...) Reasons why the
People called Quaker (...) to Swear; Confirmed by Numerous (...) out of
Gentiles, Jews and Christians, ^^^thers, Doctors and Martyrs, Presented (...)
King and Parliament. Price 1 s. An Address to Protestants upon the (...)
Conjuncture, in Two Parts, by William (...) Price 1 s. 6 d.

