Wit for Money.

Being a full Relation of the Life, Actions, merry Conceits, and pretty Pranks
of Captain James Hind the famous Robber, both in England, Holland, and Ireland.

With his new Progress through Berkshire, Oxfordshire, and the Adjacent
Counties, begun on Monday the first of March, 1651. with the Judges of the
Assize for that Circuit.

London Printed for Tho. Vere, and William Gilbertson, and are to be sold at
their shops in the Old Bailey, and Giltspur-street.

I robbed men neatly
as is here expressed,
Coin I never took
unless I gave a Jest.


Though here-tofore I'have bin a subtle Cheat,
As thou may find by what I here repeat,
Yet now resolved to give just dealing place.
I here present to public view my face,
That if again I ever do amiss
I may be known to all the World by this.
I. H.
Wit for Money.
Chap. I. Containing Hind's Birth and Education.
Captain James Hind (the subject of our ensuing discourse) was borne at
Chipping-Norton in Oxfordshire, his Father was by Trade a Sadler, who had lived
in that Town very credibly for many years: The good old man having only this
son was resolved so far as he was able, to breed him a Scoller, and to that
end puts him to an English School to learn to read and to write, where he
continued about two years, but to little purpose, for the bent of his
inclination was so adicted to waggish pastimes, that his book he accounted a
burden, and no affection he ^a^e unto it; which his Father perceiving sets him
to his own trade, but his wandering mind could not settle to that neither; in
conclusion he binds him Prentice to a Butcher, which trade above all others he
made choice of as the best, yet soon grew weary of that also, as appears by
the Sequel.

Chap. II. How Hind ran away from his Master, and became acquainted with one
Allen, a great High-way-man in London.
HInd weary of his trade, would often complain to his fellow apprentice saying,
That it was better to rob on the high way then to live in so slavish a
condition, and withal resolving to set himself at liberty, on a time he puts
on his aparrell, got forty shillings in money of his Mother by a wile, and so
gave his Master the slip, and travels toward London, upon the road overtaking
some Carriers, he puts forth some questions to them, they returned him cross
answers, he dislikes their incivility, and gives one of them a good box o'th
ear, this ingages the rest, they all fall upon him, and beat him well
favourdly; at last being parted, Hind tells them he might live to requite their
courtesy, which shortly after he performed by robbing the greatest part of
them, in the meanetime he leaves them and comes directly to London, where he
soon got acquaintance with such like idle persons as himself, with whom having
bin one night late a drinking, he was examined by the Watch as he returned to
his lodging; and giving but a slender account of his life and conversation, he
was by the Constable sent to the Counter, where after his first sleep, awaking
and looking about him, This is a large house says he, and may entertain many
Guests, but I do not intend to keep my Christmas here; In this place Hind
became acquainted with one Allen, a notorious high-way-man, put in there
likewise for being drunk; This Allen perceiving Hind to be a bold spirited
Youth, and withal pretty ingenious, des^rs to entertain him for his servant,
promising him to learn him such an Art as would for ever make him a Gentleman.
Hind willing to embrace such a proffer, vows to serve him in any thing; so the
morning being come, they paid their Fees and were discharged, and Allen takes
his new servant to the Tavern to instruct him in some points, that they might
loose no time.

Chap. III. How Allen instructed his new Servant, and set him to rob a
Gentleman.
ALLen being at the Tavern with the rest of his Associates began to drink
merrily: Hind modestly waits upon him, still expecting what rar^ Art his Master
would teach him, which Allen perceiving takes him aside saying, I would have
you to be as my Companion and Friend, and not as a servant, neither do I look
for any such respect as you do give me, you shall eat and drink as I do. and
if I have money, you shall have part and want none. and if I want you must
help to get some as well as you can: In short, Hind condescended, and they,
swore him to be true to their Gang, which done. they admit him as a Brother of
their company, And now desirous to flesh him in his new trade, they accomodate
him with a very good Horse and away they rode to Shooters-hill, where presently
they discover a Gentleman coming toward them, Allen bids Hind ride up to him
alone. and they would lie in ambush if occasion required, hereupon Hind being
already well tutord for the purpose, rides to him, bids him stand and deliver
what money he had, or else he^d presently be his death; The Gentleman not
willing to die immediately gave him ten pounds which was all he had; Hind
seeing that said, sir here is forty shillings for you to bear your charges in
regard it is my handsell; The Gentleman answered I wish you better luck with
it then I have, so Hind rod^ away to the rest of his crew, and ^llen praised
him for learning his art so quickly, saying, did you not see how he robbed him
with a grace.

IV. How Allen and his Associates made sport with an old Shepherd.
ALLen having got good store of money, buys him a Coach and four Horses, and
Hind as his Gentleman Usher, and six others waiting on him in Livery Cloaks;
himself he habits in a Ruff, a square Cap, Laune sleeves, and his long Gown,
naming himself the Bishop of Durham, and by this wile they committed many
robberies undiscovered; when any Gentleman came in their Road they would leave
their Cloaks in the Coach, rob him, then put their booty into the Coach, and
get on their Liverie Cloaks again, if any hue and cry came after them they
would never suspect any of the Bishops men, for when they came to any Inn, the
Bishop was honored as much as a man of his quality, his Gentleman Usher stood
bare all the while he was at dinner or supper; but this held not long before
the Country had gotten some notice of it, whereupon they resolve to rid
themselves of their Coach, lest by that they should be betrayed, so riding on
the Downs they called to an old Shepherd, saying if you please to be merry
with us to night, you shall do as we do; the old man was willing to go with
them. Allen told him that he would make him Lord Bishop for that night, so they
put on the Bishops habit on the Shepherd and it did become him well; then they
instructed him how to behave himself, so they came to an Inn where in great
pomp they supped; supper being ended the Bishops servants went to have their
Lord to bed, he being* in bed they came down and told the Host that their
Lord was fallen very sick and that he desired a Doctor, so they enquired for a
Doctor but there was none in seven miles, then they forged Letters, and all the
men were sent with spare Horses, some to fetch friends to see their Lord, and
some for the Doctor, so that they left no servants to wait on the Bishop, they
had also charged the Shepherd not to knock, till the next morning, and ordered
the people of the house when their Lord knocked to carry him a cawdle, so they
conveyed away their Bishops Robes, and left the Shepherds own Clothes by his
bedside and bid farewell to their Shepherd and their Coach, but about ten of
the clock in the morning the shepherd awaked out of his dream and knocked for
the people, who brought him up a Cawdle, he asks for his men, they tell him,
some were gone for the Doctor, and some for his friends, perceiving himself
abused he bid the servant go down for his Master, the fellow well eying the
shepherd, tells his Master that the Bishop had a Canvas shirt on his back as
black as the Devil, and that there was a pair of shoes stood by the bed as
full of Hobnails, as the sky of stars, and a thread bare coat fit for nothing
but to make shoe clouts; up goes the Host to see his Guest, who by that time
had dressed himself in his own habit, and thus salutes him; Friend quoth he, I
have bin robbed to night of mine honor, but they left me my old clothes,
whereat the Host began to laugh, and said to the shepherd, my Lord if you
please to buy you two Coach Horses, I will lend you a Coach and Harness to
carry your honor to the sheep fold, so the shepherd related all the story to
the Host, and left him his Coach for the reckoning, and bid them adieu.

Chap. V. How Allen and his men cozened a Country Constable that came to take
them with a Hew and Cry.
ALLen and his Comrades had acted a many robberies that now every Town almost
was full of Hew and Cries for them, and one night they coming to a small
obscure village, thought themselves secure, and Allen went to bed, but he had
not taken his first sleep before there was search made all over the Town for
such men, who at last came to the Inn where Allen say: the Constable being
somewhat silly was satisfied with a reasonable answer for they came to his
Chamber, where by his attendance he seemed to be some great person; Allen
amazed to see so many lights and watch-bils in his chamber, said, Master
Constable, you might have been more civil then to press with so much
company into my Chamber at this time of the night; sir said the Constable I
was commanded so to do, I would your Torches and Candles were all out said
Allen, otherwise I shall not sleep, Jack says he to one of his men, give the
Constable five shillings to make his Watch^men drink, I thank you sir said the
Constable, I see you are an honest Gentleman now; good night sir, good night
Master Constable I pray let me hear no more of you. The Constable going down
the stairs said to some of his watch men. I am sorry I have troubled the
Gentleman, did you not see what a glorious suit lay on the Table? I Will warrant
it cost twenty nobles at least, his men I believe are all Gentlemen, or
Gentlemen's sons, good Lord, if I had taken these men for the Robbers, what
should have become of me, and you too, pointing to his watch? One of Allens men
came down and called for a Gallon of Sack, which the Constable drank like
small Beer, till the watchmen were troubled to carry him, for go he could
not, so we lea^e the Constable drunk and return to Allen, who shortly after,
notwithstanding all his former policies and shifts was apprehended near
London* and executed at ^yborne, Hind only e^caped to practice the trade, and
now he sets up for himself.

Chap. VI. How Hind robbed a Gentleman on Foot, and furnished himself with a
Horse, money and Clothes.
HInd having lost his Horse when he made his escape, was resolved to get one,
or to follow his trade on foot, his Masters misfortune grieved him much, yet he
quickly cast it out of his mind, and now to color his knavery, he puts
himself into the habit of a Shepherd, with a long Pike staff on his neck,
and so travels toward Banbury, where in his way he espies a Gentleman coming
down a hill, leading his Horse in his hand, Hind as if he took no notice of
the Gentleman, went whistling the tune of an ordinary Psalm, when the
Gentleman came to the foot of the hill, where Hind stood whistling his Psalm,
the Gentleman inquired of him the time of the day, he answered him very
civilly, but as the Gentleman was getting on his horse, Hind hit him with his
long Pole such a stroke between the head and the shoulders that he made him
tumble on the ground; Hind presently took his Money, Cloak, Horse and Sword,
and left him his old Coat and his Pike-sta^fe to beat on the hoof as he had
done, giving him twenty shillings back to bear his charges, but to this day
the Gentleman loves not the tune of a Psalm.

Chap VII. How Hind was betrayed by two whores, who sent two High-way-men to
take his money, and how he robbed them.
HInd having gotten a good purchase in Gold past away the day very merrily, and
toward night rides to an Inn which stood in a private Road, where it seems
some High-way-men did use, after he had seen his Horse carefully dressed and fed
came into the House, where were two handsome Ladies by the fire, he bespoke a
good supper, and invited them to it, when supper was ready he called for wine,
and made them merry, they seemed very coy to him, but he knowing their humor
pulled out of his pocket a handful of Gold, singing Maids where are your hearts
become, Look you what here is; after much mirth to bed he went, and presently
after came in the two men that kept these two whores, to whom they relate the
courtesy of Hind, and that he had abundance of Gold about him, they resolve to
watch his going and to follow him in the morning; but Hind being wakefull was
up and mounted before these Lads were stirring, when they heard his horse
prance, they looked out at the window, and seeing he had so good a Horse, were
ready to fall out who should have him, I will have the Horse says one, and
you shall have his money, nay I Will have his Horse says the other; in conclusion
they quickly made them selves ready and rod after Hind, when they had overtaken
him they asked him which way he rode, he answers them toward Cambridge they
tell him they would be glad of his company; now riding in a place where no
people was nigh one of the Theus sings. Maids where are your hearts become,
Look you what here is: Hind s^^ing there in^out and knowing he was betrayed
answers them in the same tune: now (...) rogues you are both undon, Look you
what here is, ^^^wing forth his pistol and firing at one of them by chance shot
his horse in the head: who presently fell down with his master (...) under him
the other seeing this he took himself to sight, but Hind quickly ouertooke
him and made him deliver such money as he had cutting his ^irts and his bridle
made him work enough to catch his horse again Hind now rides to the other
Thief, who (...) bu^ in little ease* he alights and pulls the Horse from his
Leg, and then helps him up and takes away his money, also saying, Is there but
(...) Master Thief in England and would you venture to rob him, verily were
you not of my own profession, neither of you should have lived, but seeing you
ventured hard for it, thou deservest something, so Hind gave him his Money back
again to buy him another Horse, saying to him Disgrace not your selves with
small sums, but aim high, and for great ones, for the least will bring you to
the Gallows, so Hind shaking the poor Thief by the hand, left him to his
Partener to catch his Horse, and bid him farewell.

Chap. VIII. How Hind was enchanted by an old Hag for the space of three years.
AFter Hind had robbed the two Thieves of their Money, it was his chance to ride
to Hatfield, where lying at the George Inn, being then the Post House, he very
merrily spent the evening with some Gentlemen that were there, in the morning
early Hind calls for his Horse to be gone, takes his leave of those Gentlemen
that were stirring, and as he rode along Hatfield an old ill-favored woman
asked alms of him, his Horse presently staid and would go no further, Sir
said the old woman, I have something to say to you and then you shall be gone,
Hind not liking her countenance, pulled out five shillings and gave her, thinking
she would but like a Gypsy tell his fortune, saying good woman, I am in have,
Sir said she, I have staid all this morning to speak with you, and would you
have me loose my labor? speak your mind said Hind, Whereupon the Did woman
began thus.

Captain Hind, you ride and go in many dangers, wherefore by my poor skill I
have thought on a way to preserve you for the space of three years, but that
time being past, you are no more then an ordinary man, and a mischance may fall
on you as well as another, but if you be in England come to me and I will renew
the virtue of this charm again, in saying these words, she pulled out of her
bosom a little box almost like a Sun Dial and gave it Captain Hind, and said
to him, when you are in any distress, open this, and which way you see the
star t^rne, ride, or go that way, and you shall escape all dangers, so she
switched him with a white Rod that was in her hand, and struck the Horse on
the buttocks, and hid him farewell: the Horse presently leaped forward with
such courage, that Hind could not turn him to give her thanks, but guessing it
was her will it should be so, rode on his way.

Chap. IX. How Hind robbed a Gentleman in Yorkshire, and afterward came to the
Inn where he lay, to sup with him, but did not.
A Gentleman coming from York, intending for London, by accident met with Hind,
who soon made him deliver what he had: Hind gives him back twenty shillings to
bear his charges, till his own credit would better furnish him, to the
Gentleman rode on his Journey to the next Town, where he was well known by an
Inkeeper there, being alighted from his Horse, he desires the Host to get
somewhat ready for his supper, so the Gentleman went to his Chamber, in the
mean time in comes Hind, and asks if there were any Gentlemen that went for
London, the Host answered, there was one Gentleman alone, and he would be glad
of any good company. So Hind went up to the Gentleman's Chamber and saluted him.
The Gentleman said, Sir, sit down, and I will tell you how I was robbed to day,
and I durst have sworn that you had been the man, but that I see your Hair is
short, and his was long: Sir, said Hind, do you know his Horse, yes very well
said the Gentleman. To satisfy you said Hind you shall see mine: So Hind went
down and fetched his Horse out of the Stable and asked the Gentleman if that
were the Horse: he answered I, I, that's the Horse, then said Hind I cannot sup
with you to night, if you know my horse better ^hen my self, so bids him
goodnight.

Chap. X. How Hind robbed two Gentlemen's Servants: caused a Parson to be
apprehended for a high way man, and escaped himself.
HIND being informed of a purchase, as he rode espied some Gentlemen drinking
at an Alehouse on Horseback, having sent their servants before, Hind passed by
them, but riding at ^ good rate, quickly overtooke the Gentlemen's servants who
rode but easily, Hind by their portmantles saw there was money in them, bid
deliver the money or he would be their death, they being not used to fight
yielded unto him, but he seeing their delays would breed danger, with his
Dagger knife cut open their Port-mantles and took out the money, and tying the
Bags together, laid them before him and rid full speed away: one of the
servants rode to acquaint their Master, who presently pursued Hind, Hind met a
Parson and said to him, Sir, I am like to be robbed, you must stand to it now
for your own good as well as mine, they would have this money from me which
you see, come Sir, be of good cheer, one honest man will scare ten Thieves,
you shall have one of my Pistols, So Hind gives the Parson a Pistol ready cockt
and charged and bids him fire at them that came first, while I says he, ride
down to the next Village and raise the Country people to be our help: the
Parson having taken a cup to much at a wedding, was Pot valiant, and rid up
boldly to the Gentlemen and fired his Pistol at them, but being too far off
did no execution, he rid nigher and flung his Pistol at one of them, that he
had like to have k^ockt him off his Horse, the Gentlemen seize on him, and take
(...) prisoner, the Parson cries out spare my life and you shall have all my
money, no sirrah said the Gentlemen, we will have you ^an'gd, what? a A Parson
and rob on the High way, they presently hale him to the next Justice of Peace
which was very near, when they came before the Justice, they told him that
they were robbed of two hundred pounds, and that this Parson was one of the
Thieves: the Justice marvelled that such an apparent testimony should com
against the Parson of ^is Parish.

The Parson by this time was come to himself, and desired the Justice to give
him leave to speak for himself, being licenced to speak, he said to the
Justice, Sir, you have known me this 20. years, and no man can say I have
wronged him of a penny, much less this which is laid to my charge. Sir, I
shall tell you so much as I know of this business. As I was riding in my way
home, I met a man who had two bags of money before him, who told me that
Thieves pursued him, and he desired my help, saying, that I need not fear, for
one honest man would beat ten Thieves, so he gave me a Pistol charged, cockt,
and primed, and bid me fire at the first that came while he raised the Country
men to assist us: so when these Gentlemen came down the Hill, I rode up to
them, and fired my Pistol among them, and when I had so do^^, I flung it at
this Gentleman's head, thinking they had been Thieves: Sir, this is all I know
of the matter: The Justice laughed to see the Parson of his parrish apprehended
for a high way man, but he past his word for his appearance the next Assizes,
who, when he was brought before the Bench was cleared, but he made a vow never
to fire Pistol more.

Chap. XI. How Hind robbed a Gentleman of thirty pound that was desirous to give
twenty pound to see him.
HIND overtook a Gentleman as he rode on the rode, and they fell in discourse,
so the Gentleman was saying he would give twenty pounds to see Hind, but as
they were riding, the Gentleman fancied H^nds Horse, Sir said the Gentleman,
what money shall I give you to change horses with me, forty pound said Hind, I
will give you thirty pound in gold, said the Gentleman, so Hind said, Sir, ride
him, so the Gentleman gave him thirty pounds in gold and his Horse, but as they
rid a long there was a ditch, Sir, said Hind, leap him over this ditch, I
cannot said the Gentleman, Hind desired the Gentleman to alight, so he got on
his own horse and leapt over the ditch, and when he was on the other side, he
said, Sir, you would give twenty pound to see Hind, and now you have seen him,
but the other ten pound was for riding my horse, so now I think you have seen
enough of him, and so farewell.

Chap. XII. How neatly Hind robbed a Parson of forty pounds in gold which he had
hid in the Collar of his Dublet.
A Parson riding from Coventry toward London, by petty Thieves was robbed of
his Silver, but having forty pound in gold about him resolved to go on his
Journey, and as he rode, Hind overtook him, and asked the Parson which way he
traveled, the Parson told him that he intended for London, but says he, I was
almost prevented, for to day I was robbed of five pounds in silver, and the
Knaves left me but five shillings: Sir, said Hind I was robbed of a little
silver to day also, for a man were as good let them have it quietly as endanger
ones life to resist, but I was cunning enough to hide my gold in my boots
beforehand: nay, I believe said ye Parson that mine is as safe, for I have
quilted it in the Collar of my Dublet; Hind was not a little glad when he heard
where his gold lay, but being near their Inn, they supt together, and went to
bed, in the morning the Parson called Hind up and told him he would be glad of
his company: after breakfast they rid together, Hind asked the Parson if he
could guess what trade he was off, no said the Parson, then said Hind I am a
Cutter, for I must cut the Collar of your Dublet off before I shall come to
your money, having so done, he left the Parson forty pounds lighter then he
found him.

Chap. XIII. How Hind served two Bayliffes and a Usurer.
HInd riding through a little Town in Warwickshire, saw a tumult in the Street,
so he rid up to them to know the occasion, one told him that an honest
Innekeeper was arrested for 20. pounds, and that the man was undone if he had
not some relief speedily: Hind goes to the man and asked him if he he would
give him any security if he should pay the money for him, the poor man being
overioyed at this unlookt for ^ewes, told him he would make over all he had for
the security: so Hind had the Usurer and the Bailiffs into the House, desired
the Bond, paid the Usurer all he demanded, giving the Bailiffs their fees, and
cancelled the Bond: Hind sent for one to make over the Inkeepers goods to
himself, which being done they departed: Hind being not unmindfull to enquire
which way the Usurer was to go, went after him and overtook him in a
convenient place: Friend says he, I lent you twenty pounds even now, but I
must needs have it again, the Usurer said, you paid me so much money on a
bond: Sir, says Hind, it is no time to dispute it now: so Hind took from the
old Usurer his twenty pound and twenty more which he had got by Usury, and rode
back to the Inn, gave the Have his writing again, and five pounds in money,
telling him, that he had good luck by lending to honest men: the Usurer came
after to the Inkeeper thinking to get some money of him, but the Inkeeper did
beat him almost to death, saying, you Rogue, I am engaged in all that I have
for the payment of the money, and if you be robbed, must I pay you again, I
will, I will, so this was all the Usurer could get.

Chap. XIIII. How Hind fought with a Gentleman, and after gave him his money
again.
HIND prancing the Road in Yorkshire, by chance overtook a Gentleman and his
servant, which Gentleman was riding to London to pay his composition. This
gentleman had sent most part of his money to London by Bills of Exchange, yet
his man was forced to carry one hundred pounds behind him in a Portmantle, Hind
riding by, asked the Gentleman many odd questions, and among the rest he said,
Sir, I am a Gent^eman, and since I came from my house I have been an ill
husband, now I am in want and would desire you to lend me some money, Sir, said
the Gentleman, you are but a stranger to me, and I have no reason to part with
money to any upon so little acquaintance, but rather then you shall be
disgras'd, I shall lend you twenty shillings, Sir, said Hind, I thank you for
your love, but I care not for such small sums when there is greater in the
place, pointing to the Portmantle. The Gentleman quickly understood his
meaning, and said, Sir, you must fight for it if you have it, with all my heart
said Hind, and you shall not fight for nothing, for I will stake my Horse to
one hundred pounds, and thus it shall be, whosoever draws the first blood
shall have all, and if you win my horse, you shall give me your man's to ride
on, and if you lose your money, I will give you ten pound out of it toward your
charges, to this the Gentleman agrees, they ride out of the way about a flight
shot, where Hind ties his Horse to a hedge, and the Gentleman gives his Horse
to his man to hold, now they draw, and at the first pass, Hind ran the
Gentleman into the sword ar^e, the wound was but slight, yet being their
engagement was such the Gentleman's man yielded Hind the victory, Hind receives
the hundred pound of the Gentleman, and according to agreement returns him ten
pound back, so they mount their Horses: Hind being of a noble spirit, said,
Sir, we must not part thus, I will give you a good dinner first: the Gentleman
thankt him, and rode with him, and as they were riding, Hind asked the
Gentleman wh^her he was traveling, the Gentleman said to London, I am going to
pay my Composition, I wish I had no occasion there? Alas poor Gentleman said
Hind, you have sorrow enough, and it has been my ill fortune to augment it: so
giving the Gentleman's man all the money again: now Sir, says he, ask any
thing that lies in my power, and you shall command it; Sir, said the Gentleman,
I shall desire nothing more then your friendship, which I shall vallue above
any earthly thing; I am beholding to you for your care of me, for if I had lost
this hundred pounds, I had been undone; being nigh the place, it broke off
their discourse: Hind bespeaks the best provision that can begot, and then
sends for a Surgeon to dress the Gentleman, which being done, they fell to
the victuals, and made them selves merry with many other Jests, when they had
reposed themselves a while, Hind paid the reckoning privately, and came into
the Gentleman, and said, Sir, you are the first man that ever I hurt on the
rode, and I am heartily glad there was no more harm, so giving the Gentleman a
word to pass all highway men, called for his Horse, and so bid him farewell.

Chap. XV. How Hind robbed a Captain upon Chaulk Hill in Buckingham-shire.
AFter a day or two Hind rode into Buckingham-shire, where he was acquainted
with many Gentlemen, and passing away the time till his opportunity served, it
was his chance to ride toward Chalk-hill, Hind espied a little before him, a
Gentleman and his servant who were alighted to walk down the Hill, the Captain
gives his Horse to his man, and bids him stay at the Style till he came down,
the Captain having occasion to untrusse a point, staid under a little hedge,
Hind watching his opportunity rid softly till he came near the Captain, and
seeing him in good clothes, rid hastily up to him and bid him deliver: the
Captain was amazed at this present occasion of Hind, who all this while held a
Pistol at his breast, and bids him dispatch; for it is not my custom, said he,
to stand maunding, but I demand, and look you make no longer stay; The
Captain desired him to forbear till he was trust up, Hind giving him so much
leave, said, your money Sir: the Captain seeing it, could not be helped by
delays, delivers him thirty pieces of gold, Hind said, Sir, I take this in
part, I shall not be too mercenary upon you at this time: and so he rode down
the hill where the Captains man staid with his Masters Horse, Hind said,
Sirrah, is that your Master on the Hill, he answers him, yes Sir, then said
Hind, I seldom take any thing from the Master, but I give the servant
^omething, so giving him ten shillings, here is somewhat for thee, says he, to
drink my health, I prithee tell thy Master my name is Hind.

Chap. XVI. How Hind robbed a Gentleman of fifty pounds.
HIND traveling up and down the Country, met wit a lusty young fellow whom he
had formerly known, and asking him many questions, among the rest, said, Jack,
if thou will live with me thou shall have money at command, or any thing thou
want; Jack knowing partly his Trade, gave consent, Hind presently bought a
good Horse for his man, and furnished him with Clothes, a Sword, and small
Pistols being well fixed, away they traveled toward Nottingham, and as they
rode, they chanced to come into an Inn where a Gentleman and his man were
newly come before them, Hind ri^es by the Stable-doore where the Hostler was
taking off the other Gentleman's Port mantle, the Hostler said, it is but a
little Port-mantle but it is very heavy: Hind well eying it, said to his man,
Jack, enquire cunningly which way this Gentleman travels to morrow, so Hind
went in, and when supper was ready, they went to supper together, after the
Gentleman had supped, the servants fell too, and Hinds man gives the other
gentleman's servant a pint of Sack, and after supper Jack gives him some Spanish
Tobacco, and now they begin to be great acquaintance, so they go together into
the Stable to see their Horses dressed, Jack asks the Gentleman's servant which
way they rode in the morning, he told him toward London, my Master says Jack
rides that way too I think, now Jack has as much as he desired, went to see
what his Master wanted, Hind bids his man get his slippers ready, and pull off
his boots, which being done, he takes his leave of the Gentleman and goes to
bed: when he came into his chamber, he asked his man which way they went, Jack
tells him: In the morning Hind rides first, the Gentleman s^aies behind to eat
his breakfast: after he had done, he rode on his journey, and riding by a Wood
where Hind and his man lay in Ambush for him, Hind rides out to the Gentleman
and with his Cane slaps him over the pate saying, have I nothing to do but to
wait on you* Sir: Jack takes off the Port-mantle saying, it is heavy Master:
Sir, said Hind to the Gentleman, you are ill belovd in the Country you cannot
get gold for your Silver: Jack rides back to the Gentleman's servant and strikes
him over the pa^e, saying, you Rogue, must I spoil my horse to carry your Port
mantle, must I, must I you Rogue you: so Hind and his man rid away (leaving the
Gentleman and his servant looking one upon another almost amazed at this
sudden accident) sparing no Horse-fle^h till they were far enough from the
Gentleman, for they rid all the bywayes that it had been hard for any one to
follow them, and being at a place where they knew themselves safe, they looked
in the Port-mantle where they found one hundred and fifty pounds, this they put
up as a good mornings work.

Chap. XVII. How Hind served a Committee Man who disguised himself for fear of
robbing.
A Committee Man having occas^on to travel toward London for to buy many
commodities, hearing that there was robbing in that Road, fitted himself with
an old gray Coat out at the elbowes, and an old Mare, with boots instead of
stirrups hung at a Saddle that was not worth three pence, and a Bridle of the
same price: now ^ides he merrily thinking no High-way-man would set on him, but
money i^^ got will be ill spent, for he chanced to meet with Hind who asked
what he was, he answered that he was an Old man, going to get relief among his
friends: Hind gave him a piece of gold and bid him drink his health and be
merry at his Inn,: the old Miser thinking to please Hind, coined two or three
great Oaths presently, and said, he would be drunk with drinking his health:
Hind parted from him, and the old Man went to his Inn and set up his Mare,
then called for half a pint a sack, and after the first glass was down, he
began to say that he escaped the greatest danger that ever he was in, for said
he, I met with Hind, and instead of robbing me, he gave me a piece of gold and
bid me drink his health, but I Will see him hanged before I Will spend one penny for
his sake, hang him Rogue he robs all honest men, only Cavileeres he lets them
go, I Will put his gold among my own: I would have given t^n pound to have been
rid of him when first I met with him: so after a short supper went to bed, Hind
came to the Inn, using to lie there as a Traveller not known, the Host was
telling him in what fear an old Committee-Man was to day, saying he had met
with Hind, who gave him money to drink his health, but he said he would see him
hanged first, and called him Rogue a thousand times: Hind went to bed, and let
the old Man travel first in the morning, and about an hour after Hind rides
after him, when he had overtaken him, he asked the Old man if he drunk his
health, I said he, I was never so drunk in my life as I was the last night, for
I drank the Kings health, the Queens, the Princes, and your health ten times
over: Hind said unto him, Friend I have found you in many lies, and now I will
make you call me Rogue for something: so Hind made him untye his greasy
Snap-sake where he found fifty pound in Gold and his own piece besides: now
the Committee-man to cheer up himself, resolved to borrow so much money of
the State before he went another Journey: Hind said, the sooner you get it, the
better for me if I meet with you again.

Chap XVIII. How Hind robbed two Lawyers.
TWO Lawyers that had got money enough in their Circuit, were resolved to
return to London and now being on their way Hind overtakes them, and asks them
which way they were traveling, they told him to London, I go thither too said
Hind, and we three may make a fine company, for we may travel as cheap a^ two:
As they were riding, the two Lawyers disputed much o^ points of the Law: Hind
being almost dulled with their discourse, said, Gentlemen what point of the Law
will you give for this? suppose I take both your moneys from you, and give each
of you a small Ring in liew of it? One of the Lawyers said, it does weaken the
Law much, but because we are two and you but one, we may hang you: said Hind,
in troth I will try the title: so having a Pistol ready made them deliver their
money, and gave each of them a ring, and bid them indite him if they would:
they said, to much purpose, and you will never come: God be with you said he, and
so left them.

Chap. XIX. How Hind robbed a Gentleman in Hide-Park.
HInd being well horsed, went one evening into Hide-Parke to see some sport,
and rideing up and down the Park by the Coaches, spies a bag of money by a
Gentleman, to whom Hind use some discourse about the Race that was to run,
but the Race beginning, the Gentleman caused his Coach to stand still, that he
might judge which Horse ran best, Hinds head being not idle, rode to the Coach,
took the bag in his hand and rode away: the Gentleman presently missiig his
money, cries out, stay him, stay him, I am robbed: many rode after him,
especially the Captain whom he robbed at Chalk hill, who pursued him hard:
Hind rideing by St. James's, said to the soldiers, I have won ^he wager: but
holding his Bag fast, his Cloak fell off, which he left for them that came
^ext: he rid^ng the way by So-ho, left them: ^ut when he came to his companions
he said, ^e never earned a hundred pound so dear in ^is life.

Chap. XX. How Hind sold his horse to a Citizen of London.
HIND taking occasion to ride to Barnet, took up his Inn there, where meeting
wi^h some Gentlemen, they were very merry together, and after Supper Hind went
to feed ^is Horse and see him dressed, and some of the com^any went with him,
amongst ye rest a Citizen; ^ho when they came into the Stable, looking upon all
the Horses, wished he head a better th^n his ^wne, his being the worst: and
switching the Horses, at last switcht Hinds, which leaping ^ith such courage as
made the young Citizen ^reatly to affect him, and asked the Ho^^^er those Horse
it was: It is mine answered Hind, will you sell him said the Citizen: Money
will ^uy him said Hind: Sir said the Citizen, I have ^ good Gelding here but
that he is out of flesh: that shall I give you and my Gelding for your ^orse?
Hind said, sir you shall give me five and ^wenty pound and your Gelding: the
Citizen ^ld him it was too much: yet said he, I will (...) you twenty pound in
Gold, and my horse which is worth eight pound, for your Horse. Now he strikes
him earnest with a piece of Gold? Hind loving that kind of money yielded it a
bargain: the Citizen had the best bargain if he could have kept the Horse,
though he bought him by Candlelight; The Citizen pays Hind the rest of the
Gold, and gives him a Pottle of sack for good luck: after much mirth they go
to bed: In the morning, Hind out of courtesy, would have the Citizen on his
way, but as they rode, Hind found fault that he rayned his Horse to hard,
saying, he is tender mouthed, and you will put him quite out of his pace; But
they now riding in Enfield Chase, Hind desired the Citizen to let him ride the
Horse, and he would show him how to pace him right, the Citizen easily
believing what Hind said, alighted, and mounted the Horse that Hind rid, Hind
finding him well settled on his own Horse, paced him a little way: sir said
Hind, you shall see his true pace the next time you see me: so he rode full
speed till he was out of his sight: the Citizen began to wonder at this
sudden change, yet still thought that Hind was but in jest: but when he found
it in earnest, wished he had never seen Hind nor his Horse: but wishing was but
in vain, for Hind was sooner out of the Citizens sight then out of his mind:
for his mind was sometimes of his Gold, and sometimes of his Horse, not
knowing which was the greatest loss to him; Being in this study, he was
recollected to his senses by some of his company, who asked him the reason of
his melancholy, to whom when he had related his bad fortune, thought to have
had some comfort of them, but it proved otherwise, for instead of comforting
him, they ^est a laughing and ^earing him; The Citizen said, Gentlemen,
forbear, for this is worse then the loss of all, to be laughed at.

Chap. XXI. How Hind robbed a Tarnner.
HInd riding between Gloucester and Teuksbury, over-tooke a Country Farmer, who
had money about him, to whom Hind had some discourse, and as they were riding,
Hind showed him one of the States twenty shilling pieces, asking him how he
liked it, the Country Farmer replied, it is a very fair piece, ^ would I had
one to carry home with me; if you please Sir, I will give you one and twenty
for it, Sir, said Hind, being you are desirous of it you shall have it: The
Countryman pulled out his long Purse, and told out one and twenty shillings,
and gave Hind, so Hind gave him the piece of Gold, saying, do not put it among
your Silver, for it will wast the Gold, well said the Countryman, I will put
it in my little pocket then in a paper to keep it: Hind see^ng his Purse,
longed like a woman with child till he had it, and said to the Farmer, Sir, I
want a little Silver to buy a commodity that I have use for, nay said the
Country man, you shall have your Gold again; the old saying is true, one may
buy Gold too dear, Hind said, Tell me not of old Stories, but give me your
Money, for I will have it by fair means or soul, nay said the Country man, I
will not fight, but if you take away my Money by force, I Will go to Law with you
if there be any Law in England, Hind told him, that he cared more for the
Lawyers then the Law it self, and would be glad to meet them any where, your
money, your money, said Hind I do not use to be so long for so little money; The
Farmer pulls his Purse out, as if all the wealth of Presto John or of the Indies
had lain in it: but Hind receiving the Purse, made light of it, saying, this
is an ill days work, but I will make it better before night: If God send you
good luck said the Farmer, I hope you will give me my money again: yes, yes
said Hind and many thanks: then I suppose said the Farmer, you are no common
Thief, but one that will pay what you borrow; Hind asked him where he lived
that he might come and pay him: the Farmer told him, and so Hind parted from
him; The Farmer went home, thinking Hind would come and pay him his money
again, showing all his Neighbors his new gold, and told one of them how he
was served, his Neighbor said, you may hang him if you will when he comes to
pay you, No, no said the Farmer I will not hang him, because he let me have his
Gold so willingly.

Chap. XXII. How Hind Couzoned a Horse-Courser.
HInd being at a Gentleman's house, were he was well entertained, after Dinner
he would show them some sport with his Horse, the young Gentlemen being
desirous to see it, got their Horses sadled and rid with him, he leaped many
places, and showed them many fine tricks, but by chance leaping over a gate
which was very high, the Horse strained his back insomuch that Hind durst not
ride him upon any desperate designe^ so taking his leave of the Gentlemen, he
rode to Sturbridge Fair where he saw a gallant Horse which was to be sold,
Hind demands the price the Horse-courser (...) was to sell him said, fourscore
pound is his price, Hind said, ^ide him along: the man rode him well, but Hind
had a mind to use him better, and said to the Horse courser, prithee put my
saddle on the Horse that I may try him, he did so and held Hind's Horse which
to sight was as good as the other: Hind rid the Horse a little way and trotted
him back, and asked the Horse courser whether he had a good gallop, yes sir
said he, gallop him and try: Hind gallopt him so far that he returned no
more, leaving his Horse with the Horse-courser which ones was better, but now
may lie on his hands. Hind being well horsed rode till he came to a place where
some of his Companions staid for him, who were extreme glad to see him so well
mounted, asking him how he came by that brave Horse, and what he gave for him,
he answers them thus: Gentlemen, how long shall I tutor you, will you never
understand this, to deceive the dece^ver is no deceit, had him of an
Horse-courser at an easy rate, whereat they fell a laughing at the conceit, and
so mounting their Horses away they ride together.

Chap. XXIII. How some of Hind's Companions robbed a Gentleman, and how Hind met
him and afterward and repaid it.
HIND and his gang riding merrily along met accidentally with one of Hind's
friends, who was very glad to see Hind, and to have some private discourse with
him: Hind desired his Companions to ride before, and he would overtake them:
Hind and his friend went to a house hard by that place, where they might
disclose their minds to each other, the whilst his mad gang rid on their
Journey, where in the way they met a young Gentleman, these Lads bid him stand,
and made him deliver such money as he had, leaving very little to bear his
charges, and rode from him: the Gentleman kept on his way, and as he rode met
with Hind who bid him stand and deliver: the Gentleman said, it was the last
thing I did, for four Gentlemen in such habits met me and took all my money
from me, Hind knowing they were his Companions, said did they leave thee any
money, very little said the Gentleman: Sir said Hind I see you look
melancholy on the matter, deal ingeniously with me, and tell me how much they
had from you: In troth sir said the Gentleman, it were a folly for me to belie
my own purse, they had about twelve pounds from me: Hind pulls out five pieces
of gold and gives it the Gentleman, saying, sir here is this in part, and when
I meet you next I will give you the rest: the Gentleman giving him many thanks
would have parted from him: Hind said I have one thing more to say to you, here
are many Wags abroad and they will have this Money from you, therefore if you
meet any, tell them the Fiddler is paid and they will let you pass, so Hind bid
him farewell: the Gentleman had not rid far but he met with some Blades who
bid him stand, Gentlemen said he the Fiddler is paid, they being satisfied with
this answer, asked him which way the Fiddler went, he giving them the best
direction he could, parted from them: Hind afterward met this Gentleman in
London and paid him the rest of his money, and gave him a Dinner.

Chap. XXIIII. How Hind borrowed money of a poor man and paid it him double at
a time and place appointed.
HInd having bin very ioviall among some roaring Blades of his acquaintance,
and spent all his money, betimes in the morning he waits an oppertunity to
furnish himself aagaine, as people were going to a Fair, and meeting first
with a poor man going to bye a Cow at the Fair: Hind bids him stand and
deliver such money as he had: the poor man did pull out of his pocket a
Hankerchiefe wherein was four ^ound, and w^^ing to Hind, told him it was all
that he had in the world, and that he was undone if he took it away: Hind told
him he should not lose one penny by him, but that he would double his money,
and appointed to meet him at a Uillage near to the place where the poor man
dwelt: so Hind did take but three pound from the (...) man, and went his way:
The Poor man went to the Fair among his Neighbors, who asked him the
occasion of his melancholy: he answered that the marke^ was dead, therefore
he would stay while the next Fair: so* he went home, making no body
acquainted with what had happened unto him* But when the day came that he
should meet Hind ^ who had altered his name to the poor man, he went and
enquired for such a Gentleman at the place appointed, who was directed by the
man of the House to his Chamber: Hind presently entertained him well and gave
him sir pound to buy him two Gow^ so the poor man thankt him, and told him
that if he had never paid him he would never have disclosed: Hind seeing him
simply honest and truly honest, gave him twenty shillings more and bid him pray
for James Hind, and so sent him away.

Chap. XXV. How Hind put a trick upon a Dutch Mountebank in Holland.
HInd having committed many Robberies was constrained to leave England, and to
go for Holland: Now being in a strange Country and not having that command to
rob on the Highway as he had in England, fell into want of money: so hearing
of a rich Mountebanke that went about quacking of it, how he never went without
store of money his name was Henry Van-Veldes, he was somewhat fortunate in
Cures, therefore by every one desired: this Mountebank going so (...) his sick
Patients in devers parts of the City, having received diverse sums of money for
his particular Cures, was Watched by Hind, and as he passed through a
by-street, he runs to him as in great has^and and salutes him in a kind manner
thus, Sir I have heard much of your renown in Cures of dangerous consequence,
and since it is my happiness to meet with you, I live not far from this
place, if you please to go along with me to my house, I have a wife much
troubled with a flux in her belly for these fourteen days, and you by your
experience may do her much good, if you please to give her a visit, I humbly
request you to go along with me, and what content you desire I shall willingly
satisfy. This Bell sounded well in his Ears: Well, he goes with Hind to his
Lodging, and in the way he gives Hind comfortable answers, saying, God forbid
I should neglect that little skill I have, ^o do your wife any good I can: Upon
these Complements Hind leads ^im from one street to another, till at last he
got him within his lodging, which was so contrived, that it was some distance
from other houses, having locked the door upon him, he takes in one hand a
Pistol, in the other a great empty Purse, and furiously looking upon the
Mountebank, he said, Sir, here is my wife, (meaning the empty Purse) she has
bin a long time troubled with a Flux in her belly, and you are the only man
that can remedy and find out a means to cure this disease, else I my self by
the help of this Pistol am resolved to remedy it. This mountebank seeing
himself thus cunningly and suddenly surprised, began suddenly to cry out, but
was presently silenced by the sight of the Pistol, and feign for fear to let
go his own purse, to cure Hinds which had the Flux* but according to his
wonted charity, seeing the man in this trembling condition, he restored him
some part of his money again, promised to convey him to his lodging, and did,
with his Pistol cockt, for fear of an Outcry, and in the midway left him to
find out his chamber himself.

Chap. XXVI. How Hind cozened a merchant in holland of 300 Crowns, by giving a
counterfeit Chain for a pledge.
AFter this Hind puts himself into the habit of a Gallant, the better to set a
glass upon his knavery, he has his man to wait upon him, and by his gallant
ga^be insinuates into a rich Merchants acquaintance, makes the world believe he
has brought the wealth of the Indies with him, he pretends he has great
wealth, and happy were he that could be acquainted with him, for it is the
nature of the Dutchmen to strike Sail for their own profit, and to offer any
kindness where they perceive they may be any way a gayner. Amongst the rest, a
Merchant of no mean quality, perceiving his deportment, invites him to his
house, which he with little entreaty accepts, the Merchant entertaines him with
a great deal of civility; Hind pretends to send his man to his two Chests
which were aboard of a Ship in the Key for some money, which made the Merchant
say, Sir, I much wonder you being a stranger durst trust your wealth in such a
place, if you please Sir my house shall be at your service; Hind takes an
occasion upon discourse to pull out of a Box a Chain of pure Gold before the
Merchant, which he much admiring, said Sir, you need not want money so long as
you have this to engage; Hind replied, I should be loath to engage it, but upon
necessity which I am now driven to, for although I have money, yet I cannot
command it, because I must pay it presently upon a Bill of Exchange, Sir
replied the Merchant, I shall befriend you so far as to lend you so much money
as you have occasion for, which proffer Hind modestly denied, yet with a kind
of willing unwillingnesse, he accepted his courtesy, and presently called for
his man to take the Chain and see what the Goldsmiths would value it at, and
to bring a Test under his hand; the Merchant as (...) unwilling to receive his
Chain as apledge, replied, good Sir do not trouble your self so, I dare take
your word for more then this Sum, yet his fingers itcht to be fingering of this
pawn, Hind the more puts it upon him seeing his unwillingnesse to receive it,
well Sir says the Merchant, seeing it is your pleasure, my man shall go with
your Servant to see the value of it at the Goldsmiths, Hind delivers his own
man the Chain, and together they go, and to bring a Test under the Goldsmiths
hand, who finds it right and rich: Now Hind had played his Game so, that he had
provided his man with another Chain of Brass, gilded, of the same weight to a
grain, that you could not know one from the other, and coming home delivers
the brass Chain and Ticket to Hind, Hind delivers them to the Merchant, he
looks upon it, finds it to his thinking the same, sees nothing to the contrary,
so Hind receives 300 Crowns upon it, and when they had dined and talked, Hind
and his man took their leaves for the present, as pretending to go about
business, but he never returned to redeem his Chain, but left the Merchant
to repent him of his dear bought purchase.

Chap. XXVII. How Hind-cheated a Dutchman of two hundred pounds.
HInd being among Merchants, desired them to give him a Bill of Exchange for
two hundred pounds, one of the Merchants appointed him to come to a Tavern
where he would receive the Money, and give him a Letter of advice, and a Bill
of Exchange, so Hind paid the Merchant two hundred pound, and the Merchant gav^
him a Bill of Exchange, and a Letter of advice to a Merchant in London to pay
the Money upon sight, so Hind pli^ed Hauss^^ with wine till he made him take a
nap, and then he took his money from him, and left him to pay the reckoning
and shipped himself that night for England, where he received two hundred pounds
upon sight of his Bill: Thus you see Hind having no privilege to rob in
Holland, yet found some trick to cheat the Dutchman.

Chap. XXVIII. Hinds voyage into Ireland, and how he robbed Castle-haven of
fi^teene hundred pounds.
HInd being desirous to see Ireland when Ormond and Inch^quin were there, went
over, where he did many robberies, but chiefly this is specified of him,
Ormond, Inch^quin, Castle-haven, ^lanricka^d, and other great persons of their
party were all at play at Dice for great (...) of money; it was Ormonds and
Inchiquins fortune to lose 1500 li. to Castle-haven, who being greedy of money,
thought it not safe till he had sent it to a Castle 4 miles off from the place
where he won it; Hind being by when the money was won, got some Lads together,
and waited the coming of the money, which was carried on horseback in bags,
Hind met with Castle-havens servants and took their charge from them; so Hind
and his companions carried the money to Ormond, who gave him 500 li. to share
among his companions, but Ormond could not forbear, but told Castle-haven that
he knew who robbed him; Castle-haven being very desirous to know, Ormond told
him he would show him the men, if he would engage upon his reputation not to
prosecute them; having made their engagement to each other, Ormond sent for
Hind and his gang to come to him, who presently came and presented themselves
before Ormond, who called them severally, and gave them 20 shillings a piece
privately, but to Hind he gave 5 li. so they departed; when they were gone,
Ormond said to Castle-haven, Sir, how like you these men, they were they that
had your money, said Castle-haven these were stout men, and by their looks my
money will not last long with them; Ormond said, Sir, they have left you 500 li.
in my hand, so he paid him the money and got 500 li. himself, and all parties
were well pleased.

Chap. XXIX. How Hind went into Scotland to the Scotch King at Sterling, and
how he was apprehended in London.
HInd being ever wary of staying long in a place, shipped himself for Scotland,
when he was landed he went and presented his service to the King at Sterling,
the King being informed who it was had some discourse with him, and commended
him to the Duke of Buckingham, then present, to ride in his Troop because his
Lifeguard was full, he came into England with the same Troop, was in the
engagement at Warrington, came to the fight at Worcester, and staid till the
King was fled; Hind being in the City, saw the gates full of flying persons he
leapt over the wall on foot by himself only, traveled the Country, and lay
three days under bushes and hedges because of the Souldery, afterward he came
to sir John Packingtons woods where he lay five days, and from thence he came
on foot to London, and lodged 5 weeks very securely, but upon the 9 of November.
1651. a discovery was made of ^ap. Hinds frequenting one Denzy's a Barber over
against St. Dunstons Church in Fleetstreet, who went in the name of Brown* this
information was communicated to certain Gentlemen belonging to the right
honorable Mr. Speaker, who with great care so ordered the business that there
was no suspicion at all, to his chamber door they came, fore^t it open, and
immediately with their pistols cockt seized upon his person, and carried him to
M. Speakers house in Chancery Lane, and so secured him for that night.

The next day being monday, by order from the right honorable the Council of
State, the said Cap. Hind was brought to White-hal, who was examined before a
Committee, and diverse questions put to him concerning his late engagement with
Charles Stuart, and whither he accompanied the Scotch King for the furtherance
of his escape? to which he answered, That he never saw the King since the fight
at Worcester, neither knew he of his getting ^^e field, but was glad to hear
he had made so happy an escape: after some time was spent about his
examination, 'twas ordered he should be sent prisoner to the Gate-^ouse till
the next day. So the next day by special order from the Council of State, he
was brought from thence in a coach with iron bolts on his legs; Cap. Compton
and two other* Messengers belonging to the State guarding him, and about two of
the clock in the afternoon, he was put into Newgate, where he lay till the
next Sessions.

Chap. XXX. The trial of Cap. James Hind, in the Old Bailey, with his
Examination and Confession.
ON Friday the 12 of December. 1651, about 2 of the clock in the afternoon, Cap.
Hind was brought to the bar, at the Sessions house in the Old Bailey, attended
by 4 keepers: the Recorder asked him what Countryman he was* and where he was
borne? he replied, at the merry Town of Chipping Norton in Oxfordshire, then it
was demanded of him whither he accompanied the Scotch King into England, and
whither he was at the fight at VVorster, he answered, that he came into England
with his Majesty the King, and that ^e was not only at the fight at Worcester,
but at VVarrington also, wishing it had bin his happy ^o (...) there to have
(...) his days. Then other questions were asked him concerning his mad ^ranks,
he answered* that what he confessed before the State, the like he acknowledged
to that Honorable Court, protesting his innocence in any matter of fact or
crime since the year 1649. within any of the Parliaments Dominions; he ^tands
indicted upon high treason by the Council of State, so he was ordered to be
remanded back ^o the place he was brought from. The time he was at the Bar he
deported himself with undaunted courage, but before his departure this is
ob^ervable; passing from the Bar, he moved his head on one side, looking as
it were over his left shoulder, said, these are filthy Gingling Spurs, (...)
meaning his Irons about his legs) but I hope ^o have them changed e're long,
which expression caused much laughter. As he passed up the Old Bailey to Newgate
diverse people resorted to see him who asked if he had received sentence? Hind
hearing them, faced to the left, and smiling, said, no, no* good people there
is no have to hang true folks.

Chap. XXXI. The Trial and condemnation of Cap. Hind at Reading, and how he
was reprieved and pardoned by reason of the Act of Oblivion.
ON Monday the first of March, 1652. Cap. James Hind was carried in a Coach
from Newgate to Reading, where upon the Whednesday following he was arraigned
before the right Honorable Jude VVarberton, for murder, the manner thus: There
was four of them in company at Knowl, a little Uillage in that Country, where
they usually frequented, and having staid there in an Alehouse some time, went
all Friends out together, and riding along by the way, Hind and one Poole his
Companion, laid a wager who should leap over a Gate, and it seems Poole
leaping, his Horse failed, whereupon a difference arose between them, Hind
demands the wager, Poole, would not grant himself a looser, this occasioned
some hot speeches to arise, and from words they soon fell to blows so Hind
run him into the back through the breast, and killed him, as the Witnesses did
Testify: after this Evidence was given in against him, he was convicted of
Manslaughter, and found guilty of Manslaughter, yet was allowed his Clergy,
but when he came to his Book he could not read, but was much dijected, and
spoke very little for himself; so he was condemned, and sentence passed on him
to dye; But the next morning the Act of Oblivion being sent down to my Lord,
he was pleased to pardon him for that time, and that offense, so left him a
Prisoner in Reading Goal upon the account of high Treason against the State,
where he yet remains; but it is not probable that for any thing he has yet
done, he will by an untimely death be brought to his End.

FINIS.

