A FIFTH Collection of Papers Relating to the Present Juncture of Affairs in
England.

VIZ.

I. The hard Case of Protestant Subjects under the Dominion of a Popish Prince.
II. An Answer to a late Pamphlet, entitled, A Short Scheme of the Usurpations
of the Crown of England, etc. III. An humble and hearty Address to all English
Protestants in the Army. Published by Mr. Johnson in the Year 1686. IV. Several
Reasons against the Establishment of a standing Army, and Dissolving the
Militia. V. A Discourse of Magistracy; of Prerogative by Divine Right; of
Obedience, and of the Laws. VI. The Definition of a Tyrant, by Abr. Cowley:
With several Queries thereupon proposed to the Lawyers. VII. A Letter to the
King, inducing him to return to the Protestant Religion. VIII. Ten Seasonable
Queries, proposed by an English Gentleman at Amsterdam to his Friends in
England.
Licensed and Entered according to Order.

London printed, and are to be fold by Rich. Janeway in Queen'shead Court in
Paternoster Row, 1688.

The hard Case of Protestant Subjects under the Dominion of a Popish Prince.
A Prince putting himself and his Dominions under the Authority of the Pope,
and admitting (as he must unavoidably) the Laws and Decrees of the Romish
Church, all his Protestant Subjects being, by the Judgment and Sentence of that
Church, Heretics Distinct. 19. cap. a Cause. 25. q. 1. cap. 11.
, do forthwith lie under the Penalty which those Laws and Constitutions will
have inflicted upon Heretics; Heresy Cap. Vergent. de Hotticis.
being the highest degree of High Treason, called therefore by them, Laesae
Crimen Majestaetis Divinae: So the English Protestant must be a Traitor, and
the worst of Traitors, and exposed to the Penalties of High Treason.

The Laws and Decrees of the Romish Church against Heretics.
Heresy Cap. Infam. 6. q. 1. p. 297.
is denounced Infamous, and the Heretic must be dealt with as such; which is
many Penalties in one.

First, Whereby they are deprived of all Nobility, Jurisdiction and Dignity,
and debarred from all Offices, and public Councils, Parliaments and others;
being made incapable of choosing, and being chosen: So that it reaches all
sorts Suar. de Fide disp. 12.. 9. r. 5. l. 2. c. 29.
of Clergy, Laity, Noble and Ignoble; which is extended to their Children also.
For, they say, The Issue of Traitors, Civil and Spiritual, lose their Nobility.
And all that owe any Duty to such Infamous Persons, are discharged and exempted
therefrom, as Subjects Cap. de Haer.
from their Prince, Servants Aa^o^. Tom. 1. l. 8. c. 12. q. 7.
from their Masters, Children Cap. 2. Sect. fin. de Haer. in 6.
from their Parents, whom they also may lawfully kill.

Whereby we may see a little, to what condition the Admission of the Papal
Authority would reduce us, expelling both Nature and Humanity, and making the
dearest Relatives unnatural and barbarous to one another; it would leave no
Protestant either Dignity or Authority, either Safety or Liberty; Nobles are
sentenced to Peasants, and Peasants to Slaves.

Secondly, Another Penalty to which Heretics are condemned by their Law, is
Confiscation of Goods and Estate; and this they incur ipso jure, and ipso
facto; that is, immediately as soon as they show themselves Heretics, before
any legal Sentence have passed: For which there is an express Decree in the
Canon Law; Cap. cum secundum Legis de Haer.. Inno III. cap. de Vergentis.
Bona Haereticorum ipso jure discernemus consiscata; We decree the Goods of
Heretics to be consiscate by Sentence of Law. The Effects of this
Confiscation, wherein they all agree, makes the Severity of the Law apparent,
viz. First, All the Prosits made of the Estate from the first day of their
Guilt, is to be Vasq. in Suar. disp. 22. S. 4. n. 11.
refunded. Secondly, All Alienations S. 1. n. 5.
by Gist, Sale, or otherwise, before Sentence, are null and void; and all
Contracts for that purpose Cap. Vergent. de Haer.
rescinded. Thirdly, Children, Heirs of Heretics, are deprived of their
Portions; yea, tho they be Papists.

Whereby it appears, that as soon as the Papacy is admitted, all Title and
Property is lost and extinct among us: And therefore we must not think that
Pope acted extravagantly, who declared, That all his Majesty's Territories were
his own, as forfeited to the Holy See for the Heresy of Prince and People. Not
only Abby-Lands are in danger, who ever possess them; but all Estates are
forfeited to his Exchequer, and legally confiscated: All is his own which
Protestants in these three Nations have or ever had, if he can but meet with a
Prince so wise as to help him to catch it; whose process follows them beyond
their Grave, and ruins their Children, and Children's Children after them. And
when they have stripped the Heretic of his All, they provide that no other
shall relieve him, viz. That none shall receive him into their Houses, nor
afford him any Help, nor show him any Favor, nor give him any Counsel. We are
here in England zealous for Property; and all the reason in the World we should
so be: But we must bid adieu to this, when we once come under the Pope's
Authority; for as soon as this is admitted, all the Protestants in these
Nations are Beggars by Lrw, viz. by the Laws of that Church, which will then be
Ours, divesting us of all Property and Title to whatever we account our own.

Thirdly, Another Penalty which their Law inflicts on Heretics, is Death Cap.
ad abolendum de Haer. Suar. Dis. 23. Bull. Vrb. 4. and Inno. 4.
, which is the Sentence of the Canon Law; and which is so absolute, that no
Secular Judge can remit, and which is the Judgment of all the Doctors, Ita
docent omnes Doctores: And from which Penalty, neither Emperors nor Kings
themselves are to be freed or exempt. And the Death they inflict is burning
alive: No Death more tolerable, or of less exquisite Torture will satisfy the
Mercy of that Church. The Canon says thus; Decernimus ut vivi in conspectu
hominum comburantur; We decree, that they shall be burnt alive in the sight of
the World. So our last Popish Successor, Queen Mary, practiced upon near three
hundred Persons, without regard either to Age, Sex, or Quality: the Scripture
they urge for it, is John 15.6. Jac. de Gra. decis. l. 2. c. 9. n. 2.
If any one abide not in me, men gather them and cast them into the Fire, and
they are burnt.

So that as soon as the Papal Authority is admitted among us, all the
Protestants in these Nations are dead Men in Law; being under a Law that has
sentenced us to be burnt alive, and under a Power that has declared it
necessary that no one of us escape with Life.

Fourthly, Where legal Penalties cannot take place, by reason of opposite
Strength, they hold War necessary, and lawful to chastise Heretics: For which
we might give you diverse Authorities; Bonacina Diano. Castro Molanus, etc. Car.
Allen. ad mon. to Nobl. and Peop. p. 41.
but let Cardinal Allen, our Countryman, suffice; who asserts it is not only
lawful, but necessary: His words are these: It is clear (says he) what People
or Persons soever be declared to be opposite to GOD's Church, with what
Obligation soever either of Kindred, Friendship, Loyalty, or Subjection I be
bound unto them; I may, or rather must take up Arms against them; and then must
we take them for Heretics when our lawful Popes adjudg them so to be. And
which (says Cardinal Pool) is a War more holy than that against the Turks.

Fifthly, To destroy them by Massacres is sometimes held more advisable than
to run the hazard of War, and which ( they say) is both lawful and meritorious,
for the rooting out a Pestilent Heresy, and the promoting the Roman Interest.
This set a-foot the Iirish Massacre, that inhuman bloody Butchery, and so much
from the Savageness and Cruelty of their Nature, as the Doctrines and
Principles which directed and encouraged it; as also that of Paris, than which
nothing was more grateful and acceptable to their Popes, as their Eriess of
P.G. 13. and Clem. 8.
Bulls make manifest, and the picturing it in the Pope's Chamber; and for
which, as a most glorious Action, Triumphs were made, and public Thanksgivings
were returned to God. So in Savoy, and elsewhere, both in former and latter
Times. And this was that which the late Conspirators aimed at so fully
intending a Massacre. Those that escaped a Massacre, says 5. Jes. Trial, p. 28.
Dugdale, must be cut off by the Army. And Col. Lr. to the Internuncio.
Coleman tells the Internuncio in his Letters; That their Design prospered so
well, that he doubted not in a little time, their Business would be managed to
the utter Ruin of the Protestant Party: The effecting where of was so desirable
and meritorious, that if he had a Sea of Flood, and an hundred Lives, he would
lose them all to carry on the Design. And if to effect this, it were necessary
to destroy an hundred Heretical Kings, he would do it Prance 's Nar. p. 4.
. Singleton the Priest affirmed, That he would make no more to stab forty
Parliament Men, than to eat his Dinner. Gerard and Kelley, to encourage Pranee
to kill Sir E. B. G. told him, It was no Murder, no Sin, and that to kill
twenty of them was nothing in that case; which was both a charitable and
meritorious Act. And Cause. Ep. p. 189.
Grant, one of the Massacring Gunpowder Traitors, said, upon his Execution, te
one that urged him to repent of that wicked Enterprise, That he was so far from
counting it a Sin, that on the contrary, he was confident, that that noble
Design had so much of Merit in it, as would be abundantly enough to make
Satisfaction for all the Sins of his whole Life. See Everard Digby speaking to
the same purpose also; the Provincial Garnet did teach the Conspirators the
same Catholic Doctrine, viz. That the King, Nobility, Clergy, and whole
Commonalty of the Realm of England (Papists excepted) were Heretics; and, That
all Heretics were accursed and excommunicated; and That no Heretic could be a
King, but that it was lawful and meritorious to kill him, and all other
Heretics within this Realm of England, for the advancement and enlargement of
the Authority and Jurisdiction of the Pope, and for the restoring of the Romish
Religion. This was that Garnet whom the Papists here honored as a Pope, and
kissed his Feer, and reverenced his Judgment as an Oracle; and since his Death,
given him the Honor of Saintship and Martyrdom Five Jes. Trinis, p. 25.
. Dugdale deposed, That after they had dispatched the King, a Massacre was to
follow.

But surely, it may be supposed, that the Temper of such a Prince, or his
Interest, would oblige him to forbid or restrain such violent Executions in
England. Yea, but what if his Temper be to comply with such Courses? Or his
Temper be better? What if it be overruled? What if he be persuaded, as other
Catholics are, that he must in Conscience proceed thus? What if he cannot do
otherwise, without hazard of his Crown and Life? For he is not to hold the
Reins of Government alone, he will not be allowed to be much more than the
Pope's POSTILLION, and must look to be dismounted, if he act not according to
Order. The Law Caput Offici^m.
tells us, That it is not in the Power of any Civil Magistrate to remit the
Penalty, or abate the Rigor of the Law. Nay, if the Prince should plight his
Faith by Oath, that he would not suffer their Bloody LAWS to be executed upon
his Dissenting Subjects, this would signify nothing: For they would soon tell
him, That Bon^^i^a de print. p^a^. Disp. 3. q. 2.
Contracts made against the Common Law are invalid, though confirmed by Oath;
And; That he is not bound to stand to his Promise though he had sworn to it:
And, That Faith is no more to be kept with Heretics, than the Council of
Constance would have it. So that Protestants are to be burnt, as Jo. Huss and
Jerome of Prague were by that Council, though the Emperor had given them his
safe Conduct in that Solemn manner, which could secure them only (as they said)
from the Civil, but not Church-Process, which was the greatest. For it is their
General Rule, That Faith is either not to be given, or not kept with Heretics.
Therefore, says Simanca, That Faith engaged to Heretics, though confirmed by
Oath, is in no wise to be performed: For, says he, if Faith is not to be kept
with Tyrants and Pirates, and others who kill the Body, much less with Heretics
who kill the Souls. And that the Oath in favor of them, is but Vinculum
Iniquitatis, A Bond of Iniquity. Though Popish Princes, the better to promote
their Interest, and to ensnare the Protestant Subjects, to get advantage upon
them, to their Ruin, have made large Promises, and plighted their Faith to
them, when they did not intend to keep it. As the Emperor to John Huss and
Jerome; Charles the Ninth of France to his Protestant Subjects before the
Massacre; the Duke of Savoy to his Protestant Subjects, before their designed
Ruin; and Queen Mary, before her burning of them. But if there were neither Law
nor Conscience to hinder, yet in point of Interest, he must not show favor to
Heretics, without apparent hazard, both Parson' s Philop. p. 109.
of Crown and Life, for he forfeits both if he does. The Pope every Year does
not only curse Heretics, but every Favourer of them, from which none but
himself can absolve. Becan. Cont. Aug. p. 131, 132. In Fowlis, p. 60.
Becanus very elegantly tells us, If a Prince be a dull Cur, and fly not upon
Heretics, he is to be beaten out, and a keener Degrees must be got in his stead.
Henry the Third, and Henry the Fourth, were both Assassinated upon this
Account, because they were suspected to favor Heretics. And are we not told
by the Discoverers Oats 's Nar. p. 4. N. 5, etc.
of the Popish Plot, That after they had dispatched the King, they would depose
his Brother also, that was to succeed him, if he did not answer their
Expectations, for rooting out the Protestant Religion.

But may not Parliaments secure us by Laws and Provisions restraining the Power
which endangers us? Not possible, if once they secure and settle the Throne for
Popery: For, First, They can avoid Parliaments as long as they please; and a
Government that is more Arbitrary and Violent, is more agreeable to their
Designs and Principles: It being apparent, that the English Papists have lost
the Spirit of their Ancestors, who so well asserted the English Liberties,
being so generally now fixed for the Pope's Universal Monarchy, sacrificing,
all to that Roman Moloch, being much more his Subjects than the King's; and
though Natives by Birth, yet are Foreigners as to Government, Principle,
Interest, Affection and Design; and therefore no Friends to Parliaments, as our
Experience has told us.

But, Secondly, if their Necessity should require a Parliament, there is no
question but they may get such a one as will serve their turns: For so have
every of our former Princes in all the Changes of Religion that have been
amongst us: As Henry the 8th, when he was both for and against Popery; Edward
the 6th, when he was wholly Protestant; Queen Mary, when she was for Burning
Alive; and Queen Elizabeth, when she ran so Counter to her Sister. And the
Reason is clear, that he who has the making of the public Officers, and the
Keys of Preferment and Profit, influenceth and swayeth Elections and Votes as
he pleases. And by how much the Throne comes to be fixed in Popery, the
Protestants must expect to be excluded from both Houses, as they have excluded
the Papists: For as Heretics and Traitors, they, as ignominous Persons, etc.
you have heard, forfeit all Right, either to choose, or be chosen in any Public
Councils: And then all Laws which have been made for the Protestants, and
against the Popish Religion, will be null and void, as being enacted by an
incompetent Authority, as being the Acts of Heretics, Kings, Lords, and
Commons, who had forfeited all their Rights and Privileges.

But, Thirdly, suppose our Laws were valid, as enacted by competent Authority,
and such good and wholesome Provisions, as were those Statutes made by our
Popish Ancestors, in those Statutes of Provisoes in Edward the I. and Edward
the III. Time, and that of Praemunire in Richard the II. and Henry the IV. for
Relief against Papal Encroachments and Oppressions: Yet being against the Laws
and Canons of Holy Church, the Sovereign Authority, they will be all
superseded: For so they determine, That when the Canon and the Civil Laws
clash, one requiring what the other allows not, the Church-Law must have the
observance, and that of the State neglected: And Constitutions (they say) made
against the Canons and Decrees of the Roman Bishops, are of no moment: Their
best Authors are positive of it. And our own Experience and Histories testify
the Truth thereof: For how were those good Laws beforementioned, defeated by
the Pope's Authority, so that there was no effectual Execution thereof till
Henry the 8th's Time, as Dr. Burnet Hist. Ref. p. 110.
tells us? And how have the good Laws, to suppress and prevent Popery, been
very much obstructed in their Execution by Popish Influence?

An Answer to a late Pamphlet, Entitled, A Short Scheme of the Usurpations of
the Crown of England, etc.
THE World may very justly wonder at several Passages in this ill-designed, and
as ill-writ Pamphlet, which the Author has taken the pains to collect from some
perty Grubstreet Chronicle. Henry II. is called an Usurper ( page 4.) because
he accepted of the Crown of England in his Mothers Lifetime; though by her not
opposing his Claim, it may very reasonably be concluded, that she freely
consented to his Promotion, as the most essectual means to secure the Crown to
her Posterity.

But we are told, That a Crown is no Estate to be made over in Trust: If our
Author's meaning is, that a Crown is an Estate which the Possessor cannot
divest himself of by a voluntary Resignation; both Reason, and a multituide of
Examples in several Ages, and Nations, prove that the Principle our Author has
laid down, is founded on a gross Mistake. Therefore if our Author designs to
publish any more Schemes of Usurpation, let him first inform us what it is, and
how far it extends, lest the World should accuse him of having as notoriously
usurped to himself the Title of a Writer, as any of our Princes ever did the
Crown of England. He would persuade his Readers to believe, that God punished
King Edward III. and King Henry V. for their Usurpations, with frequent and
unexpected Victories; in the acquisition of which, though there was some English
Blood shed, (as it was impossible it should be otherwise) yet the Enemies paid
an excessive Price for it; after the defeat of their great Armies, and the
Imprisonment of their King, they being forced to buy their Peace upon such
Terms, as our conquering Usurpers pleased to impose. Nor did ever any
well-wisher to the English Nation deny, that these Two Princes were the Glory
of their Age, and of our British History. If I should reckon up all the evident
Mistakes and salfe Inferences in this Libel, it would be too tedious, since a
careless Eye cannot easily overlook them.

If the Pamphlet finds so undeserved a Reception in the World, as to need a
Second Impression, the Author is desired to add to it this Postscript; which
being founded on the Principles asserted by him, will show the World that he
has wilfully, and perhaps partially, forborne to speak of as notorious an
Usurper, as any that are mentioned in his Scheme.

Queen Mary, the Offspring of an Incestuous Marriage, had no other
unquestionable Divine Right to the Crown of England, than what was given her by
an Act of Parliament, made in her Father's Reign, and the common Consent of the
Nobility and People after the Death of her Brother King Edward VI. whose
disposal of the Crown, by Letters Patents under the Great Seal, being directly
contrary to the former Entail of it, limited by a higher Authority; His Sister,
the Lady Mary, was acknowledge Queen. Therefore, according to our Author's
abstruse Notions, She (as well as her Grandfather Henry VII.) must be reckoned
among the Usurpers of the Crown of England. Let us now see what success
attended her, and whether the Nation was happy under her Government. As soon as
She saw her self fixed in the Throne, She imprisoned and deprived several of
the Protestant Bishops, contrary to the then Established Laws of the Realm: She
intruded Popish Bishops into the Sees, thus declared vacant; the small
remainder of the Protestant Bishops, who had been called to Parliament by Writ,
were, nevertheless, violently thrust out of the Parliament House, for refusing
to worship the Mass. The Members of the House of Commons, in her First
Parliament, were chosen by force and threats: the Freeholders were hindered by
violonce from exercising their Right of choosing Representatives: false Returns
were made; and those who were for the Reformed Religion, though duly elected,
were by force expelled the House. So that we cannot wonder at the Statues made
in this pretended Free Parliament; which was in every Thing influenced by the
Court-Party. Shortly after, her Marriage with the haughty jealous Spaniard (of
which She her self felt the ill Consequences) was justly disliked by the
Nobility and Commonalty. Her base Design of setting up a Supposititious Child
for Heir to the Crown, was not only happily defeated, but deservedly exposed to
the Censure of the Nation: Her Design to erect the Spanish Inquisition in
England was disappointed. Calais (after having belonged to the Crown of England
about two hundred and eleven Years, and which was gained with great difficulty,
after eleven Months Siege) was, in the depth of Winter, lost in a Weeks time:
And quickly after, all the English Territories were, with small difficulty,
recovered by the French. We must not forget how exactly She put in practice the
base, treacherous, and destructive Principles of the pretended Catholic
Religion, in these remarkable Particulars. She barbarously used her only
Sister, the Lady Elizabeth, and designed to have taken away her Life, for no
other Cause, but her firm adherence to the Protestant Religion. She imprisoned
and burnt Archbishop Cranmer, who had formerly sheltered her from her Father's
Fury. She deprived and imprisoned Judge Hales, who alone resolutely opposed King
Edward the Sixth's Will: and preferred Judge Bromley to be Lord Chief Justice,
though he had, without any reluctance, prepared the Letters Patent for her
Exclusion. The Inhabitants of Norfolk and Suffolk, who were the first that took
up Arms for her, (upon her Promise to permit them the Exercise of their
Religion) were the first that suffered Persecution under her. And after she had
put to death near three hundred Persons, (without respect to Quality, Age, or
Sex) it pleased God to put an end to the Romish Cruelty and Idolatry, by her
unexpected and unlamented Death. Nor is her Memory preserved from Oblivion by
any thing, but her repeated Acts of Cruelty and Injustice. This was the Success
that attended her, this the Happiness, the Liberty, the Religion established in
the English Nation, during her five Years Tyranny.

That I may not detain the Reader any longer, I will conclude this Advice to
our Learned Pamphleteer; That for the suture he do not so positively ascribe
all unhappy Accidents, as frequent Wars and Rebellions, the Effusion of English
Blood, the unfortunate End of some of our Princes, to the Divine Vengeance upon
them, for the Usurpations he accuses them of; smce, if he will consult our
Historians, he may find that Edward II. Richard II. and the Incomparable
Prince, King Charles I. though their Title from William the Conqueror is
indisputable, were far unhappier than any of the Usurpers he mentions. That in
Edward the Fourth's, and Henry the Eighth's Reign, a great deal of English
Blood was shed both at Home and Abroad, though their Right was unquestionable,
and universally acknowledged. And that as to the promiscuous good or ill
Success of all Affairs in this lower World, the observation of the Wisest of
Princes, and of Men, is very often exactly verified; There is one Event to the
Righteous and to the Wicked: To the Prince who ascends the Throne by an
unquestionable Right, and to him that ascends it by Violence and Usurpation. To
the Prince that religiously performs the Solemn Oath taken at his Coronation,
and to him that wilfully breaks through all the Obligations he is under, and
endeavors by the most base Methods to dissolve the Established Government.

The following Paper was published by Mr. Samuel Johnson in the Year 1686. for
which he was sentenced by the Court of King's Bench, (Sir Edward Herbert being
Lord Chief Justice) to stand three times on the Pillory, and to be whipped from
Newgate to Tyburn: Which barbarous Sentence was executed.

An Humble and Hearty Address to all the English Protestants in this present
Army.
GENTLEMEN,
NEXT to the Duty which we owe to God, which ought to be the principal Care of
Men of your Profession especially, (because you carry your Lives in your Hands,
and often look Death in the Face). The second Thing that deserves your
Consideration, is, The Service of your Native Country, wherein you drew your
first Breath, and breathed a free English Air. Now I would desire you to
consider, how well you comply with these two main Points, by engaging in this
prsent Service.

Is it in the Name of God, and for his Service, that you have joined your
selves with Papists; who will indeed fight for the Mass Book but burn the
Bible, and who seek to Extirpate the Protestant Religion with Your Swords,
because they cannot do it with their Own? And will you be Aiding and Assisting
to set up Mass-Houses, to erect that Popish Kingdom of Darkness and Desolation
amongst as, and to train up all our Children in Popery? How can you do these
Things, and yet call your selves Protestants?

And then what Service can be done your Country, by being under the Command of
French and Irish Papists, and by bringing the Nation under a Foreign Yoke? Will
you help them to make forcible Entry into the Houses of your Countrymen, under
the Name of Quartering, directly contrary to Magna Charta, and the Petition of
Right? Will you be Aiding and Assisting to all the Murders and Outrages which
they shall commit by their void Commissions? Which were declared Illegal, and
sufficiently blasted by both Houses of Parliament, (if there had been any need
of it) for it was very well known before, That a Papist cannot have a
Commission, but by the Law is utterly Disabled and Disarmed. Will you exchange
your Birthright of English Laws and Liberties for Martial or Club-Law, and
help to destroy all others, only to be eaten last your selves? If I know you
well, as you are English Men, you hate and scorn these Things. And therefore be
not unequally yoaked with Idolatrous and Bloody Papists. Be Valiunt for the
Truth, and show your selves Men.

The same Considerations are likewise humbly offered to all the English Seamen,
who have been the Bulwark of this Nation against Popery and Slavery ever since
Eighty Eight.

Several Reasons for the Establishment of a Standing Army, and Dissolving the
Militia.
1. BEcause the Lords Lieutenants, Deputy Lieutenants, and the whole Militia,
that is to say, the Lords, Gentlemen, and Freeholders of England, are not fit
to be trusted with their own Laws, Lives, Liberties, and Estates, and therefore
ought to have Guardians and Keepers assigned to them.

2. Because Mercenary Soldiers, who fight for twelve Pence a Day, will fight
better, as having more to lose than either the Nobility or Gentry.

3. Because there are no Irish Papists in the Militia, who are certainly the
best Soldiers in the World, for they have slain Men, Women, and Children, by
Hundreds of Thousands at once.

4. Because the Dragooners have made more Converts than all the Bishops and
Clergy of France.

5. The Parliament ought to establish one standing Army at the least, because
indeed there will be need of Two, that one of them may defend the People from
the other.

6. Because it is a thousand pities that a brave Popish Army should be a Riot.

7. Unless it be Established by Act of Parliament, the Justices of Peace will
be forced to suppress it in their own Defense; for they will be loath to forfeit
an hundred Pounds every day they rise, out of Complement to a Popish Rout. 13.
H. 4. c. 7. 2. H. 5. c. 8.

8. Because a Popish Army is a Nullity. For all Papists are utterly disabled
(and punishable besides) from bearing any Office in Camp, Troop, Band, or
Company of Soldiers, and are so far disarmed by Law, that they cannot wear a
Sword, so much as in their Defense, without the allowance of four Justices of
the Peace of the County: And then upon a March they will be perfectly
enchanted, for they are not able to stir above five Miles from their own
Dwelling House. 3. Jac. 5. Sect. 8, 27, 28, 29.35. Eliz. 2.3. Jac. 5. Sect. 7.

9. Because Persons utterly disabled by Law are utterly Unauthorized; and
therefore the void Commissions of Killing and Slaying in the Hands of Papists,
can only enable them to Massacre and Murder.

A Discourse of Magistracy; of Prerogative by Divine Right; of Obedience, and
of the Laws.
CHAP. I. Of MAGISTRACY.
I. RELATION is nothing else but that State of Mutual Respect and Reference,
which one Thing or Person has to another.

II. Such are the Relations of Father and Son, Husband and Wife, Master and
Servant, Magistrate and Subject.

III. The Relations of a Father, Husband, and Master, are really distinct and
different; that is, one of them is not the other; for he may be any one of
these who is none of the rest.

IV. This distinction proceeds from the different Reasons, upon which these
Relations are founded.

V. The Reason or Foundation, from whence arises the Relation of a Father, is
from having begotten his Son, who may as properly call every old Man he meets
his Father, as any other Person whatsoever, excepting him only who begat him.

VI. The Relation of an Husband and Wife is founded in Wedlock, whereby they
mutually consent to become one Fle^h.

VII. The Relation of a Master is founded in that Right and Title which he has
to the Possession, or Service of his Slave or Servant.

VIII. In these Relations, the Names of Father, Husband, and Master, imply
Sovereignty and Superiority, which varies notwithstanding, and is more or less
absolute, according to the Foundation of these several Relations.

IX. The Superiority of a Father is founded in that Power, Priority, and
Dignity of Nature, which a Cause has over its Effect.

X. The distance is not so great in Wedlock, but the Superiority of the Husband
over the Wife, is like that of the RightHand over the Left in the same Body.

XI. The Superiority of a Master, is an absolute Dominion over his Slave, a
limited and conditionate Command over his Servant.

XII. The Titles of Pater Patriae, and Sponsus Regni, Father of the Country,
and Husband of the Realm, are Metaphors and improper Speeches: For no Prince
ever begat a whole Country of Subjects; nor can a Kingdom more properly be said
to be married, than the City of Venice is to be Adriatic Gulf.

XIII. And to show further, that Magistracy is not Paternal Authority, nor
Monarchy founded in Fatherhood; it is undeniably plain, that a Son may be the
Natural Sovereign Lord of his own Father, as Henry the Second had been of
Jeffery Plantagenet, if he had been an Englishman; which, they say, Henry the
Seventh did not love to think of, when his Sons grew up to Years. And this Case
alone is an eternal Confutation of the Patriarchate.

XIV. Neither is Magistracy a Marital Power, for the Husband may be the
obedient Subject of his own Wife, as Philip was of Queen Mary.

XV. Nor is it that Dominion which a Master has over his Slave, for then a
Prince might lawfully sell all his Subjects, like so many Head of Cattle, and
make Money of his whole Stock when ever he pleases, as a Patron of Algiers does.

XVI. Neither is the Relation of Prince and Subject the same with that of a
Master and hired Servant, for he does not hire them, but as St. Paul says,
They pay him Tribute, in consideration of his continual Attendance and
Employment for the Public Good.

XVII. That Public Office and Employment is the Foundation of the Relation of
King and Subject, as many other Relations are likewise founded upon other
Functions and Administrations. Such as Guardian, and Ward, etc.

XVIII. The Office of a King is set down at large in the 17th Chapter of the
Laws of King Edward the Confessor, to which the succeeding Kings have been
sworn at their Coronation: And it is affirmed in the Preambles of the Statutes
of Prout Regalis Officii exposcit utilitas.
Malbridg, and of the Statute of Quo Warranto, made at Sicome le profit de
Office Demand. The Kingly or Regal Office of this Realm, Mar. Sess. 3. cap. 1.
Gloucester, That the calling of Parliaments to make Laws for the better Estate
of the Realm, and the more full Administration of Justice, belongs to the
Office of a King. But the fullest account of it in few words, is in Chancellor
Fortescue, Chap. XIII. which Passage is quoted in Calvin's Case, Coke VII. Rep.
Fol. 5. Ad Tutelam namque Legis Subditorum, ac eorum Corporum, and bonorum, Rex
hujusmodi erectus est, and ad hanc potestatem a populo effluxam ipse habet, quo
ei non licet potestate alia suo populo Dominari. For such a King (that is, of
every Political Kingdom, as this is) is made and ordained for the Defense or
Guardianship of the Laws of his Subjects, and of their Bodies and Goods,
whereunto he receives Power of his People, so that he cannot govern his People
by any other Power.

Corolary, A Bargain's a Bargain.

CHAP. II. Of Prerogatives by Divine Right.
I. GOvernment is not matter of Revelation; if it were, then those Nations that
wanted Scripture, must have been without Government; whereas Scripture it self
says, that Government is the Ordinance of Man, and of Human Extraction. And
King Charles the First says of this Government in particular, That it was
molded by the Wisdom and Experience of the People. Answ. to XIX. Prop.

II. All just Governments are highly beneficial to Mankind, and are of God, the
Author of all Good; they are his his Ordinances and Institutions. Romans 13.1, 2.

III. Plowing and sowing, and the whole business of preparing Bread Corn, is
absoluely necessary to the Subsistence of Mankind; This also comes forth from
the Lord of Hosts, who is wonderful in Counsel, and excellent in Working. Isa.
28. from 23d to 29th Verse.

IV. Wisdom says, Counsel is mine, and sound Wisdom; I am Understanding, I
have Strength; by me Kings reign, and Princes decree Justice: By me Prinees
rule, and Nobles, even all the Judges of the Earth. Prove. 13.14.

V. The Prophet, speaking of the Plowman, faith, His God does instruct him to
Discretion, and does teach him. Isa. 28.26.

VI. Scripture neither gives nor takes away Men's Civil Rights, but Ieaves them
as it found them, and (as our Savior said of himself) is no Divider of
Inheritances.

VII. Civil Authority is a Civil Right.

VIII. The Law of England gives the King his Title to the Crown. For, where is
it said in Scripture, that such a Person or Family by Name shall enjoy it? And
the same Law of England which has made him King, has made him King according to
the English Laws, and not otherwise.

IX. The King of England has no more Right to set up a French Government, than
the French King has to be King of England, which none at all.

X. Render unto Caesar the things which are Caesar's, neither makes a Caesar,
nor tells who Caesar is, nor what belongs to him; but only requires Men to be
just, in giving him those supposed Rights, which the Laws have determined to be
his.

XI. The Scripture supposes Property, when it forbids Stealing; it supposes Men
Lands to be already butted and bounded, when it forbids removing the Ancient
Landmarks: And as it is impossible for any Man to prove what Estate he has by
Scripture, or to find a Terrier of his Lands there; so it is a vain thing to
look for Statutes of Prerogative in Scripture.

XII. If Mishpat Hamelech, the manner of the King, 1 Samuel 8.11. be a Statute of
Prerogative, and prove all those Particulars to be the Right of the King, then
Mishpat Haccohanim, the Priests custom of Sacrilegious Rapine, Chap. 2.13.
proves that to be the Right of the Priests, the same word being used in both
places.

XIII. It is the Resolution of all the Judges of England, that even the known
and undoubted Perogative of the Jewish Kings, do not belong to our Kings, and
that it is an absurd and impudent thing to affirm they do. Coke 11. Rep. p. 63.
Mich. 5. Jac. Note, Give us a King to judge us, 1 Samuel 8.5, 6, 20.
upon Sunday the Tenth of November, in the same Term, the King, upon Complaint
made to him by Bancroft, Archbishop of Canterbury, concerning Prohibitions,
was informed, That when Question was made of what matters the Ecclesiastical
Judges have Cognizance, either upon the Exposition of the Statutes concerning
Tithes, or any other thing Ecclesiastical, or upon the Statute 1 Eliz.
concerning the High Commission, or in any other case, in which there is not
express Authority by Law, the King himself may decide it in his Royal Person;
and that the Judges are but the Delegates of the King, and that the King may
take what Causes he shall please to determine from the Determination of the
Judges and may determine them himself. And the Arch bishop said, That this was
clear in Divinity, That such Authority belongs to the King, by the Word of God
in Scripture. To which it was answered by me, in the presence, and with the
clear consent of all the Justices of England, and Barons of the Exchequer, That
the King in his own Person cannot adjudg any Case, either Criminal, as Treason,
Felony, etc. but this ought to be determined and adjudged in some Court of
Justice, according to the Law and Custom of England. And always Judgments are
given, Ideo consideratum est per Curiam; so that the Court gives the Judgment
--. And it was greatly marvelled, that the Archbishop durst inform the King,
that such Absolute Power and Authority, as is aforesaid, belonged to the King
by the Word of God.

CHAP. III. Of OBEDIENCE.
I. NO Man has any more Civil Authority than what the Law of the Land has
vested in him; nor is he one of St. Paul's Higher Powers any farther, or to any
other purposes, than the Law has empowered him.

II. An Usurped, Illegal, and Arbitrary Power, is so far from being the
Ordinance of God, that it is not the Ordinance of Man.

III. Whoever opposes an Usurped, Illegal, and Arbitrary Power, does not oppose
the Ordinance of God, but the Violation of that Ordinance.

IV. The 13th of the Romans commands Subjection to our Temporal Governors,
because their Office and Employment is for the Public Welfare; For he is the
Minister of God to Thee for good. Verse 4.

V. The 13th of the Hebrews commands Obedience to Spiritual Rulers, because
they watch for your Souls. Verse 17.

VI. But the 13th of the Hebrews did not oblige the Martyrs and Confessors in
Queen Mary's Time, to obey such blessed Bishops as Bonner, and the Beast of
Rome, who were the perfect Reverse of St. Paul's Spiritual Rulers, and whose
Practice was murdering of Souls and Bodies, according to that true Character of
Popery, which was given it by the Bishops who compiled the Thanksgiving for the
Fifth of November; but Archbishop Land was wiser than they, and in his time
blotted it out.

The Prayer formerly ran thus: To that end strengthen the Hands of our Gracious
King, the Nobles and Magistrates of the Land, to cut off these Workers of
Iniquity (whose Religion is Rebellion, whose Faith is Faction, whose Practice
is murdering of Souls and Bodies) and to root them out of the Confines of this
Kingdom.

VII. All the Judges of England are bound by their Oath, and by the Duty of
their place, to disobey all Writs, Letters, or Commands, which are brought to
them, 18 Edw. III. 20 Edw. III. Cap. 1, 2.
either under the Little Seal, or under the Great Seal, to hinder or delay
common Right. Are the Judges all bound in an Oath, and by their Places, to
break the 13th of the Romans?

VIII. The Engagement of the Lords attending upon the King at York, June 13.
1642. which was subscribed by the Lord Keeper, and thirty nine Peers, besides
the Lord Chief Justice Banks, and several others of the Privy Council, was in
these words.

We do engage our selves not to obey any Orders or Commands whatsoever, not
warranted by the known Laws of the Land. Was this likewise an Association
against the 13th of the Romans?

IX. A Constable represents the King's Person, and in the Execution of his
Office is within the purview of the 13th of the Romans, as all Men grant; but
in case he so far pervert his Office, as to break the Peace, and commit
Murder, Burglary, or Robbery on the Highway, he may and ought to be resisted.

X. The Law of the Land is the best Expositor of the 13th of the Romans here;
and in Poland, the Law of the Land there.

XI. The 13th of the Romans is received for Scripture in Poland, and yet this
is expressed in the Coronation Oath in that Country: Quod si Sacramentum meum
violavero, Incolae Regni nullam nobis Obedientiam praestare tenebuntur. And if
I shall violate my Oath, the Inhabitants of the Realm shall not be bound to
yield me any Obedience.

XII. The Law of the Land, according to Bracton, is the highest of all the
Higher Powers mentioned in this Text, for it is Superior to the King, and made
him King, ( Lib. iii. cap. xxvi. Rex habet Superiorem Deum, item Legem, per
quam factus est Rex, item Curiam suam, viz. Comites and Barons) and therefore
by this Text we ought to be subject to it in the first place. And according to
Melancthon, It is the Ordinanee of God, to which the Higher Powers themselves
ought to subject. Vol. iii. In his Commentary on the fifth Verse, (Wherefore ye
must needs be subject, not only for Wrath, but also for Conscience sake.) He
has these words. Neque vero hac tantum per^inent and Subditos, sed etiam ad
Magistratum, qui cum fiunt Tyranni, non minus dissipant Ordinationem Dei, quam
Seditiosi. Ideo and ipsorum Conscientia fit rea, quia non obediunt Ordinationi
Dei; id est, Legibus, quibus debent parere. Ideo Comminationes hic positae
etiam ad ipses pertinent. Itaque hujus mandati severit as moveat omnes, (...)
violalationem Politici status putent esse love; peccatum. Neither does this
place concern Subjects only, but also the Magistrates themselves; who when they
turn Tyrants, do no less overthrow the Ordinance of God than the Seditious; and
therefore their Consciences too are guilty, for not obeying the Ordinance of
God, that is, the Laws, which they ought to obey. So that the Threatenings in
this place do also belong to them; wherefore, let the Severity of this Command
deter all Men from thinking the Violation of the Political Constitution to be a
light Sin.

Corolary. To destroy the Law and- Legal Constitution, which is the Ordinance
of God, by false and Arbitrary Expositions of this Text, is a greater Sin than
to destroy it by any other means: For it is Seething the Kid in his Mothers
Milk.

CHAP. IV. Of LAWS.
I. THere is no natural Obligation, whereby one Man is bound to yield Obedience
to another, but what is founded in Paternal or Patriarchal Authority.

II. All the Subjects of a Patriarchal Monarch are Princes of the Blood.

III. All the People of England are not Princes of the Blood.

IV. No Man who is naturally free can be bound, but by his own Act and Deed.

V. Public Laws are made by Public Consent, and they therefore bind every
Man, because every Man's Consent is involved in them.

VI. Nothing but the same Authority and Consent which made the Laws, can
repeal, alter, or explain them.

VII. To judge and determine Causes against Law, without Law, or where the Law
is obscure and uncertain, is to assume Legislative Power.

VIII. Power assumed without a Man's Consent, cannot bind him as his own Act
and Deed.

IX. The Law of the Land is all of a piece, and the same Authority which made
one Law made all the rest, and intended to have them all impartially executed.

X. Law on one side, is the Back-Sword of Justice.

XI. The best things when corrupted are the worst; and the wild Justice of a
State of Nature, is much more desirable than Law perverted and overruled, into
Hemlock and Oppression.

This Discourse of Magistracy, etc. and the former Reasons, were written by the
foresaid Mr. S. Johnson.

The Definition of a TYRANT, by the Learned and Loyal Abraham Cowley,
(published by the present Lord Bishop of Rochester) in his Discourse concerning
the Government of Oliver Cromwell.
I Call him a Tyrant, who either intrudes himself forcibly into the Government
of his Fellow-Citizens, without any Legal Authority over them, or who, having a
just Title to the Government of a People, abuses it to the destruction or
tormenting of them: So that all Tyrants are at the same time Usurpers, either
of the whole, or at least of a part of that Power which they assume to
themselves; and no less are they to be accounted Rebels, since no Man can usurp
Authority over others, but by rebelling against them who had it before, or at
least against those Laws which were his Superiors.

Several Queries proposed to the Sages of the Law, who have studied to Advance
the Public, equally with, if not more than their own private Interest.






B. R. against a Charter granted by Parliament? If it be of any force, then the
King's Bench is Superior to the Legislative Power of the Kingdom: If not, then,

King's Bench, as it was to Act against an Act of Parliament, before the
Judgment was entered? And then,



A LETTER TO THE KING, When DUKE of YORK, Persuading him to return to the
Protestant Religion, wherein the chief Errors of the Papists are exposed, and
the Tendency of their Doctrines to promote Arbitrary Government, proved.
By an Old Cavalier, and Faithful Son of the Church of England, as Established
by Law.
Illustrious Sir!
WHEN I look up to the Greatness of your Quality, and down on my own meanness,
I cannot but tremble to make this Address, so liable to be censured as
presumptuous, and obnoxious to variety of Misconstruction. But since my Pen is
guided by an Heart filled with profound Loyalty, and Veneration toward all the
Royal Family, and a sincere respect, and most passionate desires for the
particular Prosperity (Temporal and Eternal) of your Royal Highness, I cannot
refrain discharging what I apprehended my Duty; and therefore with good Esther,
finding not only my Country, but your Highness also, in such apparent (I wish
it may not prove inevitable) hazard of Ruin, am resolved to adventure forth,
and cast my poor weak Sentiments at your feet; and, If they perish, they perish.

It Is generally reported, That you are long since turned Papist; and so far
believed, That every day many hundred thousand Protestants are melted into
Tears and Horror merely on that Consideration, and lament the same, as one of
the greatest Calamities that has happened in our Age. I must do my self so much
Justice as to declare, That I am none of those fanatical Spirits, that either
raise, or lightly credit Rumors to the prejudice of my Superiors. But besides
what has been sworn by Persons, whose Evidence none have hitherto been able to
invalidate by any substantial Reasons, or Incoherence in their Depositions;
your Highnesses Conduct, and Deportment for many years past, your absenting
from the public Worship of our Church, Refusing legal Oaths and Tests, your
countenancing, retaining an intimate Correspondency with Roman Catholics; and
many other Reasons not fit, at least unnecessary here to be mentioned, do all
loudly speak it: And for those who would go about to deny it (as some wretched
Pamphlet-scriblers, and unthinking Health-drinkers have done,) besides the
folly of the attempt, they unwarily cast a greater load of Ignominy and
Dishonor on your Highness, whilst they pretend to vindicate you.

For is it imaginable, That a Prince of your Generosity and Prudence would so
far suffer the Affairs of your Royal Brother to be imbroil'd, His Councils
discomposed, all the Protestants in the World swallowed up with Astonishment,
and almost despair, your own Honor fullied, your Interest impaired, and these
Three Kingdoms put into a deplorable Distraction, merely upon a false
supposition, without rectifying in all this time their mistake by some real
Demonstrations to the contrary? If such a Capricio should sway with your
Highness, what were it but to render you the worst Subject, the most unkind
Brother, the most Impolitick Prince, and the maddest, or most monstrous Man in
the World?

I shall therefore take it for granted, and consequently must, though with all
Humility, and a Sorrow inexpressible, direct my Discourse to your Highness as
an Apostate from the Protestant Faith; and if I am mistaken, it is your Highness
has led not only me, but almost all the World into that Error.

I am not insensible of my own weakness, and how unfit I am to argue matters of
Religion with your Highness, and those subtle Sophisters (the Pest of Europe,
and shame of Christianity) which are always croaking about Persons of Quality,
whom they have perverted to their Idolatries; being my self but a
Lay-Gentleman, of little Learning, and in the course of my Life more conversant
with the Sword, than the Pen: And I must wonder with Regret, if none of the
Right Reverend Fathers, my Lords the Bishops, or some of our other Learned
Divines have not vigorously made Applications to your Highness, even in a
public Manner, to regain you to the Protestant Communion: If they have not
charged you, as they are God's Ambassadors, to show some Reasons, why you have
broke the League (your Baptismal vows) with his Church, and joined your self to
the Tents of his Enemies. If they have not adjur'd you in the Name of our Lord,
to show on what offense taken amongst us, and for what Beauties observed in the
Church of Rome, you quitted the true Spouse of Christ, to follow the
Enchantments of a Strumpet, whose shameless Adulteries have long since caused
an utter Divorce between Her and the Blessed Jesus: If they have not solemnly
called Heaven and Earth to Record, that they are ready to satisfy all your
scruples, to answer all your objections; and to show, That it is not through
any default in them, for want of Endeavors, nor in our Church for want of
Truth; but that your defection must be wilful, as well as unreasonable, whereby
to render you either convicted, or inexcusable.

Nor do I doubt, but several of those Glorious Lights of our Church, may
accordingly have discharged without fear of flattery their Functions herein, in
private discourses: But certainly a matter of that inestimable importance, as
wherein not only the Soul of one of the Bravest Princes of the Earth, but also
the whole Potestant Interest in the World, especially within these Three
Nations, is so deeply and dangerously concerned, might require, since I am sure
it deserves a Public and General Application: Nor ought any, though the
meanest of Men, to be blamed for contributing modestly, his help to prevent a
disaster of such universal influence: And therefore who knows but that Almighty
Providence, who overthrew Jericho's proud Walls of old, not with Battering
Engines of War, but with the blast of contemptible Rams-Horns, and is often
pleased to make use of the weakest Instruments to effect mighty Works; may give
a Blessing to these poor unpolished, inartificial Lines, which have nothing but
the Power of Truth, and the Honesty of a sincere Intention to recommend them to
your Princely Consideration?

That you were educated in Protestant Principles, is notorious. I beseech your
Highness therefore to satisfy the World what could induce you to a change. I
shall not mention your Royal Grandfather, whose Learned Pen baffled all the
Conclave, nor shall I insist on that Curse which he solemnly pronounced on any
of his Posterity that should turn Papists: I shall only say, Had you not the
Example, and the Commands too of a most Indulgent, Pious Prince, your Royal
Father, for perseverance therein; who, though barbarously murdered by vile Men,
yet continued steadfast, and even with his last breath discharged and cleared
the Doctrine of the Reformed Religion from having any share in their Crimes?
What Impiety is it, if you should dare to profess your Fathers Blessed Soul to
be eternally damned! and yet, if you are a Papist, you can do no less; for you
cannot be such without believing, That there is no Salvation out of the Pale of
the Church, and that there is no Church but that of Rome; and I am confident
none can have the Impudence to suggest, that He died in the Communion of that
Church: What follows then? or how will you answer this Horrid Scandal on his
Sacred Memory, when you shall meet his glorisied Spirit at the last dreadful
Judgmentday? Nor can the keenest Jesuit blunt the edge of this Argument by a
Retortion from the Consideration of your Highnesses Illustrious Mother: For
though Papists are so audacious, as to place the Keys of Heaven at the Pope's
Girdle, and uncharitably doom us All to unquenchable flames, not affording us
so much as a Room in Purgatory: yet Protestants are not so unchristian (but
according to Scripture) leave secret things to God, and allow grains for
Education, Prepossessions, Ignorance, etc. which is yet no more a Reason for
any Man to turn Papist, than it is for him that stands safe on the shore to leap
off into a Vessel so rotten and leaky as just ready to sink, upon a presumption
that still some of those that are in her may escape the danger: Or to choose an
impudent Quack, who boasts he only can cure him; and refuse a Learned
Physician, who modestly grants he may peradventure be healed by the other,
though very improbably; but withal, that it is a Million to one, but the
Patient, under such hands, miscarries; and that in this case, eternally.

But quitting this Argument, which is only Personal, I beseech your Highness to
tell us, how you, or any Man of sense can so far forget, not only his Education
and Interest, but his very Reason, as to embrace POPERY, frightful, detestable,
ridiculous Popery, that Chaos of Superstition, Idolatry, Error and Imposture,
that has no foundation but a Cheat; No Ends but to gratify Pride and Avarice;
no solid Argument to promote and maintain it, but Impudence and Cruelty.

Popery, That depends wholly upon nice and poor uncertainties, and unprovable
supposals: As 1st. That Peter was Bishop of Rome. 2dly. That He left there one
to be Heir of his Graces and Spirit, in a perpetual unfailable Succedion. 3dly.
That He so bequeathed his Infallibility to his Chair, as that whosoever sits in
it, cannot but speak Truth; so that all who sit where he sat, must by some
secret Instinct, say as he taught; that what Christ said to him absolutely,
without any respect to Rome, must be referred, yea tied to that place alone,
and fulfilled in it. 4thly. That Linus, Clemens and Cletut the Scholars, and
supposed Successors of Peter; must he preferred (in the Headship of the Church)
to John the beloved Apostle, then still living. 5thly. That He whose Life is
often times monstrously debauched, his Judgment childishly ignorant, cannot yet,
when in his Pontifical Chair, possibly err. 6thly. That the Golden Line of
this Apostolical Succession, in the confusion of so many long desperate
Schisms, shamefully corrupt Usurpations and Intrusions, and confessed Heresies,
yet neither was nor can be broken.

Popery, That teaches Men to worship Stocks and Stones, and painted Clouts,
with the same Honor as is due to our Creator; and lest that practice should
appear to her simple Clients too palpably opposite to Gods Law, most
sacrilegiously stifles one of the Ten Commandments in their vulgar Catechisms
and Prayer Books.

Popery, That utterly confounds the true Humanity of Christ, while they give
unto it Ten thousand places at once, and yet no place; Flesh, and no Flesh;
several Members without distinction; a substance without quantity, and other
Accidents; or Substance and Accidents, that cannot be seen, felt or perceived;
so that they make a Monster of their Savior, or nothing.

Popery, That utterly overthrows the Perfection of Christ's satisfaction; for
if all be not paid, how has he satisfied? If Temporal Punishments in Purgatory
be yet due, how is all paid? And if these must be paid by us, how are they
satisfied by him?

Popery, That has made more Scriptures than ever the Holy Spirit dictated, or
the Ancient Church received; and those which it does make, Imperiously obtrudes
upon the World; and while it thunders out Curses against all that will not add
these Books to God's, seems to defy the Curse pronounced by God himself to
those that add unto his Word, Rev. 22.18.

Popery, That erects a Throne in the Conscience to a mere Man, and many times
rather a Monster than a Man; and gives him absolute Power to make a sin of that
which is none; and to dispense with that which is; to create new Articles of
Faith, and to impose them upon Necessity of Salvation; to make wicked Men
Saints, and Saints Gods; for even by the Confession of Papists, lewd and
undeserving Men have leaped into their Calendar; yet being once installed
there, they have the Honor of Altars, Temples and Invocations; some of them in
a style fit only for their Maker.

Popery, That robs the Heart of all sound Comfort, whilst it teachethus, That
we neither can, nor ought to be assured of the Remission of our sins, and of
present Grace, and future Salvation; that we can never know whether we have
received the true Sacraments of God because we cannot know the Intention of the
Minister, without which they are no Sacraments.

Popery, That racks the Conscience with the needless torture of a necessary
shrist, wherein the virtue of an Absolution depends on the sulness of
Confession; and that upon Examination; and the sufficiency of Examination is so
full of scruples (besides infinite Cases of unresolved doubts in this feigned
penance) that the poor soul never knows when it is clear.

Popery, That under pretense of Religion plays the Bawd to sin, whilst both in
practice it tolerates open stews, and prefers Fornication in some cases before
honorable Matrimony, and gently blanches over wilful Violations of God's Law
with the favorable title of Venial Crimes.

Popery, That makes Nature vainly proud, in joining her as Copartner with God
in our Justification, Salvation, and idly puffing her up with a conceit of her
Perfection and Ability to keep more Laws than God has made, whence their
Doctrines of Merit and Supererogation, etc.

Popery, That requires no other Faith ^o Justification in Christians, than may
be found in Devils themselves; who, besides a confused Apprehention, can assent
to the Truth of God's revealed Will, and Popery requives no more.

Popery, That instead of the pure Milk of the Gospel, has long fed her starved
Souls with such idle Legends, as the Reporter can hardly deliver without
laughter, nor their Abettors be told of without shame and disclamation; so that
the wiser sort of the World read these Stories on Winter Evenings for sport,
which the poor credulous Multitude hear in their Churches with devout
astonishment.

Popery, That requires nothing but mere Formality in our Devotion; the work
wrought suffices alone in Sacraments, and in Prayers; if the number be repeated
by Rote, no matter for the Affection; as if God regarded not the Heart, but the
Tongue and Hands; and while he understands us, cared little whether we
understand our selves.

Popery, That has been often dyed in the Blood of Princes, that in some cases
teaches and allows Rebellion against God's Anointed; and both suborneth
Treasons; and excuses, pities, honors and rewards the Actors.

Popery, That overloads Men's Consciences with heavy burdens of infinite,
unnecessary Traditions, far more than ever M^ses Commented upon by all the
Jewish Rabbis; imposing them with no less Authority, and exacting them with
more Rigor, than any of the Royal Laws of their Maker.

Popery, That cozens the vulgar with nothing but shadows of Holiness in
Pilgrimages, Processions, Offerings, Holy Water, Latin Services, Images,
Tapers, rich Vestures, garish Altars, Crosses, Censings, and a thousand such
like, fit for Children and Fools, robbing them in the mean time of the sound
and plain Helps of true Piety and Salvation.

Popery, That cares not by what wilful Falsehoods, Equivocations, Perjuries and
Abominations it propagates it self, and maintains its credit: And therefore
being conscious of her own Villainies, goes about to falsify and deprave
Authors, that might give Evidence against her, to outface all ancient Truths,
to foist in Gibionitish Witnesses of their own forging, and leaves nothing
unattempted against Heaven and Earth that might advance her Faction, and
disable her innocent and just Accusers.

This, this is the true figure of Popery, through whatever false Optics your
Highness may have viewed it: This is that for which you are resolved to hazard
a Crown of Glory, and three temporal Diadems to boot; and to which you
sacrifice both your own Fortunes, and the Tranquillity of many Millions of
Souls.

What then can the World, that knows the clear light of your Hignesses Elevated
Understanding, imagine can be the Cause of your Revolt? Will they not be apt to
conceive, that you have not espoused this block Religion purely for its own
sake, but for some promised Dowry of an Absolute Monarchy, or Arbitrary Power,
which she might pretend to bring one day with her to your Embraces? But as this
is far below the Justice and Generosity of your Highness, so it is unworthy the
thoughts of any considerate Politician. For suppose any Prince, to whom the
British Scepter may hereafter devolve, intoxicated with the Tinsel Glories of
the French Monarch's blustering Grandeur, should be so vain, as to hope to
subjugate the English Liberties, and destroy the Constitution of the best
Established Government on Earth, by assuming to himself the whole Legislative
Power, raising Money, and draining his Subjects at Pleasure without their
common Consent in Parliament, etc. and should be so extravagantly enamored on
this fatal Project (fatal I say, because for above Five hundred years it has
shipwrack'd all that coasted that way,) as to be content to shift his Religion,
and exchange his Faith, and turn Papist, on a presumption, that the same might
facilitate and accomplish his Enterprise: As King John, it is said, resolved
once to embrace Mahumetism, rather than not to be revenged of his Barons,
claiming their just Liberties. Suppose I say all this should be, and that the
present Papists, to get their Religion publicly established, should comply
with his Designs; yet still is it not most reasonable to believe. That having
once gained their Point therein, they, or their Posterity, will soon recall to
mind their Birth rights and Privileges due to them as Englishmen; and will
they not then be perpetually tugging and struggling to regain them, whence
continual disturbance will ensue, and a standing Army must be kept on foot to
support this ill acquired Grandeur? For those Subjects that contended with King
John and King Henry the Third, etc. though they were Papists, and of the same
Religion with those Princes, could not brook it, to be Slaves to their
Arbitrary Pleasures in their Civil Rights: Besides, what a waking dream is it
for any King, that is free from the Roman Yoke, to think to make himself more
Absolute by involving himself and his Kingdoms in Thraldom to the Church of
Rome; wherein not only the Pope pretends a Right to domineer over him, but
every Ecclesiastic esteems himself wholly exempt from his Jurisdiction, and
all his People will be but half his Subjects, viz. in Temporals; for in
Spirituals, and in ordine ad spiritualia (a monstrous draw net, that may
include almost all the Actions of Humane Life,) they are wholly to be Conducted
by his Holiness and his Subordinate Ministers. How therefore can your Highness,
if a Roman Catholic, complain of the late successive Houses of Commons for
pressing a Bill to exclude you? Is it any Disloyalty to endeavor to preserve
the Imperial Crown of England from a truckling and shameful Servitude to a
Foreign Usurper's Power? Or is it any such unheard of thing to debarr a Prince
from a Throne, that has obstinately disabled himself? Certainly, above all
Men, the Roman Catholics ought not to murmur at this; for did not the Pope
issue forth a Bull to exclude your Grandfather, King James, unless he would
turn Papist? And did not the Romanists, though they acknowledged the Title of
your other Grandfather, Henry the Great, to the French Diadem; yet refuse to
pay him any Obedience, because a Protestant, and on that only score fought
against him, as long as he continued so, and thought it no Rebellion? Your
Highness perhaps will say -- What though they did so, true Protestants, and the
Church of England do not own such Principles? Well then, if the Protestant
Principles be better than those of the Church of Rome, what Madness is it in
your Highness to abandon the first, and choose the latter?

I am a dutiful and hearty Lover of Monarchy, and when established on such an
Equi-pois'd Basis of Wisdom as ours is, shall ever assert it to be the best
Form of Government in the World, and most agreeable to the Genius of
Englishmen: But that lineal descent is so sacred a thing, that the Heir
presumptive can for no default or crime whatsoever be debarred from the Crown
by an Act of Parliament, or public Decree of State, I do not understand; For I
am sure the practice in all Ages, both at home and abroad in almost every
Nation in the Earth, has run contrary: And as to Right; those that pretend
such Succession in all Cases to be Jure Divino, would do well to show in what
Texts of Scripture the same is prescribed; till then, they do but talk, not
argue; and if a Candidate to the Crown, for any Reasons whatsoever, may without
offense to the Law of God or Nature, be Excluded by an Act of King, Lords and
Commons; Then the June-divino-ship vanishes, and nothing is left to be
considered: But whether such next Heir have done such Acts, or is so qualified,
that in Prudence it be necessary for the Tranquillity of the Public to Exclude
him. Now I believe there are but few of the Church of England, but if the Bill
had passed the Lords, and his Majesty had given his Royal Assent to it, would
have acquiesc'd therein, and consequently they do not believe the Exclusion to
be simply unlawful by the Law of God or Nature, for against either of them no
Humane Ordinances ought to prevail.

But all true Loyalists do not despair, but your Highness may yet prevent all
Occasions of such Disputes by opening your eyes; or rather that God (in whose
hands are the Hearts of Princes) may irradiate your Royal Understanding, and
let you see the horrid Blackness of those Men who have endeavored to seduce
you, and of those Principles to which they would have inveigled you, on purpose
to have made your Highness a Property to their Ambition and Avarice, and that
under the shadow of your Illustrious Name they might one day Tyrannize at
Pleasure over these Three Kingdoms.

If Heaven shall be pleased to work such an happy Inclination in your Highness,
you shall presently see the whole British Empire echoing with Praises and
Acclamations, and instead of murmurs of Seclusion, every good Subject shall
erect you a Throne in his heart.

But the grand difficulty will be to satisfy the prejudiced World of your
sincerity herein; for if your Highness (which God forbid) should declare your
self a Protestant only to serve a present turn, and use the Sacred Name of our
Religion but as an Engine to advance the design of our bloody Enemies, you
would act at once the most dishonourably and (in the end) most prejudicially to
your own Interest, in the world, and must certainly expect the blasts of
Heaven, and curses of Earth on all your future proceedings (...) for Hypocrisy
is odious to God and Man, nor is there any Monster so abominable to serious Men
of both sides, as a Church-Papist.

Your Royal Highness, I hope, will excuse our fears, for we are not ignorant of
the Arts and Craft of Rome, that she esteems no means unlawful to obtain her
ends. How shall any Oaths be sufficient Tests, when a private dispensation may
at once allow the taking, and warrant the breaking of them? Or what signifies
the participation of our Sacraments to one that is taught, We have no true
Ministers of Christ; if so, no consecration, consequently nothing but an
ordinary Breakfast of common Broad and Wine, and who shall lose the hopes of
three Crowns rather than not taste such harmless viands? Not that I dare
imagine your Highnesses Understanding would suffer you to believe the
lawfulness, or your Princely Generosity permit you to practice these lewd
dissimulations; yet since such Doctrines are daily taught in the Roman Church,
how shall Protestants be assured they have no. Influence on your Conduct? I
must therefore with all humble freedom assure your Highness, that after so
general an Opinion of your Highnesses having been a Roman Catholic, though you
should go never so duly to Church, receive the Sacrament a thousand times, and
take Oaths all the way from Holy-rood House to St. James's, yet the People
would scarce believe the reality of your Conversion, unless withal they see it
accompanied with some other Demonstrations. For as Faith without works is dead,
so Profession of a Religion, without agreeable endeavors to advance it will be
vain. If his Royal Highness, will the People say, be a good Protestant, he will
undoubtedly discourage all Papists, the sworn inveterate Enemies of our
Religion, he will not suffer a Popish Priest to approach his Person or Palace.
If he have had any intimation of any ill designs, if any have been tampering to
reconcile him to Popery (which is no less than Treason) he will presently
detect those mischievous Instruments, that they may be brought to condign
Punishment, and applaud the Justice that has been done on Coleman, the five
Jesuits, Godfrey's Murderers, etc. thereby stopping the Mouths of that brazen
Tribe who would make the World believe they died innocently. He will declare
against all Arbitrary Designs, detest those who by sneaking flatteries would
unhinge the ancient and most wise Constitution of our Government. He will
heartily recommend Parliaments to his Sacred Brother as the wisest and safest
Councils, and even thank the late Houses of Commons for their zeal against him,
whilst they apprehended him as an Enemy to his King, and the Religion and
safety of the Kingdom. He will vigorously by his Counsels and Interests oppose
the growing greatness of the French, which at this day threatens all Europe
with Chains, and immediately tends not only to the decay of Great Britains.
Trade and Glory, but also to the diminution, oppression, and (if it lay in
humane Power) utter subversion of the Reformed Religion throughout the World.

These and the like Noble Fruits, will the People not unreasonably expect from
your R. H. when ever you shall please to declare your self a Protestant; which
that you may speedily do, not Politickly or Superficially, but with that
sincerity, as so serious a matter (of infinite more value than the Three Crowns
you are Presumptive Heir to) is the Prayer of all good Men, and particularly of

Your Royal Highness's Most Humble and Faithful Servant, Philanax Verax.

LONDON, Printed, and are to be sold by Richard Janeway, 1688.


