St. LEONARD'S HILL.

A Poem.

Written by R. F. Gent.

Licensed, May the 14th. 1666. Roger L'Estrange.

LONDON, Printed for John Simms, at the Cross-keyes in Cornhil, near the Royal
Exchange. 1666.

St. Leonard's Hill.
WHat if Apollo and the Muses now,
Should with an angry nod, and frowning brow?
Chide me, for boldly thus daring to write
Before they gave me leave, or did invite
To taste of Hellicons inspiring streams,
Although perhaps not half so clear as Thames:
Or cause I put not on considering Cap,
And upon their Parnassus took a nap:
Faith let Apollo and his Wenches know it,
I never ambitious was to be a Poet;
Yet without their good leave, I Will Verses make,
And from a Nobler Hill my Rise I Will take,
Viewing these Aerie Land-skips as I fly,
More bounded in my Fancy than mine Eye:
Well may I then great Hill, thy praise rehearse,
Since you alone give life unto my Verse;
Come hither all ye Mortals, that would be
Blessed with a taste of Heavens felicity;
Come, I Will conduct you to that mount above,
Where you will find that shall deserve your love.
Clewerth Green.
And as we go, let us view this Rural Green,
Here true content with Poverty are seen;
Here little Lambs after their Mothers bleat,
Until their mouths are stopped with the Teat;
Young Colts are here, with droves of Heyfers bred,
Making this Green, their Pasture and their Bed;
Here with her Gulls the reverend Brood-Goose walks
And old Sir Gander to the young ones talks;
Here a small Farm, there does a Cottage stand,
To which the Owner joins a little Land,
Where he does plant young Trees, and if they grow
To bear good Fruit, the Gods cannot bestow
On him or His, a greater blessing thinks,
And cheerfully a good health to his Neighbor drinks,
Living more happy under his thatch't Roof,
Than they, whose splendid Buildings stand a loof;
For in this poor and solitary Cell,
Sound health and harmless peace together dwell;
Which blessings are most commonly denied
To Great Men's houses, filled with lust and pride.
Here with the Lamb they close their slumbring eyes,
And early with the Lark again they rise
Unto their Rural labors; thus they live
Content, though poor, with what the Fates do give;
And when at last Death does his summons send,
Not sickness, but old age does make them bend.
Now whilst I Am speaking, look the Old man peeps,
Let Us enter in and see what house he keeps.
Going then in, he soon does us espy,
And pulling off his Hat, Old Pain
a loud does cry,
My Masters all, ye are welcome, pray draw near,
Sit down and drink, for I have Ale and Beer,
And sweet Metheglin that is both blithe and bonny,
Made of the Best and purest Virgin-Hony;
Or would you Syder drink, or good old Perry?
Your nose 'twill tickle, and your heart make merry:
Old Mother grief sat by the Smoaky Hearth,
Holding a brown Toast to the burning Turff;
Then sighing over a pot of Ale, anon
Her Sorrow for to break, she thus began;
O Gentlemen! my days are almost done,
My Sun's near set, and I my race have run.
Cheer up thy heart Old woman, do not cry,
Should innocence be afraid to dye?
Alas I weep, because Death comes not yet,
He to my misery would a period set:
Mourn all ye Lovers, when so e're she dies,
Of Custards, Cheese-cakes, and hot Pudding pies;
For to your sorrow, you will quickly find,
Her fellow she can never leave behind.
Now of each Liquor having had a taste,
He leads us to his little Plot at last;
And showed us how each tender Plant did grow
In rank and file, and he their names does know;
Old goodman Pain his Nursery.
First stands a file of Pippins, next to those,
Deep ranks of Codlins, and John Apples grows;
Here are Paremains, with Gilliflowers good store,
Which I have quite forgot, with many more;
And here are Pears, the best that e're were eat,
The Catherin red, and jucy Burgomat,
And the well-colour'd Marget, with the green
Sweet Cheesil, here in plenty may be seen:
But good Old Doctor, prithee tell me now,
What lovely Pear is that on yonder Bow,
For it is a Fruit I have not seen before?
That Is all I have Sir, but I hope for more;
'Twill make your mouth to water when it is named;
To tell us then, I hope you're not ashamed?
No truly Master I Will be plain and Bold,
It Is called my Ladies Buttock, I am told:
Now Husband you are wanton, pray Wife why?
Here Is my young Master knows as well as I,
And better too, that it is it is proper Name,
A pleasant fruit, and now in greatest fame.
But here is the Windsor Pear, which I dare say,
Deserves from all to bear the Bell away:
All sorts of Plums are here, and Quinces fair,
And Apricocks that most beloved are;
Here Is Flemish Cherries, here are Spanish Vines,
With Peaches sweet, and Roman Nectarines;
Here Is the Bonchretien, and the Bingfill too,
With other Fruits not to be reckoned now.
Then what reward, pray tell me, can there be
Too great, for this Man's active industry?
Who with his Labor and his old blunt Spade,
In Barren ground such Nurseries has made.
Having this plain and pleasant Green over past,
The great Hills top now we have reached at last; St. Leonard's Hill.

Nor are we far from Old St. Leonard's Cave,
Whose pious life the Name of this place gave;
And now look down upon the world below,
Then see how faint and little all things show;
Look a far off, London.
where that great City stands,
Who by it is riches all the world commands;
And whose great Ships, bring Spices from the East
To enrich our Land, and Ingots from the West;
Whose Noble Buildings stand in every street,
Where swarms and shoales of people daily meet,
Thronging so thick together as they go,
That they do one another overthrow;
And all in haste so full of Business move,
To little purpose though it often prove;
Some strive to gain, others consume as fast,
What the Old Sire gained, his young heir turns to waste,
A lively Emblem of this populous Crowd,
How often have I seen? my Self to shroud
From scorching Beams, when I have Musing stood,
Under a spreading Beech in shady Wood;
For I have seen great heaps of Emmets there,
Who in such numerous Crowds so stirring were,
And all so busy, that a man would say,
Their Work was by the Great, not by the Day;
Some loaded this way, others that way went,
Some were for Straw, and some for Timber sent;
Here in a broad High way, which they had made,
For fear that Robbers should their Wealth invade,
They seemed with Guards of Carravans to go,
And boldly Marching, did not fear the Foe:
But with my foot, how many have I killed,
And in a moment, all that they did build
Have quite thrown down, and taken all their spoil,
Which they had purchased with so much toil:
And with such care and industry did gain,
Their Commonwealth in Winter to maintain?
Poor Souls forgive me, I do now repent,
Your Actions I confess were Innocent;
I wish that I could say, our Lives were so,
And that our Actions did less Guilty show:
Then looking up to Heaven from the Ground,
Thus would I say, he might us all confound
In less than moments time, who sits above,
Were not his Mighty power controlled by Love;
But if provoked by Sinners, he does show
That power, although in Anger he is slow,
He makes whole Nations then submit to Fate,
Leaving their greatest Cities desolate,
Either by Famine, Sword, or Pestilence,
The dreadful Instruments of his Vengeance;
And if it were not for his Goodness sake,
He would in pieces that proud City shake;
For there are all Varieties of Sin,
Some reign without the Walls, and some within;
And though that true Religion preach them down,
Yet she could never drive them out of Town:
There Vice and Virtue, in extremes are set,
There Atheism and true Piety are met.
There cries and horrid noise your Temples tear,
And there soft Music sweetly Charms your Ear:
All this great Heap, then let your Eyes run over,
Nothing but Smoke and Dust you will discover,
Which the wind drives away, I know not whither.
O come Democritus, let us laugh together:
Only old Paul's sometimes his Bald-Pate shows,
Hoping those deep wounds, and those deadly blows,
Which our New Sanctity to his Old sides gave,
Will all be cured, and he preserved from Grave;
And stand a glorious Monument again,
Of Charles the Great, and's Second happy Reign,
And to succeeding Ages, shall declare
What Rebels did pull down, King Charles did rear.
Now this Way turn, and see through yonder glade,
What Reformation our late Saints have made
The great Park.
In that Great Park, whose Trees are all cut down,
By the same Powers that trampled on the Crown:
And which did then overthrow our Church and State,
These innocent Trees endured the same hard fate.
There stood that Old and stately Royal Oak,
Who for five hundred years, endured the stroke
Of Times sharp teeth, but Zeal more sharp did say,
To my dear Sons it now must fall a Prey.
Down with it Root and Branch, a Zealot cries,
As that Malignant falls, the Saints shall rise;
Down with them all, and those on the other side,
They Are in our way, and do Heavens prospect hide:
Could you no other way to Heaven find,
Deceitful Hypocrites, and Leaders blind,
But through forbidden Paths, and unjust ways,
Which were not known in our forefathers days?
Surely quoth Zeal, we have the wicked vexed,
By opening a dark place to clear the Text:
The Text is clear indeed, and ye have found,
Whose Fate is to be Hanged, shall not be Drowned.
But would you now those Royal Mansions see,
Built only for the Seat of Majesty,
Where Art and Nature, like two Rivals strove,
Which of them both should show their greatest love.
View that high Castle, Windsor Castle.
and the Church behold,
Which does St. George for her great Patron hold;
How like an Empress she alone Commands
The Lower Valleys, and the adjoining Lands;
View well her battlements and her towers again,
To satisfy my doubt, pray tell me then
What a strong breath the Rump had? that could blow
Down to the ground, that Church and Castle too;
And with one Vote they both had tumbled down,
Following the Fate of Scepter and of Crown;
To the great shame of our unhappy Age,
Had not good Providence stopped their damned rage.
Now may your stately Towers securely stand,
Nor dread the fury of a Rebels hand.
Now may your Sacred and Harmonious Quire,
Te Deum sing, and so with praise admire
How Providence preserved you from those Men,
Of wicked thieves, who made Gods house a Den.
But on the day that Martyred Charles did Dye,
Let all in Sorrow kneel or prostrate lie;
Then let no Organ play, or Music rise,
But from a Contrite Heart, and Weeping Eyes:
And passing over his cold Vault, let all
Tread softly, and a Tear or two let fall;
But Heavens forbid, that e're you should again,
Become a Prison to your Sovereign;
Though once it was your glory, not your shame,
When two great Kings of famous Name,
King John of France, and David King of Scotland
Were made your Prisoners in a narrow Room,
And from the Conqueror did attend their doom;
Then English Valor to it is height was come,
Victory they had abroad, and peace at home;
And then their naked swords, they did not show
Against their Sovereign, but the common Foe.
Then was that Noble Azure Garter found,
So much by Ours, and Foreign Kings Renowned,
Who with Ambition strove to be instal'd,
And Knights of that Heroic Order called:
And without boasting, I may boldly say,
Since the first institution to this day,
More famous Men the world has never seen,
Than they, who in succeeding times have been
Companions of that Sacred Order made,
Whose Names shall live, though their cold Ashes fade*
Whether 'twere Honor, or the power of Love
Edward the 3 d.
That did thy royal Heart, Great Edward, move,
This Noble Order for to Institute,
Let Learned Men, and Graver Heads dispute:
I for my part, do easily suppose,
That both thy Genius did alike dispose;
And if'twere Honor that devised the Plot,
I do believe 'twas Love that tied the Knot;
But whatsoever it 'twas, this we do know,
Nothing but Great, could from thy Greatness flow;
And by thy Prowess, France I me sure did find,
Great was thy Sword, but greater was thy Mind;
Which to their terror such vast wonders did,
As can no more than the Sun's Beams be hid;
Nor shall the Deeds of thy brave Offspring dye, Edward the black Prince.

Whilst time does last, or name of Victory;
He surely fell, who with thee did contend,
Black to thy Foe, but lovely to thy Friend:
Had thou the Age of thy Old Father seen,
King of all Nations, doubtless thou had been;
But Fate did think, which all things does control,
This world too little was for thy great Soul;
Nor do we wonder that thou should be so,
Because the Stock from whence you came, we know
Bellona was thy Mother, Mars thy Sire,
Who can derive himself from Parents higher?
The next great thing that to your Eye appears, Eaton College founded by Henry
the sixth.

Is the best Nursery, to tender years,
Of Piety and Learning, which our Land can show,
Blessed is that Holy King who made it so;
Nor did his Royal Goodness, only there
In Acts of Grace and Piety appear.
Kings College and Chapel.
For he at Cambridge also did erect
Another Monument, whose Architect
The Name does show, if not to his great praise,
The Stones would say, a King this Roof did raise:
Thither her hopeful Youth does AEton send,
To advance in Learning, and their knowledge mend
And raised by degrees, themselves translate
Fit Instruments, for the Church, or for the State:
So we from Nurseries, do young Plants remove
To better Soil, when they are grown above
Their Fellows heads, and proudly do aspire
To raise themselves, yet many stories higher.
And though the British Prophesies of Old,
That Harry born at Windsor have foretold
Should lose, what Monmouth Harry did obtain,
And with such personal Valor bravely gain:
Yet he has left, though frowning was his Fate,
And wicked Rebels showed their cursed hate,
More acts of Piety, and of Bounty too,
Than all succeeding Kings did ever do.
Now let your Eye turn round and look about,
To view those towns and places more remote:
Here stands a Church, and there a Noble Seat,
Which to a nearer Eye seems very great;
Yet than a House to us it seems more small, Sr. Robert Gayers house at Stoke.

Which Children make with Cards to play withal;
But if you were within it, you should see
That, which to knowing Eyes would grateful be;
And what from other Objects would invite,
The sole and whole employment of your sight.
So that I Am confident you would be glad,
To have as many Eyes as Argus had.
For the best Paintings, there you might behold,
Some done by Modern Masters, some by Old;
But I do think that hardly 'twill be said,
Whether they were by Art or Nature made:
And if to View rare Sculptures you desire,
There you may famed Bernino's Art admire:
There you may see those Heads which did Command
The world, on Pedestals in cold Marble stand:
There you may tell proud Nero to his face,
That he a Monster was, and Romes disgrace;
And pull him by the Nose too, he cannot bite,
Nor living, could like a true Roman fight.
There wanton Otho you may play withal,
And fat Vitellius beastly Drunkard call.
There Is great Augustus too, with his fair Wife,
Done all exactly well unto the life.
Yet you may speak to them, and never fear,
For I Will assure you this, they cannot hear.
There also good Old Seneca you may see,
The Monument of Nero's cruelty;
And many other things most rarely wrought,
Which the brave Owner in his travels bought;
Sparing no cost to purchase what was good,
Such from the Bad, he easily understood;
And only did Collect those things of worth,
Which the best towns of Italy then brought forth;
Not like to those who only do intend,
In viewing that fair Land, their wealth to spend
On vice and folly, not in virtuous deeds,
For in that garden there are many weeds,
Which they for flowers gather, but despise
That which a virtuous Mind would highly prize;
And after all their travels, only know
Where the best colored Whores and Mellons grow.
Therizer Thames.
And now look nearer on those silver Streams,
How they run playing with bright Phoebus Beams,
And in Meanders cunningly do glide,
To meet the Overflowing swelling Tide:
See how the Loaded Vessels swiftly Sail,
With a strong Current, and a Western Gale;
Whilst the broad shoulderd Bargemen sit and laugh,
And unto AEolus in full Measures Quaff:
Well Friends, when you return against the Stream,
You Will sing another Note, and change your Theme;
I fear your Mirth will prove but then Gee, Hoe,
When your great worships must like Horses towe;
Hear now what I shall tell you, one thing mend,
What so you get, do not like Asses spend.
You that in Angling do your selves delight,
Either in the time of Day, or silent Night,
And with a Stoick's Patience can sit still,
To watch the motion of your floating Quill:
There you may find all forts of River Fish,
As good as tongue ere tried, or heart could wish;
There is the Sprat-like Bleek, the Gudgeon, Dace,
And speckled Trout, that will to none give place;
There is the dainty Perch, beloved of all,
Which some the Partridge of the River call;
There Is the red Salmon too, both good and great,
And Carps, fit only for great Kings to eat;
There Is Roches, Chubbs, and Barbels, in great store;
Large Eeles, and Flownders too, with many more,
Which to the Hook by several Baits are brought,
And by the cunning Angler slily caught.
So have I seen a young and prodigal Heir,
Caught in the toil of Old-craft Usurer;
And as the Angler, first with worms does feed
The silly Fish, before he makes them bleed,
And they expecting more, at last are took
By a fair Bait, that hides the fatal Hook:
So Old-craft, does by tempting Baits allure
Young Hopeless, and in fine, to make him sure,
His wanton Appetite with Gold he fills,
Then on the sudden strikes him by the Gills,
And fast in Bonds he keeps him at Command,
Until he worms him out of all his Land.
But though this River now does kindly move
Like noble Souls, not by constraint, but Love;
Yet when the Floods do rise, it knows no bounds,
But is a trespasser on all men's grounds;
And like a raging Sea, over runs the Plains,
Spoiling the springing Corn, and Plowmans pains:
So when above their bounds, the People rise,
Laws both of God and Men they soon despise;
And like an Inundation overflow
Their Princes Power, nor will Allegiance owe,
Until within their Banks they are confined,
And reassume a Loyal Subjects mind.
But from these lower Valleys turn your Eye,
And let us to the walks of pleasure fly;
Where Innocence and Beauty, both unite
To court the Soul with ravishing delight.
The Walks and Glades on St. Leonard 's Hill.
Here be the Arcadian Plains, here be the Groves,
Where Swains and Shepherds, use to meet their Loves:
Here are the walks where Amarillis fair
Her Flocks does feed, and those Dorinda's are
His Flocks; on this side does Mertillo keep,
Those on the left hand are bold Silvio's Sheep;
The next to these are those delightful Lawns,
Now free from Satyrs, and secure from Fawns.
Here are the Stags, and Herds of Fallow Deer,
Which for the Royal Game preserved are.
Not far from hence a mighty Deer did keep
His shady walks, and whilst his Foes did sleep,
In silence of the Night securely fed:
Prince of a numerous Heard, and Sovereign Head;
Proud of himself, all others did disdain;
Yet e're the Sun once more should set again,
That his proud Head should fall, The Hunting of the Stag.
it was decreed,
And by a fatal Knife his throat must Bleed:
Therefore so soon as the all-seeing Sun,
His Course in the other Haemisphere had run,
And did begin the Mountain tops to gild,
The Huntsmen they were risen, and had filled
With loud Alarms, from their deep sounding Horns,
The Hills and Valleys, with the neighboring borns;
Unwelcome News unto the Lodging Heard,
But most of all the great Ones were afear'd;
For they by sad experience often try,
Greatness, which should protect them, makes them dye,
And dying, fall with mournful weeping Eyes,
To cruel men, a bleeding Sacrifice.
Whilst that the smaller Ones, and Rascal Deer,
Need not the Woodmans Knife, or Arrows fear.
All now being ready for the Royal Game,
His Majesty with many Nobles came
Well mounted like to Perseus, all did ride
When he his winged Courser did bestride:
And scarce their Horses feet the ground did feel,
As if that they had wings to every Heel;
And champing on the Snaffle, would not stay
With patience, or their Riders well Obey;
But e're the Chase be done, perhaps they will find
One that will cool their mettle, try their wind;
Here is he Lodged, a stout Old Wood-man cried,
Who midst the thickest Brakes, the Deer had spied;
The Stag was roused, and bounding nimbly leaps,
As over waves, a well built Pinnace skips;
The Dogs and Men in a full cry pursue,
Forcing the Deer to bid the woods adieu;
Now having left his walks, and pleasant woods,
Sometimes he seeks the plains, and then the floods,
And leads the Hunters such a Forest Dance,
As made their Coursers quite forget to prance.
There might you see the Brown, and bonny Bay,
In their own white and reeking Form, turn Gray;
And Dapple Gray, with his own blood be-smear'd,
More like a Brown, or Bonny Bay appeared;
Here lies a dying Horse, and there hand by
Does, with a broken Arm, his Rider lie:
Long was the Chase, and the Old Stag would fain
Have come into his Native woods again;
But now, alas, his strength and spirits fail,
Nor could the best breathed Dog scarce wag his tail,
Panting for breath and life, the Stag then stood
Against a tree, and did his ground make good,
Keeping the Dogs at bay, at last he cried,
To Fate I bow my head, and weeping died.
But whilst his Breath did last, he made a Will,
Which his Executors said they would fulfill.
Imprimis, write, I freely do dispose
My Sides, and both my Haunches unto those,
Who know best how to season them in Past,
And can good Venson, from Ram-Mutton taste:
My Head and Horns, I give to Men of the Gown,
The Major and Aldermen of Windsor town;
That they by Charter may, or Proclamation,
Make them the Ensigns of their Corporation:
My Ears I give to those, in Heart so pure,
That by no means Church Music can endure;
And I desire, what cannot now be writ,
Let my Executors give as they think fit;
And my Executors, I would have to be,
Those honest keepers in Green Livery:
Lastly, because I see my end draws nigh,
Let me at Caesar's feet fall down and dye.
Besides this Royal Game the woods afford,
With other Quarries they are always stored.
And which the Romans called delicious fare,
In every Bush we have the Light-foot Hare;
Which when we Venson want, we do pursue,
With little Spot, and great Melampo too.
Among those Oaks, whose arms so wide are spread,
Crarborn Lodge.
The Lodge of great Basilius shows his Head;
Where better Guests are now, than use to be
When Clubs were trump, and freedom slavery.
Here are fair Nymphs, with Shepherds too, and some
Sir George Carterets Family.
That from the Royal Court, are hither come;
Leaving the town, for pleasures of the field,
Such as the Court or City cannot yield.
Nymphs and Swains then come away,
Make this all a Holiday;
Nimbly Dance, and merrily Sing,
'Till the Woods and Valleys ring;
Bring your Fruits, and bring your Posies,
Bring your Chaplets made of Roses;
There Celebrate your Rural Feasts,
In honor of these New-come Guests;
And let all these Nymphs and Swains
Cry, welcome to the Arcadian Plains.
But hark, I think it is young Ergasto calls,
Away, away, to the Grove of Nightingales;
Through yonder Glade let us follow him, for there
A Consort of all singing Birds you will hear;
And passing by, we heard in every bush,
Conning their Notes, the Blackbird and the Thrush.
When to this Grove of Music we were come,
Under a shady Beech we lay along;
Then from the Forest, and from several parts
Birds flocked hither, with right willing hearts:
And first the Lark, The harmony of Birds.
taking a speedy wing,
To his great Maker did an Anthem sing;
Next after him, the Blackbird and the Stare,
Two better Counter-tenners never were;
But the shrill trebble sung the little VVren,
And little Robin answered him again;
To such a pitch the Bulfinch raised his Note,
That bigger than his breast, did seem his throat
And though grown hoarse with scolding, yet the Crow
How deep his base could reach, resolved to show;
Fain would the Owl have tried her ut'most skill,
But Philomel desired her to be still;
For since that Cold, which in her feet she had,
Although her skill be Good, her Voice is Bad:
And therefore Madge up to an Oak does climb,
And nodding with her head, kept Sembrief time;
Whilst the great Be to their Harmonious lays,
A soft sweet stop, upon his Organ plays.
When they had made an end, and all was hush,
Then Philomel vouchsafes to ascend the Bush;
And such a sweet and Heavenly tune began,
As made us all amazed, in silence stand;
Then straight another, with a clearer strain
Answered her killing Notes, when she again,
With Notes more various than at first, replies,
And to her Rival, Victory denies:
When they had sung their Vespers, we could hear
More from an inner Grove, that tuning were
Their little Pipes, who presently did join,
And made a Consort, more than half Divine;
And such I think, as never any Men;
But from their pretty throats, shall hear again.
Blessed be these Groves, blessed be these walks of shade,
May never more Sequestring Axe invade,
Your well extended arms, or spreading root,
Or cruel Satyr here again set foot;
But may you Grow, and still more Verdant look,
Or if to Old Age, you at last must stoop;
O may these younger Plants grow up, and be
Delightful shades to our Posterity;
Until both Names and Things, must all expire
In one Great Flame, and Funeral Fire.
FINIS.

