The Fifth and last PART OF THE Wandering whore: A DIALOGUE Between

Magdalena a Crafty Bawd, Julietta an Exquisite Whore, Francion a Lascivious
Gallant, And Gusman a Pimping Hector.
Discovering their diabolical Practices at the Half-crown CHUCK-OFFICE.

With an Additional List of the names of the Crafty Bawds, Common Whores,
Wanderers, Pick-pockets, Night-walkers, Decoys, Hectors, Pimps and Trappanners.

Delivered to the Publisher hereof by a late Hector, several deep Pyemen, and
decayed Gamesters amongst them.

Sine Cerere and Baccho friget Venus.

Printed in the Year 1661.

THE WANDERING WHORE CONTINUED.
Magdalena. Silence in the Court, not a word amonst us three confederates, but
what is spoken under the Rose, it is not fit to let Francion go off thus for 135
pounds; we will make him marry thee Julieta, or make thee a good jointure all thy
life time; He Will believe all to be Gospel that we say, whilst we agree in one
and the same Tale, he will not be long absent from us, therefore lets be
forewarned and fore-arm'd against his coming.


Gusman. The project will hit doubtless, we have such a grand earnest of his
folly beforehand, it is but making him believe she will turn and be honest ever
after, which if it were not so, you know Cuckolds have the best luck, for my
part, I wish I were the richest Cuckold in Europe: Ju is not overworn,
therefore not past turning, and a good two leaved book left to look in still.


Magdalena. Ay, and a good fat A -- too thou may lay thy lips on it but it is
customary here to receive money with wives, (who like light gold will not pass
without allowance,) but give money for wenches, and that he will do I warrant ye,
we will make thee a President for others to imitate and follow: what must
matrimony be made a matter of money where there is a dainty Cunny? I Will make him
believe she has as many suitors as there are days in the year, to make him
more zealous of cozening his orrivals should such an Amazonian beauty,
accomplished with such transcendant endowments both of body and mind,
proportioned with such equal parts, enriched with Silver and Golden
habiliments, be parted, with at an easy rate, so, as to make a slave her
master, or a servant her Commander.


Julietta. My very teeth water at the Contrivance, if it falls right, expect I
will reward you both out of his estate, it is but his believing that I will be
honest after all my Lusts and Lechery, and that is all one to a fool; for what
the eye sees not the heart rues not, I shall not be the first where that has
turned honest, in the flower of her age, it is but your getting another to
supply the place during my absence, for common Jades (such as Mal. Savory,
Honor Brooks, and Nan. Jones,) are numerous enough, and will sit with their
legs spread over the sides of a chair with their petticoates and smocks in
their mouths, whilst their Comrades run a tilt at their touch holes in that
posture, paying twelve pence a time for holing; and for his part and mine we
have taken a sure course to try each others abilities beforehand; we shall not
fear commencing of Law-suites for want of due benevolence, or for being
unpenetrable, yet I Will have him sign and seal these following Articles for an
Assurance of his future Affections, viz.

Inprimis, That I Mounsieur Francion do freely, and willingly settle 300 l. per
annum upon julietta, for and during her life time.

Item, That I will allow her a Coach and four Horses, with Attendants
answerable.

Item, That I wont be jealous of any man's coming, or visiting her, of what
Quality, Rank or Condition whatsoever.

Item, That I will allow her a Lusty Black, to hold up her train whilst she
walks from room to room.

Item, That she shall have free liberty to make choice of her own
Chamber-maids, and others belonging to the family, and choose anew every month,
if they do not keep close their chaps, what ever they do with their legs.


Gusman. They are singular ways to provide horns for his head, but I would not
wish you to stand upon such Iunctilios, if he will but marry thee Ju, for if he
should deny to let thee have thy will and pleasure afterward, it is but taking
a touch or two with a Counceller, (who freqently takes his fees that way, if
his Client be handsome,) and he will sue him for Alimony, and make him maintain
thee out of his Estate in spite of his teeth, and then play the where under his
nose as many brave lasses have done before thee, and he shall not help himself,
whereof we have a thousand Presidents of women running from their husbands, and
choosing other Stallions for their Guardians, as appears by a late Treatise
emituled the Trapp^n, written by Mr. Vernon in the case of Goodwin the Dyer,
etc.


Julietta. Thou have done well to satisfy me so clearly, I Will follow the example
of young Starky the Hosiers wife, who receiving some seeming abuses from her
husband, (when the major part of her Portion grew due) ranaway from him,
carrying all his bonds, bills, Goldwatch, Jewels, Rings, etc. suing him for
maintenance, as he found by woeful experience, and the leaving off of his trade,
under the pretense of his having the Pox.


Gus. I shall tell thee of another way besides that, if thou have a mind to
make him run mad; take a handsome Gentleman usher to satisfy thy Luxury, and
please thy lechery, into the house, love and lie with him and hate thy husband,
lie naked in the bed rather then have thy smock sow^d to his shirt, when thou
would under pretense of rising to piss, or going to a close stool, go to bed
with thy Gentleman Usher, and if he be angry, call him rogue, raskal, and
jealous Cuckeld; and if that fayls comb his head with a joint stool, or break
his pate with a Bed-staff, and it will cool his courage quickly.


Magdalena. You Are a prime Tutor indeed, if thou had but a whore to match
thee, for to read a Lecture in a two-leav'd book, thou have evermore had a
natural propensity to, as to venery, and know how to ride post to the Devils
Mansions; for I dare swear there is scarce a rule in all Aretines Postures, but
thou have it ad unguem, readier then thy Pater Noster; for thy zeal, (like
Harry Martins with the Beggar Wench, Thom. Scots with the Bonelace-wench of
Wickham, and Hugh Peter's when the Butcher cudgel'd the 5 pounds out of his
Carcass for lying too near his Brindle) is locked up in a Down-diddle more then
honesty, yet I like thy merry devices.


Gusman. Every man to his trade, as the Rat-trapmaker said to the Parson, be
sure I have not my name Gusman, an old beaten soldier for nothing: I have told,
Ju, a woman will have her will, and you are not to seek in that point, Im'e
sure on it.


Magdalena. Thou say very true, good wits wll jump together, as thou did
with my Cousin, but methinks we are grown huge modest in our debates bewixt
each other, but I wonder Francion tarries all this, while, I wish we had so me
pleasant tale, told to drive away the tedious night.


Gusman. Rather then want, I would invent a story, but this I shall tell you
stands upon record, is very true, and was tried at Salisbury Assizes of a
bouncing Girl, who was courted by a neighbor whom she did not fancy: this young
Enamorato out of spite, reports she had no C -- and scarce a pissing place; a
second suitor engages her affections, but upon noise of the rumor relinquishes
her; a Crafiy Lawyer (as most of that function are) tells her he would sue this
slaunderer in her behalf, and demand nothing till Recovery, to which she
assented, the party being arrested the suit was shortly brought to trial, where
a Jury of women were summoned (not men) to search her, who upon demand from the
Judge, what they had to say in the business, one of the eldest Matrons answered
that she had a good thing (meaning the maid, not her self,) the Judge told her
that was not enough to satisfy the Jury, she must speak broader and plainer?
Why, then (quoth she) she has a very good commodity: I tell thee again woman
thou must speak plain; why, then if I ^ust I will, and will swear it again and
again, before your Worship and the Jury, she has a C -- large enough for the
beggest man's P -- in the Parish, at which they all laughed, and the Jury (for
that she was a handsome wench) fined her adversary threescore pounds damage
which was accordingly paid the Plaintiff.


Julietta. That was honestly done of them, and is near a kin to a passage I
have heard of a fellow who helping a Gentlewoman on Horseback, slipp't his
hand under her belly and tore a tufft of hair off her Commodity, waring it in a
Bnavido in his hat; which her husband hearing of, su'd him for it, and it cost
him forty pounds for his frolic.


Magdalena. Well I am bound to tell a Tale or let a fart, therefore give ear to
this following, concerning a Gentleman who had continued with a great deal of
eagerness a suitor to a Gentlewoman, whose inciv^ities could not retract him,
nor persuasions withdraw him, at length when nothing would serve his turn, she
uncovered her breast naked, ranckled, rotted and corrupted, which he espying
took leave of her, and never set eye on her after.


Gusman. I believe neither of you two would have uncovered your infirmities, in
such a Case, but for my part I conceive it lawful for men and women, to go
naked, and were it customary as in preceding times, your enticing habits,
perfumed carcasses, and stately gestures would be less in request, both with
your selves and other's, and fewer provocations to lust and Lechery, which is
seldom occasioned by a brown skin, a crook'd back or legs, or poor habit, but
often by holland smocks, silk stockins, rich gowns and petticoats, with other
costly garments, which cover your greatest foulness and deformities: I have
known many women, taken out of (their better part) their cases would have been
a loathing to themselves and others, who otherwise were doted upon in their
bravery.


Julietta. Should you men, see all onr actions in a true, (and not a
counterfeit) glass, we should be the most despised wretches in the world, but
we can order you in that point, as most of your Citizens Wives do their
Coxcombs, who if they will not let them have their desires and pride to boot, it is
but dissembling a tertain or quotidian ague, a burning fever, or some other
distemper, and their lying in shall cost them more money in Doctors visits,
Apothecaryes Bills, (who now and then cornute them into the bargain) Caudles,
Potions, and Cock-broths, then if they had granted their desires at first.


Cusman. I am no stranger to those tricks, for if I were, I should have a
better opinion of your sex, then they have deserved (the number of wicked
women, being numberless) amongst which number are Mr. Savage in white
cross-street, who broke her husbands head with a marrow-bone, and had like to
have killed him with it, Mrs. Barron a fiddlers wife, who used to comb her
husbands head with a base viol, into which his head was strick as if he had
been in the Pillory, or got a ruff about his neck, Mrs Hewson at the further
end of White-chappel, a tearing Ranter, who is never quiet but when Clark the
Hatband-maker in Hounsditch, is at work in her Saw-pit, and Mrs. Blakesly, who
notwithstanding her husbands lawful and due correction, will tempt, Jack Hunt
the Butcher in White-chappel, to make her husband a Cuckold: well if you think
to have Francion I hear, and see coming Iu, you must behave your self with more
discretion, as a Chaundlers wife in Ab church lane, said her husband did her.


Julietta. Prithee Cusman keep thy breath to cool thy pottage, but stick close
to us in our new found Plots; Mounsieur Francion, truly devoted of your
servants salutes you, and rejoices at your appearance, why so long absent from
her so deerly loves you, why at such a distance from her whose life and
fortunes lie and truckle at your foot-stood, whose presence is my life and
absence death.


Francion. Thy company's no less to me my sweetheart, my deer, and my beloved
one, of whom I le say:

In twining arms let me my deer conceal
And from thy rosy lips long kisses steal
Let me thy complete parts touch without light,
And with sweet joys protract the pleasing night,
In thy sweet arms hugg thou my hanas and face
Let me in my kind bosom thee embrace,
It Is not for gold that Lovers do complain
They Are rich enough if they their Ladies gain.

Magdalena. That you have gained Julietta is no news, I would advise you Sit to
marry her, you may meet with a slut, and that is worse then a whore, but she
has vowed chastity for the future.


Gusman. I can assure that to be true, that she is resolved to turn if you l
marry her.


Francion. I thought I had removed all scruples in that point, is the motion of
your mentioning Julietta?


Julietta. Truly sir, I am very weary of this life, and would gladly turn,
would you let me be devoted wholly to your service.


Francion. It Is no slight Question to answer, much more to execute, so that
you must pardon me in that Point.


Magdalena. Why then you must allow her a yearly revenue to maintain her for
your self, and keep her in her quondam Equipage and gallantry.


Gusman. There Is all the reason in the world for it, what would not some men
give for a dainly bit in a corner, the forbidden fruit is sweetest.


Francion. Well what is your demands, what will maintain her from the scourge of
necessity, come speak out or let Magdalena do it for you, but marry I may not.


Magdalena. Sixty Pounds a year is as little as can be to maintain her honesty
and bravery.


Francin. Well, provided she lays no claim's to marriage with me, I Will settle
50 Pounds per Annum Durante vita.


Magalena. Come she shall do it, I Will be her Advocate, fill us some wine to seal
the bargain.


Jul. Content till our next days meeting.


A new Additional List of the Names.
Crafty Bauds, etc.
MRs. Linley* by whetstone Park. Mrs. Waller, Mrs. Bull in Puxfield-lane. K --
on Horseback Istington Mrs. Kerby, bell in Finsbury Robin Hood and Little John,
in Holborn
Common Whores etc.
MRs. Barker a Barbers wife in Thames Street Betty Winn -- Mrs. Webb near
Thames street. Mal. Peatley Mrs. Everet Mrs. Hewson in white Chapel Mrs.
Barron at Shadwel Mrs. Blackesley, Jack Hunts mob the Butcher Bitty Sydney, in
Heartsborn court in white Chapel Mal. Cooper, at the Globe in East-Smith field
Mal. Thresher Mrs. Drue and Mrs. Buck near Thames Street Mrs. Osbridges
scolding Daughter Iud. Mills a paviers wife Mrs. Peacham a Colemeters wife Mrs.
Bedberry Nel. Maddocks Jone Arras Betty Lemmon in Checquer-ally near Bun-hill
Mrs. Rod in Poplar Mrs. Gill Mrs. Hench in white Chapel
Hectors, Pyemen, etc.
-- Griffith -- Warren -- Jackson John Clark in Hounsditch Farmer a Poulterer
Burges a Turner Robin Hicks Th. Latimer Jack Ruddock Jack Hunt Sam, Peel Tho.
Middleton George Darby Thom. Clark Pimp. Ledsum Jack Hyde.
Another Additional List.
Crafty Bawds.
OLd Bawd Fotheringham in Cow lane Mrs. Pope in Petty France Mrs. Redman at
Cow-cross Mil. Ames Mal. Lovel, in Patridge Alley in Holborn Mother Daniel.
Gridiron in Seacoal Lane Horseshooe in Beech Lane. Mrs. Treely in Bloomsbury.
Common Whores.
JAne Campion in Hollowel Court in White-chappel Nan. Jones, a pockey whore
Mal. Foster Nan. Far, an Oyster wench Mrs. Watson, an Orangeseller Mal.
Thomas. Orange Nan Grace Cull Bess Sturdy Mrs. Walters, in St. Katherines Mrs.
Popes Daughters Mal. Gummer, in Seacoal Lane. Franck Hancock Mrs. Simpkins Mrs.
Sadler Mrs. Elwick Mal. Bennet, a Paviers wife in Cock Lane Nan. Greek in
Seacoal Lane Mal. Marten Mrs. Worster Mrs. Jane, and Mrs. Louse, belonging to
Mrs. Treely
Hectors, etc.
NIcolls in Thames Street, a Sponge Sweetman, a Spaniard Mason, the Lobster
Tim. Holly Nich. Pits, a Solicitor in Little Queen street Tom. W -- a T --
Another List of Crafty Bawds, Maiden-sellers, Common Whores, Night walkers,
Pick-pockets, Wanderers, Shop-Lifters, Foylers, Kidnappers, Decoys, Hectors,
Pimps and Trappaners, and their usual Meetings.
Crafty Bawds
DAmrole Page P^^ss, Fotheringham at the Chuck-Office Mrs Mason, in
Hors-shoo-Ally in More-fields Mas Farle, in Pepper-lane by Grayes-inn Mrs Cater
senior Betty Farmer, Tom. Beards, wise and savages Mobb Pimp Allens, wife, in
Goodmans yards John Baker Bess and Mal. Walsgrave, in Dog and Bitch yard Elean.
North, in Crosslane Abigail Littleton Gravener's in Morefields Mal Pulver
Prudence Masters Frances Coleman Elizabeth Herbertson, in New Market Mal
Winter Grace Holland Rachel War in Dog-yard Nan Hartcock Frances Sands:
Raggedstaff in Chiswel-street Wiggins, in Checquer ally in white-cross-street
Green Lettice i'^^ minories Mrs Crosbow, in the minories Mrs Eaton a
Maiden-headseller on the Ditch-side near Hogsden Pimp Yopes wife Jon Harman, a
runnin baud Mrs Hughes, in R^n-ally Mal. Ceco Mrs. Stone. Mrs. Creswel Mrs.
Garrish Mrs. Habbiger Turks-head in Moorfields Mother Baker Sn. Lemmon Mrs.
Whetston Mrs. George Mother Lockyer Mother Baxter Mrs. Arnol Mrs. Jo^es Mrs
Salmon Virginia, going to Hackney Crow, white-cross-street Mrs Osbridg, Bedlam
Mrs Gletberel Mrs Waller, Thomazin in white Chapel Mrs Thomas, Stepney
Jeremyes and Services, Booths by Hackney river Mrs Bull Mrs Halfpenny Mrs
Harrison Three Sugar-leaves in Grub-street Ship, in long Ally turns Jones, at
the Cock in long Aere Mrs Barber, a Midwife in Holborn Mrs Howard, in Lincolns
In-feild Mrs Hughes Mother Cunny The Cherry Garden Black Swan, in St.
Martins-Le-grand Mrs Brooks, Mile-end Hanna Hickman, Baud and Whore Margaret
Leech Margery Wilson Mrs. Page, Old-street Ann Price Houkins, Baud Paskins at
the Armitage Margery Lawson Alice Hulburt Mrs Burges Joyce Ebbs Nel Yate Mrs
Wellaston Mrs Stockwel Mrs Lawton, by Hattonwall Mal Ledger Mrs Sadler Mrs
Gibbins Frank Tilt Mrs Davies a Midwife Black Pegg Doctor Sherleys wife Mrs
Dennis Mrs Glover Mrs Love Betty Buly Mrs Windbo Mrs Roberts Mrs Sammond Nel
Lawrence Mrs Woodburst Jane Haywar Nan. Bennet Bess Mundel keeps three
Baudy-houses in Dog and Bitch-yard. Mrs Thomzin mrs Brooks Jacobs Well J.
well-street Mrs Lockyer Nan Evans Mrs Jones in Cross-lane Mrs Simpson Mrs
Plikering The Last and Lion, in East-smith-feild. Mrs. Saunders Mrs. Kemp Mrs
Abigail mrs Kempster
Common Whores, Night-walkers Pick-pockets, Wanderers, Shop Lifters, and
Whippers.
Mrs. Snow Nan Langsden Mrs Phaenix, near Jewen-street Mrs Farmer Betty Cater,
junior Bess Cox, Jone Broithwait, Amy Butler, Shop-lifters Rebecca Wharton Tho.
Langley's mobb Nan Lidford Shop-lifter Ursula Bunny Johanna White, a
buttock-whore Jone Horton, alias Singleton Rebecca Tentch Marget Read Nan.
Williams in Newgate marget Gladwel Grizel Conference alias Wood Nan Stanley
martha Chester mrs Debbenham, mrs. Clark-two crackt-brain'd whores mrs Smith, a
Bricklayers wife in white-chappel mrs Fletcher mrs Ives mrs Holland mrs Lettice
mrs Wells Betty Hyde mrs Elwick mrs Betty, at Crosbows Peg the Seamans wife at
mrs Crosbowes Ruth Shaw in morelane mal Crumwel alias Hyam Nan Rob^^on Penelope
mantle alias Fleteher Jane Johnson Thomzin Cobb, alias Day Nan Stacy Jane Powel
Mrs Reading Betty Edwards Betty Holly Mal. Nun Welsh Nan Mal. Avory Esther
Clark Nan Love Mrs. Warren Nell Gulliford Sarah and Nan Fullam Betty Young Faith
Clayton -- Cross Betty Orange Mrs. Curtes Betty Laurence Mrs. Sherley the
younger Mrs Smith Jane Stamford Mrs. Spencer Mrs. Taverner Mrs. Marten Mrs.
Watson Mrs Berry Mrs. Green Green M^ll, alias Joan Godfrey Mall Chauncy Betty
Cox Mall Hogg Mall Horsfield Mall Savory Peg Williams Alice Spilman Kate Hare
Mall Tremain Mrs. Westover, Bandstring-seller to the Offices in Chauncery-lane
Peg Cross Nan Bret Ursula Higgins Betty White Betty Farmer Margery Noble Jane
Dixon Mall Peak Sarah Martin Nan Glascock Mrs. Honor Queen of Morocco Mrs Mate
Toothless Betty Bess Gering G^^zzel Wood Mrs. Holli^and Mrs. Diamond Mrs Cupid
Mal Gray Nan Carper Betty Cooper Mrs Ames Nan Wats Betty Bates Betty Eton Mal.
Bell Butter and Eggs Jane Thebey Mrs Owen Mal Fink Betty Baxter Betty Gansford
Black Betty Nan Tailor Neck Lunn Mrs Love Mrs Lote Bess Whit^le Bess B^unt Mrs
Simmonds Betty Downs. Luce Brook Nel Syder Mal Craford Mal Bell Mrs Wood Mal
Rose Mrs. Flower p^e^y Frank ^^^^er, alias Ulls Foyth Anderson Dutch Whore
Wilkis, a weavers Wife at smock Ally-end Mrs Dawes Denues wife in shoreditch
Mrs Swails maid Bess, Mrs Joy Mrs Bulls Daughters Mrs Bourn a Scribes wife Mrs
Tippit Shards wife in Dunning-Alley Mrs Mail, by the Curtain Playhouse Su
^edge Jone Thorn at Newington butts Ensign Websters wife Mrs Harfed -- Robinson
Woodst Compter Mr^ Sweetman Long-haird Mrs Spencer in Spittle-fields Mrs Wroth,
Grubstreet Mrs Phillips Peg Angel Greens Satchel --. Mall Rose Nan Rash Betty
Knight Su Harris Nan Braithwilt Boulrun the bailiffs wife Will Martins wife Mrs
Fransces, alias Mal. Robinson Pimp Hollilands Pockey pug-nasty Mrs Spicer, in
Mobb-lane, alias Browns Mrs De-maroy Mrs Carr in Rose-lane Mrs Bonsly Tanners
wife Wheeler str. Mrs Dickinson Jane Glisson alias Roberts Frank Evitt Tracyes
wife Mrs Taverner Wheelerstreet Frank Rigs, alias Robinson, a thieving whore
Betty Wilson -- King Sarah Price Kate Wilkinson Grace Steel. Elizabeth Smith
Betty Blunt Mary De-gret, Mobb to Tho. Crouch Allice Jones Mall. Cole Nan Low
-- Fox Mary, Paget Mrs Cadman Sarah and Joyce Price Bess Cox Cock Birch Sarah
Bostwid Jone Bouner Jone Bouder Nan Southern Frank P^almer Silver-lac't Bess
Frank Ouden Fair Rosamond Sug^r-C -- a constant wanderer and night-walker Mrs
Dodman Peg Hodgson Nan Stephens Sarah Blades Mrs Bli^s Mrs Russel Mrs ^herman
Mrs King a Sempstress.
Foylers, Kid-nappers, Decoys, Hectors, Pimps and Trapanners.
ARmstrong Pets Pierce Savage Thom. Beard Joseph Riches Thom. Allein John Baker
Gravener beyond Bedlamgate Will. Cox. Lion Breithwait Tho Largley Harry Baily,
Ned Jervois, Peter Goodjeway, Tho. Orrel, Shop-Lifters and Foylers, Pimp
Singlecton the extemporary poet Will Peise, an entorting pimp in Long Acre, who
is burnt in the band Ned Tope Roger Kiffner, with a Wen over his eye John
Pierson, by Hattonwall Tho Blackberry Jack Miller. Tim. Thornher, Newgate Birds
Damon a Hardy Hector. Fox Tho. Hurst Will. Taverner Dick Gartwright George Clark
Will Gill Holliland, a great Cheat Gladwin, an ignorant whelp Tho. Stern Bar
Higgins Tho. Dodson Not. Lummocks, Apoth. Anniseed Robbin Will Nash. Man.
Middleton Frank Ashburn Jack Jones Wat. Gulliford Carter, Rabbit-seller Dick de
Lane Jo. Cocks Robin Thrower Tho. Rand Will. Overrit Wat. Stainton. Raymon,
Trump-alley Crone Green by Newgate Harry Martin, Vintner Pimp Skipwith. Ned
Brooks Traey a Hector Brown a Chyrurgion Raiford a Troiper Tho. Player N^d
Traford H^rry Bird Will ^ossel Will (...) Jack Daines Tailor the Prigg Little
Taffy Sam Pink, a slovenly pimp James at Dog-yard Gandamore Shatterwait, scribe
Hopper, Writing-master Winch the Nailer Jack Berry, and Jack Harris,
Billiard-players Pimp Howard Fair Rosamonds pimp George Paskins, a Kid-catcher,
at the Crooked-billet at the Armitage Pimp Glover Jack Gould Jack Wallis Ralph
Ashington, alias Shitten-arse, Gr^^^^ Tho. Ebbs Dick Stockwel Will Ledger Will
Sadler Wat. Gibbins Tho. Hayward C -- Jackson Pimp Sh^^^^ Hammond
FINIS.

