A Figure of the Heavens and Elements


COSMOGRAPHY OR, A DESCRIPTION OF THE Whole WORLD, Represented (by a more exact
and certain Discovery) in the Excellencies of its Situation, Commodities,
Inhabitants, and HISTORY: OF Their Particular and Distinct Governments,
Religions, Arms, and Degrees of Honor used amongst Them.

Enlarged with very many and rare Additions.

Very delightful to be read in so small a Volum.

Psalm. 24. 1. The Earth is the Lords and the Fullness thereof.

By ROBERT FAGE Esquire.

London, Printed by S. Griffin for John Overton at the White-Horse in Little
Britain, next door to Little St. Bartholomews-Gate. 1667.

To the Reader.
WE are so much Strangers to the World, that we know not Our Selves, that
Great Maxim and Sentence of Divinity, Know thy Self, being from no other
Causes deducible, than the scantling and narrow Conceits of the Universe. Men
reckon themselves by the Possessions and Revenues of a Manor or two, and take
themselves to be the Grand Seigniours of the World, when compared with this
Grand Machine, they are like Atoms in the Sunshine of Worldly Felicity. I
could wish every man could abridge His Ambition, as the Describers of the World
have Epitomized their Discovery, and Govern themselves by the Example of its
History; which is here truly and compendiously recited. Wherein we may see how
near a piece the two Globes are; and that which we call the New World, is no
Changeling from the Old, War and Strife being as natural there as among us.

I confess I am no Atlas to undertake the Burden of this Enterprise, but the
Pleasure of it (as is usual with desperate Lovers) ^vited me to the difficulty;
and to ^mmend it, as a Picture, or every ^ans Looking-Glass, which I have
^ought fit to contract, in its Repre^ntation to the Model of our Time and
Leisure, and by its mere sha^ow only, show its great Self and (...)
Magnificence.

Whatever this Endeavor is, I do ^ot doubt but of its kind acceptance, ^s
Parvum in Magno, and lays open ^e whole Magazine of the Earth, as (...) its
Puissance, Government, Pro^ctions, Manufactures, Merchan^es, etc. its present
State, Policy, ^d Friendships, never before at^mpted in any one Volume, but ^ow
in this Manual. There is Truth ^d Rarity in it as to Generals, be^ond the
attainment of the Pen (it being the Felicity of the Needle; and the capatious
Compass fully and clearly to investigate and disclose every particular) which
will merit a pardon for

Yours, R. F.

Reader,
THis is to advertise thee, that the Pricks, which are graven upon the firm
Land are set to distinguish and divide the three quarters of the World, viz.
Europe, Asia, and Africa, one from the other, as by near observation you may
perceive; and that the pricks upon the Water or Ocean, are the Traces of that
Course which Sir Francis Drake made in his surrounding the World. A Glorious
and no less fortunate Adventure, affording Posterity the Pleasure and Profit of
persuing his discovery both in reality and imagination, such as is exhibited in
this Map, to which we refer you.

Vale.
A DESCRIPTION OF The Whole WORLD. WITH Rules for the use of the GLOBES, and
understanding of MAPS.
THe Heavens declare the Glory of God, and the Firmament shows the work of
his hands, Psalm. 19. 1. In the Creation of which and the whole earth, and sea,
and all things therein contained, of mear nothing within the compass of six
days; and in this wise and gracious ordering and guiding of all things, is
abundantly set forth his infinite, and unutterable wisdom, power, greatness,
and goodness: His end herein is first and chiefly for his own glory, The Lord
made all things for himself, Prove. 16. 4. And secondly, men's happiness, unto
whom the dominion of all things was under God committed, Genesis 1. Psalm. 8. 6.

That men may come therefore to some understanding thereof, I shall first speak
of the Heavenly and of the Earthly Globes, and the several matters incident
thereunto. Then I shall also make a brief description of the four parts of the
earth, and the Countries in each part, the several Religions professed in them;
with the varieties of Trade and Commodities therein, never yet set forth in a
Treatise of this nature.

The whole world therefore is divided into two parts, Etherial or Celestial,
and Elemental; Of which there are two Globes accordingly, the heavenly and the
earthly. Now a Globe is a proportionable representation of the heavens or of
the earth; the Etherial, Celestial, or heavenly part does compass the
Terrestial or earthly, and contains the ten upper Spheres, or nearest unto
the earth, 1 the M^on, 2 Mercury, 3 Venus, 4 the Sun, 5 Mars, 6 Jupiter, 7
Saturn, 8 the starry Firmament, 9 the Crystalline heaven, having no stars at
all, 10 the Primum Mobile, or first mover, containing all the rest within it,
and moving from the east to the west, carrying about with it in violence all
the other Spheres. The rest of the Spheres have contrary motions, every one in
his kind, though far flower than the other, and the motions are contrary from
the west to the east; and so are carried about oftentimes by the first mover,
before they make one perfect revolution in themselves.

The Crystalline or ninth Sphere his motion is almost insensible, and is called
the Trembling motion, performed (according to the opinion of latter
Astronomers) in four thousand nine hundred years.

The eighth Sphere being the Starry firmament, in seven thousand years, the
Sphere of Saturn in thirty years, of Jupiter in twelve years, Mars in two
years, the Sun passes the Zodiac in three hundred sixty five days, Venus
ends her course in somewhat more than a year, Mercury holds equal pace with the
Sun. and the Moon courseth about the Heavens once every eight and twenty days.

Thus much for the Celestial or heavenly part of the world, wherein I shall
need say nothing of the Religion of Angels, and the spirits of just men made
perfect, seeing it is manifest enough to every one, that there they keep their
first estate; The Religion also of the fallen Angels (who are held by many to
be thrust out of Heaven, and to abide in the Air, whereupon Satan is called
the Prince of the Air, Ephesians. 2. 2.) is so notorious for enmity against God, and
all manner of wickedness; that poor man is more sentient of sorrow, for their
tentations, then furnished with words to express their wickedness to the life.

The Elemental part of the World is fourfold, earth, water, air, fire, as may
be seen in that round Figure of the frame of the heavens and elements one
within another; the inmost and middlemost circle containing earth and water
intermixed together; the next the three Regions of the air; and immediately
above that Orb is the element of fire: all which you may easily discern by
their several names in their proper places. And thus much shall suffice to have
spoken of the Globe of the whole World.

I shall now speak first generally and briefly of the Globe of the whole Earth,
and things incident thereunto; then more particularly of the several parts
thereof, and every remarkable Country in each part, as I promised in the
beginning.

The Globe of the earth therefore is defined to be a spherical body
proportionably composed of earth and water, the two parts thereof.

The parts of the earth are either real or imaginary.

The real parts are either Continents or Islands, A Continent is a great
quantity of Land not interlaced or separated by the Sea, wherein many Kingdoms
and Principalites are contained; as Europe, Asia, Africa, and America.

An Island, called in Latin insula quasi in salo, is a part of the earth
environed round with water; as Britain, Iava, St. Laurence Isle, Bermoodes.

Now these again are sub-divided into a Peninsula; Isthmus, and a Promontory. A
peninsula is such a tract of Land, which being almost encompassed round by
waters, is nevertheless joined to the firm land by some little Isthmus, as
Peloponesus, Taurica, Cymbrica, and Pervana.

An Isthmus is a little narrow neck of land which joyneth any peninsula to the
Continent; as the straits of Dariene in Peru, and Corinth in Greece.

A Promontory is some high mountain which shoots it self into the Sea, the
utmost end of which is called a Cape: as that great Cape of good hope; and Cape
Verde in Africa, Cape Gomerie in Asia, and that of St. Michaels mount in
Cornwall, the North Cape in Norway, and diverse others.

There are also other real parts of the earth, as mountains, valleys, fields,
plains, woods, and the like.

The other general part of the Globe is the water, divided into the Ocean.
Secondly, the Sea. Thirdly, the Straights. Fourthly, Creeks.

The Ocean is the general collection of all waters, which invironeth the whole
world on every side.

The Sea is part of the Ocean, to which we cannot come, but through some
strait, as the Mediterranean Sea, the Baltic Sea, and the like.

These two take their names either from the adjacent places, as the British
Ocean, the German sea, the Atlantic sea, and the like: Or from the first
Discoverer, as the Magellanick sea, Forbushers Straits; or from some remarkable
accident, as the Red Sea from the red color of the sands, and the like.

Thirdly, a Straight is a part of the Ocean, restrained within narrow bounds,
and opening a way to the sea, as the Straits of Gibralter, Hellespont, Anian.

Fourthly, a Creek is a crooked shore, thrusting forth as it were two arms, to
embrace and affectionately to hold the Sea, as the Adriatic, Persian, and
Corinthian Creek. Hitherto belong Rivers, Brooks, and Fountains, engendered of
congealed air in the earths concavities, and seconded by Sea-waters, creeping
through hidden crannies thereof.

Thus much of the real parts of the Earth in general.

The compass of the whole earth is cast by our latest learned Geographers,
twenty one thousand six hundred English miles, which we thus compute. We see by
continued experience, that the Sun for every degree in the heavens, gains sixty
miles upon the earth toward his circuit round, and after three hundred sixty
degrees returns to the same point in respect of us as before it was. Add the
number of sixty so often, and you will find the account the same, and so by
proportion of the circumference to the Diameter, which is, tripla sesqui
septima, the same which twenty two has to seven.

We may count likewise the earths thickness to the center: The whole Diameter
by rule being less than a third part of the circuit. That in the proportion to
twenty one thousand six hundred, will be six thousand eight hundred seventy
two, half the number will reach the middle of the world, and that is, three
thousand four hundred thirty six, being considered with great exactness, as the
measure of such a great bulk as the earth is, can easily be taken and
comprehended.

Geographers attribute unto the earth five circles.

The first is the Equinoctial; when the Sun in his course is come thereunto,
about the eleventh of March and September, the day and the night are of equal
length through the whole earth. It is also termed the Equator, and by the
Seafaring men the middle Line; because it divides the earth into two equal
parts, of which the one lies toward the north, the other toward the south,
and because it is in the midst between the two poles of the world, one in the
north, the other in the south. The second circle is called the Tropic of the
Crabb, because when the Sun is come thither about the tenth of June, it
returns by little and little unto the Equator. And then unto them that dwell
on the north-side of the Equator, is the day longest; and shortest to them that
dwell on the south side thereof. This circle is distinct from the Equinoctial
Twenty three Degrees, three Minutes and an half, Northward.

The third is called the Tropic of Capricorn, because the Sun being come
thereto on the eleventh of December, turns his course backward to the
Equator; and then contrariwise, to them who live on the north of the Equator is
the day shortest, and longest to them on the south thereof; it is distant from
the Equinoctial southward twenty three degrees, thirty one minutes and an half.

The fourth is called the Artickcircle; the fifth the Antartick; of which the
one is distant twenty three degrees, thirty one minutes and an half from the
north pole; the other just so many from the south pole. And are described by
the revolution of heaven from the poles of the Zodiac, which is the Sun.
Mercator the ancient Astronomer understood by the Arctick circle not only that
aforesaid, but also every circle whose half Diameter answers to the pole in
any place whatsoever, and contains, according to the Altitude of every
Country, certain stars, which never set, but always are above the earth; so
that in all regions differing in Latitude, this circle is diverse, as also is
the Antartick. Now the four lesser circles, the two Tropicks and polar circles,
do fitly part the earth into five Zones, that is to say girdles, because they
compass, like bands, the round Globe of the earth. The first of these Zones
lies under the Artick or north circle, and is called the cold north Zone; the
second lies under the Antartick or south circle, and is called the cold south
Zone; the third is situate in the middle between the two Tropicks called the
scorched Zone; the fourth lies under that which is between the north circle
and the Tropic of Cancer, and is called the temperate north Zone; the fifth
also is under that space which is between the Tropic of Capricorn and the
south circle, and is called the temperate south Zone.

Now to understand rightly the situation of Countries, their Longitude and
Latitude according to the mind of Geographers is to be known. The Latitude of
places which with the height of the Pole is always one, beginning at the
Equinoctial, is taken two manner of ways; either toward the south, or toward
the north, unto the number ninety. The Longitude is returned from the Meridian
circle, and about the west Islands called Carva and Flores, beginning right at
the Equator easterly, and running forwards unto the number three hundred sixty.
As for example, London lies from the Equinoctial northward, fifty one degrees
and a half, which is the Latitude; and the Longitude thereof is twenty degrees
answering unto that degree of the Equinoctial, reckoning from the Meridian.

And now that I have briefly touched upon the Longitude and Latitude of
Countries, and having often spoke of the Meridian and Horizon: I shall, I hope,
not unprofitably take time in a word or two, to tell you what each of them are.

The Meridian is a great circle rounding the earth from pole to pole. There are
many Meridians according to the diverse places in which a man lives. But the
chief and first Meridian passes through the Islands Saint Michael and of the
Azores.

The Horizon is a great circle, designing so great a space of the earth as a
quick sight can ken in an open field: the use of it is to discern the diverse
risings and settings of the stars.

I shall now speak a little of the Climates, and Parallels, and then, I hope, I
have done with things generally concerning the earth.

A Climate is a space of the earth included within the space of two parallels.

The use of them is to show the difference of length and shortness of days
over all the world, as you may see in the midst of every climate, the number of
the longest day in the year, under that climate; the longest day in one climate
differing half an hour from the longest of another, so that there are twenty
four climates, consisting of forty eight parallels, ere the day come to be
twenty four hours of length, which is twelve hours longer than the Equinoctial
day is. Now under the Equinoctial line, and thirteen degrees, that is, three
parallels on either side thereof, the days exceed not the length of Twelve
hours, but after in every clime increase the length of half an hour; and when
they come to forty eight parallels and twenty four climates (as I said before)
the days being then twenty four hours long, their increase is then by whole
weeks and months, till in the twenty fourth clime about the pole, the day is
full half a year long; and as it is thus between the Equator and the north
pole, so it is between the said Equator and the south pole: wherefore there are
two sorts of climes, that is, twenty four northern, and as many southern:
touching the names of which and other circumstances, I shall say nothing here,
but leave the readers to other more large discourses, thinking this enough in a
Tract of this nature to have spoken of things generally concerning the whole
earth.

The whole Earth is now divided into four parts.

Europe. Asia. Africa. America.
Of each part, and their several Regions, Empires, Kingdoms, Dominions,
Commonwealths, Titles of honors and Laws, as briefly as I can, together also
with their sundry trade and commodities.

Europe, though the least of the three first parts of the world, nevertheless
excels all other parts in worthiness, power, renown, multitudes of
wellbuilded Cities, and of People skilful in all kind of arts; also excelling
in virtue, and the knowledge of God, better than all the riches of the world.

Through the Grecian and Roman Empire in it: it has had once the Dominion
over Asia and Africa. Mr. Heylin mentions in it fourteen mother Tongues, which
I will not stand now to name.

It has plenty of grain, plants, fruits, coals, rivers, and fountains of
admirable virtue; it needs nothing but what may be well spared, as hot spices,
not so fit for our temper; precious jewels, the nourishers of vain and
soul-destroying pride; and wild beasts which cause deserts where they breed;
yet of gold, silver, and other commodities it has a part: it is divided on the
east from Asia, partly by the Rivers Duina and Tunnis, and partly by the lake
called Meotis, now termed Mare de le Zabacche, and pont Euxine, or Mare
Maggiore.

From Africa it is severed by the midland Sea; on the west and north side it
has the great Ocean. I shall follow Mr. Heylin's method in the description of
the Regions and Countries thereof, beginning with, first, Italy, then going,
secondly, to the Alps, thirdly France, fourthly Spain, fifthly Britain,
sixthly Belgia, seventhly Germany, eighthy Denmark, ninethly Swetheland,
tenthly Russia, eleventhly Poland, twelfthly Hungary, thirteenthly Solavonia,
fourteenthly Dacia, and the fifteenth Greece; speaking of the several Islands
as they relate to some or other of the greater Countries.

Italy, the Mother of all Latin Learning, stretches out easterly on Asia,
between the Adriatic and Thuscan Seas, and borders toward the west upon
France, and toward the north on Germany, and is severed from those countries
by the river Varus, and the mountains called Alps, the rest being compassed
with the Sea. It has had seven kinds of Government, first Kings, second
Consuls, third Dictators, forth Decemviri, fifth Tribunes, sixth Emperors,
seventh Popes. It flourished most in the time of Christ, and a little
afterward by means of the great and wide dominion of the mighty city of Rome,
which then reigned as Queen of the world, over many Lands of Europe, Asia, and
Africa.

This land excels all the lands of Europe, in fruitfulness and pleasantness,
the inhabitants are witty, industrious, and frugal, yet hot and lascivious. And
withal the men very jealous, and that taken to be not without cause. The
religion there now professed, is the Popish religion, unto which they are more
straightly kept by the Inquisition.

The chief Wares which are carried out of Italy into other Countries, are rice,
silks, velvets, sattins, taffaties, grogrems, rashes, stamels, bumbasins,
fustians, felts serving for Clokes, costly arras, gold and silver thread, alum,
galls, Venetian drinking and looking-glasses. It contains at this day the
Kingdoms of Naples, Sicily, and Sardinia, the lands and patrimony of the Church
so called, which the Pope posseth; the great Dukedomes of Urbin and Tuscany,
the Commonwealths of Venice, Genoa, and Luca, and the estates of Lumbardy,
being the Dukedomes of Millain, Mantua, Modena, Parma, Monferrat, and the
Principality of Piemont; of all which I shall observe somewhat.

The Kingdom of Naples in Italy, is environed on all sides with the Adriatic,
Ionian, and Tuscan Seas, excepting where it joyneth on the west to the Lands of
the Church, from which separated by a line drawn from the mouth of the River
Tronto or Druentus, falling into the Adriatic, to the spring head of Axofenus,
it takes up all the east of Italy, one thousand four hundred sixty eight
miles; it has anciently been called the Kingdom of both the Sicilies. The
fertilest place of all Italy, abounding in all things necessary for life,
delight, and physic. Hence are also brought the Neapolitan Horses. It has had
thirteen Princes, twenty four Dukes, twenty five Marquesses, ninety Earls, and
nine hundred Barons, not Titular only, but men of great Estates; It has had
twenty six Kings of several Countries, beginning first with the Norman race,
and now being in the hand of Spain. The disease called now the French Pox, was
first in all Christendom found here. The Arms of this Kingdom are Azure seem
of Fleur de Lices, Or, a file of three Labels Gules.

Its revenue is two millions and an half of Crowns, whereof twenty thousand are
the Popes for his chief rent, and the rest so exhausted in maintaining
Garrisons upon the Natives, and a strong Navy against the Turks, that the King
of Spain receives not a fourth part the^eof clearly. It has twenty
Archbishops, and one hundred twenty seven Bishops-seas.

This Crown and Kingdom has been in long dispute between France and Spain.
Charles the Eighth of France won and lost it in a Dream, so transitory was his
possession of it; much blood being spilt in the quarrel. The Duke of Guise of
the Family of Lorrain, now pretends a right to it, and has attempted the
Conquest of it, of late years twice, being called in by the Citizens of Naples
in 1647. after that famous insurrection in the City of Naples, under
M^ssianelio the Fisherman, who led and commanded 100000 men at his beck and
pleasure for 14. days, at the end whereof, he and his mutinous Government
expired, being supposed to be poisoned by the Artifice of the Spaniard.

In the year 1654. the same Duke of Guise, having better retained in mind the
Courtsh^ps of the Neapolitans, than his own misfortunes and his promises made
at Madrid, where he was kept prisoner, from the time that Naples was reduced
1647. equipped another Fleet from that Kingdom from Toulon and Marseilles,
which n^rrowly escaped the English Fleet under General Blake; designed against
it, and after much bad weather, landed and was defeated by the Spanish
Viceroy; his Lieutenant General, Marquis du Plessis being killed in the place
with 2000 more: and so the French were forced to re-imbarque, and the
Expedition frustrated.

The Spaniards how quietly hold it from the Papacy, by a fealty Present,
yearly, of a White Horse to his Holiness.

The Kingdom of Sicilia in Italy is situate under the fourth climate; the
longest day being thirteen hours and an half; it shoots forth into the Sea with
three Capes or Promontories.

The People are Ingenious, Eloquent, and Pleasant, but withal very inconstant
and full of talk; they Invented Oratory, Pastoral Eclogues, Hour-glasses,
with Military Engines. The Soil is incredibly fruitful in Wine, Oil, Honey,
Minerals of Gold, Silver, and Alum; together with plenty of Salt, and Sugar;
there are also gems of Agats, and Emeralds; it yieldthe also great store of the
richest Silk, has most excellent and delicious Fruits both for taste and
color; with abundance also of all sorts of Grain. Here is the hill Aetna,
which many have taken to be Hell, and ignorant Papists Purgatory; because of
its sending forth of flames of fire, which eth brimstone there causes. It has
many Cities, Rivers, and Lakes, of which I cannot stand to treat.

There were eight Kings of Sicilia, six of the first whereof were called to
rule. In the year one thousand two hundred eighty one, the house of Arragon
governed it, and there has succeeded ten Kings. It is now united to the Crown
of Spain; the revenue is eight hundred thousand, some say a million of Ducats
disbursed again on the entertainment of the Viceroy and defense of the Island;
the Arms are four Pallets, Gules Sable, being those of Arragon between two
Flanches Argent, charged with as many E^g'es Sable beaked Gules.

It has had seven Princes, four Dukes, thirteen Marquisses, fourteen Earls,
one Viscount, and forty eight Barons; the People are Papists, and have three
Archbishops, and nine Bishops.

The Island and Kingdom of Sardinia in Italy, lies west from Sicilie from the
nearest point, Cape Boy, or Cape Bara.

It is distant about two hundred miles, it is in length one hundred eighty
miles, ninety in breadth, five hundred sixty in the circuit; and is situate
under the fourteenth Climate, the longest day being fourteen hours; there is
neither Wolf nor Serpent, neither venomous or hurtful beast, but the Fox only,
and a little creature like a Spider, which will by no means endure the sight of
the Sun, except held by violence: Some pools it has, very plentiful of Fish,
but generally are so destitute of River-water, that they are fain to keep the
rain which falls in winter for their use in summer; by means whereof, and for
that there is no passage for the Northern Winds, being obstructed by the high
Mountains near Cape Lugudori, the air is generally unhealthy, if not
pestilential. The soil is very fertile, but ill manured, well stored with all
sorts of cattle: the horses hereof hot, headstrong, and hard to be broken, but
will last long: the bullocks naturally gentle, so that the Countryman does as
familiarly ride them, as they do in Spain on Mules or Asses. Here is also the
beast called Mufr nes or Muscriones, found in Corsica also, but in no other
part of Europe; somewhat resembling a Stagg, but of so strong an hide, that it
is used by the Italian: in stead of Armor; of the skin of which carried to
Cordova in Spain, and there dressed is made the right Cordovant leather: also
there is an Herb whereof if one eat, it is said that he will die with laughter;
the Herb being of such a poisonous nature, that it causes the Man to die with
such a convulsion of sinews, that he seems to grinn, or laugh, at the time of
his death. The People are small of stature, their Complexion inclining unto
swarthiness, rude in Manners, very slothful and rebellious, yet given to
Hunting; their Diet mean, their Apparel in Towns Gorgeous, in Villages base;
their Religion Papistically formal, little Curious, their Clergy being counted
the most illiterate and ignorant in that part of the World called Christendom;
it is now in the hands of the King of Spain, governed by a Viceroy, who
resides at Calaris, and must of necessity be a Spaniard, under whom are two
Deputies-Governours, Spaniards also; inferior Officers of command may be of
the natives: what profits arise here to the King of Spain, I have no where
found. The arms hereof are said to be Or a cross Gules betwixt four Saracens
heads Sable curled argent. There are also diverse small Islands belonging
thereunto. And lastly, it has three Archbishops and fifteen Bishops.

The lands of the Church, or the Popes Dominions in Italy, lie west of the
Realm of Naples, extended north and south, from the Adriatic to the
Tuscan-Seas, bounded on the north-east with the river Trontus, on the
south-east with the Axofenus, by which two it is parted from that Kingdom as on
the north-west by the rivers Poe and Frore; by which it is separated from the
State of Venice: and on the southwest by the river Pisco, by which it is
divided from the modern Tuscany, or the State of the Florentine. It is the
middle of Italy, having in breadth from one Sea to another, above one hundred
miles, and in length above three hundred miles; the land exceeding fertile,
abounding with multitudes of people, seldom consumed with wars: they are good
husbands for their ground, but no tradesmen for Manufactures: there have been
fifteen Exarches of Ravenna in Romandiola: which Province became wholly
subjected to the Papacy, by the inhumane treachery of Casar Borgia, Nephew, or
indeed Son to Pope Alexonder the sixth, who having waged a war, with the
Nobility and States thereof, who refused his absolute Sovereignty, fraudulently
entered into a Treaty with them, whereby it was concluded as the main Article,
that he never should assemble the said Estates together, they suspecting his
malicious perfidiousness against them would then find an advantage of
destroying them together; which nevertheless he by policy and dissimulation
effected, and then murdered them; which being related to the Pope, and the
perjury of his Nephew upbraided: He answered, it was not his Nephew had broke
the Articles, but the Estates themselves in coming altogether, meeting there
Seventeen Dukes and Marquesses of Ferrara: the revenue whereof was two hundred
fifty thousand crowns yearly, but now it is not worth so much to the Pope:
There have been also six Dukes of Urbin, the revenues are one hundred thousand
crowns; but the chiefest glory they have, is of the City of Rome, sometime the
Empress of the world: there are accounted to have passed in it sixty five
Bishops before it usurped the spiritual supremacy over Christendom; Bonifacius
the third, in the year of Christ six hundred and six, making the sixty sixth
Bishop, so fulfilling the mark of Antichrist. Rev. 13. 18. of the number six
hundred sixty six, which also the numeral letters make up in his arrogant
Title, GeneraLis VICarIVs DeI In terrIs.

The Bishops taking this Title in the year one thousand six hundred forty four,
had been one hundred seventy nine, and both added together, two hundred forty
four; and how many more they shall be, he only knows, who knows all things;
the ordinary temporal revenues of the Pope, are two millions of Crowns, but the
extraordinary spiritual, twice as much. There were several Orders of Monks
installed at several times called the Orders of Saint Basil, Austin, Jerome,
Carmelites, Crouched Friars, Dominicans, Benedictines, Franciscans, Iosuites,
and Oratorians: And of women the Orders chiefly of Clare and Bridget, which to
name only, I think may suffice in a Treatise of this nature. The Archbishops
here are forty four, The Bishops fifty seven.

The Italian Provinces of the State of Venice, lie northward of the lands of
the Church from Romandiola to the Alps, bounded on the South with the Territory
of Ferrara and the rest of Romandiola on the west, with the Dukedom of Millain
on the north, with the main body of the Alps; and on the east with the
Adriatic Sea, and the river Arsia, by which it is parted from Liburnia, a
Sclavonian Province. It abounds with wise people and fruitful Cities and
Countries; their Religion is Popish, but not so absolutely slavish as the rest.
They baptize the Sea yearly, and their Duke marryeth^ it as often.

Their government is Aristocratical, of the Nobility; they have had near one
hundred Dukes of Venice; They have two principal orders of Knighthood, of Saint
Mark the Patron of the City, instituted one thousand three hundred thirty, and
renewed one thousand five hundred sixty two. They are to be of noble blood, at
least a Gentleman: their word or Motto is, Pax tihi Marce: the other is of the
glorious Virgin, instituted one thousand two hundred twenty two: their charge
is to defend the Widows and Orphans, and to procure (as much as in them is) the
peace of Italy. The arms of the order is a purple cross between certain stars:
the Habit a white Surcoat over a russet cloak, and seems to be religious as
well as military: there are in this Italian part of Venice, two Patriarchs, and
sixteen Bishops.

The Venetians are now, and for more then twenty years last past, have been
engaged in a war against the great Turk, which is carried on at Sea, in the
Archipelage, in Dalmatia, and most fiercely in the Isle of Candia, which is
equally possessed by them both, with little difference of success, having been
so maintained twenty four years and like to continue as many more: though the
Venetians lost the Island and Kingdom of Cyprus as big again, to the said
Turkish power, in Sultan Selymus's time, in less than half a year: This
Maiden-Common-wealth, is the bulwark of Christendom.

For besides the famous Battle of Lepanto, where they defeated all the naval
power of that Empire: in the year 1654. General Morosini gave them another
overthrow as the Turkish Fleet was endeavoring to come out of the
Dardanellces, on the 14. of July: who lost in the fight, 16. Ships, 6. Galleys,
2. Mahoons, and many other Vessels; 4000 men taken prisoners, who were made
slaves, and as many killed. Their whole Navy consisted of a hundred Ships, the
Venetians not above fifty.

The Dukedom of Florence or the estate of the Great Duke of Tuscany, is divided
in the east from Saint Peter's Patrimony by the river Pisca, on the west, from
the Commonwealth of Genoa, by the river Macra, and the strong Fort of
Sarezana; on the north from Romandiola, and Marca Anteritana by the Appeninne
hills: and on the south side, it is bounded with the Tuscan o^ Tyrrhenian Seas:
It was a while a Free State, having Princes of the House of Medici, but now it
is governed by the Duke of Florence, or great Duke of Tuscany, of the same
Family. The length of this State is two hundred sixty miles, the breadth in
some places much inferior: the only order of Knighthood here, is that of Saint
Stephen, instituted one thousand five hundred sixty one. It is kept August the
6. yearly, and has all the privileges of them of Malta, upon the condition
that they of the order should make a vow of charity, of continual chastity and
obedience: they are to be nobly born, and in lawful wedlock; of the Romish
Church, and without note of infamy: their Robe is of white Chamlet, with a red
Cross of their left side sewed upon their midday garments, or their wearing
Cloaks: the number is uncertain; the great Duke is the supreme Master of it;
the reve^es are very great; besides the great Duke is a Merchant, and takes
Excise almost of every thing: the Arms are, Or, five Torteaux, Gules, two, two
and one and one in chief, Azure charged with three Flower-de-luces of the
first. Here are three Archbishops, and twenty six Bishops.

The free State of Luca in Italy, lies betwixt the State of the great Duke,
and the Commonwealth of Genoa; they are a free, courteous, modest People, of
good judgment and discreet, wisely preserving their liberty against the
strength of potent neighbors, they are industrious, also well seen in
Manufactures, especially in weaving cloth of gold and silk. The Dominions of it
are eighty miles, the revenue is eighty thousand crowns yearly; it can raise
for war fifteen thousand foot, and three thousand horse; the Government is
mixed of Aristocracy, and Democracie: the principal Magistrate, called Gone
Falinere, is changeable every second month, assisted by a certain and
determinate number of citizens, whom they change every sixth month also, during
which time they lie together in the Palace, or common hall; their Protector is
also elective, of some neighbor King or State; their Religion is Popish: they
have two Bishops, only acknowledging the Archbishop of Florence for their
Metropolitan.

The Commonwealth of Genoa in Italy lies west of Tuscany, from which it is
divided by the river Macra. They were anciently a large State, but have now
only Liguria and the Isle of Corsica in their power; the men were good
warriors, Merchants, and given to usury, which they learned of the Jews. Mr.
Heylin reports, that it was the saying of a merry fellow, that in
Christendom there were neither Scholars enough, Gentlemen enough, nor Jews
enough: not Scholars enough, for then so many would not be double or
treble-beneficed: not Gentlemen enough, for then we should not have so many
Pesants turn Gentlemen: nor Iastly Jews enough, for then so many Christians
would not turn Usurers.

The Women here are privileged above all Italy, having liberty to talk with
whom they will, and be courted by any that will, both publicly and privately:
from hence and some other particulars, they have made this proverb, of the
State of the Country: Mountains without wood, Seas without fish, Men without
faith, and Women without shame. They have a Duke and eight more assistant with
him, all subject to the general Council of four hundred men: the Duke and his
eight assustants hold but two years: Spain is their Protector, and they have
one Archbishop, fourteen Bishops.

This Commonwealth has maintained it self in perfect peace at home, and free
Commerce at Sea, by its good Government for many ages past: having sometimes
been troubled by the quarrelling interests of its Neighbor potent Princes,
viz. the Duke of Savoy, the French, and the Duchy of Millain, belonging to the
Spaniard. They are the King of Spain's constantest Exchequer.

The State of Lumbardy in Italy, is bounded on the east with Romandiola, and
the State or Territory of Ferrara; on the west with that part of the Alps which
divides Italy from France: on the north (reckoning Marca Trevigiana within the
bounds thereof) with that part of the Alps which lies toward Germany: and on
the south with the Apennine, which parts it from Liguria, or the States of
Genoa: as Italy is the Garden of Europe, so Lumbardy is the Garden of Italy for
the fruitfulness.

The Dukedom of Millain in Italy, has on the east the States of Mantua and
Parma, on the west Piemont, and some part of Switzerland one of the Provinces
of the Alps, on the north Marca Trevigiana, and on the south the Apennine,
which parts it from Liguria or the States of Genoa: It has had several Lords
and Dukes of Millain, accounted the chief Dukedom in Christendom, but now under
the Spaniards: the annual rent worth eight hundred thousand Ducats: but
considering all charges, the Spaniard is taken to lose in keeping it. The arms
are Argent, a Serpent Azure crowned, Or, in his Gorge an infant Gules. There
are one Archbishop, six Bishops.

The title to this Duchy was, as above, long contested for by the two Crowns
of France and Spain, but was finally vested in the most Catholic King: during
the last rupture between those two Monarchs, this was a sad Theater of War and
Bloodshed. The last parting blow, not to recite more, before the whole general
peace concluded, 1659. was at the City of Pavia, besieged by Prince Tho. of
Savoy General for the French, and the united strength of Savoy and Prince of
Modena, which by the valor of the besieged, and the succor brought them by
the Marquess of Caracena Governor of Millain, was freed after four months
siege: and the two aforesaid Princes put to the rout with the loss of 3000.
Men, some Cannon, Bag, and Baggage, the said Duke shot in the Arm, and the
Prince thereby contracted such a Fever, that it soon after ended him.

The Dukedom of Mantua in Italy, is bounded on the west with Millain, on the
east with Romandiola, on the north with Marca Trevigiana, and on the south with
the Dukedom of Parma; the Soil is reasonable good, and yields all sorts of
fruits, being well manured, plentiful in Corn, Pastures, and abundance of
Vines, but the Inhabitants not so civil and well bred as the rest of Italy,
childish in their Apparel, without Manly gravity in entertainment of friends,
and exacting all they can from strangers; it is a Sovereignty and has had many
Dukes thereof. The chief Order of Knighthood in these Dukedomes is of the blood
of our Lord Jesus Christ, instituted Ann. one thousand six hundred eight; it
consists of 20 Knights, whereof the Mantuan Dukes are Sovereigns. The collar
has threads of gold, laid on with fire, and interwoven with these words, Domine
probasti.

To the collar are pendent two Angels supporting three drops of blood, and
circumscribed, Nihil isto triste recepto. It is accounted a great circuit, but
not worth above five hundred thousand Ducats: the arms are Argent, a cross
Patee Gules between four Eagles sable, membred of the second, under an
Escuchion in fise charged quarterly with Gules, a Lion Or, and Or three bars
Sable: here are, one Archbishop, and four Bishops.

In the year 1627. the 26 of December, Duke Vincent of Mantua deceasing without
Children; the succession fell to the Duke of Nevers, a Peer of France, of the
illustrious kin and family of Gonzaga; who received it, and precipitated his
investiture therein, without the knowledge of the Emperor to whom that Duchy
is Feudatory. The Spaniards out of jealousy, the Savoyards out of an old
pretension, seized of many places in Montferrat, and besieged Casal. The Duke
of Never^ garrisoned many tenable places, and joined with the Venetians until
such time as the French forces arrived, who had been detained at the seige of
Rochel, under the command of the Duke of Crequi, who opposed those Armies, and
at last came an Army of twenty thousand out of Germany sent by the Emperor to
assert his own Authority. By these numerous Hosts the Country was almost
depopulated, the Churches robbed, the Germans being most Lutherans, and so
enemies to the Romish Superstition; till at last by the powerful instance of
Cardinal Richleiu who set up this Duke in spite of the Emperor; and to allay
the greatness of the House of Austria; a peace was concluded at Vienna,
(wherein the Duke of Nevers was established, and did his Homage) and published,
just as the Armies of the French and their Confederates were ready to join in
battle at the Seige of Casal, defended by the brave French Marquess De
Toyrass, who maintained the Isle of Rhee against the Duke of Buckingham newly
before. This Ducall Family is now by Marriage principally allied to the
Emperor and House of Austria.

I shall pass by the Dukedoms of Modena, Parma, and Mountferrat, as being all
three but small estates of Italy, and havin^ but four Bishops amongst them all:
the arms of Modena the same with the Dukedom of Ferrara; and the arms of
Mountferrat, Gules, a chief Argent: thus much for Italy.

These three small principalities, have afforded very excellent Courageous
Princes. Not to mention the exploits of that renowned Alexander Duke of Parma,
Governor of the Low Countries for the King of Spain in the time of Queen
Elizabeth; it shall suffice to say that they balance the over-growing Power of
either of the Monarchs of France or Spain, siding always with the weakest,
lest they become a prey to the Conqueror; and to that purpose are commonly
divided in the Quarrel, siding in opposition, yet exercise no Hostility upon
each others Dominions. Moun ferrat is now annexed to the Duchy of Mantua,
whose Duke is Prince of the same.

The Principality of Piemont, a part of the Alps, situate at the foot of the
Mount, is bounded on the east with Millain, and Mountferrat, on the west with
Savoy, on the north with the Switzers, and on the south it runs in a narrow
valley to the Mediterranean, having Mountferrat on the one side, Provence and a
part of the Alps upon the other: it is very fertile, compared with Sav^y, and
Switzerland, but thought to be inferior to the rest of Italy: the Arms of this
Principality are Gules, a Cross Argent, charged with a Label of three points
Azure* It is now subject to the Dukedom of Savoy.

This Principality has been often made the seat of War, especially in the
Reigns of Hen. the 4. and Lewis the 13th. of France, in the passage of their
Armies into Italy, and the Duke of Savoy, who is Prince and Sovereign thereof,
hard put to it, most of his strong holds being seized while he partaked with
the Spaniard: but since the alliance of that Duke with the French, it has had
a refreshment, which has been inte^rupted by some intestine troubles about
Religion, a great part thereof being of the Reformed Religion; witness that
Massacre there, for which such liberal Collections and Contributions were made
in (...) for those Protestants, in time of Oliver.

Savoy strictly and specially so called, is bounded on the East with
Wallisland, and part of Piemont, on the west with Daulphin and La Bresse, on
the south with some parts of Daulphine only, and on the north with Switzerland
and the lake of Geneva. The Country is altogether Hilly and Mountainous; very
healthful, but not very fruitful: The Common People are naturally very dull,
but the Gentry pleasant, ingenious, and civil: There have been near thirty
Earls and Dukes of Savoy: It is a very strong place with fortifications of
nature; the Revenue ordinarily a million of Crowns yearly. The only Order of
Knighthood here is that of the A^nunciado, ordained one thousand four hundred
and eight; their Collar is of fifty links, to show the mysteries of the Virgin;
at the end is her pourtraicture with the history of the Annunciation; in stead
of a Motto these Letters, F. E. R. T. i. e. Fortitu^o ejus Rhodum tenuit, are
engraven to every plate or link of the Collar, each link being interwoven one
within another in form of a true lovers knot; the number of Knights is fourteen
beside the Duke the Sovereign of the Order; the Solemnity held annually on our
Lady Day: the Arms are G. a cross A. Geneva is a City of the Dukedom of
Savoy, now a free State, having cast off both the Pope and their own Duke, and
kept free by their neighbors jealousy each of other touching it; the Religion
is Calvinist Protestant, the Government Presbyterial, the Language the worst
French, the People industrious, and Merchants; their situation for neighbors
advantageous thereunto.

Of the Duke and this Duchy enough has been said before, in the Historical
description of Mantua and Piedmont, only thus much may be added, that the
present Duke is Cousin German to our Sovereign King Charles the Second, by his
Mothers side, who is Sister to our present Queen Mother; and that he is the
powerfullest Arbitrator of the Affairs of Italy, and has the peculiar style of
His Highness Royal, as a pretender to the Kingdoms of Cyprus, as also
Jerusalem, and Portugal.

Wallisland reaches from the Mountain de Burken to the Town of St. Maurice,
where the hills do close and shut up the valley, which is so narrow in that
place, that a bridge laid from one hill to another, (under which the River
Rosne does pass) is capable of no more than one Arch only, and that defended
with a Castle, and two strong Gates; on other parts, it is environed with a
continual Wall of steep and horrid Mountains, covered all the year long with a
crust of Ice, nor passable at all by Armies, and not without much difficulty by
single passengers, so that no Citadel can be made so strong by Art, as this
Country is by nature. The Valley is very fruitful in Saffron, Corn, Wine, and
most delicate Fruits, having Meadows and pleasant Pastures. They have also a
Fountain of Salt, and many hot Baths and Medicinal Waters; they have Cattle
enough to serve them; also a wild Buck, equal to a Stag in bigness, footed like
a Goat, and horned like a fallow Deer, leaping with wonderful agility, and not
so easily caught, but in Summer time, for then with the heat he is blind. The
People are courteous toward Strangers, but very rough and churlish toward one
another: They are of the Romish Religion, and subject to the Bishop of Sion.
The Deputies of the seven Resorts having not only voices with the Cantons in
his Election, but being chosen they join with him also in the Diets for
choosing Magistrates, redressing grievances, and determining matters of State.

Of this Country few Military Occurrences are historified, for that it is by
Nature as it is described, no way fit for the entertainment of Mars; and is
only a nursery, no residence for Soldiery.

Switzerland has on the east side the Grisons, and some part of Tyrol in
Germany, on the west the Mountain Jove and the lake of Geneva, which parts it
from Savoy and Burgundy; on the north Suevia, another Province also of the
Upper Germany; and on the south Wallisland, and the Alps which borders on the
Dukedom of M^. It is totally in a manner overgrown with craggy Mountains, but
such as for the most part have grassy tops, and in their hollowness rich
Meadows and nourishing Pastures, being two hundred forty miles in length, and
one hundred eighty in breadth: The Inhabitants are rich, and rugged of
disposition like their Land, good Soldiers, and mercenary almost to every one;
their Religion mixed, some Papists, some Protestants-Zwinglians, yet they have
agreed to tolerate one another; their Government popular.

These People first knew their strength by the defeated Ambition of Charles
Duke of Burgundy some Ages since, whom, after their request to him for Peace,
which he would not admit without Subjection, intending also to swallow Italy,
they utterly overthrew at the Battle of Nancy; but Francis the first of France
made them know they were not invincible, at the Battle of Serisolles in the
Duchy of Millain, where he slew near 20000 of them, and brought down their
stomachs. They are now the best strength the Kings of France have for Infantry,
of which there is a constant standing Force maintained; but so Mercenary, that
upon any failure of their Pay, their cry, grown into a Proverb, i^, No Money,
no Switzer. The Cantons of the two different persuasions Roman and Zuinglian,
were lately at feud, and several skirmishes happened to the Breach of the
Confederacy and Union, but all was at last Composed by the mediation of the
French Ambassadors; no less a Person then the Duke of Longoville, being
employed in that affair, to prevent the designs, and intrigues of the Spaniard
and the Pope, who promoted that difference.

The Country of the Grisons is bounded on the east with the Country of Tyrol,
with Switzerland on the north, with Suevia and a part of the Switzers, on the
south with Lombardy, on the west a very Mountainous and barren Land: the People
now Protestant, their Government popular; in these Alpine parts there are two
Archbishops, thirteen Bishops.

This Country is modernly called the Valtoline, being the passage out of the
Emperor's Hereditary Country in Germany, into Italy, and therefore anxiously
and jealously looked upon by both the Crowns of France and Spain, lest the
Spaniard should have it open for any assistance, suddenly to overwhelm the
Princes thereof: upon which account these Grisons suffered by both Armies in
the business of Mantua aforesaid; but in that Peace were re-established in
their own Signiory as it now continues, more out of others distrust then its
own impregnability.

In this Country of the Grisons some thirty years ago a Mountain by an
Earthquake fell and covered a Village called Pelura, burying the Town and
Inhabitants together in its ponderous Sepulcher, so irrecoverably, that not the
Cry of any of those miserable persons was ever heard, and were swallowed up
quick in that terrible manner.

France has always been held the principal and worthiest Kingdom of all
Christendom; it is bounded on the east with Germany, and southward with the
Mediterranean Sea, south-east with the Alps, and on the north with the British
Sea. It is very fruitful in all sorts of grain, and whatsoever is needful for
the maintenance of life, especially it has great abundance of wines, wherewith
many other Lands are also served. It is divided into many great Dukedoms and
Provinces, it has in it also diverse great, mighty, and famous Cities; the
People are heady; but ingenious, and good Warriors. The Government is merely
Regal, and at the pleasure of the Prince, of which it has had many great and
powerful ones: The Religion of the Land is Popish, but there are many
Protestants there, who although they have been greatly persecuted, yet
sometimes their number has indulged them in the exercise thereof: The chief
Orders of Knighthood yet extant here, are, first of St. Michael, instituted one
thousand four hundred and nine. It consisted first of thirty persons, but
after, of three hundred: the Habit of the order, a long Cloak of white Damask,
down to the ground, with a border interwoven with cockleshels of gold,
interlaced and furred with Ermins, with a Hood of Crimson Velvet, and a long
tippet about their necks; they wear a Collar woven with Cockle-shels: the word
Immensi tremor oceani; the Picture of S. Michael Conquering the Devil was
annexed to the Collar, the Seat thereof, anciently, Saint Michael's mount in
Norm^dy, and the day Saint Michael's day. Secondly, of the Holy Ghost, ordained
one thousand five hundred seventy nine. The order of St. Michael is to be given
to none but such as were dignified with this, whereunto none were to be
admitted, but such as could prove their Nobility by three descents: their Oath,
to maintain the Romish Catholic Religion, and persecute all opponents to it:
their Robe, a black velvet mantle, pourtrayed with Lillies and flames of gold,
the Collar of Flower-de-luces, and flowers of gold, with a Cross, and a Dove
appendent to it: The Arms of France are Azure three Flower-de-luces Or; it has
seventeen Archbishops, one hundred and eight Bishops, and one hundred thirty
two thousand Parishes.

The Pyrenean hills are only a bound between France and Spain, two potent
Kingdoms; the whole length, not reckoning in the windings and turnings,
affirmed to be eighty Spanish Leagues at three miles to a League: the People
barbarous, but of what Religion my Author says not: It may be, he esteemed
them so barbarous, that he thought they could live without any Religion at all.

The Kingdom of France has been Governed, and possessed by three several Races
of Princes since the failure of the Issue of Charlemayn, the last of whose name
Chilperick the fourth was deposed, first by the Pope, and then by the common
Consent of Parliament: and Pepin the Great, Son of the Mayre of the Palace
(which Officer a long space, of 120 years and upwards, had successively
managed the State both for Peace and War) was advanced to the Crown, which
after a long descent vested in the name of Valois: which for some centuries of
years, and during the Wars with England, valiantly and prudently swayed the
Sword and Scepter. This line was extinct almost in memory in the Person of
Henry the 3. of France, stabbed at the Siege of Paris by a Iacobine Monk, when
by virtue of the Salique Law, which admits of no Females to the Crown, it
devolved after a long and bloody war, worse then their three Civil Wars
concerning Religion, (the Head of the Protestant Armies being this very
Prince,) to Henry of that name the fourth, of Bourbon. This was a Son of
Valor, the Great Captain, who by assistance of Queen Elizabeth, by some Forces
under the Earl of Essex, broke that abominable League of the Guisians against
him, and established his Throne: and preparing for some great design, was
stabbed by one Francis Ravilliac in h^s Coach in the Streets of Paris. His Son
Lewis the 13 succeeded, in whose Reign, in the year 1627. was that unfortunante
Expedition of the English to the Isle of Rhee, in relief of the Rochellers:
where, the French taking advantage; the English, as they were retreating after
four Months Continuance in that Island, defying the whole strength of France
(but in vain besieging the strong Citadel of St. Martins) were at last ventured
on as they were passing over a Cawsey to their Ships. On both sides this way
there were Salt-pans, the way it self broad enough but for four Men a Breast,
where they were put unto some Confusion, and a great many perished in the
Salt-pans; but the Van that had passed resolutely returning to the assistance
of those Companies in the Rear thus endangered: the French, their first fury
being over, fled back over the same Cawsey with more Confusion than the English
were driven before, and durst never attempt any further upon them, but
permitted them, and gladly too, to embarque, where the Duke of Buckingham
stayed eight days, resolving to do something more if the supply under the Earl
of Holland had come sooner. This Invasion of the English put the French into
another pannick Fear of their Victorious Arms; but Providence, and the Policy
of Cardinal Richleiu secured them, by whose Conduct the Reign of this Prince
was very fortunate, though embroyled in a War with Spain and the House of
Austria, for some years before his death, which a while after the decease of
the said Lewis 14, and Cardinal Richleiu, by the prudence of Cardinal Mazarine
was Concluded in a Peace and Marriage betwixt Lewis the 14. present King of
France, and the Infanta of Spain, by which Treaty, France gained some
Provinces, and since by the Surrender of the Duke of Lorrain, is possessed also
of that Sovereignty. The Nobility are Courageous and valiant, but the Plebe or
Peasants the most abject heart-less People in the World; the Gentry also of a
like temper with the Nobility, so that if they have no War abroad to spend that
fury, they will waste it among themselves in intestine troubles, as long
Experience has demonstrated it.

Spain is severed from France by the Pyrenaean Mountains, on all other sides it
is environed with the Sea: it contains at this day diverse Kingdoms; One,
Goths: Two, Navars. There have been forty one Kings: The Arms are Gules a
Carbuncle nowed, Or. The chief Order of Knighthood was of the Lilly, their
Blazon a pot of Lillies with the pourtraicture of the Virgin engraven upon it;
their Duty, to defend the Faith, and daily to repeat certain Ave Mary's: Third,
Biscay, and Empascon, it has had nineteen Lords: Their Arms Argent, two Wolves
Sable, each of them in his mouth a Lamb of the second. Four, Leon and Oviedo,
has had thirty Kings; The Arms are Argent, a Lion passant crowned, Or; Five,
Gallicia has had ten Kings: the Arms Azure semee of Cressets ficed, a Chalice
crowned, Or; Six, Cordu^a has had twenty Kings; the Arms Or, a Lion Gules
armed and crowned; of the first a border, Azure charged with eight Towers
Argent: Seven, Granado has had twenty Kings, the Arms Or, a Pomgranate
slipped, Vert: Eight, Murcia; Nine, Toledo, has had eleven Moorish Kings: Ten,
Castile has had twenty Kings; the Order of Mercy is the chief Order here:
their Arms are a Cross Argent, and four Beads, Gules in a field, Or; their
Habit white: the rule of their Order, that of St. Augustine: their Duty was to
redeem Christians taken by the Turks with such Money as was bestowed upon them:
Eleven, Portugal has had twenty one Kings; the principal order of Knighthood
here, are, first of Avis, wearing a green Cross; second of Christ, instituted
one thousand three hundred twenty one: their Robe is a black Cassock under a
white Surcoat, wherewith a red Cross stroked in the midst with a white line:
their duty, to expel the Moors out of Boetica the next neighbor to Portugal:
the Arms of this Kingdom are Argent on five Escouchins Azure, as many Besants
in Saltire, of the first pointed sable, within a border Gules, charged with
seven Towers, Or: Twelve, Aragon has had twenty Kings: the Order of Knighthood
is of Mintsea, their Robe a red Cross upon their breast; the Arms Or, four
Pallets Gules: All these, but Portugal and Navar, are united in one Monarchy of
the King of Spain: their Religion is Popish, whereunto they are kept by the
violence of the Inquisition. The Land yields all sorts of Wines, Oils, Sugar,
Grain, Metals, as Gold, and Silver: it is fertile enough for the Inhabitants,
whose ambitions for the most part are base, the meanest proud, the best
superstitious and hypocrites, many of them lascivious, yet good Soldiers, by
patience in enduring hunger, thirst, labor. The King is not rich, by reason of
his great expenses to keep his Dominions, in which he has eleven Archbishops:
fifty two Bishops.

This Kingdom of Spain is risen to this grandeur and united strength within
the Memory of our Grandfathers. Ferdinand King of Aragon, by his valor in
vanquishing the Moors, and expelling them out of Spain, and his prudence and
happiness in marrying with the Heir of the Kingdom of Castile, made it of many
one entire Realm. The wealth of the Indies by the offer and fortunate discovery
of Columbus, being thrown as an addition to his Felicity. This was further
aggrandized and increased by the Marriage of his Heir Joan to the House of
Austria, who by a late Marriage with the Heir of Burgundy, was reckoned the
most considerable Prince in Europe. This was Philip, the first of that name,
King of Castile, Son to Maximilian Archduke of Austria, Duke of Burgundy; and
from which Marriage with Joan descended Charles the fifth, Emperor of Germany,
who had Issue Philip the second, King of Spain, who, by pretense of a Right by
his Wife, and by Force of Arms, wrested Portugal from the right Heir, the House
of Braganza; This Philip long Coveted an universal Empire, and for which
ambition many thousand lives, and more hundred thousand pounds drawn from his
inexhaustible Mines have been expended. His War in the Low Countries (...) the
United Provinces which revolted from him, lasted above 80. years, during which
time He had several ruptures, with the French and English, both being his
constant Enemy all Queen Elizabeth's Reign.

Yet since the Peace of the United Provinces, he has been as hard put to it as
before; his Provinces in the Low Countries much harassed, and his Forces
overpowered by the united French and English Forces, sent by Oliver Cromwell,
to attaque him there, while a Fleet was sent to the West Indies, to seize his
Mines, that his Treasure, by the great charge, difficulty, and danger, in
bringing it from thence, was near exhausted; so that a Peace was very requisite
for him, whereby he regained Catalonia, who revolted at the same time, in the
year 1640. with Portugal, and has advantage of employing his Armies solely
against that Kingdom; but it is not to be doubted with but little success, so
that he will be constrained to abandon his pretenses, as he did to the
Hollander. He has quitted the Provinces of Artois and Henault in Flanders, and
the County of (...) to the French, as Dower with his Daughter.

England together with Scotland, on the north part thereof, makes the greatest
Island of Europe, and the richest in the World, situated in a very temperate
Soil and wholesome Air, and exceeding fruitful in Wheat and other grain; has
many pleasant Rivers, plentifully stored with Fish, excellent Havens both
commodious and safe, Mines of Silver, Lead, Iron, especially of fine Tinn;
bearing fine Wool, of which is made Cloth that serves not only themselves, but
is also transported into other parts: their chief City is London, the
Inhabitants are brave Warriors both at Sea and Land, and many of them learned
and witty: The Orders of Knighthood are, of St. George, or of the Garter; there
are twenty six Knights of it, whereof the King of England is the Sovereign: the
Ensign is a blew Garter, buckled on the left leg, on which these words are
embroidered, Honey soit qui mal y pense: about their necks they wear a blew
Ribond, at the end of which hangs the Image of Saint George, upon whose day
the Order is for the most part celebrated. Secondly of the Bath, instituted one
thousand and nine. They use to be created at the Coronation of Kings and
Queens, and the installing of the Prince of Wales: Their duty, to defend true
Religion: Widows, Maids, Orphans, and to maintain the Kings Rights: the Knights
thereof distinguished by a red Riband, which they wear ordinarily about their
necks, to difference them from Knights Batchelours, of whom they have in all
places the precedence, unless they be also the Sons of Noblemen, to whom the
Birth gives it before all Orders. Thirdly of Baronets, an hereditary Honor:
the Arms are Mars, three Lions passant gardant Sol.

This Kingdom famous for Warlike Exploits abroad (there being no Nation in the
known world, but where their dreadful Arms have been carried, witness our
Holy Land Expeditions, our Atchivements in Spain, several Times; our Conquests
in France, our defense of the Netherlands, our Triumphs over Scotland, and
subduing of Ireland: our Naval Power not less formidable, in 88. and lately
with the stubborn Dutch, whom for all our more than uncivil Broyls we humbled
into an entreaty of Peace,) was infinitely more terrible to it self, in the
late Convulsion and Subversion of the Laws and Government by a fatal Quarrel of
the Parliament with the King. A Prince no doubt of the greatest virtues, piety
and abilities that ever Swayed this Scepter: nor could the Malignity of our
Distempers have seized one of a sounder Constitution, as to Honor, Conscience,
Clemency, Justice, or what ever good quality is requisite for a King: being
absolutely the best of all the Princes that ever Reigned in this Island. It
will be alike grievous and tedious, to relate the Miseries of this unnatural
War, the Battles, Seiges, and Surrenders that happened therein: It will be too
much to say, that after a bloody Contest, the King was worsted, and with him
the Laws, and afterward, by his own rebellious and traite ous Subjects brought
to a new unparalled High Court of Justice, and by Sentence thereof, beheaded
before his own Court-Gates at White Hall, January 30. 1648.

By the perpetration of this Murder, and by a thing called an Act of
Parliament, Monarchy seemed to be actually dissolved, it being made Treason to
Proclaim the Prince, or any other Person, King or Queen of England. All Empires
have their certain periods and measures of Time, at the Expiration whereof,
they taste of that Vicissitude and Change to which all other sublunary things
are more frequently subject. This Monarchy had ^asted, without any great
alteration, in a direct Line (the Name only changed from Plantagenes, which
begun in Henry the second (who restored the Saxon Line, to T^wdor, in the
Person of Henry the seventh) (who united the two Houses of York and Lancaster)
after to Stuart, in the Person of King James, who united the two Kingdoms of
England and Scotland, and continuing, and long may it, in our present
Sovereign) six hundred years and upwards, till this fatal Revolution was come
when we were under an Anarchy, no Government at all in reality. There are
reckoned, during this interregnum, no less then seventeen Forms of Authority we
were under, in the space of eleven years, betwixt the Parliament, Protector,
and Army.

In the year 1651, our present Sovereign, to regain his Right, entered England
from Scotland, (where Cromwell had p evailed, and very like to carry all before
him) and got a start of three days march, and came to Worcester, where he was
not long after defeated, but most miraculously escaped into France, where
Divine Providence preserved him safe, and after many strange over-turnings;
(after we had been ridden by a Rump of a Parliament, and tyrannised over in our
Lives and Estates by the Protector Oliver Cromwell, (who by wicked means had
scrued himself into the Supreme Power,) and wearied with the lording
Insolences of an Army) by the Conduct of General Monk, returned him in Honor
and safety to his Kingdoms, and his Kingdoms to Peace and Prosperity on his
most happy Birthday, May 29. 1660. since which His Majesty is most happily
Married to the Infanta of Portugal, and such an alliance made, as will be most
beneficial to the Trade, and consequently promote the Glory of these Nations.

Scotland, environed with the Sea, except on the south side, where it bordereth
with England, is not so fruitful, yet has of all things enough to fustain it
self; the head-City, is Edenborough. Scotland gives many sorts of course
Woollen, Cloth, Wool, Malt, Hides, Fish. The principal Order of Knighthood
here, is that of St. Andrew. The Knights did wear about their necks a Collar
interlaced with Thistles, with the picture of St. Andrew appendent to it. The
Motto is,

Nemo me impune lacesset.

Secondly of Nova Scotia, ordained by King James, one thousand six hundred
twenty two, hereditary; but the Knights thereof distinguished by a Riband of
Orange Tawney: the Arms of the Kingdom are Sol, a Lion Rampant, Mars within a
double Tressure counter-flowered.

Little can be said of Scotland, because its story is all one with England, as
to latter Times. But be it remembered, that soon after the union of the two
Kingdoms was dissolved by dividing the Head thereof by the hand of Violence,
that Realm was totally Conquered by the English, which all the English Prowess
and valor of our Ancestors could never effect. This was atcheived by the
incomparable Felicity and conduct of the thrice renowned General Monck, who in
1653. marched over Hills, Rocks, and Praecipices, into the furthest Northern
parts of Scotland, and there forced General Middleton to fight, where the said
Middleton was overthrown, and the whole Country thereupon submitted to the
Conqueror.

Ireland is full of brooks, marshes, waters and woods, has good pasture, and
abundance of tame and wild beasts, but little grain: the Inhabitants are rude
and wild People, yet through the conversation and Government of the English
are daily more and more brought to Civility; the air here is very temperate,
cooler in Summer and warmer in Winter than in England: the Arms of Ireland are
Azure, an Harp Or, stringed Argent.

This Kingdom was never in a better constitution of Government as to
appearance, than in the beginning of our Troubles in 1639. by the prudent
steerage of the Earl of Strafford Deputy thereof, but in 1640. the 23. of
October, such a sudden and bloody Rebellion broke out, that from that day to
the 25. of March 1641. but five months, there are reckoned 150000. Protestants
slain and murdered by the Catholic confederate Rebels. After many Combats and
change of Fortune and Governors in that Kingdom, it was by Ireton, Cromwell's
Son in Law, totally reduced, and the prime ringleaders of the Rebellion (with
Sir Phelim O Neale of the Family of Tyrone, their Generalissimo) deservedly
executed.

The Isles belonging to Great Britain are the Surlings or Scillies, Garnesey,
Iarsey, Wight, Anglesey, Man, Hebrides, (...), and many others. All which three
Kingdoms and Islands aforesaid, make up one Realm, restored to the Government
of his most Sacred Majesty Char^es the second, whom God long preserve. Their
Religion is Protestant, their Church Government by Gods mercy, again Episcopal.

The Low Countries contain seventeen Provinces, the Dukedoms of Erabant,
Guelderland, Lymburge, and Luxenburge^, the Counties of Flanders, Artois,
Utrecht, Henault, Holland, Zeland, N^men, Zutfen, the Marquisate of the Holy
Empire, the Lordships of Freezland, Mechlen, Overysel and Graving; All which
are Lands above measure well tilled and inhabited, conta^ning two hundred and
eight Cities, fortified with Walls and Ditches, and about six thousand three
hundred Villages, with Parish-Churches, beside* the Castles, Forts, and
Noble-Mens Houses, which are almost infinite in number. This Land is watered
with many excellent Rivers, as the Rhine, the Mose, the Mard, the Scheld, and
others. It has also many commodious Sea-Havens, abounding in Ships, and very
skilful and expert Mariners and Pilots, as by their Navigations may appear,
whereby they have compassed, as it were, the whole World. The Inhabitants are
also very valiant, and notable Warriors, as well by Sea as by Land, as their
Enemies themselves will witness. They are excellently well skilled in all
cunning and handy-crafts. Many attribute unto them the Invention of the
Sea-Compass, as also the Needle, and laudable Art of Printing Books: they send
abroad into other parts all sorts of Linen and Woollen Cloth; Camerick,
Pasement-lace, of Gold, Silver and Silk, Taffata, Wrought Velvet, Grograms,
Says, whole and half Velvet Bags, Silk Laces, Say, and Li^en.

All manner of twined Thread, wrought Silk, refined Sugar, prepared Buff, and
Ox-hides, as also Spanish Leather; Pictures, Books, Cables, Ropes, and other
Ship-furniture; Cards, Pins, and all kind of Mercery; dried and salt Fishes,
Herrings, Butter, Cheese, and Biscuit; the People are of the Reformed Religion,
except the Spanish Provinces, and they are Papists; they suffer any Religion
among them: the principal Order of Knighthood ordained by these Princes, is
that of the Golden Fleece, instituted one thousand four hundred thirty nine;
ordained, as some^ conceive, from Gideons Fleece: Their Habit is, a Collar of
Gold interlaced with Iron, seeming to strike fire out of a Flint, Or; Ex ferro
flammam being the word, at the end whereof hung the Foison'd Or, or a Fleece of
Gold; the King of Spain may now make as many of them as he please. There are in
these parts three Archbishops, fifteen Bishops.

These Provinces have been Governed by several distinct Sovereigns, as the
Dukes of Brabant and Guelderland, Earls of Flanders, Holland, Henault and
Zeland, etc. All which by several Marriages of the Coheirs, for want of
Issue-male, at last devolved the entire Sovereignty into the House and Family
of the Dukes of Burgundy, the Male-line whereof expiring, the Heir General
Married with Maximilian Archduke of Austria, in the time of H. 7. and conveyed
these seventeen Provinces to her Son Philip the 1 of Spain, by Marriage with
Joan, Daughter and Heir of Castile and Arr^gon, in whose Posterity they
continue; the Emperor Charles the fifth, in his division of his Estates,
leaving these to his Son Philip the second, who by the Tyranny of the Duke of
A^va, and the Establishing the Inquisition, and a bloody Council, like our High
Courts of Justice, contrary to the Fundamental Laws of those People, so
alienated the Affection of those Provinces, that they (the most of them)
revolted, and being Headed and led by William Prince of Aurange Count of
Nass^n, and a Feudatory Subject of Burgundy, shook off the yoke of Spain, and
declared themselves a Free Estate; for that the King of Spain had forfeited his
Right, Title and Authority over them.

The Wars thereupon are so famous both for the length, vigourousness, and
policy thereof, both in Battles and Seiges, it becoming a Trade in which most
of the young Gallants of all Nations were bred, and also for the renown of
those Captains Generals on both sides, such as Prince William (assissinated by
a B^rgundian) Prince Maurice and Prince Frederick Grandfather to this prince of
Aurange on the Estates side (who were mainly supported by the English, and by
their blood raised to this Grandeur, and partly also by the French;) and
Alexander prince of Parma, natural Son to Charles the fifth, and the Marquess
of Spinola, on the King of Spains; who by more moderation and Arms regained
some provinces of the Defection: but seven of them, to wit, Holland, Zeland,
and ^trecht; and Overysel, part of Brabant, and most part of Guelderland, and
Zutfen could never be reduced, but after a War of 80. years, he was constrained
to acknowledge them a Free State or Commonwealth, now Governed in Common by the
States General, and in particular, by the Estates of each individual Province.

This peace was concluded on at Munster in 1647. to the great content of the
Spaniard, who was embroiled in a fierce War against the French, who therefore
mightily obstructed the proceeding thereof; but after this calm there arose
such a Tempest at Sea, that had near sunk them to their former condition of the
distressed Estates; by a difference between the up-start Commonwealth of
England and them, concerning Traffic and Sovereignty of the Sea. The usurping
Protector after six terrible Naval Fights, to secure his invasion of the
Government granted them peace in 1653. which has been better confirmed by our
Sovereign Charles the second since his Restitution, of which they seemed to be
as exceedingly and pompously (during his stay in their country just before his
happy return) as concernedly joyous. Of the ten other provinces belonging to
the Spaniard, two of them Artois and Henault, are conveyed and transferred to
the French, in portion for the late Marriage: and a part of West-Flanders, in
which is seated that memorable and well fortified Port of Dunkirke, at present
acknowledges the Dominion of the Crown of England, being put into English
Hands during the Usurpation in 1658. after the joint Conquest of it by their,
and the French Forces the same year.

Germany is one of the greatest Provinces in Europe, (and is in the midst
thereof) bounded on the East with Hungaria and Polonia; on the South with Italy
and Bolonia; on the West with France; and on the North with the North-Sea, and
with the Sea called Mare Balticum. In the midst whereof lies Bohemia, wherein
stands Prague, where the Emperor commonly keeps his Court: It is adorned with
magnificent Towers, well fortified, and furnished with such a number of
Castles, and Villages, such abundance of People, and with such Politic
Government, that she may compare with any. The Soil is fruitful both in Corn
and Wine; it has many Navigable Rivers, stored with plenty of Fishes, most
excellent Fountains, and hot Bathes, Mines of Gold, Silver, Tin, Copper, Lead,
and Iron; it has very Learned Men, skilful in all Sciences and Mechanic Arts:
The Religion is here very diverse: for there being many free Provinces, some
are Papists, some Protestants; and of these again, some Calvinists, some
Lutherans: There are six Archbishops, and thirty four Bishops.

The Wars of Germany, ushered in by the Comet or Blazing-Star in 1618, have had
dire and prodigious effects; first the Prince Elector Palatine undertaking the
Crown of Bohemia, was worsted at Prague; and the King of Denmark seconding him,
was likewise brought very low by Count Tilly the Emperor's General, and glad
to accept of a Peace upon hard terms; when in 1629 enters Gust^vus Adolphus the
King of Sweden, whose victorious Arms conquered Tilly at the Battle of
Leipsick, and presently overrun all Germany, defeated the Emperors next
General Wallestein Duke of Freidland at Lutzen, where, notwithstanding he was
killed, his Army had the Day; of whom it was said, that Before Death, in Death,
and after Death he was victorious. At the Battle of Nordling^in the Fortune of
the Swedes failed, a great slaughter being made on them by the Imperial Army,
and so a Peace was afterward patched, and again interrupted, till the solemn
and general Pacification at Munster; since which time, the Princes and People
have been in quiet. The Prince Elector Palatine losing the one half of his
Estate, as forfeited to the Emperor, who has invested the Duke of Bavaria,
the Electors nearest kinsman, in the upper Palatinate.

Denmark and Norway are very great Regions, bordering southward upon Germany;
they extend toward the north to seventy one degrees and thirty minutes, north
Latitude; toward the east they border upon Sweden, and on the west and
north-side they are environed with the Sea; they at this time are under the
Government of one King, who is Lord of Seland, Greenland, Hitland and Gothland.
These Kingdoms afford unto other Lands Oxen, Barley, Malt, Stock Fish,
Tallow, Sand, Nuts, Hides, Goat Skins, Masts, Deals, Oakenboards, Wood to burn,
Pitch, Tarr, Brimstone, and the like: their Religion is the Lutherans.

The chief Order of Knighthood in it is that of the Elephant, their Badge a
Collar powdered with Elephants, towered, supporting the Kings Arms, and having
at the end the Picture of the Virgin Mary. The Arms of the Land are, Quarterly
Of, three Lions passant, Vert, crowned, of the first, for the Kingdom of
Denmark, and two Gules, a Lion rampant; Or, crowned and armed, of the first in
the Paws, a Dansk hatchet; Argent, for the Kingdom of Norway; there are two
Archbishops, thirteen Bishops.

This King is allied to the Crown of England; Queen Ann, Wife to King James,
being Aunt to this present King Frederick. Twice in twenty years (not to
mention other Wars before) has this Crown been endangered by the Swedes, but
more nearly in 1657, and 8, when the King of Sweden, Carolus Gustavus being
drawn out of Poland to prevent the Dane, then in Arms against him, with strange
success almost overrun his Country. In a most hard Winter, he passed his Arms
and Canon over the Sea, from the Continent unto the Island of Funen, where he
overthrew the Dane, took Cronenburg Castle, which Commanded the Sound, and at
last laid Seige to Copenhaguen, the chief City of Denmark, where, attempting a
Storm by night, he was repulsed, with the loss of three thousand Men; and, soon
after, the Hollanders, with a Fleet, in spite of his Navy, and the said
Castle, entered, and relieved the Town; with Conceit whereof, and a violent
Fever, the said King not long after deceased: and the Danes, in gratitude and
Honor of their King Frederick, who had so bravely defended and stood by them,
consented to make that Kingdom hereditary, (as now it is established, all the
Estates having done Homage) which before was only Elective: the Family of this
King before, enjoying only the Crown of Norway by descent and inheritance. This
Prince suffered much; for, siding with the Dutch against the English, in the
late difference, seizing there twenty of our Merchantmen, on pretense of his
Aunts Dower, but was forced at last to make recompense for the damages, which
the Dutch undertook for him.

Sweden is a great and mighty Kingdom, bordering on the East upon Muscovia, on
the south upon the Baltic Sea and Denmark; on the West upon Norway: and on the
North upon the Finmark and the Zurick Sea. The Merchandises it sells are
Copper, Iron, Lead, costly Furrs, Buff, and Ox-hides, Goat Skins, Tallow,
Pitch, Barley, Malt, Hazel-nuts, and such like things: their Religion is
Lutheran. the Arms of the Kingdom Azure, three Crowns, Or: It has two
Archbishops, eight Bishops.

It is a wonder, and Men can scarce comprehend, how this Nation is come to this
greatness, to make War in so many parts of Europe, being to pass over the Sea:
or how they get so many Men in Arms, the Dominions thereof being large, but not
populous, so that there never came from thence, sixty thousand Men. It was
reported that many Women in Men's clothes supplied their places, and fought like
Amazons. The beginning of this upstart greatness, was from Charles Duke of
Sunderman, who being Uncle to Sigismond, King of Sweden by Descent, and of
Poland by Election, upon his seating himself in that Kingdom, and constituting
his Uncle Viceroy of his Native Kingdom of Sweden; he, with the consent of
the Senators, assumes the Crown, and maintains it against his Nephew;
whereupon ensued diverse Battles, the Usurper wafting over his Swedes into
Poland, and beginning an offensive War: when he dying, his Son, the Great
Gustavus, prosecuted it afresh, till after various Successes a Truce was
concluded on; before the expiration of which, he fell with that strange success
into Germany before said. After his death, his Daughter Christina was Crowned,
and Reigned seventeen years, when another occasion of War happening, they judging
her not capable to manage it, procured her to renounce her right to the Crown,
and resign it to her kinsman Carolus Gustavus, who with a powerful Army
invaded Poland, prompted thereunto by Cardinal Mazarine, and the Usurping
Protector of England, who by an Ambassador Mr. Whitlock, projected that
Invasion, to keep the Arms of the House of Austria in suspense and attendance
of the issue of that War, which were raised to the assistance of the Spaniards,
then in War with both French and English. Carolus Gustavus dying, as aforesaid,
the Crown is placed on the head of his Son Charles, (a Child of five years
old,) by his Wife, the Daughter of the Duke of Holsteyn: Of their late
Conquests, within these forty years, there remains to that Crown, all
Pomerania, and the Archbishopric of Br^men in Germany, besides other less
Provinces gained from the Dane, and several Islands in the Baloick Sea; with
Riga, the chief City of Liefland, a wealthy Maritine City, being seated as the
Grand Emporium of the more remote North-east Countries, as Russia, etc. and was
the only Port of Trade thither, before the passage about the North-Cape to
Archangel was found out. The Swede (a miracle) is now in full peace with all
his Neighbors; but no doubt according to Custom, is contriving another
Invasion upon some of his Neighbors.

Russia is the last Region toward the East in Europe, a good part of it is
Asia, it is bo^ded on the North with the Frozen Sea, on the East with Tartaria,
on the West it borders upon Livonia, and on the Realm of Sweden, and on the
South with the Sea called Mare C^spium; the greatest part is extreme cold, but
for the help of the Inhabitants, Nature has stored it with Furs, Sables, white
Fox, Martins, and other commodities, as Cattle, Corn, and Fruit: the whole
Region is subject to the Emperor of Russia, a wast tract, and as wild a
Government.

The people are base, ignorant, and contentious, and foolishly superstitious;
after the Greek Church, they deny the proceeding of the holy Ghost, they bury
their dead upright, with many other Ceremonies: Muscovia is the Seat of the
Empire. The Country affords very good flax, and hoops to make casks, and
ropes, and store of hides as well of Oxen as of Elks, much salt-fish, and
whales grease; the Arms are Sable, a partel open of two leases and as many
degrees, Or. Here is one Patriarch, two Archbishops, eighteen Bishops.

The Emperor hereof is the only Tyrant for Government, in Europe, and the
people more absolute slaves than in Turkey, which makes them though perpetually
in War with the Tartars, and every other year with the Polanders, no better
Soldiers; Slavery begetting in them mean and abject Spirits, so that of many
years they have effected nothing considerable, save the taking in of the City
and Duchy of Smolensko, in the year 1654. taken from them thirty years before;
where upon their besieging of it with an Army of an hundred thousand men, they
were besieged themselves with an Army of Poles, not above ten thousand in the
open fields, and were forced upon hard conditions to render themselves; for
which the Russian General nd his Son, lost their heads at their return to
Musco, They attempted Riga also, in 1657. from the Swedes, but even as the
place was by Famine and Scarcity of men ready to Capitulate, the Emperor in
despair, broke up his Siege, and departed. A peace is now concluded this year
1662. at Stockholm, by the Russian Ambassadors sent thither in most solemn
manner: But the Poles and they, are still at War with mutual success; some
fifty years ago, the Pole (in behalf of Demetrius a counterfeit Emperor) made
an in-road into Russia, of above 1200. miles length, and was possessed of the
City of Musco, which by the valor and Conduct of one Colonel Hamilton a Scot,
was rescued, and the Poles glad to depart, whose reward (of the greatness
whereof he was so confident, as that to make himself capable thereof, he turned
Russian and renounced his Religion,) was but neglect, and jealous distrust of
his abilities. This Emperor is likewise forced to keep a constant Army of
fifty thousand men, to attend the Tartars and Cossacks bordering upon his
Kingdom of Astracan, who every year invade him, and make incursions some
hundreds of miles, when in their return with their spoil and booty the Russian
either way-lays or overtakes him, and gives Battle. If the Russian prevail, he
enters their Country and makes havoc, with Fire and Sword; if not, the Tartar
keeping what he has plundered, is content to leave his victory and return home.
Nevertheless every year Ambassadors, some hundred in number, come to Musco; but
their main design is, to get Presents of Silken Vests and Rayments, they look,
and are sure to receive from the Emperor.

The Predecessor of this Emperor showed himself very affectionately respectful
to our Sovereign, and regardful of his Cause, when, upon the murder of his
Father, he presently seized all the Estates of the English, and would have sold
them, and delivered the product thereof to my Lord Wentworth, then Ambassador
from His Majesty, and for his use, if he had not wholly refused it, telling the
Emperor, They were his Masters Subjects, whom he ought rather to protect, than
to spoil, for the Rebellion of other People in England: whereupon the Emperor
lent a sum of Money freely himself, with promise of further assistance, but
would by no means grant the English their Privileges, of being Custome-free,
till His Majesty's Restitution. This Great Duke lives in great State and
Splendour, in a most ample and Magnificent Palace and Castle at Musco City,
which is now half built from Timber with Brick-Houses; the Fire, when it
happened before, usually burning down a third part thereof, the flame running
three or four miles in an instant. He is also very wealthy (all his Subjects
riches being his own when he pleases) and therefore very potent. The Patriarch
now governs Him and his Empire, being the Chief Minister, or Commander of
State. The Emperors Name is Alexei Michalowich.

Poland is bounded on the south with Moldavia, and Hungary, on the east with
Muscovia, and with the Tartaries Praecopenses, on the west with Germany, and on
the north with the Baltic Sea. Their Religion is partly with the Greek Church,
partly with the Roman: and so there are here of the Romish Church three
Archbishops, and ninteen Bishops; and of the Greek Church two Archbishops and
six Bishops: The Arms are one Gem, and Eagle, an Ass Argent Crowned and Nowed
Or, for the Region of Polonia: and two Gules, a Chevaleir armed Cap a^pe
advancing his sword Argent mounted upon a barbed Courserof the second, for the
Dukedom of Lituania: the commodities sent hence, are, Spruce or Dantz Beer,
Amber, Wheat, Rye, and other grain; Honey, Wax, Hemp, Flax, Pitch and Tarr: it
has also Mines of Copper and Iron.

This Kingdom, as well as the great Duchy of Lituania is elective, and has
had Kings often from their Neighbor Nations, such is the aemulation among the
chief Nobility: They have of late years been addicted to the French, and now to
the Duke of Anguien Son to the Prince of Conde, supposed to succeed King
Casimir. It is reckoned one of the Bulwarks of Christendom, to the east,
against the Turk and Tartar; but has been lately miserably harrassed by the
Swede and Transylvanian, who came to his assistance under Ragotzki. It proved
luckily for this People, that the King of Denmark quarreled with the Swede,
and raising a formidable Army, drew him to defend his own Country out of the
Bowels of Poland, and made him leave his design of Conquest thereof, which he
had promised to himself. The Marquess of Brandenburgh assisted him in the
beginning, but seeing his unreasonable Encroachments, and the injustice of his
Arms, which he might afterward upon the same pretenses use against his
Dominions, forsook his side, and turned enemy, a practice used to the Swedes by
the German Princes before: for just so the Elector, Duke of Saxony, served them
in the German War. This lost the Swede all he had got, save his plunder, who by
a Peace now resigned the Dutchies of Prussia, which he had Garrisoned and
possessed, and took a sum of Money in lieu thereof; like a cunning Merchant, as
my Lord Bacon observes in Hen. 7. that gets by importing and exporting of
Merchandise, such indeed is War to the Swede. But the Duke of Brandenburgh is
invested and possessed of the Ducal Prussia: seldom is it also, that the Poles
are without War, either at home or abroad; abroad now with the Muscovite: at
home a difference betwixt the Senators and the Confederate Army, which
threatens some danger, if not timely composed by the Prudence of the King, who
is a most Excellent Prince, and a^isted by very able Noblemen, such as is the
Renouned old General Czarnecki, he who has so often defeated the Muscovites
and Tartars, and once overcame the Swedes, whose Prince Adolph John was wounded
by Sandomiria, in 1657. They are a very warlike people, and the bravest enemy
both for gallantry, in mind and body in the world, carrying most of their
wealth with them into the field. Their arms, and horse-furnitures glittering
with gold and silver. They serve most on Horseback, the Gentry mounting their
Tenants, and Servants, and charge furiously with Lances, and then expertly
manage a Shabel or Scymiter: they have this year had two victories against the
Muscovites. They have been often vexed with the Cossacks, a People (bordering
upon the black Sea, where they annoy the Turk) mercenary and stipendiary to
this Crown, who under (...) their General, often combated them, but are now in
a better understanding and good compliance by a late Treaty. The Tartars are as
well disposed to be quiet, so that at present Poland seems likely to enjoy some
respite, and draw breath after so many Con^ulsions, and Concussions of its
State and Government.

Hungary is bounded on the south with Bosnia and Croatia, on the west with
Germany, on the east with Transylvania, Moldavia, and Walachia, and on the
north with Polonia: A great and mighty Kingdom and exceeding fruitful, it has
many Navigable Rivers, wherein are multitudes of Fish.

The People are strong, and show their antiquity to be of the Scythians, by
their neglect of Learning, and barbarous manners; their Sons equally inherit
without privilege of Birthright; their Daughters Portion is only a new
attire. The German Emperor and the Turk share it between them; the Commodities
that go from thence are, diverse sorts of colors, wheat, beef, salt, wine, and
river-fish salted: the A^ms are bar-wise of eight pieces, Gules and Argent:
there are here two Archbishops, thirteen Bishops.

This Kingdom of Hungary was anciently that Fortress against the Turks, which
now Poland is, several of its Kings being slain in the fields thereof, in
battle against them, so very remarkable is that War maintained by them
throughout all the Turkish History. This Crown was devolved at last to
Maximilian as Hereditary to the House of Austria, who a long while also grapled
against the same power, to a greater expense of men and money than the Title,
Revenue, and Possessions were worth; and could not expel nor drive them out,
being put to it to defend his own; Sultan Solomon, in the reign of H. 8.
carrying his Army to the Walls of Vienna the Emperors Imperial City in
Austria. The Emperors chief City, and assembly of the States is Presburgh,
where the King his Son is usually Crowned. The grand Siegnieurs is Buda upon
the River Danubius, Governed by one of his Principal Bashaws. The Hungarians
have enjoyed a long, though narrow peace, some part thereof being disquietted
by the troubled affairs of their Neighbors, such as are the Wayvods of
Moldavia, and Walachia (who are tributary Princes to the Grand Signiour, and
are invested by him, who not seldom revolt, and as often pay the price of it
with their heads) and lately, and at this time, the Princes of Transylvania, Of
which next.

Transylvania, a Principallity, is bounded on the north with Poland, on the
east with Servia and Bulgaria, on the west with Hungary, and on the east with
Moldavia and Walachia, two other small Principallities, Tributaries and Vassals
to the Turks. This Country of Transylvania is notable for good Warriors, being
beholding for their stoutness to the strength of their Country, which, toward
the south-east, is surrounded with Mountains. For these four last years it has
been the Seat of a cruel War; for, the King of Sweden having invited Prince
Ragotzki to the spoils of Poland in 1657. The Pole complained of this Invasion
to the Grand Seigniour, who commanded Ragotzki to withdraw, and withal sent an
Army to depose him for presuming against his leave and permission to engage
against the Pole. Ragotzki defended ^mself a while, but, being over-toyled, and
spent with care and hard service against so potent an Enemy, dyed. Whereupon
the States chose one Remini Ianosch to be their Prince, whom the Turks likewise
rejecting the States stood by him, against Prince Michael Abassi, invested by
the Grand Signiour. After several encounters; and the loss of Waradin, Remini
was taken and strangled, and his head and quarters set upon the Gates of one of
the chief Cities. Michael Abassi is now in authority, and the Country subdued,
which makes the Emperor fear an invasion of the Turks in Hungary and his
hereditary Countries, wherefore he is now in Treaty with those Infidel.

Sclavonia has on the South the Adriatic Sea; on the west, part of Italy;
Greece on the southeast, and Hungary on the north; part of it belongs to the
Turk, some to the Venetian Estate, some to the Hungarians, and some to the
Austrians: The arms, Argent, a Cardinals Hat, the strings meeting in bsae Gules
perpendant and placed in a true lovers knot; there are four Archbishops,
twenty six Bishops.

In a part of this Country called then Epirus, but losing now its name with its
Liberty under the Turkish Yoke, was born that famous Warrior Scanderb^g the
Scourge of the Turks, whose bones, he being dead, the Turks, long time after,
took out of his grave, and made them Meddals and Rings therewith; there are few
of this whole Nation left that have any spark of their Ancestors Spirit or
valor against their Tyrannical Masters, but only a People called the
Morlacks, who valiantly side with the Venetians, and are a great assistance to
them in keeping that footing they have in Dalmatia: The rest are buried im
their slavery, and by the heaviness of their Fetters are so benumbed, that they
stir not a hand, either in holding it up to Heaven, or in putting it out to the
aid of others, who would endeavor their redemption, so that the Country may
better be called Slavonia.

Greece, once a Mother of Learning and Arts, now the Den of the Turkish Empire,
who has its abode at Constantinople: it is bounded on the west with the
Adriatic Sea, on the north with the Mountain Hemus, on the south with the the
Mediterranean Sea, and on the east Egypt, Hellespont, Propontis. The
commodities brought from hence are, Gold, Silver, Copper, diverse Colors,
Wines, and Velvets, Damask, and Turkish Grogram; Their Religion has in it some
substantial error, as that they deny that the Holy Ghost proceeds from the
Father and the Son, they hold also baptism of Fire to be necessary, yet they
resist the authority of the Bishop of Rome.

This Greece that once had the Empire of the World, the great Mistress of Arts
and Arms is degenerated into the like base servility of mind with their
neighbors of Sclavonia. Here also the Gospel shone in its first purity, the
seven Candlesticks being placed here, as we read in the beginning of the
Revelations; and now is universally overspread with the thick darkness of
Mahometisme. Nothing left to comfort them in their Condition, but their Vines,
and the Proverb, The Merry Greeks: that arose from the wretchless stupidity and
carelessness of their Condition, which they know no better to put out of their
mind than by making themselves Beasts; metamorphosing themselves from Slavery,
into Brutality: nor are they falsely taxed with Bestiality, that crying sin of
Sodomy. So that there is little hope left, of their recovering their liberty,
who are fettered in the chaius of such abominable impieties.

And thus now have I finished Europe, the first Part of the World.

The Names of the greatest, and most Famous Cities and Rivers in Europe.
IN Italy the Cities of Genoa, Milan, Venice, Florence, Rome, Bologne, and
Naples: the Rivers most famous, are, Arnus, Tibur, and Po.

The Cities in France that are most famous, are, Amiens, Roven, Paris, Troyes,
Nanles, Orleans, Diion, Lions, Burdeoux, Toulose, Mars^illes, Grenoble,
Auvergne: the Rivers that are most remarkable, are the Loyre, the Garone, the
Rhone, the Seyne.

The Cities in Spain that do most prefer themselves to observation, are,
Toledo, Madrid, Leon, Pampelune, Bilbo, Priede, Saint James of Compostella,
Lisbone, Fax, Siville, Grenade, Mursy, Sarragosa, Barcelona, and Valentia: the
Rivers there most famous, are, the Dower, the River of Tagus, the Gadian, and
the Guadelguiner.

The Cities in England that be most famous, are, London, York, Bristol: the
Rivers most famous, are, the Thames, the Severn, the River of Humber, and the
Ouze.

The Cities in Scotland most famous, are Edinborough, Sterlin, Aberden, and
Saint Andrews: the most famous River is the River of Tay.

The most famous City in Ireland is Dublin, and the greatest River, is the
River of Shannon.

The chiefest Cities in the Netherlands belonging to the Catholics, are Metz,
Besancon, Cambeyr, Antwerp; the chief City belonging to the united States, is
Amsterdam: the two most famous Rivers are the River of Scheld, and the River
Mosa.

The most famous Cities in Germany, are Strasb^rough, Colen, Munster,
Norimberg, Ausburgh, Nuremberg, Vienna, Prague, Dresden, Berlin, Stetin, and
Lubeck; the chiefest Rivers are the Rhine, the Weser, the Elbe, the Odor, and
the (...).

The most famous Cities in Denmark are Coppenhague, and Trondon; the chiefest
River is the Wezer.

The chiefest Cities in Swedeland are Calmer, Stockholm, Ab^, and Riga, the
last whereof is in Livonia, but now in the possession of the King of Sweden;
the most famous River, is the River of Torn.

The chiefest Cities of Russia, are Muscow, Woldimar, Saint Michael the
Archangel, Cazan, and Astracan; the most famous Rivers are the Dwine, the
Volga, the Don, or Tana.

The most famous Cities in Poland are, Cracovia, Warsovia, Dantzick, Vilna,
Di^n, (...), and Smolensc^, which is part of Muscovy, and now again in the
possession of the Great Duke: the chiefest Rivers in Poland are the Vistu^a, or
Weisser, the Nieper, the Duna, or the Niester, and the Boresthenes.

The chiefest Cities in Hungary, Transylvania, Valachia, Moldavia, and little
Tartary, are Buda Presborough, Hermonstade, Tergovius, Czucham, or Sozow,
Craffa, and Burgos: the chiefest Rivers are the Drin, the River of Oxfeus, or
A^feus, the Rivers of Peneus, the Vardax, the Marize, and the Danubius.

The chief Cities of Transylvania, are Weysenlurg, Clausenburg, and Waradin.

The most famous Cities in Dacia, are Trieste, and Pedena.

The most famous Cities in Bohemia, are Prague, Cuttenburgh, Pilzen, and
Budrozis

The most famous Cities at this time in Greece, Buda, Salonique, Andrianopolis,
Scutary, Durazzo, La Valone, L Armire, Prevezza, Larta, Lepanto, Setino or
Athens, Stines or Thebes, Corinth, Patras, Misira or Lacedemonia, which are all
now in the possession of the Turks.

The most famous Cities in Bosnia, are Iucyza, Bagnalour, Fruansaray: in
Croatia is the famous City of Whitz.

The chiefest Cities in Sclavonia, are Nona, Zara, Nonigrad, Tinu, Sebenico,
St. Nicolo; Trau, Spalato, Salon^, (...), Starigrad, Vesiechio, Catara, Buda,
and Dolcigno.

The most famous City in Walachia is called Tergovis: and in Moldavia, Zaczow.

In the Land of Sicily, there are the famous Cities of Messina, and Palermo: in
the Island of Sardinia, the City of Calari: and in Corsica, the City Bastic.

The renowned Cities in Romania, are, Constantinople, and Adrianopolis.

Asia.
ASia is now the second part of the World separated from Europe by the floods,
Tanais and Duina, and from Africa, by the narrow part of Lod de lakis, and the
Red Sea, bordering on Egypt.

It is bigger then Europe, or Africa, and does far exceed them in riches, as
Precious-Stones and Spices: This Region has been renowned by the first and
second Monarchs of the World: There was Man Created, placed in Paradise,
Seduced by Satan, and Redeemed by our Savior. In this part, was done most of
the Histories mentioned in the Old Testament; and many things also in the New:
the eminent Persons that have the Rule of Asia, are the Kings of China, the
King of Persia, the great Turk, the King of India or Indosthan, the King of
Portugal, the King of Iapan, and the Emperor of Russia.

Tartaria is bordered upon the north Sea, eastward upon the Sea of China,
southward upon the Provinces of China, and India, with the flood Oxdo, and the
Sea Mare Caspium, and toward the west with the flood Mare Steneum, and
Moscovia.

The Tartarians, as they are divided into certain Kingdoms, Principalities,
and Commoalties or Colonies, one from another, so they differ in manners, and
trade of life: They are Men of a square stature, broad and gross faces, their
eyes sunk into their heads, and looking somewhat asquint; they are strong of
body, and hardy: they eat Horses, and all other Beasts except Hogs, howsoever
they are slain.

The Crim, or Precopense Tartar, is the greatest and most Potent Prince in this
vast and uncultivated Territory; He is next Heir to the Ottoman Family of the
Great Turk, if the Male-line should fail, to whose service he is always ready
bound to attend on the designs of the Turks upon Christendom. The other Chief
is called the Czeremise Tartar, of whom, came that famous Conqueror, the great
Tamberlaine, who overran all Asia. Their greatest War now, is, either with the
Chinese, or with the Russe; but the Crim Tartar is wholly Mercenary, being in
the late War of Poland; employed, first by the Pole, and then by the Swede, and
Transylvanian Prince Ragotzki.

China is bounded on the east by the east Sea, on the west with India, and
Bramus, and on the north it is divided from Tartaria with a wonderful Wall
four hundred miles long, built between the Mountains: It is divided into
fifteen Kingdoms, or great Provinces, each having a peculiar Prince, but all
yielding obedience to their great King: It is reported that he may bring into
the Field three hundred thousand Foot and two hundred thousand Horsemen. The
Land is fruitful of Grain, and Beasts wild and tame, Wines, of Precious Stones,
Gold, Copper, Iron, Steel, Pearl, and good store of Silk: Also very great
Cities well peopled: Paqu'n is the Royal City, of which, things be written that
be incredible. The People are lively, witty, wondrous Artists, they make
Wagons that sail over the land as Ships do over the Sea the Art of Printing,
and making of Guns, is more ancient with them than with us: they have good
Laws according to which they do live; but they want the knowledge of God, for
they are Heathens, and Worship the Sun, Moon, and Stars, yea, and the Devil
himself, that he may not hurt them.

Of this Kingdom of China there is little writ either certain or true, because
of its vast distance, which, if the North-west passage had been passable and
not frozen, might have been thoroughly known. The last news from thence was,
that the Tartars had invaded that Kingdom, and had thrown down part of that
eminent Wall abovesaid, that was built for a Fence against their incursions,
and defeated the Chinese in several Battles. It has been traveled of late by
some foreign Friars, but our English Ships seldom thriving in the Voyage, is
the reason no better account can be given of their Government, Laws, and
Customs. From thence come the China dishes, called Porcelane, which the
Fathers prepare 40 years under ground, and lay up for their Sons, as an Estate,
before it be fit for use: its fineness and transparency requiring such a time
of perfection.

Iapan abounds so with Gold, that it is reported that the Kings Palace was
covered therewith, in the time of Paulus Venetius.

These Iapanneses are the best Navigators and Sailers of the Nations of those
parts of the World, for which they are beholding to the situation of their
Country, being an Island, so that they are very frequent, and use Commerce in
all that Quarter, and prove good Auxiliary Soldiers to the several Princes.
They are much entertained by the Dutch, as may be seen in the business of
Amboyna.

India, situated between Persia and the Tartars, Sinca, and the Indian Sea, all
Writers account the best and goodliest Land in the World: for it fills almost
the whole World with precious Jewels and Pearls, Medicinal Drugs, and Perfumes,
that it may be called an earthly Paradise.

The King of this Country, the Great Mogul, is certainly the richest and most
Magnificent Prince in the World: which to show to his Subjects, at the several
seasons of the year, as it grows Hot or Cold, he removes his Court from City to
City, of great distance, south and north, his Country being very vast, and
well peopled. But his chief Imperial City is Agra^ where, as most great Cities
of the East, Lime trees and others of great shade, and sweet sent are placed
along the streets, most beautiful and pleasant to behold. The Mogul is
altogether, if not more absolute than any of the Eastern Princes, all whose
Governments are Monarchical Tyrannies. Every morning he shows himself in great*
State to his Nobles and Princes, who prostrate, and adore him; and at the same
time the Elephants (of which he keeps many hundreds) are brought to Salam, that
is, to bow and bend their knee, which being taught, they will do very readily.
To this Mogul, King James sent the Earl of Denbigh Ambassador, to Treat, or
rather to Complement about our Trade in the East Indies, Surrat being in his
Dominions, where constantly one of his chief Nobles is resident as Governor.
The Earl carried Presents with him, but was most magnificently and costly
Re-presented by the Mogul, even to an Estate, and his Ambassie civilly and
effectually answered; we count them Barbarians, but they are a Nation of
extraordinary Civility, as our Commerce witnesses: where they love, they love
ardently and constantly, and where they hate, they hate furiously and deadly.
At present, they are engaged in a Civil War, for the Mogul Sultan Coram lately
dying, left his Estate in Dispute, though divided to his three Sons, of whom,
he most loved his youngest, who by the favor and practice of the chief of the
Nobility having gained the Army which is always kept standing, possessed himself
of most part of the Empire, while his Brothers were disputing with one another,
about other the private Limits and Boundaries of their Lands. Both are now
joined against him, but with what success is not yet known. The English Trade
is nevertheless no way molested or impeached (their Governor now siding with
the Younger Brother) but is carried on as formerly: the chief Merchants of that
Nation being the Banians (a sect and preciser sort of People than the rest, the
most of them being Mahometans) who are just dealers and very rich, and
negotiate in all the Traffic of the East. The Hollanders have some places of
Strength here also, and are in League with the Mogul, though in War with some
of the adjacent lesser Princes.

The King of Portugal is possessed of the Kingdom of Goa, and other large
Provinces and Territories, which were formerly distinct Kingdoms and
Principalities, but Conquered and won by his Sword; but has been disquieted
and disturbed very often, as well by the Natives as the Dutch; but yet he has
made a shift to keep the greatest part still in his hands: and consequently a
very rich Trade and Traffic, which he manageth himself. There is always
resident at Goa, his Viceroy one of the Portugal Nobility, who lives in great
Pomp and State in a very fair Palace. The City is strongly fortified and
several out-Forts and Guards circumjacent to prevent a sudden attempt of an
Enemy; and other Fortresses are erected in that Kingdom, some whereof are put
into the hands of the English, by agreement, the Coast being beneficial to our
Navigation into the Indies. The Portugal Inhabitants follow the Habit and
Fashion of the Indians, as all Nations whatsoever Trading thither, do their
Habit.

Persia is a mighty rich Land, governed by the Sophy: though he be a
Mahometist, yet he warreth against the Turk for the Religion of Mahomet,
concerning the expounding of the Alcoran: out of Persia are brought the
Bezoar-stone and other precious Stones, Pearls of great value, and many
Silk-works.

This Kingdom, once honored with the Universal Empire, as absolutely lost it
self under the Turkish Slavery, as before under the victorious Arms of
Alexander the Great, till the time of Ismael some two hundred years ago; justly
as great, as he, considering the contemptiblenesse of himself and his Forces;
he drove the Turk^ out of all their Conquests, and left Persia to his
Successors, an entire and Potent Dominion. After many changes in his Line and
Family, it devolved at last to as renowned a Prince as himself; Sultan Abbas,
but infamous for his unnatural Fact. He had a hopeful Son, his expected
successor; of whom, by the flatteries and surmises of some Courtiers being
jealoused, he resolved on his Death, and communicated it, with his command of
Execution to his General; and, being by him bravely refused, to another his
Confident, who likewise knowing the worth of the Prince, offered his own Head
in lieu of his; with which not yet dissuaded, he procured one of his Chams or
Commanders to perform the Fact, which the Innocent Gentleman patiently
suffered, being as he was riding, dragged off his Horse and strangled. After
the preparation of it, the Tyrant was exceedingly sorrowful, and going to the
relief of Bagdat alias Babylon, there besieged by the Turk, after he had caused
the Executioner of his Son to be put to death, and was returning home in
triumph, he deceased, declaring his Grandson, whom he had named after his
Father Mirza Sefi or Sofi, (from whence the Modern name of Sophy) to be his
Successor, and commanded his Death to be kept secret till his Inauguration.
This Injunction was duly observed, and the young Prince, after three days
persuasion to get him from his Mother, who feared the like Cruelty from the
cunning Tyrant, solemnly enthroned. It was reported he was born with his hands
full of blood, but very true it was, he dyded with them full, in the year 1642.
in the middle of his Age when he began to be more Considerate, having caused by
his Cruelties many of his chief Lords to revolt to save their Heads: His Son
Sophy Abbas now reigns in great Splendour: at his return from Bagdat to his City
of Issaphan, he passed to his Palace through the streets filled with Roses up
to the Horses Belly, and covered from the Sun by Carpets thrown upon Cords tied
from the opposite Windows, where in the middle hung great wax Lamps and
Candles, which made an Artificial Day. The Persian has had a lazy Peace of
late, but a Rupture with the Turk or Mogul is to be expected, for they are
excellently active, and indefatigable warriors. As to our English Trade
thither, it is greatly improved within these few years, from some immunities
they have above other Nations traffiquing there, by reason of the assistance
the Persian had from them by Shipping, without which he could never have taken
Ormus, the great Mart of the East, from the Portugals in 1620. but for all that
destructive kindness to our selves, he has saltered of his Articles and
Agreement, in delaying that money which he was to pay to the English East India
Company for the hire of the said Ships. There is now two English Factories in
his Dominions, one at Gomeron a Seaport, and the other at (...) o^ Ispahan
aforesaid, to the no less reputation than profit and advantage of the said
Company, and the whole Nation.

Natolia or Asia the less, wherein is that part of Land formerly called
Canaan, by which lie the Arabians: this Asia is a good and fruitful Country,
and has been eminent in the true Religion; for therein were written the most
part of the New Testament. It is almost divided from Africa by the Red and
Mediterranean Sea, and is now a part of the Turkish Empire.

The Body of this huge Empire is like a Monster, that consists of several
Heterogeneal parts, and members: It has large Dominions in Europe, larger in
Africa, but largest in Asia; All which were mere Conquests, scarce a Cottage
belonging to the first Founder of the Ottoman Greatness; who was little better
than an unruly Shepherd, from whom are lineally descended twenty successive
Monarchs, terrible to all the world, being seated in the very midst and Heart
of it. Mahomet the Great, became terrible, by the subversion of the Greek
Empire about Anno Christi 1400. when he took Constantinople, and soon after
that the Empire of Trebisand in Asia minor; since which time, Selymus the
first, conquered Egypt, and Selymus the second, Cyprus: to omit the seizure of
Dalmatia and Epirus somewhat before, Sultan Solomon perfected their invasions,
and secured their possessions in Hungary, and made more absolute Tributaries
and Vassals of the Princes, and Waywods of Transylvania, and Moldavia,
advancing his Ensigns and Infidel Crescents to the walls of Vienna, but failed
in his ambitious Design upon the Empire of the West. After his Decease they
stood at a stay; not a Martial Prince succeeding, till Sultan Morat, in our
memory, whose assumption to that Imperial Turbant, will not be unpleasant to
relate. Sultan Achmat a voluptuary, and no way addicted to War, deceasing about
1615. left behind him two Sons and a Brother of his named Mustapha, whom,
contrary to the unnatural and cruel policy of that Government, he had preserved
alive, (though once overperswaded by his Bashaws, he had sent for him to his
presence, to strangle him:) and after his decease appointed him to succeed him;
but he being of a Book^h and Contemplative nature, the Ianizaries weary of such
a Log and idle Person, deposed him, and shut him up in a Prison, and advanced
the eldest Son of Achmat named Osman a Child, to his Fathers Throne; and being
alike weary of him, not only laid him aside, but murdered him, and set up
Mustapha again, and then relen^ing of their ungrateful dealing to Osman,
murdered Mustapha, and proclaimed Sultan Morat, Osmans Brother, to be the
Grand Seigniour. He, during these alterations and fatal changes, was grown to
discretion, and perceiving that those Distractions happened through the
headstrong insolency of the Ianizarics, (insomuch that it was verily believed
by others that a period was near set to the Glory of the Empire) after
therefore he had, as usually, distributed his Donatives among them at his first
Assumption, and gained their affection; He resolved with some private advice,
to be rid of the whole order, and Militia of those Ianizaries, and to
substitute a new standing Force in their room. In prosecution whereof, he
denounced a War against the Persian, which has always been the Sepulture of
the Turkish Infantry, and against all disswasions, marched to the siege of
Bagdat, where in several Assaults, on purpose to put them to the Slaughter, he
had well near wasted the greatest part of them, when in the midst of his
design, and in the flourishing years of his Hope, by over-labouring himself He
contracted a Fever, and dyed, but Victorious, with the Fortune of Alexander,
who dyed at the Siege of the same place. Being asked upon his Deathbed whom he
would name his successor, he started up and with indignation, replied, what do
you talk of Successors? will there be any more Worlds when I am dead? But by
his death the race of Ianizaries was preserved, and the Crown placed on the
head of his Son Sultan Ibrahim, who continued it not long, before death
transferred it to Sultan Mahomet an Infant then, but now of Age, and at this
time regnant, a Prince of hopeful Valor and Magnanimity, of which he gives
great demonstrations in his preparation for War, which he intends to prosecute
in Transylvania, (where he has lately chastised and deposed two Princes
thereof, who disobeyed his Command, and usurped the Government after he had
commanded them to quit it as we have said before in that Territory) and also in
the Isle of Candia against the Venetians, where for these two years last past,
he has had but slow success. The King lately sent to the Port, that is, his
Court at Constantinople, the Earl of Winchelsea his Ambassador, to confirm and
continue the Treaty and Friendship that has been these many years betwixt us.
The two chief Residences of the English Merchants who have Factories at Grand
Cairo and Damascus, are at Constantinople, by the Turks called Stamboly, and at
Aleppo in Syrio in the bottom of all the Straits, Scanderoon being the Port or
Key where the Ships unload and take in their Merchandise; Besides the Morda.

The Emperor of Muscovia has for his share in these Quarters of the World, the
Kingdoms of Casan and Astracan, formerly belonging to the Tartar, but taken
from him in this manner: He had made a terrible irruption into Muscovia, and
had carried all to before him to the very Walls of Musco, which at last too he
entered, and made the great Duke, upon certain Articles, to become his
Tributary, and acknowledge him, as his Supreme Lord, and to hold his Dominions
under him, which was confirmed by an Instrument in Writing under the Great Seal
of the Empire. An. 1500. Whereupon with great riches he departed, and in his
return laid Seige to a strong Castle, and seeing the Governor resolute (as the
Russes are very good in maintaining places even beyond extremity to others) he
acquainted him with what had passed, and that the great Duke had yielded him
that place by agreement, and had further submitted, etc. Whereupon the
Governor desiring to see the Deed, and promising thereupon to surrender, the
Tartar overcredulously parted with his Act of Homage, but could never gain
either the Town or that back again. Encouraged by this, the Russe took heart
and followed the Tartar, but was sorely beaten, till the Successor of that
Emperor, the Tyrant Evan Vasilowich pursuing the quarrel, marched with Fire and
Sword into those Countries, and at last sat down before Astracan, where in
sundry attempts he was resisted, but being resolutely bent to lose his Army,
Life, and Honor, or take the City, he commanded a general, though most
hazzardous Assault to be given, which lasted almost a whole day, when with a
most bloody Slaughter both of his own and his enemies he victoriously entered,
and ever since, maugre all the Force and Attempts of the Tartars, the great
Dukes have kept possession thereof, suffering no Tartars to lodge in the City,
or to wear any Arms. Both these Kingdoms are parted with the River Volga,
where the Cossacks do exercise frequent Piracies and Thefts, both upon the
Inhabitants and Passenger-Merchants which Trade that way, and so by the Caspian
Sea into Persia fo: Drugs and Silks, which are brought by Caravans to that
Seaside in great quantity.

The chief Islands of Asia are Zellant, whose ground is always green, and the
trees laden with blossoms and fruits, as Oranges, and Lemmons, the Cinnamon
grows here in whole Woods, for it is the second rind of a Tree, but being cut
and laid in the Sun, becomes red: the Tree in three years space receives his
rind again. Besides many other beasts, here are a multitude of Elephants.

Sumatra yields besides other sorts of Spices, abundance of Pepper: here are
also moneys of diverse Metals, of which the Inhabitants have learned to cast
good Ordnance; very great Elephants are found here, which being learned are
serviceable in War. The Rhinoceros, a deadly enemy to the Elephant, is found
here: for though he be less, yet he warreth with him; having whet his horn on
the Rock, he therewith seeks to rip up the Elephants belly. He is by many held
to be the true Unicorn: every part of him, especially his Horn, being sovereign
against all poison.

Iava is very fruitful in several spices and Indian fruits, especially Pepper.

Benda a second Island, but very famous, for herein are several Islands
whereabout grow all the Nutmegs and Mace which are in great abundance sent into
all the World: the Trees on which Nutmegs grow, yield three times in the year
fruit, viz. in August, and December, but the most and best in April.

The Islands of the Mollucco's, though but sand, yet are known all over the
world, by reason of the plenty of cloves which grow up here only, but are
dispersed over all the world, they are five in number, Ternate, Tidon, Matir,
Mantrian, and Bachion. Victuals are here scant, for there grows neither rice
nor any other grain; it has no cattle, but a few goats and hogs: they make
their bread of certain trees and roots. In these Islands only, are found the
birds of Paradise, which for the strangeness and fairness of feathers exceed
all the birds in the world.

Most of these Islands are in the occupation of the Hollander or Portugal, or
so leagued to them by the Natives, that the whole profit and trade thereof is
as good as theirs, which formerly by Articles of Agreement, were equally parted
(to what the Dutch possessed) betwixt them and us, witness that bloody Story of
Amboyna, to the Southward of the Molucco's where the Dutch had a Castle and we
a Factory, but the Trade arising from the Island proving so beneficial, they
conspired the ruin of the English by a pretended plot of theirs, upon the said
Castle, which by a Violation of the Articles on our part, if admitted true,
would be a good warrant for their procedure against them, which in short was
after this manner. They of a sudden as in imminent danger, seized and secured
the principal English Merchant and others on shore, and two Japanese Soldiers
in the Dutch pay, and put them to the Torture, which was by hanging them
stretched out, upon Planks broad as a Door, and muffling up their Chaps with
Napkins, and pouring in water continually till they had almost stifled them,
and burnt their Fingers ends besides, which grievious Torment extorted a kind
of Confession of what they had designed, whereupon they were all sentenced to
lose their heads, which was executed accordingly in the Castle Green, the poor
wretches so cruciated with the pains they had suffered, that it was a Courtesy
to murder them. Thus the Dutch got the entire enjoyment of that Trade, and
keep it without giving that due satisfaction for the possession, or the blood
the price of it.

Thus much touching the second part of the World.

The chiefest Cities of Asia with the Rivers.
THe chiefest cities in Asia which belong unto the Turks, are, in Anatolia,
Burse, Chioutai, Angoure, Trebisond, Sattalie: the Rivers there most famous are
the Rivers of Alie, Jordan, Euphrates, and Tigris.

The most famous Cities in Syria are Aleppo, Tripoli, Damas, Said and
Jerusalem.

The most famous Cities in Georgia are Mosul, Bagded, Balsora, Sanatopoli,
Stranu, Derbent: The most famous Rivers in Georgia are the Rivers of Fazze and
Arais.

The most famous Cities in Arabia, are Herac, Ava, Medina, and Mectra; the most
memorable River, is the River of Cayban

The chiefest Cities in Persia, are Tauris, Gorgian, Coysolma, Hispahan, Erat,
Sus, Schirae, and Ortmutz: the chiefest Rivers are the Rivers of Tirditiri, and
Bendimur.

The chiefest Cities of India, are Amedabath, Cambaia, Gouro, Diu, Bengala,
Pangab, or Lahor, Agra, Goa, Calicut, Visnagor, Pegu, Arracan, Malaca, Camboge,
and Facfo: the fairest Rivers in India are, the River Indus, Ganges, and Mecon.

The most famous Cities in China, are Paguin, Quinsay, Caneun, Macao, Mancian,
and Nagaia, Hordo: the greatest River, is the River of Quinam, or Iamsu Quiam.

The most famous Cities in Tartary are, Zahaspe, Samarcanda, Thibet, Cambalu,
Tatur, or Tartar: the chiefest Rivers are the Tatar, the Ieniscoy, the Oby, the
Chezel, and the Albiamu.

The Isles in Asia in the Ocean are the Isle of Iapan, where are the Cities of
Bungo, Meaco, and Sacay.

The Phillipine Islands, in which are the Cities of Lusor, Manille, and
Mindanao.

The Molucco Islands in which are the Cities of Gililo, Mucasar, and Aquen.

Not far from thence is Sumatra and Iava, where are the Cities of Candra, and
Columbo, near unto it is Bornro, Manur, and Male.

In the Mediterranean Sea, there are the Islands of Cyprus, Rhodes, and
Scarpanto, in which are the famous Cities of Nicosia, Famagusta, Rhodes, and
Scarpanto.

In the Archipelago there are the Islands of Chios, and Metelin, which have
Cities after their own names.

Africa.
AFrica the third part of the world, is separated from Europe by the
Mediterranean Sea, and from Asia by the Red Sea; she yields Gold, Balm,
Ivory, Ebony, Sugar, Ginger, Dates, Aloes, Myrrh, Feathers: also Madera, the
countries in Africa now follow.

Barbary is bounded by the Mediterranean Sea northward, on the east with Egypt,
on the south with the Mount Atlas, and westward with the Atlantic Ocean: the
Inhabitants are faithless, crafty in promising, and also in performing; they
are fraudulent, covetous, and beyond measure jealous of their Wives: their
Country yields Olives, Figs, Dates, Oranges, and a certain kind Goat, whose
hair makes a stuff as fine as silk.

This Country, once famous for the strife of Empire with Rome, while Carthage
stood, and after that for the Iugurthine War, is now canton^zed and parted into
several Principalities and as many Feuds, betwixt the Kings of Morocco, Fez,
Tuny, and the Die of Algier, the King of Billedulgerid and others, to one of
which Sebastian King of Portugal being invited, and inviting our Countryman
Stukely and Glorioso to partake with him in the Enterprise, in favor of an
expulsed Prince, were all three of them killed in the plains of Alcazar, upon
the Death of which Sebastian issueless, has risen a worse Feud then that he
engaged in about the Crown of Portugal. Some while before Charles the Fifth,
Emperor of Germany, invading this Country, took the City of Tunis, and the
Castle Guletto: but the Turks coming with Supplies, and the unagreeableness of
the Climate to his Europeans, joined with the Witchcrafts of the Moors, for
which they are infamous, made him quit his design and return home with loss.
Ever since they have continued their bold Depredations and Piracies at Sea,
countenanced by the Grand Seigniour, who receives therefore, or his Bashaws for
him, good part of the spoil. Some kind of Traffic they use here, but among
such Thievish Companions it can scarce be called so, though there are good
Merchandises of the growth and Manufacture of the Country. So that it may
properly be said of this place what we have in an English Proverb, Here is more
Cry then Wool, more Complaint then Commerce; the Captivity and Slavery of
People, and the Rapine of their Ships and Goods, being the common Lamentation
of all Christendom. Our late General Blake terrified them into a better
Comportment with the English, by his noble and brave exploit upon Porto Ferino,
where he burnt their Ships, and battered down their Stone Castles upon their
Heads; but no longer pipe with the Music of the Cannon, no longer would they
dance to any agreement, though they willingly subscribed then to those Terms.
Since the putting of Tangier into English Hands, and the attempt made upon
Algier, the very Den and Nest of these Thieves, by the Earl-of Sandwich, they
have again bethought themselves of the terror and danger of the English Power,
and are agreed to new Terms. This Tangier is a notable Fort in the mouth of the
Straits, and may serve as a Bridle to their Piracies. There has lately an Army
presented it self before it, under one Guyland, and some Skirmishes have
happened betwixt the Garrison and them, but another Army coming against him, he
being but a Rebel to his Prince Cidi Ali Benbucar, he drew off, and is Marched
to oppose him; but what the Event will be, will neither advance nor prejudice
the English Interest; though the King, now rebelled against, seems to Court
our Friendship.

Egypt has Idumea on the east, and the Bay of Arabia; on the west Barbary,
Numidia, and part of Lybia, on the north the Mediterranean Sea, on the south
Ethiopia superior, or the Abassin Empire. It contains in length five hundred
sixty two Italian miles, and in breadth one hundred sixty; situated under the
second and fifth Climates, so that their longest day in Summer is not above
Thirteen Hours and a half. The air is very hot and offensive; the soil is
fruitful, by the overflowing of Nilus; it has rich Pastures, wherein they feed
great store of Camels, Horses, Asses, Oxen, greater of growth then usually in
most places else: and by reason of the morishness of the Country, they have
also great store of Fouls: it is furnished with great plenty of metals, some
precious stones, good wines, and fruits, as lemmons, oranges, pomgranets,
citrons, figs, cherries, and such as these, excellent both for taste and
color: here grow the Palm Trees, which always grow in couples, the male and
female: both thrust forth cods full of seed, but the female always fruitful;
and that not except growing by the male, and having his seed mixed with hers:
the pith of these trees is an excellent Sallade, better then an hartichoke,
which in taste it does much resemble; of the branches they make Bedsteds,
Lattices, etc. of the leaves, baskets, mats, fans, etc. of the outward husk of
the cod, cordage; of the inner, brushes: the fruit it bears, is best known by
the name of Dates, which are in taste like figs: and finally it is said to
yield whatsoever is necessary to the life of man: it is the nature of this
tree, though never so ponderous a weight wereput upon it, never to yield to the
burden, but still to resist the heaviness of it, and to endeavor to lift and
raise it self the more upwards; a fit emblem of the resurrection. The people
are not black, but tawny or olive-coloured; they weep and mourn over the bodies
of their dead, daubed over with dung: they hold it a great impiety to burn or
bury them, but having embalmed them they lay them in some inner room: the men
keep at home for the household business, the Women follow merchandise and
affairs abroad; the men carry burdens upon their heads, and the women upon
their shoulders: a witty and ingenious people, the first Inventers of Geometry,
Arithmetic, Physic, Astronomy, Necromancy, and Sorcery, yea, they found out
the very use of Letters. The Christians among them differ from all other
Christians; first, using circumcision with baptism. Secondly, conferring all
orders under priesthood on infants immediately after baptism; their parents
till they come to sixteen years of age, performing what they promised in their
behalf, to wit, chastity, fasting on Wednesday and Friday, and the four Lents
of the year. Thirdly, reputing baptism not to be of any efficacy except
ministered by a Priest in the open Church, in what extremity soever. Fourthly,
and yet not baptising any children till the fortieth day, though they die in
the mean time. Fifthly, giving the Lords Supper to Infants as soon as
Christened. Sixthly, contracting marriages in the second degree without
dispensation. Seventhly, not observing the Lords day, nor any Festivals, except
in cities. Eighthly, reading the Gospel writ by Nicodemus. They differ from the
Papists in these things: first, administering the Lords Supper in both kinds:
secondly, with leavened bread: thirdly, admitting neither extreme unction nor
the Lords Supper to those that are sick: fourthly, nor Purgatory nor prayer for
the dead: fifthly, nor using elevation in the act of administering: and sixthly,
accounting the Roman Church for heretical, and esteeming the Latins no better
then the Jews.

This Kingdom of Egypt, was a long while possessed by the Mamalukes a kind of
Stratocracy or Army-power, such as we had lately in England by Red-coats and
Protector; the Sultan was always elected by the soldiery, who chose always one
out of themselves; the last of that Dignity was Tomombejus, who being defeated
by Sultan Selymus some 260 years ago, was taken in Grand Cayro, whither he fled
out of the field, and had made a brave defense by barricading the streets, for
three days; He continued not long in a condition of Captivity, for he was
hanged at his Prison Door, and exposed to the view of the Egyptians, as a
spectacle of the Vanity of humane greatness. By this Selymus this Kingdom was
reduced into a province, where one of the principal Bashawes keeps Court, in
great state: His Government being the richest in all the Turkish Dominions,
from whence yearly many ships lading of wealth is brought to Constantinople,
which is always waylaid by some Galleys of Malta or Florence, but of late
years with little success, they come so strongly guarded; and if they fear any
danger, have all the Coast of Cyprus, Rhodes, and the Continent to Friend. The
Bashawes are sent thither as Spunges, for when they have sucked an incredible
treasure by pilling, fraud, and rapine; they are sent for home and are squeezed
to their skins, which sometimes they are forced to part with to boot.

There has been no change but of the Governors ever since the Conquest of
this Kingdom, which is usual with other Bashawes, as namely those of Aleppo,
who do often rebel and threaten the Grand Seigniour, so that at present the
Egyptians continue in the same obedience and dumb slavery to which they have
been so long accustomed, changing in this Turkish Tyranny, the names, not the
nature thereof, from that they suffered under the Mamalukes.

Mount Atlas is a ridge of hills, of exceeding height, and of no small length:
it is above the clouds, and is always covered with snow in the midst of summer,
full of thick woods; and against Africa so fruitful, that it affords excellent
fruits of its natural growth, not planted, grafted, or inoculated with the hand
of man.

Lybia has mount Atlas on the north, by which it is parted from Barbary and
Asrenaca, on the east with Lybia, Marmarica interposed betwixt it and Egypt,
and part of Ethiopia superior, or the Abassine Empire, on the south with
Ethiopia inferior, and the land of Negroes, and on the west with the main
Atlantic Ocean; the country abounds with dates, the chief diet of the people,
which commonly rotteth out their teeth: their Goats they feed with the stones,
wherewith they grow fat, and yield store of Milk; the Air is so sound, that it
cures the French Pox without any Physic; the Inhabitants are base and vile
People, Thieves, Murderers, Treacherous, and ignorant of all things, feeding
most on Dates, Barley, and Carrion, counting Bread a diet for Holidayes; their
Garments of the coarsest Cloth, so short, that they cover not half the body;
the richer sort wear a Jacket of blew Cotton with great Sleeves, they ride upon
Camels without Stirrup or Saddle: a Leather thrust through an hole made in the
nose of the Camel, serves them for a Bridle, and to save Spurs, they use a
Goade; their Religion is Mahometisme.

The land of Negro's is bounded on the east with Ethiopia superior, on the west
with the Atlantic Ocean, on the north with Lybia Deserta, and the south with
the Ethiopick Ocean, and part of Ethiopia inferior: the Country very hot by
reason of the situation under the Torrid Zone, yet very well inhabited, full of
People, and in some places always grassy; well watered, specially where the
River N^ger overfloweth; well stored with Corn, Cattle, and Garden ware, well
wooded, having store of Beasts wild and tame; they want fruit Trees; they have
both Gold and Silver Mines very pure; the Inhabitants are of little wit, and
destitute of all Arts and Sciences, prone to Luxury, and for the most part
Mahomeans.

Ethiopia superior is bounded on the east with the Red Sea, and the Sinus
Barbaricus, on the west with Lybia inferior; the Realm of Nubia in the Land of
Negroes, and part of the Kingdom of Congo in the other Ethiopia, and on the
north with Egypt, and Lybia Marmarica, and on the south on the Mountains of the
Moon: it is in length a thousand five hundred miles; in breadth half as much.
The religion of the people is, they use to circumcise their children both males
and females. Secondly they baptize the males at forty, and the Females eighty
days after Circumcision. Thirdly, after the Lords Supper they are not to spit
till the Sunset. Fourthly, they profess but one nature and one will in
Christ. Fifthly, they accept only the three first general Councils. Sixthly,
their Priests live by the labor of their own hands, for they allow them
nothing, nor permit them to beg. Seventhly, they baptize themselves every
Epiphany in lakes and ponds, because that day they suppose Christ to have been
baptized of John in Jordan. Eighthly, they eat not of those beasts which in the
old Law are reckoned for unclean. Ninthly, and they keep the Jews Sabbath
equally solemn with the Lords day Tenthly, they minister the Lords Supper to
Infants presently after baptism. Eleventhly, they teach the reasonable soul of
man is derived from the parents by seminal propagation. Twelfthly, that Insants
dying unbaptized, are sanctified in the womb by virtue of the Lords Supper
received by the mother after her conception. And finally they show a Book of
eight volumes, writ as they say, by the Apostles assembled at Jerusalem for
that purpose; the contents thereof they observe most solemnly, and they differ
from the Papists as the Christians in Egypt: they are under the Government of
Prester John and the Turk.

I pass by Ethiopia inferior, the people being Pagans where we may observe the
distinguishing goodness and grace of God, who by people under the same climate
and Region is known and unknown; a peculiar Kingdom, surrounded every where
with Pagans and Mahometans, worshipping the living God, and believing in Christ
though erring in many circumstantials of Orthodox Doctrine, imputable chiefly
to remediless Tradition. This is the Abassine Empire, from whence the Eunuch
(that was converted by St. Philip) the Treasurer to Queen Candace came, and
which is now the Realm and Dominions of Prester John, a Prince of large
Territory, but of scant and narrow fame for any atchievment, and may be
supposed more beholding to credulous reports for his Greatness than any real
existence thereof. However he serves with others to fill up that great Desert,
and truly Terra Incognita of the world (the curiosity of travel being no way
competent to the danger among such inhospitable and savage people) as that
quarter does the Map to idle or no purpose, and therefore it shall take up no
further room for the Description of it, we will only touch a little upon the
Southern Coast, where we are concerned in matter of Trade.

Guinea stretching all along the South-west Shore of the Atlantic Sea, is
bounded on the North and East with Lybia, famous for Mines of Gold hidden in
the Bowels of some of its inland Mountains, for which it is very much
traffiqued by all the European Nations, even the Swedes, Danes, and
Dantzickers, though locked up by a dangerous Sea at home: such is the sacred
thirst of that Metal, that through all hazzards and difficulties it is
attempted. The Hollander, to secure his footing there, and to make a propriety,
has built several Forts, and established a Guinea-Company in imitation of the
English, who justly claim the right possession, being the first discoverers,
and that made Essay of the place, and are still better liked and entertained by
the Natives then the Dutch are. Since His Majesty's Restitution they have
quitted and delivered several Forts built upon the passage into the Country to
the English Fleet, sent thither to settle the Trade and former Factory
according to its former Regulation.

Here may not be omitted that little spot of earth lying in the Mediterranean
Sea, the Isle of Malta, which by Geographers is reckoned as part of Africa, for
no greater reason I suppose then St. Paul's character of the Inhabitants upon
his Shipwreck there in his Voyage to Rome, where he calls them Barbarians, a
term appropriate to the adjacent Continent; for, this Island is situated South
from Sicily, from whence it is not half so far disjoined as from the Coast of
Africa; and is the Diamond to that large circumference. It is very notable for
the famous repulse and defeat of the Turkish Armado about 1490. being besieged
by Sea by Mustapha B^ssa, when Mounsieur de Valette a Frenchman, was grand
Master, in honor of whom and their deliverance, they have built and called
their chief City Valette. The Knights that are called of this place, were
formerly of Rhodes (which Solomon the Great, conquered) and from thence settled
here. To this Order, none but Gentlemen of three Descents are admitted, and
must be Papists. The whole Order consisted of Seven Colleges, French,
Spaniards, Germans, Italians, English, Portugals, and S^voyrards; but since the
Reformation in England, we have had none of the Order, which minds me of a
Speech of Queen Elizabeth concerning foreign Honors conferred on some of her
subjects; That she would have her Sheep to be known by her own Brand. It
continues at present in Statu quo, a great vexation and terror to the Turkish
Navigation, with whom they are to be at perpetual Enmity by their vow of
Knighthood.

And thus much may suffice to be spoken of Africa, we will next Enumerate the
particular Cities and Rivers.

The chiefest Cities of Africa, with the names of the Rivers, which are there
most famous.
IN Barbary which contains the Kingdoms of Fez, Morocco, Tremiser, Algeir,
Tunis, Tripoli, and Barca, there are the famous Cities Morocco, Fez, Tangier,
Telensin, Oran, Algeir, Constantine, Tunis, Tripoli, and Barca.

The Rivers there most famous are the Tensife, the Ommiraby, and the River of
Cebus, Mulvia, Rio Major, and the Magrida.

In Belledulgered, which contains the Kingdoms of Suz, Daza, Sagelmosse,
Tegorarin, Biledulgerid, and the Desert of Barca: there are these famous
Cities, Taradante, Dara, Segelmoss, Tegorarin, Zeb, Billedulgerid: the chiefest
Rivers are the River of Sur, the River of Darba, and the Ghir.

In Egypt are the famous Cities of Sabod, Cairo, Alexandria, Rascha, or
Rosesta, Damiett^, Cosir, and Surs: the renowned River is the River of Nilus.

In the desert of Zaara are these memorable cities, Zauhaga, Zuenzera, Targa,
Lemta, Berdoa, Gaoga and Borno.

In the Country of the Negroes, are these remarkable Cities, Gue, Eata,
Gueneha, Tombu, Agados, Cano, Cassena, Gangara, Tula, Catan, or Senega,
Guinala, Beria, Melli, Songo, Gago, Wuber, Zegzog, and Sanfara: the rivers here
that are most famous, are, Sernoga, Gambaea, and Rio Degrand.

In Gniomy are these famous Towns, Serze-Lionne, or Cachieu, Saint George De la
Mine, and Benin.

In Nubia are these remarkable Cities, Gorham, Cusam, Nubia, Dancala, Iulac,
Bugiha, Canfila, and Dafila.

In the upper Ethiopia, which contains the Kingdoms of Barnegus, Tigremahon,
Amara, Damont, Cafatos, Innari, Gogame, Baga, Medri, Meroe, Ximenchi, and
Dambaea: There are these famous Cities, Barone, Caxumo, Amara, Damont, Gefates,
Narre, Goyame, and Adeghena: the Rivers which are here most memorable, are, the
Rivers of Zaire, and Quilmanci.

In that part which is called Zanguebar, are these remarkable Cities, Dambea,
Mosambique^, Quiloa, Monbaze, Melinda. On the side of Aian, are, Brav^,
Magadaxo, Adea, Adel. On the side of Abex, Erocco, or Arquico, Su^quem, Biafra.

In the lower Ethiopia, which comprehends Congo, Caffrare, and Monomotepa,
are the famous Cities of Banza Loanga, S. Salvador, Cabazze, or Dongo, Safula,
Simbaos, or Messapa, and Butua, and Tang, or Tete: the Rivers are Cuana,
Spiritu Sancto, and the River Dos infantes.

In Africa are diverse other Islands besides Malta: In the Western Ocean, the
Canaries, the Cape Verd, and the Isle of Saint Thomas: the chiefest in the
Canaries is called Saint Iago; and in Saint Thomas, Panoasan.

In the Eastern Ocean there is the Isle of Madagascar, or Saint Laurence; and
the Isle of Zocotora, which has a City after her own name.

America.
THE Vain and Ambitious lamentation of Great Alexander, had he extended his
Life to the same prodigious length as he did his victorious Arms, might have
found new Worlds to conquer, when he might have past from his Conquest of the
Sea of the East, to the Shore of the West Indies. It has been observed by
those that have curiously calculated the rise, growth, and perfection of Arts
and Learning, that they have always followed the fortune of Arms and Empire,
which having traversed the East, and verged Westward to Grecia settled in the
Roman Greatness among the rest of those Arts, Astronomy, and Geometry, and the
product of those Navigations, have been by the Europeans highly improved, who
scorning the pusillanimity of former Ages, that crept in their Vessels by the
Shore, have adventured into the dangerous Main, and by skillful presumption
have discovered new Lands, and so far advanced the knowledge of them by
frequent Voyages, that it is concluded, so far as Sea and Land is passable
there can be no other Countries undiscoverable. Since which fortunate
adventures, the course of the World and Governments have been altered, for
Empire has followed Arts, to wit, the discovery of those Treasures and Mines
which innocent Nature had so long obscured, and hidden from these parts of the
World; For, the King of Spain being possessed of these Mines, as we shall see
presently, a wonder it is how formidable he grew, and to what greatness he
arose, even to the aspiring ambition of an Universal Monarchy; disdaining to be
numbered the Fifth (the other Four being indeed but partly so) whereas this
aimed to be one and all: and Thomas de Campanella, a Learned Jesuit, has
written a very elaborate Tract, showing the means and feisible ways thereunto.

The first Discoverer of this Fourth part of the World, was Christopher
Columbus, a Genoese; who, having studied Geometry, and been bred at Sea, had
more then strong imaginations, that there were great and vast Regions to the
Westward of Europe; and thereupon communicated the Project to several
Merchants: who, unwilling, or unable to hazard so much Money as was requisite
to such an undertaking, advised him to address himself to some Prince, whose
Dominions were accommodated to the Design, if it did succeed; by whom he might
be set forth upon the Voyage: which he so importunately prosecuted, as it is
natural with all Men, who fancy to themselves a single and sure way to Honor
and Profit. VVhereupon he addressed himself first to our King Henry the
Seventh, and laid open to him and his Council the fair possibilities of the
Design, and the advantages which would thence accrue to this Crown, being so
conveniently situated for that Navigation: King Henry heard him, but gave
little credit to his Discourses, affecting a secure Exchequer, which he had
unknown ways (before) to fill, beyond the uncertain hopes of unknown Mines,
which, like the Philosophers Stone might have no other existence than in
projection. He then made offer of this his service to Ferdinand King of Arragon
and Castile, a wise and prudent Prince; who publicly weighing the small charge
against the exceeding Honor and Gain, consented to His desires, and furnished
him with fifteen Ships, Men, and Victuals for the Vovage, giving him Commission
and Authority in his name, to pursue the adventure.

Our Chronicles indeed report, that after this fruitless proffer, which was in
the year, 1488. King Henry gavea Commission to one John Canb^t, and his three
Sons, Sebastian, Lewis, and Santius; John and Sebastian setting Sail, ranged a
great part of this unknown Land in one thousand four hundred ninety and seven,
which Columbus had only touched in 1492, and it was 1498 ere he saw the
continent. Americus Vesputius came long after, though the whole Continent, at
this day is called America after his own name. This Sebastian discovered more
than them all, and was therefore Knighted by K. Henry the Eighth, who made him
grand Pilot of England, with a pension of 166 l. 13 s. 6 d. yearly, but the
Spanish Seizure and Landing prepossessing the Country, we got nothing there,
more then our pains for our labor till a great while after.

For it was almost 100 years after, before we set footing in any part thereof.
The first that promoted it was Sir Walter Rawleigh in 1584. who with Letters
Patents, assisted by Sir Richard Greenvile, great Uncle to the now Earl of
Bath, and other Gentlemen, set out two ships from the Thames, who in less then
three Months time, by an undue course to the Southward, passing the Canaries,
fell in with the Coast of Florida, and entering there into Harbor (after they
had sailed an hundred and twenty miles in sight of land) they took possession
of it for the Queens Majesty, which from the tops of the Hills beholding the
Sea on both sides, they reputed to be an Island, which they named Florida, by
reason of its flowery green soil, and flourishing herbage. The Continent was
then called by the Salvages, Wegan^aca; but afterward upon the return of the
Fleet, Her Majesty was pleased to honor it with her own unmarried State, and
to call it Virginia, the first Governor thereof being Mr. Ralph Lane. Hither,
during the abode of the English that were left, while the Ships returned, came
Sir Francis Drake, and seeing the men in distress, lent the Governor and them
a ship to carry them home. The next were those in 1485 that came with Sir
Richard Greenvile from Plimonth with seven sail, who in a Months time came to
St. Domingo in Hispaniola; and within a fortnight after, anchored at Florida;
and in 1586. Sir Richard Greenvile came again, but the Colony he had left were
all killed: so he returned, and sent Mr. White, who made a successeful Voyage,
and was Governor there; who, returning into England, and leaving another
Colony, they were all destroyed at his coming again: which so dis-heartned all
further undertakings, that it was twelve years before another Voyage was begun,
under Captain Gosnol, in the year 1602. who, passing by the Azores, made the
Voyage shorter by 500. Leagues, which was also seconded by two Barks from
Bristoll 1603. and another from London 1605. But still no convenient Harbor
for Ships, nor Security for the Men that should stay there was yet found, till
the Arrival of Capt. Smith in 1606.

Virginia is seated between the degrees of 34. and 45. North Latitude; the
Bounds thereof on the East Side are the great Ocean; on the South lies
Florida; on the North Nova Francia: as for the West thereof the limits are
unknown. The English Plantations, as they were in that year 1606. were under
the degrees of 35, 38. and 39. the temperature thereof agreeing very well with
the English Constitution. The Summer is as hot as in Spain: the Winter as cold
as in France, or in England. The Heat of Summer is in June, Iu^y, and August;
but the constant breezes at that time of the year, do much allay its vehemence.
The extreme cold of the Winter is, half December, January, February, and half
March. The Winds are variable, but no such Thunder or Lightning as in Europe:
all the varieties of needful Fruits which we have here, may, by the industry of
men, be in great plenty there.

There is but one entrance by Sea into this Country, and that is at the Mouth
of a very goodly Bay, eighteen or twenty miles broad: The South Cape is called
Cape Henry: and the North, Cape Charles, in honor of those two Princes. The
Land may have the prerogative over most places known, for large and pleasant
Navigable Rivers, Mountains, Hills, Valleys, and Champion Fields. In the Bay
which lies North and South, are many Isles, both great and small: the water
flows herein near 200. miles, and has a Channel for 140. miles, of betwixt
6, and 15 Fathom deep, being in breadth some 10 or 14 miles. The Mountains are
of diverse natures: for, at the Head of the Bay, the Rocks are of a Composition,
like Millstones, some of Marble, etc. the Color of the Earth did in some
places resemble Bole Armeniac, Tirra Sigillata, Fullers Earth: but generally it
is a black Sandy Mould: In some places again fat slimy Clay, in others a very
barren Gravel: The whole Country is neither Mountainous nor yet low, but
bestowed into pleasant Hills, and fertile Valleys, one prettily crossing
another, and watered conveniently with fresh Brooks and Streams, no less
commodions then delightful. There is little Grass, for all the Country is
overgrown with Trees, whose continual Droppings causes their Grass to turn to
Weeds, by reason of the ranckness of the Ground, which is now well amended by
the Plantations. The Wood is commonly Oak, and Walnut; many of their Oaks so
tall and straight that they will bear two foot and an half square of good
Timber for twenty yards long: there is also some Ash and Elm, Mulberries,
Chestnuts which taste like Damsons; and Vines, but they are wild and bear few
Grapes. There are also Gums, Cedars, Saxafras-Trees, Berries, Herbs and Roots,
Pellitory and Oranges.

For Beasts, there are Deer, Squirrells, Beaver, Otters, Foxes, Dogs, Martins,
Pole-cats, and Weasels. For Birds, there are all sorts of Hawks, Partridges,
Turkeys, Blackbirds, Thrushes, and diverse of our small Birds. In Winter there
are great plenty of Swans, Geese, and such Wild Foul; as also Parrots and
Pigeons. For Fish, there is Sturgeon, Grampus, Porcupisce, Seal, Mullets, white
Salmons, Trouts, Soales, Plaise, Herrings, Perch, Crabs, Stromps, Eeles,
Lampreys, Oysters, Cockles and Muscles.

The Inhabitants differ much in stature, but generally they are tall and
straight, they are of color Brown; or enclining to an Olive when at Age, but
are born white. They are inconstant in every thing but what fear constrains
them to keep, Crafty, Timorous, quick of apprehension, and very ingenious. They
are soon moved to anger; and so malicious, that they seldom forget an Injury.
Their Buildings and Habitations are for the most part by Rivers, or not far
distant from some fresh Spring; their Houses are built like our Arbours of
small young Twigs, bowed and tied; and so close-covered with Mats, or the Barks
of Trees, very handsomely, that notwithstanding either Wind, Rain, or Weather,
they are as warm as Stoves, but very smoky, yet at the top of the House they
have a Hole to let it out. The Men use Fishing, Hunting, and other Manly
Exercises; while the Women sow and reap, and carry burdens, and do all the
Drudgery.

Their Chief God they serve is the Devil, whom they call Okee, more out of fear
then love. In their Temples, which are Houses 60. foot high, built Arbour-wise,
are placed the Images of their Devils and Kings, and their Tombs. They have a
Chief, and Inferior Priests, but keep no Day more Holy then another. They use
also diverse Conjurations, and have Altars, but they stand from their Temples.
In some parts of their Country they have yearly a Sacrifice of Children: Upon
some conference with them concerning their Religion, although they could not be
persuaded to forsake their False Gods, yet they did believe, that our God as
much exceeded theirs, as our Guns did their Bows and Arrows.

Many encounters the English had with these Natives, who, by treacheries and
open assaults endeavored to disturb their possession: but they were so
frighted with the noise, and so terrified with the Execution of the Guns, that
they were kept in some awe, while James Town was finished which by the constant
supplies sent yearly by the Council for Virginia, was at last well built and
fortified and pallisadoed, and the Salvages awed into a good Comportment,
until the coming of the Lord de La Ware, just as through want the English
were resolved to qui^t the Country: a little before which time, as they had
taken the same resolution, Sir Thomas Gates, and Sir George Summers prevented
them by arriving from the Bermudas, where they had been in great danger by a
leaking Ship.

His Lordship arrived the 9. of June. 1610. accompanied with Ferdinando
Waynman, Captain Houlcroft, Captain Lawson, and diverse others in three ships
well appointed with a years provision, who built Fort Charles, and Fort Henry,
that were before but bare Capes; and soon after good store of Kine and Swine
were sent by Sir Thomas Dale, who was Governor after my Lord De la Ware was
returned, who built a Town called Henrico, and portioned out the adjacent
Country into Hundreds: as also he built another Town, and called it the New
Bermoudas, about fifty miles from James Town, and the English Collony fell to
planting their Corn, about April every year; every man having been allotted
three Acres of Ground, in the nature of Farms (the first Farmer there being one
William Spence) who were to supply their stores for it, with a small quantity
of Corn yearly, by which means it was wonderful to see how in so short a time
this Colony was thriven in its reputation.

But it advanced faster soon after, by the means of the standing Lottery and a
perfect peace, made with Powhatan the King of the Country; whose Daughter,
being surprised, one Mr. Rolfe had married. She proved a very good Christian
and Virtuous Woman being Christened Rebecca. They begun also now to plant
Tobacco, every year changing their Governor, and had a dispute with the French
in their new plantations. A Convention also in the nature of a Parliament was
called, and several gifts to charitable uses for bringing up the Indian
Children, transmitted to the Governor and Council, so that they were by the
year 1620 in a very flourishing condition, that year arriving no less than
eleven ships, and 1216 persons, which were thus to be disposed, 80. for
Tennants to the Governors Lands, besider 50. sent the former Spring for the
Companies Land, and 150. for the College, 100. for the Glebe-land, 90. young
Women to make Wives, 50. Servants for public Service, and 50. more, whose
Labors were to bring up 30. of the Infidels Children, the rest were sent to
private Plantations. The year before the Lord De la Ware had mainly promoted
this good and great Work, passing over thither, though he had hardly escaped
before, dyed, to the great grief and discouragement of the Plantation; most of
the Nobility entered now also into the undertaking, and were Treasurers for it
to the further promoting of these good beginnings, by whose Directions order
was taken for suppressing the Planting of Tobacco, Planting of Corn: but all to
little effect, the stream of the Inclination of the Planters, or good nature of
the Soil to cherish that Plant, preferring it before all Grain whatsoever, to
the incredible profit of that Colony, as it afterward proved. Now also there
was much suit for Patents for Plantations; and several Persons transported
themselves upon their own Accounts, bu, twe shall see, met with a miserable
entertainment.

For, on the 22 of March 1622. these perfidious Infidels, though they had
promised to hold the League inviolable, till the Sky should fall, as they
termed it, resolved upon a General Massacre; which, by reason of the English
separating themselves, for the better Soil, and commodiousness of Ground, no
way in the least distrusting these Miscreants (whom, in hope of their
Conversion, they had used with all Familiarity and Civility imaginable, and
therefore every way unprovided of defense, their Guns never used but against
Deer or Wild-foul) they had very near effected, if it had not been discovered
by one of their own Nation that turned Christian. There were murdered in this
attempt 347 Men, Women, and Children, all with their own weapons, they coming
upon them in the disguise of the same familiarity, but hurting none that
opposed them. By the discovery of the Indian aforesaid, eleven parts of Twelve
of the English escaped, for it being revealed at James Town, most of the
Plantations dispersed thereabours among the Indians (who commonly keep not
above a 100 or 200 in a division of ground) took the Alarm and stood upon their
Guard, which the Indians perceiving fled, but the plantations far distant to a
140 miles, were most destroyed, which afterward for more security, were
reduced to five or six; and these inhumane Barbarians so severely dealt withal,
that in a short time the Country was wholly subjected to the English, and
became very well peopled and of great Trade, and continued so, proving a
receptacle and good retreat for many families in our late confusions, and now
yields great emoluments to the Inhabitants and Planters; and so we will leave
it, and take a short view of the Bermuda's Islands.

The Islands of Bermuda's.
THese Islands lie in the main Ocean, and 200 Leagues from any Continent,
situated in 32 degrees, and 25 Minutes of Northerly Latitude, and distant from
England, West, South-west, about 3300 miles, some twenty miles in length, and
not past two miles and a half in breadth, environed with Rocks, which make it
naturally very strong, but infamous for Shipwreck; there being but two places,
and those not very well known, The Earth.
where Shipping may safely come in, and those now are exceedingly well
fortified, but within is room to entertain a Fleet Royal, The Island is very
uneven, distributed into Hills and Dales; the Mold is of diverse colors neither
clay nor sand, but a mean between both: under the Mold two or three foot deep,
and sometime less, is a kind of white hard substance which they call the Rock,
but Trees will fasten root in it, being pumice like and spungy.

The Air is most commonly clear, and very temperate, and moist with The Air.
a moderate heat, very apt to nourish all things, so as many things transported
hence, yield a far better increase; and if it be a living creature it becomes
far better and fatter: by this means the Country is replenished with Hens and
Turkeys; yet being, through their multitude not to be attended, they turn wild
and forsake the Houses. There seems to be a perpetual Spring, which is the
cause some things come not to that maturity and perfection which is requisite,
and though the Trees shed their leaves, yet are they always full of Green. The
Co^n is the same they have in Virginia, and the West Indies, of which, without
plowing or much labor they have two harvests every year, in July and December
(it has no Grapes in perfection) and the Oranges and Lemmons grow twice a year
likewise.

The Sun every day in the year shines upon it, for the temperature is beyond
all others the most admirable, no cold greater than we feel here in April, nor
heat much greater than an ordinary May. Frost and Snow is never seen here, and
stinking and infections Mists very seldom by reason of the Main Ocean: the
Winter they have keeps time with ours, but the longest days and nights are
shorter than ours by two hours.

At its first Discovery 'twas all overgrown with Weeds and Plants The Fruits.
of several kinds, many tall and goodly Cedars, infinite store of Palmito's and
Mulberries, and Wild Olive Trees, with diverse others unknown both by Name and
Nature, there is also diversity of curious strange fowl, as also for Game and
Diet, and likewise of Fish; the Sea as well as the rest of the Elemeets being
abundantly liberal.

It is uncertain how it came by this name of Bermuda's, but that which is most
noised for it, is the casting away of a Spanish ship called by that name,
carrying black Hogs to the West Indies, who swam ashore and were found there in
great numbers, so that it was called the Isle of Devils, and shunned as the
rock of Perdition. One Henry May an English man, being cast away in a French
Vessel by the presumption of the Pilots, who said they were twelve Leagues
beyond it, with some Frenchmen, got ashore, and making a new Bark there, got to
England in the year 1594. The next ship that was cast away, (or indeed rather
to be said saved) was that of Sir George Summers, designed in 1609 for
Virginia, which by a Hurricane being covered with water, and so leaking, that
after three days the men gave over working, committing themselves to Gods
mercy, unexpectedly, as Sir George was sitting at the Steerage, guiding the
ship to keep her upright, came within sight of Land, to which they made, and
ran her so even between two Rocks that she poised her self, where he unladed
the goods, the storm ceasing, and came on shore, where finding such unhoped for
plenteous refreshments, (though he went to Virginia in a Cedar-ship, in which
he returned thither again and there died) two of his men which staid afterward
behind two years, and one he left, when he was carried home dead, when as they
were contriving their departure and committing themselves to the Sea in a
little Bark, a Ship appeared and stayed their resolutions.

During their abode here, they found in one entire Lump among the crevises of
the Rocks a piece of Ambergreece, the greatest yet found, weighing 80 l. with
other small crumbles,

This with much ado was secured for the Company of these Sumer-Islands, who to
the number of one hundred and twenty, had purchased a Patent for the said Isle,
whom the News of the Ambergreece much augmented. The first Governor was Mr.
More, he departing, there was a monthly succession of six, till one should come
from England, which was Captain Daniel Tucker: in the mean time the
Fortifications were finished and the Isle secured from any attempt of the
Spaniard, in whose time happened that memorable Voyage of five Persons, Viz.
Richard Sanders, William Godwin a Ship-Carpenter, Thomas Harrison a Joyner,
James Barker a Gentleman, and Henry Puet; who making a Boat under pretense for
Fishing, being hardly used and not suffered to depart in the Ships, by the
assistance of a Compass, unknown to any person till they were gone, set to Sea
having provided themselves of Victuals, and by a direct Course, the wind
favoring them, in five weeks time (though a Pyrat to whom they sailed hoping
to be taken in, took away from them their Compass and other necessary
implements) arrived in Ireland, where the Earl of Thomond honorably received
them, and hung up their Vessel for a Monument.

It is now divided into eight Tribes, each Tribe having in it 50. Shares, of
which there are some for their public charge. The names of the Tribes are
Sandys Southampton Warwick Paget Pembroke Cavendish Smith Hamilton, formerly
Bedford.


And thus much for Bermuda's.

The Swedes Plantation.
The Swedes are seated between the Dutch and Virginia in a Village by a Fort,
which lies eight miles within the River of Delaware in Virginia: on the
northside of the River, they are few in number, and their principle business
is, their Commerce with the Indians, for they have little or no Cattle: they
furnish the Indians with Guns and weapons, as the Dutch do; and once in a year
are supplied by a ship or two from Swethland, that fetch away their Merchandise.

Maryland.
This Province is divided from Virginia by the great River Patomuck; it lies
on the North side of the great River, and the west side of the great Virginia
Bay, it is more wholesome then the parts of Virginia and seated better for the
English grain. It is now better peopled than formerly, the Inhabitants being
Papists and Protestants, a like countenanced, the propriety by Patent is vested
in the Lord Baltimore, a Catholic.

New-Holland.
To the South-west of New England, lies the Dutch Plantation: it has good
ground, and good air, but few of that Nation inhabiting there which makes that
there are few Plantations in the Land; they chiefly intending their East India
Trade, and but one Village, whose Inhatants are part English and part Dutch.
Here has been no news, or any matter of War or State since the first
Settlement. There is the Port Orange, thirty miles up Hudsons River; they are
mischievous neighbors to the English, for according to the European Mode, they
sell Guns and Ammunition to the Common Enemy the Indians.

New England.
This Plantation was first undertaken in the year 1606. by Patent from King
James, to several Merchants of London, and the West-Countries, with a special
Inhibition not to plant within 100 miles of the former Colony of Virginia, but
never took effect till 1622 or thereabouts, after many losses and
discouragements of several adventures. At last Sir Francis Popham had the
Happiness and Fortune to establish it, though with much hazard and difficulty
by the Treachery of the Indians, and the unproportionablenesse of the
after-Supplies. The Plantation begins about 44. degrees and is indifferently
peopled with English as Southwardly at 41. At this day it has three Divisions,
the North, the middle, and the South. In the middle is Boston,. the best Seat
and best inhabited; the South is the Government of New Plymouth. Boston has a
Street near half a mile long, full of Merchand^ze. Here is Resident, a Council,
and a Governor, which is yearly chosen, and accommodated with a very good Port
and Castle, furnished with Men and Ammunition. Near Boston lies Charlestown;
and five miles into the Country, is Cambridge an University of Nonconformists
to the Church of England; This Country having always been the Receptacle of
such religious Malcontents.

The Land of all this Region is generally barren and rocky, the Commodities are
these ensuing, Pipe-staves, Clabboard, Fish, English Grain and Fruits, and Iron
works; with these they drive a Trade to most parts of Europe, especially to
Spain, the Canaries, and Chariby Islands. They are at present very numerous,
and deserve their Name, except their diversity in Religion, which has made
them disgustful to old England. Near adjoining to this Colony, the French have
a Plantation called Canada or Nova Francia, not worth the mentioning save for
some bickerings that have lately happened betwixt us and them, concerning
limits; wherein we have been successful, driving them out of some Forts they
unjustly possessed.

New Foundland.
This is the most Septentrional land of America, but there is a straight of Sea
not yet thoroughly discovered, called Hudsons Straight, by which the North-west
passage was concluded feasible, the Lands adjoining being called Nova
Brittannia or Nova Franmurcia. This Island stretches North and South from 46.
degrees and a half to 50. and a half Latitude. The Natives of this place are
few and Savage. The Commodity thereof is Fish, which is mostly Poor John,
traded for in great quantity by French, Biscayners, and English, chiefly of the
West Country, who for the profit hereof, endure the Winter cold and Summer heat
of the Climate, amidst other very great difficulties. This Island lies at the
mouth of the River Canada, distant from the continent at the north end near
half a League and the South-west point is about a League from Cape Britton.

Martins-Vineyard.
This is a small Island upon the Coast of New England, the Governor thereof
being appointed by the Council of New England. It is 20. miles long, and 10.
miles broad, there is great plenty of Fish in this Coast. On the Southwest of
this Island lies Long Island, in length 60. English miles, and in breadth 15,
inhabited by some English, who, for their Sectary opinions have been put from
New England. They are claimed also by the Dutch, but depend of, nor pay duty to
either. As also there are diverse other Islands more particularly Cape Hatrash a
part of Island in 36 degrees, from whence till you come to the point of St*
Helena, which is in 32 degrees, all the Coast along are broken Isles and
uninhabited, the best whereof is Roantke of 18 miles compass.

The Islands of Lucahos or Bahama.
These Islands are Southwest from the Bermuda's, and to the North of Portorico,
Hispaniola, and Cuba; the most emment is Lucayneque in 27 degrees. There is
likewise the Islands of Abacoa, and Yuma of 12. and 20. Leagues in 24. degrees,
and a half. Yuemela is in 23. degrees and a half, 15. Leagues in Length, and
North from Hispaniola lies Samana 7. Leagues each way. Between which two
former lies Yalaque of 10 Leagues in 22 degrees and a half. There are also
three small Islands that make a Triangle. The Islands of Magaquana, Quaqua,
Makre, and Alreo in 20 degrees, not now inhated, and never but once sailed to
by the English; with loss too, although they go round them yearly.

St. Christophers, Mevis, and Montserat, and Antego.
This Island is of Ten Leagues in length, and seated by English and French,
each having a Governor of their own Nation, so peopled by both, that Ground
can hardly be obtained. The two Nations are so mixed in their plantations, that
no secret design upon one another can long be kept so. They make some Sugar in
this Island, some India, and Cotton Wool, but most Tobacco. Mevis is 5. Leagues
in length, lying within a League of St. Christophers. Here is the best Sugar of
the Chariby Islands, some Indico, but little Cotton or Tobacco: in 17 degrees
lie Barbada and Redanda, in the hands of the Cannibals. Montserat is inhabited
most part by Irish, within 5 Leagues of the Redanda, planted with Tobacco and
some Indico. Antego lies between 14 and 15 degrees. It has good Air, and is
planted by the English with Tobacco, Indico, Cotton-Wool, and Sugar. The other
Chariby Islands, are, Magelante, Dominica, Martinina, Santa Luca, Guarde-Lupa,
Todos Santes, Deseada, inhabited by Caniballs, French, and Spaniards; and
Barbados, or Barbudoes.

Barbados.
This is a Lee-Iland, the Wind usually blowing one way. It lies in 13 degrees,
30 minutes; inhabited all with English, and Negroes their Servants, to such a
number, that it has more people and Commerce than all the Islands of the
Indies. Their Principal Commodity is Sugar of the worst sort, Indico very good,
Cotton, and little Tobacco. They buy and sell here, and scarce any where else
in English Plantations, with pieces of 8. ready money. Here are store of
Cattle, but Horses are the most wanting, by reason of their great Draught and
Trade from place to place. It is the worst place either to live in or to make a
Voyage or Return. For what is here is as well in the rest of the Islands, and
much more plenty: for here they have too many people, and in those there is too
few, and Grain more then enough. Its strength in men makes that they have no
fortification yet perfect, the reason that induced my Lord Willoughby of Parham
sent thither Governor for the King in 1651, upon an attempt of Sir George
Ayscoughs (sent thither by the Paliament to reduce those Islands to their
subjection) who had then declared for the Royal Interest, and proclaimed his
present Majesty to land some force upon the Island) to hearken to a Capitulation
and agreement, and render it to him upon honorable Terms. This Plantation is
now ready to be deserted, unless some expedient can be found for Wood or other
Fuel to boil their Sugar; diverse having already transplanted themselves to
Surynam

Iaimaica.
This Island owes its name to Columbus; who in his first discovery of this part
of the World, landed here, and seized it for the use of the King of Spain,
being sent out by him at the instance of his Wife Isabella, with 15. Ships,
whose Dysasters it will be too tedious to relate. It will suffice to say, that
for all his great Services he was at last imprisoned in these Countries, and
sent home in Chains, from which he was by the favor of the King released; and
himself afterward honored with the Title of Duke de la Vega, a City in this
Island he himself had so named, which City is now in being.

After our unfortunate Defeat at Hispaniola in 1656. where a strange
Consternation had seized upon the Spirits of the whole Army (none daring to
show their Faces to the Enemy, but Major General Hayns and three or four more
with him, who honorably fell in Fight with that Negro, and Devil-like Molatto)
for lack of Provisions, which would not have lasted the whole Army in their
resailing to Windward to Barbados, it was resolved the Fleet should steer for
Iamaica, which was accordingly effected, and upon Landing, Proclamation made
that it should be present death for any man to turn his back to the Enemy. They
landed without opposition and while they were marching up the Country, the
crafty Spaniard, the old pocky Governor, by a Treaty and Presents, so delayed
the Motion of the Army, that they conveyed away their incredible wealth and
riches into the woods and other Coverts before it was possible to overtake
them; He himself remaining as Hostage for the performance of some idle
Articles. So the English were peaceably at present possessed of the Country.

But not long after came a reinforcement from the Island of Cuba adjacent
thereto, (Diverse Spaniards and Molatto's, still keeping in the Woods and
annoying the English) and fortified themselves at Rio Novo, where though they
were strongly entrenched, and twice more in number, the Soldiers were so
earnest to regain their lost Honor (being taunted to their hearing by the
Enemy with St. Domingo, and undervalued for that Cowardwice) that they fell on
with incredible Fury and Resolution, and forced their Trenches, and made them
accept of very hard Conditions to depart with their Skins. The like they did to
other Spaniards, who landed about the same time near Point Pedro; so that there
is little danger or expectation of another invasion; the Spaniard having such
proof of our recovered valor; though the Island, if it were less fruitful, is
worth the fighting for, though it should cost the Spaniard his best blood, for
it lies within his bowels, and in the heart of his Trade. For all the Treasure
that his Plate Fleet brings home from Cartagena, steers directly for St.
Domingo in Hispaniola, and from thence must pass by one of the ends of this
Island to recover the Havana, the common rendezvous of the whole Armado before
it returns home through the Gulf of Florida; Nor is there any other way
(whereby to miss the Island of Iamaica) because he cannot in any reasonable
time turn up to the wind-ward of Hispaniola, the which though he might with
difficulty perform, yet he would thereby lose the security of his united
strength, which at the Havana, from all parts of the Bay of Mexico, New Spain,
and the riches from Nombre de Dios, and the South Seas, accompany each other
home from the said Havana, and yet notwithstanding the private English Men of
War, snap up the Straglers, as they lie crusing upon the Coast of Iamaica,
being fifty Leagues East and West, and North and South twenty.

It is seated between the Tropicks in seventeen and 18 degrees of Northern
Latitude, and therefore twice every year subjected to the perpendicular Beams
of the Sun, but proving as happy to the Complexions and Constitutions of
English men, as Virginia, New England, Spain, or Portugal. The mortality that
happened there at our first Landing, proceeding either from the griping
Monopoly of some hoarding Officers, or through want of timely recruits, or
through some fatal Conjunction of the superior Luminaries. It is by good
Experience found to be a temperate climate, for all it is scandalized with the
Fiction of the Torrid Zone, the Heat in the day time being always allayed with
the Sea-Breezes, which rise with the Sun, and the Nights are by an
interchangeable and never-failing intercourse refreshed with Land-Breezes.

Nor is the fertility less propitious than the temperature, producing in as
great abundance, as any where in the Indies, Sugarcanes, Tobacco, Cotton, Maez
or Indian Corn, Potatoes, Yaums, and Coco-Nuts; the Earth continuing its
Spring, and being green and florid, all the year long. Here are store of Hogs
fatned by what drops from the Trees, whole Herds of Beeves, which, before they
were frighted by our unskilful method of killing them by shot, fed by 1000 in
the Savana's or large Champion fields, but now sculk in the Woods and Coverts,
and appear not but by night. Here are also a number of wild Horses, well
shaped, and very serviceable, being all bred of Spanish Gennets, which may be
bought for 3 l. sterling, and will yield 6000 l. of Sugar at Barbados. There
are likewise excellent plenty of choice Timber Trees, and Wood for the Dyers
use, as Fustick, Brasiletta, and Ebony, and a kind of Logwood, China Roots,
Gum, Guaiacum, Lignum Vitae, Cassia, etc. There are also abundance of Cocoa
Trees, which the Spaniard reckons one of his chiefest Incomes, which may be
yearly improved.

There is one Rarity more, which is the Alligator or Indian Crocodile, some of
them 6 or 7 foot long: but they cannot hurt a man if he be aware of them, their
motion being slow; and head and body must move together. There are no Mines
found out yet, but they are not to be despaired of, in the prosecution of the
Plantation

The English have built a new Town at Cagway point, of about 600. Houses, where
at present the Governor resides, having quitted the City of S. Iago de la
Vega, the Spaniards chief town, which is seated in a pleasant Savana. This City
was some 30 years ago, plundered by General Iackson, who came with 500 men from
St. Christophers, and in spite of 2000 Spaniards, in a readiness to receive
him and 7 Barricadoes (such was the Mariners exceeding greediness of spoil)
forced the Town and plundered it, and made the Spaniard give him a great sum to
boot, to spare it from the fire: it had formerly 2000 houses, and 16 Churches
and Chapels, and now but 600 Houses, the Skeleton of two Churches and an Abbey.

Point Cagway is very well fortified, and has Guns in it, as good as any the
Tower had: there is also another Plantation of the English, in one Regiment at
Port Morant, who have already made it considerable by planting several
Commodities. After Venables left the Island, the Government was devolved to the
eldest Colonel; and afterward Cromwell sent Colonel Brain to command them,
who died there: and then it was conferred on Colonel Doyley, who has been
happily active in promoting this Colony, and is yet Governor till the Arrival
of the Lord Windsor, sent thither with a Patent from the King, and Grant of the
whole Island, under whose care it is likely to flourish.

The King of Spain's Dominions in the West Indies.
IT will be unnecessary and of no use, to insist much upon the Countries
subject to the King of Spain in America, because we have no traffic in those
parts; the King of Spain forbidding and keeping all men from thence, with as
much diligent watchfulness, as the Dragon did the Golden or Hesperian Apples.
With much difficulty he obtained his Mines, several supplies being lost, and
his Colonies ready to depart: besides the frequent Fights betwixt themselves in
point of private advantages, several Governors supplanting one another by
Tragical means, the principal whereof was Columbus, that successeful Captain,
Ferdinandus Cortesius, Marquess of the Valley, Pizarro, Almagrus, Vasca; and
Blasco: By Cortesius, Atabalipa King of Peru was taken Prisoner, in which are
his Mines of Potossi, etc. Who refusing a dangerous peace offered by the
Spaniard, by the fortune of the War was made a Prisoner, and for his ransom,
sending to his chief City of Cuscon, and other places of his Kingdom, filled
his Prison, being a reasonable Hall, with Gold and Silver, and yet
nevertheless lost his Life, being strangled by the deliberate advice of his
Enemies, who substituted his Brother in his place. The Indians upbraiding the
Spaniard with their Cruelty and Covetousness, and calling Money their God,
bidding them to eat it. It is reported when they first entered the Country, they
shooed their Horses with Gold and Silver. To our discourse: this Country is
divided into Mexicana and Peruana.

That part of America, which is called Mexicana, is divided into three several
parts, according to the situation of the Land, in Plains, Mountains, and less
Hilly grounds. Out of these Countries are brought over into Europe, Gold,
Silver, Bezoar, and other precious stones, Sarsaparilla, and Sugar in
abundance, Brasil-Wood, Cotton, costly Plumes, Jackanapes, several sorts of
curiously feathered Birds, and many more Drugs and Merchandise. We will run
over only the several Countries, and so conclude.

The first is the Island of Hispaniola, famous for our Defeat before the chief
City of St. Domingo, though formerly sacked without much opposition by Sir
Francis Drake. It is seated in 18, 19, and 20 degrees of Northern Latitude,
being 150. Leagues long East and West, inhabited chiefly by Negroes, which with
the Spaniards, make not in all above 500. the Commodities are Ginger, Sugar,
Cotton, Wool, etc. and Tallow, and Hides 100000. yearly, gotten of the wild
Cattle, which are the biggest in the World.

The next is the I Will of Cuba, lying West from Hispaniola 200. Leagues long,
East and West, the broadest part not 45, the Commodities the same with
Hispaniola, the Land neither so pleasant nor wholesome. In it, is the Town of
Havana, in 22. degrees, the great resort of the Spanish Fleet; the Harbor
strongly secured by two Castles. Next Porto Rico 15 Leagues from Hispaniola, 45
Leagues long, East and West, 23 broad; then Sancta Crux in 16 degrees and a
half, the Virgins, Virgin Gorda, Blances, Anagada, Sambrito, Angula, St.
Martins, in 17 degrees and a half, once possessed by the Spaniards, now by the
Dutch, as is Eustas likewise. More Southwardly is Trinidado I Will, 50 Leagues
long, and 70 broad, Margareta, Tortuga, Gardener, Caracute, Calava, and Tamasca.

On the Continent the Spaniard has Florida, which begins in 34 degrees, the
Gulf hereof is notable having two Entrances, the one between Youcatan and Cuba,
where the stream comes fiercely in; the other is between Cuba and the Cape of
Florida, where it runs more violently out.

New Spain.
Besides this Province of Florida, the King of Spain in this Nothern America,
has three great Kingdoms. The first and principal is the Kingdom of
New-Spain: The second is the Kingdom of Galisia: The third, the Kingdom of
Gutemalia, and the Province of Varagua, that adjoyneth to the Straight of
Darian, and is properly of the Council of Panama. The Kingdom of Spain has in
it a Viceroy and Council, entitled the Viceroy of Mexico. And within his
Government the Province and Bishopric of Mexico, that of Tlascala, Guaxa^a,
Mechoachan, Chiapa, Yucatan, and Panuco. The Indians of this Kingdom, are of
two sorts; the Chickamecans, which are a sort of Rogues, that live much after
the manner of Toriges, or ancient Irish, by robbing and spoiling Passengers on
the way, Towns and Villages; and the other live even as decently as the
Spaniard, and are of all Trades and Vocations, as they are; of sharp wits, and
of great agility of body, as appears by their extraordinary feats of Activity
on the Rope, and tumblings. This Kingdom is a high Country, for the most part
of it, and for riches, pleasantness, and wholesomeness, accounted one of the
best in the world, as lacking nothing naturally that is to be had, excepting
Wine and Oil, which they might also have, but that it is forbidden, to plant
Vineyards, or Oliveyards by the King of Spain, and it has diverse things not
elsewhere to be had, both of Trees, Herbs, and Drugs.

New-Galicia.
THis Kingdom of New- Galicia, has no Viceroy, but is governed by a Council,
whose bounds is parted from New- Spain at the Port of Nativity on the South Sea
to the North North-west, and North-east. It has no bounds, but may enlarge
their Territories, as they see occasion on the Indians. It has already these
Provinces. The first, Guadalaica, Xalisco, Sacaticas, Chiamerla; Culiacan,
New-Biscai, and Sivaloa. And this Kingdom is not much inferior to New- Spain,
and it has the same sort of Indians.

Gutamalia.
This Kingdom of Gutamalia is governed as the other by a Council, without a
Viceroy; and is the Southwardliest Region of this North America, and has
within its bounds the Provinces of Gutamalia, from whence the Kingdom takes
name; Soconusco, Chiapa, Suchi^epoque, Verapas, Honduaras, and Cacos. Saint
Savior, and Saint Michael, Nievaraqua, Chuluteca, Taquesgalpa, and Costarica,
or the rich Coast. The Indians here are more warlike than the rest, and have
more unwillingly submitted to the Spanish Yoke, and therefore they have had
almost continual wars; the most of the Indians living, till very lately, after
the manner of the Chickamecians, though many of them are docible as the Indians
of Mexico. This is a rich wholesome Kingdom, not inferior to Galicia, but
rather exceeds it. But when I come to each particular Province, I shall name
them as they adjoyn on the Coast of the Sea.

Panuco is a Province near adjoining to Florida, and parted from it by the
River of Palms, which lies in 28 degrees of North Latitude.

That part of it that lies next to Mexico, is the best, and has the greatest
plenty of Victuals, with some gold: the other side, which is next Florida, is
poor and barren.

The next to Panuco, on the Coast of the North Sea, lies the Province of
Talascalia or Losangels. It has abundance of Flax, Wheat, Sugar, and Ginger;
diversity of herbs, and fruits; abundance of Cattle, Hogs, and Horses, many
silver mines, 200 chief Indian Towns, and at least 40 Monasteries of Friars.

Youcatan. The North part of this Province adjoyneth to the South of
Talascalia. It is a peninsula, and in compass 150 Leagues. The temperature is
hot and moist: it has no Rivers but is full of good willows. It is a woody
country, nor will it bear English grain, neither has it gold or other mineral.

The Province of Honduras adjoineth unto the South part of Youcatan: this coast
stretches along the north Sea as far as Nicaragua, which is near 150 leagues.

It is a hilly Country, plentiful of all sorts of Cattle, and store of Wheat,
and Mines of Gold and Silver.

Nicaragua, lies next to the South Side of Honduras: it is a plentiful
Country of Coco, Cotten-Wool, Millet, Cattle, and much, gold. It has five
Spanish Towns, and abundance of peaceable Indians, which are most expert in the
Spanish tongue.

The Province of Costarica, lies between Nickuragua, and Caragua, between
which it has 90 Leagues in length. It is a good Land, and very fruitful in
Millet, Wheat, Flax, and Sugar, plenty of Mines, both of Gold and Silver, and
it has two Spanish Towns.

The Province of Varagua lies between Costarica and Panama, adjoining on the
South part to the Straight of Dariana. The northerliest is in eleven degrees,
it has East and West 50 leagues, and in breadth 25, and is washed as
Costarica, with the north and south seas. It is a Mountainous Country full of
bushes, without Pasture or Cattle, Wheat, or Barley, but it has some Millet,
and is full of rich Mines of Gold. The Indians are few, and they be in
continual wars with the Spaniards.

And at the end of this Varagua begins the southern America. And therefore I
shall return back to the other parts of this north America, which is not yet
discovered.

The Province of Cibloa is the most northerly Province that the Spaniards
possess in America. It has but one Spanish Town.

Here are store of all sorts of our Cattle, and the Ox of the Country, which
has a bunch of Flesh on his back, of the bigness of a man's head, and his hair
is shaggy and long, his horns smaller then our Kines horns, but his body much
bigger: this is an Inland Province, and lies from the Sea many Leagues.

The Province of New-Biskay lies on the south-west of Cibloa: it has store of
Provision and Cattle, and diverse Mines of Silver. It has two fair Spanish
Towns, that is to say, Sancta Barbola, and the Baro of Saint John, with diverse
peaceable Indians. It is an Inland Province but of much Commerce, by reason of
the silver Mines.

The Province of Chiamerla lies in more than two and twenty degrees of hight.
It is ten Leagues broad, and something more in length: it lies along the south
Sea, but has no Ports of name.

The Province of Guliacan is the most northerly Province the Spaniards possess
on the Coast of the south Sea: It lies west of Chiamerla, there are much
Cattle, Seeds, and Fruits of England.

Sacetas lies south-east from Biscay, It is very wholesome in some parts of
it, and as sickly and unwholesome in other parts, which causes that in some
places there is much want, and in other places as much plenty. But to amend all
defects, there are in most places rich silver Mines.

The Province of Xalisco has the City of Compostella, near the south Sea in
one and twenty degrees, nineteen Minutes: there is the Village of the
Purification south-west from Gudalaria, thirty leagues: this land is hot and
sickly, but has Mines of Gold and Silver, good store of provisions, and
excellent Horses, that are well bred for any service.

Guadalaira is the best of all the Provinces of the Kingdom of New-Galicia, and
the most Southerly: It has all sorts of Grain, Herbs, and Fruits of New-Spain;
and plenty of Kine, Horses, and Swine: It is a wholesome good air; and has
many silver mines: the chief City and Head of the Kingdom is Guadalaira in
twenty degrees.

The Province of Mechoacan lies between the Province of Mexico, and the
Kingdom of New-Galisia: it has in breadth by the coast of the South Sea
fourscore leagues, and threescore within land. Here are many good Mines, and it
is a fruitful land, and has much Wheat, Millet, Coco, all sorts of Spanish
fruits, Cotton-wool, the rich drug of Choconeel, store of Cattle and Fish, and
the Indians are industrious, and given to labor: the chief City is Mechoachan:
it stands in eighteen degrees, fifteen minutes, and forty and seven leagues
from Mexico.

The Province of Mexico falls between Mechoacan and Talasvalia: it has in
length North and south one hundred and thirty leagues, and in breadth eighteen.

Guaxcaca Province, comes to the Coast of the South Sea, and it lies between
Mexico and Gutamalia Province, along the coast of the South Sea one hundred
leagues.

Soconusco is the Westerliest Province of the Kingdom of Gutamalia, it joyneth
to the Province of Guaxcaca, from whence it lies on the Southeast thirty four
Leagues and far into the Land. It is plentiful of Wheat, Coco, Millet, and
Cattle.

The Province of Gutamalia, is the head of the Kingdom of Gutamalia; it
joyneth to the Province of Soconusco, and on the South Sea, it stretches 70
leagues; the Country is of a good temperature, and plentiful of Cotton-Wool,
Wheat, Millet and Cattle, and other Seeds and fruits; the Winds and Rains in
October are very furious.

This Province has abundance of Gold, some Silver, store of Balm, and liquid
Amber, Copal, Suchicopal, excellent liquors, and the Gum animi, with the
Beasts that breed the Bezoar stone. But the Volcans here, are very noisome to
those that lie near them, for they often burst forth, casting out fire-stones
and ashes. And here are more of those Volcans or fire-pits, than in all India
besides.

The Province of Chiapa is an inland Province, it is Mediterrauean to
Soconusco, Mexico, Tabasco: and Verapas, and in length forty leagues, and
something less in breadth. It has store of Wheat, Millet, and other Grain and
Seeds, much Cattle, but few Sheep.

Verapas is also an inland Province of Gutamalia, and is Mediterranean to
Chiapa, Youcatan, Honduras, and Gutamalia of thirty Leagues over: it is a moist
Country, and it has plenty of Millet and Wheat, Cotton-Wool, Coco, and much of
that sort of Fowls, whose feathers make the rare colored Indian pictures, and
this is a great Merchandise amongst them.

Panama has a Council that has for Jurisdiction no more then the Province of
Panama, and the election of the Governor of Veragua, in regard they are
appointed Principals of the Navigation for the dispatch of Peru, and ordering
the King of Spains Treasure, which is yearly transported to Porto Belio, over
the straight of Darien, and from thence to Spain. It adjoyneth on Carthagena,
and Popian, to the south-east, and south-West.

The air at Panama is extreme unwholesome, and the place very sickly; but it is
mended and made durable, by the Trade is brought in by the vast sums yearly
brought there to carry to Spain, of which the Inhabitants get part.

The Country of Carthegena lies on the north sea, and is parted from the
Province of Panama, by the River of Darian, from whence to the River Magdalen
is fourscore leagues. The Land is mountainous and hilly, full of high trees;
this Region is fruitful in some places, and in other some as Barren. The Seed
of England will grow but in few parts of this Country: but here are many
Cattle, Horses, and Swine.

The temperature of this Country is hot and very rainy, neither is their Mines
worked either of Gold or Silver, but much rozen and liquors, which they have
from the Trees, and Sanguis Draconis.

Granado.
THis Kingdom lies from the Sea, adjoining on the South part of Cartagena. It
is a very rich Country in Mines of Emralds, Gold, Steel, and Copper, store of
Pastures, with all sorts of Cattle, Wheat, Millet, Fruits and Herbs. The
Indians are great Traders and able men of body, ingenious in the Sciences of
the Spaniards. The Merchandise comes up the River Magdalen, on which this Land
lies.

The Province of Sancta Martha, lies between Cartagena and the River Hacha, on
the North sea. It is a plentiful Country of Millet, Potatoes, much Gold,
Emralds, and other rich Stones, and Copper.

The Province of Venesiula, lies on the north Sea, parted from Sancta Martha,
by the River of Hacha, on the east is the Province of Suava, or New Andulesia,
as the Spaniards call it.

The Coasts of the Sea is near one hundred and thirty leagues of length. In
this Land are veins of Gold, of more than two and twenty Caracts and a half. It
is plentiful of Wheat and other Seeds, for there are two Harvests in a year. It
has abundance of all kind of Cattle great and small, Cotton, and Salsaparilla.

Guana. This Region comprehends all the Land that lies between the Province
of Venesiula and Brasill, which begins at two degrees of South latitude;
this Land is more famous for report, than for any certain knowledge of the
riches thereof.

The Provinces of Plate, take name from the River on which they lie: the
passage to them is up the said River, but they are almost on the back of
Brazil. They are large and far wholsomer than Brazil, plenty of Sugar, Ginger,
Wine, Wheat, Millet, all sorts of English Fruits, store of Cattle, Swine, and
Horses, but no mines that are worked. They are subjected by the Spaniards, and
united to the Council of Peru, on the South Sea, for nearness of lying to that
Kingdom, there is a common passage from these Provinces thither by land over
the Mountains; the most of the Land is indifferently inhabited.

The Coast of Chilia reaches to twenty eight degrees of South latitude. This
Region is wholesome above all other in the Indies, being of an excellent
temperature, as neither too hot nor too cold. It is abundantly Rich in Gold and
Silver Mines and all sorts of Cattle and Grain, Fruits, and excellent and
pleasant Wine. The Country men are strong and valiant beyond compare, which the
Spaniards know to their great cost: for they could never totally subdue this
Nation.

The bounds of this Council of Charcas stretches from Chilia to Peru: It has
abundance of Cattle of all kinds, great shag-haired Sheep bigger than Goats,
that carry great burdens on their backs; store of Corn of all sorts, Fruits
and Wine, much Gold and the greatest Mines of Silver in the World. There are
few Spanish Towns, and but one but Port, in regard the Spaniards get neat the
Hill of Potosi, to the City Imperial, which lies in nineteen degrees of
latitude far from the Sea, and delivers that which is exported, and receives
the Merchandise imported at the City of Arica.

Peru.
THis Kingdom is governed by a Council and Viceroy. It has to the North the
Council of Quito, on the south Charchas, and to the west the south sea, and to
the east without limits. This Kingdom is well peopled with civil orderly
Indians, that are in great subjection to the Spaniards. Peru does abound in all
sorts of Fruits, Seed, Cattle, Horses, Sheep, Swine, rich Mines of Gold,
Silver, Quicksilver, plentiful of Wine, Oil, and Sugar. The Andes runs
through this Province within ten Leagues of the Sea. In all which Coasts it
never raineth; but on the said hills it raineth continually, and beyond as in
other Regions. The Plains between the Sea, and the said Hills have few or no
Rivers, but the industry of the Inhabitants draw, in trenches, (which are
artificially made) the water either from those few Rivers, or from the side of
the said Andes, which makes that the said plain is mighty populous, fruitful
and pleasant, even as a Garden.

The City of Cusco is the head City of Peru, by a Title that it has from the
King of Spain. It lies in 13 degrees and a half south of the Equinoctial. It
is a very great City, and has four great streets that go to the four parts of
the World. It has many Monasteries and Nunneries, with a Cathedral, and diverse
Schools of Indian Children.

Quito.
THis Kingdom is governed by a Council, whose bounds lies between Peru and
Panama. It has two mighty Countries or Provinces within his circuit, that is
to say, first Quits, and then Popyan. Quito lies between Peru and Popyan on
the south sea, and far into the land under the Equinoctial line: and, contrary
to the opinion of the Ancients, it is a most wholesome temperate Country, and
rather cold than hot in most places of it. In those places where the Snow
continues all the year, it raineth from October to March, which they call
Winter: This Province is rich in Mines of Emralds, and Gold, Silver, and
Quicksilver, plentiful of English Grain and Cattle, Horse, and Swine. This
Region is happy in the temperature of the Air, there being neither extreme cold
nor heat, as lying Equinoctial to these extremes, and, which is more delightful
to man's nature, always a clear Sky.

The Province of Popyan, lies between Quito and Panama; the greatest part of
it is Inland, yet does it for a good way lie on the south sea. The Eastern part
bordereth on the Kingdom of Granado and Cartagena.

The temperature of Air, is very different in this place, for here are some
places indifferent temperate and cool, other places are very hot and sickly.
This Province has some Indians peaceable, other some extraordinary savage,
insomuch that about the Village of Arma and Canarna, they eat not only those
that they take in War, cutting off slivers, eating one part while the other
lives; but sell their Children, and the Sons their Fathers and Mothers to the
Butchers, who keep shambles of man's flesh.

This Country is exceeding rich in Gold Mines, which makes that the Spaniards
endure the other inconveniences of the Country with great patience.

Magellan-Straight.
This Straight is famous for the troublesome passage of Drake, Candish, and
Haukins, three English men Generals, each in a several Fleet: Drake and Candish
being the first that sailed along the coast of Peru, and so to the East Indies,
and came home by the cape of Bona Speranza, circum-navigating the Globe. The
last being much over-matched was taken by the Spaniards on the coast of Peru,
and conveyed from thence Prisoner to Spain. From whence with much difficulty he
obtained his freedom, although solemn engagements passed from the General his
Taker for his freedom.

The entrance into this Straight is in 52 degrees, and the coming out into the
south sea the same height.

It is an extreme difficult passage by reason of the meeting of the north and
south seas in the channel, driving each other back, prevailing as they are
favored by the wind, which commonly blows there exceeding boisterously and
cold. There are diverse Caves and Bays in it, but no encouragement for a Seaman
to adventure that way. The Inhabitants on this Straight are few, and extreme
savage, neither is this passage any more in use: for those that will go by the
south of America to the East Indies, or into the south sea, to any part of the
west coast of America, have a more convenient passage south of this Straight in
an open sea. The entrance into it is called Lamair, but the sea was discovered
by Sir Francis Drake, and Sir Richard Haukins, both which were driven back by
foul weather into those seas after they had passed the Strait.

On the coast of the south sea, which lies between the Straight and Chilli,
there are no inhabitants save the wild Natives, but it has the Bay of Horses
in 52 degrees, and the Bay of Saint John in 50. The cape of Saint Francis in
51. And 18 Leagues before you come to Port Hearnan the Bay of Galago in 48
degrees 40 Minutes: and north of it the Bay of Kings, and the Isle of Catilina;
then the Cape of Saint Andrew in 42 degrees, where Chilia begins

There is a coast between the River of Plate, and the Straight of Magellan. The
Straight lies southwest from the mouth of this River, and is distant thence
400 Leagues. It has on the said coast, first the point of Saint Helena in 37
degrees, the point of Francis in 38, the River of Canobi in 45. And to the
south the Isle of Ducks. And in 47 the River of Seriani, and in 49 the Port of
Saint Julian, the River of Sancta Crux in 50. And 12 leagues before you come to
the Straight of Ilefonsus. But the Land possessed with no other but the Natives,
which are a Giantly people.

This Magellanica belongs to the King of Spain, which some Geographers would
have now the fifth part of the World, it is since found out to be a very little
part, as consisting only of some few Islands, on the southern side of the
Magellanick-Straights, so called, by Fredericus Magellanicus, who discovered it
in the year one thousand five hundred and twenty: writing moreover that there
he had seen tall men about nine and ten foot high; and he saw many fires which
the inhabitants had kindled, doubtless by reason of the coldness of the
weather: he named it the land of fire, or smoky, whereby he presumed the more
that it must needs be a very vast great country, reaching east and westwards
unto new Guinney, according to which ghessing, it has hitherto been delineated
by the Maps of Geographers; but since has there instead thereof a large and
wide sea been found out, both by Jacob Le Mair, who in the year one thousand
six hundred and sixteen, sailing about the southern coast of these Islands,
entered into the Indies; and by John Davis, in the year one thousand six hundred
forty two, who sailing toward the North, about on thousand six hundred forty,
further than Guinny, discovered diverse Lands, and passing on the South Side,
sailed about the East coast of New Guinny, and so going on Westward he came to
the Indies; whence we may certainly gather, that all the former descriptions
and definitions of the Magellanick and unknown Lands are but mean abuses and
certain devised Fables.

These Lands and Countries being subdued in the space of 60 years, with much
blood and hazard, were settled as his Dominions in the year 1550, from which
time they have continued without any remarkable alteration, setting aside some
private inroads of the English, Dutch, and French, till the business of
Iamaica, which now threatens some danger to the vast and potent body of the
Spanish Empire.

Brazil.
This Province begins where Guana ends, at two degrees of south latitude,
where there is a point called the Cape of Snakes, from whence it lies along
the Coast of the North-Sea to twenty five degrees, and on the backside west,
lies the Provinces of the River of Plate. The air is the whole year through
very hot, the Winter; which your Summer, distinguished only with the rain that
falls at that season.

Here are many venomous Worms, and great Serpents; it is plentiful of Pastures,
Cattle, and Horses, little Millet, and no English grain; wherefore their bread
is Casabi or Potatoes, which are in great plenty. There are great shows of
silver and gold, but none gotten, nor Mines certainly known. The chief
commodity is Sugar Cotton-wool, Bombast, and Brazil wood. It has near the
Seacoast about 20. Portugal Towns, many Ingeniowes, or Sugerworks: the first
Town of the Country is called Tamerico, and five leagues to the south of that
Farnambuck or Recif, then All Saints a hundred leagues from Farnambuck in
fourteen degrees forty minutes. The Town of the Sure-haven in 16 degrees and a
half, the Holy Ghost in 20. There is another Town on the River Generio, in
twenty three degrees, near which they cut much Brasil-wood. There are on the
coast eight or ten Ports, more principal than the rest, which are the River
Saint Dominick northeast of Farnambuck, by the Cape of Saint Augustine, which
stands in nine degrees. The Island of Tamerico before rehearsed, the River of
Saint Francis in ten degrees and a half. It is very great. The Bay of All
Saints is three leagues and thirteen up into the land. The River of Trinidado
and the River of Canamon in 13 degrees and a half, and the River of the Virgins
in 16, and Portesceurae in 17. The River of Parague in twenty near the Town of
Sanctus Spiritus, and in twenty three degrees Cold Cape beyond Saint Vincent.
This Province has been in difference between the Portugeses and West India
Company of Holland, and as the Dutch got great footing there without right, so
the Portugals, since their falling from Spain, have surprised them again; and
recovered them by the same slight they got the East Indies from us, but not
with such vile murders, as they committed on the English.

This Reconquest of it by the Portugal from the Dutch was in 1654, the strong
Fort of Recif which held out the last, being delivered to them, with the whole
Land, by certain Articles, which contained the whole surrender, for which the
Dutch General there, Sigismond Schop, at his coming home into Holland was
tried for his life, but his Friends, or the Justice of his Cause preserved him.

And thus now God enabling me, I have finished the Description of the World,
and the four parts thereof: and leave my endeavors herein to the judgment of
the Reader.

The chiefest Cities of America, with the Names of the Rivers.
IN the Northern part of America, are Greenland, East-land, and Iceland, in
which are the Towns of Bearford, and Scalbod.

In Canada or new France, are the Towns of Quebec, and Port Royal, some degrees
more southerly, are New England, the New-Low-countries, Virginia, the Isles of
Bermudes, and more southerly of them, the Islands of Barbados and Saint
Christophers: In Virginia are the towns of James: In New England the towns of
Plimmouth and Boston: the Rivers in Canada that be most famous, are the River
of Canada, or Saint Lawrence: the River of Chesseapeac, or Powatan, Trinity,
and the River of May.

The Cities in New-Mexico that are most remarkable, are the End, and the
Granado.

In Hispaniola is the City of Domingo, in Cubai the City called Havana.

In the Isle of Iamaica, the City called Sevilla: In the Island of Boriquenrie,
Puerto-Rico: In Florida is Saint Augustino: In Mexico, or New-Spain, are these
great Cities, Mexico, Mechoacan, or Wallodolid, Saint Estevan, Del Puerto,
Los-Angeles, Antequera De la Vetoria, Meroda, Guadalaida, Compostella, Saint
Sebastian, Saint Miguel, Gernada, and Zacateca.

There are also Saint Iago, De Guatimala, Guevetulan, Cividad Real, Verapax,
Valadolid, or Commagaiva, Leoa de Nicaragua, Cartago, La Conception, Porto
ello, and Panama.

The Rivers here most famous, are North of New-Mexico, Spiritu Sancto, toward
the east, Spiritu Sancto toward the west; Econdido, Panuco, Barania, Zacatula,
and Desaguadero, de Nicaragua.

In Terra Firma, are the famous Cities of Cartagena, Saint Martha, Saint Fe de
Bogatta, Na Sa de los Remedios, Veneznella, O Cori, Cordova, Lannuen^, O
Comana, Manoa, O el Dorado.

In Peru are these remarkable Cities, Cali Popaian, Saint Francisco, de Quito,
Bacca, Saint Iuan de las Selinas, Lima O los Reyes, Cusco, Potosi, la Plata,
Sancta Cruz de la Sierra, Saint Iago de Chili, and L' Imperiale.

The Rivers which are most famous in Terra Firma and in Peru, the River Grand,
O de Darien: the River Grand O de Santa Martha, Paria, Orinoque, Essequebe, and
Desaguedero de Peru.

In the south part of America, is Terra Magellanica, where is the City of Del
Rey Felippe, there are the Magellan Isles, and Terra del Foco.

In Brasil are these fifteen memorable Cities Para, Maranhan, Ciara, Potenii,
Paraiba, Tamaraca, Olinda, Seregippe, Saint Salvador, Los Isteos, Porto Seguro,
Spiritu Sancto, Sancte, Sebastian, Los Santos, and Farnambuck.

The Rivers in Brasile are Orelane, or des Amazones, Maragnan, O de Mirari,
Tabacourn, the great River of Potengi, the River Zoyal.

In Ria de plata are the Cities of Saint Iago, del Festero, Cordova, de
Tucuman, L. Assumtion, Cividad Real O Ontiveros. The River here that is most
famous is called Paraguay.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of some Plates, Maps, Pictures, and Copy-books, that are Printed
and Sold by John Overton, dwelling at the sign of the White Horse next door to
Little Saint Bartholomews Gate, in Little Britain.

General Maps.
A Map of the World. A most excellent Map of England, Scotland, and Ireland. A
Map of France. A new Map of England adorned and beautified with the chief
Cities and Towns thereof more exact than hitherto.

Maps of Shires.
Kent two sheets. Essex. Surrey. Hartfordshire. Norfolk. Suffolk.
Staffordshire. Warwickshire. Worcestershire. Leicestershire and Rutland in one.
Cheshire. Lancashire. Virginia.

Pictures of Men in Quarto.
The Picture of Oliver Cromwell, Sir Tho. Overbury. Cardinal Wolsey. Sir Tho.
Gresham. D. of Buckingham. Prince and Princess of Orange. Prince Rupert. Prince
Maurice. E. of Salisbury. Mr. Brightman. Bish. Usher. Dr. Eravius. M. Shelton.
Genesis Lashly. L. Say. E. of Pembrook. E. of Manchester.

Great Sheets.
The Pourtraictures of their most excellent Majesty's King Charles 2d. and
Queen Katherine, most excellently Graven to the life beyond all Draughts
before; in Imperial Paper. The Pourtraictures of all the Royal Progeny.

Battle of Nazeby 2 sheets with observations. Dunbar-battel in 2 sheets. 4
Plates of signs or badges for Inns or Taverns, 42. The City of London,
Gunpowder Treason, and 88. The Arms of the Trades and Corporations of London
74. A Death Jerusalem 2 sheets. Colonel Ludlow on Horseback. X Commandments. X
Persecutions of Christians. Orpheus.

Copy-Books.
Some late Copy-Books by Ed. Cocker with several Books of Flowers, Beasts,
Birds, Flies, and Worms, very delightful and useful to all Naturalists. A Book
of Flowers and Fishes with the same curiosity of Art. Davis Copy-Book.
Billingsley in Quarto. Billingsley in Octavo. One published by P. S. 2d. by
Lewis Hews 2d. called Hancocks 22. Plates. And all other sorts of Copy-Books
that are to be had in London.

Books for Draughts of Men, Birds; Beasts, Flowers, Fruits, Flies, Fishes, etc.
1 Book of J. Fullers Drawings, 15. plates.

1 Book of Draughts of Mr. Hollars work, and Mr. Vanderburghs 18 plates.

Flora 13 plates, Beasts, Birds, etc.

1 Book of Birds sitting on sprigs 16 plates.

1 Book of Beasts. 1 Book of branches 11 plates

1 Book of Flowers, 12 Plates for Cheese trenchers.

Pictures in Sheets of their Excellencies.
Rob. E. Essex. Tho. L. Fairfax. Also O. Cromwell

Diverse Pictures of Mr. Pain, Hollar, Faythorn, Pumbarp, Gaywood, and other
Artists works. And all other sorts of Maps, Pictures, Copy-books, etc. that are
usually sold in black and white, and in Color.

Minerva and 7 liberal Arts.

FINIS.

