A Compendious DISCOURSE UPON THE CASE, As it stands between the Church of
England and of Rome on the one hand, and again between the same Church of
England and those Congregations which have divided from it on the other hand.

TOGETHER WITH The Treatise of the Division of the English Church and the
Romish, upon the REFORMATION.

Enlarged with some Explicatory Additionalls. By H. F. D.D.

LONDON, Printed by J. G. for R. Royston, at the Anstel in Ivy-lane. 1655.

To the READER.
BE pleased to understand, that for amending not a few faults escaped in the
first Edition of the Treatise touching The Division of the English and Romish
Church, upon the Reformation, the Printer intended a second. In order to which,
the Corrections were sent up to him with some explicatory Additionalls; but
other more necessary employments intervening caused him to lay it aside; and
when I thought he had forgotten it, and was willing he should do so, he lets
me know he had reprinted some sheets of it. I did not like he should after
almost two years suppression, send it abroad with no more advantage: it came
therefore into my mind to draw up the Case into a more compendious and
methodicall Discourse, and to add the other part of the Case, as it stands
between us and those that have divided from us; still making references to the
like points and passages as they lie scattered in the Two Treatises before
printed: This of the Division, etc. and that other of Certain considerations
touching this Church.

What is here done, is intended, and accordingly contrived (with such brevity
and plainness, as the Cause would well permit) for satisfaction of those, who,
not acquainted with large Controversies, are ready to receive the instruction
given them; and being still in the Unity and Communion of this Chu: are willing
to continue therein, notwithstanding the Temptations on both sides; or else
following the seduction of the one side or the other ( Romish or Sectarian) in
the simplicity of their hearts, are not unwilling to return upon discovery of
the Error, and danger of their Way. Which that they may see, I pray God in time
to open their Eyes.

ERRATA.
PAge 15. l. 28. add former. p. 24. l. 11. after serving God add Romans 12. 1.
p. 28. l. 15. for or Western, r. and Western, l. 25. after of which tima, add
i. e. of the four first general Councels. p. 31. l. 20. for Christ always, r.
and always. p. 45. l. 27. after yet, add they think. p. 49. l. 13. for Act r.
Article, p. 54. l. 6. for of r. or, p. 87. ult. for preserving r. preventing.
p. 111. 16. for understanding r. undervaluing, p. 122. l. 25. for know r. knew,
p. 126. l. 11. for that may r. that they may, p. 129. l. 25. for his r. their.
p. 136. l. 15. for the old Prophet r. old Prophets, p. 144. for cares r. jarres.

A Compendious Discourse upon the case, as it stands between the Church of
England and of Rome on the one side; And again, between the same Church of
England, and those, who have divided from it, on the other.
. I. The Church of England.
I Need not premise any thing for distinguishing the three Parties concerned in
this case. They are too much at odds, and their differences too many and
notorious; yet lest there be a mistake in Names, (because all the Sects in this
Nation call themselves Churches, and Churches of England) therefore by the
Church of England is understood the Church of Christ in this Land established
upon the Reformation, holding out her Doctrine and Government in the 39.
Articles, her Liturgy and Public Divine Service in the Book of Common Prayer:
and all those are called Sectaries, and are proved so to be, who (of what
persuasion soever) have departed from, or refused to hold communion with this
Church upon dislike of Doctrine, Government, Liturgy, Rites and Ceremonies, or
any of these.

It holds the truth between Romanists and Sectaries.
The Church of England, standing thus between the Church of Rome on the one
hand, and the aforesaid Sects, which have divided from it on the other hand, is
challenged, and assaulted by both, put now to defend it self against both.
Which brings to mind the Device of some Romanist, who to make himself merry,
has pictured an English Protestant standing between a Papist and an
Independent, borrowing Arguments and Reasons from the One, to oppose or answer
the Other: Against the Papists he must plead (as do all Sectaries) Invisibility
of the Church, Scripture alone, Liberty of private judgment: against other
Sects he must help himself by urging (as do the Papists) the visible condition
of the Church, the Authority of it, Catholic Tradition and Practice, and the
Succession of Bishops and Pastors. Well, the Romanists may thus seemingly*
please themselves, but indeed This of all other Reformed Churches has been, and
is, by reason of its most regular Reformation, their great eyesore and
heart-sorrow. And the English Protestant, or obedient Son of the Church of
England, as he is well set between a Papist and Sectarie, as between two
Extremes, so he only is able to stand against the opposition or pretensions of
both; for if we examine the false Grounds and deceiving Principles of Both, as
to this point of the Constitution, Government, and Communion of the Church: we
shall clearly see the Truth lies in the midst between both, and the Church of
ENGLAND holds and maintains it. To give some Instances.

. II. First instance in Holy and Catholic.
I. The Church of Christ according to the Article of our Belief is One, Holy,
Catholic. The Romanists run away with the name Catholic, appropriating it to
themselves, and every Sect with the title Holy, holding themselves the only
Congregations of Saints. And as the Romanists enforce the name Catholic to the
prejudice of the Title Holy, admitting no Church to be Catholic, that will not
defile it self with their errors and corruptions: So Sectaries, under pretense
of advancing Holiness, and purity, and of gathering a Holy Church, and
assembly of known Saints, overthrow the Catholic, and draw the Church of
Christ into a corner, confining it to their own Sect or persuasion. Now see the
Church of England in the midst: which by a most regular and warrantable
Reformation had respect to both, and in relation to the title Holy, provided
for purity of Doctrine and worship so, that there can be no just complaint of
Errors retained, and for purity of life, by coercion of Ecclesiastical censure
so, that no scandalous or notorious offender should be suffered. So in relation
to the title Catholic, this Church did retain (as for Belief, so for practice)
whatever had that stamp of Consent of all Ages upon it; not confining the
Church of Christ within the bounds of her persuasion, but leaving it still
Catholic, and communicable to all such Christian Assemblies, as do not
wilfully cut themselves off, but are careful, so far as they have means, to
hold the Unity of faith, with the bond of charity: which is necessary for
preserving that one body, which is the Church, Ephesians. 4. 4. 13. 16.

In Catholic, Practice and Tradition.
II. As for Catholic or Universal Practice or Tradition, which stands in the
consent of all the Churches in all Nations and Ages since the Apostles, as
Sectaries wave it altogether, as wholly contrary to their Novelty, so Papists
pretend it only, reducing it into the testimony of their present Church, and
cannot truly give Catholic Tradition for any point of their faith and worship,
wherein they differ from us. But the Church of England, in the midst between
both, denying only the Romish Tradition, which brings not down any part of
their Faith or Worship through all Ages from the Apostles, admits of the true
Catholic Tradition or Practice, and yields due Authority to it: the force of
it resting upon common sense and reason (which is in every man, and which he
must forsake that denies the Witness of such Tradition) it being not possible,
that all the Christian Churches, which began in and about the Apostolical
Times, and so succeeded through all Nations and Ages, should be either deceived
in what they unanimously witnessed, or agree all of them to deceive those that
followed them. Whereas the testimony of the Romish Church, being but part of
the Catholic, and possibly overruled with some prevailing Faction, cannot
convince upon any such common notion of humane reason; but must first prove it
self to be the only Church, and infallible. And seeing it is forced to seek
such proof by witness of Scripture, they plainly run in a Circle from the
testimony of their Church to the receiving or proving of Scripture to be the
Word of God, and back again from the Witness of Scripture to prove their
Church; But Catholic or Universal Tradition brings down Scripture to the
Conviction of Heathens or Jews, that will but use their common sense and
reason: that discovery, which Scripture makes of it self by light from the
innate qualities, and internal Arguments relucent in it, comes after, and
appears to them only, that having entertained it upon the former Witness of
Catholic Tradition, are versed in it. So by this Witness of Catholic Practice
in observing the Lords day, Easter day, Episcopal Government throughout the
Church from the Apostles time, we are assured that such passages of Scripture,
as concern any of these, do show the Beginnings of the said Practices: and the
Church of England, as it received at first and ever since observed the
forementioned particulars, so it commands in general, due respect and
adhaesion to that sense of Scripture, which comes down by such universal
consent.

In the visible and invisible condition of the Church
III. Whereas the condition of the Church according to several respects admits
the distinction of Visible and Invisible, the Romanists bear themselves too
much upon the one extreme, and the Sectaries upon the Other: the first will
have such a visible flourishing condition of it, as is inconsistent with that
state, which the Church of Christ has and may fall into, and prejudicial (as
by them pretended) to all just Reformation, and profession of Truth, which more
nearly concerns the life and soul of the Church, and the more invisible
perfection of the members thereof. And therefore they please themselves with
the outward garb and face of their Church, and will have it tried by the
conspicuous Eminency of it, (as Tr. 1 c. 12.) rather than by truth and purity
of doctrine. Sectaries on the other extreme bear themselves too much upon the
Invisible condition of the Church, which stands in those inward qualifications
of true faith and sanctification, requisite to make a true and lively member of
Christ's mystical Body: so that in the pursuit thereof, and in pretense of
gathering Churches consisting of such members only, they dissipate the visible
Church of Christ, and dissolve the Government he has settled in it.

But every true English Protestant acknowledges the Church of Christ is a
visible society of Believers, or of Professors of the Christian Faith, (of whom
some are effectually called, true and lively members, but that is invisible,
others not yet advanced beyond the external calling or profession) a society,
I say, of such Professors, under such a Regiment or Government left by Christ
and his Apostles: and left to this purpose, to keep all in unity, and to
advance those, that are admitted in the visible Church to the means of
Salvation, unto a real and effectual participation of Grace and Union with
Christ, as lively Members of his body, Ephesians. c. 4. 11 12, 13. 16. And therefore
all Christians are bound to yield obedience to the lawful Pastors and
Governors of that Visible Church whereof they are Members.

The Article touching the Church.
All this we profess in that Article of our Creed touching the Church; for
albeit that invisible condition of true Faith and Sanctity be the highest
concernment and qualification of a Member of Christ's Church, and the attaining
to that condition be the hope and aim of every good Christian in the Visible
Church, and therefore the chiefest thing in the profession of that Article, (
viz. a Communion of such true Believers, Saints, and Members of Christ) yet
because the administrations of the visible Church tend necessarily unto that
end, and he that cuts himself off from the communion of the visible Church,
bereaves himself necessarily of the means to be advanced to that invisible
condition; therefore he that professes this Article, says he believes Christ
always has his visible Church, which may be found, in which such Means and
Administrations may be had, and that he yields obedience to the Pastors and
Governors set in it to that end and purpose.

IV. As the Romanists pretend to an infallible assistance of Gods Spirit bound
to St. Peter's Chair; so have Sectaries their confidence of the special
guidance of the same Spirit. In the Papal Infallibility and private judgment.
And if we set the vanity of the one against the other, we may find as much
semblance of Reason from those places of Scripture, which Sectaries allege for
every true Believer so inspired and directed, as from those places the
Romanists allege for the Papal Infallibility, of which Tr. 1. c. 27. Both
these pretenses are the very bane of the Unity of the Church: Romish
Infallibility rendering that Church incorrigible, and setting it beyond all
bounds of accord with other Christians, that desiring Reformation, will not be
satisfied or put off with that pretended privilege: and the pretense of
Sectaries, rendering Pastors and Teachers in the Church useless, or at least
weakening the obedience due to them, puts it into the power of every one, that
will fancy himself a true Believer, and guided by such assistance, to be a
Reformer, and to break the Church in pieces.

In the Church of England no such pretense, either of Infallibility in the
Governors, or of Private Judgment in any against their Governors; but such
Authority of Governors and Pastors lawfully constituted, as is beyond Appeal,
(save to a General Council sitting) and competent to determine and define in
all Causes, and to stop the mouth of the gainsayer, and bind under
Ecclesiastical Censures. The ancient Church pretended to no more, had no other
way, or means of preserving Unity; as said Treat. 1. c. 13.

When we ask of Those, that dissent from this Church, in following their own
sense or interpretation of Scripture, Who shall judge? The Papists think we
then come into their Road, and oppose their Plea to our Sectaries; But we are
still in the midst between them: Not establishing a Papal Infallible Judge, nor
allowing Private Judgment to stand against the Public: Not calling them to be
tried at Rome, as if that Church should judge for all, but to submit to the
Public Judgment of this National Church, of which they were Members, and in
which there is such power (as is said) of judging for others, and of censuring
or binding the obstinate Gainsayers, as Treat. 2. c. 1. nu. 36.

If it be objected, There was such Authority in the Governors of this Church
before Reformation, how then could Private Judgment take place against them,
to introduce the Reformation?

We answer, It is possible there may be cause of dissenting from the chief
Governors of the Church, and that Reformation may take its first rise from
Private Judgment, as Tr. 1. c. 9. but then to be managed with all peaceable
moderation and subjection, as is there shown, and more largely, Tr. 2. c. 1.
Now whether our Reformation took rise from some private judgment intimated to
them in Authority, or from the immediate inclination and judgment of those that
had the Authority, it is not material, seeing all was carried peaceably, and
the work done not against, but by those that were the chief Governors in the
Church.

In the due subordination of Pastors and Governors.
V. As for that due Subordination of Pastors and Governors in the Church, seen
and set forth in the true ancient Episcopal Government, it is wronged on both
sides. The first invasion was made upon it by Papal usurpation, under the title
of Universal Bishop or Pastor, which in the judgment of Gregory the first, is
to make him in effect the only Bishop, and all others but his Ministers, as
the same Gregory declared against John of Constantinople, affecting that Title,
and cleared himself and his Predecessors from assuming it to themselves. But
it was not long ere his Successors challenged and obtained it, and ever since
have used it to the vassalage of Christian Bishops, where they will suffer
themselves to be so abused. On the other side, every Sect risen in these days,
has lift up a hand to pull down that office and power, making spoil of the
Means and Maintenance thereunto belonging. The Church of England in her
Reformation did according to the Universal Practice of the Church, retain the
Episcopal Government, vindicating it from Papal Usurpation; and is now put to
defend it against the invasion of all other Sects, which therefore stand
convinced of downright Schism; as will appear below. I have the longer stayed
upon these Instances, because they do much tend to the clearing of the
business in hand. Now more particularly to the Case, which is thus in general
resolved.

. III. Resolution of the case.
The true Protestant Church of ENGLAND is unjustly charged with Schism by the
ROMAN, for that Division which followed between them upon the Reformation: But
does justly charge all other Sects with Schism, which have divided from it,
since that Reformation.
There are three words to speak of here by way of Explication, National-Church.
1. National Church; for we have often spoken in the Treatises, and still shall
speak of the Church of England as of a National Church. That therefore is to
be accounted a National Church, which has in it the whole subordination of
Church governments, (as the third Council of Carth. Can. 2. Provinciae quae
primas seeds habent) viz. One Primate, with several Bishops, Priests and
Deacons: Whether the extent of it be bounded with the Limits of the Nation, or
according to the Precincts appointed by the Ancient Councils, or the Supreme
Civil Power. Every Congregation, nay every House may bear the name of a Church,
( the Church in their h^use, Romans 16. 5.) but as part only of, and in
subordination to the National Church. So the Churches of Ephesus, Rome,
Corinth, upon the first planting of Christianity in these Cities, began in a
singular Congregation, but being enlarged to a due fullness, had every of them
the exercise (or practice) of that whole subordination of power and Government.

Reformation Public or Private.
II. For the word Reformation. We must distinguish between that which is Public
or National, the reformation of a whole Church, in forbidding and casting out
errors or Corruptions in belief or practice, and that which is Private or
particular, the Reformation of a man's self, in not admitting or ceasing to
profess Errors prevailing or imposed by the Church, of which he is a Member,
or in which he was baptized and Educated: upon which Reforming of himself may
follow a dividing from that Church by Excommunication, or at least by
Non-communion.

Actual Non-communion.
III. Touching the words Schism, or dividing of Communion, we must distinguish
Actual non-communion, or want of Actual Communion with a Church, from Schism
or the guilt of Schism. The first, which is want of Actual communion may
happen between two National Churches disagreeing in some practices, and that
disagreement followed with too much heat, (as Tr. 1. c. 17, 18.) and sometimes
between a Church and particular Members of it, through mis-informations,
passion, exasperations: Schism.
But Schism is a wilful ( i.e. voluntary, causles,) dividing or separating
from those we ought to hold Communion with. And as before said of
Non-communion, so observe that the guilt of Schism may fall either upon a
National Church causlesly dividing from, or refusing to hold communion with
other Churches: Difference of it in regard of the parties between which.
or else upon the Members and parts of a National Church, withdrawing their
obedience from their lawful Pastors or Governors, and dividing from them and
the Congregations under them: setting up a distinct communion, or joining
themselves to any such, elsewhere set up, The case between the Churches of
England, and of Rome stands according to the first consideration of Schism, as
it falls between two National Churches; and if the division, which followed
upon the Reformation, must be called Schism we shall see in examining the cause
of our Reformation, that the guilt of it falls on them, not us; But the case
between the Church of England and other Sects, which have divided from it,
stands according to the second consideration of Schism, between a National
Church and the Members thereof. Which dividing from it stand guilty of the
highest degree of disobedience unto their Governors, and the highest breach of
Charity both toward their Governors and also all the people of God continuing
in obedience to, and Communion with them.

Difference in degrees of it.
Lastly, there are degrees in the height and guilt of Schism. A Schism, by a
bare recess from the Communion of an established Church, setting up a distinct
Communion from it, but leaving it in its own condition and establishment,
pretending only to private or selfe-reformation; Such was the Schism of former
Separatists, whilst this Church stood free from violence; They went their way,
and it remained where it was. This incurrs the guilt aforesaid of high
disobedience and breach of Charity: but not in so high a degree as that which
follows. A Schism, that not only divides from the Communion, but also offers
violence to the destruction of the Church, pulls down what was, not only
persons and Governors, to set themselves in their places, but also the form
and government it self, to set up their own in stead of it. This is higher and
farther than ever any of the Ancient Schismatikes went, which changed not the
form of Government always used in the Church: and this will be considerable in
the violence of our modern Schism. But before we charge them according to the
premises, let us clear the Case as it stands between the Church of England, and
that of Rome, charging us with Schism upon the Reformation.

. IV. Our Defense against the Church of Rome.
Our Defense in general comes to this (as it was touched Tr. 1. c. 4. 5, 6.)
This Church had Cause for such Reformation, and Authority for the doing it:
sufficient both. For when such Errors prevail in a Church, and come to such
general practice, it is high time by due Reformation to cast them out: and
when they are in Authority be convinced and do it, then is the Reformation
just and lawful.

Just cause for Reformation.
First, there was sufficient Cause by reason of Error and corruption in belief
and Worship, such as we could not continue in without gross dissembling and
wrong to our consciences and Gods honor. The truth and evidence of this stands
upon the examination of those doctrines touching Faith and Worship, wherewith
the English Church was generally tainted according to the Romish infection. The
trial whereof was in part made, Tr. 1. c. 30. to show that the points, wherein
they and we differ, cannot be (as they would impose upon the world) Catholic
doctrines, i. e. the belief and practice of the Church in all ages since the
Apostles, or as S. Jude, ver. 3. calls it, the faith once delivered.

But farther, to the end that they, which cannot examine all the Romish
doctrines, whether they be Catholic, or professed in all Ages, may briefly and
more near at hand see so far into that Church, as to perceive it is not such a
Church, that they, who have means to know better, can safely or conscionably
communicate with: Trial of a Church as to a safe communion with it.
We will make a brief trial or estimate of a Church, by the Faith, Worship,
Sacraments professed, practiced, administered therein; for these the Romanists
will not deny to belong immediately to the constitution of the Church: and
therefore fit to give us direction for holding, or not holding Communion.

As for example, If we find any Church or Congregation of Men, calling
themselves Christians, deny directly and peremptorily any Article of the Creed
or Belief, into which all Christians are baptized, as professed Arrians and
Socinians do; it is evident their Error is immediately against the foundation:
they do not deserve the name of Christian Churches. We do not so charge the
Church of Rome. But albeit she holds the Foundation, yet find we her
superstructures, in no less matters than of Faith and Worship, to be such as
the Foundation will not safely bear, nor any good Christian (coming to the
knowledge of them) conscionably endure. For when any Church propounds any
thing, as matter of Faith and Worship without manifesting the truth thereof to
men's consciences by clear consequence from those prime Fundamentals into which
they are baptized, or from Scripture it self: A necessary Rule.
it is intolerable. For this Rule is just and reasonable; Whatever the Church
propounds so to be believed and practiced, it stands bound so to manifest the
same: else it sets it self in Gods stead, taking an immediate dominion over
men's faith and consciences; but in all other things, which the Church propounds
and enjoynes, as matters of Order, Ceremony, discipline, for the more
significant profession of that Faith, or the more decent performance of that
Worship, every Member of the Church is to obey, or to bring as express warrant
from Gods word against the particular he refuses to do, as the command is
express, which binds him to obey those that are over him in the Lord. Were
this Rule well held to, there would have been more peace in the Church. It was
necessary for peaceable subjection, Tr. 2. c. 1. will be useful below against
those that causelessly divide from this Church. And as to the present Case, we
did not quarrel at the Church of Rome for matters of Rite, Order or the like,
but of Faith and Worship. The superadded Articles being so far from a
manifestation by clear consequence as above said, that they proved clearly
inconsistent with the Word: and the worship then in an unknown tongue against
the Apostle plainly, 1. Cor. 14. against the reason of a reasonable serving of
God: beside that Worship which was given to Images against the express words of
the second commandment.

Lastly, examine a Church by the Sacraments in it administered: Those two, which
confessedly are of Christ's appointment. Where we find the Cup denied to the
Cummunicants, we see a direct breach of Institution, a defrauding the People of
God of that part of the Sacrament which affords and makes them partakers of
Christ's bloodshed, also where we find a daily propitiatory Sacrifice
established, we plainly see a depravation of the Sacrament, and a derogation to
the One oblation upon the Cross. Thus to say nothing of Primitive Antiquity: it
is clear to every one that sees any thing, there is just Cause of Reformation,
where such Errors and Corruptions have prevailed, and of ceasing to communicate
(at least as to those Errors and Practices) with that Church which will not
(being admonished) reform them: so that if the Question be put to any man,
whether he will be of the English Church, as it was corrupted together with the
Romish, or as it was after reformed? it amounts to this: Whether he would be a
sick and diseased man, or whole and healthful? Whether keep company with
persons infected, or with those that are clear and sound? The choice is easy
to a man in his wits.

. V. Just and sufficient Authority for public Reformation.
But to cast those Errors and Corruptions out of a Church, by public
Reformation, is required Sufficient Authority. That also was not here wanting,
both the Civil and the Ecclesiastical. Both these were seen in the Ancient
lawful Synods, gathered and held for the same purpose of Reformation. And
therefore every National Church, having within it self, the whole
subordination of Ecclesiastical Power or Government, (the Permission and
Authority of the Supreme Civil Power concurring) may reform it self, i. e.
make a public national Reformation. The Ancient Council of Arles in France,
the several Councils of Carthage in Africa, of Toledo in Spain, did so; and
that not only in matters of Discipline, but Doctrine also; as that of Arles,
for rebaptizing them which came from Heretics, denying the Trinity* can. 8.
The Melivetan Council determined against the Pelagean Heresy: The third
Council of Toledo gathered for extinguishing the Relics of that Heresy,
which had long infected the Gothic Nation, and hindered the meeting and
benefit of such Councils: as King Riccared (who called that national Synod)
complains in his speech to the Bishops then assembled.

Again, these Councils were gathered, and held, and did conclude independently
on Rome, or without acknowledgement of any such Jurisdiction, as was after
challenged by the Bishop of Rome. Fair respect indeed was had to that Bishop
in a fraternall way of Communion, and sometimes of communicating to him, what
they had done and concluded; as that first Council of Arles, Fratri Sylvestro,
and charitative significamus; In the third Council of Carthage, Can. 47. for
reading nothing in the Church but Canonical Scripture, it is added, Hoc
innotescat fratri and con-sacerdoti Bonifacio (I suppose they mean Boniface,
Bishop of Rome) vel aliis earum partium Episcopis, to the end, this Canon might
be received and practiced in those parts: But presently after in the fourth
Council (in which S. Augustine was) when the Liberty of their Church seemed to
be infringed, through a kind of Jurisdiction challenged by the same Boniface
in the point of Appeals, they utterly rejected his Plea, which he made by the
general Council of Nice, but could not prove it. So he that looks into the
several Councils of Toledo, will find no signification of a dependence on
Rome, but great acknowledgement of the religious care of their several Kings,
by whose permission they assembled.

Such authority in the national Ch: of Engl.
The Church of England therefore being such a National Church, and having like
power, might lawfully reform it self without asking the Bishop of Rome any
leave, or without staying for a free general Council: for albeit such a
Council was in agitation, yet could not be expected, either a general one,
because of the Division of the East or Western Churches, or a free one,
because of the Popes exorbitant power, as Tr. 1. cap. 4. And as it might, so it
did justly reform, casting off in the first place that Papal usurpation,
which hindered all Reformation, but desining nothing against the definitions of
known and approved General Councils, (within the compass of which time
Cardinal Perroun thinks it reasonable the trial of a Church be restreined, as
Tr. 1. c. ult) unless some will quarrel at something of Discipline, not
retained in our church according to the ancient constitutions: which being a
matter of prudentiall Provision, admits variation according to the Exigence of
the Times. Also it is clear, that National Synods have not held themselves
always bound to all things determined formerly in that kind, but have put the
receptions of such Canons to the vote, as we see in the beginning of the first
of Toledo; Statuta Concilii Niceni, The Statutes of the Council of Nice about
Ordinations, before not used among them, are voted there to be observed. Also
we find they frequently make relaxation of former rigor, as in the
injunctions of penance. Lastly, it is evident, there are many constitutions of
this kind not retained or observed by the Church of Rome; Such as concern the
exercise of public Penance; such as forbid the translating of a Bishop from
City to City, and Ordinations without a Title: things determined in general
Councils. Of this, as to the point of single life of Clergy men, T. 2 c. 1. and
of the whole point of the warrantableness of our Reformation, Tr. 2. c. 2.

. VI. Answer to the Romish Plea.
Upon these Grounds, it is easy to answer, what they object or pretend against
us, which, that it may have the better impression upon the unwary, they
represent the Church of England, before Reformation, wholly Romish, professing
their Doctrine ever since the receiving of the Faith in this Land, under
Gregory the first, Bishop of Rome, acknowledging that jurisdiction, and
accordingly yiedling Obedience to that See, yea, and owing it as Duty upon the
conversion of this Land. From these premises their Inference is (and they think
it will take with the unwary) That the Church of England by her Reformation,
has cast off the Faith received, and so fallen into Heresy, and by denying
subjection to that See, has incurred the guilt of Schism. But as there is some
truth apparent in the Premises, so as much Falsehood supposed, and taken for
granted, which renders the Inferences inconsequent and invalid.

First, it is a Truth, that the National Church of England, before the
Reformation, was generally Romish, both for Doctrine professed in it, and for
Obedience yielded to the Bishop of Rome; but then the Inference they make,
therefore the Protestant Church of England is a New Church, or Heretical, is
invalid, because it rests upon this untruth, supposed, and taken by them for
granted, viz. that the Romish Church was always such, teaching such Doctrine,
and that the profession of such Doctrine makes a Church to be Catholic, and
the denial of it renders it Heretical; all which they must prove to make good
that Inference; where as it is evident that the Catholic Christian Faith once
delivered, What makes a Church Christian Orthodox.
Jude 5. Christ always professed in all ages (and into which they and we
baptize) makes a Christian Church, and the holding that Faith undefiled, and
free from Errors and Corruptions in Belief and Worship, makes a pure and
Orthodox Church. So did the ancient Church of Rome hold the Faith, so does the
reformed Church of England hold and profess it, freed from the mixture of
Error, which had crept into the later Romish Church, to the infecting of the
English; so that this National Church is so far from being Heretical, by
ceasing to be Romish, that it is therefore the more pure and Orthodox.

Upon the like supposals, false and impertinent, they give pretense (plausible
to the unwary) for that demand: Show such a Protestant Church in England before
the Reformation, as if every National Church did always teach the same
Doctrine, without mixture of such Error generally prevailing; or as if it were
reasonably required of us to show the Church of England always Protestant,
Protestant and reformed.
i.e. protesting against Errors, whereas the Errors were not always, nor at
first known; or to show a Reformed Church before the Reformation made. For
though Truth be always before Error, yet Error is before Reformation, which
protests against it, and casts it out. So the English Church, as corrupted with
Romish Errors, must needs be so before it could be Protestant or Reformed; but
the Catholic Truths it always held made it a Christian Church, even under
that mixture of Errors: so when by Reformation it had cast them off, it
remained the same Christian Church: but a more pure and sound one, holding
still the same Catholic Truths, without that mixture of Error, like as the
ancient Christian Church did, before Popery prevailed, as Tr. 1. c. 1.

we have not cast off the Faith received.
Secondly, It is a Truth, that the Saxons or English (whatever preparation they
had to it by the Vicinity and Acquaintance of the British Christians) did
indeed receive the Christian Faith from Rome, through the godly care of Gregory
the first, then Bishop, and the Ministry of Austin and others, whom he sent to
preach it here. But then the untruth (which they suppose, and usually impose
upon the unwary) is palpable, viz. That the Doctrine of the Church of Rome, as
to Faith and Worship, is the same it was in Gregorie's time: and that we, by
Reformation have cast off the Faith we received. For first, as to the maine and
fundamental Faith, that makes a man or Church Christian, no question but
Austin, and those that were sent, preached that they baptized into, which is
the very same that we do still. Then as for the matters of Faith and Worship,
which they and we differ in, the Novelty is clear: neither can they
demonstrate, that any point we cast off, was a doctrine of Faith in S.
Gregory's time. Some things, I confess, of misbelief and practice, were then
crept in, and gathering strength; but it is observable, that in all their
allegations of Fathers for the points we differ in, their own Gregory comes
rarely in; indeed, that Purgatory was his opinion, they have express proof,
not that it was an article of Faith in that Church. On the contrary, it is
plain, that Communion in both kinds, was the doctrine and practice of the
Church in his time, as it had been always before: that Image Worship is
declared against in his answer to the Bishop of Marsellis: the Title also and
Jurisdiction of Universal Bishop (which immediately concerns the Cause in
hand) is declared against, in his contestation with John of Constantinople, who
affected it. In a word, had the Church of Rome continued the same for Faith and
Worship, as it was in Gregory's time, and the Bishop of Rome taken no more to
himself than the said Gregory did, certainly it would not have come to a
division, neither would there have been cause for it.

. VII. Denial of Obedience to Papal jurisdiction makes not Schismatic.
Thirdly, it is a Truth, that the English Church (still generally taken) before
Reformation, acknowledged the Jurisdiction of that See, but the Inference they
make (therefore it is Schismatic in casting off or denying to yield
obedience thereunto) is invalid; for it supposes this untruth, that we owed it
of duty upon special relation, viz. our conversion or receiving the Faith by
the Ministers of that See. To answer,

I. It seems the Bishop of Rome makes his claim to England upon a double
Title, One of Universal Pastorship, which extends to all Churches of what
Plantation soever; the Other of Conversion or Plantation, Bishop of Rome his
pretense to universal jurisdiction.
which reaches to England, and some other Nations; and it seems, when these
Titles are divided, the first prevails, and swallows up the other, and so
brings under his Jurisdiction, all the Churches which other Apostles (besides
Peter) and their Successors planted. Whereupon it follows, that the other
Apostles shall not leave the like Title of Jurisdiction to those which
succeeded them in the Churches they planted, unless dependantly on Rome: also
that the other Apostles labored dependently on Peter, and as his Ministers and
Commissioners plaated Churches for him to rule over as supreme general Pastor;
when as it is evident they were sent immediately by Christ with equal
commission to plant Churches in all the world: God teach all Nations, Mat. 28.
and As my Father sent me, so I send you, John 20. Therefore Peter and Paul,
when they made that agreement, Gal. 2. departed to the work upon equal terms.

Impossible to make it good.
To establish this first and transcendent Title of Universal Jurisdiction, they
are bound to make good these several untruths. That it was so with Peter in
respect of the other Apostles: That it is so with the Successors of Peter in
respect of Those which succeeded the other Apostles in the Churches by them
planted: That the Power and Privilege pretended to be in Peter, was derived
upon his Successors: Lastly, that it is derived only upon the Bishops of Rome,
not of Antioch or elsewhere. All these they are bound to make good; yea, and
seeing all their Romish faith (resting upon the pretended Privileges of that
Church) is founded upon these false Supposals: they are bound to make all good
by apparent Scripture; for they grant, that the prime points of Faith,
necessary for all to believe (as this is according to their doctrine) are
clearly contained in Scripture. But to show this point of the Privileges of
that Church ( Infallibility and Universal Jurisdiction) so contained, is
impossible for them to do; for when in this vast Controversy they leave
nothing untoucht in Scripture or Fathers, which may be drawn to make any
seeming appearance for such privileges, they do but give us words, nothing of
force to prove the thing indeed. Some passages to this purpose in Tr. 1. c. 27.
and in cap. 28. and 30.

His special pretense to jurisdiction over this Chur:
II. As to his second Title from Plantation of the Church here: We do not find,
that the Converting of any Nation to the Faith gave a Title of Jurisdiction to
that Church from whence that Nation received the Faith; for we do not see it
was held for any Rule in the distribution of Provinces, and the limiting or
extending the bounds of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction: We do not find that the
ancient Councils, which provided therein, had any respect to such Title, but to
the constitution of the Empire rather, and the Provinces thereof; and that the
alteration, which has been any where since made in the bounds of National
Jurisdiction, followed the division of Kingdoms into which the Empire was
broken: which appears in the several Councils of Toledo (above mentioned)
under their several Kings, without dependence on Rome. And if we look into the
Saxon Church and Councils (gathered and published by the industry of Sir Hen:
Spelman) it will appear, that all the Application made unto, or intercourse had
with Rome, did not speak a due subjection, but at most a voluntary adhaesion;
not acknowledgment of that Jurisdiction, but of their fair respect, such as any
Church ought to have to that Church, from which it received the faith, so long
as that Church continues safely in the faith it propagated, and so in a
condition of giving advise and direction to, and of receiving due respect and
compliance from those, among whom it planted the faith.

But as Errors prevailed in that Church of Rome, so in this; and among the
rest, that usurped Jurisdiction. Pope Hildebrand or Gregory the 7. about 400.
years after Gregory the first, did lay on that yoke, and began to bring the
necks of Kings and Princes under it too: and still by their power does the
Bishop of Rome hold his jurisdiction over the Churches within their Dominions,
as Spain, France, etc. But such Princes as came to understand their own right,
not only in Civil, but Ecclesiastical things, did justly vindicate their
Crowns to the power and dignity due unto them, and their Churches to the
Liberty and Independency, which, as abovesaid, belongs to every National
Church, having within it the whole Subordination of Ecclesiastical Government.

Conclusion of the whole case as it stands with the Roman Church.
To conclude. Seeing by Reformation we cast out, as we had just cause, Error and
Corruptions crept in upon the Christian Faith and Worship, and retained what
ever was Catholic, we cannot be accused of Heresy; Seeing also by the same
Reformation we cast off the yoke of an usurped Jurisdiction, and vindicated
this National Church to the just Liberty, we cannot incur the guilt of Schism:
for that breach of Communion, which followed either upon our ceasing to hold
and practice with them in the aforesaid corruptions, or upon our denying
farther obedience to that usurped Authority, cannot be imputed to us, who had
just cause for doing it, and used just Authority in the doing. But if that
breach of communion, which followed, be Schism, the guilt of it rests upon the
Church of Rome in general, and on all English Romanists in special: according
to the several consideration of Schism (above,. 3.) as it falls between two
National Churches, or between any National Church and the Members thereof; When
between two National Churches, that Church stands guilty, which gives the
cause, and peremptorily prosecutes it: So the Church of Rome did, by imposing
(under pretense of Infallibility, and therefore incorrigible) her own
doctrines, pronouncing all those to be Heretics that did not receive them,
and by usurping Universal Jurisdiction, concluding them Schismatiques, that did
not obey. But the guilt of Schism lies upon all English Romanists, holding to
that Church, as upon Members dividing themselves from the body and communion of
their National Church; and this concerns not only those, who have revolted
from this Church to the Romish, but such as always professed themselves to be
of that Church: it falls upon these not for desertion or separation, but for
Recusancie, or their fefusing the communion of their National Church, and
adhering to a foreign Jurisdiction: which is contrary to the way and order
which the ancient Church took for preserving Unity, and excluding Schism: by
no means suffering such disobedience and division of the Members of any
National Church, where that Church did not divide it self from the Catholic,
or give cause, as the Church of Rome has done.

. VIII. Second case as to those that have divided from this Chur:
Now to the consideration of the Case, as it stands between the true Reformed
Church of England, and Those who (of what persuasion soever) have divided from
the communion of it.

By that which has been said, it is evident, the Reformation made by this
National Church was most just and regular: taking for the Rule, Gods Word, with
the consent and practice of the Ancient Church, and thereupon rejecting no more
than was necessary, and retaining what wns useful: Difference 'twixt just and
distempered Reformations.
showing therein a due zeal of Truth, together with Christian Prudence and
Charity: to the taking away just cause of Complaint from all distempered
Zelots, and giving fair occasion of conviction and allurement to those of the
Romish persuasion, from whom we differ; when they shall duly consider, there
was no more Difference made, than needs must: Whereas others, who have
endeavored Reformation out of a misguided zeal, taking for their Rule, an
opposition to the Church of Rome, rather than a conformity to Gods Word, and
the Consent of Primitive Times, have cast out for Popery many things (
Episcopal Government, Set Forms of Liturgy, Kneeling at the Communion, and the
like) which were most undenyably before Popery was hatched in the world. Now
these being cast out upon that score by Heady Reformers, who call themselves
Protestants, (Protestors indeed against many Truths) the Papist takes them up,
and thanks such Reformers for yielding such Truth to be Popery; and so he
remains more confirmed in his way, and has more cause of offense at Reformed
Protestants, were they indeed to be measured by such irregular proceedings.

The Romanists know this well enough, and are sensible of the difference
between the Reformation or Establishment of the Church of England, and all
other pretensions: and therefore have made it always their main design, to
undermine this Protestant Church so well established: and in these days, the
Emissaries of Rome have been very active to help forward a confusion, joining
themselves (if there be truth in that, which so many have reported on their
knowledge) to Sects of several Persuasions, for the pulling down what was, and
advancing their pretended Reformations. Not that the Romanist approves them,
but because he knows, that if the Church of England, established on such sure
grounds, can by any means be subverted, the other unbottom'd Reformations will
fall of themselves, or stand at no stay, to the shame of the Religion they
profess; and so make fair way for the Romish Religion, to come in through
their breaches, or over their ruins, and find more general entertainment. It
is the Tempters Policy, and indeed his Masterpiece, when he must act an Angel
of Light, and must make his advantage of those that are come to some sense of
Religion, or at least to a conceit they are religiously disposed, to lead them
on by false Lights, and make them over-act their parts by a mis-guided zeal, to
a quarrelling with their Governors, and slighting all former Reformations,
under pretense of Purity and Reformation; til in pursuit of that purity, and
seeking out a more Reformed Assembly or purer Church, they run themselves clean
out of the Church, and yet carry it with them.

Whither they are run, that have left us, let them look to it. It is our work
now to show (and I wish they would sadly consider it) what they have incurred
by leaving us, no less than the guilt of Schism, which lies heavily on as
many as have (of what persuasion or Sect soever) wilfully divided themselves
from the communion of the Church of England: Whether they do this (as above
premised) by a bare Separation, or by adding Violence and Sacrilege to it, in
pulling down, and (as much as lies in their power) destroying what was
established, that they may set up their own form and way of Government, and
public Worship. I said divide themselves wilfully, to lessen the guilt of
those that follow the Schism in the simplicity of their hearts, deceived with
the fair pretenses of Religion and Purity, which they could not at first see
through; but if they will not use their eyes, and carefully look into their
way: if they will not use the best means they can for discovering the
obliquity and danger of that way, and so return from it, they lie under the
same guilt with those they follow, and will with them fall into the ditch. Also
we must note here the difference of the Case, between us and them, from that
with the Church of Rome; which will at first sight show the impertinencie of
the Romanists alleging, that the present Sects of these days may plead
against the Church of England, from which they have divided, what the Church of
England can against the Roman; for, as it was above premised, the case between
English and Romish Church, is as between two National Churches, having full
authority for public Reformation; but the case between the English Church, and
those that have divided from it, is between a National Church, and the members
of it; by which appears, they could have no sufficient Authority for public
Reformation, without, and against the Authority in being, to pull down and set
up as they have done, and it will appear they could have no just Cause for so
much as a Separation from the Communion of this Church.

. IX. Grounds laid for convincing them of Schism.
Now for making good the charge of Schism against them, we will premise some
undeniable Truths, which speak the Authority of Church Governors, the
obedience due thereunto, the condition of Schism, and the danger and guilt of
it.

1. Church Government.
I. That the Church of Christ is a Society or Company under a Regiment,
Discipline. Government, and the Members constituting that Society, are either
Persons taught, guided, governed, or Persons teaching, guiding, governing: and
this in order to preserve all in Unity, and to advance every Member of this
visible Society, to an effectual and real participation of Grace, and Union
with Christ the Head; and therefore, and upon no less account is obedience due
unto them: Ephesians. 4. 11, 12, 13, 16. and Heb. 13. 17. and he that will not hear
the Church, be as a Heathen and Publican, Mat. 16.

II. That every National Church has power, 2. Church Authority in making
Decrees and Orders
as to determine in matters of Faith, according to Gods word, so to determine
in things indifferent, Rites, Ceremonies, matters of order, as in prudence it
sees most fit for the better and more convenient performance of Gods worship,
or administration of Discipline and Government. This is plain by the Apostle, 1
Cor. 14. 26, 40. The Rule above delivered speaks to this purpose, That the
Church propounding or determining matters of Faith, or of the substance of
Worship, ought to manifest it out of Gods Word, cannot do it besides the same,
(as the 20 Act of our Church has it) and we may expect such manifestation or
proof, before we yield the absolute assent of belief unto any thing so
propounded; But in the Churches determination of things in themselves
indifferent, and enjoining the observation of Rites and Ceremonies, it is
enough that the particular be not against Gods Word: and he that will not yield
obedience to it, is bound to show it plainly contrary to the Word, or else
stands guilty of disobeying the known precepts of the Word, which command
obedience to Authority.

I will not be enough to say, The Governors of the Church did not hold to
their Rule, for this Rite or Ceremony is not to edification, is not decent; it
might be better otherwise. For this is to set a man's own judgment, against
that of the Church, in matters of prudence: a spice of that pride and self
conceit, which is the Mother of all disobedience and Schism; and though a
private judgment might truly say, some things might be better done in, and
about Gods Worship or Service; yet unless such a one can say as truly, those
things are unlawful to be done, and that by direct warrant from Gods Word, he
ought not to disobey.

III. When the Apostle used an argument from Custom against certain
disorders, 3. Force of Church-Custome.
We have no such Custom, nor the Churches of God, 1 Cor. 11. 16. he plainly
shows what force the Customs of a Church (so they be not against Gods Word)
have to bind the Members of that Church, as from Introducing any New Custom
without Authority, so to observe such Customs as the Church has; and he that
will not, is reckoned by the Apostle there, among the Contentious, or
disturbers of the peace of the Church; for against such he urges that. Much
more are we to take notice of the strength of Universal Tradition, the Custom
and Practice of the whole Church in all Ages: for of this we shall have
occasion below against the Contentious.

4. Union of charity.
IV. In the same Epistle (for it is mainly spent upon this Argument) he commends
Charity, as a Remedy against that Pride, which upon conceit of Knowledge, or
Spiritual gifts ( cap. 12.) pufft: them up, and made them swell one against
another, and despise one another; the ready way to Division, and breaking all
asunder. This Charity (not that which does works of mercy, or relieves the
poor, as we see by ver. 3. cap. 13. but which binds together the body of the
Church; Edifying it self in Love, as Ephesians. 4. 16. (Charity in opposition to
Schism) this I say he commends, and by several properties discribes: It
vanteth not, is not puffed up, ver. 4. not against Equals, much less in
setting our private judgment against our Governors. It thinks no evil, ver.
5. It receives satisfaction easily from Equals, interprets their Words and
Actions to the best: much more the commands and doings of our Governors.
Charity seeks not her own, endures all things, ver. 5, 7. suffers much,
rather than come to open difference and contention with Equals: so will
peaceable Charity suffer much ere it come to a division from the Church: much
less will it seek that which is another, that especially which belongs to the
Governors, their power, means, preferments. Thus Schism takes beginning from
Pride, and self-conceit, goes on by uncharitableness to enormous excess of
disobedience and injustice; and renders all Knowledge, Faith, and other good
works, for want of this Charity, unprofitable, nothing worth; as the Apostle
in that Chapter often tells us.

5. Admonition and rejection of Heretics and Schismatics.
V. The Apostle when he set Titus over the Churches of Crete, directs him in the
use of his power, as to this point of dealing with the Contentious, Tit. 3. 10,
11. A man that is an Heretic -- reject -- being self-condemned. Every
Schismatic is this Heretic: for so the word Heresy and Heretic signifies,
and according to the use of it then employed; one, that obstinately stood out
against the Church, or that lead any Sect: after the strictest Sect (or
Heresy) of the Pharisees, Act 26. 5. after that -- which they call Heresy --
Act. 24. 14. a Factious company divided from the Church, so they called or
accounted of Christians; and Gal. 5. 20. we have it reckoned among the works
of the Flesh, Debates, Contentions, Heresy: So here Heretic, that leads a
Faction, a Sect, or that wilfully follows or abets it. A Man therefore that is
a Heretic, contentious, disobedient to the Order and Authority of the Church,
reject, for he is self-condemned, having both passed the Sentence upon himself,
by professing against, or dividing from the Church, and also done execution
(like that of the Churches censure, and excommunication) upon himself, by
actual separation, or going out of the Church. A fearful condition.

Application of the Premises.
Now the application of the Premises to the convincing of those that have
divided from the Church of England, is very easy and obvious. Disobedient they
are to the lawful Authority in this Church: and that, not only in their
denying to obey the Orders, Decrees, Constitutions Lawfully made by them which
had the Authority, but in an utter withdrawing of their obedience for the
future: yea, in abolishing and taking away (as much as in them lay) that very
Authority and Office too; a step farther than ever the Ancient Schismatics
went. And all this against the Constitution and Custom, not only of this
Church, but of all the Catholic Church: against that Charity which Saint Paul
enjoynes, as most necessary to preserve the Unity of the Church, and to keep
out Schism: against all the admonitions (not once and again, as the Apostle
bids Titus, but often given them) yea, satisfactions endeavored by the
Governors and Writers of this Church, in all the particulars of Government,
Worship and Ceremony, which the Contentious from time to time excepted against.

. X. Answer to their plea against this Chu:
Let us then hear what they plead to this charge, by way of exception against
the Church of England, and briefly rejoyne, so as may be to the satisfaction of
them at least, who desire to continue in the Unity of the Church of England,
notwithstanding the Temptations of the Times, and to the reduction of such as
follow the Schism in the simplicity of their hearts, deceived by the fair
pretenses thereof.

Want of Purity.
Their general pretension for themselves, and exception against this Church,
is, their desire or seeking of Purity, Holiness, strict walking, which they
could not have or exercise (in that way they desired) under the Government, or
in the way of Worship, used in this Church of England. Answ. The pretense of
Purity, Holiness, and strict life, has a fair gloss, and to endeavor it
really and conscionably is the duty, and should indeed be the desire and care
of every Christian. But we find the Pharisees in the Jewish Church, pretending
to it above all other, and by the forced exercises of it, drawing admiration
from the beholders, and bringing in Proselites to their Sect; and it would be
worth the examining, at least in the Consciences of these Pretenders, whether
their righteousness exceeds the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees!
Our Savior has also foretold, that false Teachers shall arise in his Church,
Ancient Schismatics had like pretense of purity.
and come in Sheeps clothing, but may be known by their fruits. We find also
that the Ancient and famous Schisms of the Novatians, and Donatists, had the
pretense of purity and strictness; Novatus about the year 250. was so strict,
that he denied reconciliation to all that after Baptism fell into Adultery, or
in times of persecution yielded to Idolatry: and broke with the Church for
re-admitting such upon their unfeigned Repentance. His followers were called
Cathari or Puritans upon this pretense, and many followers he had; yea, many of
the Confessors, such as suffered for the Christian Faith, were carried away
with that false pretense, and sided awhile with him, till seeing their error,
they returned again to the Unity of the Church, and condemned his Schism, as
Saint Cyprian relates it to Cornelius, Ep. 46. Donatus in the next age after
him, discontented because he could not be made Bishop of Carthage, divided
himself and his party from the Communion of the Church: despising it as a mixed
company of good and bad, and rebaptizing all that revolted from the Church to
his Communion, confined the true Church only to those of his persuasion: for
under that pretense of Purity, he drew many away, and it proved a Schism of
great extent, and long continuance.

If therefore this be one Reason wherefore our pretenders cannot, as they
conceive, have that Purity, or partake of the Ordinances as they ought, because
of Carnal Christians suffered in the Communion of the Church of England, and
unworthy receivers admitted to the Sacrament: it was long ago refuted by S.
Austin, in his learned works against the Donatists, demonstrating by several
places of Scripture, which acknowledge, and by several parables of our
Savior, which represent the condition of the Church on Earth, to be such for
mixture, as a heap of Chaff and Wheat in the same Floor, of good Fish and bad
in the same Net, of Corn and Tares in the same Field, and that neither the
unworthiness of the Minister, or of other Receivers, makes Gods Ordinance
ineffectuall, or pollutes him that comes in Charity, and with a Conscience
undefiled, or cleansed from selfe-pollutions. It is in the power and belongs to
the duty of Church Governors, to cast out the scandalous, or such as walk
disorderly: but when that is done, it is not for any man to judge, he or she is
carnal and unsanctified; for this is to take the Lords Fan out of hand, with
which he will purge his Floor, Mat. 3. and by breach of charity to offend
against his Brother: Nay, if that be not done, but that disorderly persons are
yet suffered, and come to the place of Worship, yea, to the Lords Table; the
guilt rests upon the Governors that are to see to it, the Ordinance is not
less effectual to thee, if by self-conceit and uncharitableness thou render
not thy self incapable of the benefit, as the Pharisee did, when he saw the
Publican in the Temple with him; yea, for any thing thou know, such a
disorderly person may come at that time, when thou art offended with him, as
the Publican then did, truly penitent and converted.

XI. Trial of Purity of Religion.
In the next place, I would know, what hinderance or prohibition of purity, or
strict life, had they in the Communion of this Church? Did the Governors
thereof forbid any thing which St. James requires to pure Religion (c. 1. ult.)
to keep themselves unspotted of the World, by Covetousness, Selfe-seeking,
Swearing, Drunkenness, Lusts of the flesh, the common spots of the World? Or
did they forbid to visit the Fatherless and Widow in their affliction, or any
works of Charity? Might they not have done all these with praise and
commendation, had they continued in the Communion of this Church? And for these
other exercises of Devotion, Prayer, Reading, Hearing, (which though belonging
to pure Religion, S. James thought good to omit; we shall see the reason of it
presently) might they not be had duly, frequently? Was there any thing forbid
but the irregular use, or seditious abuse of them? Private Meetings or
Conventicles, which were preparatories to Separation and Schism, in a
performance of those Duties, to the despising of the Church, or public
Assemblies.

But they will say, they could not have these exercises in public purely
administered or performed: that is (as it will appear below) not according to
their own devising and fancy. Good reason there is, that every Christian
should have a special care of performing these duties of Prayer, Reading,
Hearing: but seeing our Pretenders to Purity seem to place the sum of
Religion in these especially, I would wish them to examine the purity of their
Religion, by the Apostles trial of it, Jam. 1. ult. who thought good to omit
the mention of these exercises, because of the Pharisees, seeking the esteem of
holiness by such performances, and because of Christians then (as now in our
Times) resting too much on a fansy of their faith and performance of such
Exercises without works and deeds answerable. And therefore the Apostle
described pure Religion, by such duties (of Charity, and absteining from all
spots of the world or works of the Flesh) as make better proof of the sincerity
of Religion.

If the making of Fatherless and Widows, the turning men out of their
Estates, the invading of other men's Rights, had by the Apostle been made the
trial of pure Religion, then might the Contentious of our days have pretended
to Purity and Religion; and have blessed the Lord that they were become rich,
though with the spoiling of others, as they did, Zech. 11. 5. but if Charity,
and denying of worldliness, and lusts, be the marks, then let them try whether
their way of Religion bring forth such fruits, or be in a capacity to do it:
When the Romanists allege the many pious and charitable works (as building of
Churches, Colleges, Hospitals, Schools, and the applying maintenance
thereunto) done by men in their Religion; our pretenders to Purity will be
ready to say, it was the Doctrine of Merit that did it; not reflecting upon
themselves to consider what kind of Doctrine theirs is, which pulls down the
Monuments of Piety and Charity, and converts the public to private use. But
when we show that since the Reformation (which cast out Popish merit) as many
good works (for the computation has been made) done in the like kind, as have
been done in any one Age before: we show the fruits of our Religion, and
challenge theirs, which only can show (for their way and doctrines tend to no
other issue) a distempered zeal in destroying much of that which before was
raised to pious uses, and a self-seeking in the enriching themselves by the
spoils. Swearing and drunkenness, the usual and noted spots of the World,
are (as it is fit) very much declined in their way of purity; but the Pharisee
could say more, he was no Extortioner, no Adulterer; and Saint James implied
many other spots of the World, which pure Religion must keep a man from: and S.
John, 1. Ep. c. 2. 16. reducing the things of the world, to three heads, makes
two of them the lust of the Eye, and pride of Life, and therefore tells us,
that Coveting, Injustice, Sacrilege, and the Pride of life, that either causes
them, or is maintained by them, are the Exorbitant Iniquities of the world, and
therefore Spots, which by S. James his rule, will not consist with pure
Religion.

I have been the longer upon this Argument, because there is scarce any other
thing by which the Devil has gained more, or the Church lost more, than by
this pretense of Purity, the common plea of all Sects in all Times.

Now, as to their Reply above, that they could not have those duties of
exercises of hearing, praying in public, purely administered, satisfaction
will be given below, when we come to consider of the offense they take at the
Liturgy, forms of public Service, Rites and Ceremonies used in and about Gods
worship in this Church. But first of their Exceptions against the Government it
self; for we charge them of separating, or withdrawing their Obedience from
their lawful Pastors and Governors. Such as Bishops were in this, and in all
the Catholic Church in all Ages.

XI. Their Plea against the Government of this Chu.
They plead it is no lawful government of the Church, but to be cast out as
Antichristian. This last contentious age has called the office of a Bishop into
question, and made a vast controversy of it. I will not follow it at stretch,
but only observe such grounds as Truth and Peace seems mainly to rest on, and
which every ordinary capacity may understand, and receive satisfaction so far,
as to keep himself in the unity of the Church.

What is meant by a Bishop.
It is fitting therefore in the first place, to remove the prejudice, under
which the Adversaries usually represent Bishops to vulgar eyes: as men swelled
with their titles of Honor, large Revenues, attendance of Chancellors,
Commissaries, Officials, Lording it over the flock not feeding it. Why persons
Ecclesiastical should be thought incapable of the Honor, or unfit for the
means which the piety of former times has applied unto them, out of a religious
respect, I know no cause besides the ingratitude, and sacrilegious disposition
of this latter Age: But to wave these Additionals, as external, to the very
office of a Bishop, and to pass by Abuses, that might be in government,
through the iniquity of Persons and corrupter Times, all which are capable of
Reformation by due Authority: that which is concerned in this Controversy, is
the Function, and very office of a Bishop. By the office (be the times what
they will) he is set in the Church, as a chief or more general Pastor, within
such precincts or compass (commonly called a Diocese) having inspection and
superintendency (in which stands his Prelacy) over particular Pastors and
Flocks, providing or ordaining such Pastors as need requires; and doing all
this with the advice and assistance of his Presbyters, or some of the inferior
Pastors (anciently called Presbyteri civitatis) and they nothing without him.
Such an office will appear to be conformable as to the perpetual practice of
the Catholic Church, so to the Word of God, and most agreeable to the reason
of Church Government, as to the preserving of Unity, and keeping out Schism,
the main concernments of the Church: and therefore they must appear also
highly guilty of Sacrilege and Schism, that not only deny obedience to the
established Authority of this Office, but have endeavored to subvert the very
Function it self.

. XIII. Episcopal, Government is by universal Practice of the Chu:
First, the practice of the whole Church in all Ages is against them. Into this
Island the Christian faith was received, if not in the Apostles times (as some
think) yet in the next age at farthest (as all do acknowledge) and with that
faith the government by Bishops was received, and ever since continued; neither
did the Catholic Church ever know any other Government till the last hundred
years. So the force of the Apostles argument, 1 Cor. 11. 16. falls upon the
Contentious of this Age, and explodes their new way of ordaining Pastors, and
ruling their Churches without Bishops: The Churches of God never had any such
Custom; yea, in some Councils they declared against it, upon occasion given by
the presumption of some Presbyters, that took upon them to ordain, as in the
Case of Ischyras, and some others, ordained by one Coluthus* who carried
himself as a Bishop, but was found to be none; in Athanas. Epist. certainly
the lawful Customs of any National Church, are by the Apostles reason,
binding to all the Members thereof: how much more Universal practice? This the
Adversaries of Episcopall-government (whether they be of the Classical, or
Congregationall way) turn off with a light finger, as if it had no weight in
it; or as if the Apostle had said nothing in alleging the Customs of the
Church: Scripture is the only thing they will be tried by.

We refuse not to meet them there: but let them consider, that they come
against the Established authority of their own National Church, Force of
universal practice or Catholic Tradition.
against the custom and practice, not only of that, but of all the Churches
of God, and there are bound to bring plain and express Scripture to
demonstrate that Episcopacy, or such a superiority over other inferior
Pastors, or mere Presbyters, is directly unlawful; for else the Custom and
Practice of the Churches, by the Apostles rule, must be observed, so long as in
force, i. e. till due Authority change them, supposing they are changeable, and
that it is in the power of the present Church to change them. It were well the
Adversaries of the Episcopal Function, would yield more Authority to
Universal Practice or Tradition of the Churches of God, at least in their
respect to some points they will acknowledge themselves bound to maintain: As
first, That Scripture is the Word of God. I do not ask upon what grounds they
finally believe this themselves, but how they would maintain it against
Heathen or Jew, and persuade them to it, but upon the witness of universal
Tradition, which speaks to the conviction of all men upon the ground of common
Sense or Reason, as abovesaid. 2. or Secondly, That the observation of the
Lords day comes from the Apostles. How would they convince such a one as Mr.
Trask was, by the places of Scripture, mentioning the Apostles meeting upon the
first day of the week, or that place which names the Lords day, Rev. 1. which
might be on Easter day, the annual Lords day: He, according to the doctrine of
these men, slighting the Witness of Universal Tradition or Practice, found
nothing in Scripture express, but the Commandment for the Seventh day, or
Jewish Sabbath, and so obstinately held for that, till he was reclaimed by the
labor and travail of our learned Bishops, and made to see how the continued
and undeniable practice of the whole Church did clearly show those passages in
Scripture were intimations of this practice then beginning, and that their
observing of the Seventh day, or Jewish Sabbath (for they observed that too as
occasion served) was but in compliance with the Jews for a time, while the
Temple stood. In like manner, the Universal practice of the Church, the best
interpreter of Scripture (where there is not any place of it so plain as to
take away all gainsaying) tells us, those passages we show in Scripture for
this Government, contain so many intimations, and sometimes exercises of that
Episcopal power, which should continue in the Church after the Apostles, and
assures us, those other instances brought by the Adversaries against that
Function, cannot infer any other way of Government. And therefore we had good
cause to say above, Episcopal Government was conformable to Gods Word which is
our second consideration.

. XIV. Episcopal government conformable to the word.
Secondly then, take we a brief survey of the Grounds on both sides, which yet
I cannot in reason enter upon, without asking leave to suppose it possible
(which never was seen in any particular) that Universal Tradition or Practice
can be contrary unto Scripture: but yiedling that, as possible, to the
Adversaries, it is clear they are bound as abovesaid, to demonstrate this
Practice or Government, is against Scripture, and that their way is
peremptorily there prescribed. How impossible it is for them to do this,
appears at first sight, by their several judgments upon the passages of
Scripture, concerning Church Government. Some of them look upon these passages,
and think they see a Classical, or Presbyterian; others of them look upon
them, and are as strongly persuaded they see a Congregationall, or Independent
way. Where Is the clear Evidence then, which they pretend against Episcopal
Government? To examine their chief Instances briefly and plainly, for the
satisfaction of ordinary Capacities, make the trial of those that are alleged
for the Classical way: because that pretends to more regularity, and to a
better foundation than the other.

Presbytery
Their Instances are from the mention made in Scripture, of Presbytery and
Presbyters, or Elders, and the name of Bishop applied to them. We read, 1 Timothy
4. 14. the laying on of the hands of the Presbytery: But what evidence is there
in this to demonstrate, that the power of ordination was put into the hands of
mere Presbyters? For first, it is a question, whether this laying on of hands
was for ordination here, or for some other purpose; Secondly, when that is
granted, it is a question whether the word Presbytery here, implies the office
to which Timothy was ordained, or the Persons ordaining him, for both
interpretations are admitted: Thirdly, admit the Persons ordaining are meant,
yet never can it be proved they were mere Presbyters; for besides that, the
word Presbytery, or Eldership included, the Apostles, and all the chief Rulers
of the Church, (1 Pet. 5. 1. who am also an Elder, and John Ep. 2. v. 1. Ep. 3.
v. 1. the Elder) St. Paul says expressly, he laid hands on Timothy, 2 Timothy 1.
6. Neither can they in all Scripture, give one instance of Imposition of hands
for Ordination permitted to mere Presbyters alone.

Elders and Bishops.
So for the places (alleged by them) mentioning Bishops and Deacons only, as
the Ministers of the Church, Phil. 1. 1. or calling them first Elders, and then
presently Bishops, Tit. 1. 5. 8. Acts 20. 17. 28. If we say, that in these and
the like places, those first Elders set in the Churches, newly planted, were
Bishops properly; or that the Elders or Bishops there mentioned, were of both
sorts, some Bishops properly, some inferior Presbyters, the Adversaries could
disprove neither part evidently: or if in the third place, we should grant them
what they aim at, that these were only Presbyters, it would be nothing to the
purpose, unless they could directly show the power of Ordination and
Government over those Churches fully committed to them. For supposing those
Elders to be such Presbyters, the name Bishop might be appliable to any of
them, in as much as he had oversight of any flock: which Name was appropriated
after to the more General Pastor, who had oversight of the Presbyters, and
particular Flocks, or Congregations within such Precincts. And what marvail is
it, if the distinction of these two sorts of Elders or Bishops, did not, nay
could not appear so clearly in the beginning of the new planted Churches, and
whilst the Apostles were on earth governing the Churches, as it did after the
Churches were enlarged, and the Apostles gone off? Then clearly appeared, who
succeeded them, and how far in that ordinary power which was to continue in the
Church. For our Savior left his Apostles with full power (extraordinary and
ordinary) for the planting and propagating his Church through the World. The
ordinary power they were to leave unto others after them, for continuing of his
Church to the Worlds end, viz the power of Reconciliation in the Ministry of
the Word and Sacraments, the power of ordaining and sending others, and the
power of jurisdicton and government. How, and into what hands they communicated
these several powers, That Is the question.

Of the first Elders set in the Church by the Apostles.
Some of the Ancients apprehend it thus, That they committed the whole power to
those first Elders they placed in every City where the Church was planted, so
that those first Elders were properly Bishops, having power to ordain other
Ministers and Laborers, as the increase or extent of the Church required.
Other Fathers, or ancient Writers, seem to apprehend those first Elders to be
mere Presbyters, to whom the whole power was not committed; but that afterward
upon the increase of the Church, other special Men were entrusted with it to
ordain others, as need required, and as General Pastors to rule and over-see
the whole Church, with all the particular Congregations and Presbyters, or
inferior Pastors belonging to it. Either way is sufficient for establishing
the Episcopal power and government, and the Adversaries thereof, as they
cannot disprove it, if we say those first Elders were Bishops properly; so
neither will they gain any thing, if we grant them in courtesy thus much, that
the first Elders were mere Presbyters. For see briefly what they can say
against the first, or draw from the second.

Against the first they usually say, 1. If those Bishops at Philippi were so
properly, then were there more than one Bishop in one City or Church: Answ.
This indeed was absurd and inconvenient, and never suffered in the Church
enlarged and established, but in the Church Nascent or beginning it might be
very reasonable by way of provision for the future enlargement and
establishment of that Church. So we find 12. Apostles left in the Church of
Jerusalem by our Savior, in order to their propagating and governing the
Church through the whole World: And so in some great Cities, where and from
which the Gospel might suddenly spread it self, the Apostles might
provisionally leave more than One Elder vested with power for the supply of the
Church enlarged. Secondly, If the Elders or Bishops mentioned in those places,
were Bishops properly, vested with such power, then would the Apostle also have
remembered the other sort of Elders between them and Deacons. Answ. But what if
there were not yet in that Church Elders or Presbyters of the second sort? For
no Church at first was full. Or if there were such in that Church, why might he
not salute both sorts under that general name, Bishop? Thirdly: But then the
Apostle did not distinctly set down the Office of the one or the other, for
having set down the office of a Bishop, he presently goes to the Deacon, 1 Timothy
3. Tit. 1. 5. Answ. It was not the Apostles purpose in those places, distinctly
to set down the Office of Elders, nor of Deacons, but the general qualification
of the Persons to be admitted to those Offices. We may ask of them, Where has
the Apostle distinctly set down, or described the Office of a Lady-Elder? They
are fain to force it out of one word Ruling (1 Timothy 4. 17.) which belongs to
the Preaching Elders, as they well acknowledge. In the places above mentioned,
the Apostle gives, as I said, qualifications fitting the Persons of both sorts
of Elders (that then were, or should be, in the Church) for the duties there
hinted, teaching, ruling, do belong to both sorts of Elders, but with
Subordination of the one to the other. And if they will have the word rule (1 Timothy 4. 17.) insinuate a distinct Office of Elders from the preaching Elders,
without any intimation of such an Office any where else in Scripture, why might
not we say with more reason, that the same word in the forementioned place (1 Timothy 3. 5.) belongs to Bishops of both sorts, according to their order and
station, to rule or take care of the Church of God? Especially seeing we show
elsewhere in the same Epistle, such a Prelacy or supereminent power of rule
given to Timothy distinctly from other Elders: as Lay hands suddenly on no man,
Rebuke not an Elder -- receive no accusation against an Elder, etc. cap. 5. v.
19. 22. Like special power given to Titus, as we see in that Epistle, besides
all the acts of ordinary power exercised by the Apostles, and not communicated
in general to Presbyters. And so the exhortation of the Apostle, Acts 20. 28.
might generally fit both sorts of Elders or Bishops (supposing those of the
inferior rank present there) that they should all of them feed the Flock
according to their several stations, and in that subordination of Rule which
was in the Church.

But if we grant them, that those Elders or Bishops in the above cited places
were not Bishops properly, but ordinary presbyters: No example or precept in
Scripture for the Adversaries pretension.
What can they draw from thence advantageous either to the Classical or
Congregational pretension, when as there is no instance in all Scripture of the
Power vested in a Classis or consistory of Presbyters, or in every particular
Congregation: but on the contrary where ever there is mention of the exercising
of the power (for ordination by laying on hands, or for Jurisdiction in
rebuking or receiving accusation against an Elder in rejecting Heretics or the
like) we find it always done by the Apostles, or special men appointed
thereunto, as Timothy, Titus. Nor is it to any purpose to reply (as they do)
These were extraordinary men, Apostles or Evangelists, and so exercised that
power as such: For albeit in the office of Apostle and Evangelist there was
something extraordinary, and supposing Timothy and Titus may pass under the
Title of Evangelists, yet the power (of ordination and Jurisdiction) was
ordinary, and to continue in the Church, and to be communicated unto others as
was most convenient: What help therefore can the Adversaries have in the
Apostles and Evangelists being extraordinary persons, unless they can show the
power did ordinarily belong to, and was exercised by the company of Presbyters:
or else demonstrate it was left in their hands by express and peremptory order
from the Apostles. So that here they would be nonsuited, laying their plea
only by Scripture against Universal Tradition, and practice of the Church: for
the Scripture story goes not down to the departure of the Apostles: Now after
they were gone off, it clearly appeared by the practice of the whole Church in
what hands the chief power and Government was left, viz. not to Presbyters in
common, but in special hands, according to the instances and examples of the
exercising that power in the Apostles Time. The Ancient Records also which
continue the Church story from that Time, give us the succession of Bishops
from the Apostles in the more eminent Churches, as Jerusalem, Antioch, Rome,
Ephesus, Corinth, and this practice and succession settled before St. John the
Apostle dyed.

The alteration of Church Government from Presbyterian to Episcopal not
imaginable.
All which, as it clearly shows those several Angels of the several Churches,
to whom our Savior by Saint John did write, could be no other then such
Bishops, having chief care of and rule in those Churches, and therefore more
chargeable with the Corruptions prevailing in them: So does it clearly convince
that plea of the Adversaries, which amounts to a charging the first Bishops
with Usurpation and invasion upon the right of Presbyters, or particular
Congregations, to be a conceit altogether unreasonable; for it is beyond all
Imagination, that Saint John would have suffered such an invasion, or that
those first Bishops, who conversed with the Apostles and were their disciples,
should make such an invasion, and immediately subvert the Apostolical order
pretended for the Presbyterian Consistory: Or that those first Bishops, being
holy men, and many of them Martyrs (for still we find the heathen Persecutors
sought chiefly after the Bishop of the Church, that the chief Pastor being
smitten the flock might be more easily scattered) should be so ambitious and
unjust; or lastly, that the Presbyters then should be so tame, as not once to
complain of the wrong done them, or to transmit their Protestation against it
to Posterity.

To conclude this Trial by Scripture; It comes to this issue: The Adversaries
were bound to show direct Authority of Scripture against Episcopal Government,
it being in possession, established by the continued Authority of this
National Church, and which is more, by the perpetual practice of the
Catholic Church; against this it was expected they should bring some places of
Scripture, forbidding that power of Ordination and Jurisdiction to be committed
to special hands, such as Bishops properly taken: or commending it to the
Consistory of Presbyters, or some instances at least of that power exercised by
such a company: Whereas all they can evince out of Scripture, is, that there
were Presbyters (strictly so taken, and of the inferior rank) which being
granted them, we show there was a Prelacy still over such Presbyters; still
there were special men, that had an inspection and rule over them; and when the
Apostles went off, the practice of the Church shows the power was left in the
hands of special men, called Bishops properly: So that the Government of the
Church by Bishops, appears (as was said above) conformable, not only to the
Universal practice of the Church, after the Apostles time, but also to the Word
of God, i.e. to the practice and patterns we have there, 1. of our Savior
appointing twelve Apostles, and besides, and under them seventy Disciples of a
lower rank; 2. of Apostolical practice, by which we find the power exercised by
special Elders, viz. the Apostles themselves, or other choice men appointed
thereunto by them: whereas all Elders had power of the Ministry of the Word and
Sacraments: 3. of the several Angels of the several Churches, to whom the
Epistles were directed, Rev. c. 2. and 3. which is the last instance in holy
Writ to this purpose.

. XV. Episcopacy most agreeable to the reason of Church Government.
Lastly, The Government of the Church, by Bishops, was said above to be most
agreeable to the reason of Church Government, for preserving Unity, and
excluding Schism. This is very obvious in the writings of the Fathers: St.
Cyprian had much to do with the Novatian Schismatics of his time, which caused
him to write many Epistles upon that occasion, and a Book entitled De Vnitate
Ecclesiae; wherein he shows the Unity of the Church, as to the preventing of
Schism, stands much upon this, that there be one Bishop in one Church. St.
Hierom (whom they of the Presbyterian persuasion take for their best friend,
because he strives to advance the Order of Presbyters as much as he can, yet)
as he denies the power of Ordination belongs to Presbyters, so he acknowledges,
that Bishops were appointed over Presbyters to keep out Faction and Schism;
that the people should not say, as they did at Corinth, I am of Paul, I of
Apollos -- I of this Teacher, I of that. And for his saying of Presbyters, that
they did anciently communi consilio, with joint advice rule the Churches, is
not to be understood exclusive to the Bishop, for such a time was never known
in the Church, but jointly with him as his Council: so were the Presbyteri
Civitatis to the Bishop; and their advice was more used (and there was more
cause for it) before the many Canons and decrees of Councils gave rule in most
particulars what the Bishop should do: as it was by that time S. Jerome wrote:
and whatever he says for the advancing of the order of Presbyters, it is but
to set them above all Deacons (even those that immediately attended on the
Bishop, and, it seems, carried themselves too high) it is not to equal them to
Bishops, whose Prelacy St. Jerome acknowledged, and thought it very necessary
for this purpose of keeping out Schism, which the Parity of Presbyters would
expose it to.

And I would appeal to the reason of any of that persuasion, whether it were
not more convenient and necessary for keeping all in order, to have one aged,
grave, learned, and experienced in the way of the Church, to be the standing
Moderator of the Classis or company of Presbyters, than to change their
Moderator year by year, and leave the place open to every young unexperienced
Presbyter, that can make a faction to advance him unto it: I have heard this
inconvenience complained on by some of the new erected Classes: whereas a
Bishop being such a Moderator as is fixed, and above all competition, is more
enabled to keep all ordinary Presbyters in their station, and within their
bounds. And then again, I would demand, whether the Apostles, who complained of
Divisions, as in the Church of Corinth, and of false Teachers there and
elsewhere, were not careful to provide the most reasonable Expedient in
government against them? It cannot be denied; and upon this score, and to this
very end of preserving Schism, it cannot be thought otherwise, but that the
Apostles gave beginning to this Government throughout the Church.

1. Notwithstanding those of the Classical persuasion, bear themselves much
upon Mr. Blondels Collections: whose pains might have been better employed to
the use of the Church upon some other Argument. For in this it is impossible to
drive out of Antiquity (though ransaked over again) any more to the purpose of
the Presbyterian claim, than has been already acknowledged, and the weakness of
it discovered, viz. That it seems to be the judgment of some Fathers, that the
name Bishop was at first common to all Elders, and that those Bishops mentioned
Phil. 1. 1. 1 Timothy 3. Tit. 1. were Presbyters, or Elders of the second rank.
But what advantage is this to the cause they would establish, without proving
also, that the power of Ordination and Government (which we appropriate to
Bishops strictly taken) was communicated to Presbyters in common? To the
witnessing of this, it is not possible to force Antiquity, no not S. Jerome
alone. All that seems to speak any thing that way, amounts but to this: that
they were used in the Government, and things done with their advise and
counsel; and that they were more used in Ages before St. Jerome, than in his
time; and there was some reason for it (as I said) because by that time
provision was made in most Cases by the many Canons and Constitutions of the
Church.

. XVI. Of the ordination of our Bishops received from Rome.
There are some slight exceptions and allegations they make, which are fit
only to take with the ignorant; as that we had our Bishops from Rome, but they
desire to conform to other Reformed Churches which want Bishops. They, that
cannot distinguish the Times, several conditions and concernments of the Roman
Church may be startled at every mention made of Rome: but we are not ashamed to
acknowledge we thence received Bishops, from whence we received the Christian
Faith: both went together (same Faith, and same Government) first in the
British, then in the English Conversion of this Nation; and indeed, in all
Nations where Christianity was planted. In the time then of Gregory the first,
Ordination of Bishops was here received with the Faith, and ever since has been
continued from hand to hand in this National Church. Of this seeming prejudice
more largely Tr. 2* c. 4, 5. But to return the Enquiry upon the New Pastors of
the New Churches (Classical or Congregationall.) If it should be demanded,
Whence have they their Ordination? They cannot give any reasonable account, nor
hold up their heads in the defense of their Pastors and Churches against any
Romanist, much less against any true English Protestant or obedient Son of
this Church, Challenging them of Schism in departing from their lawful
Governors and Pastors, and taking to themselves a Power never given them.

Of other reformed Churches which have not Bishops.
As for the Reformed Churches which have not Bishops, their defect is nothing
comparable to the fullness of the whole Catholic Church, to the practice of
which they ought in all reason to conform: Especially seeing those Churches had
but tumultuary Reformations; and no marvel then in they were not fully regular
in their constitution. Nor does the example of those Churches come home to the
Case in hand; there being a wide difference between Wanting or not having
Bishops, and casting them out when they have them; Besides this all the
foreign Churches approved Bishops in this Church, and their most learned men
acknowledged a want in their own, excusing it as proceeding of necessity rather
then choice, as Tr. 2. c. 3. Nor can it justify those that divide from us to
say they join with other Reformed Churches; for first they must answer for the
Schism in forsaking the Communion of this Church; and as their Case is not the
same with that of the Churches abroad, so cannot those Churches justly receive
them, having broken the Communion of this. Therefore was it so carefully
provided for in many Councils of the Ancient Church, that none should travail
to any foreign Church without his Communicatory letters to testify his
Communion with the Church he came from, before he could be received to
Communion in the Other. And this to preserve Unity. And thus much touching the
Government.

. XVII. Exceptions in regard of the public worship.
Now to the usual exceptions made against the Communion of the Church of
England in the point of Public Worship, the Liturgy, administration of
Sacraments, Rites and Ceremonies used in this Church; by reason whereof they
could not (as they pretend) Worship God purely in Spirit and Truth. This
Assembling or meeting together, and joining in the public divine Service,
especially in the participation of the Sacrament or Eucharist, is indeed the
witnessing and exercising of that Communion which is and must be held between
all the Members of the same Church: So they. Act. 2. 42. in such duties and in
breaking of bread: So the Apostle calls earnestly for it, Heb. 10. 25. and cap.
13. 15 and insinuates the Communion of them that are in the Chu: by their
eating and partaking of One Altar (v. 10.) the participation of that Altar
being the Eucharist. And according to this expression, was the phrase of the
ancient Church ((...) and (...)) to be within or without the Altar, i* e. in or
out of the Communion of the Church, and to set up Altar against Altar, i. e. a
new Communion against the Communion of the Church. Lastly, the Apostle, 1. Cor.
10. 17. One Bread, One Body: the joint participation of One Bread, shows them
to be of one Body, holding the Unity of the Church; and withal, it shows what
a dangerous thing it is for any to abstein causlesly, or to separate from the
Communion of the Church of which they are Members.

But see in particular what they pretend as Causes of their Separation. There
is indeed nothing alleged now, but has been before by the Contentious, which
have disturbed the peace of this Church from Time to Time, and has been often
at large, and learnedly refuted, and those that understand themselves, being
not swayed with faction and passion, have received satisfaction; but because my
intent is still to afford some present satisfaction to them that are now
troubled, and more easy to be wrought upon, I shall briefly and plainly speak
to those exceptions against our Church Communion, which usually prevail with
such persons.

Our Liturgy how agreeing with the Mass Book.
First that our Liturgy or Common Prayer was taken out of the Masse-book. This
is of the same seasoning with that of our Bishops deriving their ordination
from Rome, fit only to distaste the weak, who are offended with any thing that
smells of Rome; But as we said of Bishops, we had them from that Church, from
which we received the Christian Faith, and then when we received it: so we say
of our Liturgy it has no more of the Mass, or public service of the Romish
Church, than was received and continued from the Ancient Church, and was
agreeable to the Christian faith. And to retein so much, was according to that
Christian Prudence and Charity used in our Reformation, that would have no more
opposition to them we were forced to differ from, then must needs. Whatever the
prevailing Errors and Corruptions of Aftertimes had brought into their Mass,
Reformation cast out: And some of those learned Bishops and Clergy, who were
chief instruments of the Reformation, and Composers of our Liturgy in that
frame it had, sealed the Reformation, and their renouncing of Popish Errors
with their Blood: and we challenge them to show any such Popish corruption
retained in our Liturgy: and might think it enough to oppose the judgment of
other Reformed Churches approving it, with which they might also rest
satisfied, if they did not too much value their own. But more particularly: Two
things are considerable in Liturgy, Matter and Frame.

XVIII Lawfulnes and fullness of our Liturgy as to the matter.
For the Matter or things prayed for, or spoken there, we are assured they
cannot show any one particular to be contrary to sound doctrine, or unfitting
for Christian men to beg of God, and to speak in the serving and Glorifying
of him. All suitable to the ends and purposes of the public Assemblies, and
reason of public Worship; which will appear if we consider the Frame, which
implies two things, the Order in which it runs, and the set Forms in which
every thing is expressed. As to the Order in which it is framed, what could be
more to the purpose of holy meetings and Assemblies? Where Christians come
together First, to confess their sins in the presence of God, then to hear
the promise of the Gospel to their comfort; accordingly after some short
exhortation, Confession is made, and then a general Absolution pronounced to
all that are truly penitent. Again Christians come together to praise God;
therefore Psalms are read before, and Hymns used after each Chapter: still
concluding the Psalms and Hymns with the Doxology, or giving Glory to the
whole Trinity, Father Son and Holy Ghost; Furthermore, They meet to show
themselves Christians, and that they Worship God in Christ. Not only by
concluding all their Prayers in his name, but also by express profession of
the Christian Faith, according to the Apostles and Nicene Creed, to the actual
renouncing of Heresy against the Person of our Savior Christ. Christians also
meet to give thanks for blessings they received, and to beg what they need:
accordingly there are several prayers and Supplications for the necessities of
the Congregation, with Intercessions for others: So the Apostle enjoins 1 Timothy
2. 1. Lastly, They come together to hear and receive instruction, for which the
Word is both read and preached: besides, a continual repeating of the ten
Commandments, with a suitable deprecation subjoyned to every Commandment.
What can be more full, useful and comfortable?

The way of Worship, which they that are gone from us use, as it is defective
in many of these (as Absolution, Hymns, profession of Faith, repeating the
Commandments of God) so what they have of Confession, Petition or
Thanksgiving, is reduced or shuffled up into one continual Prayer, which,
admit it be not defective in those three, yet does it not in so convenient a
way as the Church of Engl. does in distinct, several, concise Forms. For so
it is more intelligible to ordinary capacities, because delivering every part (
Confession, Petition, Thansgiving) more distinctly: also it is more for the
holding up intention of the spirit, which is more dulled with one long
continued Prayer, wherein those parts are confused, than if it were broken into
so many several Colects or Prayers I have heard ordinary people acknowledge it,
and show themselves sensible of it, complaining, not only of the defect of
that Service (for they observe they hear not the Lords Prayer, Creed, Ten
Commandments, as formerly) but also of the confusednesse of such continued
Prayer, which they could not go along with were not edified by it: whereas
before they understood still what they were about, and by reason of the short
expressions of the Churches Prayers, and the Responses the people were
sometimes to make, they remembered many things. And much they have to answer for
it, who through, ^ know not what pretense of the Spirit, or spiritual gifts,
but indeed through self-conceit, or some fleshly respects, have drawn the
people from that way of Worship, which was more to Gods glory and their comfort
and edification.

. XIX. Set Forms of public Prayer.
But all those parts of public Worship or Liturgy (which I have instanced to
show the fullness of that which is used in this Church) rre delivered in set
Forms; That they are afraid of, lest they worship God with the inventions of
Man: But by this reason they should be afraid to pray their own way, lest they
worship God with their own invention; or to pray with their approved Ministers,
lest they worship God with their inventions; for the Form or Expression of a
Prayer, whether Set, or Extemporary Conception, is equally of man's Invention:
and if so, surely it is better to worship God upon a Set, premeditate, and
deliberate Invention, than upon an extemporary one. The truth is, it is not for
man to invent that which is of the Substance of Worship, viz. the work, act, or
Duty directed upon such a due Object, for that is of Gods prescribing, as
Prayer: but Authority may invent something for the better managing of the work
in public, or for the more convenient performance of the Worship, i. e. of
the Act or Duty prescribed by God. The Apostle bids it be done in order,
decently, and to edification, 1 Cor. 11. ult. That set Formers may be so, we
are assured by those which the Church always had, the Jewish Church had, as
see Numb. 6. 23. and elsewhere; John Baptist taught his Disciples a Form of
Prayer, and so did our Savior teach his, Luke 11 1, 2. The Practice of the
whole Church has approved the use of Set Forms in public; and so does the
judgment and practice of Reformed Churches abroad. Nay, but they will not be
satisfied unless we show it to be the practice of the Church in the Apostles
time, which they do not find in Scripture. Nay, but they must, according to
the Rule above set, not expect the Church should show example in Scripture for
every thing she Orders, but they stand bound to show it is against Gods Word,
if they will not yield obedience, that they may have that warrant against
Authority, We must obey God rather then Man. And though we know not whether, or
what Forms they used in those first Times (for all things they did are not
recorded) yet is it no marvel if they did not as then use Set Forms,
considering the condition of the Church, small, and unsettled by reason of
Persecution, or the quality of the Persons ministering in it, few, and of
extraordinary perfections and gifts for the most part.

Lawfulness of set Forms.
Whatever judgment these men have of Prayer in set Forms, or low conceit of them
that use them: See we how Reason evinces the lawfulness and expediency of them
in public, and therein commends the prudence of the Church in appointing
them. 1. As the matter or things prayed for, and the intention of the spirit or
affection, with which they are prayed for, is of the substance of Prayer: so
the utterance or words are but external to it, and therefore Prayer without
words, is Prayer truly; Now let the matter of our Prayer be according to Gods
will, and the Spirit and affection suitable thereunto, and accompanying our
Petitions, it is indifferent whether the expression be in our own words, or
borrowed; whether in Forms before composed, or upon the present conceived. Let
a man prepare his heart aforehand suitable to the Forms and general Requests,
that he knows are made in public, and God, who is not taken with words or
varying of the phrase, will hear him, as he did the penitent Son, who thought
and resolved beforehand what to confess, what to beg, I will go -- and say --
Luke 15. 18. and accordingly he said when he came into his Fathers presence.
And as our Savior prayed thrice, saying the same words, Mat. 26. 44. so let
the same affections and desires of the heart return, or be present, they may
again be uttered in the same form of words: And if the forms of the public
Service do contein (as we said above they do in general) all the requests
fitting to be made, then may they still be used for the expressing such
requests and desires.

Here, that they may seem to say something rather than nothing, they reply;
That prayer of the penitent Son, though set and before composed, was his own,
and so was that prayer of our Savior, though set, and in the same words
repeated; but the set Forms of the Church are not his prayers that ministers in
the Congregation. If he would utter his own prayers, though set and before
prepared, they would join with him; for then they conceive he prays, what the
Lord has put into his mind, whether upon former premeditation, or present
conception. These seem to be the most reasonable of all those that are against
the set Forms of the Church: for they see Reason to allow the people to pray in
set Forms of other men's making, and the Minister to pray in set Forms of his
own, but not another composing. Now if they would well examine this, they
would see little Reason upon such a difference to quarrel with Authority, and
abstein from the public Worship of God in his Church: For no ground in
Scripture can they have of such a distinction, much less warrant upon such a
pretended difference to abstein from Church Communion. Also by this reason the
Minister should not use the Lords prayer, because not of his own composing.
Again, this is to place the substance and effect of prayer in Frame of Words,
rather than in matter or things prayed for, and the suitable affections of the
heart: both which may be found right in using Forms composed by others. For the
matter of the Church Forms it is plain, there is nothing but according to the
will of God, and if he that uses them prepare his heart with suitable
affections, God requires no more. The prophet bids, Take words with you -- and
say, Take away all Iniquity, etc. Hos. 14. 2. If then the heart be prepared
with such motions and desires as are fitting for Confession and petition, is it
so material whence we take the words* either suggested to us by others, as it
is there, or invented by our selves? Surely if the people can better understand
the things prayed for, and better prepare their hearts with suitable
affections, when the set Forms of the Church are used, than they can when they
hear the Ministers Prayer: (which they can, by reason Those Forms contein all
necessary requests, better than any one man's prayer can probably do; and
because the public prayers being necessarily expressed in generals, the
people ought still, from those general Confessions or Petitions, to reflect
upon their own particular Sins, Infirmities, Wants and Desires) it is
therefore most reasonable the people have the Public prayers in the Set
forms, with which they are best acquainted, which speaks the expediency
following.

Expediency of set Forms in public.
II. They are not Lawful, but Expedient too in public; Every particular man, as
he best knows his private Necessities, Expediency of Set Forms in public.
so he may express them in private to God as his heart suggests: but in
public it is necessary that the requests of and for the whole Congregation,
should be in general expressions, such as may comprehend the necessities, and
concernments of all: and it is needful this be done in set forms, prudently and
godlily composed, not left to the conceptions and inventions of so many
thousands as minister in this National Church, and are to be the Mouth of the
Congregation to God; for though some may do it discreetly, yet would many
inconveniences follow through the different performance of others. 1. Want of
Uniformity in the public Worship of the same Church. 2. Defect often in not
putting up all the requests, which are fitting to be made, not doing all that
is fit to be done at public meetings to the glory and worship of God. 3. Many
Impertinencies, Tautologies in expression, sometimes unfitness, and
unlawfulness of that which is spoken, such as the Congregation cannot say Amen
to. A difference there is betwixt Liberty in this performance of public
worship, and of preaching; for the Worship and Prayers are presented
immediately to God himself; but preaching, though it treats of things
pertaining to God, yet speaks to the people: To the Prayers of the Church, the
whole Congregation is to say Amen: but that which is delivered in preaching,
falls under trial and examination, whether it be so: For providing and
delivering a Sermon to the people, they have liberty of time as they please,
and of using what means and help they please: but as for the putting up the
prayers of the Congregation, wheresoever there is a despising of set Forms, and
an expectation of private Conceptions from the Minister, there the former
inconveniences will often be run into by some, through self-conceit of Gifts,
and Pride of showing them in variety of Expressions, and length of Prayers by
others, through disability and weakness; yet thinking themselves concerned in
reputation to follow the former, and to attempt the like way of a seeming
extemporary long Prayer.

Spiritual gifts to be used, but with submission to the Chur:
Notwithstanding they plead for Liberty in using the spiritual Gifts they have,
to the edifying of the Church. for to that end they are given, and the Apostle
bids to use them to that purpose, 1 Cor. 14. True, but first they must observe
a difference between the Gifts then, and now, and know that all were to be used
with submission to the Church: The Gifts then were extraordinary, by special
a^^lation or revelation of the spirit: spiritual gifts now are ordinary, from
the operation and motion indeed of the same spirit, but upon use of means.
Therefore they which strive to order their Assemblies according to the
particular passages of that Chapter, doing in them, as then was used, cause
great confusion and ridiculous deportment in their holy meetings. But secondly,
if the Apostle give restraints there (as he does) to those spiritual gifts,
though extraordinary, that they be used with submission to the Church, as is
thought fit for order and edification, much more the use of Gifts now ought to
be limited. Else may women that are gifted, take the liberty of using them in
the Church; but the Apostle saw Reason to impose Silence upon them in the same
Chapter, or at least every man that has gifts may use them (as some now plead
for the Liberty) to the edification of the Church: but many of those who are
against Set Forms, see great reason against that too, thinking it fit (as
indeed it is) that none should use their gifts publicly, but such as are
called, allowed, and ordained to it by the Church; and if so, then also should
they think it sit, that those, who are so allowed, as public Ministers in the
Congregation, should use their gifts so, and in such a way, as the same Church
sees sit and allows: for if these will plead liberty of using their spiritual
Gifts against the Constitution of the Church, and that by this 14. chapter to
the Corinthians, then may the other with as good Reason plead Liberty for all
gifted men; for all that had such gifts (as here the Apostle speaks of, and
seeks to order) might have their turn of speaking and using them.

But they are both out of the way, and inconsequent in their reasoning from
this Chapter, not distinguishing Times and Gifts, nor acknowledging duly the
Authority of the Church; and therefore under pretense of such Gifts, pleading
for Liberty of using them, that is, as it often proves of venting what they
please in the Congregation; whereas they ought in all humility, to expect the
Churches approbation of their Gifts, and then know they must use them with
submission still to the Church, in such a way as is thought most fit for
preventing the abovementioned inconveniences, for preserving Order and Unity
in the Church, for setting forth an Uniformity in Gods Worship, and upon all
these respects for edification of the people. Calvin, no friend to Popery, or
sloathfulnesse in Ministers: but a person furnished with as great gifts as any
of our Pleaders for this Liberty can pretend to, is said to have often wished,
that all the Churches had one and the same Form of public Service or Liturgy,
and that upon these Reasons, The holding of Unity in the Church, and the
excluding of Novelty, Faction, and boasting of Gifts.

But see whether this Pride of spirit, and self conceit (for I can call it no
otherwise, when once it sets it self against the Churches constitution without
express Scripture) has proceeded in some, Lords Prayer undervalued, neglected.
from a despising of the Churches Prayers to an understanding of the Lords
Prayer, because a Set form, and to a neglecting the use of it altogether as far
below them; then to a conceiting of themselves to be above prayer it self, as
needing not to pray at all. Such I have met with, miserably cutting themselves
off, not only from the comfort of the prayers of Christ's Church on Earth, but
from the benefit of his intercession in Heaven, and evacuating (as to
themselves) the eternal Priesthood of Christ: for if they need not pray, they
need not confess, nor ask forgiveness, nor beg Grace or any spiritual help,
and so need not the Intercession of Christ for obteining such mercies; for his
being our Advocate 1 John 2. 1. supposes our Confession of sin, required c. 1.
v. 9. and his being our High Priest inferrs our coming to the Throne of Grace,
Heb. 4. 16. or our coming to God by him, Hebr. 7. 25. And as for those that so
much prize the prayers of their own conception to an undervaluing of that,
which the Lord framed and taught us; let them consider how little they deserve
his Intercession, when they come by him to put up their own prayers, despising
or wilfully neglecting his But we knowing the perfection of that prayer, which
conteins all things fitting to be asked, do often use it in the public
prayers of the Church, and always with our own, that if any thing needful be
through our imperfection Omitted in our own, it may be supplied in the use of
that, and knowing that Christ is ready to hear and receive the requests of
every humble spirit, which is careful to do, and make use of what he has
taught us, We therefore delight to express, or to sum up our desires often in
his form of words; for as Saint Cyprian in his exposition of the Lords Prayer,
tells us, Christ when we beg his intercession using that prayer, will
acknowledge his own Words, will remember the prayer he taught us. Thus much of
set Forms, and Prayers of the Church.

. XX. Exception against Rites and Ceremonies.
They farther pretend, they cannot hold Communion in the public Worship of
God, according to the way and form of the Church of England by Reason of Rites
and Ceremonies used therein. Here they are chiefly offended, at the Habit of
the Minister, standing up at Creed and Gospel, Ring in Marriage, Cross in
Baptism, Kneeling at the Lords Supper, Bowing at the Name of Jesus. And the
reason of their offense is, because they take them to be Burdensome, and
therefore against Christian Liberty, yea, Superstitious, and therefore against
purity of Worship.

Not burdensome or superstitious:
For the first; Where Ceremonies are burdensome for Number, it is a fault in
that Church, and cause of offense and complaint, but not of separation or
breaking Communion: St. Augustine in his Epist: to Januar: took notice of the
increase of Ceremonies then, and in part complained, they began to be
burdensome; in the Church of Rome, the number was excessive before
Reformation, and gave just. Cause to complain of the burthensom observance of
them; but that was not any Cause of dividing Communion, had they not been
(many of them) burdensome for Weight, as well as for Number, and insupportable
by reason of apparent superstition. Now the Ceremonies and Rites retained in
this Church were few for number, and eased of that weight or superstition that
was in any of them. The truth is, if the Pretenders of Liberty of Conscience do
therefore quarrel at our Rites and Ceremonies, as contrary to Christian
Liberty, because appointed and enjoined by the Church, they do plaily show they
use that Liberty as a Cloak for their unruly and contentious Spirits, that
cannot abide the commands of Authority, but would do every thing according to
their own devising, and will (when they have power) impose severely Orders and
Constitutions of their own; for so they do where they can erect their new
Communions: imposing Conditions of admittance into, and of Continuance in that
Communion, such as they think good: but such as Christ or his Apostles never
required, such as the Catholic Church never knew: as for example, their
Trial by Lay Elders, and denial of Communion or Church Fellowship, yea, of the
Sacrament of Christ's Body and Blood to him that will not undergo that Trial,
or is not approved by it according to those rules they please to use, but is
found unanswerable to that measure of knowledge or gifts, which they expect; of
which and other devices of theirs, we may say as the Apostle did, 1 Cor. 11.
17. We have no such Custom, nor the Churches of God.

But in the Rites and Ceremonies of the Church of England they find
Superstition; and why? because such Rites and Ceremonies were derived from, and
abused in Popery unto Superstition. They were used indeed in the Church of Rome
(and abused too) but derived from the Ancient Church, and used by it to good
purpose before Popery crept in. Nor is it a good Rule of Reformation to cast
out whatever has been abused by Popery; we need not do it to the very same
individual things which have been so abused, (excepting Images (as the Brazen
Serpent) that had been objectively used to Superstition) for the same
individual Churches stand, which I suppose they hold, were abused in time of
Popery; much less are we bound to abolish all Rites and Ceremonies which have
been abused only in specie, in their kind, the individual act or performance
of them under that abuse being transient and not remaining. But the Rule of our
Reformation was still according to Christian prudence and charity, not making
more differences than must needs; and therefore retaining the use of that which
Antiquity, with good reason, practiced, but without the after-abuse; and
looking not only at ancient Practice, but the Apostles Precept, according to
which the forementioned practices tend to order and decency, and as far as
Ceremonies are capable of it, to edification.

Thus much the Church has sufficiently declared by her Doctrine, and by
hundreds of books written upon that argument, that she enjoins these Rites and
Ceremonies cleared from all superstitious abuse, either of yiedling worship to
any undue ob^ect, or of affixing any sacramental Efficacy to any of them, or
of giving them any spiritual Virtue, either to better the duty, to which they
are joined (professing the duty is good without the^, though not so orderly and
reverently performed) or to satisfy by such performances; or that she has any
other superstitious respect in the enjoining of them, but regard only to the
aforesaid precept for order and decency, which easily appears in the more
solemn and reverent performance of the duty with these Rites than without them,
Use of Ceremonies significant.
and for edification, according to the nature of a Ceremony, by its
signification, minding us of some duty. (To this purpose, Treat. 2. c. 7. number.
7. of Ceremonies significant.) Peter Martyr said well in his Comment on that
14. chap. to the Corinths: Ceremonies are more commendable, if they do admonish
us, (Instar concionum de aliquo officio) like Sermons of some duty.

As for example, that women should be covered in the Congregation, was not
only for decency, but signified and minded them of Duty, viz. Subjection, as
the Apostle shows, 1 Cor. 11. The Ceremony of the Holy Kiss used in their
meetings, and enjoined by the Apostle several times; minded them of that
Charity which should be among Christians, and testified they had it then for
each other. So the putting off the Old man, so often mentioned in the Apostle,
was the duty: and it was represented in Baptism, by their putting of Old
clothes, and putting on New. Such signification has the White Vesture, minding
both the People of the holy duties they come to, and him that wears it, of the
holiness required of them that minister in holy Duties. Standing up at Creed.
Standing up at the Creed is for a more significant profession of the Christian
Faith, that they acknowledge and receive it, and will, by the help of God,
stand to it and defend it: The like signification is in standing up at the
reading of the Gospel. Ring in Marriage.
The Ring in Marriage added only as a visible Symbol of that Union and
Conjunction, and for remembrance thereof is it so carefully kept and worn ever
after. What the Cross in Baptism signifies, and wherefore it is used, is there
and then expressed, when it is used, in token that the party baptized shall not
be ashamed of the Cross of Christ etc. Cross in Baptism:
The Ancient Christians used to make the sign of the Cross (upon occasion) in
the sight of the Heathen, to witness or speak the profession they were of; and
I do not doubt the truth of those Ancient Records that tell us how God was
pleased sometimes (for the conviction of the Heathen, and the approving of the
Christian profession) to work a miracle at the making that Sign: and what
marvel, when for the same purpose he wrought miraculously at the falling of
Peter's shadow upon the sick, and at the touch of handkerchiefes brought from
Paul's body, Act. 5. 15. and 19. 12. He that purposely uses the sign of the
Cross to work supernatural effects, does it without warrant Superstitiously:
So he that affixes any Sacramental virtue or spiritual efficacy to it in
baptism; The Church of England has no such respect, but only uses it as a bare
Ceremony, for remembrance and testification of that which indeed is every
Christian man's duty, viz Not to be ashamed of the Cross of Christ, but to
sight manfu^y under his banner etc. And truly (considering what a pass
Christianity is at among us, how the very principles thereof are so openly
overthrown by Sacrilege, Injustice, Atheism: that they are likely (if men go
on) to be forgotten in the next age, that there may now seem to be some Cause
to have the Cross of Christ imprinted with fire (as they say the Ethi^pick
Christians do) upon the foreheads of the Children: that they may remember so
often at least as they look in the Glass, that they are Christians, and what
they promised in baptism.

Kneeling at the Sacrament.
Kneeling at the Communion, can be no compliance with Popery in the
acknowledging of Transubstantiation, or Adoration of the Host; for our Church
has sufficiently declared against the doctrine of Transubstantiation; which
being taken away, that Adoration falls. Nor yet is their Kneeling in the Romish
Church the Test and acknowledgment of Transubstantiation, or of that Adoration
(which they think due to the Host) but their falling down, when it is elevated
or lifted up. They do Popery too much honor, that make the devout and lowly
behavior of kneeling at the Sacrament, proper to that Religion, and do seem
not to understand themselves, nor what they are about (in that application of
the soul to God, and the receiving from him the greatest pledges of mercy)
that think not the most humble and reverent gesture most fit for such a Duty.
Their sitting mentioned, Mark 14. 18. As they sat and did eat, etc. does not
speak directly the gesture they used at receiving the Lords Supper, but their
falling to, or applying themselves to eat the Passover; and whether in the
receiving the Sacrament they used the same posture which they commonly did at
their Feasts (a kind of lying or leaning, more near to a prostration of the
Body than our sitting) is not certain; but no question they used such
expressions of devotion then, as were suitable to the present duty. Nor must
our application to Christ now be after such a common and familiar way, as
theirs was, when he conversed with them on Earth: They did not then so pray to
him, or asked in his name, as they did afterward, Jo: 16. 24. They know Christ
then after the flesh, familiarly conversing with him, but now we know him so no
more, 2 Cor. 5. 16. He is now in Heaven at Gods Right Hand, we on Earth: and if
we understand Him and our selves, how, when we are admitted to the Sacrament,
we are applying to God by him, and receiving from God through him the greatest
benefits: we cannot but think there is cause for the greatest expression of our
most humble acknowledgments.

Bowing at the name.
Bowing at the Name of JESUS, is by the Church appointed to be done sometimes
in public Divine Service, as an acknowledgment of his Deity, his Exaltation
and Lordship over all, (set out Act. 2. 36. Phil. 2. 11.) and that we are his
poor devoted Creatures, whom he has made and redeemed: It is a divine worship
(standing in such inward acknowledgment and honor, and outward bowing of the
body) given to the Person of Christ, known by that Name; and it is strange if
any Christian should deny it lawful to worship and adore our Savior Christ at
any time, especially to do it when he is named, considering what the Apostle
also says, Phil. 2. 10. which must needs infer at least, that it may be done,
when he is named. So here is no new Worship invented by the Church, (for the
Worship then given is due to God, and prescribed by him) but the performance of
it only determined, when it shall be given or expressed, viz. at the Name of
Jesus, or when he is named.

As for that precept of the Apostle, Abstain from all appearance of evil, 1
These. 5. 22. which they make a pretense for their declining of the Rites and
Ceremonies of this Church: It gives direction for private practice in things
left indifferent to our choice, in the occurrencies of life; gives no warrant
against Authority, to use liberty, in things determined thereby, under pretense
of appearance of evil in them, as said Treat. 2. cap. 1. For here we are still
bound (according to the Rule often above delivered) to show the thing enjoined
by Authority, is (not only in appearance, but) indeed evil, in it self
formally, or forbidden by Gods positive command.

Again, The Rites, Ceremonies, and Practices of this Church, have not (to any
judgment cleared from Passion, Prejudice, or Faction) an appearance of evil in
them, i. e. of Superstition or Will Worship, as they fancy ignorantly or
wilfully, but of good, i. e. of order, decency, reverence, devotion, expression
of the duty we are about, and of the internal worship then yielded: Of all
which, there is a fairer appearance in the communion of this Church, than in
the confused and irreverend deportments of their Assemblies.

. XXII. Touching the point of worship.
Now to the end that they which understand not so much as they should in the
points of Worship and Adoration, may better conceive what error and offense
they run into by their causeless and inconsiderate fear of Superstition in
many just and lawful practices of the Church: I must first tell them, that by
their abstaining from the public service of God, because the Prayers are in
Setforms, by their not coming to the Communion, because to be received
Kneeling; by withholding their Children from Baptism, rather than they should
be signed with the cross and the like, they make themselves guilty of wilful
neglect of duty to God, of obed^ence to the Church, and fall into that
superstition, which is called Negative: For they place Religion in not doing
these, account themselves therefore godly and pure, and make such abhorring or
abstinence from these, a mark of their Religion or Sect: And then, that may
better understand themselves in the point of Worship, they ought to put a
difference between the Substance, and the Circumstantials of Worship.
Circumstantialls of Worship.
The Substance of Worship stands (as said above) in a due act, (internal,
external) directed on the due object; and this is of Gods prescription: The
Circumstantials of Worship are seen in the decent and profitable managing of
the Worship for Time, Place, Order, or the like; and in these the Church has
power. Objective terminations of Worship, and Circumstantiall.
Again, Worship is determined Objectively to such or such a thing or person
receiving the worship, or Circumstancially, ad hic and nunc, to the time and
place; The Church has no power in the first, cannot transfer any religious
worship upon an undue Object; but has power in the Second, may appoint when and
where, and by whom, and on what occasion the worship due to God, and prescribed
by him, shall be performed in public. For Words that are heard, and Things
that are seen, carrying in them a remembrance of benefits and duties, and
therefore Motives of Worship to God, who gives the benefit and expects the
duty, may determine our Worship to time and place, inciting us to perform it
then and there, when and where we hear such Words or see such Things: and this
is a Circumstantiall determination of Worship, not an Objective.

Instances.
When the people heard Moses words, they bowed the head and Worshipped, Exodus 12.
27. What! not the Words which Moses spoke, but they worshipped the Lord upon
hearing such words as contained such Motives of Worship. In that Idolatrous
Worship, Dan. 3. at the hearing of the Instruments of Music they fell down
etc. The Worship was not given to the sound, but at the sound to the Idol
erected, the sound of that Music did only circumstancially determine the
Worship, but the Golden Image Objectively* and that made the Idolatry. So when
religious worship* (for the reason is alike) is given to our Savior Christ,
upon the hearing of his name Jesus, not letters and syllables of his Name, but
the Person of our Savior is the Object of the Worship; and the naming or
speaking of his Name Jesus (which notes his Person, and withal carries in it
the remembrance of that Salvation he wrought for us, and therefore the greatest
Motive of worship) does determine the Worship Circumstantially, i. e. the
performance of it to such a time or occasion.

So for Things seen, which bear the remembrance of such benefits, as may give
Motive of Worship, and determine it, not Objectively but this way rather then
that. The Ark with the Mercy seat was the sign and witness of Gods presence, (
there I will meet with thee, and commune with thee. Exodus 25. 22.) and therefore
they worshipped toward it. Worship at his footstool. Ps. 99. 5. and 132. 7.
So it was called because of the special exhibition of his presence on Earth.
Now the worship was not given to the Ark Objectively, but to God: only that
way, or thitherward rather then other. Thus Daniel prayed toward Jerusalem --
c. 6. 10. And should any (that I may speak of Rites not enjoined by this
Church, yet practiced by some, and no question piously) pray as the Ancient
Christians did, toward the East, in acknowledgement of the light of the Gospel
risen upon them; or at their coming into Gods house bow themselves in sense of
the great presence, and of the holy duties they come to, and of their own
unworthiness; or in their approach to the holy Table bow or prostrate
themselves to the ground, in acknowledgement of that special exhibition Christ
makes of himself there, and in sense of his own unworthiness; what Christian
that understands himself, could accuse these of superstition and Popery, or not
rather approve them as significant and seemly expressions of Christian devotion?

There is a Custom of uncovering the head at the coming in of light, if this be
done with thankfulness of soul for the light of the Gospel, and desire of
enjoying the light of heaven, what harm? Is it not lawful, yea Christian-like
to glorify God on all occasions? for the coming in of the light is but an
occasional remembrance. Let me put it to them farther; should a Papist when he
uncovers the head or bows the body at the sight of a Cross, do it out of
hearty thankfulness to God for redemption by Christ Crucified; making the
Cross no object of the Worship, but only the sight of it an occasional
remembrance and motive: would there be any thing in this unbeseeming a
Christian? I cannot but say it concerns a Christian often to remember, and
thankfully to acknowledge Gods mercies upon any occasion: and if the inward
worship (which stands in such due acknowledgments of the heart) may upon
occasional remembrances be given, then may the outward expression also by
uncovering the head or bowing the body, unless prudence out of respect of time
or place forbid it, for Religion will not. And to come a little more home to
those that are so ready to cry superstition: should any one of them escape a
shipwreck or hazard of battle, or be redeemed out of Turkish slavery; and so
often as he hears of other men's suffering in any of these kinds, or so often as he
sees a ship safe in harbor, or looks on the Armor he wore in that battle, or
on the Chain he bore in Captivity, should be so often uncovering his head lift up
his heart to God in thankful acknowledgement of the blessing, and desire of
farther Protection: would there be any thing in this, but what beseems a good
Christian, when as neither words heard, nor things seen are made any object of
the worship, but accasionall remembrances, and motives? How much rather may
this be done, when we hear that name, which carries salvation in it, see those
things which mind us of the greatest mercies, and therefore may move us: and
all this the more if the Prudence and Authority of the Ch: has so determined. I
have enlarged this discourse to instances beyond the enjoined Rites and
practices of this Church, to meet with that vain plea of superstition and
Popery charged upon it, for the better countenancing of the Schism made, and
the sacrilege committed in these our days.

. XXII. Cause of their several Error, that have divided from this Church.
To wind up all. By that which has been said, it may appear, what is the Cause
of this Error, (which carries so many such several ways from the Communion of
this Church) and what the Issue of it. The Cause is their misunderstanding of
the Rule by which they should be guided. First of the supreme Rule, the
Scripture, which for faith and substance of worship is a set and punctual
Rule, not so for other matters of practice. Secondly, of the next, and as I may
say, Secundary Rule the witness of Universal Custom, practice or Tradition,
which (as unfolded above 2. and 13.) is the best external proof of Scripture,
so also the best expositor of it: bringing down nothing as of the substance of
Faith and Worship, but what is clearly grounded on Scripture, and giving clear
light to those darker passages in scripture, which concern the beginnings of
some Practices, which were to continue in the Church, as Infant^ baptism,
Observation of Lords day, Easter, Pentecost, Episcopal Government. Thirdly
thein misunderstanding of the Authority of the present Church, defining in
matters of faith and worship according to direct Scripture, and decreeing in
other matters according to prudence: but in both having respect to, and in a
due sort guided by Universal consent, or Tradition of the Catholic Church,
viz. the Doctrines that have been always taught, and the Customs or Practices
always observed therein. For let men forsake the guidance of these Rules, and
what remains but the extravagancie of a private judgment? and what can follow
but error upon error? and what can be the issue of that, but remediless
consasion?

Hence have we so many private interpretations of Scripture, broached instead
of Catholic doctrine; Circumstantials of Worship taken for Substance, and
thereupon the lawful Worship of the Church ignorantly charged with
Superstition. And for matters of Practice, some will have all practices
observed they meet with in Scrip: Some not all, but not any else, save what is
there. Lastly, upon the like misunderstanding, they cast out the perpetual
government of the Church, but cannot agree what to set up: in this, as in many
other things, Confusion the Issue of Error, having passed due bounds.
following their private judgment, destitute of the guidance of the former
Rules, and therefore upon necessity disagreeing: one destroying what the other
would build; yet all pretending (for Satan is here an Angel of light) to set up
the Discipline, Scepter, and Kingdom of Christ, and to advance Purity of
Religion. This was the pretense of all Schismatics, and it is the Masterpiece
of Satan's cunning (as above noted,. 8.) to set men on work under that pretense,
but with mis-guided zeal, to purge, reform, refine a Church, and to outstrip
others in that zeal, till they have brought all to confusion. But we should not
be ignorant of his devices, as the Apostle warns them in a case not much
unlike, 2 Cor. 2. 11. for Satan was there playing his part as an Angel of
light, under the pretense and covert of severity and strictness against the
Incestuous person; as he did after in the Novation Schismatics.

These his devices we might indeed have seen in those Ancient Schismatics,
Montanists, Novatians, Donatists: and in those more irregular of the last Age,
Anabaptists, Libertines, Familists, and the like; whose Errors and Follies were
well silenced by Learned Protestant Writers, but now broken out again, when
that which did let (the Civil and Ecclesiastical Authority) was taken away, or
so weakened, that it could not stop the inundation of former Errors and
exorbitant phansies flowing back upon us from every corner, into which they had
retired; and working apparently to confusion, Confusion and levelling upon
levelling.
to a levelling upon levelling, as in the State, so in the Church Government
and affairs. The consideration of the first is not to my present purpose; but
as for the business of the Church and Religion, I cannot but note, How they,
who first pretended to Reformation, (by Covenant obliging themselves and
others, and conceiving that Cov. in such general terms, as might engage men of
all sects and persuasions to join with them in pulling down what was
established, and invading the means and revenues belonging to Cathedral
Churches) did not or would not (I pray God they may yet) see Satan's device, by
like principles and pretenses, and in such general words to have still a new
Reformation undertaken, and to level or pull down not only what the former had
built, but what they had left standing of that which was before. The first
pretenders to Reformation, would cast off Bishops (their lawful Pastors and
Superiors) invade their power of Ordination and Government, and have their
Revenues with those of Deans and Chapters alienated; Now are there risen up men
that would make it a part of their Reformation, to cast off the Ministry of
Presbyters too, laying open the Office of Teaching to all gifted men: also to
take away their Tithes and maintenance, putting them to live upon benevolence,
if any will have them for their Teachers. And as the first had no consideration
of the Cathedral Churches, no more have these of the Parochial: but as if all
other Christians were Infidels or Heathens, they will gather Churches anew: the
ready way to dissipate the Church of Christ, and bring in Confusion: But
furthermore, as the first Reformers of these days, would have no respect to
the Ancient practice of the Catholic Church, so have these as little regard
(and with far greater reason) to the pattern of the other Reformation, the
Scottish Kirk. Lastly, As They first cast out Set-forms, and the Public
prayers of this Church, so Those that came after, have cast out their
Directory, will not be bound up by their Rules and Order: but as one Error
begets another, and is boundless in its progress, so here from despising the
Set-forms of the Church, they proceed to an undervaluing the Lords Prayer, as
below them; and some to advance themselves above Prayer it self, as needless
to them, in that height of perfection they conceive themselves to have
attained: and this is the chief aim of Satan's device, to bring men by a
misguided pursuit of purity and holiness, to such a pitch of spiritual pride
and self-conceit, as if they had already apprehended -- which S. Paul would not
take to himself, Phil. 3. 13.

Nor is it sufficient to say, We are not so: If you are not gone so far, yet
like Principles and Pretenses, which you went on against the Government, and
Lyturgie of this Church, would carry you so far; for what certain bounds are
left to stay any, when once ye have pulled up those, that the above mentioned
Rules fixed? This being done in that Covenanting pretended Reformation, the way
is laid open to others more bold and heady, to run on farther.

Self-Condemnation of the Pharisees.
But let me argue it a little with you, (you, that pretend to more regularity
and order in the Classical or Congregational way, and make show of a more quiet
spirit and temper) and challenge you a little, as our Savior did the Scribes
and Pharisees roundly, ( Mat. 23.) for building and garnishing the Sepulchers
of the Prophets; and yet persecuting Him and those that followed Him:
notwithstanding his Office and doctrine agreed with that of the Old Prophet.
Let me therefore ask you, have ye not the book of Martyrs in your houses, and
set some price on it? Do ye not there read of the ancient Bishops of the
Primitive Church suffering Martyrdom for the truth of Christ? How it concerns
these days.
And do not ye applaud them, abhorring the Cruelty of their Persecutors, and
saying, If we had been in their days we would not have been partakers in that
blood? Do ye not also there read of Cranmer, Ridly, Latimer, with other
Bishops, and many of the Clergy of this Land, suffering the flames for that
truth, which they by a just Reformation had reestablished in this Church? Do
you not applaud and praise them, when you read their Acts and sufferings,
abhorring the cruelty of their Persecutors, and saying, If we had been in their
days, we would not etc. Thus you build their sepulchers, garnish and adorn
their Monuments or Memories, and now examine whether you have not done the like
to those, that followed them, in the same Office, which they bore in the same
Doctrine, which they taught in the same reformed Worship, which they restored,
held, and Sealed with their blood; see if ye have not done more then they which
slew those Martyrs: for ye have not only spoiled their Persons of all their
means and livelihood, but also taken away the maintenance from the Office, and
(as much as in you) the Office from the Church: a double Sacrilege which the
Romanists that killed those Martyrs would abhor to be guilty of.

I speak this not to the reproach of any, but to the conviction of all whom it
may concern, that they may fear the Woe our Sav^our there denounces in the like
case, That all should be required of that Generation. It is just with God, when
After-generations will not take warning by the former, but do the like, to
bring upon them the greater punishment, and make them bear, what the former had
deserved. And examine I beseech you, how far ye have consented to, or approved
of the shedding their blood, the spoiling their persons, the sequestring their
estates who have suffered in these days, and yet held and taught the same
Religion and Doctrine with those former Martyrs: how far ye have had an hand
in, or consented to that horrid Sacrilege and devastation of Church-meanes
committed in these days: conclude your selves so far chargeable with the guilt
of that former Cruelty and wrong done to the Martyred Bishops and Clergy in
Queen Maryes days, and of that first Sacrilege committed in her Fathers
days: and that ye must answer for it (by our Saviors reckoning, Mat. 23. 35.)
so much the deeper, because ye have not taken warning by the former, but done
the like; and added to the guilt of Blood, and Sacrilege, which lay before
upon this Land, not only by your persecuting of Them, against whom ye had no
other accusation, than what the Papists had against those Martyrs, their
faithful and constant holding to the established reformation of the Church of
England; but also by your seizing of Church-meanes, and abolishing the Office
of the chief Governors of the Church; a double Sacrilege (as I said) which
neither Romanists nor Ancient Schismatics would dare to commit.

Gods Judgments on Schism and Sacrilege.
It is worthy our nothing, how it pleased God to show his judgment upon Schism
and Sacrilege in the beginnings of his Church, both Jewish and Christian, to
the end that his people might ever after fear to do the like. We see Numb.
16: who they were that rose up against Moses and Aaron, saying, Ye take too
much upon you, ye Sons of Levi, seeing all the Congregation are holy every one
of them, the very saying of these Times; and it is plain what they committed in
so saying and doing, Schism in departing from their lawful Governors, and
sacrilege in breaking in upon, or invading the priests Office; and the
judgment shown upon them is notorious; a Fire broke out upon many of them, and
a Schism or rent made in the Earth swallowed up the rest. So in the beginning
of the Christian Church we find Act. 5. what a fearful judgment was shown
upon Ananias and his Wife for withdrawing part of that, he had devoted to the
use of the Church; That they may fear who are so hardy, as to commit greater
Sacrilege in taking to their private use, what others have applied to the
service of the Church.

Why God suffers Error so much to prevail against Truth.
And shall I speak the Result of my Thoughts, secretly enquiring, what might be
the Cause, wherefore it should please God to suffer the Church of Rome to
continue in so powerful condition, notwithstanding all the Errors, and
profanations taught and practiced therein? I saw reason, wherefore God (whose
way is in the Sanctuary. Ps. 77. 13. secret, but holy and just) should for the
sins and carelessness of Christians, turning his grace into wantonness, suffer
(after 600 years knowledge of his Truth) many Errors to enter, and prevail
generally over the Church, and make the word of truth more precious; to the end
that they which were approved might be manifest, 1 Cor. 11. And wherefore he
should for the divisions and cares of Christians, suffer the Vanity of
Mahumetan superstition to gain ground upon the Christian Territories, to the
punishment of many, and the trial of those that were constant; But that after
it pleased him to make the light of the Gospel break out, and the truth appear
in the Reformation, he should suffer the Church of Rome with all her detected
Errors which from the Sixth age of Christianity had prevailed) still to continue
in power and glory as to the greater part of what it possessed: besides that
general reason, (the lives of Protestants too much unanswerable to the Truth
and light God had opened unto them) I can find no special one, unless it be
the guilt of sacrilege in most protestant Churches tumultuarily reformed;
casting out Bishops, invading their Office, and seizing upon the revenues of
their Churches. Thus to the dishonor and prejudice of Gods Truth, making it a
part of their Reformation to cast out that, which the Catholic Church had
always carefully observed: and was yet commendably retained in the Church of
Rome. Had the Reformation every where (as it did in England) retained the
Ancient prayers and form of Liturgy, the ancient Government by Bishops, and not
laid hands on the means of the Church: the Dagon of Romish Error would every
where have fallen before it.

If the prevailing of Sects to the disturbance of this Church be objected
against the Regular reformation of it: We acknowledge God is just, and how now
covered the face of this Church with a Cloud in his his Anger, and for our sins
chiefly, who should have kept the charge of his Sanctuary, and his holy things:
We are ready to receive the charge of any Personal failings or neglects, in
the use of our power, Office, performance of our Duties according to our
several stations: yet let them know they had not sufficient Authority to make
Reformation of Personal Abuses; but if through our sides they strike, as they
do at the Power, Office and Function it self, and because they conceive us
unworthy of the means applied to the Church, will therefore take it to
themselves, let them fear what will follow; and what can follow but confusion,
both from the boundless course of Error finding no stay, when once it has past
the due limits, and from the usual Course of Gods justice punishing deceitful
men with their own pretenses, fears, and delusions?

For when once the spirit of Error has forsaken the Rule, and broken the bounds
of lawful Government which held all together, has raised so many humors, and
empowered so many sects, Confusion of boundless Error.
what one way (right or wrong) can be agreed on, settled, established? It is not
imaginable without changing of the Errors and destructive Principles, upon
which the discord is raised, and continued. And what can be the end or Issue
suitable to such proceedings and to the just judgment of God, but that after
there has been Levelling upon Levelling, and every sect has had its course to
the punishment of this sinful unthankful Nation, we should be exposed to the
danger of some foreign power, that will impose new Laws and another Religion
upon this people, if a more general humiliation do not prevent it? I do not
mean a Fasting for strife as they did, Isa. 58. 4. (we have had too much of
that already, to the greater provocation of Almighty God) but a real true
repentance, in turning every man from his evil way, and from the violence that
is in their hands, as the Ninivites, did Jon. 3. 8.

It was the Pretense or fear of the Scribes and Pharisees gathered together in
their great Council against Christ. Punished often with its own pretenses.
Venient Romani -- if they should suffer him and his doctrine, the Romans would
come and take away their place and nation, Jo. 11. 48. and therefore God in his
just judgment did punish them (as he threatened, Isa. 66. 4.) in choosing their
delusions, and bringing their fears upon them; the Romans did come, and
therefore come and took away their Place and Nation, because they took away
Christ and opposed his Gospel: and to make the easier way for the Romans to
come in, several factions (as Josephus tells us) prevailing amongst them,
ceased not in the mean time to destroy one the other. So it was the pretense,
and this fear was put into the people, that if the Church of England and the
Governors thereof were suffered to go on, Venient Romani, the Romish
Religion, or Popery would come in: and by this fear or jealousy the People were
raised against their superiors, as the people were then against Christ. When
as indeed by their pulling down, what formerly was well established, and by
destroying one what the other builds, they make fair way for the Romish
Religion, or the Alcoran, or Atheism to come in over their Ruins, or through
the many breaches made by several Sects: If the Tears and prayers of the
obedient Sons of this Church, and of those that would live peaceably in the
Land, do not prevent it, by averting Gods just wrath and procuring a
restoration to this Church, that it may be a praise again upon Earth.

There is hope and comfort in the next verse, Isa. 66. 5. to them that tremble
at the word of the Lord. Your brethren that hated you, that cast you out for my
Names sake, said. Let the Lord be glorified: (blessing him for the success of
their iniquity, or in confidence thereof provoking him to show his approbation
of their Cause and doings, by his judgments) but he shall appear (to your joy,
and they shall be ashamed. The first Ejectors or Levellers of our Time (those
of the Presbyterian way) who cast out and sequestered whom they pleased, and
took possession, and said Let the Lord be glorified for their success: great
cause have they, (now it appears what confusion follows upon their beginnings)
to be ashamed of what they have done. I pray God they may, and lay it sadly to
heart, and that all others, who have advanced upon their or the like
Principles, may in time consider it; and not think it enough to say, the Lord
be glorified, because they prosper and are become rich, but rather enquire,
whether that they have done, be as to their private advantage and gain, so to
the behoof of Gods Church and the advancement of true Religion, and whether
the Lord, to whom they have so often appealed (by their Fasts and Thanksgivings)
can indeed own their doings, as making for his glory: certainly the Lord must
deny himself, which he will not do, if he own Injustice, Schism, and
Sacrilege; He forbeares a while, and keeps silence (for Causes best known to
himself) and men prospering by those sins, think he is such a one as
themselves, (approving their doings:) but he will reprove them, and set before
them what they have done; He will appear, and they shall be ashamed.

Exhort. to all that truly desire Purity.
If such considerations as these, prevail not with them, that do gain by the
formentioned sins, yet let the word of exhortation take hold upon you, all you
that have followed the Schism in the simplicity of your hearts: not engaged by
any design of gain or self-interest, but only deceived with the pretense of
Purity in Gods worship, and of strictness of life. Do not make your selves
guilty of other men's sins; sins that cannot stand with Righteousness, or that
Charity which the Apostle requires so strictly, 1 Cor. 13. without which all
your other supposed Purity* Faith or Knowledge, is nothing, will stand you in
no stead. Consider sadly, how those you follow, have led you from the Unity of
this your National Church, and thereby from the profession of Catholic
Primitive Truth: from Obedienee to your lawful Governors and Guides, who bore
the same Office, taught the same Doctrine, held the same way of public
Worship, as did those martyrd Bishops in Primitive Times, as did also those
other in Queen Marie's days: How, I say, they have led you from this
Catholic Communion, into a way of which (whether Classical or
Congregationall) we see the late and irregular beginning: it being but the
product of some tumultuary Reformations made in France, Geneva, Holland, or
Scotland, and by those that would be contentious here, imitated and violently
attempted, to the disturbance of this Church, not without the downright guilt
of Schism and Sacrilege.

which cannot be had truly in the state of Schism.
Consider it sadly, and do as those Confessors did, who (being led away by the
Novation Schismatics under like pretense of purity and strictness) as soon as
they perceived their error, confessed it, and returned to the Unity of the
Catholic Church; as St. Cyprian often relates and propounds it as an example
and motive for Unity. Do you so, and then may you obtain what you pretend was
your aim and desire, Purity and righteousness indeed, which you cannot in the
way of Schism by reason it holds not a perfect Rule of Righteousness, but such
as is strict in denying small things, and flying appearances of Evil, but
large in admitting great Offenses, teaching to strain at Gnats, and swallow
Camells, to scruple at a Rite and Ceremony, but makes no bones of Disobedience,
Schism, Sacrilege, and so necessarily leaves your Consciences (while ye are
in that Communion) defiled with your partaking in such sins. But return into
the Unity of this Church, and show your Communion with it in the public
worship of God, Liturgy, and Sacrament: then may you perfect Holinsse in the
fear of God, and with good Conscience peforme all the parts of Purity and
Righteousness: And do it, in Gods name, according to all the Duties he
requires of you, and according to all the opportnuities he puts into your
hands: So will your Purity and Righteousness exceed that of the Pharisees; and
as many as walk after this Rule, Peace be on them and Mercy, and on the Israel
of God. Amen.

The End.

